Density functional theory for transition metals and transition metal chemistry  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B907148B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B907148B
(Review Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10757-10816Density functional theory for transition metals and transition metal chemistryChristopher J. Cramer* and Donald G. Truhlar*Department of Chemistry and Supercomputing Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0431, USA. E-mail: cramer@umn.edu; truhlar@umn.eduReceived 8th April 2009, Accepted 20th August 2009First published on 21st October 2009AbstractWe introduce density functional theory and review recent progress in its application to transition metal chemistry. Topics covered include local, meta, hybrid, hybrid meta, and range-separated functionals, band theory, software, validation tests, and applications to spin states, magnetic exchange coupling, spectra, structure, reactivity, and catalysis, including molecules, clusters, nanoparticles, surfaces, and solids.1. IntroductionDensity functional theory (DFT) describes the electronic states of atoms, molecules, and materials in terms of the three-dimensional electronic density of the system, which is a great simplification over wave function theory (WFT), which involves a 3N-dimensional antisymmetric wave function for a system with N electrons.1 Although DFT is sometimes considered the “new kid on the block”, it is now ∼45 years old in its modern formulation2 (more than half as old as quantum mechanics itself), and it has roots3,4 that are almost as ancient as the Schrödinger equation. In practical work, DFT is almost always applied in the form introduced by Kohn and Sham,5 including its spin-polarized extension.6,7 The basic quantity in DFT is the many-electron spin density, ρ. The spin-polarized Kohn–Sham formalism involves a determinant formed from a set of N fictitious single-particle spin-orbitals corresponding to a noninteracting system of electrons with the same spin densities, ρα and ρβ, as the real system, where ρ is the sum of ρα and ρβ, the spin density ρα is the 3-dimensional electron density of all spin-up electrons, and ρβ is the same for spin-down electrons. In the original Kohn–Sham formalism (applicable to closed-shell molecules and nonmagnetic solids), ρα equals ρβ. (The original Kohn–Sham formalism may also be labeled spin-restricted Kohn–Sham or restricted Kohn–Sham, and the spin-polarized version may be called spin-unrestricted or unrestricted.) We note that “spin density” is a generic term for the density associated with the subset of electrons characterized by the same definite value of Sz, i.e., either α or β (thus one might say “spin-up density and spin-down density” rather than “spin densities”). In a many-electron system comprised of both spin-up and spin-down electrons, the term spin-density is also sometimes used to refer to the position-dependent difference between the up and down spin densities, or to the vector analog of this quantity. To avoid confusion, in this article we will refer to the difference density as the spin polarization density.Density functional theory (DFT) has now become the preferred method for electronic structure theory for complex chemical systems, in part because its cost scales more favorably with system size than does the cost of correlated WFT, and yet it competes well in accuracy except for very small systems. This is true even in organic chemistry, but the advantages of DFT are still greater for metals, especially transition metals. The reason for this added advantage is static electron correlation.It is now well appreciated that quantitatively accurate electronic structure calculations must include electron correlation. It is convenient to recognize two types of electron correlation, the first called dynamical electron correlation and the second called static correlation, near-degeneracy correlation, or nondynamical correlation. Dynamical correlation is a short-range effect by which electrons avoid one another to reduce electron repulsion. It is a very general effect for all finite systems containing two or more electrons. Accounting for dynamical correlation by a configuration interaction wave function is very slowly convergent and requires a very large number of configurations. Other correlation effects, which are very system specific and can be either medium ranged or long ranged, can be accounted for to a large extent by mixing a small number (sometimes two, sometimes more) of configurations that are “nearly” degenerate.8,9 Such correlation effects are called static or near-degeneracy correlation and systems exhibiting significant static correlation effects are often called multi-reference systems;10 likewise, WFT methods based on multi-configurational zero-order states are often called multi-reference methods. Due to partially filled d subshells, and nearly degenerate (n + 1)s and nd subshells, systems containing transition metals often have a plethora of low-lying nearly degenerate states, and near-degeneracy correlation effects on the ground-state structure, electron distribution, and energy of transition metal systems can be very large. Even though static correlation can often be accounted for to a zero-order approximation by a small number of configurations, it is often very difficult to include correlation effects in a well balanced way in WFT calculations on multi-reference systems.11,12 DFT, however, remains simple for such systems and is often surprisingly accurate. This empirical fact adds to the advantage of computational efficiency in making DFT a preferred method for transition metal chemistry.The subject of transition-metal DFT is too large for any single review to be complete. We selected recent papers that best illustrate the promise of DFT in a number of very active areas of transition-metal chemistry, and we also include some older references that help to put them in perspective. We largely exclude biological applications, which deserve and receive13–17 their own reviews.Section 2 reviews the theory, section 3 contains some comments on methodology, and section 4 reviews validation studies. Section 5 reviews recent applications and section 6 contains concluding remarks.2. Overview of DFT and functionals2.1 Fundamental backgroundKohn–Sham spin-orbitals, ψjσ where σ is α or β and j denotes the other quantum numbers, are obtained by a self-consistent field (SCF) calculation and are formally functions of the exact density of the system. Then (1)where σ is the spin component (α or β), the spin-orbitals are normalized, and the sum is over occupied orbitals of a given spin component. The electronic energy of the system is approximated as a sum of four terms, Tn, εne, εee, and εxc. Tn is the kinetic energy of a system of noninteracting electrons with the same spin densities as the real system; εne is the interaction of the electron distribution with the nuclear framework; εee is the classical Coulomb energy of the spin densities interacting with each other and with themselves; and εxc, called the exchange–correlation energy, is everything else (everything except Tn, εne, and εee). Therefore εxc includes the interaction correction to Tn, the correction to Vee for the fact that real electrons do not interact with themselves, the exchange energy (due to the indistinguishability of electrons exchanging their space and spin variables), and the correlation energy (due to the fact that the many-electron spin densities are not uncorrelated products of spin-orbital densities). εxc is written as a functional, called the spin-density functional, of the spin densities. Since the Kohn–Sham spin-orbitals are functions of the spin-densities, εxc can depend explicitly on the spin densities and also implicitly on them by depending on the spin-orbitals. Direct dependence on the spin-densities can also include a dependence on their derivatives (e.g., the magnitudes of their gradients, their Laplacians, etc.). The Hohenberg–Kohn theorem2 shows that the density functional exists; but a closed-form expression for the exact spin-density functional does not exist, and there are no systematic routes to improving an approximate functional. Nevertheless useful approximations have been obtained, and—by a series of fits and starts—they keep getting better.The effective potential corresponding to εxc is generated from a functional of the spin densities. The spin-polarized Kohn–Sham formalism and the spin-density functional are usually just called Kohn–Sham theory and the density functional, and approximations to the latter are also called density functionals. The density functional is usually written as the sum of an “exchange” part and a “correlation” part. One should be careful though because the meaning of these terms is different in DFT and in WFT. In particular, DFT correlation includes only dynamic correlation, and DFT exchange includes not only exchange but also some static correlation, although the latter is present in an unspecified and uncontrolled way.18,19 In subsection 2.2 we introduce some exchange and correlation density functionals, and in subsections 2.4 and 2.5 we describe a greater number of them.Transition metal chemistry often involves open-shell systems and excited states. Kohn–Sham theory is not general enough to treat all open-shell systems or excited states.20–22 Although generalized Kohn–Sham theories have been advanced to overcome this limitation, they are not in widespread use. Thus one encounters difficulties not just due to inaccurate density functionals but due to Kohn–Sham theory itself. There is a rich theoretical literature on these questions, but it contains more than one point of view, and much practical work in DFT involves using approximate functionals in a rough-and-ready way (see, e.g., section 5.1). Despite such issues, Kohn–Sham theory, even with approximate functionals, is often the most accurate available approach for practical work on a given system, especially for complex systems.One type of generalized Kohn–Sham theory that is in widespread use is often called hybrid DFT, and it involves combining Hartree–Fock exchange, which is orbital-dependent, with explicit functions of local spin densities and their gradients. (Note that one can also treat Hartree–Fock exchange within the ungeneralized Kohn–Sham framework by using the “optimized effective potential” (OEP) method,23,24 but we shall not consider this formalism in detail within the present review.) Further generalizing hybrid functionals to include dependences on the local Laplacians of the spin densities or on the local spin kinetic energies computed from the spin-orbitals yields what are called hybrid meta functionals, and these are the most powerful functionals now available. Although one should distinguish between Kohn–Sham and generalized Kohn–Sham methods, and making fundamental progress at extending DFT to arbitrarily complex systems certainly will require careful attention to the fundamentals of the theory,25 especially for magnetic properties,26 most practical algorithms in popular use ignore such issues and address the theory from a computational perspective with approximate methods and procedures being accepted or abandoned based on their success or failure for practical predictions, i.e., empirically. Since the present review is application oriented, we will concentrate on such practical aspects and put these fundamental issues aside for now. We note that extended coverage of applications, as opposed to the theory, is included in this review and can be found in section 5.One should be careful not to overinterpret the Kohn–Sham orbitals. They correspond to a fictitious noninteracting system with the same electron density as the correct many-body function. They are introduced primarily to get an approximation for the kinetic energy, which equals T = ½τα + ½τβ(2)where (3)where ħ is Planck’s constant divided by 2π, and me is the mass of an electron. Since the density computed from the Kohn–Sham orbitals is an approximation to the exact density (it is inexact only because we do not know the true density functional), one-electron properties like dipole moments are meaningful. But most properties that depend on individual orbitals should be interpreted with care. One important exception is the orbital energy of the HOMO. This is correctly interpreted27 as the negative of the lowest ionization potential (for solids that would be the work function). Nevertheless many studies, including a large number of those cited in this review, do employ DFT molecular orbitals to interpret the electronic origins of chemical bonding and reactivity.An issue of great concern in many cases is the proper treatment of noncovalent interactions. For two ground-state closed-shell spherical atoms (for example, Zn and Ne), the interaction potential at long distances decreases as R−6, where R is the distance between the atoms. In the region where the electron densities of the interacting monomers do not overlap, the long-range forces can be expressed in an asymptotic series in powers of 1/R by using WFT, a multipole expansion, and perturbation theory, and the forces in this region of R are called dispersion forces. The asymptotic series diverges at smaller R,28 and this is sometimes modeled by truncating the asymptotic series and adding damping factors to the retained terms.29,30 Semiempirical analytic functions for potential energies are usually called molecular mechanics (MM), and MM terms of this form are sometimes added to DFT to improve the interaction potentials at large R, but this is not a fully satisfactory method for several reasons. First of all, the semiempirical damping functions are somewhat arbitrary and must be readjusted when the underlying DFT method is improved. Secondly, the usual functional forms are not uniformly valid, failing, for example, for metallic nanostructures.31 A completely satisfactory solution to including long-range noncovalent interactions in DFT will probably ultimately be based on the random phase approximation for correlation energy,32,33 but in chemistry we are usually more interested in noncovalent interactions at medium range, for example at the distances typical of van der Waals molecules or of 1,3 interactions (geminal interactions). At such distances, overlap of the change distributions of the interacting moieties cannot be neglected (for example, at the van der Waals minimum the gradient of the sum of the repulsive interactions is equal in magnitude to the gradient of the sum of the attractive interactions), and some recent density functionals, especially those involving kinetic energy density that were developed with special attention to medium-range exchange and correlation energy (see section 2.2), do already seem to provide very useful estimates of the medium-range correlation energy in such interactions.34–40 The best way to include medium-range correlation energy in DFT is not understood in satisfactory detail, just as it is not understood in satisfactory detail how correlation functionals include other kinds of dynamical correlation energy.There are so many reviews of DFT that even a review of the reviews would be very long, but it is still useful to point the reader to some previous reviews. For fundamental background we mention only a few particularly lucid expositions.1,41–49 We also mention two recent papers by Perdew and coworkers that give useful perspective on various aspects of DFT.50,512.2 Introduction to functionals(We consider only collinear functionals in this section, that is, functionals for collinear DFT—see section 3.2 for a definition of collinear DFT.)The oldest approximation to a density functional is the Dirac–Slater approximation52,53 to exchange. This must be renormalized for use with Kohn–Sham theory.5 This is now usually called the local spin density approximation (LSDA) since it depends only on spin densities (not their derivatives or orbitals). It can be derived from the exact exchange energy of a uniform electron gas (UEG), which is a somewhat unphysical system in which a constant electron density is neutralized by a constant background positive charge (rather than by discrete nuclear charges). The UEG correlation energy can be calculated numerically54 and fit in various ways55,56 and that leads to the LSDA for correlation, which has recently been thoroughly reviewed.57The next level of complexity in density functionals is to add a dependence on the gradients of the spin densities; in particular the functional depends on the unitless reduced spin-density gradients, sσ, which are proportional to |∇ρσ|/ρ4/3σ. (Usually, though, we just say it depends on ∇ρσ.) Such functionals are called generalized gradient approximations (GGAs). Popular GGAs include BP86, where B denotes Becke’s 1988 exchange functional (usually abbreviated as B88 or just B),58 and P86 denotes Perdew’s 1986 correlation functional;59 BLYP, where LYP denotes the Lee–Yang–Parr correlation functional;60 PW91, from Perdew and Wang in 1991;61 and a functional of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE).62 The modified Perdew–Wang functional of Adamo and Barone,63 called mPWPW, is very similar to PBE. Notice that GGAs may combine an exchange functional from one source with a correlation functional from another, or they may both be from the same source. Thus BP86 and BLYP combine B88 exchange with P86 or LYP correlation, respectively; PW91 combines PW91 exchange with PW91 correlation; PBE combines PBE exchange with PBE correlation; mPWPW combines mPW exchange with PW91 correlation; SLYP combines the Slater LSDA exchange with LYP correlation; and PBELYP combines PBE exchange with LYP correlation.Density functional theory with LSDA or GGA functionals includes self-exchange and self-correlation, both of which are unphysical. As a consequence such functions tend to predict too small a HOMO–LUMO gap in molecules or too small a band gap in solids. Furthermore they tend to underestimate the relative stability of high-spin states in molecules or of high magnetic moments in solids. An important consequence of the error in LSDA and GGA exchange functionals is that an electron interacts with its own charge density; this unphysically raises the energy of localized states and causes DFT to produce excessively delocalized charge distributions64–73 and to incorrectly predict some materials to be metals rather than insulators. Systems for which these errors are especially severe are sometimes called strongly correlated systems because delocalization is associated with the dominance of kinetic energy terms, and localization is associated with dominance by screened Coulomb potentials,74 and electron correlation is important for electron localization because correlation minimizes the interatomic repulsion of electrons near the same center. The connection between covalency and an insulator gap has been especially well studied in the metal oxide insulators like MnO, FeO, CoO, and NiO.75–92 By including partial or full Hartree–Fock exchange one can decrease or eliminate, respectively, self-exchange, and by including kinetic energy density one can eliminate self-correlation50,79 and decrease the sensitivity to the percentage of Hartree–Fock exchange.39 Hartree–Fock exchange and kinetic energy density thus reduce some of the inaccuracies of the LSDA and GGA functionals while retaining many of the computational advantages of GGAs as compared to WFT.The density functionals that perform best for main-group chemistry are not the same as those that perform best for transition metals.93–95 Whereas in solid-state chemistry local functionals are often chosen, partly because they are easier to apply to extended systems, in organic chemistry hybrid functionals are the more typical choice because of their demonstrated superior predictions of energetics; by far the most popular such hybrid functional is B3LYP, which is a hybrid GGA put together by Stephens et al.96 on the basis of earlier work by Becke and others,58,60,97 especially a hybrid GGA called B3PW91.97 The correlation functionals of B3PW91 and B3LYP are based on PW91 and LYP, respectively but are optimized specifically for use in a hybrid functional,97,98 whereas the most straightforward hybrid functionals result from simply replacing a percentage (here called X) of local density functional exchange by Hartree–Fock exchange. Such functionals often have a “1” in their name to denote this one parameter (although there are usually other parameters in the local part of the exchange–correlation functional). Examples include B1LYP99 (BLYP with X = 25), mPW1PW63 (mPWPW with X = 25), PBE1PBE99,100 (PBE with X = 25, also called PBEh [but it is not the only functional called PBEh] and here called PBE0, which is its most common name), and MPW1K101 (mPWPW with X = 42.8). One occasionally sees a functional, e.g., BH&HLYP, with X = 50. In comparison, B3LYP and B3PW91 both have X = 20 (and each has two other new parameters as well). Reiher et al.,102 on the basis of predicting the relative energetics of various spin states of FeII complexes, suggested adjusting X to 15 in B3LYP; they called the resulting functional B3LYP*. Later, Brewer et al.103 found that X = 13 works best for a set of iron(II) and iron(III) complexes. Bredow and Gerson81 proposed a PW91-based hybrid functional, called HF + PWGGA81 or PW1PW,104 with X = 20, which was optimized to the band gaps and thermodynamic and geometric properties of MgO, CoO, and NiO.In further related work, Radon et al.105 performed CASPT2 calculations, a method that uses second-order WFT perturbation theory to add dynamical correlation to the complete active space self-consistent-field WFT method, CASSCF, which is a multi-configurational method that includes only a small fraction of the dynamical correlation. They assumed the CASPT2 calculations on single molecules of bis(acetylacetonate) cobalt(II), usually abbreviated Co(acac)2, to be of benchmark quality, and they found a tetrahedral quartet ground state. They then found that BP86, PBE, and TPSS (all with X = 0) predict the ground state to be a planar doublet, whereas B3LYP, PBE0, and TPSSh (with X = 20, 25, and 10, respectively) predict a tetrahedral quartet. The crystal is known experimentally to involve planar Co(acac)2, where the difference from the single-molecule case is apparently due to π–π stacking interactions.Mixing in Hartree–Fock exchange is not the only way to include nonlocality. The nonlocal character of the true density functional is more general and can be summarized by noting that the exchange–correlation energy density at a given point in space depends not just on the local properties of the density at that point but rather on the density everywhere. The Kohn–Sham orbitals also depend on the density everywhere. Some methods of including nonlocality that are even older than hybrid DFT are the weighted density approximation106–111 (WDA), the self-interaction correction (SIC) method,112,113 the average-density SIC method,114,115 and the screened exchange (sX) approximation of Bylander and Kleinman.110,111,116 The WDA is particularly interesting in that it is based on approximating the exchange–correlation charge density in a way that conserves the total exchange charge and the depth of the exchange hole.An approximate version of the SIC method based on the premise that most of the self-interaction error arises from localized regions has been introduced,117,118 variously called atomic SIC (ASIC) and pseudo-SIC. Pemmaraju et al.119 further developed the ASIC method and suggested it for use in modeling quantum transport. Although ASIC accomplishes some of its goals in correcting self interaction, it still suffers from the inadequacy of being built on the LSDA.120Another approach to reducing these inaccuracies is to invoke the so called DFT + U approximation,76,121,122 which becomes LSDA + U or GGA + U, depending on the type of density functional employed. The +U modification ameliorates self-interaction by using system-dependent parameters (for solids, the parameters should probably also depend on pressure or molar volume and on phase, and for molecules on geometry). The +U modification takes one out of the realm of DFT and into a less rigorous model Hamiltonian approach, but it is instructive in the way it corrects DFT. The method is approximate and not uniquely defined123 and is employed in a variety of inequivalent ways by different researchers, but the various versions attempt to enforce the same physical corrections by adding a Hubbard-like124 term to the DFT energy; this term has the form (in the version78,85 of DFT + U employed in the VASP program): (4)where U−J (sometimes called U) is an empirical constant, and ρσ is the one-electron density matrix of metal d electrons (sometimes metal f electrons) for spin σ. A key issue in essentially all implementations is the inclusion of the Hubbard-like term only in a basis of localized d electrons (or f electrons). The Hubbard-like term adds a penalty for non-idempotent density matrices in this subspace and therefore it favors filling d orbitals that are localized on one particular atom78 (a “correlation” effect), which sometimes also favors high-spin states on each atom and therefore less covalent bonding in molecules or antiferromagnetic coupling in solids. The +U correction would be expected to be smaller for a GGA than for LSDA, and smaller yet or not needed for a well balanced hybrid functional; for accurate results, the +U correction should depend on the structure.125In some cases, for example solid MnO,87,126,127 FeO,88,126,127 and Co,88,126,127 the +U approach and the inclusion of partial Hartree–Fock exchange lead to similar results, which are much better than GGA, and one anticipates that the methods would be even more similar if the Hubbard-like term were included for the entire electronic space rather than just the metal d space.85As just one example, we note that LSDA,128–130 BLYP,131 PW91,129 and PBE130 predict that FeO is a metal (no band gap), whereas LSDA with SIC,126,127 LSDA + U84 and hybrid DFT (BLYP with X≥ 10, from ref. 131) correctly predict it to be an insulator. However, the detailed nature of the crystal orbitals is predicted differently by the various methods.131A key issue in +U methods is that they approximate the energy not only in terms of the electron density but more generally in terms of the density matrix. Further development of this line of approach includes LDA + DMFT132 (in which the LSDA approximation is combined with dynamical mean-field theory). We will not include DFT + U or LDA + DMFT in the rest of this review, but the reader is directed to a few particularly relevant references for further reading.85,132–149 A related approach that attempts to improve on LDA + U is the recent Gutzwiller DFT150,151 (LDA + G).2.3 Introduction to band theorySince DFT saw its initial development in the physics community but has since become an essential tool in chemistry, there is a certain difficulty in reconciling the conceptual frameworks used in the two disciplines. This is especially true for the language developed around the important application of band theory, and this language now occurs in many contexts in the DFT literature.As in many areas of chemical physics, a useful first step is defining terms, and that is especially important for chemists reading the solid-state physics literature where many applications of density functional theory to systems containing transition metals have been reported. One key quantity associated with a solid is its “gap”, but there is more than one way in which this is defined; alternatively one can say that there is more than one gap. First, one can define the gap by using quasielectrons and holes, sometimes called quasiparticles.152 The energy to remove an electron from a system is called the ionization potential (for metals it is called the work function), I, and it is equal to EN−1−EN where N is the number of electrons in the material or molecule under study. Experimentally, I can be measured by photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) [which is also called photoemission spectroscopy and which could be ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) or X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)] or by inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES). The energy to add an electron is called the electron affinity, A, equal to EN−EN+1. One definition of the gap is I−A.153 This is sometimes called the physical gap, the quasiparticle gap, or the fundamental gap.The gap is also sometimes associated with excitation energies, as in optical spectroscopy. This may be called the optical gap, and it is defined by the onset energy of absorption. An optical excitation does not change N. In quasiparticle language, the calculation of optical properties requires calculating the interaction between a quasielectron (also called an electron or a particle) and a hole (and their exchange counterparts).154–157 The optical spectrum of a solid is the frequency-dependent imaginary part of the macroscopic dielectric function, and the spectrum is sometimes calculated using this equivalence.Thirdly, the gap may be associated with the difference between the energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) or highest occupied crystal orbital (HOCO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or lowest unoccupied crystal orbital (LUCO). This orbital-energy gap is sometimes called the independent-particle gap, the single-particle gap, or the one-electron gap. Strictly speaking, the orbital-energy gap is only an approximation to the physical quasiparticle gap or the optical gap. Thus, orbital-energy band gaps are often 30–100% below the quasiparticle band gaps in semiconductors and insulators.158,159 The correction of the orbital energy gap to the quasiparticle one is sometimes called a quasiparticle shift160 or a quasiparticle correction,159 and the correction of the physical gap to the optical one, due to electron–hole interaction,161 is sometimes called an exciton shift or a local-field effect. In practice there is typically some cancellation between the quasiparticle shift and the exciton shift because the former increases the gap, and electron–hole attraction lowers it (just as electron–nucleus interactions in atoms lower the bound states below the ionization potential). The electron–hole unit is a two-body quasiparticle, and it is called an exciton. In semiconductors and other high-dielectric materials, the electron–hole interaction is often weak (∼0.1 eV), and the exciton is spread out over several unit cells (this is called a Mott–Wannier exciton). In insulators the exciton may be localized and can be thought of as a mobile electronically excited state of a molecule or formula unit (such an exciton is called a Frenkel exciton); the exciton shift of a Frenkel exciton can be very significant, 1 eV or more.Note that the expression “band gap” is itself ambiguous since the word “band” is used to describe not only the quasiparticle energies as a function of momentum ħk but also the independent-particle approximation to those curves.The quasiparticle shifts may be approximated by the GW approximation159,162–165 for the self energy operator (also called the mass operator or effective mass operator), where G is a one-particle Green’s function, and W is the dynamically screened Coulomb interaction. The quasiparticle shift calculated this way is sometimes called the GW shift. The GW approximation is a many-body perturbative solution of the exact equation, called the Dyson equation, for the self-energy operator, and the calculations often begin with a DFT calculation160,166–169 (just as perturbative solutions for molecules often begin with a Hartree–Fock calculation). The non-self-consistent version of the GW method is called G0W0.160,170 The solution to the Dyson equation may also be approximated by uniform electron gas considerations.171 At a higher level one would solve the Dyson equation without approximations. Exciton effects may be calculated by the Bethe–Salpeter equation involving the two-particle Green’s function.159,163Onida et al.159 have provided a comparison of the GW and Bethe–Salpeter approaches commonly used in solid-state physics to the TD-DFT approach commonly used for optical spectra in chemical physics. Whereas the Bethe–Salpter equation starts with the quasiparticle states corresponding to (N− 1)- and (N + 1)-electron systems, as calculated for example by the GW approximation, TD-DFT works directly with the N-electron systems.172 TD-DFT is based on the response of a system to a time-dependent perturbation, and Onida et al.159 point out that “the system’s response is directly related to the N-particle excited states of an N-particle system similar[ly] to the way the one-particle Green’s function is related to the (N + 1)- and (N− 1)-particle excited states of the same system”. Both approaches are exact in principle but subject to inevitable error due to the practical approximations, such as approximate density functionals or the truncation173 of TD-DFT response at linear terms. The exchange–correlation potential of a TD-DFT calculation must provide the same physics as self-energy corrections and electron–hole interactions in the GW and Bethe–Salpeter calculations.159In principle, the exchange–correlation functional of TD-DFT is time-dependent and depends on the entire past history of the density. If the time-dependent potential changes slowly, the system adjusts adiabatically, and one can approximate the time-dependent exchange–correlation functional by the time-independent (local-in-time, frequency-independent) ground-state exchange–correlation functional. This is called the adiabatic approximation.174 Most TD-DFT calculations employ this approximation.A complication with the traditional physics-literature hierarchy described above is that hybrid functionals, which until recently were the starting point for most chemistry applications but very few physics ones, include some of the interactions often included in the physics community by the GW perturbative approach to the exchange–correlation functional. In particular, Hartree–Fock exchange is similar to the screened exchange interaction in GW theory. Therefore hybrid functionals can be a better starting point than local functionals for GW calculations; this leads to smaller quasiparticle shifts.160 Hybrid functionals can also be very useful without GW shifts because they are less expensive than the GW method and permit economical self-consistent calculations of electronic eigenfunctions;83 the same can be said for the sX approximation.175 The poor accuracy of band gaps computed with local functionals may ultimately be attributed to the nonanalytic dependence of the effective potential on the density due to the derivative discontinuity at integer numbers of electrons.153,176–1792.4 More types of functionalsLet’s again start with language. Many chemists label any functional that depends only on local properties, e.g., LSDA or GGA, as “local”79,180–184 and other functionals, such as hybrid GGAs, are called nonlocal. This language focuses on the algorithmically important consideration of whether the effective potential in the generalized Kohn–Sham equations can be applied as a multiplicative operator or requires an integral operator (rather than focusing on the strict locality of the functional relationship). We will follow this usage in the present review. In the older literature, GGAs are sometimes called nonlocal or gradient-corrected, but this usage is now becoming uncommon. Some chemists call local functionals “pure” but we deprecate this usage because it could imply to nonspecialists that the unknown exact functional is local, which is untrue. Some physicists separate local functionals into strictly local, as in the LSDA, and “semilocal”, which is used to describe GGAs (and meta functionals, which are described in the next paragraph). We will not use the “semilocal” language. Although we distinguished the Kohn–Sham equations from the generalized Kohn–Sham equations in section 2.1, in the rest of this article we will call them both the Kohn–Sham equations.Local functionals may involve more than just spin densities and reduced spin density gradients. The next level of complexity is to introduce either ∇2ρα or the magnitude of the spin kinetic energy density. The latter is given by ½τσ. For a one-electron system, ρα is equal to |ψ1α|2 and τα becomes ℏ2|∇ρα|2/4meρα. Thus the deviation of τα from this quantity may be used to “detect” one-electron regions and eliminate spurious self-interactions and self-correlation in such regions.79,185Functionals that depend on the spin kinetic energy density or ∇2ρα are called meta functionals. The only established meta functionals are meta GGAs, which depend on ρα, ∇ρα, and ∇2ρα or on ρα, ∇ρα, and τα. Adding Hartree–Fock exchange to meta GGAs yields hybrid meta GGAs, which were already mentioned in section 2.1.Some early examples of meta GGAs are Becke95186 (usually abbreviated B95) for correlation and TPSS187 for exchange and correlation. The B95 correlation functional was originally combined with B88 exchange, yielding BB95. Adding an optimized amount of Hartree–Fock exchange to BB95 yields B1B95 where the “1” stands for the one optimized parameter, X. Optimizing X for TPSS yields a functional called TPSSh where “h” denotes hybrid.Notice that hybrid GGAs, meta GGAs, and hybrid meta GGAs depend explicitly on the occupied spin orbitals as well as on the spin densities and their derivatives. The next level of complexity is to introduce a dependence on the unoccupied spin orbitals. This allows one to model correlation energy in a way analogous to how it is modeled in WFT. Functionals depending on unoccupied orbitals are called fifth-rung functionals. Hybrid functionals depending on unoccupied orbitals are sometimes called doubly hybrid functionals. Such functionals have not yet been widely applied to transition metals.A very promising approach, also not yet applied widely to transition metals, involves range-separated hybrid functionals and local hybrid functionals. Range-separated functionals188–196 involve separating the electron–electron interaction into a short-range and a long-range part,188–195 or even into three parts196 (short-, middle-, and long-range) and treating the contribution of one part of the exchange energy by the Hartree–Fock method and the other part or parts by a local exchange functional. In local hybrid functionals,197–201 the percentage of Hartree–Fock exchange that is mixed with density functional exchange depends on the point in space. The percentage could depend on any local function of the point in space; for example, τα197,198 or the reduced spin density gradient, sσ.199–201 A particularly successful range-separated functional is that of Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof (HSE).1912.5 Still more functionalsSo far we have introduced the following functional types and functionals:1. local: LSDA approximation. Various approximations or fits to UEG exchange and correlation energies. (All LSDA functionals are very similar, and in the present review we will not distinguish them.)2. local: GGAs. BP86, SLYP, BLYP, PW91, PBE, PBELYP, mPWPW, mPWLYP.3. nonlocal: hybrid GGAs. B3PW91, B3LYP, B1LYP, PBE0, MPW1K, B3LYP*, HSE.4. local: meta GGAs. BB95, TPSS.5. nonlocal: hybrid meta GGAs. B1B95, TPSSh.In this section we introduce additional functionals of types 2–5.GGAs. GGAs for exchange are defined by a single curve corresponding to the enhancement of exchange as a function of sσ. For larger sσ, addressing the GGA exchange functionals mentioned in section 2.2, B88 has the largest enhancement, PW91 has the lowest, and PBE and mPW are in between these two. Other functional forms for this curve have also been proposed, or sometimes the curve is found by multiparameter optimization. In the former category we mention ten particularly interesting exchange functionals. In 1996, Gill202 introduced a functional now called G96 with the goal of finding an exchange functional that performs as well as B88 but has a simpler form. In 1998, Zhang and Yang203 introduced a revised PBE functional called revPBE, with the goal of obtaining more accurate atomic absolute energies and molecular atomization energies; then in 1999, Hammer et al.204 introduced another (closely related) revision usually called RPBE, with the goal of obtaining improved chemisorption energies for small molecules on metal surfaces. In 2000, Vitos et al.205 parameterized an exchange functional, called LAG, against the local Airy gas model206 in an attempt to improve the predictions for bulk properties of late transition metals and semiconductors and the exchange energies of surfaces. The local Airy gas is an “edge” electron gas, designed to mimic electronic properties near an edge, such as a solid surface (that is, a solid/vacuum interface) or the periphery of a molecule. In 2001, Handy and Cohen207 introduced an exchange functional called OPTX, usually abbreviated O. This exchange functional was designed to predict more accurate exchange energies of atoms, but it does not satisfy the UEG limit. In 2004, Xu and Goddard208 introduced an exchange functional called X. This X exchange functional was designed to improve noncovalent interaction energies; it is very similar to mPW. In 2005, Armiento and Mattsson209 presented a functional, now called AM05, optimized against the jellium-surface exchange–correlation energy (which has recently been clarified210) and designed to give improved lattice constants, bulk moduli, and vacancy formation energies. In 2006 Wu and Cohen211 designed a new exchange functional, now called WC, with the goal of improving lattice constants, crystal structures, and metal surface energies. Their derivation was based on attempting to enforce the expansion about the UEG limit through fourth order in sσ. However, due to an error in their derivation, the claimed accuracy through fourth order does not hold;212 their functional must therefore be judged on empirical grounds rather than on the basis of the gradient expansion. In 2008, Perdew et al.213 empirically modified the PBE functional to improve the predicted lattice constants. Their functional design strategy involved fitting the jellium surface exchange–correlation energies, as done previously for a GGA by Armiento and Mattsson. Also in 2008, Zhao and Truhlar214 derived a functional, called SOGGA, that precisely satisfies the gradient expansion through second order for both exchange and correlation (none of the other functionals discussed so far does this). The G96, OPTX, and X exchange functionals are usually combined with the LYP correlation functional yielding G96LYP, OLYP, and XLYP, respectively. OPTX is also used with PBE correlation, yielding OPBE. The LAG exchange functional is used with the LSDA for correlation. The AM05, PBEsol, and SOGGA functionals have corresponding correlation functionals designed to complement them. The revPBE, RPBE, and WC functionals are used with the PBE correlation functional.The above functionals are not unrelated. None of them satisfies all the known exact constraints on the density functional, and they involve different choices of which constraints to satisfy. Extensive discussion of the constraints satisfied and not satisfied by these functionals, the relationships between the functionals, and how the functionals’ characteristics affect their performance has been provided by Zhang and Yang,203 Perdew and coworkers,213,215,216 Mattsson and coworkers,217 and Zhao and Truhlar.214 Mattsson et al.218,219 have also provided further discussion of the importance of surface energy. The bottom line of these discussions is that different choices for the behavior of the density functionals determine whether a functional will be more accurate for interatomic spacings in lattices and small-molecule bonds or for solid-state cohesive energies and small-molecule energetics.214 The surface energy provides a third dimension to this discussion.216Hybrid GGAs. The very successful hybrid GGA called B3LYP has already been mentioned in section 2.2. Sousa et al.220 analyzed the number of occurrences of various functional names in article titles and abstracts in the Web of Science over the 1990–2006 period and found that 80% of the references were to B3LYP, with a slightly higher percentage over the 2002–2006 period. For the 1990–2006 period the second most popular functional by this measure was the local BLYP (5%), followed by the hybrid GGA called B3PW91 (4%) and the local BP86 (3%). Another hybrid GGA, B3P86, which is similar to B3PW91 and B3LYP but with a different correlation functional, was fifth (2%). Hybrid density functionals, however, are still very expensive for periodic calculations on extended systems.221Other hybrid functionals that occur in this review are X3LYP, which is like B3LYP but with the X exchange functional replacing B88, and MPWLYP1M, which is like mPWLYP, but with a nonzero percentage X of Hartree–Fock exchange, optimized for metals.94A number of more sophisticated hybrid GGAs have been developed that go beyond combining separate GGAs for exchange and correlation with an optimized value of X. These include a sequence of multiparameter functionals from Becke, Handy, and Tozer and their coworkers: B98,222 B97-1,223 B97-2,224 and B97-3.225 By some measures B97-3 is the most accurate hybrid GGA for main-group chemistry, but, like B3LYP, it is inaccurate in general for transition metal chemistry.39Meta GGAs and hybrid meta GGAs. Becke, Boese, Perdew, and Savin and their collaborators and Zhao and Truhlar developed functionals including τσ in the correlation,186,226 the exchange,185,227–229 or both.79,187,230,231 Most of these density functionals can be used in either local or hybrid form. The τ-HCTH,207 BMK,208 and PW6B95205 functionals have been especially widely tested, as have the M05 and M06 families discussed below. Prior to 2005, no available density functional was among the better functionals for both transition metal chemistry and main group barrier heights. Good accuracy for both is important for studying, for example, organometallic catalysis or organic reactions. The former seemed to require zero or low Hartree–Fock exchange (X≳ 15), while the latter seemed to require high Hartree–Fock exchange (X≲ 40). Furthermore, no available functional predicted realistic noncovalent interactions for weakly interacting systems. The Minnesota 2005 hybrid meta functional,34 called M05, overcame both of these difficulties, with X = 28, by incorporating τσ into exchange and correlation in a balanced way, removing self-interaction errors in exchange and self-correlation errors in correlation, enforcing the UEG limit, and including a diverse set of data in the parameterization, in particular main-group atomization energies, ionization potentials, electron affinities, barrier heights, noncovalent interactions, and absolute atomic energies and transition metal ionization potentials and bond energies. The functional was parameterized against 35 data and initially tested against 231 data. A key parameterization strategy was to optimize X simultaneously with the other parameters in the density functional to reduce the reliance on compensating errors in the local component of exchange with errors in the correlation functional. The resulting M05 functional showed, for the first time, uniformly good results for main-group thermochemistry, kinetics, and noncovalent interactions and transition metal bond energies. No previous functional was accurate for more than two of these four categories.In a subsequent effort, Zhao and Truhlar38 attempted to find the best functional with X = 0. The motivations for this were twofold: (i) to learn more about the best functional form and (ii) to develop a functional with lower cost for large and extended systems. To obtain good results with X = 0 they required a more general form for the local exchange functional. Great care was taken to be sure that flexibility afforded by the parameterization procedure was not too large for the size and diversity of the chosen training sets. The resulting functional, called M06-L, had the best overall performance of any functional for a combination of thermochemistry, thermochemical kinetics, metallochemical and noncovalent interactions, bond lengths, and vibrational frequencies. The worst performance area was barrier heights, although these were predicted more accurately than by any other local functional and with about the same accuracy as the popular B3LYP functional.In later work, Zhao and Truhlar designed a functional with X = 100;232 this functional, called M06-HF, completely removed one-electron self-interaction error, but it is not recommended in general for transition metals or transition-metal compounds because they often have multi-reference character. Based on what was learned by designing M06-L and M06-HF, Zhao and Truhlar redesigned and re-optimized M05, yielding M06,39 which has X = 27, whereas M05 had X = 28.Zhao and Truhlar doubled the percentage of Hartree–Fock exchange in M05 and M06, yielding M05-2X233 and M06-2X,39 respectively, and they made two slightly improved versions of M06-2X, called M08-HX and M08-SO.234 These functionals are not recommended for transition metal chemistry, except for Zn, which Amin and Truhlar235 found to have density-functional requirements more like a main-group metal than a transition metal. (The Minnesota functionals have not been tested for Cd and Hg.) We called M08-HX a “high exchange” functional because there is no M08 functional whose exchange can be doubled. In this language, low exchange would be X in the 5–15 range, “standard exchange” would be X in the approximately 20–30 range, and high-exchange would be X in the 40–60 range.One advantage of M06-HF, as compared to most other functionals, is that it eliminates the long-range self-interaction error that has a disastrous effect on calculated charge transfer excitation energies.39,232 Another way to eliminate the long-range self-interaction error is with range-separated functionals that use Hartree–Fock exchange for the long-range part188,190 (unlike HSE,191 which uses it for the middle range). An example of such a functional is CAM-B3LYP.236Other general functionals encountered in this review are VSXC237 (also called VS98), a meta functional, MPW1B95,238 a hybrid meta functional formed from mPW exchange and B95 correlation, with X = 31, and OLAP3, a combination of OPTX with the LAP3239 correlation functional.Functionals with specific reaction parameters. Another type of functional is one in which the parameters are adjusted not in a general way for a broad range of systems, but rather to be as accurate as possible for a specific reaction or a small range of systems. Such a parametrization yields a function with specific reaction parameters (SRP). The SRP approach was first developed for small-molecule reactions in the gas phase,240,241 and it has recently242 been extended to predict a potential energy surface for H2 chemisorbing on Cu(111).3. Methodology and software3.1 Methodology: nonrelativistic aspectsMost applications of DFT in chemistry are carried out using large electronic structure packages, and one way to understand the available methodology is to review the capabilities of these packages. Many of these packages are updated frequently, and many of them have web pages where new versions and added capabilities can be monitored. In addition in many cases the capabilities of the packages have been summarized in journal articles. This section includes some of those references.One can distinguish various categories of calculations, e.g., molecules vs. solids, calculations with Gaussian basis sets vs. those based on plane waves or both243,244 Gaussians and plane waves, and all-electron calculations vs. those with effective core potentials245–265 (ECPs, also called pseudopotentials) to replace some or all of the core electrons. The options for treating core electrons are even more diverse when one includes methods like the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method,266–271 which is a frozen-core all-electron method. Some programs can carry out more than one kind of calculation; others can carry out only one kind. Programs employing periodic boundary conditions can include solid-state symmetry by sampling272–274 many k points in the Brillouin zone; they can be applied to crystalline systems with nonperiodic defects or surfaces by the supercell method,273,275,276 and they can be applied to liquids277 or isolated molecules278,279 by evaluating only the Γ point in the Brillouin zone. Several of the electronic structure packages also include dynamics modules.280For calculations on molecules, some programs employ or can employ a procedure281–284 called density fitting or resolution of the identity (RI) in which an auxiliary basis set is used to fit the electron density. In some cases this provides large savings in computer time for calculations on large molecules. For studying solids, a key procedure employed by several codes is variable-cell-shape molecular dynamics,285,286 which can be used to optimize structures as a function of pressure.Another methodological element that is becoming increasingly important is the combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) method, in which the electronic structure of a primary subsystem is treated by explicit quantum mechanics (QM) whereas the effect on the energy of the secondary subsystem (the rest of the entire system) is included by molecular mechanics. A key issue in such methods is how to treat the boundary when it passes through one or more bonds. The QM/MM method is widely used, for example in enzyme chemistry,287 but the QM/MM boundary is not usually placed through a bond to a transition metal. Ohnishi et al.288 have considered the question of how to truncate the QM system at a bond between a transition metal and a phosphorus. A long-term goal would be to develop a QM/MM method defined for boundaries passing through any kinds of bond.2893.2 Methodology: relativisticRelativistic effects are non-negligible for late 3d transition metals, important for 4d transition metals, and so important for 5d transition metals that they must be included for even a zero-order description.290 A fully relativistic calculation involves the four-component Dirac spinor operator, but this is seldom employed for transition metal chemistry, where, at least until recently, at most a two-component formalism has tended to be employed. A review from the point of view of DFT is available.291The reduction of the four-component formulation to a useful two-component one can be accomplished by transformations developed by Foldy and Wouthuysen,292 Douglas and Kroll,293 and Hess294–298 and van Lenthe299 and their coworkers, with the former work leading to the Douglas–Kroll–Hess (DKH) Hamiltonian and the latter to the zero-order-regular approximation299 (ZORA). Practical two-component formulations of the DKH and ZORA Hamiltonians suitable for use with DFT were reported by Malkin et al.297 and Mayer et al.300 and by van Lenthe et al.301 and Wang et al.,302 respectively. The reduction to two components eliminates the so-called small components associated with positrons (although these are usually called the small components, a more specific name is charge conjugation components). In two-component calculations, an atomic orbital is sometimes expressed as linear combination of spin-up and spin-down orbitals associated, respectively, with angular momentum j = l±½. A further reduction to a one-component formulation is also possible; this yields the spin–orbit operator in its familiar form,303 as well as a spin–spin term. In the one-component formulation, the spin direction is fixed along an arbitrary axis (the z axis). This is sometimes called the collinear approximation or the spin-free formulation, even when the orbitals depend on the spin. In the collinear approximation, the spin polarization density is simply the difference of the spin-up density and the spin-down density. (Note that the spin polarization density is usually called the spin density, but the term “spin density” is also used to refer to the spin-up and spin-down densities in the collinear approximation, so there is a possible source of confusion.)In two-component calculations—in contrast to a collinear calculation, in which every electron at every point in space is either spin-up or spin-down along the same axis—one has the flexibility for each one-electron orbital to have a spin pointing along any axis and, furthermore, the spin associated with a given orbital need not point in the same direction at all points in space. A formulation with this flexibility is called a noncollinear treatment.7,297,300 This is accomplished by writing each orbital as a general spinor, that is, as a linear combination of a spin-up orbital times a spin-up spin function and a spin-down orbital times a spin-down spin function.The relativistic formulation leads to a more satisfactory definition of the spin polarization density.304 In particular the spin polarization density is defined using the length of the spin magnetization vector rather than z component of the spin magnetization vector, which means that the spin polarization vector has the desirable property of being invariant to rotations in spin space.7 When we refer to a noncollinear treatment, we imply this improved definition of the spin polarization density.In a spin-restricted DFT calculation, all spin orbitals have the form of a product of a spatial ket and spin ket, all spin kets have the same fixed quantization axis, and every occupied spin-up spin orbital is paired with a spin-down spin orbital having the same spatial part. In a “spin-polarized” or “spin-unrestricted” DFT calculation, the spin orbitals still have the form of a space-spin product with a single quantization axis of the spin parts, but now the spatial orbitals are not doubly occupied; for example the spatial part of a spin-up 1s orbital need not be the same as the spatial part of a corresponding 1s spin-down orbital. In a noncollinear calculation, every orbital is a general spinor, with complex spatial parts. (As mentioned in section 1, it is common to say “restricted” or “unrestricted” rather than spin-restricted or spin-unrestricted. Furthermore, the noncollinear formalism is sometimes called the generalized spin orbital305 or general spin orbital306 description.) One can use general spinors not only in two-component relativistic calculations, but also in nonrelativistic SCF calculations; for Hartree–Fock theory this is called general Hartree–Fock theory (more general than spin-unrestricted Hartree–Fock theory),307–309 and as a generalization of Kohn–Sham theory it is called generalized spin density functional theory310 or noncollinear spin density functional theory.311 These nonrelativistic formulations are useful for treating biradicals and certain magnetic problems.The spin-dependent version of DFT developed by von Barth and Hedin6 and Rajagopal and Callaway7 was originally formulated for a general noncollinear system, but until recently it has usually been applied only to spin-polarized systems in the collinear approximation. The key distinction is that a noncollinear density functional depends on the off-diagonal elements of the spin density matrix as well as the diagonal elements.An illustrative example of a system requiring a noncollinear treatment is provided by a spin frustrated Cr monolayer on a face-centered-cubic Cu(111) substrate312 or an unsupported Cr(111) monolayer.313,314 However, noncollinear magnetism can also be important in molecules as small as Fe3,315–317 Fe5,315–319 Cr3,314,320,321 and Cr5.320–322Relativistic effects may be classified into scalar effects and vector effects; the former are due to mass–velocity and Darwin terms in the relativistic kinetic energy, and the latter arise from magnetic interactions involving the operators associated with spin and orbital angular momentum.290 Spin–orbit effects can be included by treating the spin–orbit terms by perturbation theory or variationally in one-component calculations or by a two-component calculation.290The main effect of the scalar relativistic terms is to shrink the s orbitals and, to a lesser extent,290,323–325 the p orbitals. This effect can be added to a nonrelativistic formulation by using ECPs determined in relativistic calculations on atoms. Such relativistic ECPs were recently tested for calculations on PdCO, where the relativistic effects are scalar in nature, and were found326 to perform excellently in reproducing calculations327 carried out with a relativistic Hamiltonian based on the regular approximation. When relativistic effects are to be treated explicitly, all-electron basis sets optimized for such calculations are required for good accuracy.328–3323.3 SoftwareThe Gaussian program333 is based on Gaussian basis sets. It is the most widely used program for isolated molecules, but it also supports periodic boundary conditions, as well as calculations with continuum solvation. Molecular calculations with local functionals can employ density fitting. It includes TD-DFT as well as DFT. It is very flexible in the choice of basis sets, effective core potentials, and density functionals, and it has excellent geometry optimizers and initial guesses for the self-consistent-field iterations. It supports analytic Hessians334 for all functionals (even meta and hybrid meta functionals), and it has classical dynamics capabilities and a very useful interface to external programs. An external interface to the POLYRATE335,336 variational transition state theory code is available.The Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package278,337,338 (VASP) is the most widely used program for calculations on solids and surfaces. (The name is confusing since most implementations of density functional theory are not ab initio in the sense that “ab initio” is used by chemists. However, many physicists and materials scientists label all DFT methods as ab initio or “first principles” methods.) VASP employs plane waves with either pseudopotentials or the PAW method. It includes DFT + U and GW capabilities and has a dynamics module. VASP has especially powerful algorithms for converging the self-consistent-field iterations even for systems with near degeneracy of HOCO and LUCO.The WIEN2k code339,340 is another well established code. It uses the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method, which uses a spherical harmonic basis set inside of atomic spheres and a plane wave expansion in the interstices.In a pair of landmark papers, Kresse and coworkers used the above three programs to demonstrate that if one converges the results with respect to basis set, one can obtain the same results with plane waves and Gaussians for molecules279 and in some cases for solids.341 For molecules the Gaussian and plane wave approaches were shown to become equivalent when the Gaussian basis set was increased to augmented correlation-consistent polarized valence quintuple-ζ and the plane wave cutoff for PAW calculations was increased to 60–70 Ry; the equivalence was demonstrated for both local and hybrid density functionals.279 For solids,193,341 reasonably good agreement was obtained between plane wave and Gaussian calculations with the range-separated HSE hybrid functional for most insulators, semiconductors, and simple metals, but not for open-shell transition metals. (Gaussian calculations with full-range hybrids (also called global hybrids) like PBE0 are still prohibitively costly because of the slow convergence for the long-range part of the exchange interaction.341) For both solids341 and surfaces342 the VASP-PAW and WIEN2k-FP-LAPW calculations agreed well.The Amsterdam Density Functional (ADF) program,343–345 somewhat uniquely, uses Slater-type orbitals rather than Gaussians. SCF calculations are performed only for local functionals, but post-SCF energies can be evaluated for hybrid functionals. ADF uses density fitting to reduce computational cost, and it treats scalar and vector relativistic effects by the ZORA method. For LSDA and GGA functionals, analytic Hessians are available. A companion program, called BAND,346–348 carries out periodic calculations for bulk crystals, polymers, and surfaces; various tools, such as a search program for transition states in heterogeneous catalysis, are available.The NWChem package349,350 contains both a Gaussian module and an independent pseudopotential plane wave module. The program is especially designed for massively parallel calculations. Both internal (DRDY module) and external interfaces to the POLYRATE335,336 variational transition state theory code are available.The General Atomic and Molecular Electronic Structure System (GAMESS) package351,352 has a broad range of Gaussian-based electronic structure capabilities, many of which are parallelized. Solvent effects can be modeled by effective fragment models. GAMESSPLUS353 allows one to apply a well validated continuum solvation model.354Jaguar is the electronic-structure program in the suite of computational chemistry and drug design program offered by Schrödinger, Inc. Jaguar carries out calculations with Gaussians for both isolated molecules and molecules in continuum solvent.355 An external interface to the POLYRATE335,336 variational transition state theory code is available.MOLCAS is also a Gaussian-based electronic structure program for studying molecules.356 Methods are included for modeling effects of solvents, embedding in ionic solids, or macromolecular environments.QChem357 is a modern quantum chemistry package available either as a stand-alone code or integrated with the Spartan’08 package from Wavefunction, Inc. It employs Gaussian basis sets and includes a well validated continuum solvation model.354QChem has been integrated with the CHARMM molecular mechanics and classical dynamics program.358TURBOMOLE359 is a Gaussian-based program with a fast RI algorithm, a TD-DFT option, and analytic Hessians. Density fitting and RI methods use an auxiliary Gaussian basis set to describe the electron density, in addition to the primary Gaussian basis set used to describe the orbitals.DALTON 2.0360 is a Gaussian-based program including linear, quadratic, and cubic361 response functions for both singlet and triplet perturbing operators; the properties section is especially complete.QUICKSTEP244 is the electronic structure module of the CP2K program. It is a pseudopotential program that uses Gaussian basis functions to describe the orbitals and an auxiliary plane wave basis to describe the electron density. The CP2K package provides molecular dynamics capability.362MOLPRO363 is an electronic structure program with very fast post-Hartree–Fock capabilities, such as coupled cluster calculations. It includes a DFT module, and DFT orbitals can be used in coupled cluster calculations.ORCA364 is a Gaussian-based quantum chemistry program with special emphasis on spectroscopic properties of open-shell molecules. It includes hybrid, meta, and hyper functionals.The Spanish Initiative for Electronic Simulations with Thousands of Atoms (SIESTA)365–367 is a program designed for linear-scaling calculations on materials by employing a basis set of numerical finite-support atomic orbitals. It employs periodic boundary conditions.The density of Montreal package368 (deMon) carries out DFT calculations in a Gaussian basis with density fitting. It includes TD-DFT. It was merged with the ALLCHEM program,369,370 and the merged code is called deMon2k.371DMol3 is a program that uses numerical functions on an atom-centered grid as basis functions and can be used for calculations in the gas phase, solvent, or solid state. Only local functionals are supported.372–374The Octopus program375,376 carries out DFT calculations including the influence of time-dependent electromagnetic fields. It can be used to calculate linear and non-linear absorption spectra, harmonic spectra, laser-induced fragmentation, and electron–ion dynamics of systems, from small clusters to medium-sized quantum dots.PWSCF377 (see also http://www.pwscf.org/) is the electronic structure module of the opEn Source Package for Research in Electronic Structure, Simulation and Optimization (Quantum Espresso) package, which adds capabilities for classical dynamics, geometry optimization, and transition state searches. PWSCF is a plane wave pseudopotential code for solid-state calculations. A linear scaling algorithm for hybrid functionals has recently been developed for Quantum Espresso.378The CRYSTAL electronic structure code379,380 forms Bloch orbitals for periodic calculations as linear combinations of Gaussians. Some examples of its usage are cited to illustrate its capabilities.131,381,382 The tutorial article380 by the authors of CRYSTAL is an excellent introduction to solid-state calculations in chemistry. Whereas CRYSTAL, Quantum Espresso, and VASP support hybrid calculations, most solid-state codes do not support nonlocal functionals.We also mention four other plane wave codes and examples of their usage: ABINIT,383–386 CASTEP,387–391Dacapo,271,392–394 FLEUR,395 LMTART,396,397 and ParaGauss.300,398Although we have emphasized computer programs based on Gaussian basis functions and/or plane waves, we note that some DFT calculations are instead accomplished by finite difference methods.399–401Examples of codes that can carry out noncollinear DFT calculations are ABINIT, deMon2k, FLEUR, LMTART, Paragauss, SIESTA, VASP, and Wien2k.4. Validation studiesThere are a large number of papers devoted to validating density functional theory or containing a large validation component. The benchmark data used for validation can be either from experiment or, for simple enough systems, from high-level WFT. (One must be cautious about WFT results, even high-level ones, for transition-metal chemistry because if multi-reference character is too large, WFT may not be reliable.) In this section we briefly review some recent validation studies, beginning with those restricted to 3d metals and then lifting this restriction, in each case summarizing in approximately chronological order. (Additional validation studies are included in section 5.) Most validation studies are discussed in this section, but some solid-state validation is discussed in section 5.3.2. Furthermore, some of the papers considered in the application section (5.3.1) may be viewed as also contributing to the validation effort.Barden et al.402 considered the LSDA, BP86, BLYP, B3P86, and B3LYP functionals applied to nine homonuclear 3d dimers (they also considered LSDA and a functional called BHLYP that both performed very poorly and will not be included in this summary). For bond energies, the mean unsigned error (MUE) ranged from 19 kcal mol−1 (BLYP) to 30 kcal mol−1 (B3P86). For bond distances the MUE ranged from 0.020 Å (BP86) to 0.053 Å (B3LYP). For vibrational frequencies the MUE ranged from 98 cm−1 (BLYP) to 122 cm−1 (B3P86). They characterized the performance of DFT as “surprisingly plausible,” with BLYP and BP86 rated best. Already in this study we see a trend emerging. Whereas previous studies showed that hybrid functionals usually perform better for main-group chemistry, local functionals perform better for transition metal chemistry.Diedrich et al.403 tested BP86 against the first bond dissociation energy of four 3d transition metal carbonyls. The MUE was only 4 kcal mol−1. First-row transition metal monocarbonyls were also studied by Adamo and Lelj,40 who concluded that inclusion of HF character in B3LYP was important for the accurate calculation of vibrational frequencies and metal-carbonyl dissociation energies.Holthausen404 considered s/d excitation energies in 3d-series atomic cations. A number of subtle issues such as choosing orbital occupancies and artificial mixing of 3d and 4s orbitals were discussed. Unfortunately this study did not include scalar relativistic effects, and it was pointed out405 that the conclusions are quite different if these are included. The revised conclusion is that local functionals are more accurate than hybrid functionals for these intershell excitation energies. The most accurate functionals, of 38 tested, are SLYP, PBE, BP86, PBELYP, and PW91, with MUEs for these five functionals ranging from 2.8 to 3.7 kcal mol−1. B3LYP had an MUE of 4.4 kcal mol−1, and HCTH had an MUE of 15.1 kcal mol−1. It would be interesting to extend this study to more modern functionals.Furche and Perdew95 made a benchmark suite of 18 3d transition metal reaction energies, twelve of which are bond energies. They tested the LSDA, BP86, PBE, TPSS, B3LYP, and TPSSh functionals. Excluding LSDA, which has an MUE of 29 kcal mol−1, the MUEs ranged from 10 kcal mol−1 for TPSSh to 12 kcal mol−1 for B3LYP. In later work, this benchmark test was extended to several more functionals, with the following MUEs in kcal mol−1: 8 for M05 and B97-2, 9.5 for MPWLYP1M, and 11 for BLYP in the first extension,406 7 for M06-L, 8 for HCTH, 9 for VSXC and OLYP, 10 for G96LYP and mPWPW, 12 for τ-HCTH, and 12.5 for BB95 in the second,38 and 7 for M06, 9 for B97-3, 10 for B98, and 13 for BMK and PBE0 in the third.39Furche and Perdew95 also examined the s/d excitation energies of the neutral 3d-series atoms, plus Ca. They used a procedure involving averaging non-self-consistent energies over multiplet components. MUEs ranged from 8.3 kcal mol−1 for B3LYP to 18–20 kcal mol−1 for PBE, BP86, and LSDA, with TPSSh and TPSS at 14 and 17 kcal mol−1, respectively. Köster et al.370 found that GGA calculations of s/d excitation energies of the neutral 3d atoms reproduce the experimental sawtooth behavior as a function of atomic number, but quantitative errors can be 15 kcal mol−1 or more.Zhao and Truhlar35 tested 18 density functionals for ZnNe, ZnAr, ZnKr, and Zn2; these are all weakly bound complexes with accurate binding energies in the range from 0.07 to 0.80 kcal mol−1. B97-1, M05-2X, and PWB6K were the most accurate functionals tested for the binding energies of Zn-rare gas dimers, and MPW1K, M05-2X, and PWB6K were the most accurate for Zn2. Tests were also presented for geometries.Karttunen et al.407 tested B3LYP against WFT, in particular, Hartree–Fock theory and second-order perturbation theory (MP2) for geometry predictions on 80 hafnocenes in the Cambridge structural database. They found MP2 is most accurate, followed by Hartree–Fock theory, with B3LYP least accurate. This somewhat surprising result was attributed to low multi-reference character in the molecules studied.Jensen et al.408 tested the performance of BP86, BLYP, PBE, B3LYP, and PBE0 for 62 3d-series coordinatively unsaturated diatomics with bonds to H, C, N, O, F, S, Cl, and Br. Scalar relativistic effects were not included. Root-mean-square errors (RMSEs) in bond energies range from 13 kcal mol−1 (B3LYP and PBE0) to 17 kcal mol−1 (PBE). The poor performance was attributed mainly to inaccurate s to d promotion energies. The study also included dipole moments, and it was found that hybrid functionals lead to more ionic (less covalent) bonding character than local functionals; on average a PBE0 dipole moment is 0.7 D larger than a BLYP or PBE dipole moment. The spin densities on the metal were found to be widely different in several cases, with FeC the most extreme. BP86 and PBE were found to give the most accurate bond distances, with MUEs of ∼0.02 Å. B3LYP gave the most accurate ionization potentials (RMSE = 2 kcal mol−1) and BP86 and PBE0 the least accurate (RMSE = 5.5 kcal mol−1).Goel and Masunov409 tested the BLYP, TPSS, B3LYP, and BMK functionals for hydrides and hydride cations of the 3d-series. The authors took special care with the SCF process to find broken-symmetry solutions that provide continuous potential energy curves. BMK gave the most accurate bond energies and TPSS the least accurate. Scalar relativistic effects were included and led to more accurate bond lengths. They found MUEs in ionization potentials of 3 kcal mol−1 for BMK and 6 kcal mol−1 for TPSS.Legge et al.410 tested the LSDA, BLYP, BPW91, B3PW91, and B3LYP density functionals against dissociation energies, geometries, and vibrational frequencies of 15 diatomic molecules containing Cu, Ag, and Au. Excluding LSDA, they got the most accurate results with BPW91 and the least accurate with B3LYP. They also tested vibrational frequencies for larger molecules.Wang and Li411 tested bond energies, geometries, and vibrational frequencies of 17 functionals against 6 diatomics containing Ag and 2 containing Au. Mean errors for the various functionals are not tabulated or discussed.Schultz et al.93 created databases of 9 bond energies and 8 bond lengths for transition metal dimers that contain only the data for which the experiments are judged to be especially reliable. The transition elements represented are Zr, V, Cr, Mo, Ni, Cu, and Ag. They used these databases to test 42 different density functionals, including two LSDA functionals, 12 GGAs, 13 hybrid GGAs, 7 meta GGAs, and 8 hybrid meta GGAs. The differences between double-ζ and triple-ζ basis sets are often quite large (greater than 10 kcal mol−1), so double-ζ basis sets are not recommended for transition metals. The bond energy MUEs (in kcal mol−1) averaged across these classes of functionals are 7 for GGAs, 8 for meta GGAs, 19 for hybrid GGAs, 20 for hybrid meta GGAs, and 30 for LSDAs. The most accurate functional in each of these classes (and its MUE in kcal mol−1) is respectively G96LYP and BLYP (5), TPSSKCIS (6), B97-1 (5), TPSSh (11), and SPWL (28), and the least accurate is respectively HCTH (12), mPWB95 (13), MPW1K (32), BB1K (28), and SVWN3 (33). The errors are much smaller if one limits attention to dimers with small amounts of multi-reference character, although even here the trends are different from main-group chemistry. This study shows very clearly that the methods that perform well for transition metal bonds are not the same ones that perform best for main-group chemistry. This study identified a key anticorrelation: none of the methods (e.g., MPW1K or BB1K) that did well for barrier heights also did well for transition metal bond energies. This was shortly before the design of the M05 functional, which would be the first to overcome this limitation.In a second paper, Schultz et al.,94 again following the guideline of using only the most reliable data for validation, made databases of 21 metal–ligand bond energies and 13 metal–ligand bond distances. Of the 21 and 13 molecules in these sets, respectively 17 and 9 contain transition metals. The transition metals represented are V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Rh, Ni, Cu, and Ag. A total of 57 density functionals were tested. A composite MUE was created based on main group atomization energies per bond, transition metal dimer bond energies, metal–ligand bond energies, atomic ionization energies (including metals), transition metal dimer bond lengths, and metal–ligand bond lengths. Based on this composite MUE the most accurate density functionals are, in order, G96LYP (a GGA), MPWLYP1M (a hybrid GGA), and XLYP, BLYP, MoHLYP and mPWLYP (four more GGAs). These tests preceded the creation of several more successful modern functionals such as B97-3, PW6B95, M05, M06-L, and M06.In the process of analyzing the data in the two papers just discussed,93,94 Schultz et al. created smaller representative databases, the first containing a subset of four transition-metal dimers and the second containing four metal–ligand complexes. Mean errors computed with these small databases reproduce the mean errors of the full databases remarkably well and allow one to gauge the accuracy of new density functionals very conveniently by comparing the results on the small databases to those for the very large number of functionals already tested against these databases.The tests conducted with the databases of Furche and Perdew and of Schultz et al. are overall reasonably consistent.38,93–95,406,412 They have been reviewed in detail by Harvey413 in an excellent review that provides very useful general comments about testing DFT.de Jong and Bickelhaupt414 tested 26 density functionals for reaction energies and saddle point energies of oxidative addition of the C–Cl bond of CH3Cl to Pd atom. The best performing functionals, excluding HCTH, and their mean unsigned errors in kcal mol−1 were found to be X3LYP (1.4), RPBE (1.7), B3LYP (1.8), RevPBE (2.0), and BLYP (2.9). Three different parametrizations of the HCTH functional were tested with mean unsigned errors of 0.8, 1.0, and 4.2. Quintal et al.415 tested 25 functionals for Pd oxidative addition reactions, the mechanism of the Heck reaction (which involves Pd in the 0, II, and IV oxidation states), the reduction of acetone by hydrogenation with a Rh complex, and other data. They found the best performance by hybrid meta functionals in particular B1B95 and PW6B95, followed by the hybrid PBE0, the hybrid meta TPSS25B95 (which is TPSS plus B95 with X = 25), and the hybrid B97-1 and B97-2.Li et al.416 tested 27 functionals (unfortunately, these were mainly old ones—25 from 2001 or earlier and one each from 2003 (TPSS) and 2004 (BMK)) against benchmark-quality WFT data for atomization energies and clustering energies of (MO2)n (M = Ti, Zr, and Hf) and (MO3)n (M = Cr, Mo, and W) transition metal oxide clusters with n = 1–4. Among the functionals tested, PBE0 performed best. In another recent study that tested only older density functionals, Mayhall et al.417 tested PW91, B3LYP, and PBE for heats of formation of a test set of twenty small molecules (eighteen of which have 2–4 atoms) containing 3d transition metals and found mean unsigned errors of 5–22 kcal mol−1, with B3LYP being the best.Schultz et al.326 obtained benchmark values and studied bond energies, geometries, and dipole moments of PdCO and Pd2CO with 27 density functionals. They defined a mean percent unsigned error in three bond energies, two dipole moments, and five bond lengths. Both triple-ζ and quadruple-ζ basis sets were employed. The most accurate results were obtained with O3LYP (2%) and OLYP and PW6B95 (both 3%), followed by B97-1, B98, and MPW1K (all 4%). The least accurate methods were BMK (18%) and PBE, TPSS, BP86, and mPWPW (all 14%). This paper was published too soon to test M05, M06, or M06-L. Ge et al.418 used PW91 to study CO adsorption on Pt and Au nanoparticles. (PW91 was not included in the study of Schultz et al.326 because it is usually less accurate than its successors, PBE and mPWPW.) A similar strategy for testing DFT by comparing to coupled cluster calculations for MCO and M2CO has been applied by Schwerdtfeger et al.,419 who applied it for M = Au as compared to M = Pd here; their work is discussed in section 5.3.1.9.de Jong et al.420 tested 24 density functionals against a CCSD(T) benchmark for the energies along the reaction path for the oxidative addition reaction of Pd atom with methane, in particular, the relative energies of the separated reactants, the reaction complex, the saddle point, and the products. Their assessment includes the LSDA, 14 GGAs, 2 hybrid GGAs, and 7 meta functionals, but it did not include any of the six functionals mentioned above as having performed best in the later study of Quintal et al.415 for Pd oxidative addition reactions. This study involved post-SCF calculations with the BLYP density, and the VS98 and TPSSh functionals performed best, with MUEs below 2 kcal mol−1. The least accurate functionals and their MUEs in kcal mol−1 were LSDA, ∼16; OLAP3, ∼10; and PW91, PBE, and BP86, each ∼6.Ikeda et al.421 calculated coupled cluster-quality binding energies of d6, d8, and d10 transition metals with π-conjugated systems with up to ten carbon atoms, and they used these results to test the B3LYP, B3PW91, BLYP, BP86, BH&HLYP, mPW1PW, and LSDA functionals. They found that LSDA overestimates the binding energies and the other functionals significantly (e.g., 25 kcal mol−1) underestimate them when the π-conjugated system has four or more carbon atoms.Li and Dixon422 used experimental electron detachment energies for MO6− (M = Cr, Mo, and W) and M2O6− (M = Cr and W) to test the predictions of CCSD(T) and 28 functionals. They found that BP86 performed best, with a maximum error of 0.29 eV and second largest absolute error of 0.07 eV; CCSD(T) had a maximum and second largest absolute error of 0.31 and 0.12 eV respectively. DFT was found to be more accurate than CCSD(T) for systems with large multi-reference character. For heats of formation of MO6 and M2O6, CCSD(T) was more accurate than DFT, and among functionals tested (only three were tested for heats of formation), B3LYP was most accurate, although the largest absolute error was 44 kcal mol−1.S. Zhao et al.423 applied 23 density functionals to relative energies of different structures, ionization potentials, bond distances, and vibrational frequencies of neutral and ionic clusters containing up to four Ag atoms. PBE0 was found to be the most satisfactory functional. Functionals that tend to the correct limit for a uniform electron gas (UEG) were judged to be more satisfactory than those that do not.Stevens et al.424 applied two LSDAs, seven GGAs, seven meta GGAs, and four hybrid GGAs to bond distances, vibrational frequencies, and dipole moments of diatomics of Cr, Mo, and W with C, N, and O. The BP86 functional was judged to be the most satisfactory.Rogal et al.425 compared the LSDA, PBE, and RPBE functionals against experiment for the heat of formation of bulk PdO and the binding energies of O2, CO, and CO2 on Pd(110). The mean unsigned errors in these four quantities are 0.3 eV for RPBE, 0.6 eV for PBE, and 1.9 eV for LSDA, with 9 of the 12 values being overestimates.Song et al.426 applied one LSDA, three GGAs, and five hybrid GGAs to bond energies, bond lengths, and vibrational frequencies of 20 4d-series neutral and cationic monoxides. The main conclusions about performance were based on bond energies of neutrals, and the local BP86, BLYP, and BPW91 functionals were deemed to have best performance.Sears and Sherrill427,428 assessed the performance of the BP86, BPW91, and B3LYP functionals for Sc, Ti, V, Nb, Cr, Mo, and Mn complexes of bis(salicylaldehyde)ethylenediamine. The accuracy for relative energies was found to be poor, which was attributed to multi-reference character.Ghosh et al.429 provided multi-reference WFT calculations of the low-energy states of FeIII, CoIII, and NiIII diiminato complexes to serve as standards against which to evaluate the spin-state predictions of various density functionals. In particular they tested BP86, BLYP, PW91, OLYP, OPBE, B3LYP, and B3LYP*. The found that B3LYP performed best in these cases but cautioned that previous work by Ghosh and Taylor430 showed opposite trends in functional performance for some bis(salicylaldehyde)ethylenediamine compounds.In the first full benchmark study published after the hybrid meta M05 functional34 became available, Zhao et al.233 tested 14 functionals against 234 data in several databases including the two representative metal databases of Schultz et al.93,94 For the latter, they found the best performance by BLYP and M05 (MUE = 6 kcal mol−1), and the least accurate performance by BMK (MUE = 27 kcal mol−1). M05 was found to have the advantage of working well both for systems with low multi-reference character and systems with high multi-reference character and to give much more accurate barrier heights, noncovalent interaction energies, and main-group bond energies than any previous functional with relatively good performance for transition metals. Zhao et al. concluded that designing the dependence of the exchange–correlation functional to take full advantage of the dependence on kinetic energy density and to be consistent with a reasonably high percentage of Hartree–Fock exchange was the key to this breakthrough.Sousa et al.220 reviewed the status of DFT and assessed the performance of many functionals for a variety of chemical properties. The review is very thorough up to mid 2006.Zhao and Truhlar38 carried out additional validation studies when the local meta M06-L functional became available. Nine GGAs, three meta GGAs, two hybrid GGAs, and one hybrid meta GGA were tested against 22 energetic databases plus main-group and metal–ligand bond lengths and main-group vibrational frequencies. Three of the energetic databases (all discussed above: two of Schultz et al.93,94 and one of Furche and Perdew95) contain compounds containing transition metals. The composite MUE for these three metal databases ranged from 6 kcal mol−1 (M06-L) to 14 kcal mol−1 (τ-HCTH). The best performances following M06-L were: 7 kcal mol−1 for M05 and 8 kcal mol−1 for G96LYP, OLYP, and TPSS. BLYP and B3LYP had MUEs of 8.5 and l2 kcal mol−1, respectively. A broader composite including main-group thermochemistry (atomization energies per bond and bond energies, ionization potentials, electron affinities, proton affinities, and π isomerization energies), barrier heights, noncovalent interactions, the metal databases mentioned above, and metal atom excitation energies yielded the following MUEs in kcal mol−1: 3 for M06-L and M05, 5 for B3LYP, 5.5 for TPSSh, 6 for eight functionals, 7 for two others, and 7.5 for G96LYP. M06-L and M05 can be strongly recommended.Yet another extensive evaluation was carried out when M06 became available.39 Two GGAs, five hybrid GGAs, two meta GGAs, and seven hybrid meta GGAs were tested against 29 energetic databases, three bond length databases, one vibrational frequency database, and one zero point energy database (496 data). The M06 functional was recommended as the best for organometallic and inorganometallic chemistry. It also predicts accurate noncovalent interactions. A review is available.412Amin and Truhlar235 tested 39 density functionals against 12 bond energies, 10 bond lengths, and 8 dipole moments in Zn coordination compounds with H, NH3, O, OH, H2O, S, and SCH3 ligands. It was found to be important to include scalar relativistic effects. The three best performing functionals overall were found to be M05-2X, PW6B95, and B97-2, in that order. A follow-up study431 involved a larger dataset that also included binding energies and dipole moments of Zn centers in coordination environments taken from metalloenzymes, for which bond lengths can be quite different than in small compounds. M05-2X continued to perform well, and B3LYP was found to have some large errors.Paier et al.432 published a study entitled “Why does the B3LYP hybrid functional fail for metals?” This study contains tests of the PBE, B3PW91, B3LYP, PBE0, and HSE functionals for lattice constants, bulk moduli, and cohesive energies of various metallic and nonmetallic systems. Transition metals are represented by bulk Rh, Pd, Cu, and Ag, and some aspects of the conclusions apply to all metals. In particular they conclude that the B3LYP functional “fails to describe the transition from localized electrons (atoms) to delocalized electrons (metals)”. This failure is ascribed about 2/3 to the LYP correlation functional and about 1/3 to the B88 exchange functional. Behavior for extended systems with large gaps (e.g., LiF, NaF, MgO, and diamond) was quite different from that for bulk metals. The authors concluded, as had many (but not all) workers before them, that it is important to incorporate the UEG limit.Stroppa and Kresse433 followed up by testing the accuracy of the BLYP, PBE, RPBE, B3LYP, HSE, AM05, and PBEsol functionals for the adsorption site and adsorption energy of CO on the (111) surfaces of Ru, Os, Rh, Ir, Pd, Pt, and Ag. They found that BLYP and B3LYP are the “overall best” choices for these adsorption properties among the functionals tested, but they were simultaneously dismayed that these functionals perform poorly for the properties of the metal itself, as discussed in the previous paragraph.When the RPBE functional was originally developed,204 it was tested for adsorption energies of O, CO, and NO on Rh(100), Ni(100), Pd(100), and Pd(111). RPBE and revPBE gave similar results, with noticeable improvement over PBE. In tests on molecules, Matveev et al.434 found that revPBE and RPBE were more accurate than BP86, PW91, and PBE both for atomization energies of small molecules and for dissociation energies of Cr(CO)6 and Fe(CO)5. Deeth and Fey435 tested the BLYP, PW91, PBE, revPBE, and RPBE functionals for geometries and energies of homoleptic FeIIL6 and FeIIIL6 complexes, where L denotes a ligand. When solvation effects were included, the best performance was obtained with RPBE. However, the preference for low-spin states in iron complexes was overestimated by ∼13 kcal mol−1. More recently, Mattsson et al.219 tested the LSDA, BLYP, PBE, RPBE, PBE0, AM05, and HSE functionals for lattice constants and bulk moduli of 23 solids, seven of which (W, Rh, Pd, Pt, Cu, Ag, and Au) were transition metals. AM05, PBE0, and HSE outperformed LSDA and PBE, which in turn outperformed RPBE and BLYP. These trends (e.g., RPBE better than PBE for energies but worse than PBE and AM05 for lattice constants) can seemingly be understood from the principles that emerged from the benchmarks of Zhao and Truhlar.214 Zhao and Truhlar tested PBE, PBEsol, SOGGA, TPSS, and M06-L for lattice constants of 21 solids, including Rh, Pd, Cu, Ag, and PbTiO3, cohesive energies of eight main-group solids, six representative atomization energies of main-group molecules, six representative barrier heights, the dissociation energy of SF6, 20 main-group bond lengths, and the exchange energy and total energy of the He atom. For three lattice constants the comparisons also included LSDA, BLYP, PW91, BPW91, mPWPW, and RPBE. For lattice constants, SOGGA and M06-L were usually most accurate, followed by PBEsol, with RPBE and BLYP least accurate. For energies, M06-L was most accurate followed by RPBE. Again we see RPBE more accurate than PBE for energies and less accurate for interatomic distances. This, along with several other trends, was rationalized by examining the second-order term in the gradient expansion of the exchange functional. The results are also consistent with the analysis of Perdew et al.,215 and they extend that analysis. Perdew et al.216 have made the point that fitting to the jellium surface exchange–correlation energy is not a possible explanation of the relative performance of various functionals for the lattice constants of solids, and Csonka et al.436 have recently tested selected density functionals for lattice constants, bulk moduli, and cohesive energies of nonmolecular solids (metals and nonmetals, including Rh, Pd, Cu, and Ag) and provided further discussion of the tradeoffs one must make in GGAs such that it may be impossible to develop a single GGA that can accurately predict solid-state cohesive energies, surface energies, lattice constants, and bulk moduli. Yet another test of functionals for surface properties has been provided recently by Haas et al.,437 who found the best performance for lattice constants for 60 solids with PBEsol and SOGGA, which outperformed LSDA, PBE, TPSS, WC, and AM05. Unfortunately, neither the Csonka et al. paper436 nor the Haas et al. paper437 considers the M06-L functional.Ropo et al.438 tested the LSDA, PBE, LAG, AM05, and PBEsol functionals against exchange energies of five rare gas atoms, atomization energies of six main group diatomic molecules, and lattice constants and bulk moduli of eight metals (including Fe, W, Pd, Pt, Cu, and Au), three semiconductors, and NaCl (an insulator). They suggested that AM05 and PBEsol are superior to PBE and LAG.Tran et al.439 compared the performance of the LSDA and the PW91, PBE, and WC GGAs for main-group bond lengths and noncovalent interactions, for the surface formation energies and cohesive energies of ten bulk transition metals, and for the lattice constants and bulk moduli of 76 solids, including 14 bulk transition metals and 22 binary solids containing one transition metal and one main-group element. They found that the WC functional gives the most accurate lattice constants (MUE of 0.03 Åvs. 0.04 for PBE and 0.07 for LSDA) but that none of the functionals tested was uniformly better than the others for all properties. Many interesting systematic trends were observed such as how the errors change as one proceeds across a transition row.Rinaldo et al.440 evaluated the errors in B3LYP thermochemical predictions for 56 transition metal atomic energies and 71 bond energies of transition metal compounds and found MUEs of 7.7 and 5.3 kcal mol−1 respectively. They developed an empirical scheme to correct these errors.Bühl et al.441 tested 14 density functionals against 41 transition metal–ligand bond distances in 25 5d-series molecules. They found the best results for PBE0. They also updated previous tests for the 3d and 4d series, and for the combined test set comprising all three transition rows they obtained the best results with PBE0, B3P86, and B3PW91. They found that BLYP, VSXC, and LSDA “cannot be recommended”. It would be interesting to extend these tests to M06-L and B98.Handzlik442 evaluated 22 density functionals against experimental data and CCSD(T) calculations for the thermochemistry of molybdenum compounds. The best performance was obtained with TPSS, PW91, PBE, and M05. M05 was the only functional with nonzero Hartree–Fock exchange to show good performance. The M06 and M06-L functionals were not included in the tests.Although the study does not include transition metals, the work of Mosch et al.443 on the interaction of O2 with Al clusters and Al(111) is very relevant. They found, just as for nonmetallic reactions,444 that GGAs (for example, they studied PBE) systematically underestimate barrier heights for reactions of metal clusters and at metal surfaces.5. ApplicationsWe now consider applications of particular interest that have appeared in the recent literature.5.1 Spin state and magnetic propertiesSpin and associated magnetic interactions in transition-metal-containing systems are often discussed within the context of considering the molecular system to be composed of one or more subsystems over which unpaired spin is localized, e.g., the various transition-metal atoms in a cluster (for an interesting discussion of the physical meaning of spin localization in the context of various electronic structure theories, including DFT, see Reiher445). It is convenient to use a spin-labeled model Hamiltonian to describe such localized spins as if they interact as coupled angular momenta, as proposed by Heisenberg446 and Dirac447 and later elaborated by Van Vleck448 and Slater.449 This model has been used extensively in conjunction with DFT to explain magnetic properties in coordination compounds.450–452If we restrict ourselves here, for simplicity, to two interacting centers A and B, the Heisenberg–Dirac Hamiltonian takes the form H = −2JABSA·SB(5)where SX is the local spin on center X, JAB is the coupling constant between the two centers, and the dot product between the spins is considered only for antiparallel (antiferromagnetic, low-spin) or parallel (ferromagnetic, high-spin) vectors. It is important to keep in mind that eqn (5) is a shorthand description and should not be taken as an indication that magnetic interactions are involved; they are not. Rather the parameter JAB results from exchange integrals involving electron repulsion. When the S2 values for the pure spin states of the full system and the two fragments are well defined, the eigenvalues of the operator SA·SB for alternative total spin states may be determined from the relationship S2 = (SA + SB)2 = SA2 + SB2 + 2SA·SB(6)If there is a single unpaired electron on each center A and B, the eigenvalues of SA2 and SB2 are each 3/4; therefore 〈SA·SB〉 is −3/4 for singlet coupling (for which 〈S2〉 = 0) and 1/4 for triplet coupling (for which 〈S2〉 = 2). With such definitions of SA·SB, eigenvalues of the Heisenberg–Dirac Hamiltonian are given by ES = −JABS(S + 1)(7)where S takes on whole or half-integer values ranging from |SA−SB| to |SA + SB|, and where −SA(SA + 1) −SB(SB + 1) has been moved into the zero of energy.For a single unpaired electron on each center A and B, a linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) wave function for the high-spin triplet state is typically well represented by a single determinant and in that respect is well suited for treatment by DFT within the Kohn–Sham formalism. In another respect though, it may be less well suited than the singlet because DFT is a ground-state theory and the triplet state might not be the ground state. The wave function for the low-spin singlet state, however, in the limit of weak coupling requires at least two determinants for a balanced description and is thus problematic for Kohn–Sham DFT if the goal is to compute directly the energy difference between the two states (the same problem holds for direct calculation of the MS = 0 triplet).453–456 This discussion may be generalized to multiple spins on each center, where the high-spin case (in which S is equal to the highest possible value of MS) continues to be single determinantal. As originally discussed by Ziegler et al.457 and Noodleman,458 a non-physical broken-spin-symmetry state can be useful for predicting the proper state-energy difference in such instances. Cohen et al.459 have recently noted that the broken-symmetry approach provides a formal way to circumvent static correlation errors in existing functionals by avoiding fractional spins in, say, stretched two-electron bonds.The broken-symmetry state is constructed by permitting the system to localize antiparallel, unpaired spins separately on the two centers A and B. Such a situation is clearly non-physical, since, for instance, an antiferromagnetically coupled singlet would have up density on one center and down density on the other but a true singlet has zero spin polarization density at every position in space.452,454 In the weakly interacting limit, however, this wave function is formally a weighted average of pure spin states, and Noodleman458 has shown that the coupling constant JAB may be estimated from it as460,461 (8)where HS and BS denote high-spin and broken-symmetry, respectively. When the high-spin state has low multi-reference character, its Kohn–Sham DFT energy is sometimes taken (as a working hypothesis) as accurate (within the accuracy of the chosen functional) and the energies of other spin states are then computed relative to it using eqn (7) with the value of JAB determined from a broken-symmetry calculation according to eqn (8).In the limit of strong coupling, Ruiz et al.462 have proposed that it is more appropriate to consider the broken-symmetry state to represent the true low-spin state (e.g., the singlet state for an even number of electrons). This is equivalent to modifying eqn (8) as (9)where center B has the smaller of the two spins if the spins on A and B are not the same. In effect, eqn (9) simply expresses the energy difference from a ΔSCF calculation (that is, the difference in energy of separate SCF calculations on each state) of the two spin states in the J coupling notation of the Heisenberg–Dirac formalism.Alternatively, Yamaguchi and co-workers463,464 have suggested an approach designed to be valid over the full range from the weak to strong coupling limits (10)where the expectation values of S2 are evaluated for high-spin and broken-symmetry Kohn–Sham determinants, i.e., they are treated as trial wave functions of this many-electron operator. Since the Kohn–Sham determinant is not the variational wave function for the electronic Hamiltonian, use of eqn (10) is necessarily empirical for DFT, but practical experience suggests that it can be effective. More recently Shoji et al.465 have generalized the approach underlying eqn (10) in order to permit its application to systems having more than two interacting spin sites.From a fundamental standpoint, there has been substantial discussion in the literature with respect to the meaning of 〈S2〉 as determined from the Kohn–Sham determinant. Although the Kohn–Sham determinant has (for the unknown exact density functional) the same density as the exact wave function (and therefore provides a convenient parameterization of the density), its relationship to the actual wave function is not formally defined in DFT, and there has been lively debate with respect to the interpretation of the expectation value of the many-electron operator S2. In 1995, Pople et al.466 argued that restricted open-shell Kohn–Sham procedures were inappropriate for DFT as they would not properly predict negative spin densities in open-shell systems (the same can be said of restricted open-shell Hartree–Fock methods), and suggested—based on empirical observation—that spin contamination was not as significant a problem in DFT as in wave-function theories (which was first pointed out by Baker et al.467 and others64,468–471), emphasizing, though, that one cannot be certain that 〈S2〉KS is necessarily a quantitative measure of spin contamination (where 〈…〉KS denotes an expectation value over the Kohn–Sham determinant). Wang et al.472 pointed out that 〈S2〉 can be computed from one- and two-particle density matrix elements, and examined 〈S2〉 as a function of various approximations for the two-particle matrix elements that are not strictly available from a DFT calculation. A deeper analysis of the relationship between 〈S2〉KS and spin contamination was provided by Cremer and co-workers473–475 based on analysis of the total and on-top pair densities for a variety of systems having open-shell biradical character, following an approach first suggested by Perdew et al.21 Cremer and co-workers noted that 〈S2〉KS is not necessarily in good quantitative agreement with 〈S2〉 as evaluated by other means for the Kohn–Sham density, but that 〈S2〉KS is qualitatively useful in terms of its description of the degree to which mixing of spin states is present in the Kohn–Sham determinant. A number of subsequent works have explored the relationship between the spin properties of the Kohn–Sham determinant and the true wave function, in general emphasizing that the former need not satisfy the same restrictions as the latter.51,476–479Returning to applications, the relative utility of eqn (8) [or its generalization eqn (10)] vs.eqn (9) for predicting magnetic coupling has been debated in the literature, but no clear consensus has emerged because results have been variable depending on the chemical system studied and the functional employed. For example, Valero et al.480 recently compared results from eqn (8) and (9) for a number of functionals, including those in the M06 family,39 for several binuclear copper complexes as well as other non-metallic biradicals, and observed that M06-L, M06, and B3LYP were more accurate with eqn (8), while M06-2X was more accurate with eqn (9), and PBE0 showed no preference for eqn (8)vs.eqn (9). One of the earliest studies employing the broken-symmetry approach was also to binuclear copper complexes, in particular 2-azido bridged compounds, where Adamo et al. observed that predicted exchange interactions using the mPW1PW functional were extremely sensitive to geometry.481 Ruiz and co-workers482 compared eqn (8) to eqn (9) for a binuclear copper complex and found that while the latter worked better with standard functionals, the former was better when self-interaction error was removed explicitly following the Perdew–Zunger approach.112 They concluded that self-interaction error effectively cancelled the error associated with the non-dynamical correlation not captured by the single-determinant Kohn–Sham model, thereby eliminating the need to employ eqn (8) to correct for the latter error. This interpretation was, however, challenged by Adamo et al.,483 who asserted that in general spin symmetry must be restored to broken-symmetry wave functions [e.g., by the mapping associated with eqn (8)] in order to provide proper estimates of the energy.In a different study also focusing on binuclear copper complexes, Lewin et al.484 considered singlet–triplet splittings in various supported dicopper–dioxygen complexes in both their isomeric bis(μ-oxo) and μ-η2:η2-peroxo structural forms. These species provide a particularly interesting test set because the instability of their singlet Kohn–Sham orbital representations to spin-symmetry breaking is highly dependent on the choice of functional. Thus, with local functionals like BLYP or mPWPW, restricted closed-shell singlets are predicted to be stable or metastable in Kohn–Sham calculations, while the incorporation of Hartree–Fock exchange tends to lead to instability to symmetry breaking. In this case, six different functionals (BLYP, mPWPW, TPSS, TPSSh, B3LYP, and mPW1PW) are in reasonable agreement with one another for singlet–triplet splittings of the μ-η2:η2-peroxo isomers, where 〈S2〉 values range from 0.00 to 0.95 depending on ligand and functional, but only when eqn (10) is used—use of eqn (9) leads to quite poor results for those cases having the greatest biradicaloid character (the importance of using eqn (10) to compute the singlet energies was also inferred from analysis of bis(μ-oxo)/μ-η2:η2-peroxo isomerization energies484–486). Interestingly, in the bis(μ-oxo) isomers, all functionals predicted rather similar singlet–triplet splittings when closed-shell singlets were assumed, even in those cases where a broken-symmetry instability existed. Similar observation have been made for a number of monocopper complexes of dioxygen.487,488 In all of these cases, it appears that substantial degrees of covalency in Cu–O interactions, as judged from explicitly multi-reference calculations,489 can lead to improved predictions with restricted DFT calculations that would otherwise be inappropriate in more weakly coupled systems. In a very recent contribution, Rivero et al. also considered exchange coupling in binuclear copper compounds, but examined the performance of range-separated hybrid functionals for this task;490 they concluded that such functionals might have utility for the study of magnetic interactions in metal oxides and other challenging solids. A study by Roth et al.491 on a trinuclear copper complex supported by aminosugar Schiff base ligands found B3LYP* to give reasonable agreement with experiment for a small doublet–quartet splitting (−91 cm−1vs.−24 cm−1), with some of the discrepancy being attributed to delocalization of the spin on one of the coppers over adjacent coordinating heteroatoms, thereby limiting the applicability of the Heisenberg–Dirac model.Another set of systems showing great sensitivity of the ground electronic state and symmetry breaking to the choice of functional are the intermediate-spin systems MnPc and FePc molecules, where Pc is phthalocyanine. Marom and Kronik492 studied these systems with B3LYP, PBE, PBE0, and M06.Another study comparing DFT to multi-reference calculations has been carried out by Batista and Martin,493 who examined the binuclear ruthenium blue dimer [(bpy)2(OH2)RuORu(OH2)(bpy)2]4+. In two prior publications, Yang and Baik494,495 had initially reported a singlet ground state for this species and then a triplet ground state based on B3LYP calculations and a broken-symmetry formalism. Batista and Martin employed CASSCF. They had difficulty converging certain of the states reported by Yang and Baik, but noted that their CASSCF calculations predict a singlet ground state consistent with magnetic susceptibility measurements496 and inconsistent with the B3LYP results. As the active space employed for the CAS wave function included only 10 electrons in 6 orbitals and dynamical correlation effects were not subsequently estimated, the CASSCF result is not quantitatively accurate, but the overestimation of the triplet stability by B3LYP is noteworthy and additional studies to assess the influence of Hartree–Fock exchange in the functional would be interesting.A comparison of DFT to much more highly correlated multi-reference results has been reported by Pierloot and Vancoillie for the singlet–quintet energy splittings in [Fe(L)(NHS4)], where NHS4 is 2,2′-bis(2-mercaptophenylthio)diethylamine dianion and L = NH3, N2H4, PMe3, CO, and NO+.497 On the basis of comparison to extended-basis-set CASPT2 calculations, these authors noted that DFT functionals incorporating increased Hartree–Fock exchange did better in more ionic systems, but the opposite was true for more covalent systems (cf. the discussion of copper–dioxygen systems above). They found that OLYP offered the best quantitative performance for computing the spin-state energy splittings compared to other functionals that they tested, but noted that this functional did a poor job of predicting geometries and that its extensibility to other systems was suspect. Swart reported that the O exchange functional, when combined with PBE correlation, also gave good results for the ground spin states and geometries of a number of iron halide ions and spin crossover compounds.498 Rong et al.499 compared various functionals for state-energy splittings in supported iron complexes and suggested that the bias towards low-spin states observed for local as opposed to hybrid functionals could be attributed to a more localized frontier orbital that was placed at higher energy in the orbital manifold for the local functionals than for the hybrids. Carreon-Macedo and Harvey have emphasized the significant challenges associated with accurately computing the very small spin-state splittings in iron carbonyls, even with very large basis set CCSD(T) calculations,500 where CCSD denotes coupled cluster theory (a single-reference WFT approach) with single and double excitations, and CCSD(T) denotes CCSD with a quasiperturbative treatment of connected triple excitations. We note that CCSD(T) is usually reasonably reliable for single-reference systems but is of unknown validity for multi-reference systems, as illustrated by the following example.The difficulty of evaluating the accuracy of DFT for spin-state orderings is well illustrated by a study of NiO2. In main-group chemistry, a high-level WFT calculation is often used to provide a benchmark, and the most widely used method for this purpose is CCSD(T). Song et al.501 employed CCSD, conventional CCSD(T), and four versions of locally renormalized CCSD(T), abbreviated as LR-CCSD(T), to calculate the singlet–triplet splitting (Δ, defined as energy of singlet minus energy of triplet) in the cyclic form of NiO2. For the same problem, they also employed other WFT methods, namely multi-reference configuration interaction, without (MRCI) and with (MRCI + Q) a Davidson correction, CASSCF, and generalized Van Vleck perturbation theory (GVVPT2, a form of multi-reference perturbation theory), as well as two GGAs, including PBE, and two hybrid functionals, PBE0 and TPSSh. Conventional CCSD(T), one of the four LR-CCSD(T) methods, and GVVPT2 predicted negative Δ of −7, −5, and −8 kcal mol−1, respectively, whereas CCSD, the other three LR-CCSD(T) calculations, CASSCF, MRCI, and all four DFT calculations predicted positive Δ, with the DFT predictions in the range 7–11 kcal mol−1. Their best estimate was that Δ is positive and equal to about 4 kcal mol−1. The MRCI and MRCI + D calculations predicted +12 and +13, respectively, significantly higher than their best estimate and also higher than DFT (of course MRCI would become exact if enough configurations were included, but this is impractical even for this triatomic system). Although the argument for what is the best value of Δ is not completely convincing, this study shows the danger and uncertainties associated with using either conventional CCSD(T) or MRCI as a benchmark for transition-metal systems. We also note the work of Neese examining the triplet and quintet states of [FeO(NH3)5]2+ and comparing DFT to multi-reference WFT.502A thorough comparison of methods including B3LYP was undertaken by Matxain et al.503 for the scandium dimer. Based on many prior DFT calculations and an unclear experimental situation, the ground state of Sc2 came to be accepted as 5Σu, and indeed at the B3LYP level this state is predicted to be lowest by 0.08 eV. However, large CASPT2 calculations and diffusion quantum Monte Carlo calculations both predict that the 3Σu state is 0.16 eV below the 5Σu state and that the other properties of the 3Σu state, namely the vibrational frequency and the dissociation energy, are in equally good agreement with experiment as those predicted for the 5Σu state. Sorkin et al.479 also considered state-energy splittings in diatomic cases, in particular Fe2, Fe2−, and FeO+. They highlighted the accuracy of predicted state-energy splittings from Kulik et al.138 employing the PBE + U approach, although they noted that the U potentials employed in such calculations tend to be system-specific, and found that within the uncertainty in experimental values, B3LYP, M05, and M06 also gave reasonable results, but without system-dependent parameters. Sorkin et al. interpreted all of their broken-symmetry results as corresponding to S = MS, i.e., without resorting to spin purification, and additionally noted the importance of permitting spatial symmetry breaking. In particular, in the case of FeO+, they observed a monotonic decrease in computed electronic energies for the 4Φ state upon reducing the imposed symmetry from C6v to C4v to C2v, and the predicted energy relative to the 6Σ+ ground state was found to improve with reduced symmetry.Returning to spin-purified calculations, a particularly interesting variation on the use of the broken-symmetry approach to compute state-energy splitting has been reported by Herrmann et al.504 for a study of the spin-state energetics ranging from S = 0 to S = 4 in the [Fe2O2] core of methane monooxygenase. In this case, the use of eqn (10) was compared to an alternative505 (11)where the expectation value of the SA·SB operator is computed using local projector techniques as described either by Clark and Davidson506 or by Mayer.507 The primarily methodological study of Herrmann et al. indicated substantial quantitative dependence of predicted J values on the amount of Hartree–Fock exchange in the functional employed (a similar sensitivity for a different bridged diiron core was observed by Hübner et al.508), and found that predictions from eqn (11) using Clark and Davidson’s SA·SB operator differed from eqn (10) by 223 cm−1 (about a factor of 2) for a representative geometry, with eqn (10) being closer to the experimental value of less than 30 cm−1. Podewitz et al.509 later compared results from Clark and Davidson’s approach to that obtained using Mayer’s alternative for a set of supported iron and manganese clusters; they concluded that Mayer’s method provided more physically meaningful measures of spin population on individual atoms (i.e., when evaluating SA·SB), but the two approaches give nearly identical results for SA·SB so that coupling constants computed using eqn (11) are insensitive to this choice.Another new development that has begun to see application is the use of constrained DFT510–512 (cDFT) to generate broken-symmetry Kohn–Sham determinants having their uncoupled spins localized by the chosen constraints, as opposed to determined only by the variational energy. As the energy of the broken-symmetry state does not correspond to a true spin state, including additional constraints need not be regarded as unphysical. Thus, Difley et al.513 have used cDFT to study the singlet–triplet splittings of geminate electron-hole pairs in the charge-transfer configurations of zinc–organic light emitting devices, and Rudra et al.514 have adopted the approach to study spin-frustrated iron and chromium clusters. In the latter case, Rudra et al. emphasize that optimal results can be obtained by associating each constrained Kohn–Sham determinant and its energy with an individual spin-coupling scheme in the Heisenberg–Dirac Hamiltonian. Using these energies the relevant coupling constants in multisite magnetic systems can be easily computed from the Heisenberg–Dirac Hamiltonian itself rather than by invoking a broken-symmetry projection scheme. Schmidt et al.515 have recently described an extension of the cDFT approach that in addition to constraining spin localization constrains the magnitude of spin contamination computed from the Kohn–Sham orbitals. Schmidt et al. observe that the additional inclusion of the spin-contamination restraint is essential for the accurate computation of hyperfine couplings in doublet [Mn(CN)5NO]2−. In other work focused on multisite systems, Fliegl compared broken-symmetry approaches to CASCI models in order to examine magnetic couplings in a structural model for the tetramanganese-containing oxygen evolving complex in photosystem II and noted that BS DFT approaches tended to overestimate ferromagnetic couplings between centers.516In the context of solid-state calculations, Ciofini et al. have observed that τ-dependent local functionals provide good accuracy for the prediction of exchange coupling constants in KNiF3 and K2NiF4 insulators by broken-symmetry approaches.517 Avoiding hybrid functionals and the costly computation of their HF exchange component speeds the solid-state calculation.The use of broken-symmetry approaches in computing magnetic exchange is motivated by the poor performance of standard Kohn–Sham DFT for states that are not well represented by single determinants, like singlet-coupled diradicals. An alternative approach explored for cases of two unpaired electrons is to abandon the single determinantal formalism of the Kohn–Sham model and adopt the restricted ensemble-referenced Kohn–Sham (REKS) approach of Filatov and Shaik.518–520 In this case the singlet density is constructed from two closed-shell Kohn–Sham determinants differing from one another by a single orbital, i.e., (12)where N is the total number of electrons and nr and ns are fractional occupation numbers (that sum to two) for the two non-common orbitals. The REKS energy is then taken to be EREKS = ½[nrEKS(…ϕ2r) + nsEKS(…ϕ2s)] +f(nr,ns){EKS(…ϕrϕs) −½[EKS(…ϕrs) + EKS(…rϕs)]}(13)where f is a factor whose value may be chosen by analogy to CASSCF calculations or simply empirically. Comparison of REKS singlet energies to restricted-open-shell Kohn–Sham (ROKS) triplet energies then offers an alternative means to compute 2J values in systems with 2 unpaired spins. Moreira et al.521 compared the REKS approach with different factors f to use of eqn (8) for 6 binuclear copper complexes having J values ranging from –382 to 111 cm−1. They found that with eqn (8) the predicted J values correlated reasonably well with experiment, but the slopes of the correlations were 4.8, 1.6, and 0.5 for the BLYP, B3LYP, and BH&HLYP functionals, respectively [note that the slopes in this case would be one-half of the values with eqn (8) if eqn (9) were used instead]. Thus, there is considerable sensitivity in the approach to the amount of Hartree–Fock exchange included in the functional. With the REKS approach based on eqn (13), Moreira et al.521 observed similar correlations and slopes of the correlations to those obtained with eqn (8) for B3LYP and BH&HLYP. The concluded that eqn (8) is the more appropriate one for use in these systems when prediction from the broken-symmetry SCF solution is undertaken (cf. the contrasting conclusions of Valero et al.480 above with M06 results) and that improved quantitative performance of the REKS formalism will be contingent on improved understanding of how to avoid double counting the electron correlation energy by designing functionals specifically for use in the REKS approach, a point which Perez-Jimenez et al.522 have explored in more detail for various antiferromagnetic solids and biradicals. Ukai et al.523 have also explored the application of more general CAS-DFT approaches for computations of magnetic properties for the complexes V(H2O)63+, V(CO)63+, and [Cu(H2O)]2(μ-CH3CO2)4.Other alternatives to the broken-symmetry approach include the use of so-called spin-flip DFT, where the antiferromagnetically coupled low-spin state can be rigorously described as an excited state of a single-determinantal high-spin reference.524 In a recent study of copper–dioxygen complexes, de la Lande et al.525 observed good agreement between spin-flip singlet–triplet splittings and either experiment or multi-reference WFT predictions; they further emphasized that the spin-flip formalism permits optimization of the molecular geometry without the spin-state ambiguities associated with broken-symmetry calculations and also that analysis of the spin-flip excitations can be useful for identifying suitable active spaces for subsequent multi-reference WFT calculations. Rhee and Head-Gordon have also successfully employed spin-flip DFT to characterize molecules containing oxidized CuPCuP rings as singlet diradicals.526A difficulty with spin-flip DFT as originally introduced is that, with collinear density functionals (which are used in the overwhelming majority of applications), the spin flip can only be introduced by Hartree–Fock exchange, and thus the theory can be used only with hybrid functionals. In local collinear functionals, the functional depends on the spin-up and spin-down densities, the magnitudes of their gradients, and, in meta functionals, the spin-kinetic energies or the Laplacians of the spin densities. However, as mentioned in section 3.2, noncollinear functionals also depend on the off-diagonal elements of the spin density matrix, and they induce spin-flip transitions even in the absence of Hartree–Fock exchange;527 the resulting noncollinear spin-flip TD-DFT527–530 is more satisfactory; so far, however, applications to systems containing transition metals are in their infancy.531Another recently described alternative to broken-symmetry DFT involves the use of perturbation theory and the second derivative of the Kohn–Sham energy for a single, chosen reference state.532 And, in somewhat older work, Cramer et al.64,471 considered correcting broken-symmetry DFT energies based on application of wave function spin-projection operators to the Kohn–Sham Slater determinant. It will be interesting to observe how these various approaches perform as additional applications are reported for transition-metal containing systems.We will not review here in detail recent developments or applications associated with the use of DFT to compute EPR and NMR spectral parameters for open-shell systems containing transition metals. Rather, we refer readers to the recent review of Neese for a thorough coverage of this subject,452 and we note briefly a few interesting reports. Teale et al.24 have recently compared NMR chemical shifts computed from GGA and hybrid functionals using the optimized effective potential (OEP) formalism. Alam et al.533 predicted 19F chemical shifts in fluoropolyoxotantalates and in particular the influence of Ta–F spin–orbit coupling on those shifts, and Autschbach and Zheng534 have used two-component relativistic DFT to rationalize the influence of nonbonding Pt 5d orbitals on Pt chemical shifts in supported coordination compounds having oxidation states from II to IV. Morbec and Capelle535 have recently emphasized the connections between spin–orbit polarization terms in spin DFT and the exchange correlation vector potential that arises in current-density functional theory, which may serve as an interesting alternative for the computation of magnetic spectral quantities. Hrobárik et al.536 calculated EPR parameters for oxo-molybdenum(V) and oxo-tungsten(V) complexes by two-component relativistic calculations.5.2 Electronic and vibrational spectroscopy5.2.1 Electronic spectroscopy. The primary method for computing transition energies to electronically excited states within the framework of DFT is to employ a time-dependent formalism537,538 (TD-DFT, which was introduced in section 2.3), and the strengths and limitations of that model have been amply reviewed elsewhere.159,232,452,539–544 With respect to transition-metal complexes, a particularly troublesome feature of TD-DFT is the tendency of many functionals to significantly underestimate the energies of excited states characterized by high degrees of non-local charge transfer, although in principle this problem may be addressed by replacing the DFT exchange functional by 100% Hartree–Fock exchange,232,545 by using certain range-separated functionals,188,190,236 as in a recent application to charge transfer excitation in pyridine complexes with Ag20,546 or by going beyond first-order response.173 Nevertheless, linear-response TD-DFT with various functionals continues to be an especially useful one-electron model for understanding the optical spectra of transition-metal complexes. We highlight a few examples here.Salassa et al.547 have used TD-B3LYP to study the singlet and triplet excited states of RuII polypyridine complexes and to explain their photodissociation behaviors on the basis of the excited-state potential energy surfaces (a number of earlier TD-DFT studies of Ru and Os polypyridyl complexes have been reported with the goal of rationalizing their absorption spectra in the gas and condensed phases548–554). Jackson et al.555 have employed TD-DFT to characterize the intense near UV absorptions in axially ligated FeIVO complexes as ligand to FeO charge transfer transitions and thereby rationalize the strong resonance enhancement of the FeO stretching mode upon excitation of these transitions. Hutin et al.556 characterized the unusual mixed valence excited state of a binuclear copper helicate with TD-B3LYP and TD-BP86 and further computed its circular dichroism in order to assign its absolute chirality which derived from an interesting self-sorting process during crystallization. Later, Schultz et al.557 showed that this mixed valence behavior extends over all 4 copper atoms in a helicate dimer, thereby rationalizing experimental cyclic voltammetry data and indicating a potential means to construct a wrapped molecular copper wire. In addition, Bar-Nahum et al.558 found TD-B98 to be especially helpful in explaining an unusual long wavelength metal to ligand charge-transfer transition occurring in a mixed valence trinuclear copper disulfide (Fig. 1). Fig. 1  Experimental (light) and computed (TD-B98, 0.2 eV offset, dark) UV/Vis spectrum for the inset trinuclear copper complex. A recent review provides an overview of DFT and TD-DFT applications to electronic spectroscopy and excited-state properties of d6 metal carbonyls, strongly phosphorescent cyclometallated complexes, RuII photosensitizers (as used, for example, in solar cells and light switches), and isonitrile complexes of ReI and RuII.559Fan et al.560 used spin-unrestricted TD-DFT with the BP86 density functional, a continuum solvation model, and empirical corrections to calculate circular dichroism spectra of a number of trigonal dihedral CrIIId3 complexes and compared to earlier related work.Perala et al.561 used TD-DFT and magnetically perturbed TD-DFT with statistical averaging of orbital potentials562 to calculate ultraviolet and magnetic circular dichroism spectra of MTAP (M = Ni, Zn) and ZnPc where TAP denotes tetraazaporphyrin.Another particularly useful application of TD-DFT is for the interpretation of the optical spectra of intermediates too reactive to be readily isolated. Thus, Kunishita et al.563 inferred the creation of a reactive CuII 2-hydroxy-2-hydroperoxypropane intermediate upon addition of hydrogen peroxide to a solution of a supported CuI complex in acetone based on a comparison of measured UV spectral data to those computed at the TD-B98 level, thereby rationalizing subsequent reactivity of this complex.In the area of larger inorganic clusters, Stener et al.564 have successfully reproduced and rationalized the blue shift in the optical spectra of gold nanoparticles with decreasing cluster size using scalar relativistic TD-DFT applied to clusters of 146, 44, and 6 gold atoms. Stener et al.565 have also examined the optical spectroscopy of the WAu12 and MoAu12 clusters at the TD-DFT level, noting that while spin–orbit coupling merely shifts the energies of the lower excitations in the former compound, it gives rise to more complex splittings in many of the excitations for the latter compound. In subsequent work, Stener et al.566 added to their comparison TD-DFT results for the anionic dodecahedral clusters VAu12, NbAu12, and TaAu12.It is important to note that medium effects on optical spectra (solvatochromism) can be large for polar transition-metal compounds, and the inclusion of such effects in the TD-DFT model is typically most efficient when the surrounding medium is modeled as a dielectric continuum. Thus, for example, Charlot and Aukauloo552 have assessed aqueous solvatochromic effects on the spectra of RuII polypyridine complexes using the non-equilibrium polarized continuum model567–569 (PCM). De Angelis et al.570 have employed a similar strategy combined with Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics to simulate the optical properties of dye sensitizers interacting with TiO2 nanoparticles, such systems being critical components of modern dye-sensitized solar cells. Lundqvist et al.571 used B3LYP to study the structural and optical properties of ruthenium polypyridyl complexes on TiO2 nanoparticles. The spectra550,572,573 and photovoltaic parameters574 of dyes adsorbed on bulk TiO2 surfaces were also studied with B3LYP. Abuabara et al.575 studied the dynamics of interfacial electron transfer at catechol-sensitized TiO2 with the PW91 functional.In the cases of smaller inorganic molecules, various benchmark studies of DFT protocols compared to WFT methods have been undertaken. Ramirez-Solis et al.576 have compared DFT to CASPT2 and multi-reference averaged coupled pair functional (ACPF) results for the lowest ligand-field states of AgCl2, including consideration of spin–orbit effects. Considering the B97-2, B3LYP, and PBE0 functionals, they found that DFT predicted the first excited 2Σ+g state to be too high in energy relative to the 2Πg ground state by about a factor of 2. Although improved results could be obtained by increasing the percentage of Hartree–Fock exchange in B3LYP to 42%, this led to poor prediction of molecular geometries. In general, the DFT densities were found to predict excessive delocalization of unpaired spin density in the various states, this phenomenon being attributable to self-interaction error.In the ultra-high energy region of electronic spectroscopy, DFT has proven to be a popular tool for the interpretation of X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) in transition-metal containing systems. In the most straightforward applications, the only DFT calculation undertaken is for the ground state. Experimental pre-edge XAS intensities D0 for ligand atoms may be interpreted according to577 (14)where the core electron is typically 1s, α2 is the covalency of the light atom’s valence p orbitals mixed into the acceptor orbital ϕ* (expressed as a percentage), h is the number of holes in the acceptor orbital (or orbitals in the event of degeneracy), n is the number of absorbing atoms, and the transition dipole moment is estimated based on empirically determined linear relationships with measured edge XAS intensities into outer light-atom orbitals. Following experimental near-edge intensity measurements, eqn (14) is solved for α2 and the covalencies so determined are compared to those computed from atomic basis orbital contributions to computed Kohn–Sham virtual orbitals. Analogous procedures may be used with metal XAS intensities. In this way, the nature of the acceptor orbitals and the ordering of the virtual manifold may in principle be established, offering insights into ligand and metal oxidation states and redox behavior.Applying this XAS analysis approach, ligand effects on the covalency of supported FeIVO species have been assessed,578 the varying oxidation states of S2 bridges in binuclear copper complexes have been characterized,579 and the effects of different ligands and oxidation states on the properties of copper and nickel bis(dithiolene)580 and molybdenum tris(dithiolene)577 complexes have been rationalized.In terms of predicting actual near-edge XAS transition energies, TD-DFT in principle provides a means to predict such one-electron excitation energies in the same fashion in which valence to valence excitations are computed. However, the total number of all possible one-electron excitations is MN where M is the number of occupied orbitals and N the number of virtual orbitals, so applying TD-DFT for all one-electron excitations is cumbersome. Instead, the TD-DFT process is modified so that only core orbitals are included in the linear response equations. Thus, the remaining occupied molecular orbitals do not relax with respect to the core hole, although the valence orbitals are all responsive since they are included in the calculation. While this approach tends to lead to large absolute errors, it has shown good utility in the prediction of relative transition energies, and has been applied to assess the covalency of metal-chloride bonds in metallocene dichlorides, both with581 and without582 accounting for relativistic spin–orbit effects. The inclusion583 of spin–orbit effects using the two-component zeroth-order regular approximation (ZORA) leads to significant improvements in predicted absolute excitation energies for heavy transition metals. In addition, the TD-DFT for XAS approach has been used to characterized metal ligand covalency in oxomolybdenum compounds relevant to the sulfite oxidase active site.584 A particularly interesting application of this method to study benzenedithiolate complexes of Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Co, and Au offered insights into those factors affecting the innocence or non-innocence of the benzodithiolenes.585 Other recent studies have provided insights into the nature of relativistic and solvation effects on K-edge XAS spectra for FeII and FeIII species,586 as well as for “superoxidized” FeV and FeVI complexes.587,588 Finally, in something of a DFT tour de force, Sarangi et al.589 used both ground-state DFT and valence and near-edge TD-DFT to compare changes in bonding, UV spectra, and pre-edge XAS spectra between the wild-type blue copper active site of azurin and a mutant substituting selenocysteine for cysteine. These authors found that changes in Cu–S vs. Cu–Se bond distances led to very similar covalencies in the two copper–chalcogen bonds, so that spectra were minimally affected in spite of the 0.2 Å variation in bond lengths.As an alternative method to computing electronic excitation energies, Cheng et al.590 and Gilbert et al.591 have both recently described an approach they call excited-state DFT (eDFT) or the maximum overlap method (MOM), where in each instance the Kohn–Sham procedure is modified so that the total energy is minimized subject to a constraint that the final density has maximal overlap with a target density. In this way densities that correspond to systems with one or more holes in low energy orbitals may in principle be constructed and their Kohn–Sham energies determined directly (as opposed to using TD-DFT). In the case of a system of non-interacting electrons, selection of a target density is trivially accomplished by swapping one or more virtual orbitals with occupied orbitals. By turning on the adiabatic coupling in small steps, Cheng et al.590 found that they were able to achieve self-consistent eDFT solutions even for Rydberg states and Gilbert et al.591 showed the utility of MOM for charge-transfer excited states. This work is too preliminary to have been applied to any transition-metal containing systems, but it has the potential to sidestep known problems with TD-DFT in such complexes, so we mention it here.An interesting question in the spectroscopy and optics of metal clusters is the quenching of spin–orbit coupling as a function of geometry. This was studied using PBE for gold clusters by Castro et al.592One key application where it is important to predict the correct spin-state splitting is multi-state reactivity. Yang et al.593 used B3LYP calculations to study the gas-phase spin-forbidden addition reactions of Y+, Zr+, Nb+, Mo+, Pd+, and Ag+ with N2O to form MONN+, where M denotes the metal atom; the location of the crossing scheme is sensitive to the spin-state splitting. Additional examples are found in the two-state reactivity examples studied by Shaik and coworkers,594 which are discussed briefly in section 5.3.1.6, and in the two-state triplet–singlet mechanism for olefin epoxidation and oxidation reactions studied by Morokuma and coworkers.5955.2.2 Vibrational spectroscopy. The computation of vibrational frequencies is nearly always undertaken in modern practice in order to verify the nature of optimized stationary points. The comparison of computed frequencies to values measured by IR or Raman spectroscopy is also routine, and we will not address such studies here, although the performance of various functionals on benchmark data sets is summarized above in section 4. One study focusing more specifically on an information provided by the vibrational spectrum has been described by Hebben et al.596 In order to critically assess a prior suggestion597 that homoaromatic interactions between ethylene ligands causes the geometry of Ni(C2H4)3 to have all of its heavy atoms in a common plane, Hebben et al.596 used BP86 calculations to assign in detail measured IR and Raman spectra for Ni(C2H4)3, Pd(C2H4)3, and Pt(C2H4)3. From analysis of the interfragment force constants, they concluded that homoaromaticity plays no role in the structures of these species: the Ni and Pd cases are well described as Dewar–Chatt–Duncanson complexes; the Pt case includes some metallacyclopropane character. A prior study noted the high accuracy of hybrid functionals with respect to predicting the vibrational spectra of Ni(C2H4) and Ni(C2H4)+.598Vibrational spectroscopy can be useful in assigning chirality in transition metal complexes, typically from comparison of experimental and computed vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) or Raman optical activity (ROA) spectra.452,599–601 Some recent examples in this area include prediction of VCD602 and ROA603 spectra for some chiral tris(acetylacetonato) metal complexes.Coupling optical and vibrational spectroscopies, resonance Raman and off-resonance Raman spectroscopies also play key roles in the characterization of transition-metal containing systems.604–606 Recent advances in the direct computation of resonance Raman intensities have been reported,452,600,601,607 and applications have included examination of the first photoexcitation step in a tetranuclear (Ru2Pd2) light-harvesting complex608 and the determination that benzenedithiolate ligands need not be innocent in complexes of group 8, 9, and 10 metals.609Another interesting use of computed vibrational frequencies is for the construction of molecular partition functions from which equilibrium or kinetic isotope effects (EIEs and KIEs, respectively) may be computed so as to gain improved insight into electronic structure or mechanism. We note in particular recent work of Popp et al.610 which reported a computed 18O/16O KIE in good agreement with experiment for the formation of a PdO2 adduct. Popp et al. found the rate-determining step to involve an end-on to side-on isomerization of the O2 unit, which was contrary to an earlier proposal611 that the measured KIE was consistent with a concerted 2-electron oxidation and direct side-on binding of the O2. Roth and co-workers have also been quite active in comparing experimental and DFT-derived KIEs in transition-metal containing systems.611–614 In recent work on O2 binding to Cu614 and also in rationalizing 18O/16O KIEs in horseradish peroxidase,615 it has been emphasized that EIEs need not represent upper limits on KIEs, which had hitherto been a fairly common assumption for O2-binding reactions in the bioinorganic community.613In another interesting study making use of the full vibrational partition function, Brehm et al.616 used the BP86 functional to compute the differential vibrational entropic contribution to temperature-dependent spin crossover in [Fe(pmea)(NCS)2] (pmea = {bis[(2-pyridyl)methyl]-2-(2-pyridyl)ethylamine}), providing insights into its low-spin to high-spin transition.Carbonniere et al.617 studied anharmonic effects on the vibrational spectra of d0 transition-metal tetroxides and found B3LYP and PBE0 to offer good comparison with experiment, while BP86, OLYP, and TPSS did less well.5.2.3 Nonlinear optical properties. Most applications of TD-DFT are carried out using the linear-response formalism in which the applied electromagnetic field is weak; this is sufficient for single-photon spectroscopy. Nonlinear optics618,619 and two-photon spectroscopy620 require high-order treatments or a combination of TD-DFT with a sum over states, and such treatments are beyond the scope of this review.5.3 Structure, reactivity, and other propertiesThis section is divided into six subsections, focusing on coordination complexes/clusters and organometallics, solids, surfaces, systems having special relevance to heterogeneous catalysis, those having special relevance to electrocatalysis and those having special relevance to photocatalysis.5.3.1 Coordination complexes/clusters and organometallics. We organize this subsection, which addresses coordination complexes/clusters and organometallics, by the transition-metal groups in the periodic table from left to right. In some cases this organization has the unfortunate consequence that a given type of problem is discussed in more than one subsection, but there is no completely satisfactory organizing principle for such a broad survey. Of course, certain transition metals have been the subject of considerably more theoretical attention than others, but we make an effort to identify at least one interesting application for each element insofar as this is possible. In many instances, a particular modeling study may have addressed several different transition metals, in which case we have tended to discuss it within a group that offers opportunities to compare to other, perhaps more specifically focused work. As there are a vast number of reports from which to choose, we have inevitably applied somewhat arbitrary selection principles in determining which studies to highlight below. Thus, for instance, we do not discuss full metalloenzyme studies, but we do summarize several small-molecule model studies relevant to metalloenzyme active sites. We trust that readers will understand that such choices were essential to maintaining a reasonable size for the review.Before starting to work our way across the periodic table, we mention an especially relevant review by Ziegler and Autschbach,621 who surveyed a large number of applications of DFT to inorganic and organometallic reaction mechanisms and kinetics. We also direct the reader to a somewhat older but very concentrated thematic issue of Chem. Rev. devoted to computational transition metal chemistry.6225.3.1.1 Scandium, yttrium, lanthanum. We have already discussed in section 5.1 the DFT calculations of Matxain et al.503 associated with the computational determination of the ground state for Sc2.Group 3 metallocenes have been studied extensively as catalysts for C–H bond activation, and olefin polymerization, hydroamination, and hydroalkylation.623–632 The primary focus of these studies has been to elucidate the influence of varying degrees of ligand steric bulk and metal size on reactivity. In the case of C–H bond activation, transition-state theory rate constants computed for methane metathesis (Fig. 2) at the mPW1PW level were found to be in good agreement with experiment as long as important contributions from tunneling were included.623 The utility of ansa ligands with respect to increasing the exposure, and thus reactivity, of the metal center, has been a particular subject of study.627,632 Vastine and Hall633 have examined the transition-state structures for the methane metathesis shown in Fig. 2, for the illustrated scandocene, for [Cp*Ir(PMe3)(CH3)]+, and for some additional systems; using atoms-in-molecules analysis634 of the electron density they conclude that a continuum of mechanisms ranging from σ-bond metathesis (shown in Fig. 2) to oxidative addition/reductive elimination can be operative in the overall metathesis process. Fig. 2  Methane metathesis in a methyl group-3 metallocene. Cationic alkyl complexes of Sc or Y have also been found to be effective polymerization catalysts, and Tredget et al.635 used DFT to characterize the structural details of various such species, noting the general presence of stabilizing agostic interactions.Scott et al.636 have used DFT to characterize the metal–ligand binding in a novel methylidene scandium complex. In addition, the first examples of compounds containing a μ4 bonded hydride species, the tetranuclear polyhydride clusters [(C5Me4SiMe3)4M4H8] with M = Y and Lu, were characterized by Luo et al.637 at the PW91 level, elucidating structural features obscured by significant disorder in the Lu crystal structure.5.3.1.2 Titanium, zirconium, hafnium. In a recent study of all-inorganic metallocene analogs of the early transition metals, which have been the subject of considerable prior theoretical attention,638–640 Mercero et al.641 characterized the electronic structures of the sandwich compounds (cAl4)2Mn− for M = Ti, V, Cr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta, and W, where n is 2, 1, or 0 for metals in groups 4, 5, and 6, respectively, and cAl4 is the 4-membered ring composed entirely of aluminium atoms that is triply aromatic as a dianion. Mercero et al. found that the sandwich compounds of groups 5 and 6 were stable, maintained strong aromaticity in the cAl42− rings, and were not prone to autodetachment of an electron. Introduction of an alkali cation was required to prevent such autodetachment in the case of the group 4 analogs.Ochi et al.642 studied C–H and N–H bond activation at TiIV imido complexes with B3LYP and WFT. They drew conclusions not only from energetics (energetic stability of a precursor complex) but also by analysis of the atomic populations, orbitals, and orbital interactions at stationary points.The growth of zirconium clusters up to 15 atoms has been studied by Sheng et al.643 using the PW91 functional. These authors found that cluster sizes of 7, 13, and 15 were particularly stable, and that all clusters were particularly active with respect to the dissociative chemisorption of molecular hydrogen. Joubert et al.644 have studied the alkane hydrogenolysis reactivity of ZrH species supported on alumina surfaces at the PW91 level.Mandal et al.645 have characterized at the B3LYP level the olefin polymerization activities of two hybrid metallocene-nonmetallocene polynuclear complexes, in one case a binuclear (ZrTi) species and in the other a trinuclear (Zr2Hf) species. They found that cationic zirconocene sites are more energetically favorable but that cationic titanium sites are more sterically accessible so that bimodal activity would be expected for the polymerization of small vs. sterically hindered alkenes. Lewin and Cramer646 have described a multilevel quantum protocol that combines DFT for zirconocenes with small-basis-set Hartree–Fock calculations or molecular mechanics calculations using modified carbon effective core potentials to account for changes in the electron-donating strengths of alkyl-substituted metallocenes. Wondimagegn et al.647,648 have use QM/MM calculations with the BP86 density functional for the QM part to suggest improved zirconocene catalysts for olefin polymerization. Morokuma has provided an historical overview of DFT studies on the activation of molecular nitrogen by homogeneous zirconium catalysts.5955.3.1.3 Vanadium, niobium, tantalum. We noted in section 5.2 the TD-DFT calculations of Stener et al.566 undertaken to rationalize the optical spectra of MAu12− clusters, where M = V, Nb, and Ta.Owing to the importance of vanadium oxide catalysts in a number of heterogeneous industrial processes, a substantial amount of work has been done applying DFT to study the reactivity of small VmOn clusters with various species. Thus, Dong et al.649,650 have studied the gas-phase oxidation of saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons by such clusters at the B3LYP level, comparing theoretical predictions to product distributions generated in mass spectrometric experiments. In analogous work, Ma et al.651 have examined the cyclotrimerization of acetylene catalyzed by VO2, and Gracia et al.652 have studied the gas-phase reaction of propyne with VO2+.The VO2+ cation may be present in aqueous solution during the hydrothermal synthesis of vanadophosphates. To better understand its behavior in aqueous solution, Sadoc et al.653 have performed Car–Parrinello simulations using the PBE functional. They determined that a five-coordinate VO2+(H2O)3 species was most stable, but that strongly acidic conditions were required to prevent spontaneous deprotonation of this compound.Because of the utility of the 51V nucleus in NMR, various studies have appeared combining DFT and NMR to gain insights into geometric and electronic structural details, e.g., in heptacoordinate hydroxylamido vanadium picolinate complexes654 and oxoperoxo vanadium complexes of lactic acid.655Michelini et al.656 used B3LYP to calculate energies along the gas-phase reaction paths for Nb+(3P) and Nb+(5D) reacting with ethane to produce H2, C2H4, H, or C2H6. Validation of available functionals for the relative energies of high-spin and low-spin insertion transition states would be valuable for this kind of calculation.Arteaga-Müller et al.657 have characterized the electronic structures of supported niobium and tantalum imido compounds in order to better rationalize their activities as catalysts for the polymerization of methyl methacrylate. Based on orbital analysis they emphasize the isolobal character of the niobium and tantalum complexes compared to monocyclopentadienyl zirconium complexes.5.3.1.4 Chromium, molybdenum, tungsten. The series of supported transition-metal dimers  where Pn* is permethylpentalene (C8Me62−) and M = V, Cr, Mn, Co, and Ni has been prepared by Ashley et al.658 and the character of the metal-metal bonding has been analyzed using the BP86 functional. In particular, a triple bond is observed between the two V atoms, a double bond between the two Cr atoms, a single bond between the two Mn atoms, and single bond character is maintained in the cases of Co and Ni but the coordination of the Pn* fragments to the metals is increasingly reduced from η5 to η3. For the Cr case, replacing the Pn* ligands with 1,4-triisopropylpentalene ligands leads to a supported metal dimer having a ground state best characterized as two antiferromagnetically coupled S = ½ Cr atoms, but the triplet state is measured to be higher in energy by only about 0.5 kcal mol−1, so that paramagnetic behavior is observed at room temperature.659 BP86 and B3LYP calculations incorrectly predict the triplet state to be the ground state by 2–3 kcal mol−1, and CASPT2 calculations of the state-energy splitting using partially relaxed DFT structures also incorrectly predict a triplet ground state but by only 0.6 kcal mol−1.The nature of bonding between bare and supported Cr2 dimers has been extensively explored by Gagliardi and co-workers660–665 because of substantial interest in the very high bond order between the two atoms and the significant challenge to many theoretical models posed by the nature of the bonding.93,658,659,666–669 In experimental practice, the very high bond orders inferred for supported chromium dimers compared to iron or cobalt analogs are attributable to the tendency for the latter two metals to preferentially bond to arenes included in the ligand structure; chromium exhibits a much smaller tendency to engage in such bonding.664The activity of Mo and W alkylidene complexes as catalysts for olefin polymerization has been studied by Poater et al.,670 who found at the B3PW91 level that turnover efficiency was related to a balance between the stability of metallacycle intermediates in the catalytic cycle and energies required to distort the organometallic from its resting tetrahedral geometry. Haunschild et al.671 used B3LYP to characterize the many possible paths for reaction of ethylene with the group 6 alkylidenes MO2(CH2)(CH3) for M = Cr, Mo, and W.Caramori and Frenking672 have carried out energy decomposition analysis at the DFT level to characterize the bonding of Mo to P, N, PO, and NO ligands.Yan et al.673 employed the BP86 functional and a continuum model of acetonitrile solvation to study alternating bond lengths in Mo-containing polyoxometallates, which they attributed to pseudo Jahn–Teller distortions involving frontier π bonding and antibonding orbitals.Schenk et al.674 have used BP86 (with occasional state-energy splittings computed using B3LYP*) to study the nitrogenase activity of the Schrock catalyst MoHIPT (HIPT = tris[(N-hexaisopropylterphenyl)-2-amidoethyl]amine). The local nature of the BP86 functional was critical for efficiency with the very large HIPT ligand, which was found to have a significant influence on predicted reaction energetics compared to prior studies that employed smaller model ligands.675–682 Christian et al.683 came to similar conclusions with respect to the importance of including the full ligand in rationalizing differences between the full HIPT ligand vs. model ligands in the Schrock and related systems. Schrock684 has recently provided a very interesting comparison of theoretical predictions and experiment for such molybdenum-based complexes, noting that theory has proven particularly helpful in elucidating the role of added acid in the reaction mechanism. Stephan et al.685 have recently detailed acid effects further in various steps relevant to catalysis. Finally, Dance686 has summarized the implications of these and other theoretical studies with respect to the biological nitrogenase activity of the FeMo cofactor.Leyssens et al.687 examined the changes in electron density (and molecular geometry) associated with one-electron oxidations of chromium and molybdenum phosphine and amine complexes, and they noted that the changes are consistent with significant metal to phosphorus π back bonding that is not present in the analogous amine compounds. This analysis approximated the Fukui function as a full electron finite difference calculation.6885.3.1.5 Manganese, technetium, rhenium. A key feature of the group 7 series is the ready accessibility of their high-spin d5 states following oxidation by two electrons in the presence of a suitably weak ligand field. Matxain et al.689 have used MPWB1K to study the endohedral Mn@Sn12 molecule and its dimer in order to evaluate its potential for the construction of a magnetic material. They predict that the MnII ion inside the dodecahedral Sn122− cage prefers a high-spin ground state by more than 1 eV, that it has a large ionization potential, and that two such endohedral complexes associate, without reorganization to a more networked solid, with a binding energy on the order of 0.03 eV. The exchange coupling (computed using eqn (10) above) of the dimer is computed to be −5 cm−1, i.e., high-spin coupled, suggesting that the monomer should be an interesting precursor from which to make potentially magnetic materials. In analogous work, Matxain et al.690 considered endohedral complexes of the first 8 third-row transition metals in ZnSn cages for n = 12 and 16. In all cases, they found the endohedrally trapped species to be thermodynamically stable, and negligible spin or charge transfer was observed from the interior metal atom to the surrounding cage, such that the high-spin state of each atom was preferred, again suggesting that materials built from such encapsulated species might have interesting magnetic properties.Manganese is also of particular interest as the transition-metal found in the active site of the oxygen evolving complex (OEC) in photosynthesis. Yamaguchi et al.691 investigated the electronic structures of manganese–oxo bonds using hybrid DFT, comparing a high-valent manganese–oxo porphyrin complex to the active MnO bonds found in both native OEC and artificial systems. The oxygen atoms in these bonds were found to be highly electrophilic in nature and also to exhibit strong biradical character, not unlike the situation observed for other high-valent metal oxos like those found in methane monooxygenase (MMO) and cytochrome P450 (see below). Relevant to such systems, Balcells et al.692 have emphasized that in oxomanganese porphyrins, only high spin states placing substantial radical character on the O atom are reactive for C–H bond activation, so that trans ligands stabilizing the singlet ground state relative to the high-spin states decrease reactivity.The studies of Ashley et al.658 and Balasz et al.659 on various bimetallic pentalene sandwich compounds have been highlighted above in section 5.3.1.4. In addition, for the case of Mn2 bis(1,4-triisopropylpentalene), a particularly interesting phenomenon is observed: one of the two MnII atoms is low-spin (S = ½) and coordinated η5, while the other is high-spin (S = 5/2) and coordinated η2.693 B3LYP calculations predict that the state having MS = 3 is 1.1 kcal mol−1 lower in energy than that having MS = 2, consistent with magnetic susceptibility measurements that suggest an S = 3 state lying slightly below an S = 2 state. With respect to the binuclear rhenium, Krapp et al.694 have performed energy decomposition analysis at the DFT level to quantify the importance of σ, π, and δ bonding in Re2Cl82−.Lundberg and Siegbahn57 tested BLYP, HCTH, B3LYP, B3LYP*, and B98 for O–H bond energies and bond lengths in six aqua- and hydroxyl-manganese complexes. The best functional was found to be B3LYP with an MUE of 3 kcal mol−1, and the least accurate was BLYP with an MUE of about 20 kcal mol−1.Jia et al.695 applied B3LYP to investigate interconversions of five-coordinate monooxo TcV and six-coordinate dioxo TcVI amine oxime complexes, which involve both addition reactions and proton transfer with the aid of water molecules.Solans-Monfort et al.670 used B3PW91 to study the structural and dynamic properties of rhenium alkylidene complexes, which are of interest as olefin polymerization catalysts. Haunschild et al.696 used B3LYP to characterize the many possible paths for reaction of ethylene with the group 7 alkylidenes MO2(CH2)(CH3) for M = Re, Tc, and Mn.5.3.1.6 Iron, ruthenium, osmium. Because of their tremendous importance in biology and their possible extension to bio-inspired catalytic systems, the chemistry of heme- and non-heme-supported iron–oxo species has been the subject of extensive theoretical attention.578,697–713 However, given the number of extant reviews in this area,702,709 we will restrict our discussion of iron here primarily to polynuclear cases. Particularly informative studies addressing species containing a single iron atom, however, do merit some mention. For example, B3LYP calculations were instrumental in establishing that bis(α-diimine) complexes of single iron atoms—hitherto commonly described as high-spin Fe0 complexes—are instead properly described as antiferromagnetically coupled bis(α-diiminate)FeII species, the non-innocent ligands each having accepted one electron from iron into a low-energy π orbital.714 In a detailed study, the ability of various functionals to predict the binding energy of CO, NO, and O2 to heme-supported iron was studied by Radon and Pierloot715 using several functionals and also the CASPT2 model. These authors found that CASPT2 provided the best agreement with experiment and that the OLYP functional was similarly accurate (cf. the good performance of this functional in the prediction of state energy splittings in supported iron compounds497 in section 5.1 above), but that BP86 predicted severe overbinding and B3LYP and PBE0 severe underbinding. A prior study by Strickland and Harvey716 focused on the same binding processes (and also considered binding of H2O) and emphasized the contribution of a spin-crossover requirement to the kinetic barrier associated with CO binding. Mehn et al.717 characterized the bonding of borohydride ligands to high- and low-spin iron compounds, finding sufficiently strong interactions with both H and B atoms to describe borohydride as an η4 ligand. Shaik, Thiel, and their respective co-workers594,718–734 have been especially active in characterizing the single- and two-state reactivities of various supported iron compounds, particularly for cases relevant to metalloenzymes like cytochrome P450, heme oxygenase, horseradish peroxidase (cf. the KIE work of Roth and Cramer615 noted in section 5.2.2), and nitric oxide synthase, and have provided additional recent insights into mechanistic details through DFT calculations, primarily making use of the B3LYP functional. The most recent example734 involves triplet and quintet reactivity in nonheme oxoiron(IV), which was modeled in B3LYP calculations.In the case of polynuclear iron compounds, Reilly et al.735 employed PBE to study the ground state geometries and spin multiplicities of cationic iron oxide clusters containing one or two iron atoms and up to five oxygen atoms. They compared computed reaction paths for the oxidation of CO with mass spectrometric data to assess the relative facility of CO oxidation vs. oxygen atom replacement by CO and found good correlation between computed barriers and observed reaction channels.Gold/iron oxide composite nanoparticles have a number of potential biological applications based on binding magnetic nanoparticles to various substances, and there are many questions about the binding strengths. Sun et al.736 showed that the PW91 functionals applied to Au6Fe13O8 clusters can explain the differential binding ability of various amino acids to these nanoparticles. They also studied magnetic moments, bond distances, and gold coating energies in clusters up to size Au50Fe13O8.Considering biologically relevant multinuclear iron complexes, Schwarz et al.737 employed BP86 to correlate predicted d orbital energy splittings with those determined from magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) for the two non-equivalent iron atoms in the active site of toluene-4-monooxygenase (T4MO) which is strongly similar to that of soluble methane monooxygenase (sMMO). Based on their calculations, which also address the energetics of different active site geometries formed from the two iron centers and anchored amino acid side chains acting as ligands, they concluded that a water molecule found to be axially bound to one of the iron centers in several sMMO X-ray crystal structures is unlikely to remain bound when the oxygenases are complexed with their respective effector proteins, T4moD and MmoB; they further conclude that complexation by these effector proteins is likely to change the orientation of a terminal glutamate ligand on one iron, thereby possibly facilitating formation of a Fe2O2 reactive intermediate and rationalizing the 1000-fold increase in catalytic activity of sMMO when complexed with MmoB. In separate work, Rinaldo et al.738 have examined the catalytic cycle of sMMO by employing a QM/MM method in which a QM subsystem is treated with the B3LYP functional, and they suggest that the protein stabilizes a peroxo intermediate having a μ-η2:η2 coordination geometry and also adjusts the overall thermochemistry so as to favor products over reactants, thus emphasizing the sometime importance of including the full protein environment in the modeling of metalloenzymes.An additional spectroscopic technique that can be useful for characterizing the electron structure of iron compounds is Mossbauer spectroscopy, and Han et al. have reported good agreement between experimental isomer shifts for 61 different iron sites and those computed at the PW91 level after applying a linear correction.739 Han and Noodleman subsequently evaluated the performance of a number of other functionals for computed Mossbauer isomer shifts and found similarly good performance from OPBE and OLYP.740,741 Based on computed isomer shifts, geometries, pKa values, spin populations, predicted ground states, and quadrupole splittings, Han and Noodleman assign a cis-μ-1,2 peroxo bridging structure to intermediate state P of MMO,740 a bis(μ-oxo) structure to intermediate Q,741 and a cis to trans isomerization pathway connecting P to Q that is coupled to specific ligand rearrangements.740A different binuclear iron site of substantial biological interest is that found in ribonucleotide reductase, where there has been substantial controversy with respect to the geometric and electronic structure of intermediate X in the catalytic cycle,699,704,742 which includes antiferromagnetically coupled high-spin FeIII and FeIV centers. Mitic et al.743 have compared (i) d orbital energies computed for various hypothetical geometries at the BP86 level to splittings determined from MCD and (ii) predicted transition energies from TD-DFT and ΔSCF calculations for the same geometries to electronic spectroscopic data; based on their calculations, they conclude that the best model for intermediate X involves one bridging μ-oxo group and one bridging μ-hydroxo group. This prediction stands in contrast to a prior suggestion of a bis(μ-oxo) core based on a similar analysis,744 illustrating the somewhat subtle spectral differences predicted for different model geometries. However, Mitic et al.743 emphasize that the use of group theory to predict spectral intensities can offer helpful additional information for use in resolving spectral differences.Turning to polyiron clusters involving sulfide bridges in place of oxo bridges, which have been extensively studied by DFT and indeed have served as a testing and validation ground for broken-symmetry techniques over the years,305–306,310,460,745–751 Szilagyi and Winslow478 have presented an interesting technical study of alternative approaches to generating broken-symmetry determinants that have an antiferromagnetic coupling of proper magnitude spin densities on different centers, noting that some electronic structure programs provide tools for doing this based on fragment constraints, while others can be induced to converge to the experimentally supported spin distribution when starting from fully ionic determinants generated by enforcing block diagonalization of the Kohn–Sham matrix in a preceding step. They note that spin densities in a series of Fe2S2, Fe4S4, and MoFe3S4 clusters are relatively insensitive to choice of correlation functional combined with B88 exchange, but are improved relative to local exchange by inclusion of 5% Hartree–Fock exchange. Such clusters are also relevant to the chemistry of nitrogenase enzymes, and Moritz et al.752 have employed B3LYP* (the asterisk indicates, as explained in section 2.2, that the amount of exact exchange in the B3LYP functional is reduced from the usual 20% to 15%) to study the binding of N2 to Sellmann-type iron(II) complexes, noting that spin-state changes associated with binding have thermodynamic and kinetic consequences on this process.In an effort to understand the widespread distribution of Fe4S4 clusters in biology, Jensen et al.753 have carried out BP86 calculations for MFe3S4 and M2Fe2S4 clusters where M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, and Pd. They observe good agreement for structures and spin states in cases that are known experimentally, and note that the structures and reduction potentials of the cubic clusters are surprisingly insensitive to substitution of other transition metals, suggesting that this may be an evolutionary advantage to this motif. Jensen et al. also note that the modified clusters all have alternative spin states that lie closer in energy to one another than those for the all-iron case, so that spin crossover may be more facile in the mixed-metal clusters.Li et al.754 found that MR-CI calculations agree with experiment that FeO2− is linear, but nine of ten tested density functionals predict it to be bent, with only BH&HLYP giving a linear ground state. However, BH&HLYP predicts qualitatively incorrect results for other states.The prediction of one-electron reduction (or oxidation) potentials for molecules containing transition-metals has been extensively explored in the recent past,755–763 building on the good success of DFT-based models applied to predict this property in organic systems.764–771 Recent efforts in this area include a study by Jaque et al.762 examining the aqueous Ru3+|Ru2+ couple with 37 density functionals and five basis sets and further considering the effects of one or two explicit shells of solvent water (six or 18 water molecules, respectively) about the bare Ru ion in addition to continuum solvation. Jaque et al. concluded that at least two shells of explicit water were necessary to approach quantitative agreement with experiment and that an important issue is a substantial degree of positive charge transfer from the metal ion to the outer-shell waters in microsolvated clusters (cf. the hydrated gold cation discussed below). For two explicit solvent shells, the difference in solvation energy of Ru3+ and Ru2+ varies from −6.83 to −7.45 eV, depending on the choice of density functional and basis set, showing that one must be cautious about qualitative values of calculated reduction potentials especially in articles where the sensitivity to the functional is not explored. Kritayakornupong772,773 carried out QM/MM calculations on both Ru2+ and Ru3+ in aqueous solution. Although the QM region was treated by Hartree–Fock theory (not DFT), the simulations provide valuable insight into the solvated structures presented in the solution. For example, for Ru3+ the second coordination shell contains only ten water molecules.773 Three-body corrections to a purely MM calculation were insufficient to reproduce the hydration structure of Ru3+.773 The structure of the hydration shell of Fe3+(aq) was studied by Amira et al.,774 and the hydrolysis of Fe3+ was studied by De Abreu et al.775The relative stability of hydrated oxo vs. hydroxy structures has been examined by experiments and calculations for compounds with the formula MO2H2+, where M = Fe, Co, or Ni. For M = Ni, the (H2O)MO+ structure is favored, whereas for M = Fe, the M(OH)2+ structure is favored; for M = Co, the isomers are energetically similar.776In work focusing on a large number of supported Ru complexes, interesting because of their anticancer therapeutic potential, Chiorescu et al.763 benchmarked various continuum solvation models in conjunction with the B3LYP functional for 80 reduction potentials in four solvents. Comparison with experimental data indicated that errors were minimized when solute cavities were constructed from Bondi’s set of atomic radii—the default choices in some electronic structure programs were found to lead to errors that were larger by 70 to 140 mV.In work aimed at predicting aqueous one-electron reduction potentials for the most common aqueous couple of all of the first-row transition metals, Moens et al.771,777 found that the global value of the electrophilicity (a descriptor from conceptual DFT688) was a good predictor of reduction potentials when computed for clusters including two solvation shells about the central metal ion. Uudsemaa and Tamm756 had previously studied this series, computing the reduction potentials directly from DFT and continuum solvation free energies, and had come to similar conclusions with respect to the importance of two solvation shells.While not computational electrochemistry per se, recent experimental work measuring one-electron reduction potentials of aqueous nanodrops in the gas phase778,779 is worth noting here because of its potential to connect more directly to the absolute half-reaction reduction potentials that are typically computed by theory. Continued comparison of theory to experiment in these instances is likely to be helpful in resolving ongoing discussion on the absolute potential of the hydrogen electrode,778,780–785 to which the relative electrochemical scale is anchored.We turn next to ruthenium. Grubbs Ru-based catalysts for olefin metathesis are among the most economically important catalysts invented in the past decade, especially the second-generation catalysts with N-heterocyclic carbene ligands like 1,3-dimesityl-4,5-dihydro-2-ylidene (H2IMes), and substantial DFT work has been done to rationalize the influence that various factors may have on the activity of the supported ruthenium complexes.670,786–793 Thus, for instance, Mathew et al.790 have used DFT to study five different self-deactivation pathways, all based on intramolecular C–H bond activation, and suggested that increased rigidity in NHC substituents might be expected to improve catalyst stability. Benitez et al.791 have used B3LYP and M06 to determine that throughout the metathesis process the olefin remains “bottom-bound” to the (H2IMes)(Cl)2Ru catalyst and the chlorides remain trans to one another, so that efforts to design diastereo- and enantioselective catalysts should be undertaken within this coordination environment. In later work Benitez et al.794 used the M06 functional to calculate the dissociation energy of the Ru bond to tricyclohexylphosphine (PCy3) in a Grubbs catalyst and found excellent agreement with experiment. They found that the M06 functional leads to improved accuracy over B3LYP (by ∼0.5 kcal mol−1) for relative energies of various stable intermediates and much improved accuracy (by ∼23 kcal mol−1) for PCy3, and they concluded that their calculations settle a longstanding controversy. In very recent work, Tonner and Frenking792 have used DFT to suggest that carbodiphosphoranes might prove to be better ligands than NHCs for the design of Grubbs catalysts.In a particularly comprehensive study, Zhao and Truhlar793 developed a set of benchmark relative energies for key stationary points in the Grubbs second-generation olefin metathesis catalytic cycle using a composite model based on CCSD(T) calculations. To make the calculations of benchmark results feasible, small model ligands were used. They assessed spin-component-scaled MP2 approaches for computing these relative energies, where MP2 denotes second-order WFT perturbation theory, and they also examined 39 different density functionals; they found that the local M06-L functional combines good accuracy and, by virtue of being local, excellent efficiency with respect to computations on reasonably large catalysts. A number of GGA functionals incorporating the LYP correlation functional were found to perform poorly, in part because these functionals do a poor job of accounting for medium-range correlation effects that are decisive for predicting the importance of dispersion-like interactions between various ligands in the catalytic system.789 Averaging over the entire catalytic cycle, the mean unsigned errors in kcal mol−1 were found to be 1.2 for hybrid M06, 2.6 for hybrid MPW1B95, 3.0 for local meta M06-L and hybrid PBE0, 4.1–4.4 for local PBE, hybrid M06-2X, and local meta TPSS, 5.7 for hybrid meta τ-HCTHh, 6.6 for the popular local BP86, 7.2–9.9 for hybrid B98, X3LYP, and B97-3, and 11.0 for the popular hybrid B3LYP.When these methods were applied to real catalysts, with their large bulky ligands, the differences between the predictions of the various functionals were even larger.412,789,793 Grubbs second-generation (Grubbs II) catalysts are a hundred to a thousand times more active than the first-generation (Grubbs I) Ru metathesis catalysts, and they have greater thermal and chemical stability and better functional group tolerance. However, the 14-electron catalyst is generated more slowly from the 16-electron precatalyst than was the case for the first-generation catalysts. This can be problematic because living polymerization can be thwarted if the ratio of the rate constant of chain propagation to that for chain initiation is too high.795 The difference between the Grubbs I and Grubbs II catalysts is the substitution of one tricyclohexylphosphine (PCy3) in a typical biphosphine Grubbs I precatalyst, (PCy3)2Cl2RuCHPh, by an NHC in a typical Grubbs II precatalyst, (PCy3)(H2IMes)Cl2RuCHPh. These catalysts are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3  Ball-and-stick depictions of Grubbs I (left) and II (right) catalysts. Tsipis et al.796 noted that gas-phase calculations with B3LYP and BP86 both predict that the PCy3 bond dissociation energy of the Grubbs I precatalyst is larger than that of the Grubbs II precatalyst by 1.4–2.3 kcal mol−1, whereas the experimental result797 is that it is smaller by 3 kcal mol−1, approximately independent of solvent. Zhao and Truhlar789,793 showed that PW91, PBE0, and TPSSh also give the wrong sign (+0.4 to +1.1 kcal mol−1) for the difference in bond dissociation energies but that M06-L gives −4 kcal mol−1 in good agreement with the experimental value of −3 kcal mol−1. Zhao and Truhlar then repeated the calculation with the Ru and Cl atoms removed to find the contribution of noncovalent interactions of the bulky ligands. For B3LYP this noncovalent interaction is repulsive, but for M06-L it is attractive, and in fact it is 4.5 kcal mol−1 stronger for the Grubbs I precatalyst than for the Grubbs II precatalyst. Thus the difference in the bond dissociation energies is essentially completely accounted for by noncovalent attractive interactions. This is an important qualitative finding because the catalyst design literature is almost entirely focused on the electron donating ability of the ligands and their potential coordinate covalent bonding strength, with some consideration given to steric crowding, but there has been essentially no consideration of attractive noncovalent interactions.M06-L gives a bond dissociation energy of 39–40 kcal mol−1 for the Grubbs II precatalyst, whereas MPW1B95 gives 30 kcal mol−1, and B3LYP, BP86, TPSS, PBE, TPSSh, and PBE0 give values in the range 14–23 kcal.789,793 The value inferred from the experiment797 in toluene is 27 kcal mol−1. After the 40 kcal mol−1 value was published,789 a gas-phase experiment was published,798 yielding the same 40 kcal mol−1. This not only confirms the M06-L calculation (and also M06, which gives very similar results in this case793), but it shows that the older density functionals give much worse results for the large, real molecules than for the smaller model catalysts; this effect of size has also been noted in main-group chemistry799 and is attributed to an accumulation of medium-range correlation energy in large, complex systems, with smaller effects in extended chains.799,800 In more recent work, Stewart et al.801 reported that B3LYP predicts geometries for Ru-metathesis-relevant complexes more accurately than M06-L.In related work, Pandian et al.802 successfully applied the M06 functional to the Ru-catalyzed ring closing metathesis of 1,6-heptadiene. Sieffert and Bühl803 studied the binding enthalpy of a triphenylphosphine ligand in Ru(CO)Cl(PPh3)3(CHCHPh) with BP86, B3LYP, and the M05 and M06 families, as well as with density functionals to which an empirical MM dispersion is added. They found that BP86, B3LYP, and M05 do not reproduce the experimental results, whereas all four members of the M06 family and the empirically corrected functionals do; M05-2X was found to be intermediate. They agreed with the conclusion of Zhao and Truhlar789,793 that noncovalent interactions make a very large contribution to the total binding enthalpy. The success of new density functionals for these noncovalent interactions allowed them to define a computationally efficient protocol for studying catalytic reactions.In other work on ruthenium, Caramori and Frenking804 have carried out energy decomposition analysis to characterize the bonding of NO to ground- and excited-state ruthenium tetraamine complexes. Krapp et al.805 have used BP86 and CCSD(T) calculations to clarify details of the electronic structures of supported iron and ruthenium complexes coordinating naked carbon, e.g., (CO)2(PMe3)2Ru(C). And, as noted in section 5.1, Baik and co-workers494,495 have used B3LYP calculations to assess mechanistic details associated with oxygen formation in water catalyzed by supported diruthenium complexes, an area that continues to generate intense interest in the experimental and theoretical communities.493,806–820 In particularly recent work, Bozoglian et al.818b have shown that M06-L correctly predicts which of two alternative pathways for water oxidation is operative for the Ru-Hbpp catalyst; B3LYP, on the other hand, makes the wrong prediction.495Morokuma595 recently reviewed his DFT studies of multi-step reactions of organometallic tri-ruthenium complexes.Elschenbroich et al.821 characterized the electronic structures of trans-Cl2-(η1-C5H5P)4M for M = Ru and Os and trans-Cl2-(η1-C5H5As)4Ru, the final case being the first arsenine complex of a late transition metal to have been isolated.Zhang et al.822,823 employed B3LYP and TD-B3LYP to study the structures and spectroscopic properties of highly luminescent OsII complexes.5.3.1.7 Cobalt, rhodium, iridium. The organometallic coenzyme B12 and related small-molecule models have been the subject of many studies designed to probe the mechanistic details of the Co–C bond cleavage reactions critical to the function of such enzymes as 5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase and methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase.824 The more recent demonstration of the efficacy of B12 for the reductive dechlorination of halogenated aliphatics and olefins has sparked additional interest in the design of supported cobalt species for environmental remediation.825 For example, reaction of a pyridine-coordinated cobaloxime with trichloroethylene leads to a cis-1,2-dichlorovinyl organocobalt species that may undergo subsequent reductive Co–C bond cleavage (Fig. 4).826 From a mechanistic standpoint, the final bond-cleavage event may proceed either homolytically to generate an organic radical and a CoI species or heterolytically to generate an organic anion and a CoII species. In biological systems involving B12, the Co is supported by a corrin macrocycle and trans ligation is typically effected by an imidazole or benzimidazole. Fig. 4  Reductive dechlorination of trichloroethylene by a cobaloxime. Pratt and van der Donk827 carried out extensive studies of chlorinated vinylcobalamin species at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level and observed good correlations between computed and experimental structural data, noting in particular that the use of a corrin ring having all of its rim substituents removed compared to one with 15 methyl groups (to mimic the various side chains present in biological corrins) led to no substantial geometric differences. By computing one-electron reduction potentials for different species and analysis of the virtual orbitals involved, Pratt and van der Donk827 and subsequently Birke et al.828 suggested that reductive bond cleavage may take place via the “base-off” cobalamin, i.e., after equilibrium dissociation of the trans imidazole or benzimidazole ligand. Both Pratt and van der Donk827 and Birke et al.828 also observed good correlations between one-electron reduction potentials and Co–C bond lengths in the pre-reduction complexes.Follett et al.826 carried out similar studies at the B3LYP/6-31+G(d) level for the system illustrated in Fig. 4. They too analyzed one-electron reduction potentials and, more interestingly, followed the electronic structure of reduced cobaloximes along their bond dissociation coordinates. By examining spin and charge distributions, they were able to elucidate the degrees to which different organic ligands (methyl, vinyl, and dichlorovinyl) tended to prefer the homolytic vs. heterolytic pathways and the influence of solvation upon those preferences.Both Pratt and van der Donk827 and Follett et al.826 confirmed observations first reported by Jensen and Ryde829 with respect to the computed Co–C bond dissociation energies (BDEs; see Fig. 4). In particular, the B3LYP functional consistently underestimates BDEs in both cobalamin and cobaloxime systems by 40–50 kJ mol−1 when the products include a doublet CoII species, but B3LYP provides more accurate results when singlet CoI or CoIII products are generated. By contrast, the local BP86 functional was found to provide near quantitative agreement with experiment, illustrating the degree to which inclusion of exact Hartree–Fock exchange can affect predicted energy differences between open- and closed-shell states. Jensen et al. have discussed this point in more detail with respect to dissociation energies of diatomic species formed from one transition metal atom and one non-metal atom, relating functional performance to the high- or low-spin nature of the various asymptotes.408Considerable modeling attention has also been paid to Co–C bond cleavage in the enzymatic systems 5-methyltetrahydrofolate homocysteine methyltransferase and methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase as well. As that work has been very recently reviewed elsewhere, we refer interested readers there.830Morschel et al.831 have examined the influence of supporting ligands on cobalt-catalyzed Diels–Alder reactions. At the BP86 level, at least 4 different pathways are available leading to products, with low-energy intermediates not necessarily correlating with low-energy barriers for subsequent steps; once all paths are considered, the BP86 predictions for regioselection in the reaction between isoprene and phenylacetylene were found to be in good agreement with experiment.There is substantial interest in CO2 as a cheap C1 feedstock, so its catalytic hydrogenation is an active area of exploration. Huang et al.832 have used the KMLYP functional to characterize the mechanism of hydrogenation of CO2 by a pincer PCP–rhodium complex, noting that strongly electron-donating ligands disfavor reductive elimination of formic acid after hydrogenation (where PCP denotes phenylcyclohexylpiperidine). Hu and Boyd833 assessed B3LYP for the reaction energy and forward and reverse barrier heights to dissociate a CO ligand in Cl2Rh(CO)2−. The deviation of these three quantities from CCSD(T) calculations was only 1–2 kcal mol−1.In an unusual example of oxygen activation, Praetorius et al.834 have characterized a singlet square planar rhodium complex in which the O2 ligand has not oxidized the metal center. They suggest that prior examples of rhodium-O2 complexes with very short O–O bonds that have been assigned as superoxo species may merit reassignment in light of their new results.In the organic area, the mechanistic details associated with rhodium-catalyzed asymmetric addition of boronic acids to α,β-unsaturated 2-pyridylsulfones have been studied by Mauleon et al.835 at the B3LYP level. In another recent report, Fristrup et al.836 have explored the mechanism for the rhodium-catalyzed decarbonylation of aldehydes, also at the B3LYP level. Based on a comparison of computed to measured H/D KIEs, migratory extrusion of CO was established as the rate determining step for this process. Liu et al.837 used B3LYP to study the mechanistic details of homogeneous rhodium catalyzed [5 + 2] cycloadditions between vinylcyclopropanes and alkynes. Orian et al.838 used BLYP calculations to study end-on side-on isomerization of nitrile ligand half-sandwich five-membered rhodacycles; they analyzed the saddle points in terms of the strain energy upon activation.The utility of IrIII cyclometalated complexes in organic light-emitting diodes has given rise to many TD-DFT studies of their electronic spectral properties.839–843 More relevant to catalysis, recent studies have appeared employing DFT (usually B3LYP) to study the mechanistic details of iridium-catalyzed allylic etherification,844 alkene hydrosilation,845 and C–H bond activation.846 Ghosh et al.847 successfully rationalized carbon–carbon bond forming reductive elimination rates in pincer PCP–Ir complexes having various degrees of steric bulk, noting the critical importance of non-bonded interactions (as opposed to electronic effects) affecting ligand rotations required to bring eliminating alkyl fragments into reactive conformations.Marom and Kronik848 compared Kohn–Sham orbital eigenvalues computed for CoPc and NiPc with the B3LYP, PBE, PBE0, and M06 functionals to experimental ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) data. They found poor agreement for PBE and good agreement for the other three functionals.5.3.1.8 Nickel, palladium, platinum. Calaminici has examined the polarizability of small nickel clusters, up to 5 atoms, using a GGA functional.849 She found that in contrast to clusters of iron or copper, the per-atom polarizability failed to increase with increasing cluster size, but instead showed more complex behavior, suggesting that experiments to better understand this situation would be of interest. Earlier work by Arvizu and Calaminici850 established the energetics of various isomers of Nin, Nin+, and Nin−, for n up to 5, and was useful for the development of a Ni basis set optimized for cluster calculations.370,850 Shoji et al.851,852 have employed the generalization465 of the Yamaguchi broken-symmetry method [eqn (10)] with B3LYP to compute exchange interactions in two supported Ni9 complexes and compared this approach to the simpler Ising model, observing good agreement with experiment for predicted ground spin states and magnetic susceptibilities.Conradie et al.853 observed that the BLYP, OLYP, OPBE, and PW91 local functionals and the B3LYP and B3LYP* hybrid functionals all predict, in gas-phase calculations on the doublet d7 states of nickel(III) tetra(tert-butyl)porphyrin dicyanide anion, that the ground state has the unpaired electron in a  orbital, whereas the experimental ground state has it in a  orbital. They attribute the error not to inaccurate functionals but rather to neglect of the counterion effect.Kozuch et al.854 studied Pd0L2 and Pd0L2Cl− model catalysts with B3LYP calculations for cross coupling reactions with phenyl chloride as substrate. They found that the anion lowers the barrier for the oxidative addition step, and they explained this in terms of occupied orbital destabilization and unoccupied orbital stabilization.de Jong and Bickelhaupt855 used the BLYP functional to study oxidative addition of C–H, C–C, C–F, and C–Cl bonds to model Pd coordination complexes in order to gain insight into the competing factors of reactant strain, steric shielding, transition-state stabilization, and anion assistance in controlling these bond activation processes. They studied these factors not only at the transition state but also as functions of the reaction coordinate, and they used the Kohn–Sham orbitals and an energy decomposition scheme in their interpretation. The analysis provided considerable insight into the differences between C–C and C–Cl bond activations and C–H alternatives.Viñes et al.856 examined palladium clusters having nuclearity ranging from 38 to 225 by adopting a plane-wave approach where the individual clusters occupy the centers of unit cells having at least 1 nm of vacuum separating one cluster from another, thus permitting the efficiency of the plane-wave approach with negligible interactions between clusters and no symmetry constraints on individual clusters. They determined that scalability to bulk density-of-states behavior begins at a cluster size of about 80, with Pd140 and Pd225 particles showing properties very similar to bulk Pd. In a separate study,857 Viñes et al. showed that these larger nanoparticles also showed converged behavior with respect to their tendency to self-aggregate in linear arrays, as observed in the formation of particulate Pd nanowires.858Betz et al.859 have explored the relative stabilities of different N,S vs. N,N, vs. S,S coordination motifs in π-allyl palladium complexes supported by asymmetric bis-thiazoline ligands and their influence on reactivity. Legault et al.860 employed B3LYP to rationalize regioselectivities in homogeneous palladium catalyzed sequential cross-couplings of polyhalogenated heterocycles.Continuing in the organometallic arena, the last decade has seen substantial interest in the use of N-heterocyclic carbenes861,862 (NHCs, already mentioned in section 5.3.1.6) as ligands owing to their tunable steric demands and their character as a strong σ donor to the metal center. Radius and Bickelhaupt863 have studied the nature of σvs.π bonding of NHCs to metals in the group 10 series as a function of other ligands using the extended transition state density decomposition scheme of Ziegler and Rauk.864 Radius and Bickelhaupt emphasize that the importance of π bonding, particularly with 3rd-row transition metals, should not be discounted, and the directionality of the bonding (in terms of charge transfer) and its magnitude are quite sensitive to the nature of the remaining ligands, e.g., with CO ligands being better π acceptors in this d10 series than NHCs (a similar sensitivity of metal–NHC π bonding to other ligands was noted in recent calculations on supported f element compounds865,866). Computational investigations into the nature of NHCs and their bonding to all transition metals have recently been reviewed by Jacobsen et al.867 and a review focused exclusively on the Group 10 transition metals has also been provided by Radius and Bickelhaupt.868 Finally, Tonner et al.869 have compared the bonding of different tautomers of NHCs to phosphine ligands for complexes of group 4, 6, 8, and 11 transition metals. All of these studies need to be re-examined in light of the importance of attractive noncovalent interactions, as discussed in section 5.3.1.6.Based on computed structural data and comparison of computed EPR spectral parameters to experiment, Harmer et al.870 have proposed a novel nickel hydride intermediate that plays a key role in “reverse methanogenesis” in the enzyme methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MCR). In earlier work, Yang et al.871 applied a similar protocol to identify a related methylnickel complex.de Jong and Bickelhaupt used the BLYP functional to study carbon–halogen bond activation by oxidative addition at Pd atoms414,872 and PdCl− model catalysts872 and by an SN2 mechanism involving Walden inversion at C. Solvation effects were found to change the relative favorability of the two mechanisms. The results were explained by an activation strain analysis.The B3LYP functional has been used to study ligand effects on oxidative addition,873 reductive elimination,874 and carbon–carbon bond formation875 in Pd coordination complexes.Adams et al.876 used B3PW91 calculations, either treating a small model fully quantum mechanically or employing a QM/MM approach with the UFF force field877 to fully represent large phosphine ligands, to characterize the ability of a pentanuclear Re2Pt3 complex to add up to three equivalents of H2 at room temperature. Because of the clinical importance of cisplatin as an anticancer drug, several recent DFT studies have appeared focusing on the structural details of the drug or derivatives either isolated or bound to DNA, and on the chemical consequences of binding.878–886 For example, van der Wijst et al.887 used the BP86 functional to study the influence of coordination to PtII on the relative energies of tautomers of 1-methyluracil and 1-methylthymine, finding that such coordination causes an otherwise rare tautomer to be favored in solution.Datta et al.888 used the B3LYP functional to study tunneling effects in oxidative addition of methane to a Pt complex. As in an earlier study889 applying B3LYP to oxidative addition of methane to a model Rh complex, they found very large tunneling effects.Gilbert and coworkers890 used the MPW1K functional to study the intramolecular hydrogen bonds in cis-diamineplatinum(II) pyrophosphate complexes.Mo and Kaxiras891 used the PBE functional to study cyanide-transition-metal nanotubes containing Ni, Pd, or Pt. They stated that their computational parameters ensure high accuracy, but the accuracy of the PBE functional is not guaranteed.5.3.1.9 Copper, silver, gold. Studies of the coinage metals have focused upon their activities as single-center catalysts in supported metal complexes as well as upon their structures and properties in clusters ranging from a few atoms to nanoparticles; single atoms, ions, and bulk metals have also been studied. With respect to clusters, Roldán et al.892 have employed plane-wave LDA and PW91 calculations to study nanoparticles of copper and silver ranging from 38 to 146 atoms and nanoparticles of gold ranging from 38 to 225 atoms. They observed linear convergence to bulk values of predicted average nearest-neighbor interatomic distances with respect to average coordination numbers as the sizes of the nanoparticles increased. However, the reproduction of experimental bulk values was inconsistent, with PW91 being better than LDA by 5 pm for Cu, LDA better than PW91 by 7 pm for Au, and the experimental value for Ag falling precisely in between LDA and PW91, differing from each by 5 pm. Trends in cohesive energies per atom were similar, with PW91 being clearly better for Cu, but not for the heavier coinage metals. Analysis of density of states (DOS) plots for the three families of clusters indicated that beyond 80 atoms, DOS parameters were scalable to bulk values, with no special characteristics like those associated with smaller clusters.Calaminici et al.893 employed the same density functionals as Roldán et al. but focused in detail on neutral and anionic Cu9. The work was motivated by significant disagreement between prior theoretical studies894 and experiment895 for the electron affinity of the nonameric cluster. Employing a cluster geometry search strategy896 at the LDA level Calaminici et al. found six and nine minima for the neutral and anionic nonamers, respectively. While LDA energies were not found to be useful for identification of the lowest energy structures, nor for rationalizing the measured electron affinity, energies computed at the PW91 level (for the LDA structures) provided good agreement with both vertical and adiabatic experimental data.Shi et al.897 studied the mechanism of a gold-catalyzed [1,2]-hydrogen shift whose rate is increased by water. A spotlight discussion is available.898Because of their importance in heterogeneous catalysis, the properties of small gold clusters have been studied extensively, and Pyykkö has recently reviewed theoretical efforts in this area.899,900 An unusual and interesting feature of gold anion clusters compared to their Cu and Ag congeners is that various experimental techniques901–903 indicate that two-dimensional structures are preferred over three-dimensional isomers up to a cluster number of 12. Johansson et al.904 showed very recently that DFT successfully predicts this 2D to 3D transition size provided (i) one uses the meta TPSS functional, the hybrid meta TPSSh functional, or a GGA like PBEsol that is fit (among other criteria) to yield accurate predictions of jellium surface energies, and (ii) spin–orbit contributions to cluster energies are included. They found by contrast that BP86 and PBE both are significantly biased towards 2D clusters. Other functionals that performed poorly compared to PBEsol and TPSS include LSDA, BLYP, B3LYP, and X3LYP. It was shown previously905 that the mean absolute relative error in the exchange–correlation surface energy for jellium is much smaller (1.1%) for the TPSS and TPSSh functionals than for PBE (5%), and Johansson et al. emphasized this property in rationalizing why PBEsol, TPSS, and TPSSh perform better than PBE for this transition. The conclusion about the importance of fitting the jellium surface energy is very interesting in light of the discussion in section 2.5, and this issue deserves further study. Olson et al.906 had previously noted poor performance of older functionals for this same problem, and had shown that large basis-set MP2 and CCSD(T) calculations gave results in good agreement with experiment. Recently it has been shown that the hybrid meta M05 and M06 functionals and the meta M06-L functional all predict the 2D to 3D transition correctly in going from Au11− to Au13−.907 Ferrighi et al. reported a similar finding, almost simultaneously.908 Several other authors have used DFT to study related structural issues in slightly larger gold clusters, from Au5 to Au20,909 Au14 to Au29,910 Au15− to Au24−,911 Au20,912 Au20n+,912 Au20n− (with n = 1 or 2),912 Au21− to Au25−,913,914 and Au26.915 For example, Kryachko and Remacle, in a review,912 noted that Au20 has several planar and 3D isomers, including a unique tetrahedral structure with all atoms on the surface and a “large” HOMO–LUMO gap.Another interesting study of a gold cluster anion has been reported by Lechtken et al.916 These authors studied Au34− and found that the TPSS functional predicts the lowest-energy cluster to be chiral and belong to the C3 point group. Lechtken et al. then employed BP86 structures and TD-DFT with this functional to compute the electronic excitation spectrum of the neutral cluster at the anion geometry, and derive therefrom a predicted photoelectron spectrum (PES). The TD-DFT approach is more physically appropriate than using a density of states computation based on orbital energies, and Lechtken et al. find that only the chiral isomer predicted at the TPSS level to be lowest in energy gives a predicted PES consistent with experiment. This result is particularly intriguing since chiral clusters might be expected to carry out asymmetric catalysis. Gu et al.917 also studied Au34−. They used the LSDA and PW91 functionals and found several low-energy structures with the form of a Au4 core surrounded by 30 fluxional outer atoms.Li et al.918 carried out calculations on Au20 and Au20− with the PW91 functional and found that the optimum geometry is a pyramidal cluster that represents a small piece of bulk gold with four (111) faces. They found an orbital energy gap of 1.8 eV.918 Further work on the anions Aun− with the PBE functional showed an evolution in shape from planar to flat cages to hollow cages to pyramidal as n increased from 13 to 20,919,920 and a transition from pyramidal to fused planar to tubular to core/shell compact for n = 21–25.914 Zubarev and Boldyrev analyzed the bonding in the cages with the B3PW91 functional.921Torres et al.922 used the PBE functional to study AunO2+ for n = 4–8 and MAunO2+ for n = 3–7 where M is a dopant atom of either Ti or Fe. The preferred geometry for adsorption of oxygen on the doped clusters is with both O atoms on the impurity. Prestianni et al. used B3LYP to study various adsorption sites of O2 or CO on Aum+n with n = 1, 9, and 13 and m = 0, 1, and 3,923 later extending this to coadsorption on Au13+,924 coadsorption on Au13,924,925 and separate and coadsorption on Au9, Au13, Au9+, and Au13+.925 The latter study included reaction paths and barriers.Metiu and coworkers926,927 examined the binding of propene to gold and mixed gold-silver clusters and showed that it binds in an electron-donating mode and binds most strongly at sites where the LUMO protrudes. They concluded that orbital shape and orbital energy, not just low coordination number, are important for determining the catalytic properties of small gold clusters. They also noted927 that there are numerous low-lying isomers of metal clusters, a subject mentioned above.912,928,929 They used the local PW91 or PBE functionals to study the binding of gold clusters on TiO2 surfaces,930 CO adsorption on gold-doped ceria surfaces,931 and CO oxidation on TiO2 doped with V, Cr, Mo, W, and Mn.932 Supported gold atoms and clusters have also been studied in other works.933,934 See section 5.3.3 for further discussion of surface science.Golightly et al.935 used B3LYP to study diphosphine-protected Au11 clusters and stressed the sensitivity of the results to the precise nature of the ligand when the ligand has donor–acceptor abilities.A troubling aspect of gold clusters is that even for Au3 the most complete DFT calculations of the dissociation energy still show discrepancies from experiment of 5–10 kcal mol−1.936Ending our discussion of coinage metal clusters, Crawford et al.937 have reported a particularly interesting study of a semiconductor cluster Ag28S26(P(O)PhOMe)12(PPh3)12. The X-ray crystal structure of this cluster exhibits substantial disorder in its core associated with two silver atoms that can occupy any of six equivalent sites. DFT calculations at the BP86 level show that as long as the two sites occupied do not neighbor one another, essentially equivalent structures are obtained upon optimization of any given choice. By following a constrained DFT molecular dynamics trajectory, Crawford et al. estimated the barrier for the concerted movement of both silver atoms into new (equivalent) positions to be about 26 kJ mol−1. They suggest that this estimate may also be appropriate for cation mobility in bulk silver chalcogenides.The largest gold cluster studied so far by DFT is the thiolate-passivated Au102(p-MBA)44 where p-MBA is p-mercaptobenzoic acid.373,938Moving from clusters to supported metal compounds having only one or two atoms, there has been extensive theoretical activity devoted to studying the activation of molecular oxygen by supported copper species,487,939–942 owing to the prevalence of this theme in biological and inorganic catalysis.487,611,939,940,943–946 Güell et al.947 have studied the interaction of O2 with atomic copper and noted that a broad range of local, hybrid, and meta-hybrid functionals all predict the ground-state geometry of the triatomic complex to involve end-on binding to O2, a result at odds with highly correlated levels of electronic structure theory (CCSD(T) with a complete basis set,947 CASPT2,948etc.) In addition, they found that B3LYP-like functionals required substantially different amounts of exact exchange to provide satisfactory agreement with complete basis set CCSD(T) for geometries (20%) vs. relative electronic state energies (90%), and they attributed this behavior to the failure of most functionals to properly balance the covalent vs. ionic character of the different geometries and states, noting that most DFT models significantly overestimate the first ionization potential of Cu.In most biological and catalytic systems, however, copper is not found in its atomic form but is rather ionized prior to its interaction with O2. From a formal oxidation-reduction standpoint, the combination of O2 with a LCuI partner (L being a generic supporting ligand environment) may occur either without change of the copper oxidation state, or with one or two electrons transferred so as to generate LCuIIO2(−) and LCuIIIO2(2−) mesomers, respectively. As O2 has a triplet electronic ground state, weakly coupled LCuIO2 species may also be expected to be triplets, while singlet and triplet states may have similar energies for LCuIIO2(−), since the d9 CuII and superoxide radical anion may have separated biradical character, while finally LCuIIIO2(2−) would be expected to have a singlet ground state given the closed-shell character of d8 CuIII and the peroxide dianion. Accurately modeling this spectrum of energetic possibilities is a challenge for Kohn–Sham DFT because of the varying degrees of dynamical and non-dynamical electron correlation effects in the different redox states, which can be effectively tuned by choice of ligand environment L. An additional factor influencing the electronic structure and reactivity of LCuO2 complexes is the geometry of O2 coordination; both end-on and side-on coordination geometries have been observed depending on L.487Cramer et al.949 computed the relative energies of the singlet and triplet states for the end-on and side-on geometries of the 7 LCuO2 complexes in Fig. 5 at several different levels of electronic structure theory. They observed good agreement in predicted relative energies when comparing completely renormalized coupled-cluster calculations950–953 (CR-CC(2,3)) and multi-reference second-order perturbation theory954 (CASPT2) and based on such agreement benchmarked various DFT protocols against the two WFT methods. They observed that local functionals such as BLYP, mPWPW, and M06-L provided generally good agreement with benchmark values, but the inclusion of Hartree–Fock exchange in functionals like B3LYP, mPW1PW, M06, or M06-2X led to increasingly inaccurate results with increasing Hartree–Fock exchange. Interestingly, the most accurate results from the BLYP and mPWPW functionals were obtained when a restricted Kohn–Sham formalism was employed for the singlet states, even though the Kohn–Sham wave functions were unstable to spin-symmetry breaking. With the M06-L functional, spin purification of broken-symmetry energies provided slightly improved values for singlet energies compared to restricted Kohn–Sham energies. For the remaining functionals, errors were large irrespective of the protocol used to assign singlet state energies. Fig. 5  Benchmark ligand systems L for comparing singlet and triplet electronic state energies for end-on and side-on LCuO2 coordination geometries and TMG3trenCuO2+ (inset). By studying the ligands in Fig. 5, Cramer et al.949 were able successfully to rationalize the observed geometries and ground electronic states of a diverse array of experimentally characterized LCuO2 complexes, identifying the importance of ligand stereoelectronic effects on orbital interactions between the LCu and O2 fragments. One particular case is especially interesting, namely TMG3trenCuO2+ (TMG3tren = 1,1,1-tris{2-[N2-(1,1,3,3-tetramethylguanidino)]ethyl}amine; see Fig. 5 inset). Originally reported by Schatz et al.,955 the end-on nature of the O2 coordination was assigned in part based on good agreement between observed resonance Raman O2 stretching frequencies and those computed for a restricted singlet state at the BP86 level. The O2 coordination geometry was later confirmed by single-crystal X-ray crystallography;956 however, subsequent experimental work by Lanci et al.614 established the electronic ground state of TMG3trenCuO2+ to be triplet, not singlet, suggesting that the correlation in observed (triplet) and computed (singlet) O2 stretching frequencies was coincidental. At the mPWPW level of theory, the triplet state is predicted to be lower in energy than the restricted singlet by 16 kcal mol−1, and it is also lower than the broken-symmetry state by 7 kcal mol−1, consistent with the experimental ground-state determination.614 The mPWPW level of theory also provides reasonable quantitative agreement with the measured 18O equilibrium isotope effect (EIE) for O2 binding, with theory suggesting that solvation effects in acetone increase the charge transfer from LCu to the O2 fragment, compared to the gas phase, and play a significant role in modulating the O2 stretching frequency. De la Lande et al.957 have also considered the chemistry of the trenCuO2+ system, applying a variable supplementary pseudopotential to the apical nitrogen atom to tune the oxidation potential of the supported Cu atom and examine the effects on C–H bond cleavage reaction coordinates. Gherman et al.958 have examined the influence of biological ligands on O2 coordination geometries and oxidation numbers.The reactivity of supported LCuO2 complexes has also seen substantial study at the DFT level. Thus, Aboelella et al.959 examined the influence of a thioether ligand on the binding of O2 to a CuI diketiminate, using BLYP and B3LYP to characterize the energetics and geometric details of the complex, as well as to explain an experimentally observed equilibrium between the monocopper complex and a bis(μ-oxo) dimer (see below for further discussion of bis(μ-oxo) copper species). Gherman et al.960 used B3LYP to compare variations in oxygenation pathways, reduction potentials, and other properties when comparing diketiminate supporting ligands to anilido–imine ligands; Hill et al.961 employed the same level of theory to explore the effects of ligand fluorination; and Heppner et al.962 examined the possible influence of other auxiliary ligands on Cu-diketiminate-O2 electronic structures. (In all of the studies cited in this paragraph, the poor performance of B3LYP for predicting singlet–triplet state energy splittings in LCuO2 complexes was suspected and CASPT2 state energy splittings were computed instead.)Considering a novel reaction of LCuO2 species, Hong et al.963 have employed M06-L to characterize the reaction path by which a supported CuI-α-ketocarboxylate-O2 complex is transformed by decarboxylation of the ketocarboxylate into a highly reactive CuO species (best described as a triplet CuII–O(−/˙) moiety) which then goes on to oxygenate a ligand phenyl ring via a concerted electrophilic attack on the ring. Huber et al.488,964 expanded this initial study to explore ligand effects on the energetics of various steps, and moreover on computed electronic state energy differences, singlet vs. triplet, for all intermediates. For singlet–triplet splittings M06-L was compared to CASPT2 and RASPT2 and predictions from the DFT and WFT levels of theory were generally within 2 kcal mol−1 of one another irrespective of whether broken symmetry energies were used or spin purification was carried out. The starting O2 complexes were exceptions, however, with M06-L predicting the singlet states to be substantially too high in energy, probably owing to the large nondynamical correlation associated with what amounts to a weakly perturbed singlet oxygen fragment. Comba et al.965 have used B3LYP and coupled cluster methods also to study the aromatic hydroxylation activity of a CuO species, in this case generated from N–O homolysis of CuTMAO complexes (TMAO = trimethylamine N-oxide). As in the system of Hong et al.,963 concerted attack of the oxo fragment on the aromatic ring is predicted by both B3LYP and coupled-cluster calculations to be favored over a stepwise H-abstraction/hydroxylation path, giving good agreement for the energetics of the reaction pathway. The critical intermediacy of a CuO species has also been invoked by Yoshizawa and Shiota966 based on DFT studies, including QM/MM analyses, of the mechanism of methane to methanol conversion at the monocopper active site in particulate methane monooxygenase.Considering the nitrogen equivalent of the CuO fragment, namely a copper nitrene, Comba et al.967 have used B3LYP to characterize the mechanistic details of the bispidine copper catalyzed aziridination of olefins. A spin crossover is required to move from triplet reactants to singlet products. Bar-Nahum et al.558 have used M06-L to determine the mechanism by which a trinuclear copper cluster reduces N2O to N2.The structures and reactivities of various supported dinuclear (LCu)2O2 complexes have been the subject of many modeling studies, in part because they pose significant challenges to DFT with respect to computing relative isomer energies (Fig. 6). This challenge arises primarily from the varying degrees of open-shell vs. closed-shell character in singlet states depending on the oxidation states of the coupled copper atoms; when the two copper atoms are well described as d9 CuII the usual challenges associated with multiconfigurational character in DFT arise.413,485,486,968,969 As the modeling of (LCu)2O2 systems has been very recently reviewed,942 we will mention only one recent addition. In particular, Sander et al.970 have provided a detailed characterization of the mechanistic details associated with aromatic hydroxylation accomplished by an (LCu)2O2 complex having a μ-η2:η2 core. Fig. 6  Different core geometries for supported (LCu)2O2 complexes. A sometimes important reactive intermediate in the activation of molecular oxygen by copper is the hydroperoxide CuOOH. Osako et al.971 employed the B98 functional to establish, by comparison of computed and experimental vibrational frequencies and EPR parameters, that a reactive intermediate originally presumed to be a CuII peroxide was instead a CuIIOOH species. Ghattas et al.,972 based in part on B3LYP calculations, have also posited the importance of a CuOOH intermediate in the copper catalyzed conversion of 1-aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid into ethylene by hydrogen peroxide. In acetone as solvent, the CuOOH intermediate can react with a molecule of solvent to generate a coordinated hydroxyhydroperoxypropane fragment that is itself capable of aromatic ring hydroxylation;563 the mechanism for this process was studied by Kunishita et al.973 at the mPWPW level.Considering other ligands binding to copper, Periyasamy et al.974 have concluded based on computed isomer energies and EPR parameters that the binding of nitric oxide to the CuI site in copper nitrite reductase is end-on, which is not consistent with current structural data, suggesting that higher resolution crystallography may be required to assess this discrepancy.In the area of computational electrochemistry, Holland et al.975 have employed DFT and continuum solvent models in the characterization of supported copper complexes that undergo quasi-reversible one-electron reductions at biologically accessible potentials that render them suitable as medical imaging agents for the study of hypoxia. As noted above, Schultz et al.557 also rationalized experimental cyclic voltammetry data in multicopper helicates based on DFT calculations with continuum solvation, observing wirelike behavior in a tetranuclear system. Nazmutidinov et al.976 modeled medium effects on the multi-electron reduction of CuII–CuII binuclear complexes.Reveles et al.977 have examined the nucleation of water molecules around Au+, choosing a functional and basis set combination based on good agreement with experiment for simple water clusters. Consistent with the trend in experimental gas-phase binding energies and earlier theoretical studies, they predict that only 2 molecules of water can be considered to coordinate to the Au cation; subsequent waters form a shell that is anchored to the two ligating waters. As noted for Ru cations in section 5.3.1.6, they found significant charge transfer to the outermost water molecules in increasingly large solvation shells.Considering supported gold compounds in homogeneous catalysis, Cheong et al.978 employed B3LYP to establish the mechanism of homogeneous gold-catalyzed cycloisomerization of 1,5-allenynes to cross-conjugated trienes. Interesting, two molecules of catalyst are required to activate the alkyne. Soriano and Marco-Contelles979 also used B3LYP and studied Pt- and Au-catalyzed the mechanisms of cycloisomerizations of enynes and propargylic esters.Schwerdtfeger et al.419 carried out accurate coupled cluster calculations on AuCO, Au2CO, and their positive and negative ions. They used this data to test four density functionals, finding that B3LYP performs better than LSDA, BP86, and PW91. Unpublished calculations980 show that M06-L performs about as well as B3LYP on this test.5.3.1.10 Zinc, cadmium, mercury. Carrasco et al.981 have used plane-wave PW91 calculations to study novel polymorphs of ZnO formed from the combination of low-energy (MO)12 cage structures. The resulting nanoparticles would lead in the bulk limit to ultralow density mesoporous solids with potentially interesting properties, particularly if dopants can be introduced into the cavities. By analysis of equation of state data, Carrasco et al. predict that their most stable poly-cage structure should exhibit a bulk stability falling between the known wurtzite and rock-salt phases of ZnO, suggesting that it should be an ideal candidate for synthetic attention.Cadenbach et al.982 have shown the utility of alkylzinc and monocyclopentadienylzinc fragments as one electron donors to other transition metals, e.g., in the unusual molybdenum complex Mo(ZnCH3)9(ZnCp*)3.Bernasconi et al.983 used the BLYP functional to study the dissociation of a water molecule coordinated to Zn2+ in aqueous solution. They observed delocalization of OH− charge density over several water molecules in Zn(H2O)5(OH)+.Zn clusters have been studied by various workers. Dai et al.984 used PW91, and Iokibe et al.985 used LSDA, PW91, and B3LYP. Sorkin et al.431 found that B3LYP and M05-2X both give reasonable results for the binding energies of small Zn clusters. Iokibe et al.985 found that the bond length and cohesive energy of the clusters depends on the extent of 4s/4p mixing, in contrast to earlier transition metals where 4s/3d mixing is a key quantity.Botticelli et al.929 applied the PBE functional to investigate 13-atom Zn–Cu alloy clusters, both neural and cationic, and found special stability for icosahedral Zn7Cu6 clusters. However, they also found two other low-lying (within 0.2 eV of the global minimum) isomers of Zn7Cu6, indicating that the structure is not magic. The search for magic numbers and low-energy isomers of metal nanoparticles is an important field for future activity, as theory can characterize the rugged landscapes of such particles in a way not accessible to experiment.928Tachikawa et al.986 applied PW91 to calculate structures and electronic states Znn(H2O)m with n = 1–32 and m = 1–3. In agreement with earlier work,987 they found that the transition from noncovalent to covalent binding in Znn occurs between Zn3 and Zn4. This transition persists when water is bound.Suwattanamala et al.988 carried out B3LYP and PBE0 calculations on dipropoxythiacalix[4]arenes in chloroform solvent and examined the preferred metal coordination modes in their Zn2+ complexes by using B3LYP.Lu et al.989 have employed B3LYP and TD-B3LYP to rationalize the structure and intense fluorescence of a trinuclear cadmium coordination polymer, noting that the cadmium plays only a structural role, with the optical transitions being well described as ligand-to-ligand charge transfer in character. Fernandez et al.990 used a phosphinothiol ligand designed to suppress the formation of coordination polymers and successfully isolated a series of polynuclear Zn, Cd, and Hg compounds. These authors used B3LYP calculations to assess the nature of the bonding between the group 12 metals and their different ligands. Bonding between two group 12 metals has only rarely been demonstrated, but Zhu et al.991 successfully synthesized dimers of the form ArMMAr for Ar = tetraisopropylterphenyl and M = Zn, Cd, or Hg and characterized the bonding at the BP86 level using energy decomposition analysis.With respect to Hg, Wiederhold et al.992 employed a combination of M06-L calculations with relativistic pseudopotentials and all-electron relativistic MP2 calculations to compute the mass-dependent and nuclear volume fractionation factors (MDF and NVF, respectively) contributing to the equilibrium partitioning of all Hg isotopes between dissolved HgII species and thiol-bound HgII, where the latter is a model for environmentally sorbed HgII. Wiederhold et al. observed excellent agreement with experiment for HgCl2 and Hg(OH)2 and found that both MDF and NVF made significant contributions to the total equilibrium isotope effects.5.3.2 Solids. There is a wide range of solids containing transition metals. For example, transition metal oxides may be insulators, semiconductors, conductors, or superconductors, and they may have interesting magnetic, ferroelectric, antiferroelectric, and piezoelectric properties; they are important minerals and constituents of rocks, and they are also important in modern technology.993 The literature is far too large to be fully surveyed here, but it is interesting to make some connection to other topics discussed in this review.The LSDA already provides a good approximation for some, but not all, properties of some, but not all, transition metal solids.994,995 GGAs do not necessarily improve the results.996Kurth et al.997 tested the accuracy of nine local functionals for the unit cell volumes of Cu, Pd, W, Pt, and Au. The mean unsigned errors (MUEs) are 1.0% for LSDA, 1.3–2.9% for GGAs (PBE best, followed by HCTH, RPBE, and BLYP), and 0.6–2.7% for meta-GGAs (PKZB best, followed by FT98, and VS98). Simple math shows that the percentage errors in lattice constants would be about 3 times smaller. LSDA underestimates the volumes (overbinding) whereas the GGAs and meta-GGAs usually overestimate them (underbinding). A similar trend was found for Cu, Rh, Pd, Ag, Ir, Pt, and Au with LSDA and PBE.998 For the same five transition metals the MUEs in bulk moduli are 19% for LSDA, 8-34% for GGAs, and 6–27% for meta-GGAs.997 The TPSS meta-GGA typically improves on PKZB for TM lattice constants but makes TM bulk moduli worse.905Heyd et al.999 showed that they could calculate accurate lattice constants with the screened Coulomb hybrid HSE functional. For example, the lattice constants of ZnS, ZnSe, and ZnTe are overestimated by HSE by an average of 0.7%, whereas the local PBE functional overestimates the same lattice constants by an average of 1.4%. This is important because HSE predicts much more accurate band structures (discussed below) than do local functionals.For phonon frequencies of pure TMs, LSDA usually overestimates and PBE usually underestimates, but for thermal expansion, heat capacity, and free energy, LSDA is usually more accurate than PBE.998 Suggestions have been made for improving the accuracy of calculated thermodynamic data of TMs and alloys by combining DFT data for temperature dependence with more accurate results for 0 K.998 DFT has also been applied to more complex solid materials such as PbTiO3 perovskites1000–1002 and HCP iron.1003,1004Sun et al.1005 used the LSDA, PBE, and WC functionals to calculate the equation of state for Pt. The Helmholtz energy was approximated as a function of lattice constants and temperature by setting it equal to a sum of three terms: the ground-state electronic energy (including core repulsion), the free energy of thermally excited electronic states, and the vibrational free energy of the lattice. Scalar relativistic effects were included, but not spin–orbit coupling. Electronic temperature effects were nonnegligible (as has also been found true recently for the free energies of Al nanoparticles1006).With local functionals, the vertical HOMO–LUMO orbital energy gap is equal (to at least a good approximation) to the lowest TD-DFT excitation energy.1007 This is also true1007 for range-separated hybrids like HSE so that such functionals can give more accurate band gaps with the orbital-energy gap expression than do local hybrids.999 For example, for ZnS, ZnSe, and ZnTe, HSE orbital energies underestimate the band gaps by an average of 0.27 eV (7–14%) whereas for the same three materials, the local PBE functional underestimates the band gaps by an average of 1.46 eV (41–58%).Improvements can be obtained with the nonlocal weighted density approximation (WDA; see section 2.3); for eleven metal oxides containing transition metals (Ti, Hf, Zr, or Cu), the average error in the LSDA gaps is 2.0 eV, whereas the average error in the WDA calculations of Robertson et al. is 0.5 eV.110 The error in the LSDA gap is inversely proportional to the high-frequency dielectric constant.110,1008 The ability to calculate the gaps more accurately allows one to study interesting problems such as the charge states of interstitial hydrogens in oxides like TiO2, SrTiO3, PbTiO3, ZrO2, SrZrO3, ZrSiO4, HfO2, ZnO, and CdO.110,1009Grabowski et al.998 calculated the free-energies and phonon dispersion curves of Rh, Ir, Pd, Pt, Ag, Au, and Cu with the LSDA and the PBE GGA. For the electronic free energy they used the finite-temperature DFT of Mermin.1010 For phonon dispersion curves, the experimental results generally lie between those calculated by LSDA and PBE, whereas for free energies, LSDA is usually more accurate. The biggest differences between the two functionals were found for Ag and Au.Theoretical studies are especially useful for studying materials under conditions that are hard to produce experimentally, for example, under the high-pressure conditions in the earth’s mantle. Isaev et al.1011 used the PBE density functional to calculate the electronic energy, including core repulsion, as a function of volume at high pressure for three phases of FeH, and they extended their calculations to free energy as a function of pressure by adding a quasiharmonic vibrational (i.e., phonon) contribution to the ground-state electronic energy. Their analysis of the resulting phase diagram shows phase transitions at 37 GPa at 300 K and 50 GPa at 1000 K.Umemoto et al.1012 studied the spin state of Fe in iron-bearing magnesium silicate perovskite, (Mg,Fe)SiO3, under lower-mantle conditions; this spin state is a crucial parameter for determining key mantle properties such as elastic and seismic properties, the post-perovskite transition pressure, and electrical and thermal conductivities. Unfortunately the spin properties depend strongly on the choice of density functional (LSDA vs. PW91129 or LSDA vs. PBE130). Nevertheless calculations with the LSDA and PBE functionals provide valuable insight into the effect of iron concentration, the coordination number of iron, and the nonmetalllic band structure at lower-mantle pressures.1012Shi et al.175 used the PW91 and sX approximations to study the cohesive energy, structural parameters, vibrational frequencies, and band structure of Au2O and Au2O3. The projected density of states was analyzed to characterize the bonding, in particular the Au 5d and O 2p mixing and the ionic character. Whereas PW91 predicts Au2O to be metallic, sX predicts a band gap of 0.8 eV.For ZnO, the local LSDA, BLYP, PBE, and TPSS functionals predict a band gap of 0.9 eV, the local M06-L functional predicts 1.0 eV, and the hybrid HSE functional predicts 2.9 eV, in comparison to an experimental value of 3.4 eV.999,1013,1014 The effect of Mn cluster doping on the optical properties of ZnO was studied with the PW1PW density functional.104Filippetti et al.1015 used ASIC-corrected (see section 2.2) LSDA calculations as well as uncorrected LSDA to study the spin-polarized band structures of the Mn-doped GaN and GaAs semiconductors. The results confirmed the LSDA picture for (Ga,Mn)As, but the results of the two kinds of calculations were very different for (Ga,Mn)N. Additional DFT calculations on this kind of half-metallic diluted magnetic semiconductor were reported by several subsequent groups.1016–1022 Filippetti and Fiorentini1023 applied the SIC scheme to cuprates.Liu and Ge1024,1025 studied hydrogen absorption in Ti-doped and Sc-doped NaAlH4 with the PBE density functionals in order to better understand how transition metal doping might affect reversible hydrogen storage mechanisms.Recent applications of linear response theory to the optical excitations of Cu, Ag, and Au are examples of improved approaches based on DFT.1026,1027DFT has also been used to study spin polarization in potential materials (such as CO1−xFexS2 alloys) for spintronics applications. An introduction to this subject is provided by Leighton et al.1028An area of special interest for technology is the effect of external variables on spin-state orderings. In an atom, the high-spin state is often preferred, whereas crystal field splitting can stabilize a lower spin state in coordination compounds. As an example of the effect of an external variable, changing the pressure can affect the competition between high-spin (favored by electron exchange and reduced repulsion between two electrons otherwise paired in the same orbital) and low-spin (favored by crystal field splitting). A recently studied example is SrFeO2, in which experiments reveal a transition at 33 GPa from an antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator phase, in which the four-coordinate FeII is in a high-spin S = 2 state to a ferromagnetic (FM) metallic phase in which the four-coordinate FeII is in an intermediate-spin S = 1 state.1029,1030 This was studied with the PBE0 functional, but varying the percentage X of Hartree–Fock exchange from the standard value of 25; it was found that the spin transition from the AFM S = 2 state is to a half-metallic FM S = 1 state if X < 20, and to a FM S = 2 state if X > 20. With X = 15, the calculated transition pressure is at 53 GPa.1029 The transition was attributed to in-layer bonding interactions of Fe d orbitals with O p orbitals.5.3.3 Surfaces and nanoparticles. Surfaces of bulk materials and nanoparticles, thin films, self-assembled monolayers, nanocrystalline coatings, and ligand-decorated materials interfaces are very important for catalysis and for technological applications such as molecular electronics, microelectronics, structural components, magnetic data storage, solar devices, and sensors. (Catalysis is mainly deferred to section 5.3.4.) In all of these applications, DFT can be used to study structural and morphological issues, reactivity and stability, and optical properties such as photoabsorption. In some cases it can also be used to calculate electrical and electron dynamical properties such as conductance and electron transfer or mesoscopic processes like sintering. Our review contains only a small subset of this burgeoning field.Magyar et al.1031 studied the geometries and magnetic properties of Au dimer, Au14, and Au nanoclusters of sizes from Au28 to Au68 with B3LYP, PBE, and PBE0. They found that the clusters are magnetized primarily on their surfaces and that the Au14 and Au38 clusters are expanded as compared to the bulk geometry. They attributed the magnetism of Au nanoclusters to s–d hybridization, in contrast to another mechanism for surface magnetism in gold, in which local magnetic moments are induced by coupling to adsorbates.1032Wende et al.1033 used PW91 to calculate the energy of iron porphyrin molecules as a function of their distance from a face-centered cubic Co(100) magnetic substrate. At the optimum distance they also computed the spin-resolved partial densities of states in order to study the Fe–Co exchange coupling.The rest of this subsection is primarily devoted to a sampling of the literature on adsorption; see also section 5.3.4 on heterogeneous catalysis.Bilic et al.1034 studied physisorption of benzene on Cu, Ag, and Au surfaces with the PW91 and PBE GGAs; they found that the binding energy is severely underestimated due to inaccurate treatment of correlation energy by these functionals. In related work, Caféet al.1035 studied monolayers of 1,10-phenanthroline on Au surfaces with the PW91 functional. Because this functional does not treat medium-range correlation accurately the binding energy of the physisorbed horizontal molecule was calculated to be only 2 kcal mol−1; WFT calculations were used to estimate that the actual binding energy is much larger, 15 kcal mol−1. The binding energy of the chemisorbed vertical molecule was also underestimated by PW91, which yielded an 8 kcal mol−1 binding energy as compared to a WFT estimate of 22 kcal mol−1. Ma and Yang1036 used B3PW91 to calculate Raman frequencies for adsorbed p-nitroaniline on a single Au-atom model of Au nanoparticles.Neyman et al.1037–1040 calculated the adsorption energies of all group-6 through group-11 atoms and of dimers, trimers and tetramers of Cu, Ag, and Au (group 11) on MgO(001). For Pd absorption they obtained a binding energy of 1.4 eV with the BP86 functional and 1.1 eV with the RPBE functional, both in good agreement with the experimental value of 1.2 ± 0.2 eV. The effective adsorption energy per atom was found to be 7% less for Cu3 than for Cu2 and 22% less for Au3 than for Au2. They also studied the optical spectra of monomers and dimers.1041 Additional studies of these systems were carried out by other workers.1042–1046 The most recent study1046 showed that the Au adsorption site most likely to lead to growth of a dimer (Au2) is a neutral F8 center. Florez et al. considered the effects of adsorption on that atomic spin states of the adsorbed metals and found that although spin-state splittings were reduced, high-spin states were in general not quenched upon adsorption.1047Hinneman and Carter1048 used the PBE density functional to study the adsorption of Y, Hf, and Pt on γ-Al2O3(0001). They found that Y and Hf form strong ionic bonds at 3-fold hollow sites, whereas Pt bonds more weakly at an on-top site without appreciable charge transfer.The interaction of oxygen with Ag surfaces has been studied for a long time, but it is still controversial, despite the application of DFT.1049–1052 The structures of oxide layers on other late transition metals have also been studied in detail;425,1051,1053 the study of Rogal et al.425 is particularly complete in that it uses calculated chemical potentials to compute the phase diagram of the Pd(100) surface in equilibrium and constrained equilibrium with an O2 and CO gas phase. Jacob and coworkers1054 analyzed the adsorption of oxygen on five different surface faces that are involved in the faceting of Ir(210), including the effect of aqueous electrolytes under electrochemical conditions.Ge and coworkers used the PW91 density functional to study the adsorption and clustering of Pt adatoms on defect-free and defective anatase TiO2(101).1055,1056 They found barriers of 1.0 and 1.1 eV for Pt diffusion as required for dimer formation.Xia et al.1057 used the PW91 density functional to study surface hydration on freshly cleaved slabs of γ-manganite, MnO(OH). They found that water–water interactions dominate water–surface interactions for the density functional used.King and coworkers1058 used PW91 to explain the fact that water dimers diffuse more rapidly than water monomers on Pd(111) by a beautiful mechanism that they dubbed “the waltz of the water dimers”. The details of their interpretation in terms of tunneling need to be checked. Another study of a similar nature is the finding that Pd4 diffuses 200 times faster than Pd across an MgO(100) surface;1059 on this surface, Pd2 shows a walking (not quite waltzing) mechanism.1059LSDA, PW91, PBE, and revPBE calculations predict that CO on Pt(111) preferentially adsorbs at 3-fold hollow sites, but the experimental result is preference for an on-top site.1060,1061 This is consistent with a general trend for LSDA and GGA functionals to overly favor higher-coordination sites.1060 Hybrid B3LYP calculations, in contrast, predict the correct preference,1061,1062 which was attributed to the predicted HOMO–LUMO gap and the position of the HOMO and LUMO with respect to the Fermi energy.1062 The reported contrast between the local PBE and nonlocal PBE0 functionals was particularly dramatic:1063 PBE was said to favor the 3-fold site by 0.11 eV, and PBE0 was said to favor the on-top site by 0.13 eV, with the 2-fold bridge site intermediate for both functionals. Studies on the triatomic molecule PdCO and the tetra-atomic molecule Pd2CO also lead to the conclusion that only hybrid functionals can qualitatively and quantitatively predict the nature of the σ-donation/π-back donation mechanism that is associated with CO binding in these cases.326 Nevertheless the local BLYP functional does correctly predict the site preference, not only for CO/Pt(111), but also for CO/Rh(111) and CO/Cu(111).221 The BLYP calculations also show that the HOMO–LUMO gap explanation for the site preference is not correct.221 The PBE density functional predicts accurate CO stretching frequencies for CO adsorbed on Pt and Pt–Ru surfaces.1064 The explanation for the frequency shifts in terms of σ donation and π back donation are very similar for adsorption at surfaces and for organometallic molecules.326,1064 We will return to the important role of the π back-bonding orbital of CO in section 5.3.4 in discussing the adsorption of CO on Au(111).1065Stroppa and Kresse433 applied the local BLYP and PBE functionals and the nonlocal B3LYP and HSE functionals to the adsorption of CO at atop and hollow sites on the (111) surfaces of Ru, Os, Rh, Ir, Pd, Pt, and Ag. They concluded that BLYP and B3LYP are more accurate for adsorption, with PBE inaccurate, and HSE least accurate. This contradicts the previous claim1063 that hybrid functionals solve the CO adsorption puzzle; Stroppa and Kresse conclude that the previous conclusion1063 is an artifact of the way that pseudopotentials were employed in the previous work. Stroppa and Kresse drew general conclusions in a broad discussion that includes not only BLYP, B3LYP, PBE, and HSE but also LSDA, RPBE, PBE0, AM05 and PBEsol. One pays a price for the successful chemisorption predictions of BLYP and B3LYP, namely a poor description of the lattice constants of transition metals and a poor description of surface energies. They concluded that hybrid functionals are not a step forward for metals, which agrees with the conclusion of Schultz et al.93,94 prior to the development of M05 and M06. Unfortunately M05 and M06 have not yet been put to most of the tests discussed in this section.Lo and Ziegler1066 carried out spin-polarized PBE calculations of CO adsorption and dissociation on the (110) surface of FeCo alloys. They then recalculated the adsorption energies with the RPBE functional and obtained values lower by 7–10 kcal mol−1. Furthermore, for coverages of 0.25 monolayer and higher, the favored binding site at Fe changed from a long bridge to an on-top site, which is consistent with previous work1067 for Fe(110), whereas the overall favored binding site at Co did not change. In related studies using the PW91 functional, they examined CO adsorption on Fe(310),1068 and they studied adsorption and reactions of C2 hydrocarbon fragments on Fe(100);1069 spin polarization was included in all calculations to account for the ferromagnetic properties of bulk Fe.Valcárcel et al.1070 used the PW91 density functional to calculate the binding modes of propyne on Pd(111) and Pt(111). Wang et al. used the PW91 density functional to study the adsorption of 2-methyl-2-propanethiol on reconstructed Au(111),1071 the adsorption of CH3S radicals on unreconstructed Au(111),1072 and the  surface reconstruction of Au(111).1073 In the last-named study they found that the nearest-neighbor distances in the top layer are 0.09–0.16 Å shorter than the bulk nearest-neighbor distances, and the interlayer distance is increased by 0.05–0.17 Å by reconstruction. Friend and Kaxiras and coworkers1074 also used the PW91 density functional, and they studied changes in gold surfaces induced by sulfur adsorption. They also studied structures and binding energies of chlorine adsorbed on Au, again with the PW91 density functional.1075,1076Marks et al.1077 studied the surface reconstruction and surface energies of SrTiO3 by DFT with a limited number of functionals, and they found TPSSh to be most accurate. The results are analyzed in detail, which makes the paper particularly interesting.Mao et al.1078 calculated spin-polarized band structures with the PBE density functional for single Mn, Fe, and Co atoms on a single graphene sheet. Kaghazchi et al.,1054 employing the PBE density functional, evaluated interfacial free energies of adsorbate-induced surface faces of nanofaceted Ir(210). Kuganathan and Green1079 used the LSDA to predict the structure and conduction band of CuI in single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs). Sceats and Green1080 used LSDA and PW91 functionals to study cobaltocene and bis(benzene)chromium encapsulated in SWNTs. Friend and Kaxiras and coworkers1081 used the PW91 density functional to study MoO3 monolayers nanocrystals on Au(111) and their selective reduction.Carter and Yarovsky and their coworkers used the PBE and PW91 functionals, respectively, to study a variety of adsorption, dissociation, and diffusion processes on Fe, Al/Fe, Fe/Si and sulfur-covered-Fe surfaces1082–1090 and structure and magnetism at Cr/Fe interfaces.1091 Yarovsky and coworkers1092,1093 used the PW91 density functional to carry out spin-polarized direct dynamics simulations of H2S dissociation at the (110) and (100) surfaces of Fe at temperatures from 298 K to 1800 K. The dissociation mechanism was found to change as a function of temperature.Iokibe et al.985 studied the adsorption and diffusion of Zn on Zn(001) with the PW91 density functional. Kurzweil and Baer1094 used a novel DFT approach to study the surface plasmon absorption of Au8 and Au18. Ferrando et al.1095 reviewed the application of theory to structural, optical, magnetic, thermodynamic, and kinetic properties of mixed-metal clusters and binary alloyed nanoparticles of transition metal elements.Zhu et al.1096 used hybrid GGAs to calculate quantum well states for charge transfer excitations from Au to C60 at the C60/Au(111) interface. The experiments were later reinterpreted by Li et al.1097 in terms of superatom molecular orbitals1098,1099 of C60.Geng et al.1100 and Derosa et al.1101 studied adsorption of benzenethiolate at transition-metal (Pt, Cu, Ag, Au) surfaces.Although there are no established rules for the precise usage of words like “nanoparticles” and “quantum dots”, one could classify isolated molecules in a range of ascending sizes from complexes and clusters, defined as particles with diameters less than 1 nm, to nanoparticles, defined as particles with diameter greater than 1 nm but having morphology different from the bulk, up to quantum dots, often defined as having the bulk structure but exhibiting quantum confinement (of electrons or holes) in three spatial dimensions (note that systems with quantum confinement in only two or one dimensions are called quantum wires and quantum wells, respectively, or—especially if smaller—they may be called, among other possibilities, nanowires, nanotubes, nanowells, or thin films). However, these distinctions are fluid; for example, quantum dots are often called nanoparticles, but nanoparticles that do not have the bulk structure are not usually called quantum dots. Furthermore, researchers interested in catalysis are more likely to use the nanoparticle language, and those interested in electronic properties are more likely to use the quantum dot language. Some recent examples of DFT studies modeling quantum dots containing transition metals are cited to illustrate the possibilities.1102–11055.3.4 Heterogeneous catalysis. The distinctions between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis are blurred in many applications, such as catalysis by clusters or nanoparticles, which may be unsupported or supported on metal oxides, zeolites, or thin films, or catalysis by supported thin films, or by supported organometallic species.856,916,1054,1106–1122 As mentioned in section 5.3.1.9, gold atoms, gold clusters, and gold nanoparticles have been especially widely studied.856,1112,1113,1116,1119–1121,1123 Although only a fraction of this kind of work could be included in section 5.3.1, in this section we focus only on conventional heterogeneous catalysis, in particular on surfaces of metals, alloys, and oxides; see also discussions of adsorption and adsorbates on surfaces in section 5.3.3. Grönbeck,1124 Catlow et al.,1125 Cinquini et al.,1126 Nørskov et al.,1127,1128 and Neyman and Illas1129 recently provided introductory overviews of DFT applied to heterogeneous catalysis, and Coquet et al.1130 provided a critical review of the theory and simulation of heterogeneous gold catalysis. Two recent contributions have emphasized the nanoparticle/crystal surface distinctions for catalysis from both experimental1131 and combined experimental/computational1132 points of view. For example, Falsig et al.1132 contrasted Au12 to Au(111). A review more focused on dynamical processes, especially of hydrogen, has been presented by Lanzani et al.1133In discussing dynamical processes at surfaces, especially metal surfaces (and sometimes in discussing dynamical processes more generally), the question arises of whether the Born–Oppenheimer approximation is valid or, in contrast, whether one must invoke electronically nonadiabatic processes and the participation of electronic excited states.1134–1160 In the surface science literature this is often called electron-hole creation or electron-hole participation (similarly, vibrational excitation of the surface is often called phonon creation). There is considerable evidence that electronically excited states play a role in some but not all processes at metal surfaces. Kroes and coworkers1147 have offered an explanation for why electron-hole pairs are more important for H2/Pt(111) than for NO/Au(111). In other work discussed below, it is assumed (usually implicitly) that only the ground-electronic-state potential energy surface plays a role.A heterogeneous catalytic process with a dramatic effect on the course of world history is the Haber process for the synthesis of ammonia, originally carried out on enriched Fe and later on Ru, and this reaction is still being studied, most recently with the PW91 and RPBE density functionals.1161–1163 It was found that the overall rate predicted by the RPBE density functional is a factor of 3 to 20 too low, as compared to experiment.1161A familiar and practically important example of heterogeneous catalysis by transition metals is catalytic removal of undesirable gases from automotive exhausts. Liu et al.1164 studied the selective reduction of NO by Ir under conditions of excess oxygen such as occur in lean burns. In the absence of an appropriate reductant, oxygen is found to poison the catalytic process.Although it is not a catalytic process, the chemisorption of H2 on metal surfaces has been a very widely studied prototype process, and much can be learned because of the possibility of carrying out more complete quantum mechanical dynamics calculations than for other reagents and the resulting possibility of obtaining accurate empirical values for barrier heights.242 Recent papers on H2 dissociation over W, Ru, Pt, and Cu be consulted as an entry point into this literature,1147,1165–1171 and there is also a recent review.1172The binding of CO on MgO(001) has proved to be a very difficult case, but recent work has shown that the M06-2X and M06-HF functionals can, for the first time, provide a simultaneously satisfactory description of adsorbate geometry, vibrational frequency shift, and adsorption energy.1173 Although this system has no transition metals, it may provide a route to further progress on equally challenging problems such as the bonding and dissociation of nitrogen oxides on Nix Mg1−xO(100).1126, 1174–1180 In preliminary studies1180 the M06 functional shows the best performance for NO binding to NixMg1−xO(100).Heyden et al.1181–1183 used B3LYP to study nitrous oxide decomposition at iron sites in the iron-exchanged microporous ZSM-5 zeolite. Rate parameters were determined for 167 elementary steps, and the resulting reaction mechanism explained a variety of transient and steady-state experiments. This work elucidated the nuclearity of the active Fe sites during steady-state decomposition of N2O and showed that previously invoked oxygen desorption is kinetically not relevant for this process.Goodrow and Bell1184 used B3LYP for methanol oxidation on isolated vanadate ((O)3VO3−) supported on TiO2 and showed that the difference in rate from vanadate supported on TiO2 is not due to the influence of the support on the electronic properties of vanadate, but rather is due to the higher incidence of defects on TiO2. Introduction of an O-vacancy in the support adjacent to vanadate lowers the apparent activation energy of the rate limiting step (transfer of an H atom from an adsorbed methoxy to a vanadyl O) from 23 to 16 kcal mol−1.Bonde et al.1185 used the RPBE functional to model electrochemical oxidation of nanoparticulate MoS2, WS2, Co–Mo–S, and Co–W–S with special emphasis on the edge structures.Gokhale et al. studied the water-gas shift reaction (CO + H2O → CO2 + H2) on Cu(111)1186 and Pt(111)394 with the PW91 functional. They found that key mechanistic determinants are the binding energies of CO, OH, and COOH and that a mechanism involving COOH is more favorable than direct oxidation of CO. Their results were used in a microkinetic model to estimate turnover rates under various conditions, and they provide an excellent example of the state of the art in complete catalytic process modeling.Andersson et al.1187 studied the dissociation of CO on Ni surfaces. They used the RPBE functional with a scheme to correct for the systematic overbinding of CO to metals with this functional. Their study included the effect of coadsorbed hydrogen and defects, and they included a COH species in their mechanism; they provided a good account of the experimental results.Schneider and coworkers have also placed a special emphasis on using DFT to simulate catalysis under realistic conditions of oxidation environment, oxygen pressure, temperature, particle size, and catalyst composition. They attempted to quantify the conditions that lead to various adsorbate coverages. Their work is mainly concerned with CO and NO oxidation on Pt catalysts,1188–1192 and they also used PW91 to study the influence of oxygen coverage on the structure, energetics, and electronics of the RuO2(110) surface.1193Rösch, Chen, and coworkers398,1194–1199 and other researchers1200 used the PW91 and BP86 density functionals to study the effects of crystal faces, surface composition, and steps on a variety of decomposition steps on ZnPd, Cu, and Pd surfaces. The recent work398 on methanol decomposition on nanocrystallites of Pd catalysts is particularly illuminating because it models some aspects of the nanocatalyst more realistically than usual, in particular as a 79-atom nanocrystallite that contains nonideal specific sites and facets that occur in real catalytic systems.1201 Unfortunately, the cluster geometries were frozen during the calculations in an attempt to make up for deficiencies of the models and density functional.Li et al.1200 found that nuclear tunneling needs to be taken into account to predict the temperature-programmed desorption peak temperatures for β-hydride elimination of ethyl radical on Cu. Additional studies have recently been carried out using the PBE density functional.1202 Recent experiments on Pd surfaces with Zn incorporation are consistent with earlier theoretical studies1194–1196 but suggest that such studies should be carried out with lower concentrations of Zn.1203Tang and Trout1204 used the PW91 functional to calculate adsorption energies of SO2 and NO on surface alloys of Pt with Ru, Ru, Ir, Ni, Pd, Cu, and Au to evaluate potential oxidation emissions catalysts.King and coworkers studied the dissociative chemisorption of methane on Pt1205 and subsequent dehydrogenation steps to produce CH2, CH, and C.391 Using PW91, they found1205 breaking bond lengths for the transition states of the CH4→ CH3 + H reaction on Pt(110)-(1 × 2) and Pt(111) to be 1.48 Å and 1.54 Å, respectively, which may be compared to earlier calculations that yielded 1.37 Å (calculated1206 by embedded diatomics-in-molecules), 1.53 Å (calculated1207 by an embedded-cluster configuration interaction calculation), 1.59 Å (calculated1208 by PW91), 1.47 Å (calculated1209,1210 by PW91), or 1.58 Å (calculated1211 by PBE) on Ni(111) and 1.53 Å (calculated1212 with an unspecified GGA) on Ni(100). The calculated barriers also differ, with barriers of 17,1207 26,1208 14,1206 and 251211 kcal mol−1 on Ni(111) and barriers of 121205 and 211211 kcal mol−1 on Pt(111). (Liao et al.1213 and Psofogiannakis et al.1214 also discussed the CH4→ CH3 + H reaction at metal surfaces (Pt1213,1214 and three other metals,1213 with PB86,1213 B3LYP,1214 and PW911214), but they approximated the metal surfaces by small (unembedded) clusters.) For CH2 dehydrogenation, the calculated barrier height of King and coworkers,391 28 kcal mol−1, agrees well with an experiment that was interpreted to yield 29 kcal mol−1.Further work on C–H bond activation has been reported by Li et al.,1215 in this case including both metal surfaces and oxides. In particular they applied the PBE functional to study the dissociation of CH4 on Tc(0001), Ru(0001), Pd(111), Pt(111), Cu(111), and three crystal faces of PdO. Following Nørskov and coworkers (see next paragraph) they found a linear correlation between the C–H activation barrier and the total chemisorption energy in the final dissociated state, and they discussed the heterolytic component of the dissociation process.Nørskov and coworkers have developed a general analysis based on scaling properties1128 and have applied it to numerous problems. In such an analysis one compares results for several different surface compositions and tries to identify a small number of key variables upon which the binding energy depends linearly. A good example is provided by the adsorption energies of hydrogen-containing compounds (CHn, NHn, OHn, and SHn) on Ru, Rh, Ir, Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Ag, and Au; here they identified n as the key variable, and they rationalized this by an effective medium theory similar to embedded atom theory.1216 The finding that reaction rates vary linearly with bond energies or reaction energies is reminiscent of the Evans–Polanyi–Semenov linear correlation between activation energy and enthalpy of reaction in gas-phase kinetics.1217,1218 Another example is provided by the analysis of the selective hydrogenation of acetylene on metallic and bimetallic surfaces; the key variables were identified as the heats of adsorption of acetylene and ethylene; and on this basis they identified NiZn alloys as potential new selective catalysts (producing ethylene in preference to ethane), and the prediction was verified experimentally.1219 Later work based on the same principles showed how subsurface carbon and alloying Pd with Ag have similar effects on selective hydrogenation of acetylene.1220 The compromise required in optimizing a process that correlates with two or more different properties is often presented in the form of a two-dimensional or three-dimensional “volcano” plot.1221,1222Surface-catalyzed chain growth mechanisms, that is, the formation of C–C bonds, on Re, Fe, Ru, Co, and Rh were studied using the PBE functional.1223,1224 Surface catalyzed hydrogenation has also been studied; for example, Saeys et al.1225 have used BP86 to assess the mechanistic details associated with the hydrogenation of benzene to cyclohexane on Pt(111) surfaces.Interpretation of the role of promoters on heterogeneous catalysis has long been a goal of theoretical modeling.1226,1227 Zhang et al.1065 took up the question for stabilization of CO on Au(111); they used the PBE functional to calculate charge densities of adsorbed species to interpret experimental observations of promoting effects. They found depletion of electron density from the π back-bonding orbital of CO when coadsorbed with NO2, thereby weakening the bonding of CO to the surface. O, S, and Cl behave analogously to NO2, and the calculations suggest that the interaction between two electronegative adsorbates need not be repulsive.Pacchioni and coworkers147,148 have recently provided a very pessimistic assessment of the ability of DFT to predict the energetics needed for quantitative modeling of catalytic processes in TiO2 and at TiO2 and NiO surfaces. The functionals on which they based their conclusions are PW91, PBE, B3PW91, B3LYP, and BH&HLYP. On the other hand, Labat et al.1228,1229 noted that while it is disappointing that all functionals fail to predict accurately the relative stability of rutile and anatase, PBE0 otherwise offered a good compromise for lattice parameters and band structure.Porous metal–organic frameworks are becoming more popular as hosts for catalytic reactions, and Choomwattana et al.1230 have recently used combined QM/MM calculations with B3LYP for the QM subsystem for the Cu-catalyzed reaction of formaldehyde with propene. Kuc et al.1231 concluded that PBE0 greatly underestimates the interaction energies of hydrogen molecules with the organic linkers of Zn-based metal–organic frameworks.Various groups have applied DFT for additional studies of the structures and energetics of adsorption and heterogeneous catalytic processes, and selected references are given to illustrate recent progress.1063,1186,1222,1232–1250Despite the great progress that has been made in modeling heterogeneous catalytic processes, comparison to experimental catalytic processes is still limited, not only by the quality of the density functionals (and sometimes by inadequate basis sets or noninclusion of scalar and/or vector relativistic effects), but also by the inability to simultaneously include all aspects of finite temperature, coverage, partial pressures of all species present, dopants, coadsorbents, reconstruction, local morphology, defects, and consideration of all possible pathways. Nevertheless, much has been learned and progress is accelerating. A key direction for making the calculations more and more relevant to real catalysis is the increasing use of kinetic Monte Carlo and microkinetic models in conjunction with the DFT calculations.394,1186,1251–1266 Without inclusion of DFT input and explicit treatment of diffusion and site-specific local concentration effects (spatial effects), phenomenological models may involve “effective parameters which have only limited (if any) microscopic meaning”.1255,1259 Reuter et al.1255 included dissociation, adsorption, surface diffusion, surface chemical reactions, and desorption in their KMC model of CO oxidation on RuO2(110). Coupling to heat transfer and fluid dynamical treatments of mass transfer are in the near future.While the microkinetic models allow improved comparison to experiment under a variety of realistic conditions involving competing pathways, better experimental isolation of preselected pathways allows more direct comparison of theory with experiment. It is hoped that the recent experimental study of size-preselected Pt clusters under high-temperature catalytic conditions (atmospheric pressure) presages a new round of informative activity of this type.1267,1268 In these experiments, size-preselected Pt8–Pt10 clusters stabilized on high-surface area supports were used to dehydrogenate propane to propene with high efficiency and good product selectivity, and B3LYP (for clusters) and RPBE (for surfaces) calculations were used1268 to interpret the improved catalytic properties of clusters relative to the surface in terms of the under-coordination of the Pt sites in the clusters.1268Tao et al.1269 have recently investigated the performance of selected density functionals for jellium surfaces and bulk jellium linear response, where jellium systems serve as a model for testing functionals.5.3.5 Electrocatalysis. Electrochemical redox processes at metal surfaces have also been studied by DFT, but we limit ourselves here to presented some very recent references on processes occurring at Pt as a starting point into the literature of the field.1270–1280 For more general remarks on DFT applied to electrocatalysis involving transition metals, see the recent Faraday Discussion.1281,12825.3.6 Photocatalysis. Doped and sensitized TiO2 are well studied for their photocatalytic properties.1283–1287 Although research on TiO2 structural, electronic, optical, photocatalytic, photovoltaic, and hydrogen storage properties is still driven mainly by experiment, there are many opportunities for DFT to contribute.570–575,930,932,1009,1014,1055,1056,1097,1184,1283–1302Zapol and Curtis1303 reviewed the application of DFT to adsorption and photoexcitation of organic adsorbates on TiO2 nanoparticles. Vittadini et al.1290 reviewed theoretical studies of surface structure, stability, and reactivity of TiO2 surface systems. Recent studies of the band structure of Mn-doped rutile TiO21304 and of the nucleation, growth, and adsorption of transition metal clusters on anatase TiO2 (101)1305,1306 are of particular interest.A very recent calculation1287 employs the local PBE functional and the nonlocal B3LYP functional to calculate the spin-polarized density of states for Cr/Sb codoped TiO2. The PBE, experimental, and B3LYP band gaps are 2.6, 3.6, and 3.9 eV, respectively, and the two calculations give different predictions for the positions of the Sb and Cr states relative to the valence and conduction bands, but the more accurate hybrid calculations allow an interpretation of why the co-doped system shows increased photostability.Nakamura and Yamashita1307 used a nonequilibrium Green’s function method to calculate the reaction probability of the photoinduced desorption/dissociation of O2 on Ag(110). They used the PBE density functional.6. Concluding remarksThe application of DFT to transition metal systems has become well established, even though many studies have been carried out with less than fully reliable density functionals. Given the rapid pace of ongoing functional development and the ever increasing scope of applications, the field must be regarded as still in its infancy. There remains considerable room for improvement, and the future is likely to be exciting.AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to Yan Zhao for innumerable discussions, for collaboration on density functional development and applications, and for providing Fig. 3 and to Ilaria Ciofini, Ke Yang, and Yan Zhao for suggestions on improving the manuscript. This work was supported in part by the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant no. FA9550-08-1-018 and the US National Science Foundation under grants CHE-0610183 and CHE07-04974.ReferencesW. Kohn, A. D. Becke and R. G. Parr, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 12974 CrossRef CAS .P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. B, 1964, 136, B864 Search PubMed .L. H. Thomas, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 1927, 23, 542 Search PubMed .E. Fermi, Z. Phys., 1928, 48, 73 Search PubMed .W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133 CrossRef .U. von Barth and L. Hedin, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1972, 5, 1629 CrossRef .A. K. Rajagopal and J. Callaway, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1973, 7, 1912 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Hartree, W. Hartree and B. Swirles, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1939, 238, 229 CrossRef .O. Sinanoglu and D. F. Tuan, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 1740 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Truhlar, J. Comput. Chem., 2007, 28, 73 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Silverstone and O. Sinanoglu, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 44, 1899 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Schmidt and M. S. Gordon, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 233 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Deeth, Struct. Bonding, 2004, 113, 37 CAS .F. Neese, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 11, 702 CrossRef CAS .P. E. M. Siegbahn and T. Borowski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 729 CrossRef CAS .L. Noodleman and W.-G. Han, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 11, 674 CrossRef CAS .L. Bertini, M. Bruschi, L. de Gioia, P. Fantucci, C. Greco and G. Zampella, Top. Curr. Chem., 2007, 268, 1 CAS .V. Polo, E. Kraka and D. Cremer, Mol. Phys., 2002, 100, 1771 CrossRef CAS .D. Cremer, Mol. Phys., 2001, 99, 1899 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Becke, A. Savin and H. Stoll, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1995, 91, 147 CAS .J. P. Perdew, A. Savin and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1995, 51, 4531 CrossRef CAS .A. Görling, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 062203 CrossRef .J. D. Talman and W. F. Shadwick, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1976, 14, 36 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Teale, A. J. Cohen and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 074101 CrossRef .A. V. Arbuznikov, M. Kaupp and H. Bahrman, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 204102 CrossRef .A. V. Arbuznikov, J. Struct. Chem., 2007, 48, S1 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Janak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1978, 18, 7165 CrossRef CAS .I. G. Kaplan, Intermolecular Interactions, Wiley, Chichester, UK,  2006, ch. 3 Search PubMed .K. T. Tang and J. P. Toennies, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 3726 CrossRef CAS .K. T. Tang and J. P. Toennies, Molecular Physics: An International Journal at the Interface Between Chemistry and Physics, 2008, 106, 1645 Search PubMed .J. F. Dobson, A. White and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 073201 CrossRef .J. Harl and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 045136 CrossRef .M. Rohlfing and T. Bredow, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 266106 CrossRef .Y. Zhao, N. E. Schultz and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 161103 CrossRef .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 5121 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 1009 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 289 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 194101 CrossRef .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 215 CrossRef CAS .C. Adamo and F. Lelj, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 103, 10605 CrossRef CAS .T. Ziegler, Chem. Rev., 1991, 91, 651 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Perdew, in Density Functional Theory of Molecules, Clusters, and Solids, ed. D. E. Ellis, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1995, p. 47 Search PubMed .W. Kohn, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1999, 71, 1253 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Baerends, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2000, 103, 265 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Perdew and S. Kurth, in A Primer in Density Functional Theory, ed. C. Foilhais, F. Nogueira and M. Marques, Spinger-Verlag, Berlin,  2003, p. 1 Search PubMed .U. von Barth, Phys. Scr., 2004, t109, 9 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Scuseria and V. N. Staroverov, in Theory and Applications of Computational Chemistry: The First Forty Years, ed. C. E. Dykstra, G. Frenking, K. S. Kim and G. E. Scuseria, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2005, p. 669 Search PubMed .F. M. Bickelhaupt and E. J. Baerends, Rev. Comput. Chem., 2000, 15, 1 Search PubMed .T. A. Wesolowski, in Molecular Materials with Specific Applications, ed. W. A. Sokalski, Springer, Heidelberg,  2007, p. 153 Search PubMed .J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinsky, J. Tao, V. N. Staroverov, G. E. Scuseria and G. I. Csonka, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 062201 CrossRef .J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, L. A. Constantin, J. Sun and G. I. Csonka, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 902 CrossRef CAS .P. A. M. Dirac, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 1930, 26, 376 Search PubMed .J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev., 1951, 81, 385 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1980, 45, 566 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Vosko, L. Wilk and M. Nusair, Can. J. Phys., 1980, 58, 1200 CrossRef CAS .J. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13244 CrossRef .J. P. Perdew, J. Tao and S. Kümmel, ACS Symp. Ser., 2007, 958, 13 CAS .A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1988, 38, 3098 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 33, 8822 CrossRef .C. Lee, W. Yang and R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 785 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Perdew, in Electronic Structure of Solids '91, ed. P. Ziesche and H. Eschrig, Akademie Verlag, Berlin,  1991, p. 11 Search PubMed .J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Enzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS .C. Adamo and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 664 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Lim, S. E. Worthington, F. J. Dulles and C. J. Cramer, in Chemical Applications of Density Functional Theory, ed. B. B. Laird, R. B. Ross and T. Ziegler, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1996, vol. 629, p. 402 Search PubMed .M. W. Nolan and G. W. Watson, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 144701 CrossRef .T. Bally and G. N. Sastry, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 7923 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer and S. E. Barrows, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 5523 CrossRef CAS .B. Braieda, P. C. Hiberty and A. Savin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7872 CrossRef .M. Sodupe, J. Bertran, L. Rodriguez-Santiago and E. J. Baerends, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 166 CrossRef CAS .G. Pacchioni, F. Frigoli, D. Ricci and J. A. Weil, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 63, 054102 .J. L. Gavartin, P. V. Sushko and A. L. Schluger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 035108 CrossRef .J. Poater, M. Sola, A. Rimola, L. Rodriguez-Santiago and M. Sodupe, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 6072 CrossRef CAS .M. Lundberg and P. E. M. Siegbahn, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 224103 CrossRef .F. Lechermann, A. Georges, A. Poteryaev, S. Biermann, M. Posternak, A. Yamasaki and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 125120 CrossRef .K. Terakura, T. Oguchi, A. R. Williams and J. Kübler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1984, 30, 4734 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Anisimov, J. Zaanen and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 943 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Anisimov, P. Kuiper and J. Nordgren, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 8257 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Bolton and S. Y. Savrasov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 2092 CrossRef CAS .N. M. Harrison, V. R. Saunders, R. Dovesi and W. C. Mackrodt, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1998, 356, 75 CrossRef CAS .T. Bredow and A. B. Gerson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 5194 CrossRef CAS .O. Bengone, M. Alouani, P. Blöchl and J. Hugel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 16392 CrossRef CAS .J. Muscat, A. Wander and N. M. Harrison, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 342, 397 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Gramsch, R. E. Cohen and S. Y. Savrasov, Am. Mineral., 2003, 88, 257 CAS .A. Rohrbach, J. Hafner and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075413 CrossRef .X.-B. Feng and N. M. Harrison, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 035114 CrossRef .C. Franchini, V. Bayer, R. Podloucky, J. Paier and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045132 CrossRef .F. Tran, P. Blaha, K. Schwarz and P. Novak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 155108 CrossRef .L. Wang, T. Maxisch and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 195107 CrossRef .P. Novák, J. Kunes, L. Chaput and W. E. Pickett, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 563 CrossRef CAS .D. Kasinathan, J. Kunei, K. Koepernik, C. V. Diaconu, R. L. Martin, I. D. Prodan, G. E. Scuseria, N. Spaldin, L. Petit, T. C. Schulthess and W. E. Pickett, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 195110 CrossRef .L. Giordano, G. Pacchioni, J. Goniakowski, N. Nilius, E. D. I. Rienks and H.-J. Freund, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 026102 CrossRef .N. E. Schultz, Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 4388 CrossRef CAS .N. E. Schultz, Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 11127 CrossRef CAS .F. Furche and J. P. Perdew, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 044103 CrossRef .P. J. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. F. Chabalowski and M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 11623 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. S. Ashwar, K. L. Bak, P. R. Taylor and M. J. Frisch, in Chemical Applications of Density Functional Theory, ed. B. B. Laird, R. B. Ross and T. Ziegler, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1996, vol. 629, p. 105 Search PubMed .C. Adamo and V. Barone, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 274, 242 CrossRef CAS .M. Ernzerhof and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 5029 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Lynch, P. L. Fast, M. Harris and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4811 CrossRef CAS .M. Reiher, O. Salomon and B. A. Hess, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2001, 107, 48 CrossRef CAS .G. Brewer, M. J. Olida, A. M. Schmiderkamp, C. Viragh and P. Y. Zavalij, Dalton Trans., 2006, 5617 RSC .H. Saal, T. Bredow and M. Binnewies, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3201 RSC .M. Radon, M. Srebro and E. Broclawik, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 1237 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Alonso and L. A. Girifalco, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1978, 17, 3735 CrossRef CAS .J. P. A. Charlesworth, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 12666 CrossRef CAS .M. Sadd and M. P. Teter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 13643 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Rushton, D. J. Tozer and S. J. Clark, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 235203 CrossRef .J. Robertson, K. Xiong and S. J. Clark, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 1 CrossRef CAS .J. Robertson, K. Xiong and S. J. Clark, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 2054 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 5048 CrossRef CAS .A. Svane, W. M. Temmerman, Z. Szotek, J. Laegsgaard and H. Winter, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2000, 77, 799 CrossRef CAS .C. Legrand, E. Suraud and P.-G. Reinhard, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 2002, 35, 1115 CrossRef CAS .I. Ciofini, H. Chermette and C. Adamo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 380, 12 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Bylander and L. Kleinman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 7868 CrossRef .D. Vogel, P. Krüger and J. Pollmann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 3865 CrossRef CAS .A. Filippetti and V. Fiorentini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 035128 CrossRef .C. D. Pemmaraju, T. Archer, D. Sanchez-Portal and S. Sanvito, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 045101 CrossRef .A. Akande and S. Sanvito, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 034112 CrossRef CAS .A. I. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, R5467 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Anisimov, F. Aryasetiawan and A. I. Liechtenstein, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 767 CrossRef CAS .W. E. Pickett, S. C. Erwin and E. C. Ethridge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 1201 CrossRef CAS .J. Hubbard, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1963, 266, 238 CrossRef .H. Hsu, K. Umemoto, M. Cococcioni and R. Wentzcovitch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 125124 CrossRef .A. Svane and O. Gunnarsson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 65, 1148 CrossRef CAS .Z. Szotek, W. M. Temmerman and H. Winter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 4029 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Isaak, R. E. Cohen, M. J. Mehl and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 7720 CrossRef CAS .S. Stackhouse, J. P. Brodholt and G. D. Price, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2007, 253, 282 CrossRef CAS .A. Bengtson, K. Persson and D. Morgan, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2008, 265, 535 CrossRef CAS .M. Alfredsson, G. David Price, C. R. A. Catlow, S. C. Parker, R. Orlando and J. P. Brodholt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 165111 CrossRef .G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko, O. Parcollet and C. A. Marianetti, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2006, 78, 865 CrossRef .P. Ravindran, R. Vidya, P. Vajeeston, A. Kjekshus and H. Fellvåg, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 176, 338 CrossRef CAS .P. Zhang, W. Luo, V. H. Crespi, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 085108 CrossRef .F. Zhou, M. Cococcioni, C. A. Marianetti, D. Morgan and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 235121 CrossRef .R. Pocha, D. Johrendt, B. Ni and M. M. Abd-Elmeguid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8732 CrossRef CAS .M. Cococcioni and S. de Gironcoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 035105 CrossRef .H. J. Kulik, M. Cococcioni, D. A. Scherlis and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 103001 CrossRef .K. Leung, S. B. Rempe, P. A. Schultz, E. M. Sproviero, V. S. Batista, M. E. Chandross and C. J. Medforth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3659 CrossRef CAS .K. Leung and C. J. Medforth, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 024501 CrossRef .C. Yao, W. Guan, Z. M. Su, J. D. Feng, L. K. Yan and Z. J. Wu, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 115 CAS .N. J. Mosey, P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 014103 CrossRef .H. J. Kulik and N. Marzari, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 134314 CrossRef .S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 235104 CrossRef .M. Cococcioni, A. Dal Corso and S. de Gironcoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 094106 CrossRef .G. Rollmann, H. C. Herper and P. Entel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 10799 CrossRef CAS .G. Pacchioni, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 182505 CrossRef .E. Finazzi, C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 154113 CrossRef .F. Cinquini, L. Giordano and G. Pacchioni, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 575 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Deng, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Europhys. Lett., 2008, 83, 37008 CrossRef .G.-T. Wang, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 066403 CrossRef .M. Marder, Condensed Matter Physics, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .J. P. Perdew and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 51, 1884 CrossRef CAS .W. Hanke and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1980, 21, 4656 CrossRef CAS .L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2555 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kayanuma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 9797 CrossRef .C. Delerue, M. Lannoo and G. Allan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2457 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 2733 CrossRef .G. Onida, L. Reining and A. Rubio, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 601 CrossRef CAS .F. Fuchs, J. Furthmuller, F. Bechstedt, M. Shishkin and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 115109 CrossRef .P. H. Hahn, K. Seino, W. G. Schmidt, J. Furthmüller and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2005, 242, 2720 CrossRef CAS .L. Hedin, Phys. Rev., 1965, 139, A796 CrossRef .S. G. Louie, in Conceptual Foundations of Materials: A Standard Model for Ground- and Excited-State Properties, ed. S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2006, p. 9 Search PubMed .P. Huang and E. A. Carter, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2008, 59, 261 CrossRef CAS .M. Shishkin and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 235102 CrossRef .P. Rinke, A. Qteis, J. Neugebauer and M. Scheffler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 929 CrossRef CAS .P. H. Hahn, W. G. Schmidt, K. Seino, M. Preuss, F. Bechstedt and J. Bernholc, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 037404 CrossRef CAS .L. E. Ramos, J. Paier, G. Kresse and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 195423 CrossRef .S. Botti, A. Schindlmayr, R. D. Sole and L. Reisling, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2007, 70, 357 CrossRef .A. Marini, R. D. Sole and A. Rubio, in Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory, ed. M. A. L. Marques, C. A. Ulrich, F. Noguiera, K. Burke and E. K. U. Gross, Springer, Berlin,  2006, p. 161 Search PubMed .L. J. Sham and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev., 1966, 145, 561 CrossRef CAS .L. X. Benedict, A. Puzder, A. J. Williamson, J. C. Grossman, G. Galli, J. E. Klepeis, J.-Y. Raty and O. Pankratov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 085310 CrossRef .T. Ziegler, M. Seth, M. Krykunov, J. Autschbach and F. Wang, THEOCHEM, 2009, 914, 106 CrossRef CAS .E. K. U. Gross and K. Burke, in Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory, ed. M. A. L. Marques, C. A. Ulrich, F. Noguiera, K. Burke and E. K. U. Gross, Springer, Berlin,  2006, p. 1 Search PubMed .H. Shi, R. Asahi and C. Stampfl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 205125 CrossRef .L. J. Sham and M. Schlüter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 51, 1888 CrossRef .R. W. Godby, M. Schlüter and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 10159 CrossRef .M. Gruning, A. Marini and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 161103 CrossRef .A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sanchez and W. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 115123 CrossRef .A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 2155 CrossRef CAS .R. van Leeuwen and E. J. Baerends, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1994, 49, 2421 CrossRef CAS .A. Dal Corso and R. Resta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 4327 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Arbuznikov and M. Kaupp, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 381, 495 CrossRef CAS .P. Mori-Sanchez, A. J. Cohen and W. Yang, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 201102 CrossRef .A. D. Becke and M. R. Roussel, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1989, 39, 3761 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 1040 CrossRef CAS .J. Tao, J. P. Perdew, V. N. Staroverov and G. E. Scuseria, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 146401 CrossRef .A. Savin, in Recent Developments and Applications of Modern Density Functional Theory, ed. J. Seminario, Elsevier, New York,  1996, p. 227 Search PubMed .T. Leininger, H. Stoll, H.-J. Werner and A. Savin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 275, 151 CrossRef CAS .H. Iikura, T. Tsuneda, T. Yanai and K. Hirao, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 3540 CrossRef .J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207 CrossRef CAS .J. Heyd and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 7274 CrossRef CAS .J. Heyd and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 1187 CrossRef CAS .R. Baer and D. Neuhauser, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 043002 CrossRef .E. Livshitz and R. Baer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2932 RSC .T. M. Henderson, A. F. Izmaylov, G. E. Scuseria and A. Savin, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 221103 CrossRef .J. Jaramillo, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 1068 CrossRef CAS .H. Bahmann, A. Rodenberg, A. V. Arbuznikov and M. Kaupp, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 011103 CrossRef .A. V. Arbuznikov and M. Kaupp, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 440, 160 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Arbuznikov and M. Kaupp, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 214107 CrossRef .A. V. Krukau, G. E. Scuseria, J. P. Perdew and A. Savin, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 124103 CrossRef .P. M. W. Gill, Mol. Phys., 1996, 89, 433 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang and W. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 890 CrossRef CAS .B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 7413 CrossRef .L. Vitos, B. Johansson, J. Kollár and H. L. Skriver, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 10046 CrossRef CAS .W. Kohn and A. E. Mattsson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 3487 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Handy and A. J. Cohen, Mol. Phys., 2001, 99, 403 CrossRef CAS .X. Xu and W. A. Goddard, III, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 2673 CrossRef CAS .R. Armiento and A. E. Mattsson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 085108 CrossRef .L. A. Constantin, J. M. Pitarke, J. F. Dobson, A. Garcia-Lekue and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 036401 CrossRef .Z. Wu and R. E. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 235116 CrossRef .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 197101 CrossRef .J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 136406 CrossRef   and the erratum:   J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 039902 Search PubMed .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 184109 CrossRef .J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 891 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 239702 CrossRef .A. E. Mattsson, R. Armiento and T. R. Mattsson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 239701 CrossRef .A. E. Mattsson, R. Armiento, P. A. Schultz and T. R. Mattsson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 195123 CrossRef .A. E. Mattsson, R. Armiento, J. Paier, G. Kresse, J. M. Wills and T. R. Mattsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 084714 CrossRef .S. F. Sousa, P. A. Fernandes and M. J. Ramos, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 10439 CrossRef CAS .M. Alaei, H. Akbarzadeh, H. Gholizadeh and S. de Gironcoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 085414 CrossRef .H. L. Schmider and A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 9624 CrossRef CAS .F. A. Hamprecht, A. J. Cohen, D. J. Tozer and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 6264 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Wilson, T. J. Bradley and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 9233 CrossRef CAS .T. W. Keal and D. J. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 121103 CrossRef .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5656 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 4020 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Boese and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 9559 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Boese and J. M. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 3405 CrossRef CAS .J. Krieger, J. Chen, G. J. Iafiate and A. Savin, in Electron Correlations and Material Properties, ed. A. Gonis and N. Kioussis, Plenum, New York,  1999, p. 463 Search PubMed .J. P. Perdew, S. Kurth, A. Zupan and P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 2544 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 13126 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, N. E. Schultz and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 364 CrossRef .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 1849 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Amin and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 75 CrossRef CAS .T. Yanai, D. P. Tew and N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 51 CrossRef CAS .T. Van Voorhis and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 400 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 6908 CrossRef CAS .E. I. Proynov, S. Sirois and D. R. Salahub, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1997, 64, 427 CrossRef CAS .J. Pu and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 1468 CrossRef CAS .B. L. Kormos and C. J. Cramer, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2002, 15, 712 CrossRef CAS .C. Diaz, E. Pijper, R. A. Olsen, H. F. Busnengo, D. J. Auerbach and G. J. Kroes, preprint (April 21 2009).G. Lippert, J. Hutter and M. Parrinello, Mol. Phys., 1997, 92, 477 CrossRef CAS .J. VandeVondele, M. Krack, F. Mohamed, M. Parrinello, T. Chassaing and J. Hutter, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2005, 167, 103 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Phillips and L. Kleinman, Phys. Rev., 1959, 116, 287 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Cohen and V. Heine, Phys. Rev., 1961, 122, 1821 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Melius, B. D. Olafson and W. A. Goddard, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 28, 457 CrossRef CAS .L. R. Kahn, P. Baybutt and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 65, 3826 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Christiansen, Y. S. Lee and K. S. Pitzer, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 71, 4445 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Hamann, M. Schlüter and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 43, 1494 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Stevens, H. Basch and M. Krauss, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 6026 CrossRef .P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 270 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 284 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 299 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Rappe, K. M. Rabe, E. Kaxiras and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 1227 CrossRef .D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 7892 CrossRef .N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 43, 1993 CrossRef CAS .T. V. Russo, R. L. Martin and P. J. Hay, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 17085 CrossRef CAS .S. Goedecker, M. Teter and J. Hutter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 1703 CrossRef CAS .P. Schwerdtfeger, J. R. Brown, J. K. Laerdahl and H. Stoll, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 7110 CrossRef CAS .J. M. L. Martin and A. Sundermann, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 3408 CrossRef CAS .A. Dal Corso, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235118 CrossRef .M. Dolg, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2005, 114, 297 CrossRef CAS .E. Fromager, L. Visscher, L. Maron and C. Teichteil, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 164105 CrossRef .L. E. Roy, P. J. Hay and R. L. Martin, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 1029 CrossRef CAS .P. E. Blöchl, C. J. Först and J. Schimpl, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2003, 26, 33 Search PubMed .P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953 CrossRef .G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758 CrossRef CAS .M. Valiev, E. J. Bylaska, A. Gramada and J. H. Weare, in Reviews of Modern Quantum Chemistry, ed. K. D. Sen, World Scientific, Singapore,  2002, vol. 2, p. 1684 Search PubMed .M. Valiev, E. J. Bylaska and J. H. Weare, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 5955 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 035109 CrossRef .H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1976, 13, 5188 CrossRef .A. E. Mattsson, P. A. Schultz, M. P. Desjarlais, T. R. Mattsson and K. Leung, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2005, 13, R1 CrossRef CAS .A. Sorouri, W. M. C. Foulkes and N. D. M. Hine, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 064105 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Payne, M. P. Teter, D. C. Allan, T. A. Arias and J. D. Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1992, 64, 1045 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Han, L. Z. Sun, X. D. Qu, Y. P. Chen and J. X. Zhong, Phys. B, 2009, 404, 131 CrossRef CAS .G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 13115 CrossRef CAS .G. Y. Sun, J. Kurti, P. Rajczy, M. Kertesz, J. Hafner and G. Kresse, THEOCHEM, 2003, 624, 37 CrossRef CAS .J. Paier, R. Hirschl, M. Marsman and G. Kresse, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 234102 CrossRef .J. S. Tse, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2002, 53, 249 CrossRef CAS .B. I. Dunlap, J. W. D. Connolly and J. R. Sabin, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 71, 4993 CrossRef CAS .O. Vahtras, J. Almlöf and M. W. Feyereisen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 213, 514 CrossRef CAS .M. Sierka, A. Hogekamp and R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 9136 CrossRef CAS .R. Polly, H. J. Werner, F. R. Manby and P. J. Knowles, Mol. Phys., 2004, 102, 2311 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Wentzcovitch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 2358 CrossRef .R. M. Wentzcovitch, J. L. Martins and G. D. Price, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 3947 CrossRef CAS .H. M. Senn and W. Thiel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1198 CrossRef CAS .Y.-y. Ohnishi, Y. Nakao, H. Sato and S. Sakaki, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 1946 CrossRef CAS .B. Wang and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput. Search PubMed  , in press.K. G. Dyall and K. Faegri, Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Chemistry, Oxford University Press, New York, USA,  2007 Search PubMed .N. Rösch, A. Matveev, V. A. Nasluzov, K. M. Neyman, L. Moskaleva and S. Krüger, in Relativistic Electronic Structure Theory, Part 2. Applications, ed. P. Pyykkö and P. Schwerdtfeger, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2004, p. 656 Search PubMed .L. L. Foldy and S. A. Wouthuysen, Phys. Rev., 1950, 78, 29 CrossRef .M. Douglas and N. M. Kroll, Ann. Phys., 1974, 82, 89 CAS .B. A. Hess, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1986, 33, 3742 CrossRef CAS .G. Jansen and B. A. Hess, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1989, 39, 6016 CrossRef .A. Wolf, M. Reiher and B. A. Hess, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 9215 CrossRef CAS .I. Malkin, O. L. Malkina, V. G. Malkin and M. Kaupp, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 244103 CrossRef .M. Reiher, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 116, 241 CrossRef .E. van Lenthe, E. J. Baerends and J. G. Snijders, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 9783 CrossRef CAS .M. Mayer, S. Krüger and N. Rösch, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 4411 CrossRef CAS .E. van Lenthe, J. G. Snijders and E. J. Baerends, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 6505 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang, G. Hong and L. Li, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 316, 318 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Fedorov, S. Koseki, M. W. Schmidt and M. S. Gordon, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 22, 551 CrossRef CAS ; B. O. Roos and P.-Å. Malmqvist, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2919 RSC .C. van Wüllen, J. Comput. Chem., 2001, 23, 779 .M. Shoji, K. Koizumi, R. Takeda, Y. Kitagawa, S. Yamanaka, M. Okumura and K. Yamaguchi, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 2335 CrossRef CAS .K. Yamaguchi, S. Yamanaka, M. Nishino, Y. Takano, Y. Kitagawa, H. Nagao and Y. Yoshioka, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1999, 102, 328 CrossRef CAS .S. Lunell, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1972, 13, 93 CrossRef CAS .K. Yamaguchi, Y. Yoshioka and T. Fueno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1977, 46, 360 CrossRef CAS .S. Hammes-Schiffer and H. C. Andersen, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 99, 1901 CrossRef CAS .S. Yamanaka, D. Yamaki, Y. Shigeta, H. Nagao, Y. Yoshioka, N. Suzuki and K. Yamaguchi, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2000, 80, 664 CrossRef CAS .S. Yamanaka, D. Yamaki, Y. Shigeta, H. Nagao and K. Yamaguchi, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2001, 84, 670 CrossRef CAS .D. Hobbs and J. Hafner, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2000, 12, 7025 CrossRef CAS .S. Sharma, J. K. Dewhurst, C. Ambrosch-Draxl, S. Kurth, N. Helbig, S. Pittalis, S. Shallcross, L. Nordstrom and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 196405 CrossRef CAS .D. Naveh and L. Kronik, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 177 CrossRef CAS .T. Oda, A. Pasquarello and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 3622 CrossRef CAS .D. Hobbs, G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 11556 CrossRef CAS .P. Ruiz-Díaz, J. Dorantes-Davila and G. M. Pastor, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2009, 52, 175 CrossRef CAS .N. Fujima and T. Oda, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2003, 24, 89 CrossRef CAS .C. Köhler, T. Frauenheim, B. Hourahine, G. Seifert and M. Sternberg, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5622 CrossRef .C. Kohl and G. F. Bertsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 4205 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Peralta, G. E. Scuseria and M. J. Frisch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 125119 CrossRef .S. Yamanaka, R. Takeda, T. Kawakami, K. Nakata, T. Sakuma, T. Takada and K. Yamaguchi, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2004, 272–276 Search PubMed  /Supplement 1, E255.K. S. Pitzer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1979, 12, 271 CrossRef CAS .P. Pyykkö and J. P. Desclaux, Acc. Chem. Res., 1979, 12, 276 CrossRef CAS .P. Pyykkö, Chem. Rev., 1988, 88, 563 CrossRef CAS .N. E. Schultz, B. F. Gherman, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24030 CrossRef CAS .M. Filatov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 373, 131 CrossRef CAS .E. Van Lenthe and E. J. Baerends, J. Comput. Chem., 2003, 24, 1142 CrossRef CAS .B. O. Roos, R. Lindh, P.-Å. Malmqvist, V. Veryazov and P.-O. Widmark, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 2851 CrossRef CAS .R. L. A. Haiduke, L. G. M. De Macedo and A. B. F. Da Silva, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 932 CrossRef CAS .B. O. Roos, R. Lindh, P.-Å. Malmqvist, V. Veryazov and P.-O. Widmark, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 6575 CrossRef CAS .K. Dyall, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 115, 441 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., T. Vreven, K. N. Kudin, J. C. Burant, J. M. Millam, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, M. Cossi, G. Scalmani, N. Rega, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, M. Klene, X. Li, J. E. Knox, H. P. Hratchian, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. Ochterski, P. Y. Ayala, K. Morokuma, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, V. G. Zakrzewski, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, M. C. Strain, O. Farkas, D. K. Malick, A. D. Rabuck, K. Raghavachari, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, Q. Cui, A. G. Baboul, S. Clifford, J. Cioslowski, B. B. Stefanov, G. Liu, A. Liashenko, P. Piskorz, I. Komaromi, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, T. Keith, M. A. Al-Laham, C. Y. Peng, A. Nanayakkara, M. Challacombe, P. M. W. Gill, B. G. Johnson, W. Chen, M. W. Wong, C. Gonzalez and J. A. Pople, GAUSSIAN 03 (Revision D.1), Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2004 Search PubMed .B. G. Johnson and M. J. Fisch, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 100, 7429 CrossRef CAS .J. Zheng, M. A. Iron, B. A. Ellingson, J. C. Corchado, Y.-Y. Chuang and D. G. Truhlar, NWChemRate 2007, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,  2007 Search PubMed .A. Fernandez-Ramos, B. A. Ellingson, B. C. Garrett and D. G. Truhlar, Rev. Comput. Chem., 2007, 23, 125 Search PubMed .G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef CAS .J. Hafner, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 2044 CrossRef CAS .P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, P. Sorantin and S. B. Trickey, Comput. Phys. Commun., 1990, 59, 399 CrossRef CAS .K. Schwarz and P. Blaha, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2003, 28, 259 CrossRef CAS .J. Paier, M. Marsman, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, I. C. Gerber and J. G. Angyan, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 154709 CrossRef CAS .A. Kiejna, G. Kresse, J. Rogal, A. De Sarkar, K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 035404 CrossRef .C. Fonseca Guerra, J. G. Snijders, G. te Velde and E. J. Baerends, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1998, 99, 391 CrossRef .G. te Velde, F. M. Bickelhaupt, E. J. Baerends, C. F. Guerra, S. J. A. Van Gisbergen, J. G. Snijders and T. Ziegler, J. Comput. Chem., 2001, 22, 931 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Baerends, J. Autschbach, J. A. Berger, A. Bérces, F. M. Bickelhaupt, C. Bo, P. L. d. Boeij, P. M. Boerrigter, L. Cavallo, D. P. Chong, L. Deng, R. M. Dickson, D. E. Ellis, M. van Faassen, L. Fan, T. H. Fischer, C. Fonseca Guerra, S. J. A. van Gisbergen, A. W. Götz, J. A. Groeneveld, O. V. Gritsenko, M. Grüning, F. E. Harris, P. van den Hoek, C. R. Jacob, H. Jacobsen, L. Jensen, E. S. Kadantsev, G. v. Kessel, R. Klooster, F. Kootstra, M. V. Krykunov, E. v. Lenthe, J. N. Louwen, D. A. McCormack, A. Michalak, J. Neugebauer, V. P. Nicu, V. P. Osinga, S. Patchkovskii, P. H. T. Philipsen, D. Post, C. C. Pye, W. Ravenek, J. I. Rodriguez, P. Romaniello, P. Ros, P. R. T. Schipper, G. Schreckenbach, J. G. Snijders, M. Solà, M. Swart, D. Swerhone, G. t. Velde, P. Vernooijs, L. Versluis, L. Visscher, O. Visser, F. Wang, T. A. Wesolowski, E. M. van Wezenbeek, G. Wiesenekker, S. K. Wolff, T. K. Woo, A. L. Yakovlev and T. Ziegler, ADF2008, Scientific Computing and Modeling, Amsterdam,  2008 Search PubMed .G. Wiesenekker and E. J. Baerends, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1991, 3, 6721 CrossRef .G. te Velde and E. J. Baerends, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 7888 CrossRef .G. te Velde, E. J. Baerends, P. H. T. Philipsen, G. Wiesenekker, J. A. Broeneveld, J. A. Berger, P. L. de Boeij, R. Klooster, F. Kootstra, P. Romaniello, J. G. Snijders, E. S. Kadantsev and T. Ziegler, BAND2008.1, Scientific Computation and Modeling, Amsterdam,  2008 Search PubMed .R. A. Kendall, E. Apra, D. E. Bernholdt, E. J. Bylaska, M. Dupuis, G. I. Fann, R. J. Harrison, J. Ju, J. A. Nichols, J. Nieplocha, T. P. Straatsma, T. L. Windus and A. T. Wong, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2000, 128, 260 CrossRef CAS .E. Aprà, E. J. Bylaska, D. J. Dean, A. Fortunelli, F. Gao, P. S. Krstic, J. C. Wells and T. L. Windus, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2003, 28, 209 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Schmidt, K. K. Baldridge, J. A. Boatz, S. T. Elbert, M. S. Gordon, J. H. Jensen, S. Koseki, N. Matsunaga, K. A. Nguyen, S. Su, T. L. Windus, M. Dupuis and J. A. Montgomery, J. Comput. Chem., 1993, 14, 1347 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Gordon and M. W. Schmidt, in Theory and Applications of Computational Chemistry: The First Forty Years, ed. C. E. Dykstra, G. Frenking, K. S. Kim and G. E. Scuseria, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2005, p. 1167 Search PubMed .M. Higashi, A. V. Marenich, R. M. Olson, A. C. Chamberlin, J. Pu, C. P. Kelly, J. D. Thompson, J. D. Xidos, J. Li, T. Zhu, G. D. Hawkins, Y.-Y. Chuang, P. L. Fast, B. J. Lynch, D. A. Liotard, D. Rinaldi, J. Gao, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, GAMESSPLUS version 2008-2, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,  2008 Search PubMed .A. V. Marenich, R. M. Olson, C. P. Kelly, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 2011 CrossRef CAS .B. Marten, K. Kim, C. Cortis, R. A. Friesner, R. B. Murphy, M. N. Ringnalda, D. Sitkoff and B. Honig, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 11775 CrossRef CAS .G. Karlström, R. Lindh, P.-Å. Malmqvist, B. O. Roos, U. Ryde, V. Veryazov, P. O. Widmark, M. Cossi, B. Schimmelpfennig, P. Neogrady and L. Seijo, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2003, 28, 222 CrossRef .Y. Shao, L. F. Molnar, Y. Jung, J. Kussmann, C. Ochsenfeld, S. T. Brown, A. T. B. Gilbert, L. V. Slipchenko, S. V. Levchenko, D. P. O'Neill, R. A. DiStasio, R. C. Lochan, T. Wang, G. J. O. Beran, N. A. Besley, J. M. Herbert, C. Y. Lin, T. Van Voorhis, S. H. Chien, A. Sodt, R. P. Steele, V. A. Rassolov, P. E. Maslen, P. P. Korambath, R. D. Adamson, B. Austin, J. Baker, E. F. C. Byrd, H. Dachsel, R. J. Doerksen, A. Dreuw, B. D. Dunietz, A. D. Dutoi, T. R. Furlani, S. R. Gwaltney, A. Heyden, S. Hirata, C. P. Hsu, G. Kedziora, R. Z. Khalliulin, P. Klunzinger, A. M. Lee, M. S. Lee, W. Liang, I. Lotan, N. Nair, B. Peters, E. I. Proynov, P. A. Pieniazek, Y. M. Rhee, J. Ritchie, E. Rosta, C. D. Sherrill, A. C. Simmonett, J. E. Subotnik, H. L. Woodcock, W. Zhang, A. T. Bell, A. K. Chakraborty, D. M. Chipman, F. J. Keil, A. Warshel, W. J. Hehre, H. F. Schaefer, J. Kong, A. I. Krylov, P. M. W. Gill and M. Head-Gordon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3172 RSC .H. L. Woodcock, M. Hodoscek, A. T. B. Gilbert, P. M. W. Gill, H. F. Schaefer and B. R. Brooks, J. Comput. Chem., 2007, 28, 1485 CrossRef CAS .R. Ahlrichs, M. Bär, M. Häser, H. Horn and C. Kölmel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1989, 162, 165 CrossRef CAS .T. Helgaker, H. J. Aa. Jensen, P. Jørgensen, J. Olsen, K. Ruud, H. Ågren, A. A. Auer, K. L. Bak, V. Bakken, O. Christiansen, S. Coriani, P. Dahle, E. K. Dalskov, T. Enevoldsen, B. Fernandez, C. Hättig, K. Hald, A. Halkier, H. Heiberg, H. Hettema, D. Jonsson, S. Kirpekar, R. Kobayashi, H. Koch, K. V. Mikkelsen, P. Norman, M. J. Packer, T. B. Pedersen, T. A. Ruden, P. Salek, A. Sanchez, T. Saue, S. P. A. Sauer, B. Schimmelpfennig, K. O. Sylvester-Hvid, P. R. Taylor and O. Vahtras, DALTON, a molecular electronic structure program, Release 2.0,  2005, see http://www.kjemi.uio.no/software/dalton/dalton.html Search PubMed .B. Jansik, P. Salek, D. Jonsson, O. Vahtras and H. Ågren, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 054107 CrossRef .M. Guidon, F. Schiffmann, J. Hutter and J. VandeVondele, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 214104 CrossRef .H.-J. Werner, P. J. Knowles, R. Lindh, F. R. Manby, M. Schütz, P. Celani, T. Korona, A. Mitrushenkov, G. Rauhut, T. B. Adler, R. D. Amos, A. Bernhardsson, A. Berning, D. L. Cooper, M. J. O. Deegan, A. J. Dobbyn, F. Eckert, E. Goll, C. Hampel, G. Hetzer, T. Hrenar, G. Knizia, C. Köppl, Y. Liu, A. W. Lloyd, R. A. Mata, A. J. May, S. J. McNicholas, W. Meyer, M. E. Mura, A. Nicklaß, P. Palmieri, K. Pflüger, R. Pitzer, M. Reiher, U. Schumann, H. Stoll, A. J. Stone, R. Tarroni, T. Thorsteinsson, M. Wang and A. Wolf, MOLPRO 2008.1, University College, Cardiff,  2008 Search PubMed .F. Neese, ORCA, Universtiy of Bonn, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed.J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, J. D. Gale, A. García, J. Junquera, P. Ordejón and D. Sánchez-Portal, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 2745 CrossRef CAS .D. Sánchez-Portal, P. Ordejón and E. Canadell, Struct. Bonding, 2004, 113, 103 CAS .E. Artacho, E. Anglada, O. Dieguez, J. D. Gale, A. Garcia, J. Junquera, R. M. Martin, P. Ordejon, J. M. Pruneda, D. Sanchez-Portal and J. M. Soler, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 064208 CrossRef .D. R. Salahub, A. Goursot, J. Weber, A. M. Köster and A. Vela, in Theory and Applications of Computational Chemistry: The First Forty Years, ed. C. E. Dykstra, G. Frenking, K. S. Kim and G. E. Scuseria, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2005, p. 1079 Search PubMed .A. M. Köster, G. Goudtner, T. Heine and A. Vela, ALLCHEM, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico,  2001 Search PubMed .A. M. Köster, P. Calaminici, Z. Gómez and U. Reveles, in Reviews of Modern Quantum Chemistry, ed. K. D. Sen, World Scientific, Singapore,  2002, p. 1439 Search PubMed .A. M. Köster, P. Calaminici, M. E. Casida, R. Flores-Moreno, G. Geudtner, A. Goursot, T. Heine, A. Ipatov, F. Janetzko, J. M. del Campo, S. Patchkovskii, J. U. Reveles, D. R. Salahub and A. Vela, deMon2k,  2006 (http://www.demon-software.com/public_html/), accessed October 12, 2009 Search PubMed .M. Ryzhkov, A. Ivanovskii and B. Delley, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 119, 313 CrossRef CAS .Y. Gao, N. Shao and X. C. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1497 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Cui, J. E. Medvedeva, B. Delley, A. J. Freeman and C. Stampfl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 245317 CrossRef .M. A. L. Marques, A. Castro, G. F. Bertsch and A. Rubio, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2003, 151, 60 CrossRef CAS .A. Castro, H. Appel, M. Oliveira, C. A. Rozzi, X. Andrade, F. Lorenzen, M. A. L. Marques, E. K. U. Gross and A. Rubio, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 2465 CrossRef CAS .S. Scandolo, P. Giannozzi, C. Cavazzoni, S. de Gironcoli, A. Pasquarello and S. Baroni, Z. Kristallogr., 2005, 220, 574 CrossRef CAS .X. Wu, A. Selloni and R. Car, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 085102 CrossRef .R. Dovesi, R. Orlando, C. Roetti, C. Pisani and V. R. Saunders, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2000, 217, 63 CrossRef CAS .R. Dovesi, B. Civalleri, R. Orlando, C. Ruetti and V. R. Saunders, Rev. Comput. Chem., 2005, 21, 1 Search PubMed .I. Baraille, A. Loudet, S. Lacombe, H. Cardy and C. Pisani, THEOCHEM, 2003, 620, 291 CrossRef CAS .D. Muñoz, N. M. Harrison and F. Illas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 085115 CrossRef .G. M. Rignanese, X. Gonze, G. Jun, K. Cho and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 184301 CrossRef .M. Levy and T. Pagnier, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 204 CrossRef .J. W. Zwanziger and M. Torrent, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2008, 33, 447 CrossRef CAS .A. Mellouki, L. Kalarasse, B. Bennecer and F. Kalarasse, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 876 CrossRef CAS .Y. Imai, M. Mukaida and T. Tsunoda, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 381, 176 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Medlin and M. D. Allendorf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 217 CrossRef CAS .K. Refson, S.-H. Park and G. Sposito, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13376 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Clark, M. D. Segall, C. J. Pickard, P. J. Hasnip, M. J. Probert, K. Refson and M. C. Payne, Z. Kristallogr., 2005, 220, 567 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Petersen, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5920 CrossRef CAS .B. Hinnemann and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1466 CrossRef CAS .F. Abild-Pedersen, O. Lytken, J. Engbaek, G. Nielsen, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2005, 590, 127 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Grabow, A. A. Gokhale, S. T. Evans, J. A. Dumesic and M. Mavrikakis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4608 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Postnikov, G. Bihlmayer and S. Blügel, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2006, 36, 91 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Savrasov, Z. Kristallogr., 2005, 220, 555 CrossRef CAS .A. Umetani, E. Nagoshi, T. Kubodera and M. Matoba, Phys. B, 2008, 403, 1356 CrossRef CAS .I. V. Yudanov, A. V. Matveev, K. M. Neyman and N. Rösch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9342 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Chelikowsky, N. Troullier and Y. Saad, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 1240 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Fattebert and J. Bernholc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 1713 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Fattebert and F. Gygi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 115124 CrossRef .C. J. Barden, J. C. Rienstra-Kiracofe and H. F. Schaefer, III, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 690 CrossRef CAS .C. Diedrich, A. Luchow and S. Grimme, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 021101 CrossRef .M. C. Holthausen, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1505 CrossRef CAS .N. E. Schultz, Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 185 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 224105 CrossRef .V. Karttunen, M. Linnolahti, T. Pakkanen, J. Maaranen and P. Pitkänen, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 118, 899 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Jensen, B. O. Roos and U. Ryde, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 014103 CrossRef .S. Goel and A. E. Masunov, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 214302 CrossRef .F. S. Legge, G. L. Nyberg and J. B. Peel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 7905 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang and L. M. Li, J. Comput. Chem., 2004, 25, 669 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 157 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Harvey, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 2006, 102, 203 RSC .G. T. de Jong and F. M. Bickelhaupt, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 322 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Quintal, A. Karton, M. A. Iron, A. D. Boese and J. M. L. Martin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 709 CrossRef CAS .S. Li, J. M. Hennigan, D. A. Dixon and K. A. Peterson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 7861 CrossRef CAS .N. J. Mayhall, K. Raghavachari, P. C. Redfern and L. A. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 5170 CrossRef CAS .Q. Ge, C. Song and L. Wang, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2006, 35, 247 CrossRef CAS .P. Schwerdtfeger, M. Lein, R. P. Krawczyk and C. R. Jacob, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 124302 CrossRef .G. T. de Jong, D. P. Geerke, A. Diefenbach and F. Matthias Bickelhaupt, Chem. Phys., 2005, 313, 261 CrossRef CAS .A. Ikeda, Y. Nakao, H. Sato and S. Sakaki, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 7124 CrossRef CAS .S. Li and D. A. Dixon, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 11908 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhao, Z.-H. Li, W.-N. Wang, Z.-P. Liu, K.-N. Fan, Y. Xie and H. F. Schaefer III, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 184102 CrossRef .F. Stevens, I. Carmichael, F. Callens and M. Waroquier, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 4846 CrossRef CAS .J. Rogal, K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 205433 CrossRef .P. Song, W. Guan, C. Yao, Z. Su, Z. Wu, J. Feng and L. Yan, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 407 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Sears and C. D. Sherrill, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6741 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Sears and C. D. Sherrill, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3466 CrossRef CAS .A. Ghosh, E. Gonzalez, E. Tangen and B. O. Roos, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 12792 CrossRef CAS .A. Ghosh and P. R. Taylor, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2003, 7, 113 CrossRef CAS .A. Sorkin, D. G. Truhlar and E. A. Amin, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 5, 1254 Search PubMed .J. Paier, M. Marsman and G. Kresse, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 024103 CrossRef .A. Stroppa and G. Kresse, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 063020 CrossRef .A. Matveev, M. Staufer, M. Mayer and N. Rösch, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1999, 75, 863 CrossRef .R. J. Deeth and N. Fey, J. Comput. Chem., 2004, 25, 1840 CrossRef CAS .G. I. Csonka, J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, P. H. T. Philipsen, S. Lebegue, J. Paier, O. A. Vydrov and J. G. Angyan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 155107 CrossRef .P. Haas, F. Tran and P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 085104 CrossRef .M. Ropo, K. Kokko and L. Vitos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 195445 CrossRef .F. Tran, R. Laskowski, P. Blaha and K. Schwarz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 115131 CrossRef .D. Rinaldo, L. Tian, J. N. Harvey and R. A. Friesner, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 164108 CrossRef .M. Bühl, C. Reimann, D. A. Pantazis, T. Bredow and F. Neese, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 1449 CrossRef CAS .J. Handzlik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 469, 140 CrossRef CAS .C. Mosch, C. Koukounas, N. Bacalis, A. Metropoulos, A. Gross and A. Mavridis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6924 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Zheng, Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 808 CrossRef CAS .M. Reiher, Faraday Discuss., 2007, 135, 97 RSC .W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys., 1928, 49, 619 Search PubMed .P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1929, 123, 714 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Van Vleck, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1945, 17, 27 CrossRef .J. C. Slater, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1953, 25, 199 CrossRef .I. Ciofini and C. A. Daul, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 238–239, 187 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Harvey, Struct. Bonding, 2004, 112, 151 CAS .F. Neese, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 526 CrossRef CAS .L. Noodleman and E. R. Davidson, Chem. Phys., 1986, 109, 131 CrossRef .F. Neese, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 781 CrossRef CAS .E. R. Davidson and A. E. Clark, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2005, 103, 1 CrossRef CAS .S. Pittalis, S. Kurth and E. K. U. Gross, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 084105 CrossRef CAS .T. Ziegler, A. Rauk and E. J. Baerends, Theor. Chim. Acta, 1977, 43, 261 CrossRef CAS .L. Noodleman, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 74, 5737 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sánchez and W. Yang, Science, 2008, 321, 792 CrossRef CAS .J.-M. Mouesca, J. L. Chen, L. Noodleman, D. Bashford and D. A. Case, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 11898 CrossRef CAS .S. Sinnecker, F. Neese, L. Noodleman and W. Lubitz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2613 CrossRef CAS .E. Ruiz, J. Cano, S. Alvarez and P. Alemany, J. Comput. Chem., 1999, 20, 1391 CrossRef CAS .K. Yamaguchi, F. Jensen, A. Dorigo and K. N. Houk, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1988, 149, 537 CrossRef CAS .T. Soda, Y. Kitagawa, T. Onishi, Y. Takano, Y. Shigeta, H. Nagao, Y. Yoshioka and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 319, 223 CrossRef CAS .M. Shoji, K. Koizumi, Y. Kitagawa, T. Kawakami, S. Yamanaka, M. Okumura and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 432, 343 CrossRef CAS .J. Pople, P. Gill and N. Handy, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1995, 56, 303 CrossRef CAS .J. Baker, A. Scheiner and J. Andzelm, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 216, 380 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, L. A. Eriksson, R. J. Boyd, Z. Shi and B. G. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 1844 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, F. J. Dulles and D. E. Falvey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 9787 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, F. J. Dulles, J. W. Storer and S. E. Worthington, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 218, 387 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, F. J. Dulles, D. J. Giesen and J. Almlöf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 245, 165 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, A. D. Becke and J. V. H. Smith, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 3477 CrossRef CAS .J. Gräfenstein, E. Kraka, M. Filatov and D. Cremer, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2002, 3, 360 Search PubMed .D. Cremer, M. Filatov, V. Polo, E. Kraka and S. Shaik, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2002, 3, 604 Search PubMed .J. Gräfenstein and D. Cremer, Mol. Phys., 2001, 99, 981 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Staroverov and E. R. Davidson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 142 CrossRef CAS .H. Carmen, Y. Lian and R. Markus, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1223 CrossRef CAS .R. K. Szilagyi and M. A. Winslow, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1385 CrossRef CAS .A. Sorkin, M. A. Iron and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 307 CrossRef CAS .R. Valero, R. Costa, I. Moreira, D. G. Truhlar and F. Illas, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 114103 CrossRef .C. Adamo, V. Barone, A. Bencini, F. Totti and I. Ciofini, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 1996 CrossRef CAS .E. Ruiz, S. Alvarez, J. Cano and V. Polo, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 164110 CrossRef .C. Adamo, V. Barone, A. Bencini, R. Broer, M. Filatov, N. M. Harrison, F. Illas, J. P. Malrieu and I. D. R. Moreira, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 107101 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Lewin, D. E. Heppner and C. J. Cramer, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 12, 1221 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, A. Kinal, M. Wloch, P. Piecuch and L. Gagliardi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 11557 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, M. Wloch, P. Piecuch, C. Puzzarini and L. Gagliardi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 1991 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer and W. B. Tolman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 601 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Huber, M. Z. Ertem, F. Aquilante, L. Gagliardi, W. B. Tolman and C. J. Cramer, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4886 CrossRef CAS .P. Å. Malmqvist, K. Pierloot, A. R. Moughal Shahi, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 204109 CrossRef .P. Rivero, I. D. R. Moreira, F. Illas and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 184110 CrossRef .A. Roth, J. Becher, C. Herrmann, H. Gorls, G. Vaughan, M. Reiher, D. Klemm and W. Plass, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 10066 CrossRef CAS .N. Marom and L. Kronik, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 95, 165 CrossRef CAS .E. R. Batista and R. L. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7224 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang and M. H. Baik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13222 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang and M. H. Baik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7476 CrossRef CAS .T. R. Weaver, T. J. Meyer, S. A. Adeyemi, G. M. Brown, R. P. Eckberg, W. E. Hatfield, E. C. Johnson, R. W. Murray and D. Untereker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 3039 CrossRef CAS .K. Pierloot and S. Vancoillie, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 034104 CrossRef .M. Swart, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 2057 CrossRef CAS .C. Rong, S. Lian, D. Yin, B. Shen, A. Zhong, L. Bartolotti and S. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 174102 CrossRef .J. L. Carreon-Macedo and J. N. Harvey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 93 RSC .J. Song, E. Apr·, Y. G. Khait, M. R. Hoffmann and K. Kowalski, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 277 CrossRef CAS .F. Neese, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2006, 100, 716 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Matxain, E. Rezabal, X. Lopez, J. M. Ugalde and L. Gagliardi, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 194315 CrossRef .C. Herrmann, L. Yu and M. Reiher, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1223 CrossRef CAS .C. Herrmann, M. Reiher and B. A. Hess, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 034102 CrossRef .A. E. Clark and E. R. Davidson, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 7382 CrossRef .I. Mayer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 440, 357 CrossRef CAS .O. Hubner, K. Fink and W. Klopper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1911 RSC .M. Podewitz, C. Herrmann, A. Malassa, M. Westerhausen and M. Reiher, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 451, 301 CrossRef CAS .P. H. Dederichs, S. Blügel, R. Zeller and H. Akai, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 2512 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wu and T. V. Voorhis, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2005, 72, 024502 CrossRef .Q. Wu, C.-L. Cheng and T. Van Voorhis, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 164119 CrossRef .S. Difley, D. Beljonne and T. Van Voorhis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3420 CrossRef CAS .I. Rudra, Q. Wu and T. Van Voorhis, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10539 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Schmidt, N. Shenvi and J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114110 CrossRef CAS .H. Fliegl, K. Fink, W. Klopper, C. E. Anson, A. K. Powell and R. Clerac, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3900 RSC .I. Ciofini, F. Illas and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3811 CrossRef CAS .M. Filatov and S. Shaik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 304, 429 CrossRef CAS .F. Illas, I. D. R. Moreira, J. M. Bofill and M. Filatov, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 116, 587 CrossRef CAS .A. Kazaryan, J. Heuver and M. Filatov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 12980 CrossRef CAS .I. d. P. R. Moreira, R. Costa, M. Filatov and F. Illas, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 764 CrossRef .A. J. Pérez-Jiménez, J. M. Pérez-Jordá, I. d. P. R. Moreira and F. Illas, J. Comput. Chem., 2007, 28, 2559 CrossRef CAS .T. Ukai, K. Nakata, S. Yamanaka, T. Takada and K. Yamaguchi, Mol. Phys., 2007, 105, 2667 CrossRef CAS .Y. H. Shao, M. Head-Gordon and A. I. Krylov, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 4807 CrossRef CAS .A. de la Lande, V. Moliner and O. Parisel, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 035102 CrossRef .Y. M. Rhee and M. Head-Gordon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3878 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang and T. Ziegler, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 12191 CrossRef CAS .F. Wang and T. Ziegler, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 074109 CrossRef .F. Wang and T. Ziegler, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2006, 106, 2545 CrossRef CAS .O. Vahtras and Z. Rinkevicius, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 114101 CrossRef .A. V. Soldatova, J. Kim, A. Rosa, G. Ricciardi, M. E. Kenney and M. A. J. Rodgers, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4275 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Peralta and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 194107 CrossRef .T. M. Alam, J. S. Clawson, F. o. Bonhomme, S. G. Thoma, M. A. Rodriguez, S. Zheng and J. Autschbach, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2205 CrossRef CAS .J. Autschbach and S. Zheng, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2008, 46, S45 .J. M. Morbec and K. Capelle, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2008, 108, 2433 CrossRef CAS .P. Hrobárik, O. L. Malkina, V. G. Malkin and M. Kaupp, Chem. Phys., 2009, 356, 229 CrossRef CAS .E. Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52, 997 CrossRef CAS .R. Bauernschmitt and R. Ahlrichs, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 256, 454 CrossRef CAS .R. Van Leeuwen, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 2001, 15, 1969 CrossRef .K. Burke, M. Petersilka and E. K. U. Gross, in Recent Advances in Density Functional Methods, ed. P. Fantucci and A. Bencini, World Scientific, Singapore,  2002, vol. 3, p. 67 Search PubMed .R. J. Deeth, Faraday Discuss., 2003, 124, 379 RSC .M. A. L. Marques and E. K. U. Gross, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 427 CrossRef CAS .A. Dreuw and M. Head-Gordon, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 4009 CrossRef CAS .P. Elliot, F. Furche and K. Burke, Rev. Comput. Chem., 2009, 26, 91 Search PubMed .N. C. Handy, Mol. Phys., 2004, 102, 2399 CrossRef CAS .V. Arcisauskaite, J. Kongsted, T. Hansen and K. V. Mikkelsen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 470, 285 CrossRef CAS .L. Salassa, C. Garino, G. Salassa, R. Gobetto and C. Nervi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9590 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Guillemoles, V. Barone, L. Joubert and C. Adamo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 11354 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Lainé, I. Ciofini, P. Ochsenbein, E. Amouyal, C. Adamo and F. Bedioui, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3711 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Lainé, F. Loiseau, S. Campagna, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5538 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Charlot and A. Aukauloo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 11661 CrossRef CAS .M. Marcaccio, F. Paolucci, C. Fontanesi, G. Fioravanti and S. Zanarini, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2007, 360, 1154 CrossRef CAS .M. Abrahamsson, M. Jager, R. J. Kumar, T. Osterman, P. Persson, H. C. Becker, O. Johansson and L. Hammarstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15533 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Jackson, J. U. Rohde, M. S. Seo, C. V. Sastri, R. DeHont, A. Stubna, T. Ohta, T. Kitagawa, E. Munck, W. Nam and L. Que, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12394 CrossRef CAS .M. Hutin, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi, A. R. Moughal Shahi, G. Bernardinelli, R. Cerny and J. R. Nitschke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8774 CrossRef CAS .D. Schultz, F. Biaso, A. R. M. Shahi, M. Geoffroy, K. Rissanen, L. Gagliardi, C. J. Cramer and J. R. Nitschke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7180 CrossRef CAS .I. Bar-Nahum, A. K. Gupta, S. M. Huber, M. Z. Ertem, C. J. Cramer and W. B. Tolman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2812 CrossRef CAS .A. Vlček Jr and S. Záliš, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 258 CrossRef .J. Fan, M. Seth, J. Autschbach and T. Ziegler, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11656 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Peralta, M. Seth, H. Zhekova and T. Ziegler, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4185 CrossRef CAS .P. R. T. Schipper, O. V. Gritsenko, S. J. A. van Gisbergen and E. J. Baerends, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 1344 CrossRef CAS .A. Kunishita, J. Teraoka, J. D. Scanlon, T. Matsumoto, M. Suzuki, C. J. Cramer and S. Itoh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7248 CrossRef CAS .M. Stener, A. Nardelli, R. De Francesco and G. Fronzoni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11862 CrossRef CAS .M. Stener, A. Nardelli and G. Fronzoni, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 134307 CrossRef CAS .M. Stener, A. Nardelli and G. Fronzoni, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 462, 358 CrossRef CAS .M. Caricato, B. Mennucci, J. Tomasi, F. Ingrosso, R. Cammi, S. Corni and G. Scalmani, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 124520 CrossRef .G. Scalmani, M. J. Frisch, B. Mennucci, J. Tomasi, R. Cammi and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 094107 CrossRef .B. Mennucci, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 116, 31 CrossRef CAS .F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and A. Sgamellotti, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 1093 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Lundqvist, M. Nilsing, S. Lunell, B. Akermark and P. Persson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20513 CrossRef CAS .P. Persson, M. J. Lundqvist, R. Ernstorfer, W. A. Goddard and F. Willig, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 441 CrossRef CAS .M. Nilsing, P. Persson, S. Lunell and L. Ojamae, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12116 CrossRef CAS .F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3189 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Abuabara, L. G. C. Rego and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 18234 CrossRef CAS .A. Ramirez-Solis, R. Poteau and J. P. Daudey, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 034307 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Tenderholt, R. K. Szilagyi, R. H. Holm, K. O. Hodgson, B. Hedman and E. I. Solomon, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6382 CrossRef CAS .A. Decker, J. U. Rohde, E. J. Klinker, S. D. Wong, L. Que and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15983 CrossRef CAS .R. Sarangi, J. T. York, M. E. Helton, K. Fujisawa, K. D. Karlin, W. B. Tolman, K. O. Hodgson, B. Hedman and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 676 CrossRef CAS .R. Sarangi, S. DeBeer George, D. J. Rudd, R. K. Szilagyi, X. Ribas, C. Rovira, M. Almeida, K. O. Hodgson, B. Hedman and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2316 CrossRef CAS .M. Casarin, P. Finetti, A. Vittadini, F. Wang and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5270 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Kozimor, P. Yang, E. R. Batista, K. S. Boland, C. J. Burns, C. N. Christensen, D. L. Clark, S. D. Conradson, P. J. Hay, J. S. Lezama, R. L. Martin, D. E. Schwarz, M. P. Wilkerson and L. E. Wolfsberg, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 5365 CrossRef CAS .G. Fronzoni, M. Stener, P. Decleva, F. Wang, T. Ziegler, E. van Lenthe and E. J. Baerends, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 56 CrossRef CAS .G. Fronzoni, M. Stener, A. Reduce and P. Decleva, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 8467 CrossRef CAS .K. Ray, S. D. George, E. I. Solomon, K. Wieghardt and F. Neese, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 2783 CrossRef CAS .S. DeBeer George, T. Petrenko and F. Neese, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 12936 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Berry, S. D. George and F. Neese, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4361 RSC .J. F. Berry, E. Bill, E. Bothe, S. D. George, B. Mienert, F. Neese and K. Wieghardt, Science, 2006, 312, 1937 CrossRef CAS .R. Sarangi, S. I. Gorelsky, L. Basumallick, H. J. Hwang, R. C. Pratt, T. D. P. Stack, Y. Lu, K. O. Hodgson, B. Hedman and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3866 CrossRef CAS .C.-L. Cheng, Q. Wu and T. Van Voorhis, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 124112 CrossRef .A. T. B. Gilbert, N. A. Besley and P. M. W. Gill, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 13164 CrossRef CAS .A. Castro, M. A. L. Marques, A. H. Romero, M. J. T. Oliveira and A. Rubio, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 144110 CrossRef .X.-Y. Yang, Y.-C. Wang, Z.-Y. Geng and Z.-Y. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 430, 265 CrossRef CAS .S. Shaik, H. Hirao and D. Kumar, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 532 CrossRef CAS .K. Morokuma, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80, 2247 CrossRef CAS .N. Hebben, H.-J. Himmel, G. Eickerling, C. Herrmann, M. Reiher, V. Herz, M. Presnitz and W. Scherer, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 10078 CrossRef CAS .R. Herges and A. Papafilippopoulos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4671 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Alexander and T. J. Dines, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 146 CrossRef CAS .V. W. Jurgensen and K. Jalkanen, Phys. Biol., 2006, 3, S63 Search PubMed .S. Sinnecker and F. Neese, Top. Curr. Chem., 2007, 268, 47 CAS .C. Herrmann and M. Reiher, Top. Curr. Chem., 2007, 268, 85 CAS .H. Sato, T. Taniguchi, K. Monde, S.-I. Nishimura and A. Yamagishi, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 364 CrossRef CAS .S. Luber and M. Reiher, Chem. Phys., 2008, 346, 212 CrossRef CAS .B. B. Johnson and W. L. Peticolas, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1976, 27, 465 CrossRef CAS .A. Warshel, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng., 1977, 6, 273 Search PubMed .R. J. H. Clark and B. Stewart, Struct. Bonding, 1979, 36, 1 CAS .F. Neese, T. Petrenko, D. Ganyushin and G. Olbrich, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 288 CrossRef CAS .C. Herrmann, J. Neugebauer, M. Presselt, U. Uhlemann, M. Schmitt, S. Rau, J. Popp and M. Reiher, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6078 CrossRef CAS .T. Petrenko, K. Ray, K. E. Wieghardt and F. Neese, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4422 CrossRef CAS .B. V. Popp, J. E. Wendlandt, C. R. Landis and S. S. Stahl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 601 CrossRef CAS .V. V. Smirnov, D. W. Brinkley, M. P. Lanci, K. D. Karlin and J. P. Roth, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 251, 100 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Lanci and J. P. Roth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16006 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Roth and J. P. Klinman, in Isotope Effects in Chemistry and Biology, ed. A. Kohen and H.-H. Limbach, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2006, p. 645 Search PubMed .M. P. Lanci, V. V. Smirnov, C. J. Cramer, E. V. Gauchenova, J. Sundermeyer and J. P. Roth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14697 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Roth and C. J. Cramer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7802 CrossRef CAS .G. Brehm, M. Reiher, B. Le Guennic, M. Leibold, S. Schindler, F. W. Heinemann and S. Schneider, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2006, 37, 108 CrossRef CAS .P. Carbonniere, I. Ciofini, C. Adamo and C. Pouchan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 429, 52 CrossRef CAS .B. Insuasty, C. Atienza, C. Seoane, N. Martin, J. Garin, J. Orduna, R. Alcala and B. Villacampa, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 6986 CrossRef CAS .L. Fang, G. Yang, Y. Qiu and Z. Su, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 119, 329 CrossRef CAS .O. Rubio-Pons, Y. Luo and H. Agren, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 094310 CrossRef .T. Ziegler and J. Autschbach, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2695 CrossRef CAS .E. R. Davidson, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 351 CrossRef CAS .E. C. Sherer and C. J. Cramer, Organometallics, 2003, 22, 1682 CrossRef CAS .N. Barros, O. Eisenstein, L. Maron and T. D. Tilley, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 5699 CrossRef .N. Barros, O. Eisenstein and L. Maron, Dalton Trans., 2006, 3052 RSC .N. L. Woodrum and C. J. Cramer, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 68 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Lewin, N. L. Woodrum and C. J. Cramer, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 5906 CrossRef CAS .L. Perrin, O. Eisenstein and L. Maron, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 549 RSC .P. A. Hunt, Dalton Trans., 2007, 1743 RSC .V. L. Cruz, S. Martinez, J. Martinez-Salazar and J. Sancho, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 7413 CrossRef CAS .M. Zimmermann, F. Estler, E. Herdtweck, K. W. Tornroos and R. Anwander, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 6029 CrossRef CAS .N. Barros, O. Eisenstein, L. Maron and T. D. Tilley, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 2252 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Vastine and M. B. Hall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12068 CrossRef CAS .R. F. W. Bader, Chem. Rev., 1991, 91, 893 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Tredget, E. Clot and P. Mountford, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 3458 CrossRef CAS .J. Scott, H. Fan, B. F. Wicker, A. R. Fout, M.-H. Baik and D. J. Mindiola, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14438 CrossRef CAS .Y. Luo, J. Baldamus, O. Tardif and Z. Hou, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 4362 CrossRef CAS .M. Lein, J. Frunzke, A. Timoshkin and G. Frenking, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4155 CrossRef CAS .E. Urnezius, W. W. Brennessel, C. J. Cramer, J. E. Ellis and P. v. R. Schleyer, Science, 2002, 295, 832 CrossRef CAS .M. Lein, J. Frunzke and G. Frenking, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 2504 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Mercero, E. Formoso, J. M. Matxain, L. A. Eriksson and J. M. Ugalde, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4495 CrossRef CAS .N. Ochi, Y. Nakao, H. Sato and S. Sakaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8615 CrossRef CAS .X.-f. Sheng, G.-f. Zhao and L.-l. Zhi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17828 CrossRef CAS .J. Joubert, F. Delbecq, C. Thieuleux, M. Taoufik, F. Blanc, C. Coperet, J. Thivolle-Cazat, J.-M. Basset and P. Sautet, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 3329 CrossRef .S. K. Mandal, P. M. Gurubasavaraj, H. W. Roesky, G. Schwab, D. Stalke, R. B. Oswald and V. Dolle, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10158 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Lewin and C. J. Cramer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 12754 CrossRef CAS .T. Wondimagegn, D. Wang, A. Razavi and T. Ziegler, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 6434 CrossRef CAS .T. Wondimagegn, D. Wang, A. Razavi and T. Ziegler, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 1383 CrossRef CAS .F. Dong, S. Heinbuch, Y. Xie, J. J. Rocca, E. R. Bernstein, Z.-C. Wang, K. Deng and S.-G. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1932 CrossRef CAS .F. Dong, S. Heinbuch, Y. Xie, E. R. Bernstein, J. J. Rocca, Z.-C. Wang, X.-L. Ding and S.-G. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1057 CrossRef CAS .Y.-P. Ma, W. Xue, Z.-C. Wang, M.-F. Ge and S.-G. He, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3731 CrossRef CAS .L. Gracia, V. Polo, J. R. Sambrano and J. Andres, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 1808 CrossRef CAS .A. Sadoc, S. Messaoudi, E. Furet, R. Gautier, E. Le Fur, L. le Polles and J.-Y. Pivan, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4835 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Ooms, S. E. Bolte, J. J. Smee, B. Baruah, D. C. Crans and T. Polenova, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 9285 CrossRef CAS .L. L. G. Justino, M. L. Ramos, F. Nogueira, A. J. F. N. Sobral, C. F. G. C. Geraldes, M. Kaupp, H. D. Burrows, C. Fiolhais and V. M. S. Gil, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7317 CrossRef CAS .M. Michelini, I. Rivalta and E. Sicilia, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 395 CrossRef CAS .R. o. Arteaga-Müller, J. Sánchez-Nieves, J. Ramos, P. Royo and M. E. G. Mosquera, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 1417 CrossRef .A. E. Ashley, R. T. Cooper, G. G. Wildgoose, J. C. Green and D. O'Hare, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15662 CrossRef CAS .G. Balazs, F. G. N. Cloke, L. Gagliardi, J. C. Green, A. Harrison, P. B. Hitchcock, A. R. Moughal Shahi and O. T. Summerscales, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 2013 CrossRef CAS .F. Ferrante, L. Gagliardi, B. E. Bursten and A. P. Sattelberger, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 8476 CrossRef CAS .M. Brynda, L. Gagliardi, P. O. Widmark, P. P. Power and B. O. Roos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3804 CrossRef CAS .B. O. Roos, A. C. Borin and L. Gagliardi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1469 CrossRef CAS .I. Infante, L. Gagliardi and G. E. Scuseria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7459 CrossRef CAS .G. La Macchia, L. Gagliardi, P. P. Power and M. Brynda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5104 CrossRef CAS .M. Brynda, L. Gagliardi and B. O. Roos, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 471, 1 CrossRef CAS .K. Andersson, B. O. Roos, P. A. Malmqvist and P. O. Widmark, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 230, 391 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Bauschlicher and H. Partridge, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 231, 277 CrossRef CAS .H. Stoll and H. J. Werner, Mol. Phys., 1996, 88, 793 CrossRef CAS .K. E. Edgecombe and A. D. Becke, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 244, 427 CrossRef CAS .A. Poater, X. Solans-Monfort, E. Clot, C. Coperet and O. Eisenstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8207 CrossRef CAS .R. Haunschild and G. Frenking, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 737 CrossRef CAS .G. F. Caramori and G. Frenking, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 351 CrossRef CAS .L. Yan, X. López, J. J. Carbó, R. Sniatynsky, D. C. Duncan and J. M. Poblet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8223 CrossRef CAS .S. Schenk, B. Le Guennic, B. Kirchner and M. Reiher, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3634 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Khoroshun, D. G. Musaev and K. Morokuma, Mol. Phys., 2002, 100, 523 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Cao, Z. H. Zhou, H. L. Wan and Q. N. Zhang, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2005, 103, 344 CrossRef CAS .M. Reiher, B. Le Guennic and B. Kirchner, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 9640 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Graham, G. J. O. Beran, M. Head-Gordon, G. Christian, R. Stranger and B. F. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 6762 CrossRef CAS .M. Holscher and W. Leitner, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 4407 CrossRef .F. Studt and F. Tuczek, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1278 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Khoroshun, D. G. Musaev and K. Morokuma, J. Comput. Chem., 2007, 28, 423 CrossRef CAS .A. Magistrato, A. Robertazzi and P. Carloni, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 1708 CrossRef CAS .G. Christian, R. Stranger and B. F. Yates, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 646 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Schrock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5512 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Stephan, C. Sivasankar, F. Studt and F. Tuczek, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 644 CrossRef CAS .I. Dance, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 936 CrossRef CAS .T. Leyssens, D. Peeters, A. G. Orpen and J. N. Harvey, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 1424 RSC .P. Geerlings, F. D. Proft and W. Langenaeker, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1793 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Matxain, M. Piris, E. Formoso, J. M. Mercero, X. Lopez and J. M. Ugalde, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 2096 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Matxain, E. Formoso, J. M. Mercero, M. Piris, X. Lopez and J. M. Ugalde, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8547 CrossRef CAS .K. Yamaguchi, S. Yamanaka, H. Isobe, M. Shoji, K. Koizumi, Y. Kitagawa, T. Kawakami and M. Okumura, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 2216 CrossRef CAS .D. Balcells, C. Raynaud, R. H. Crabtree and O. Eisenstein, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10090 CrossRef CAS .G. Balazs, F. G. N. Cloke, A. Harrison, P. B. Hitchcock, J. Green and O. T. Summerscales, Chem. Commun., 2007, 873 RSC .A. Krapp, M. Lein and G. Frenking, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 313 CrossRef CAS .H.-M. Jia, D.-C. Fang, Y. Feng, J.-Y. Zhang, W.-B. Fan and L. Zhu, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 121, 271 CrossRef CAS .R. Haunschild and G. Frenking, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 3627 CrossRef CAS .A. Ghosh, J. Almlöf and L. Que, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5576 CrossRef CAS .K. Yoshizawa, T. Ohta, T. Yamabe and R. Hoffmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 12311 CrossRef CAS .E. I. Solomon, T. C. Brunold, M. I. Davis, J. N. Kemsley, S. K. Lee, N. Lehnert, F. Neese, A. J. Skulan, Y. S. Yang and J. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 235 CrossRef CAS .E. I. Solomon, A. Decker and N. Lehnert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 3589 CrossRef CAS .A. Ghosh, E. Tangen, H. Ryeng and P. R. Taylor, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 4555 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Abu-Omar, A. Loaiza and N. Hontzeas, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2227 CrossRef CAS .A. Decker and E. I. Solomon, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 152 CrossRef CAS .S. V. Kryatov, E. V. Rybak-Akimova and S. Schindler, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2175 CrossRef CAS .A. Bassan, T. Borowski, C. J. Schofield and P. E. M. Siegbahn, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 8835 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Park, J. Lee, Y. Suh, J. Kim and W. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2630 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Brown, M. L. Neidig, M. B. Neibergall, J. D. Lipscomb and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7427 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Harman and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15128 CrossRef CAS .W. Nam, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 522 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Neidig, C. D. Brown, K. M. Light, D. G. Fujimori, E. M. Nolan, J. C. Price, E. W. Barr, J. M. Bollinger, C. Krebs, C. T. Walsh and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14224 CrossRef CAS .M. Y. M. Pau, M. I. Davis, A. M. Orville, J. D. Lipscomb and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1944 CrossRef CAS .L. Que, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 493 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Bell, S. D. Wong, Y. M. Xiao, E. J. Klinker, A. L. Tenderholt, M. C. Smith, J. U. Rohde, L. Que, S. P. Cramer and E. I. Solomon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9071 CrossRef CAS .N. Muresan, C. C. Lu, M. Ghosh, J. C. Peters, M. Abe, L. M. Henling, T. Weyhermoller, E. Bill and K. Wieghardt, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4579 CrossRef CAS .M. Radón and K. Pierloot, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 11824 CrossRef CAS .N. Strickland and J. N. Harvey, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 841 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Mehn, S. D. Brown, T. K. Paine, W. W. Brennessel, C. J. Cramer, J. C. Peters and L. Que, Dalton Trans., 2006, 1347 RSC .S. Shaik, S. P. de Visser, F. Ogliaro, H. Schwarz and D. Schröder, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 556 CrossRef CAS .A. Altun, S. Shaik and W. Thiel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8978 CrossRef CAS .E. Derat, S. Shaik, C. Rovira, P. Vidossich and M. Alfonso-Prito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6346 CrossRef CAS .C. Hazan, D. Kumar, S. P. de Visser and S. Shaik, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 2966 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Hirao, W. Wu and S. Shaik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8168 CrossRef CAS .C. V. Sastri, J. Lee, K. Oh, Y. J. Lee, J. Lee, T. A. Jackson, K. Ray, H. Hirao, W. Shin, J. A. Halfen, J. Kim, L. Que, S. Shaik and W. Nam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 19181 CrossRef .S. Shaik, H. Hirao and D. Kumar, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2007, 24, 533 RSC .Y. Wang, D. Kumar, C. L. Yang, K. L. Han and S. Shaik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 7700 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, H. Hirao, E. Derat, I. Schlichting and S. Shaik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 9490 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, Y. Moreau, E. Derat and S. Shaik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1953 CrossRef CAS .K. B. Cho, H. Hirao, H. Chen, M. A. Carvajal, S. Cohen, E. Derat, W. Thiel and S. Shaik, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 13128 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Dhuri, M. S. Seo, Y. M. Lee, H. Hirao, Y. Wang, W. Nam and S. Shaik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3356 CrossRef CAS .H. Hirao, L. Que, W. Nam and S. Shaik, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1740 CrossRef CAS .S. Shaik, D. Kumar and S. P. de Visser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10128 CrossRef CAS .D. Q. Wang, J. J. Zheng, S. Shaik and W. Thiel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 5126 CrossRef CAS .K. B. Cho, M. A. Carvajal and S. Shaik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 336 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Klinker, S. Shaik, H. Hirao and L. Que, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1291 CrossRef CAS .N. M. Reilly, J. U. Reveles, G. E. Johnson, J. M. del Campo, S. N. Khanna, A. M. Koster and A. W. Castleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19086 CrossRef CAS .Q. Sun, Reddy M. Marquez, P. Jena, C. Gonzalez and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4159 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Schwartz, P.-p. Wei, K. H. Mitchell, B. G. Fox and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7098 CrossRef CAS .D. Rinaldo, D. M. Philipp, S. J. Lippard and R. A. Friesner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3135 CrossRef CAS .W. G. Han, T. Q. Liu, T. Lovell and L. Noodleman, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1292 CrossRef CAS .W. G. Han and L. Noodleman, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 2975 CrossRef CAS .W. G. Han and L. Noodleman, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 973 CrossRef CAS .M. Torrent, D. G. Musaev, H. Basch and K. Morokuma, J. Comput. Chem., 2002, 23, 59 CrossRef CAS .N. Mitic, M. D. Clay, L. Saleh, J. M. Bollinger and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9049 CrossRef CAS .W.-G. Han, T. Liu, T. Lovell and L. Noodleman, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 8533 CrossRef CAS .L. Noodleman and D. A. Case, Adv. Inorg. Chem., 1992, 38, 423 CrossRef CAS .L. Noodleman, C. Y. Peng, D. A. Case and J.-M. Mouesca, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1995, 144, 199 CrossRef CAS .E. Ruiz, A. Rodriguez-Fortea, J. Cano, S. Alvarez and P. Alemany, J. Comput. Chem., 2003, 24, 982 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Torres, T. Lovell, L. Noodleman and D. A. Case, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1923 CrossRef CAS .M. Shoji, K. Koizumi, Y. Kitagawa, S. Yamanaka, M. Okumura and K. Yamaguchi, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2007, 107, 609 CrossRef CAS .S. Niu and T. Ichiye, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 275 CrossRef CAS .L. Noodleman, T. Lovell, T. Liu, F. Himo and R. A. Torres, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 259 CrossRef CAS .G. Moritz, M. Reiher and B. A. Hess, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2005, 114, 76 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Jensen, B. L. Ooi and H. E. M. Christensen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 12829 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Li, Y. Gong, K. N. Fan and M. F. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 13641 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Baik and R. A. Friesner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 7407 CrossRef CAS .M. Uudsemaa and T. Tamm, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 9997 CrossRef CAS .J. Blumberger, L. Bernasconi, I. Tavernelli, R. Vuilleumier and M. Sprik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3928 CrossRef CAS .J. Blumberger and M. Sprik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6529 CrossRef CAS .J. Blumberger, Y. Tateyama and M. Sprik, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2005, 169, 256 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tateyama, J. Blumberger, M. Sprik and I. Tavernelli, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 234505 CrossRef .J. Blumberger and M. Sprik, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 115, 113 CrossRef CAS .P. Jaque, A. V. Marenich, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5783 CrossRef CAS .I. Chiorescu, D. V. Deubel, V. B. Arion and B. K. Keppler, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 499 CrossRef CAS .P. Winget, E. J. Weber, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 1231 RSC .E. V. Patterson, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 2025 CrossRef CAS .C. Fontanesi, R. Benassi, R. Giovanardi, M. Marcaccio, F. Paolucci and S. Roffia, J. Mol. Struct., 2002, 612, 277 CrossRef CAS .A. Lewis, J. A. Bumpus, D. G. Truhlar and C. J. Cramer, J. Chem. Ed., 2004, 81, 596 CrossRef CAS  ; erratum, 2007, 84, 934.P. Winget, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2004, 112, 217 CAS .S. Bhattacharyya, M. T. Stankovich, D. G. Truhlar and J. L. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5729 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Hodgson, M. Namazian, S. E. Bottle and M. L. Coote, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 13595 CrossRef CAS .J. Moens, P. Jaque, F. De Proft and P. Geerlings, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6023 CrossRef CAS .C. Kritayakornupong and S. Hannongbua, Chem. Phys., 2007, 332, 95 CrossRef CAS .C. Kritayakornupong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 441, 226 CrossRef CAS .S. Amira, D. Spångberg, V. Zelin, M. Probst and K. Hermansson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14235 CrossRef CAS .H. A. De Abreu, L. Guimaraes and H. A. Duarte, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 7713 CrossRef .D. Schröder, S. O. Souvi and E. Alikhani, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 470, 162 CrossRef CAS .J. Moens, G. Roos, P. Jaque, F. D. Proft and P. Geerlings, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 9331 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Leib, W. A. Donald, J. T. O'Brien, M. F. Bush and E. R. Williams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7716 CrossRef CAS .W. A. Donald, R. D. Leib, J. T. O’Brien, M. F. Bush and E. R. Williams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3371 CrossRef CAS .S. Trasatti, Pure Appl. Chem., 1986, 58, 955 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Tissandier, K. A. Cowen, W. Y. Feng, E. Gundlach, M. H. Cohen, A. D. Earhart, J. V. Coe and T. R. Tuttle, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7787 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Camaioni and C. A. Schwerdtfeger, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 10795 CrossRef .C. P. Kelly, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16066 CrossRef CAS .C. P. Kelly, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 408 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Fawcett, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9868 CrossRef CAS .A. Correa and L. Cavallo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13352 CrossRef CAS .C. E. Webster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7490 CrossRef .B. F. Straub, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 204 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 1967 CrossRef CAS .J. Mathew, N. Koga and C. H. Suresh, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 4666 CrossRef CAS .D. Benitez, E. Tkatchouk and W. A. Goddard, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6194 RSC .R. Tonner and G. Frenking, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1584 RSC .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 324 CrossRef CAS .D. Benitez, E. Tkatchouk and W. A. Goddard, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 2643 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Bielawski and R. H. Grubbs, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Tsipis, A. G. Orpen and J. N. Harvey, Dalton Trans., 2005, 2849 RSC .M. S. Sanford, J. A. Love and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6543 CrossRef CAS .S. Torker, D. Merki and P. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4808 CrossRef CAS .S. Grimme, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4460 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 5753 CrossRef CAS .I. C. Stewart, D. Benitez, D. J. O’Leary, E. Tkatchouk, M. W. Day, W. A. Goddard and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1931 CrossRef CAS .S. Pandian, I. H. Hillier, M. A. Vincent, N. A. Burton, I. W. Ashworth, D. J. Nelson, J. M. Percy and G. Rinaudo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 476, 37 CrossRef CAS .N. Sieffert and M. Bühl, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4622 CrossRef CAS .G. F. Caramori and G. Frenking, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 5815 CrossRef CAS .A. Krapp, K. K. Pandey and G. Frenking, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7596 CrossRef CAS .F. Liu, T. Cardolaccia, B. J. Hornstein, J. R. Schoonover and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2446 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Betley, Y. Surendranath, M. V. Childress, G. E. Alliger, R. Fu, C. C. Cummins and D. G. Nocera, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2008, 363, 1293 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Betley, Q. Wu, T. Van Voorhis and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1849 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Cady, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 444 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Cape and J. K. Hurst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 827 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17632 CrossRef CAS .Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Kgerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896 CrossRef CAS .N. A. Ketterer, H. J. Fan, K. J. Blackmore, X. F. Yang, J. W. Ziller, M. H. Baik and A. F. Heyduk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4364 CrossRef CAS .F. Liu, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, T. Cardolaccia, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1727 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Muckerman, D. E. Polyansky, T. Wada, K. Tanaka and E. Fujita, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1787 CrossRef CAS .E. Poverenov, I. Efremenko, A. I. Frenkel, Y. Ben-David, L. J. W. Shimon, G. Leitus, L. Konstantinovski, J. M. L. Martin and D. Milstein, Nature, 2008, 455, 1093 CrossRef CAS .Y. L. Pushkar, J. Yano, K. Sauer, A. Boussac and V. K. Yachandra, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 1879 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. R. Kollipara, L. Francas, E. Mas-Marza, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1824 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Bozoglian, S. Romain, M. Z. Ertem, T. K. Todorova, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. Rodriguez, I. Romero, J. Benet-Buchholz, X. Fontrodona, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc. DOI:10.1021/ja9036127 .W. M. C. Sameera and J. E. McGrady, Dalton Trans., 2008, 6141 RSC .J. M. Saveant, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2348 CrossRef CAS .C. Elschenbroich, J. Six, K. Harms, G. Frenking and G. Heydenrych, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3303 CrossRef CAS .J.-P. Zhang, X. Zhou, T. Liu, F.-Q. Bai, H.-X. Zhang and A.-C. Tang, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 121, 123 CrossRef CAS .J.-P. Zhang, X. Zhou, F.-Q. Bai, H.-X. Zhang and A.-C. Tang, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2009, 122, 31 CrossRef CAS .Vitamin B12 and B12-Proteins, ed. B. Kräutler, D. Arigoni and B. T. Golding, Wiley-VCH, Berlin,  1998 Search PubMed .G. Glod, W. Angst, C. Holliger and R. P. Schwarzenbach, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 253 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Follett, K. A. McNabb, A. A. Peterson, J. D. Scanlon, C. J. Cramer and K. McNeill, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 1645 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Pratt and W. A. van der Donk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 384 CrossRef CAS .R. L. Birke, Q. Huang, T. Spataru and D. K. Gosser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1922 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Jensen and U. Ryde, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 7539 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Jensen and U. Ryde, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 769 CrossRef CAS .P. Morschel, J. Janikowski, G. Hilt and G. Frenking, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8952 CrossRef .K.-W. Huang, J. H. Han, C. B. Musgrave and E. Fujita, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 508 CrossRef CAS .Z. Hu and R. J. Boyd, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9393 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Praetorius, D. P. Allen, R. Y. Wang, J. D. Webb, F. Grein, P. Kennepohl and C. M. Crudden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3724 CrossRef CAS .P. Mauleon, I. Alonso, M. R. Rivero and J. C. Carretero, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 9924 CrossRef CAS .P. Fristrup, M. Kreis, A. Palmelund, P.-O. Norrby and R. Madsen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5206 CrossRef CAS .P. Liu, P. H.-Y. Cheong, Z.-X. Yu, P. A. Wender and K. N. Houk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3939 CrossRef CAS .L. Orian, W.-J. v. Zeist and F. M. Bickelhaupt, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 4028 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhao, T. Cao, F. Li, X. Li, H. Jing, T. Yi and C. Huang, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 2077 CrossRef CAS .D. Di Censo, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, C. Klein, N. Evans, K. Kalyanasundaram, H. J. Bolink, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 980 CrossRef CAS .T. Liu, B.-H. Xia, X. Zhou, H.-X. Zhang, Q.-J. Pan and J.-S. Gao, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 143 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Lee, K.-M. Park, K. Yang and Y. Kang, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1030 CrossRef CAS .T. Liu, B.-H. Xia, X. Zhou, Q.-C. Zheng, Q.-J. Pan and H.-X. Zhang, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 121, 155 CrossRef CAS .M. Kimura and Y. Uozumi, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 707 CrossRef CAS .E. Calimano and T. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9226 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Ess, S. M. Bischof, J. Oxgaard, R. A. Periana and W. A. Goddard, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 6440 CrossRef CAS .R. Ghosh, T. J. Emge, K. Krogh-Jespersen and A. S. Goldman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11317 CrossRef CAS .N. Marom and L. Kronik, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 95, 159 CrossRef CAS .P. Calaminici, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 164317 CrossRef .G. L. Arvizu and P. Calaminici, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 194102 CrossRef .M. Shoji, K. Koizumi, T. Hamamoto, Y. Kitagawa, S. Yamanaka, M. Okumura and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 421, 483 CrossRef CAS .M. Shoji, Y. Kitagawa, T. Kawakami, S. Yamanaka, M. Okumura and K. Yamaguchi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 4020 CrossRef CAS .J. Conradie, T. Wondimagegn and A. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 1053 CrossRef CAS .S. Kozuch, C. Amatore, A. Jutand and S. Shaik, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 2319 CrossRef CAS .G. T. de Jong and F. M. Bickelhaupt, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1170 CrossRef CAS .F. Viñes, F. Illas and K. M. Neyman, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 8911 CrossRef CAS .F. Viñes, F. Illas and K. M. Neyman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7094 CrossRef CAS .Z. Shi, S. Wu and J. A. Szpunar, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2161 CrossRef CAS .A. Betz, L. Yu, M. Reiher, A.-C. Gaumont, P.-A. Jaffres and M. Gulea, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 2499 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Legault, Y. Garcia, C. A. Merlic and K. N. Houk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12664 CrossRef CAS .F. E. Hahn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1348 CrossRef CAS .F. E. Hahn and M. C. Jahnke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3122 CrossRef CAS .U. Radius and F. M. Bickelhaupt, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 3410 CrossRef CAS .T. Ziegler and A. Rauk, Inorg. Chem., 1979, 18, 1755 CrossRef CAS .L. Gagliardi and C. J. Cramer, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 9442 CrossRef CAS .H. Nakai, X. Hu, L. N. Zakharov, A. L. Rheingold and K. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 855 CrossRef CAS .H. Jacobsen, A. Correa, A. Poater, C. Costabile and L. Cavallo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 687 CrossRef CAS .U. Radius and F. M. Bickelhaupt, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 678 CrossRef CAS .R. Tonner, G. Heydenrych and G. Frenking, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 1555 CrossRef CAS .J. Harmer, C. Finazzo, R. Piskorski, S. Ebner, E. C. Duin, M. Goenrich, R. K. Thauer, M. Reiher, A. Schweiger, D. Hinderberger and B. Jaun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10907 CrossRef CAS .N. Yang, M. Reiher, M. Wang, J. Harmer and E. C. Duin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11028 CrossRef CAS .G. T. de Jong and F. M. Bickelhaupt, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 514 CrossRef CAS .R. Fazaeli, A. Ariafard, S. Jamshidi, E. S. Tabatabaie and K. A. Pishro, J. Organomet. Chem., 2007, 692, 3984 CrossRef CAS .A. Ariafard and B. F. Yates, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2075 CrossRef CAS .V. P. Ananikov, D. G. Musaev and K. Morokuma, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 5390 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Adams, B. Captain, C. Beddie and M. B. Hall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 986 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Rappé, C. J. Casewit, K. S. Colwell, W. A. Goddard and W. M. Skiff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10024 CrossRef CAS .J. Raber, C. B. Zhu and L. A. Eriksson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11006 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Deubel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1654 CrossRef CAS .J. K. C. Lau and D. V. Deubel, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 103 CrossRef CAS .T. Song and P. Hu, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 091101 CrossRef .Y. Mantri, S. J. Lippard and M. H. Baik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5023 CrossRef CAS .T. Matsui, Y. Shigeta and K. Hirao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 1176 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Oldfield, M. D. Hall and J. A. Platts, J. Med. Chem., 2007, 50, 5227 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Fiuza, A. M. Amado, M. P. M. Marques and L. A. E. Batista de Carvalho, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3253 CrossRef CAS .P. D. Dans, A. Crespo, D. o. A. Estrin and E. L. Coitiño, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 740 CrossRef CAS .T. van der Wijst, C. Fonseca Guerra, M. Swart, F. M. Bickelhaupt and B. Lippert, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 209 CrossRef .A. Datta, D. A. Hrovat and W. T. Borden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2726 CrossRef CAS .J. Espinosa-García, J. C. Corchado and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 9891 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Mishur, C. Zheng, T. M. Gilbert and R. N. Bose, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7972 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mo and E. Kaxiras, Small, 2007, 3, 1253 CrossRef CAS .A. Roldán, F. Viñes, F. Illas, J. Ricart and K. Neyman, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 565 CrossRef CAS .P. Calaminici, A. M. Koster and Z. Gomez-Sandoval, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 905 CrossRef CAS .K. Jug, B. Zimmermann, P. Calaminici and A. M. Koster, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 4497 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Leopold, J. Ho and W. C. Lineberger, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 86, 1715 CrossRef CAS .J. U. Reveles and A. M. Köster, J. Comput. Chem., 2004, 25, 1109 CrossRef CAS .F.-Q. Shi, X. Li, Y. Xia, L. Zhang and Z.-X. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15503 CrossRef CAS .H. Garcia, http://pubs.acs.org/JACSbeta/jvi/issue3.html. Accessed October 12, 2009.P. Pyykkö, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2005, 358, 4113 CrossRef .P. Pyykkö, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1967 RSC .F. Furche, R. Ahlrichs, P. Weis, C. Jacob, S. Gilb, T. Bierweiler and M. M. Kappes, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 6982 CrossRef CAS .H. Hakkinen, B. Yoon, U. Landman, X. Li, H.-J. Zhai and L.-S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 6168 CrossRef .X. Xing, B. Yoon, U. Landman and J. H. Parks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 165423 CrossRef .M. P. Johansson, A. Lechtken, D. Schooss, M. M. Kappes and F. Furche, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2008, 77, 053202 CrossRef .V. N. Staroverov, G. E. Scuseria, J. Tao and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075102 CrossRef .R. M. Olson, S. Varganov, M. S. Gordon, H. Metiu, S. Chretien, P. Piecuch, K. Kowalski, S. A. Kucharski and M. Musial, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1049 CrossRef CAS .M. Mantina, R. Valero and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 064706 CrossRef .L. Ferrighi, B. Hammer and G. K. H. Madsen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10605 CrossRef CAS .L. Xiao and L. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 392, 452 CrossRef CAS .L. Barrio, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, J. M. Campos-Martin and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 164715 CrossRef CAS .B. Yoon, P. Koskinen, B. Huber, O. Kostko, B. v. Issendorff, H. Häkkinen, M. Moseler and U. Landman, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 157 CrossRef CAS .E. S. Kryachko and F. Remacle, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2007, 107, 2922 CrossRef CAS .M. Sterrer, T. Risse, U. M. Pozzoni, L. Giordano, M. Heyde, H.-P. Rust, G. Pacchioni and H.-J. Freund, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 096107 CrossRef .S. Bulusu, X. Li, L.-S. Wang and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4190 CrossRef CAS .W. Fa and J. Dong, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 114310 CrossRef .A. Lechtken, D. Schooss, J. R. Stairs, M. N. Blom, F. Furche, N. Morgner, O. Kostko, B. v. Issendorff and M. M. Kappes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2944 CrossRef CAS .X. Gu, S. Bulusu, X. Li, X. C. Zeng, J. Li, X. G. Gong and L.-S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8228 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, X. Li, H.-J. Zhai and L.-S. Wang, Science, 2003, 299, 864 CrossRef CAS .S. Bulusu, X. Li, L.-S. Wang and X. C. Zeng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 8326 CrossRef CAS .W. Huang, S. Bulusu, R. Pal, X. C. Zeng and L.-S. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1225 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Zubarev and A. I. Boldyrev, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 866 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Torres, E. M. Fernández and L. C. Balbás, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6678 CrossRef CAS .A. Prestianni, A. Martorana, F. Labat, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12240 CrossRef CAS .A. Prestianni, A. Martorana, I. Ciofini, F. Labat and C. Adamo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18061 CrossRef CAS .A. Prestianni, A. Martorana, F. Labat, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, THEOCHEM, 2009, 903, 34 CrossRef CAS .S. Chretien, M. S. Gordon and H. Metiu, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 3756 CrossRef CAS .S. Chretien, M. S. Gordon and H. Metiu, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 9931 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Li, A. W. Jasper and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14899 CrossRef CAS .J. Botticelli, R. Fournier and M. Zhang, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 583 CrossRef CAS .S. Chretien and H. Metiu, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 084704 CrossRef .M. Nolan, V. S. Verdugo and H. Metiu, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 2734 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Kim, H. M. Lee, R. G. S. Pala, V. Shapovalov and H. Metiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12398 CrossRef CAS .N. Lopez, T. V. W. Janssens, B. S. Clausen, Y. Xu, M. Mavrikakis, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2004, 223, 232 CrossRef CAS ; T. Janssens, B. Clausen, B. Hvolbæk, H. Falsig, C. Christensen, T. Bligaard and J. Nørskov, Top. Catal., 2007, 44, 15 CrossRef CAS .Y. Chen, P. Hu, M.-H. Lee and H. Wang, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 1736 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Rusakov, E. Rykova, G. E. Scuseria and A. Zaitsevskii, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 164322 CrossRef .J. S. Golightly, L. Gao, A. W. Castleman, D. E. Bergeron, J. W. Hudgens, R. J. Magyar and C. A. Gonzalez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14625 CrossRef CAS .N. R. M. Crawford, C. Schrodt, A. Rothenberger, W. Shi and R. Ahlrichs, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 319 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, G. Galli and F. o. Gygi, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1896 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Lewis and W. B. Tolman, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 1047 CrossRef CAS .S. Itoh, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 115 CrossRef CAS .M. Rolff and F. Tuczek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2344 CrossRef CAS .B. F. Gherman and C. J. Cramer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 723 CrossRef CAS .T. Punniyamurthy, S. Velusamy and J. Iqbal, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2329 CrossRef CAS .B. Isabel, M. A. Carrondo and F. L. Peter, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 11, 539 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Klinman, J. Biol. Chem., 2006, 281, 3013 CAS .J. M. Bollinger and C. Krebs, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2007, 11, 151 CrossRef .M. Güell, J. M. Luis, L. Rodriguez-Santiago, M. Sodupe and M. Solà, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1308 CAS .J.-y. Hasegawa, K. Pierloot and B. O. Roos, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 335, 503 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, J. R. Gour, A. Kinal, M. Wtoch, P. Piecuch, A. R. Moughal Shahi and L. Gagliardi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3754 CrossRef CAS .P. Piecuch and M. Włoch, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 224105 CrossRef .P. Piecuch, M. Włoch, J. R. Gour and A. Kinal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 467 CrossRef CAS .M. Włoch, M. Lodriguito, P. Piecuch and J. R. Gour, Mol. Phys., 2006, 104, 2149 CrossRef CAS .M. Włoch, J. R. Gour and P. Piecuch, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 11359 CrossRef CAS .K. Andersson, P.-Å. Malmqvist, B. O. Roos, A. J. Sadlej and K. Wolinski, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 5483 CrossRef CAS .M. Schatz, V. Raab, S. P. Foxon, G. Brehm, S. Schneider, M. Reiher, M. C. Holthausen, J. Sundermeyer and S. Schindler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4360 CrossRef CAS .C. Wurtele, E. Gaoutchenova, K. Harms, M. C. Holthausen, J. Sundermeyer and S. Schindler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3867 CrossRef .A. De La Lande, H. Gerard and O. Parisel, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2008, 108, 1898 CrossRef CAS .B. F. Gherman, D. E. Heppner, W. B. Tolman and C. J. Cramer, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 11, 197 CrossRef CAS .N. W. Aboelella, B. F. Gherman, L. M. R. Hill, J. T. York, N. Holm, V. G. Young, C. J. Cramer and W. B. Tolman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3445 CrossRef CAS .B. F. Gherman, W. B. Tolman and C. J. Cramer, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1950 CrossRef CAS .L. M. R. Hill, B. F. Gherman, N. W. Aboelella, C. J. Cramer and W. B. Tolman, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4944 RSC .D. E. Heppner, B. F. Gherman, W. B. Tolman and C. J. Cramer, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4773 RSC .S. Hong, S. M. Huber, L. Gagliardi, C. J. Cramer and W. B. Tolman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14190 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Huber, A. R. Moughal Shahi, F. Aquilante, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, J. Chem. Theory Comput. DOI:10.1021/ct900282m .P. Comba, S. Knoppe, B. Martin, G. Rajaraman, C. Rolli, B. Shapiro and T. Stork, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 344 CrossRef CAS .K. Yoshizawa and Y. Shiota, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9873 CrossRef CAS .P. Comba, C. L. Lang, C. L. de Laorden, A. Muruganantham, G. Rajaraman, H. Wadepold and M. Zajaczkowski, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5313 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer, B. A. Smith and W. B. Tolman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 11283 CrossRef CAS .M. Flock and K. Pierloot, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 95 CrossRef CAS .O. Sander, A. Henss, C. Nather, C. Wurtele, M. C. Holthausen, S. Schindler and F. Tuczek, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9714 CrossRef CAS .T. Osako, S. Nagatomo, T. Kitagawa, C. J. Cramer and S. Itoh, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 10, 581 CrossRef CAS .W. Ghattas, M. Giorgi, Y. Mekmouche, T. Tanaka, A. Rockenbauer, M. Reglier, Y. Hitomi and A. J. Simaan, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4627 CrossRef CAS .A. Kunishita, J. D. Scanlon, H. Ishimaru, K. Honda, T. Ogura, M. Suzuki, C. J. Cramer and S. Itoh, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 8222 CrossRef CAS .G. Periyasamy, M. Sundararajan, I. H. Hillier, N. A. Burton and J. J. W. McDouall, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2498 RSC .J. P. Holland, P. J. Barnard, D. Collison, J. R. Dilworth, R. Edge, J. C. Green, J. M. Heslop, E. J. L. McInnes, C. G. Salzmann and A. L. Thompson, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3549 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Nazmutdinov, N. V. Roznyatovskaya, D. V. Glukhov, I. Manyurov, V. M. Mazin, G. A. Tsirlina and M. Probst, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6659 CrossRef CAS .J. U. Reveles, P. Calaminici, M. R. Beltran, A. M. Koster and S. N. Khanna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15565 CrossRef CAS .P. H.-Y. Cheong, P. Morganelli, M. R. Luzung, K. N. Houk and F. D. Toste, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4517 CrossRef CAS .E. Soriano and J. Marco-Contelles, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1026 CrossRef CAS .M. Mantina and D. G. Truhlar,  2009, unpublished calculations.J. Carrasco, F. Illas and S. T. Bromley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 235502 CrossRef .T. Cadenbach, T. Bollermann, C. Gemel, I. Fernandez, M. von Hopffgarten, G. Frenking and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9150 CrossRef CAS .L. Bernasconi, E. J. Baerends and M. Sprik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11444 CrossRef CAS .Y. Dai and E. Blaisten-Barojas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 11052 CrossRef CAS .K. Iokibe, K. Azumi and H. Tachikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13510 CrossRef CAS .H. Tachikawa, K. Iokibe, K. Azumi and H. Kawabata, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3978 RSC .H. J. Flad, F. Schautz, Y. X. Wang, M. Dolg and A. Savin, Eur. Phys. J. D, 1999, 6, 243 CrossRef CAS .A. Suwattanamala, A. Magalhães and J. Gomes, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 431 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lu, L. Wen, Z. Ni, Y. Li, H. Zhu and Q. Meng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 268 CrossRef CAS .P. Fernández, A. Sousa-Pedrares, J. Romero, J. A. García-Vázquez, A. Sousa and P. Pérez-Lourido, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 2121 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhu, M. Brynda, R. J. Wright, R. C. Fischer, W. A. Merrill, E. Rivard, R. Wolf, J. C. Fettinger, M. M. Olmstead and P. P. Power, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10847 CrossRef CAS .J. G. Wiederhold, C. J. Cramer, K. Daniel, I. Infante, B. Bourdon and R. Kretzschmar, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2009, 73, A1438 .C. M. Rignanese, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, R357 CrossRef .W. E. Pickett, Comments Solid State Phys., 1985, 12, 1 Search PubMed .K. B. Hathaway, H. J. F. Jansen and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 31, 7603 CrossRef .A. García, C. Elsässer, J. Zhu, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 9829 CrossRef CAS .S. Kurth, J. P. Perdew and P. Blaha, Int. J. Quantum
Chem., 1999, 75, 889 CrossRef CAS .B. Grabowski, T. Hickel and J. Neugebauer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 024309 CrossRef .J. Heyd, J. E. Peralta, G. E. Scuseria and R. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 174101 CrossRef .S. Piskunov, E. Heifets, R. I. Eglitis and G. Borstel, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2004, 29, 165 CrossRef CAS .P. Baettig, C. F. Schelle, R. LeSar, U. V. Waghmare and N. A. Spaldin, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1376 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Hosseini, T. Movlasooy and A. Kompany, Phys. B, 2007, 391, 316 CAS .C. M. S. Gannarelli, D. Alfé and M. J. Gillan, Phys. Earth Planet. Interiors, 2005, 152, 67 CrossRef CAS .D. F. Johnson and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 104703 CrossRef .T. Sun, K. Umemoto, Z. Wu, J.-C. Zheng and R. M. Wentzcovitch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 024304 CrossRef .Z. H. Li, D. Bhatt, N. E. Schultz, J. I. Siepmann and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16227 CrossRef CAS .A. F. Izmaylov and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 034101 CrossRef ; E. N. Brothers, A. F. Izmaylov, J. O. Normand, V. Barone and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 11102 CrossRef .V. Fiorentini and A. Baldereschi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 17196 CrossRef CAS .K. Xiong, J. Robertson and S. J. Clark, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 083701 CrossRef .N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev., 1965, 137, A1441 CrossRef .E. I. Isaev, N. V. Skorodumova, R. Ahuja, Y. K. Vekilov and B. Johansson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 9168 CrossRef CAS .K. Umemoto, R. M. Wentzcovitch, Y. G. Yu and R. Requist, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2008, 276, 198 CrossRef CAS .J. Uddin and G. E. Scuseria, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 245115 CrossRef .Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 074103 CrossRef .A. Filippetti, N. A. Spaldin and S. Sanvito, Chem. Phys., 2005, 309, 59 CrossRef CAS .M. Peressi, A. Debernardi, S. Picozzi, F. Antoniella and A. Continenza, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2005, 33, 125 CrossRef CAS .C. Tablero, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 035213 CrossRef .P. Boguslawski and J. Bernholc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 115208 CrossRef .T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, J. Masek, J. Kucera and A. H. MacDonald, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2006, 78, 809 CrossRef CAS .C. Tablero, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 164703 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Cui, B. Delley, A. J. Freeman and C. Stampfl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 045201 CrossRef .J. A. Chan, J. Z. Liu, H. Raebiger, S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 184109 CrossRef .A. Filippetti and V. Fiorentini, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2007, 310, 1648 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25863 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 446–447, 267 CrossRef CAS .P. Romaniello and P. L. de Boeij, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 164303 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Berger, P. Romaniello, R. van Leeuwen and P. L. de Boeij, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 245117 CrossRef .C. Leighton, M. Manno, A. Cady, J. W. Freeland, L. Wang, K. Umemoto, R. M. Wentzcovitch, T. Chen, C. L. Chien, P. L. Kuhns, M. J. R. Hoch, A. P. Reyes, W. G. Moulton, E. D. Dahlberg, J. Checkelsky and J. Eckert, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 315219 CrossRef .T. Kawakami, Y. Tsujimoto, H. Kageyama, X.-Q. Chen, C. L. Fu, C. Tassel, A. Kitada, S. Suto, K. Hirama, Y. Sekiya, Y. Makino, T. Okada, T. Yagi, N. Hayashi, K. Yoshimura, S. Nasu, R. Podloucky and M. Takano, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 371 Search PubMed .M.-H. Whangbo and J. Köhler, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 351 Search PubMed .R. J. Magyar, V. Mujica, M. Marquez and C. Gonzalez, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 144421 CrossRef .C. Gonzalez, Y. Simon-Manso, M. Marquez and V. Mujica, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 687 CrossRef CAS .H. Wende, M. Bernien, J. Luo, C. Sorg, N. Ponpandian, J. Kurde, J. Miguel, M. Piantek, X. Xu, P. Eckhold, W. Kuch, K. Baberschke, P. M. Panchmatia, B. Sanyal, P. M. Oppeneer and O. Eriksson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 516 CrossRef CAS .A. Bilic, J. R. Reimers, N. S. Hush, R. C. Hoft and M. J. Ford, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 1093 CrossRef CAS .P. F. Cafe, A. G. Larsen, W. Yang, A. Bilic, I. M. Blake, M. J. Crossley, J. Zhang, H. Wackerbarth, J. Ulstrup and J. R. Reimers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17285 CrossRef CAS .W. Ma and Y. Fang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2006, 8, 761 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Neyman, C. Inntam, V. A. Nasluzov, R. Kosarev and N. Rösch, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 78, 823 CrossRef .C. Inntam, L. V. Moskaleva, K. M. Neyman, V. A. Nasluzov and N. Rösch, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 82, 181 CrossRef CAS .C. Inntam, L. V. Moskaleva, I. V. Yudanov, K. M. Neyman and N. Rösch, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 417, 515 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Neyman, C. Inntam, L. V. Moskaleva and N. Rösch, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 277 CrossRef .S. I. Bosko, L. V. Moskaleva, A. V. Matveev and N. Rösch, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 6870 CrossRef CAS .E. Florez, F. Mondragón, T. N. Truong and P. Fuentealba, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 656 CrossRef CAS .G. Bacaro and A. Fortunelli, New J. Phys., 2007, 9, 22 CrossRef .V. Bonacic-Koutecky, C. Bürgel, L. Kronik, A. E. Kuznetsov and R. Mintric, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2007, 45, 471 CrossRef CAS .M. Sterrer, T. Risse, L. Giordano, M. Heyde, N. Nilius, H.-P. Rust, G. Pacchioni and H.-J. Freund, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8703 CrossRef CAS .R. Caballero, C. Quintanar, A. M. Köster, S. N. Khanna and J. U. Reveles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14919 CrossRef CAS .E. Florez, F. Mondragón, P. Fuentealba and F. Illas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 075426 CrossRef .B. Hinnemann and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7105 CrossRef CAS .A. Michaelides, K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2005, 23, 1487 CrossRef CAS .J. L. C. Fajín, M. N. l. D. S. Cordeiro and J. R. B. Gomes, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 424 CrossRef CAS .C. Stampfl, A. Soon, S. Piccinin, H. Shi and H. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 184021 CrossRef .B. Akdim, S. Hussain and R. Pachter, in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Computational Science—ICCS 2008, Part II), Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2008, vol. 5102, p. 353 Search PubMed .H. Zhang, A. Soon, B. Delley and C. Stampfl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 045436 CrossRef .P. Kaghazchi, F. C. Simeone, K. A. Suliman, L. A. Kibler and T. Jacob, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 69 RSC .Y. Han, C.-j. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7463 CrossRef CAS .Y. Han, C.-j. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16397 CrossRef CAS .S. Xia, G. Pan, Z.-L. Cai, Y. Wang and J. R. Reimers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10427 CrossRef .V. A. Ranea, A. Michaelides, R. Ramírez, P. L. de Andres, J. A. Vergés and D. A. King, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 136104 CrossRef CAS .L. Xu, G. Henkelman, C. T. Campbell and H. Jónsson, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 1351 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Feibelman, B. Hammer, J. K. Nørskov, F. Wagner, M. Scheffler, R. Stumpf, R. Watwe and J. Dumesic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4018 CrossRef .K. Doll, Surf. Sci., 2004, 573, 464 CrossRef CAS .M. Neef and K. Doll, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 1085 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, S. de Gironcoli, N. S. Hush and J. R. Reimers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10402 CrossRef CAS .I. Dabo, A. Wieckowski and N. Marzari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11045 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhang, Z.-P. Liu, S. M. Driver, S. J. Pratt, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 266102 CrossRef .J. M. H. Lo and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3679 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, Surf. Sci., 2004, 570, 167 CrossRef CAS .J. M. H. Lo and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3692 CrossRef CAS .J. M. H. Lo and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13149 CrossRef CAS .A. Valcárcel, A. Clotet, J. M. Ricart and F. Illas, Chem. Phys., 2005, 309, 33 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, N. S. Hush and J. R. Reimers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10878 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, N. S. Hush and J. R. Reimers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14532 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, N. S. Hush and J. R. Reimers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 233416 CrossRef .S. Y. Quek, M. M. Biener, J. Biener, J. Bhattacharjee, C. M. Friend, U. V. Waghmare and E. Kaxiras, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15663 CrossRef CAS .W. Gao, T. A. Baker, L. Zhou, D. S. Pinnaduwage, E. Kaxiras and C. M. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3560 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Baker, C. M. Friend and E. Kaxiras, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 104702 CrossRef .L. D. Marks, A. N. Chiaramonti, F. Tran and P. Blaha, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 2179 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mao, J. Yuan and J. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 115209 CrossRef .N. Kuganathan and J. C. Green, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2432 RSC .E. L. Sceats and J. C. Green, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245441 CrossRef .S. Y. Quek, M. M. Biener, J. Biener, C. M. Friend and E. Kaxiras, Surf. Sci., 2005, 577, L71 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, Surf. Sci., 2005, 583, 60 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20469 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22213 CrossRef CAS .M. J. S. Spencer, I. K. Snook and I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10965 CrossRef CAS .M. J. S. Spencer, I. K. Snook and I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9604 CrossRef CAS .M. J. S. Spencer, I. K. Snook and I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10204 CrossRef CAS .M. J. S. Spencer, I. K. Snook and I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 956 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Nelson, M. J. S. Spencer, I. K. Snook and I. Yarovsky, Surf. Sci., 2005, 590, 63 CrossRef CAS .N. Todorova, M. J. S. Spencer and I. Yarovsky, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 665 CrossRef CAS .D. F. Johnson, D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 699 CrossRef CAS .M. J. S. Spencer and I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16372 CrossRef CAS .M. J. S. Spencer, N. Todorova and I. Yarovsky, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 1547 CAS .Y. Kurzweil and R. Baer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 075413 CrossRef .R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Zhu, G. Dutton, D. P. Quinn, C. D. Lindstrom, N. E. Schultz and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 241401 CrossRef .B. Li, J. Zhao, K. Onda, K. D. Jordan, J. Yang and H. Petek, Science, 2006, 311, 1436 CrossRef CAS .M. Feng, J. Zhao and H. Petek, Science, 2008, 320, 359 CrossRef CAS .Y. Pavlyukh and J. Berakdar, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 468, 313 CrossRef CAS .W. T. Geng, J. Nara and T. Ohno, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 464–465, 379 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Derosa, A. G. Zacarias and J. M. Seminario, in Reviews of Modern Quantum Chemistry, ed. K. D. Sen, World Scientific, Singapore,  2002, p. 1537 Search PubMed .Z. A. Schelly, Colloids Surf., B, 2007, 56, 281 CrossRef CAS .M. Walter, P. Frondelius, K. Honkala and H. Hakkinen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 096102 CrossRef .E. Badaeva, Y. Feng, D. R. Gamelin and X. Li, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 055013 CrossRef .H. Zeng, R. R. Vanga, D. S. Marynick and Z. A. Schelly, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14422 CrossRef CAS .I. V. Yudanov, K. M. Neyman and N. Rösch, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 116 RSC .K. M. Neyman, G. N. Vayssilov and N. Rösch, J. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 689, 4384 CrossRef CAS .H. Grönbeck and P. Broqvist, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 073408 CrossRef .L. M. Liu, B. McAllister, H. Q. Ye and P. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4017 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Ivanova Shor, V. A. Nasluzov, A. M. Shor, G. N. Vayssilov and N. Rösch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12340 CrossRef .M. Yang, K. A. Jackson and J. Jellinek, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 144308 CrossRef CAS .F. Cinquini, L. Giordano, G. Pacchioni, A. M. Ferrari, C. Pisani and C. Roetti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 165403 CrossRef .S. K. Brayshaw, J. C. Green, N. Hazasi and A. S. Weller, Dalton Trans., 2007, 1781 RSC .M. Castro, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 435, 322 CrossRef CAS .M. Baron, D. Stacchiola, S. Ulrich, N. Nilius, S. Shaikhutdinov, H. J. Freund, U. Martinez, L. Giordano and G. Pacchioni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3405 CrossRef CAS .G. Pacchioni, S. Sicolo, C. D. Valentin, M. Chiesa and E. Giamello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8690 CrossRef CAS .D. Bandyopadhyay, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 084308 CrossRef .D. Bandyopadhyay and M. Kumar, Chem. Phys., 2008, 353, 170 CrossRef CAS .S. Alayoglu, A. V. Nilekar, M. Mavrikakis and B. Eichhorn, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 333 CrossRef CAS .V. Simic-Milosevic, M. Heyde, N. Nilius, T. KoÃànig, H. P. Rust, M. Sterrer, T. Risse, H. J. Freund, L. Giordano and G. Pacchioni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7814 CrossRef CAS .H.-J. Freund and G. Pacchioni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2224 RSC .L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7390 CrossRef CAS .M. Gruber, G. Heimel, L. Romaner, J.-L. Bredas and E. Zojer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165411 CrossRef .H. Grönbeck, Top. Catal., 2004, 28, 59 CrossRef .C. R. A. Catlow, S. A. French, A. A. Sokol and J. M. Thomas, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2005, 363, 913 CrossRef CAS .F. Cinquini, C. Valentin, E. Finazzi, L. Giordano and G. Pacchioni, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 827 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Nørskov, M. Scheffler and H. Toulhoat, MRS Bull., 2006, 31, 669 CAS .J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, B. Hvolbaek, F. Abild-Pedersen, I. Chorkendorff and C. H. Christensen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2163 RSC .K. M. Neyman and F. Illas, Catal. Today, 2005, 105, 2 CrossRef CAS .R. Coquet, K. L. Howard and D. J. Willock, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2046 RSC .G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9212 CrossRef CAS .H. Falsig, B. Hvolbaek, I. S. Kristensen, T. Jiang, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4835 CrossRef CAS .G. Lanzani, R. Martinazzo, G. Materzanini, I. Pino and G. Tantardini, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 805 CrossRef CAS .B. Kasemo, E. Tornqvist, J. K. Nørskov and B. I. Lundqvist, Surf. Sci., 1979, 89, 554 CrossRef CAS .M. Persson and B. Hellsing, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 49, 662 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Wonchoba, W.-P. Hu and D. G. Truhlar, in Theoretical and Computational Approaches to Interface Phenomena, ed. H. L. Sellers and J. T. Golab, Plenum, New York,  1994, p. 1 Search PubMed .J. T. Kindt, J. C. Tully, M. Head-Gordon and M. A. Gomez, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 3629 CrossRef CAS .H. Nienhaus, H. S. Bergh, B. Gergen, A. Majumdar, W. H. Weinberg and E. W. McFarland, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 446 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Tully, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 51, 153 CrossRef CAS .B. Gergen, H. Nienhaus, W. H. Weinberg and E. W. McFarland, Science, 2001, 294, 2521 CrossRef CAS .H. Nienhaus, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 45, 1 CrossRef .J. W. Gadzuk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8265 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Trail, M. C. Graham, D. M. Bird, M. Persson and S. Holloway, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 166802 CrossRef CAS .G. Katz, R. Kosloff and Y. Zeiri, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3931 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Ji and G. A. Somorjai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22530 CrossRef CAS .J. Behler, B. Delley, S. Lorenz, K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 036104 CrossRef .P. Nieto, E. Pijper, D. Barredo, G. Laurent, R. A. Olsen, E.-J. Baerends, G.-J. Kroes and D. Farias, Science, 2006, 312, 86 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Luntz, M. Persson and G. O. Sitz, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 091101 CrossRef CAS .N. Shenvi, S. Roy, P. Parandekar and J. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 154703 CrossRef .M. Lindenblatt and E. Pehlke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216101 CrossRef CAS .D. Krix, R. Nunthel and H. Nienhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 073410 CrossRef .I. Rahinov, R. Cooper, C. Yuan, X. Yang, D. J. Auerbach and A. M. Wodtke, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 214708 CrossRef .N. H. Nahler, J. D. White, J. LaRue, D. J. Auerbach and A. M. Wodtke, Science, 2008, 321, 1191 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Bird, M. S. Mizielinski, M. Lindenblatt and E. Pehlke, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 1212 CrossRef CAS .M. Tomellini, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 135002 CrossRef .J. I. Juaristi, M. Alducin, R. D. Muino, H. F. Busnengo and A. Salin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 116102 CrossRef CAS .R. Cooper, I. Rahinov, C. Yuan, X. Yang, D. J. Auerbach and A. M. Wodtke, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2009, 27, 907 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Maximoff and M. P. Head-Gordon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 11460 CrossRef CAS .N. Shenvi, S. Roy and J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 174107 CrossRef .M. Timmer and P. Kratzer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 165407 CrossRef .K. Honkala, A. Hellman, I. N. Remediakis, A. Logadottir, A. Carlsson, S. Dahl, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Science, 2005, 307, 555 CrossRef CAS .A. Hellman, E. J. Baerends, M. Biczysko, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen, D. C. Clary, S. Dahl, R. van Harrevelt, K. Honkala, H. Jonsson, G. J. Kroes, M. Luppi, U. Manthe, J. K. Nørskov, R. A. Olsen, J. Rossmeisl, E. Skulason, C. S. Tautermann, A. J. C. Varandas and J. K. Vincent, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17719 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Tautermann, Y. K. Sturdy and D. C. Clary, J. Catal., 2006, 244, 199 CrossRef CAS ; C. S. Tautermann and D. C. Clary, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 1437 RSC .Z.-P. Liu, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10746 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Vincent, R. A. Olsen, G.-J. Kroes, M. Luppi and E.-J. Baerends, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 044701 CrossRef .C. Crespos, H. D. Meyer, R. C. Mowrey and G. J. Kroes, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 074706 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Abbott and I. Harrison, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 024704 CrossRef CAS .G. J. Kroes, E. Pijper and A. Salin, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 164722 CrossRef CAS .I. M. N. Groot, H. Ueta, M. J. T. C. van der Niet, A. W. Kleyn and L. B. F. Juurlink, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 244701 CrossRef CAS .H. F. Busnengo and A. E. Martinez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5579 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Olsen, D. A. McCormack, M. Luppi and E. J. Baerends, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 194715 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Luntz, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1557 CrossRef CAS .R. Valero, J. R. B. Gomes, D. G. Truhlar and F. Illas, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 124710 CrossRef .C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni, T. Bredow, D. Dominguez-Ariza and F. Illas, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 2299 CrossRef CAS .D. Dominguez-Ariza, F. Illas, T. Bredow, C. D. Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Mol. Phys., 2003, 101, 241 CrossRef CAS .M. Chiesa, M. C. Paganini, E. Giamello, C. D. Valentin and G. Pacchioni, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 204–205, 779 CrossRef CAS .G. Pacchioni, C. D. Valentin, D. Dominguez-Ariza, F. Illas, T. Bredow, T. Kluner and V. Staemmler, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, S2497 CrossRef CAS .A. Scagnelli, C. D. Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 386 CrossRef CAS .A. Rohrbach and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 045405 CrossRef .R. Valero, J. R. B. Gomes, D. G. Truhlar and F. Illas, to be published.N. Hansen, A. Heyden, A. T. Bell and F. J. Keil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2092 CrossRef CAS .A. Heyden, B. Peters, A. T. Bell and F. J. Keil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1857 CrossRef CAS .A. Heyden, N. Hansen, A. T. Bell and F. J. Keil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17096 CrossRef CAS .A. Goodrow and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13204 CrossRef CAS .J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219 RSC .A. A. Gokhale, J. A. Dumesic and M. Mavrikakis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1402 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Andersson, F. Abild-Pedersen, I. N. Remediakis, T. Bligaard, G. Jones, J. Engbaek, O. Lytken, S. Horch, J. H. Nielsen, J. Sehested, J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 2008, 255, 6 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xu, W. A. Shelton and W. F. Schneider, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16591 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Getman and W. F. Schneider, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 389 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Getman, Y. Xu and W. F. Schneider, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9559 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Smeltz, R. B. Getman, W. F. Schneider and F. H. Ribeiro, Catal. Today, 2008, 136, 84 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xu, R. B. Getman, W. A. Shelton and W. F. Schneider, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6009 RSC .H. Y. Wang and W. F. Schneider, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 064706 CrossRef .Z.-X. Chen, K. M. Neyman, K. H. Lim and N. Rösch, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8068 CrossRef CAS .Z.-X. Chen, K. H. Lim, K. M. Neyman and N. Rösch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4568 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Lim, Z.-X. Chen, K. M. Neyman and N. Rösch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14890 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Lim, L. V. Moskaleva and N. Rösch, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1802 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cao and Z.-X. Chen, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 4572 CrossRef CAS .Q.-L. Tang and Z.-X. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 104707 CrossRef .X. Li, A. J. Gellman and D. S. Sholl, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 144710 CrossRef .G. Pacchioni, http://pubs.acs.org/JACSbeta/issue3.html, accessed Jan. 16,  2009.A. S. Y. Foo and K. H. Lim, Catal. Lett., 2009, 127, 113 CrossRef CAS .E. Jeroro and J. M. Vohs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10199 CrossRef CAS .H. Tang and B. L. Trout, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6856 CrossRef CAS .A. T. Anghel, D. J. Wales, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 113410 CrossRef .S. E. Wonchoba and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 6842 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang and J. L. Whitten, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 5529 CrossRef CAS .P. Kratzer, B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 5595 CrossRef CAS .S. Nave and B. Jackson, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 224702 CrossRef .S. Nave and B. Jackson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 173003 CrossRef .S. Nave and B. Jackson, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 054701 CrossRef .W. Z. Lai, D. Q. Xie and D. H. Zhang, Surf. Sci., 2005, 594, 83 CrossRef CAS .M.-S. Liao, C.-T. Au and C.-F. Ng, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 272, 445 CrossRef CAS .G. Psofogiannakis, A. St-Amant and M. Ternan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24593 CrossRef CAS .H.-Y. Li, Y.-L. Guo, Y. Guo, G.-Z. Lu and P. Hu, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 051101 CrossRef .F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Greeley, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, T. R. Munter, P. G. Moses, E. Skulason, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016105 CrossRef .N. N. Semenov, Some Problems in Chemical Kinetics and Reactivity, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,  1958 Search PubMed .M. G. Evans and M. Polanyi, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1938, 34, 11 RSC .F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard, R. Z. Sørensen, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Science, 2008, 320, 1320 CrossRef CAS .F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard, R. Z. Sørensen, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9299 CrossRef CAS .G. Jones, J. G. Jakobsen, S. S. Shim, J. Kleis, M. P. Andersson, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard, S. Helveg, B. Hinnemann, J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, I. Chorkendorff, J. Sehested and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2008, 259, 147 CrossRef CAS .J. Cheng and P. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10868 CrossRef CAS .J. Cheng, P. Hu, P. Ellis, S. French, G. Kelly and C. M. Lok, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6082 CrossRef CAS .J. Cheng, P. Hu, P. Ellis, S. French, G. Kelly and C. M. Lok, J. Catal., 2008, 257, 221 CrossRef CAS .M. Saeys, M. F. Reyniers, M. Neurock and G. B. Marin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2064 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Bird, Faraday Discuss., 1998, 110, 335 RSC .D. G. Truhlar, Faraday Discuss., 1998, 110, 521 RSC .F. Labat, P. Baranek, C. Domain, C. Minot and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 154703 CrossRef .F. Labat, P. Baranek and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 341 CrossRef CAS .S. Choomwattana, T. Maihom, P. Khongpracha, M. Probst and J. Limtrakul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10855 CrossRef CAS .A. Kuc, T. Heine, G. Seifert and H. Duarte, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 543 CrossRef CAS .F. Abild-Pedersen, O. Lytken, J. Engbaek, G. Nielsen, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2005, 590, 127 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirovic, Y. Xu, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2132 CrossRef CAS .S. Kandol and J. Greeley, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 52 CrossRef .A. Kokalj, N. Bonini, S. de Gironcoli, C. Sbraccia, G. Fratesi and S. Baroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12448 CrossRef CAS .D. Torres, S. Gonz·lez, K. M. Neyman and F. Illas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 422, 412 CrossRef CAS .D. Loffreda, F. Delbecq, F. Vigne and P. Sautet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1316 CrossRef CAS .C. Morin, D. Simon and P. Sautet, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 1339 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Valero, P. Raybaud and P. Sautet, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1759 CrossRef CAS .A. Salameh, J. Joubert, A. Baudouin, W. Lukens, F. Delbecq, P. Sautet, J. M. Basset and C. Coperet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3870 CrossRef CAS .Z. Gu and P. B. Balbuena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17388 CrossRef CAS .S. Sharifzadeh, P. Huang and E. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4649 CrossRef CAS .Z. Gu and P. B. Balbuena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5057 CrossRef CAS .Y. Pluntke, L. A. Kibler and D. M. Kolb, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3684 RSC .Y. Ma and P. B. Balbuena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14520 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Croy, S. Mostafa, L. Hickman, H. Heinrich and B. R. Cuenya, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 350, 207 CrossRef CAS .F. o. Delbecq and F. Zaera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14924 CrossRef CAS .R. Callejas-Tovar and P. B. Balbuena, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 3531 CrossRef CAS .F. Tian and A. B. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18566 CAS .Y. Gilman, P. B. Allen and M. S. Hybertsen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3314 CrossRef CAS .K.-i. Aika, Y. Ogata, K. Takeishi, K. Urabe and T. Onishi, J. Catal., 1988, 114, 200 CrossRef CAS .C. G. M. Hermse, A. P. van Bavel, A. P. J. Jansen, L. A. M. M. Barbosa, P. Sautet and R. A. van Santen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11035 CrossRef CAS .S. Kandoi, J. Greeley, M. Sanchez-Castillo, S. Evans, A. Gokhale, J. Dumesic and M. Mavrikakis, Top. Catal., 2006, 37, 17 CrossRef CAS .J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3910 CrossRef CAS .K. Reuter, D. Frenkel and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 116105 CrossRef .L. D. Kieken, M. Neurock and D. Mei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2234 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Mhadeshwar and D. G. Vlachos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16819 CrossRef CAS .P. Raybaud, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 322, 76 CrossRef CAS .B. Temel, H. Meskine, K. Reuter, M. Scheffler and H. Metiu, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 204711 CrossRef .O. R. Inderwildi, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1751 CrossRef CAS .H. Falsig, T. Bligaard, J. Rass-Hansen, A. Kustov, C. Christensen and J. Nørskov, Top. Catal., 2007, 45, 117 CrossRef CAS .O. R. Inderwildi, S. J. Jenkins and D. A. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2213 CrossRef CAS .N. V. Petrova and I. N. Yakovkin, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2008, 63, 17 CrossRef CAS .J. Assmann, V. Narkhede, N. A. Breuer, M. Muhler, A. P. Seitsonen, M. Knapp, D. Crihan, A. Farkas, G. Mellau and H. Over, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 184017 CrossRef .J. Rogal, K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 155410 CrossRef .M. Rieger, J. Rogal and K. Reuter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016105 CrossRef .G. Pacchioni, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 167 CrossRef CAS .S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, J. P. Greeley, C. L. Marshall, L. A. Curtiss, G. A. Ballentine, J. W. Elam, S. Catillon-Mucherie, P. C. Redfern, F. Mehmood and P. Zapol, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 213 CrossRef .J. Tao, J. P. Perdew, L. M. Almeida, C. Fiolhais and S. Kummel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 245107 CrossRef .J. Rossmeisl, J. K. Nørskov, C. D. Taylor, M. J. Janik and M. Neurock, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21833 CrossRef CAS .V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2897 CrossRef CAS .E. Skulason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. Jonsson and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3241 RSC .G. S. Karlberg, T. F. Jaramillo, E. Skulason, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 126101 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Vukmirovic, J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, A. U. Nilekar, F. Uribe, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2257 CrossRef CAS .A. Nilekar, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, M. Vukmirovic, K. Sasaki, R. Adzic and M. Mavrikakis, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 276 CrossRef CAS .M. Janik, C. Taylor and M. Neurock, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 306 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Wang and D. D. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8266 CrossRef CAS .P. Ferrin, A. U. Nilekar, J. Greeley, M. Mavrikakis and J. Rossmeisl, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 3424 CrossRef CAS .M. Subhramannia and V. K. Pillai, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5858 RSC .Y. Gohda, S. Schnur and A. Groß, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 233 RSC .M. T. M. Koper, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 11 RSC .D. J. Schiffrin, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 439 RSC .F. De Angelis, A. Tilocca and A. Selloni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15024 CrossRef CAS .C. Di Valentin, E. Finazzi, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi, A. M. Czoska, M. C. Paganini and E. Giamello, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3706 CrossRef .A. M. Czoska, S. Livraghi, M. Chiesa, E. Giamello, S. Agnoli, G. Granozzi, E. Finazzi, C. D. Valentin and G. Pacchioni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8951 CrossRef CAS .K. Yang, Y. Dai, B. Huang and M.-H. Whangbo, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6528 CrossRef CAS .C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni, H. Onishi and A. Kudo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 469, 166 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, B. Li, K. D. Jordan, J. Yang and H. Petek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 195309 CrossRef .A. Vittadini, M. Casarin and A. Selloni, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 663 CrossRef CAS .L. K. Dash, F. Bruneval, V. Trinite, N. Vast and L. Reining, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2007, 38, 482 CrossRef CAS .G. Teobaldi, W. A. Hofer, O. Bikondoa, C. L. Pang, G. Cabailh and G. Thornton, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 437, 73 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Duncan, C. F. Craig and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8528 CrossRef CAS .K. Yang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 456, 71 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9756 CrossRef CAS .J. Graciani, L. J. Alvarez, J. A. Rodriguez and J. F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2624 CrossRef CAS .P. R. McGill and H. Idriss, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 3688 CrossRef CAS .D. P. Hagberg, J.-H. Yum, H. Lee, F. De Angelis, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, R. Humphry-Baker, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6259 CrossRef CAS .A. Vittadini and M. Casarin, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120, 551 CrossRef CAS .T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, M. Hedlund, T. Edvinsson, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo, H. Rensmo, T. Brinck, L. C. Sun and A. Hagfeldt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 133 RSC .H. Perron, C. Domain, J. Roques, R. Drot, E. Simoni and H. Catalette, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 565 CrossRef CAS .S. Li and D. A. Dixon, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6646 CrossRef CAS .P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci., 2007, 4, 222 CAS .G. Shao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18677 CAS .X.-Q. Gong, A. Selloni, O. Dulub, P. Jacobson and U. Diebold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 370 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, W. Li, X. Meng and B. Zong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19506 CrossRef CAS .H. Nakamura and K. Yamashita, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 194706 CrossRef .This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
Table Content:
	(1)
T = ½τα + ½τβ	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
H = −2JABSA·SB	(5)
S2 = (SA + SB)2 = SA2 + SB2 + 2SA·SB	(6)
ES = −JABS(S + 1)	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
EREKS = ½[nrEKS(…ϕ2r) + nsEKS(…ϕ2s)] +f(nr,ns){EKS(…ϕrϕs) −½[EKS(…ϕrs) + EKS(…rϕs)]}	(13)

 	Fig. 1  Experimental (light) and computed (TD-B98, 0.2 eV offset, dark) UV/Vis spectrum for the inset trinuclear copper complex.	 
	(14)

 	Fig. 2  Methane metathesis in a methyl group-3 metallocene.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ball-and-stick depictions of Grubbs I (left) and II (right) catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reductive dechlorination of trichloroethylene by a cobaloxime.	 

 	Fig. 5  Benchmark ligand systems L for comparing singlet and triplet electronic state energies for end-on and side-on LCuO2 coordination geometries and TMG3trenCuO2+ (inset).	 

 	Fig. 6  Different core geometries for supported (LCu)2O2 complexes.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
