Recent development of carbon electrode materials and their bioanalytical and environmental applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00297D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00297D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 715-752Recent development of carbon electrode materials and their bioanalytical and environmental applications

        
          
            Wei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuyun 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rafael 
            Luque
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Shuang 
            Han
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Lianzhe 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guobao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China. E-mail: guobaoxu@ciac.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85262747;   Tel: +86-431-85262747
bQufu Normal University, 273465, Qufu, China
cDepartamento de Quimica Organica, Universidad de Cordoba, Campus de Rabanales, Edificio Marie Curie, E-14014, Cordoba, Spain
dShenyang University of Chemical Technology, 110142, Shenyang, China
Received 
      10th April 2015
    First published on 14th December 2015AbstractCarbon materials have been extensively investigated due to their diversity, favorable properties, and active applications including electroanalytical chemistry. This critical review discusses new synthetic methods, novel carbon materials, new properties and electroanalytical applications of carbon materials particularly related to the preparation as well as bioanalytical and environmental applications of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes, various carbon films (e.g. pyrolyzed carbon films, boron-doped diamond films and diamond-like carbon films) and screen printing carbon electrodes. Future perspectives in the field have also been discussed (366 references).
Wei Zhang
Wei Zhang received her MSc from Harbin Engineering University in 2009 majored in Applied Chemistry. In 2009, she joined Professor Guobao Xu's group at the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry and worked as a research associate. Her research interests include carbon nanomaterials, capacitors, silica nanoparticles, tantalum electrodes, hazardous substance electrochemical detections, as well as electrogenerated chemiluminescence of tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) and luminol.
Shuyun Zhu
Shuyun Zhu received her MSc from the University of Science and Technology of China and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. She is currently working as a college teacher in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Qufu Normal University. Her research interests include single-walled carbon nanohorns, solid-phase extraction, electrochemical, colorimetric and fluorescent biosensors based on aptamers, DNA and enzymes.
Rafael Luque
Rafael Luque has published more than 250 peer-reviewed papers. He is an Editorial Board member of Chemical Society Reviews, Catalysis Communications and Sustainable Chemical Processes as well as Editor of Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical, Series Editor of Topics in Current Chemistry, Editor-in-chief of the Porous section of Materials and Deputy Head of Departamento de Quimica Organica. He has received several awards including the Green Talents from BMBF in Germany, the TR35 Spain from Technology Review and MIT and very recently the RSC Environment, Sustainability and Energy Early Career Award from RSC as well as Visiting Professorships at HKUST, the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Universidade de Pelotas under Cienciasem Fronteiras Program.
Shuang Han
Shuang Han obtained her BSc in chemistry from Northeast Normal University and PhD under the guidance of Professor Guobao Xu from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. After postdoctoral research at Technical University of Denmark, she joined Shenyang University of Chemical Technology. Her research involves in the synthesis and applications of graphene-based functional nanomaterials, coreactants of tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) electrochemiluminescence, rotating ring-disk electrodes, plasticizer-based electrodes, diazonium electrochemistry, and biosensors.
Lianzhe Hu
Lianzhe Hu obtained his BSc from Jilin University and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. After postdoctoral research in King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) and The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, he is currently doing postdoctoral research in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include electrochemistry, DNA machines and switches, DNA nanotechnology, fluorescent nanoclusters, bioimaging, hydrogen peroxide-mediated boronate deprotection, biocatalysis, and enzyme mimetics.
Guobao Xu
Guobao Xu received BSc, MSc and PhD from Jilin University, Xiamen University, CIAC, respectively. He did postdoctoral research at the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and JST-NTT. He currently is FRSC, CChem, CSci, Assoc. Editor of Anal. Methods, and Vice-Chair of Division 6 of ISE. His research interests include electrochemiluminescence, carbon nanohorns, wireless POCT devices, seed-mediated and solvothermal synthesis of metal nanocrystals, hydrothermal synthesis of microbeads, molecular imprinting, titanium dioxide nanotubes and biosensors. He has won Young Scholar Award of Chinese Chemical society, Second Class Award of National Natural Science of China, and SCOPUS Young Researcher Gold Award in Materials Science.
1. Introduction
Carbonaceous materials exhibit favorable features such as structural polymorphism, high chemical stability, low cost, wide potential windows, relatively inert electrochemistry, rich surface chemistry or electrocatalytic activities for a variety of redox reactions.1–4 Therefore, numerous carbonaceous materials have been designed and been extensively studied for a variety of electrochemistry applications including electroanalysis,1,5–7 energy conversion and storage8–10 (e.g. dye-sensitized solar cells,11 fuel cells,12 biofuel cells,6 supercapacitors,13 lithium–sulfur batteries,14 and metal–air batteries15), electrocatalysis (e.g. hydrogen evolution reaction,16 oxygen evolution reaction,9,17,18 and carbon dioxide reduction19),20 spectroelectrochemistry,21 photoelectrochemistry,21 electrochromatic display,22 light-emitting devices,23 electrosynthesis,24 field effect transistors (FETs),25 biotechnologies,26 degradation of pollutants,27 and drinking water disinfection.28 For example, besides traditionally investigated carbonaceous materials,29–36 various families of novel carbon materials with unique properties and advanced electrochemical performances (i.e. graphene,37–39 carbon nanotubes (CNTs)40,41 and nanoporous carbonaceous materials42) emerged and rapidly established themselves as reliable alternatives in electroanalysis due to their nano-sizes and/or special structures.2,6,7,43
Overviews focused on single carbon material, such as graphene, were available along with the growing scientific research on novel carbonaceous nanomaterials. Interestingly, only a few comprehensive reviews on carbon materials are available due to the large diversity and applications of carbonaceous materials.1,44,45 McCreery provided an excellent overview of the electrochemistry and electrochemical applications of advanced carbon electrode materials including microfabricated carbon thin films, boron-doped diamond (BDD), carbon fibers, CNTs and carbon composite electrodes in 2008.1 This comprehensive review has been aimed to cover new trends, updates and developments on the design, preparation and applications of new carbonaceous materials in electroanalysis and representative electroanalytical applications. Representative examples of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), graphene, CNTs, carbon-films and screen-printing electrodes (SPEs) and latest developments with future prospects and possibilities in the field will be critically discussed.
2. Introduction to carbon materials: classes and properties
Carbon materials could be simply divided into three types according to their basic structures or hybridization, sp2, sp3 or sp2–sp3 combination.1 Graphite and HOPG stand for typical sp2 hybridization. Diamond represents sp3 hybridized carbon materials exhibiting different electrochemical properties from sp2-related carbon materials. Comparatively, glassy carbon (GC) and some carbon films feature sp2 and sp3 hybridization properties. Electrochemical activities of carbon materials depend on their inherent structure and other factors such as surface bonds and functional groups as shown in Table 1. Most papers discuss the electrochemical activities of carbon materials in terms of the basal plane and the edge plane (Fig. 1).46 Generally speaking, edge planes play dominant roles in electrochemical activities, and basal planes play a small role in electrochemical activities. Recent research studies however show that basal planes play important roles in electrochemical activities in some cases.47–49 Detailed discussion will be provided in subsequent sections.
Table 1 Electrode kinetics of [Ru(NH3)]3+/2+, [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− and dopamine (DA)




Electrode material
Preparation
Pretreatment
Method

k
0, [Ru(NH3)6]3+/2+ (cm s−1)

k
0, [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− (cm s−1)

k
0 or ΔEp, DA
Ref.





a Diamond followed by Al2O3 slurries in water.
b Cyclic voltammetry.
c Scanning electrochemical cell microscopy.
d Ultramicroelectrode.
e Reduced graphene sheet films.
f Stacked graphene nanofibers.
g Pyrolyzed photoresist films.
h e-beam deposited carbon films.
i Tetrahedral amorphous carbon (nitrogen-incorporated).
j Scanning electrochemical microscopy.
k Electron cyclotron resonance.





GC20


Conventional polisha
CVb


0.005 ± 0.003



50



GC20


Ultraclean polish
CV
0.51
0.14
52 mV

51 and 52



HOPG basal plane




CV
0.0014
<10−7



53 and 54



HOPG basal plane


Freshly cleaved
SECCMc voltammetry
>0.5





47



HOPG edge plane








0.06–0.1



53



Carbon fiber 60 μm


Polishing
UMEd CV
0.5 ± 0.06





55



Carbon fiber 7 μm


Freshly cut
UME CV
1.22 ± 0.07





56



Nanocrystal diamond B-doped




CV
0.012–0.017
0.017–0.019
7.3 × 10−5–3.2 × 10−4 cm s−1

57



Nanocrystal diamond N-doped




CV
0.1





58



rGSFse
Chemical reduction
Modified on GC
CV
0.18
0.049
0.25 cm s−1

59



Monolayer graphene
Mechanical exfoliation of natural graphite
Deposited on silicon/silicon oxide wafers
CV


1.2 × 10−3



60



o-SGNFf


Immobilized on GC
CV


6.9 × 10−3



61



f-SGNF
High temperature-annealed stacked graphene nanofibers
Immobilized on GC
CV


0.2 × 10−3



61



SWNTs
Catalytic chemical vapor deposition
On Pd thin film
SECCM
10 ± 5





62



MWNT microbundle electrodes




CV


0.5
30 mV

63



PPFg
Pyrolyzed positive photoresist AZ4330


CV
0.020
0.012



64



PPF
Microfabricated PPF disk electrodes (AZ4562)


CV


0.014 ± 0.007



65



ECFsh
Evaporation vacuum chamber


CV


2.9 × 10−2



66



ta-C: Ni
Deposited by pulsed laser-arc


CV
>0.1
0.005–0.015



67



BDD


Polycrystalline oxygen-terminated BDD electrodes
CV
>0.1
0.04 (D) 0.06 (E)



68



High doped facets of BDD




SECMj
3.3 ± 1.5 × 10−2
9.7 ± 4.0 × 10−2



69



Low doped facets of BDD




SECM
0.7 ± 0.3 × 10−2
2.2 ± 0.8 × 10−2



69



ECRk-75
ECR sputtering method


CV


1.22
472 mV

70



ECR-20
ECR sputtering method


CV


0.24
464 mV

70





 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of (A) a six-layer step edge and (B) cyclic voltammograms obtained from basal plane pyrolytic graphite (BPPG) and edge plane pyrolytic graphite (EPPG) electrodes in 1 mM ferricyanide in (0.1 M KCl). Scan rate, 100 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
2.1 HOPG
HOPG comprises a family of most ordered three dimensional graphite materials which could be considered as paralleled stacking sheets of graphene. It is composed of a flat basal plane, parallel layers and an edge plane presented perpendicular to the basal surface. HOPG exhibits a strong covalent bonding within each layer but weak van der Waals forces between different layers.30 HOPG can be synthesized from pyrolytic graphite at high temperatures and pressures with less impurity.1
Traditionally, basal and edge planes of HOPG exhibit contrary properties in electrochemistry, with edge planes being considered active as compared to inert basal planes.71,72 Edge plane and basal plane electrodes have been prepared from HOPG with completely different structures (full of edge planes and basal planes, respectively) to further prove these premises. Edge plane electrodes exhibited a fast electron transfer (ET) rate due to located defects suitable for electrocatalysis and electroanalysis. Basal plane electrodes have been adopted as inert substrates to demonstrate properties of other materials such as CNTs and graphene.
Compton's group has conducted comprehensive studies to demonstrate the diverse electrochemical characteristics of basal planes and edge planes. Extensive work has been carried out in diffusion mode and adsorption mode to ascertain whether the electrochemical activity of the basal plane of HOPG can be exclusively attributed to defects located on edge plane steps or something between basal plane and edge plane steps. For example, MoO2 nanowires and inert materials were employed to cover edge planes and basal planes, respectively (Fig. 2). Under diffusive mode with [Ru(NH3)]3+/2+, a nearly recovered electrochemical response is observed after removing the coverage of edge steps while keeping basal planes covered, pointing to an effectively inert basal plane.71 In adsorptive mode, the electrochemical performance of commonly used electrodes was also studied. As illustrated in Fig. 3, adenine was exclusively oxidized on carbon-based electrodes with weak bonding strength. The edge plane showed lower oxidation potential, higher oxidation current and narrower oxidation peak as compared to the basal plane (Fig. 3).72 In addition, voltammetric responses of basal plane and edge plane electrodes with or without surface-adsorbed anthraquinone monosulfonate were investigated. The basal plane was found to show significant activity, although the ET rate at the basal plane is 2–3 orders of magnitude lower than that at the edge plane.48
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of nanotrench fabrication and cyclic voltammograms for the reduction of 1 mM [Ru(NH3)6]3+ at the HOPG electrode after each step nanotrench fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71, copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammograms of adenine (A) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (pH 6.85) on EPPG (a), Au (b), GC (c), BPPG (d), BDD (e), and Pt (f). Scan rate, 50 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The above-mentioned strategy was subsequently extended to a switchable graphite electrode between adsorptive and diffusive mode through acetone pre-adsorption. In standard diffusive systems such as [Ru(NH3)6]3+, cyclic voltammograms did not change in the presence of acetone. Interestingly, the adsorption of aromatic molecules including anthraquinone monosulfonate and ferrocene dimethanol was blocked due to the pre-adsorption of acetone. As a result, the electrochemical response of aromatic molecules was switched from adsorptive to pure diffusive mode.73 This study shows that the adsorption of some compounds, even simple interactions of solvents with graphite, can have a significant impact on electrochemical properties.

Fig. 4 showed characterization experiments of HOPG surfaces by AFM and electrochemical activity studies by scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM).47 The SECCM results pointed to the presence of terraces, with a wide scope accounting for the basal surface and narrow lines for step edges. Remarkably different from low ET rates (10−9 cm s−1) on basal surfaces in previous reports, an ET rate constant of 0.5 cm s−1 or even higher for the reduction of [Ru(NH3)6]3+/2+ was observed. A pristine surface is critical to obtain such a high ET rate. The excelling ET rate of basal surfaces decreases dramatically upon exposure to air and solutions.47In situ AFM studies reveal two important points. The local surface conductivity deteriorated with time and deposited materials on HOPG surfaces suppressed the surface ET kinetics. Further studies show that the pristine basal surface of HOPG exhibited a considerable ET activity not only at the nanoscale but also at the macroscale.49,74,75 Unexpectedly, the pristine basal plane surface of HOPG is much more active and shows better voltammetric signal to background current than not only GC, polycrystalline boron-doped diamond (pBDD), BPPG, but EPPG for DA at concentrations less than 10 μM (Fig. 5).49 At higher DA concentrations, the pristine basal plane surface of HOPG is easily blocked by dopaminergic products, which may lead to sluggish kinetics of DA observed in the past work.
 Fig. 4  Reduction of 2 mM [Ru(NH3)6]3+/2+ at HOPG. SECCM maps of (a) topography (z-piezo position), (b) the AC component of the conductance current, and (c) surface redox activity recorded at −0.25 V. (d) Normalized activity histogram. (e) AFM image of the area of interest. (f) Line scan along the arrow of the AFM image. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 5  CVs for the oxidation of 10 μM DA in 0.15 M pH 7.2 PBS at 0.1 V s−1 on (a) GC, (b) pBDD, (c) basal plane of HOPG (ZYA grade), (d) BPPG, and (e) EPPG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Because of its highly ordered structure, HOPG is frequently used as a model carbon material for studying ET kinetics. However, reported ET rate constants on the basal plane of HOPG vary by orders of magnitude even for some simple outer-sphere redox reactions. McCreery's comments on ET kinetics on HOPG are most enlightening.76 He discussed that ET rate constants depend significantly on redox mechanisms of redox reactions, the content of edge plane sites on electrode surfaces, and the surface density of electronic states. Inner-sphere redox systems are strongly affected by the presence of defects, and their ET rate may be much faster at edge plane defects. Out-sphere redox systems do not require specific sites but their ET rate are also affected by the presence of defects because the presence of defects influence the surface density of electronic states. A high resolution scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) study of HOPG defects shows that a physical defect can induce a larger electronic disturbance, significantly amplifying defect effects. It has also been found that the methods used to expose the basal plane and the grade of HOPG have a remarkable effect on defect densities of the basal plane surface of HOPG. For example, the exposure of the basal plane with adhesive tapes leads to much more defects than that with razor blades. The difference in defect densities and larger electronic disturbance effects explain dramatic difference in reported ET rate constants for the same redox reaction. Since different carbon materials have different electronic structures, a physical defect may induce much different electronic disturbance on different carbon materials. Consequently, a variety of properties of carbon materials are expected, in particular, for redox systems with specific interaction with carbon materials.
2.2 Graphene
The emergence of graphene nanosheets (2010 Nobel Prize in Physics, 2004) recently opened up an exciting new field in the science and technology of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials. Graphene comprises single or multiple sp2 hybridized carbon atoms joined by covalent bonds to form a honeycomb lattice structure.77 The extended honeycomb network is the basic building block of other important allotropes; namely wrapped to form 0D fullerenes, rolled to form 1D nanotubes and stacked to form 3D graphite (Fig. 6).78
 Fig. 6  Mother of all graphitic forms. Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D buckyballs, rolled into 1D nanotubes or stacked into 3D graphite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group. 
Graphene has been widely studied for its excelling properties including a large surface area (>2000 m2 g−1) which surpasses that of graphite (10 m2 g−1) and CNTs (1315 m2 g−1),79 as well as an electrical conductivity of ca. ∼64 ms cm−1 which is approximately 60 times superior to SWCNTs.6,80,81 Large surface areas resulted in improved adsorptive ability. Proteins can be easily adsorbed on graphene surfaces and ET between the active center of the protein and the electrode are facilitated.82
Numerous synthesis methods have been developed for graphene synthesis due to the significance of graphene to introduce various functionalities aiming to achieve certain properties. The preparation methods could be classified into top-down and bottom-up approaches.6,83
Top-down methods almost completely derive from graphite. A scotch tape has been adopted as a powerful tool to stick single layer graphene materials with large size (up to 1 mm) from HOPG.84 The use of ultrasound is another way to graphene. HOPG or graphite can be dispersed in various organic solutions/inorganic-surfactant solutions and ultrasonicated for several hours. High quality graphene can be obtained in this way but with uncontrollable size and low yield. A scalable graphene production method promising for commercial applications was recently reported by shear in suitable solvents.26 After the final centrifugation step, high quality graphene could be obtained with nearly no basal plane defects. Such a favourable method featured a simple and scalable process with a high production rate of 5.3 g h−1.85
Electrochemical exfoliation has also been employed as an eco-friendly method under ambient preparation conditions. Being a rapid methodology, it can also be adjusted via potential or current modulation.86 Inserted ions can however provide side effects. The most employed method for graphene preparation is a chemical oxidization–exfoliation–reduction treatment from graphite. The graphite source is first oxidized to increase interlayer distances and weaken van der Waals forces. The obtained graphene oxide (GO) is then exfoliated under ultrasonication, and is eventually reduced either thermally or chemically using some reducing agents to form graphene. Recently, a novel improvement was reported as a promising commercial way to synthesize single-layer GO. K2FeO4 was employed as a strong oxidant featuring high oxidation efficiency, low explosion risk as well as improved green credentials. Nearly 100% single-layer GO could be produced in 1 hour. The resulting GO could be easily dispersed in water and DMF with high stability as compared to other methods.87 CNTs have also been utilized in graphene preparation. Chemical treatment of CNTs resulted in graphene nanoribbons. The band gap of graphene could be modulated by varying the width of nanoribbons which was a most attractive point to scientific researchers.
As compared to top-down methods, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) stands out from all bottom-up graphene preparation methods due to its potential to scale-up production and the high quality graphene that can be obtained on metal substrates. However, it is challenging to transfer graphene to the target substrate and to remove metal substrates. Residual substrates and etching agents will both result in impure graphene. In addition, there will be wrinkles on the graphene surface after transfer. The wrinkles caused anisotropy carrier mobility, higher in paralleled wrinkle direction and lower in perpendicular.88 Recently, cost-effective and eco-friendly transfer of graphene has been achieved by utilizing a novel material. Agarose gel worked as a solid electrolyte for copper corrosion and as a mechanical support layer to transfer graphene. The method allowed not only copper recovery but also avoided the use of solvents, holding a significant potential for future industrial production of graphene.89
As listed above, several graphene preparation methods advanced the field towards a more future sustainable and scalable production of high quality graphene, with advantages and disadvantages of different protocols. Mechanical exfoliation and shear can yield graphene materials with comparable structures (basal planes) to those of graphite, high conductivities but reduced electrochemical activities. Alternatively, methods involving chemical oxidations and reduction agents will result in high electrochemical activity graphene materials (with increasing defects and more functional groups). The most frequently employed CVD method results in inevitable contamination with metals which can contribute to the electrochemical activity of final graphene materials. These may only be accurately applied in electrochemistry if quantities and types of metal species could be accurately controlled under CVD conditions.
Basic electrochemical behaviours were first studied to determine several important parameters of graphene electrodes including electrochemical potential window, ET rate and redox potentials. Graphene exhibited a wide electrochemical potential window of ca. 2.5 V in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.0),90 comparable to that of graphite, GC, and even BDD electrodes.1,90,91 Furthermore, the charge-transfer resistance of graphene (determined from alternating current impedance spectra) was significantly reduced with respect to that of graphite and GC electrodes.90 In addition, a low peak-to-peak potential separation (ΔEp) was characterized by several redox species, such as [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−, [Ru(NH3)6]3+/2+, and Fe3+/2+.59,92–94 As an example, vertically orientated knife-edge graphene nanoflake films (MGNFs) (Fig. 7) synthesized by a novel microwave plasma enhanced CVD demonstrated a low ΔEp very close to the ideal value of 59 mV at low scan rates.94
 Fig. 7  (A) Different magnification transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of MGNFs and (B) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MGNFs deposited for 30 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94, copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Graphene sheets also have two types of ET sites (edge and basal), similar to most sp2 carbonaceous materials.95 Edge planes have been proved to facilitate ET on graphene as ET kinetics of the edge is predominant over that of the basal. Banks and his coworkers7,38 demonstrated that graphene structurally resembles the edge plane of HOPG which was the origin of the reported ‘electro-catalytic’ effects of many graphene modified electrodes.96 Compared to the basal plane of graphite substrates, both monolayer and bilayer samples of graphene were reported electroactive and improved ET kinetics in ferricyanide reduction.60 An electrochemical device was precisely designed with either mechanical exfoliated monolayer graphene or CVD graphene to demonstrate the electrochemical performance of graphene. The apparent ET rate constants (k0) calculated from cyclic voltammograms on individual graphene monolayers was over 10-fold faster as compared to those of the basal plane of bulk graphite.60 The electrochemical activity of single layer graphene edges isolated from the basal plane was studied using a nanopore-based structure comprising stacked graphene and Al2O3 dielectric layers (as shown in Fig. 8).97 Such a 5 nm nanopore graphene edge exhibited an extremely high current density of 1.2 × 104 A cm−2, 3 orders of magnitude higher than those reported for CNTs and much higher than those reported for the graphene surface. The observed excelling properties were proposed to be derived from a high density of states at the graphene nanopore edges, a convergent diffusion mechanism and high local concentration of electroactive species in the vicinity of the nanopores.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of graphene and Al2O3 dielectric layer nanopore-based structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Heterogeneous ET studies in graphene recently attracted significant attention to ascertain how the inherent properties in graphene or graphene related materials can affect their electrochemical performance in electroanalysis and electrocatalysis of graphene surfaces. Several factors need to be taken into consideration in heterogeneous ET studies of graphene. First of all, heterogeneous ET is closely related to the molecules investigated. Outer-sphere molecules such as Ru(NH3)63+/2+ is insensitive to most surface defects and impurities. These types of molecules do not adsorb on carbon material surfaces and heterogeneous ET has been only related to diffusion processes. The content of edge planes does not affect much the electrochemical response of such molecules. However, for inner-sphere molecules (e.g. Fe3+/2+, DA and β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)), the graphene surface will significantly influence the electrochemical response. More edge planes will facilitate ET in surface sensitive molecules as electroactive sites.
Second, the amount of defects in graphene materials has been proved to have an important influence in heterogeneous ET. The chemical oxidation–exfoliation–reduction method often suffers from incomplete reduction of GO, with the strong oxidation step resulting in a significant number of defects and oxygen functional groups. GO comprised of oxygen functional groups has been found to have a worse conductivity as compared to graphene, but more defects and edge planes. Defects often produce an enhanced heterogeneous ET effect for electroanalysis.
The third factor, as just mentioned, relates to the presence of oxygen functional groups including carbonyl, carboxyl, epoxide and peroxide. Different oxygen functional groups arise from different preparation protocols such as different oxidation agents and have different effects on electrical properties and ET.
Fourth, graphene often contains impurities, especially when prepared via classical top-down methods. Impurities in graphene could be classified into residual metals, oxidation debris, amorphous carbon and residual surfactants. In spite of the inherent electrochemical activities of graphene, some reported activities of graphene materials have been attributed to residual metals. Recently, Pumera39 demonstrated that metallic impurities present in both synthetic and natural graphite still remained after their oxidation to GO by most common oxidation methods (Hummers and Staudenmaier methods). Such graphene materials containing metallic impurities were extremely active as electrocatalysts of some redox reactions. They proposed a graphene purification method based on thermal treatment at 1000 °C in a chlorine atmosphere to reduce the effect of such impurities on the electrochemical properties. Surprisingly, metal impurities were still present after such extreme treatment. Furthermore, they had also proved that inherent electrochemical activities of GO were due to oxidization debris in some cases. Electrochemical activities could be adjusted via ultrasonic irradiation of GO (longer time of ultrasonication, lower oxidation debris residual and consequently reduced ET).98 In addition, amorphous carbon and residual surfactants have also been reported to influence the electrochemical properties of graphene. Residual surfactants can inhibit ET for some electrochemical reactions.99
Graphene structure conformation also altered its electrochemical performance. It has been suggested that different edge structures may exhibit different electrochemical properties.1,83 In addition to open edges, graphene can possess folded edges, either as single loop, double loops or multiple loops.100,101Ambrosi and coworkers found that heterogeneous ET rate is significantly higher on open edge sites of graphene as compared to folded graphene edges for ferro/ferricyanide.61
Last, but not least, chemical doping can be another effective method to intrinsically modify graphene materials, tailor electronic properties, manipulate surface chemistries and produce local changes to the elemental composition of host materials.102,103 In carbon materials, chemical doping is also a potentially interesting strategy to enrich free charge-carrier densities aiming to enhance electrical or thermal conductivities.104,105 Recent studies have demonstrated that nitrogen doping can play a critical role in regulating the electronic properties of carbon materials. Material properties and performance of nitrogen doped (N-doped) graphene strongly depended on the bonding configuration of N atoms in graphene lattices. Bonding configurations of typical N functionalities present in N-doped graphene were commonly divided into N atoms doped into a graphene basal plane (quaternary N), N atoms in six-membered rings (pyridinic N) and five-membered rings (pyrrolic N) as well as N atoms bonded with O atoms (oxidized N).106 As an example, high power electric annealing of graphene in the presence of NH3 can lead to interesting N-doped graphene materials.107 Edge doping is an alternative approach to dope graphene ribbons influencing their intrinsic properties.
2.3 CNTs
CNTs, as a new member of the carbon allotrope family, were first discovered by Iijima in 1991.108 CNTs are built from sp2 carbon units and present a seamless structure with hexagonal honeycomb lattices of several nanometers in diameter and many microns in length.109 CNTs are closed structures that exhibit two well-defined regions (tube and cap) with clearly different properties. The cap is a half-fullerene-like molecule with topological defects (mainly pentagons). There are two groups of CNTs, namely single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs, one rolled graphene sheet) or multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs, two or more rolled graphene sheets). MWCNTs can be visualized as concentric and closed graphite tubules with multiple layers of graphite sheets. CNTs can be arranged in a multitude of different geometries, ranging from 1D isolated tube to 2D planar arrays and random networks, and 3D forests. MWCNTs are metallic conductors. SWCNTs can be metallic or semiconducting depending on their chirality. SECCM electrochemical current maps of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs showed their different response to Ru(NH3)63+ (Fig. 9).62
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the experimental setup for SECCM imaging and SECCM electrochemical current maps for the reduction of 0.5 mM Ru(NH3)63+ in pH 7.2 PBS containing 25 mM KCl in metallic and semiconducting SWCNT devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Due to significant applications of CNTs, several methods have been developed to synthesize CNTs including arc discharge, laser ablation/vaporization as well as CVD, most widely used in commercial preparation of CNTs.110 Chemical properties could be adjusted by tuning condition parameters such as temperature and metal catalysts. CVD processes require product purification to remove residual metals.40,111 The low production yield of SWCNTs as compared to that of MWCNTs makes it rather challenging to obtain in a large quantity and affordable prices. Consequently, much effort has been devoted to improve yields of SWCNTs using simple methods. Significantly enhanced yields of SWCNTs were realized using low-activity carbon feedstock-butane or tungsten-based bimetallic alloy nanocrystals as catalysts.112–114 Excitingly, Li's group recently prepared SWCNTs with unprecedented high content (92%) of chirality-specific (12, 6) (as illustrated in Fig. 10).114 Alternatively, the synthesis of hoop-shaped aromatic hydrocarbons was considered as a promising starting point to design chiral SWCNTs.115
 Fig. 10  Preparation of the W–Co nanocrystal catalyst and the template growth of a SWNT with specified (n, m). Reprinted with permission from ref. 114, copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
CNTs with unique mechanical, geometric, electronic, and chemical properties108 are increasingly attractive in electrochemical detection. CNT-based electrodes have been reported with various advantages, such as negligible surface fouling,116,117 increased voltammetric currents,118,119 increased heterogeneous ET rates63 and decreased over-potential. For a number of electrochemical applications of CNTs, readers are kindly referred to recent reports in the field.95,116,120,121 The key take-home message provided by Compton and coworkers relates to the similarities between the electrochemistry at the ends of CNTs and that of graphite edge planes.71,122–124 For a comprehensive review on CNT film-based flexible electronics (fabrication and application on FETs), readers are kindly referred to the work by Park et al.125
Because CNTs are generally prepared in the presence of metal catalysts using CVD, CNTs usually have metallic, nanographitic and amorphous carbon-based impurities. These impurities can dramatically influence, even in some cases dominate, the electrochemical properties of CNTs. Compton's group found that nitric acid “washing” of CNTs is not an effective method to remove residual metal impurities present in CNTs122 which dictate most electrochemical properties in CNTs. Later, Fe impurities in CNTs were found responsible for the electrochemical oxidation of glucose126 and the electrocatalytic reduction of hydrogen peroxide.127 The presence of Ni-based metallic impurities dominated the electrocatalytic oxidation of amino acids,128 sulfides,129 and glutathione.130 In some cases, the borderline between being redox-active and redox-inactive (i.e. iron-based impurities) was found to be in the mid-ppm range.131
In addition to metallic impurities, CNT materials also contain carbonaceous impurities such as nanographite. The electrochemistry of MWCNTs could be dominated by the presence of nanographite impurities with a higher edge plane/weight ratio, and even 5 wt% of nanographitic impurities can exhibit such an effect (Fig. 11).132 Many studies have subsequently investigated the influence of nanographitic impurities in CNTs on the electrochemical responses of a large number of substrates including azo compounds,133 hydroquinone,134 amino acids,135 NADH,136 carbamazepine,136 insulin,137 nitric oxide,137 extracellular thiols137 and ascorbic acid (AA).138 Moreover, the fact that CNTs are prone to passivation also originates from the presence of nanographitic impurities.139
 Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammograms of CNTs (MWCNT-A) with different ratios of NG impurities of 10 M [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− in 0.05 M PBS (pH 7.2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Despite the high electrochemical activity of CNTs are attributed to impurities of CNTs in some cases, CNT is still a very appealing material for electroanalytical applications with unique advantages. For example, CNTs can adsorb ss-DNA and proteins strongly for facile construction of biosensors. The excellent conductivity and ultrathin 1D structure of CNTs can facilitate the direct electrochemistry of proteins, promote the applications of nanomaterials with low conductivity as electrocatalysts, and make CNTs a fine probe for high resolution electroanalytical study. It is also beneficial for the fabrication of flexible sensors and sensors with 3D porous structures. The hollow structure of CNTs allows the encapsulation of electrocatalysts for enhanced activity and stability. The strong interaction of CNTs with some compounds and/or instable intermediates enables the reversible electrochemistry of some compounds. The much different interaction of CNTs with ss-DNA and ds-DNA provide an interesting way for the construction of DNA sensors and aptasensors. The dependence of electronic properties of SWCNTs on its interaction with analytes enables the development of FETs. CNTs have also been found to show high electrochemiluminescent quenching efficiencies for enhanced sensitivity. Recent studies demonstrate that the doping of CNTs is an effective way to obtain fine electroanalytical properties.140
2.4 Carbon films

2.4.1. Pyrolyzed carbon films. 
Pyrolysis is an effective method for preparing various carbon materials, particularly for the preparation of conductive thin carbon films that show promise in electrochemical sensors, batteries, capacitors, microelectromechanical system (MEMS) devices, protective/tribological coatings, high temperature growth masks, high surface area energy storage electrodes and fuel cell electrodes. Because the film structure enables the preparation of optically transparent electrodes, microelectrodes, and interdigitated carbon electrode, as well as facile integration with microfluidic chips, various methods have been developed to fabricate carbon film electrodes.141 The pyrolysis fabrication methods mainly divide into six categories based on precursors used. The first category is based on the pyrolysis of low molecular weight aliphatic gas sources, such as methane, acetylene, and natural gas. For example, the pyrolysis of natural gas can deposit conductive carbon film easily on a quartz surface using a simple glassblowing equipment. The second category is based on the CVD of low molecular weight aromatic compounds to form thin films and subsequent pyrolysis of thin films. 3,4,9,10-Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride142–144 and parylene145 are two frequently used precursors. The third category is based on the pyrolysis of films made from liquid prepolymers and polymers, such as photoresists, furfuryl alcohol–phenol copolymers, proteins, resins of furfuryl alcohol, phenol-formaldehyde, and acetone-furfural.146 It has been reported that the shape of pyrolyzed photoresist structures depend on the properties of photoresists used. Positive photoresists have been extensively used because it is easy to prepare carbon microstructures from positive photoresists with less film shrinkage and at lower temperatures than negative photoresists.147 When a thermoplast photoresist is used, pyrolyzed photoresist structures shrink from all sides during pyrolysis, resulting in sloped sidewalls, because the thermoplast photoresist is free to move during the entire shrinking phase. When a thermoset photoresist is used, it transformed into flat pyrolyzed photoresist structures with sharp elevations at the edges because the cross-linking thermoset photoresist cannot move freely during the shrinking phase.148 To improve electrical and electrochemical material properties, the preparation of most carbon films from pyrolyzed photoresists have been carried out using relatively slow temperature ramp rates in the 2–10 °C min−1 range and take many hours. Recent studies show that conductive carbon films from pyrolyzed photoresists can be produced with a rapid thermal process at rates larger than 140 °C min−1 and a dwell time of one hour149 and even a fast ramp rate of 100 °C s−1 and a dwell time of a few minutes.150 The processing time decreases dramatically from 8–12 hours to 0.25–1 hour. The success of the rapid thermal process suggests that the process final temperature plays a much more important role than heating rates and annealing time. Noteworthily, the pyrolysis time can be decreased to a couple of seconds by laser pyrolysis in air at room temperature.151 The fourth method is based on the pyrolysis of electrografted layers derived from diazonium.152 The fifth method involves in the pyrolysis of amorphous carbon films. For example, an ultraflat carbon film with a root-mean-square roughness of ∼1 Å was deposited by electron beam evaporation on flat, oxide-free, and highly doped silicon wafers. The postdeposition pyrolysis at 1000 °C increase conductivity and ET rate. ET rates at pyrolyzed films are similar to that at GC and are among the highest for carbon thin-film electrodes (Table 1).66 Finally, the pyrolysis of graphite oxides, such as silylated graphite oxides, can lead to the formation of carbon films.153
Besides conductivity, much effort has been made to prepare a film with desired structures, including optically transparent carbon electrodes,154,155 carbon films with near-atomic flatness,64 high-aspect ratio carbonaceous microelectrodes (carbon coated pipettes),145 microelectrode array156–158 three-dimensional PPFs and graphene structures.159 For example, optically transparent carbon electrodes were prepared through the pyrolysis of a thin photoresist film made from dilute solutions.154,160 Nearly atomically smooth carbon films were prepared with a surface roughness less than 0.5 nm by pyrolyzing positive photoresist AZ433064 or with a surface roughness less than 0.2 nm by pyrolyzing negative photoresist, AZ nLOF 2070.161 As shown in Fig. 12, high-aspect ratio carbonaceous microelectrodes have been prepared by CVD of parylene C on a quartz pipette, pyrolysis of a parylene C film, and masking a pyrolyzed parylene C film coated pipette with its tip in a thin film of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with an insulating parylene C film.162 Microelectrode arrays are generally fabricated by the pyrolysis of precursor patterns formed by conventional photolithography, micro-molding in capillaries and microtransfer molding,163 laser pyrolysis of photoresists,151 and etching photoresist pattern-covered carbon films.156–158 Interestingly, the pyrolysis of micrometer-size precursor patterns can be converted into a nanometer-size electrically conductive carbon pattern by the predetermined shrinkage of photoresist during pyrolysis.164 The laser pyrolysis method enables the simultaneous and rapid formation of patterns and carbon, which eliminates time-consuming and costly fabrication of the photomasks and thermal treatment in conventional photolithography methods. Moreover, the laser pyrolysis method is highly flexible to design a variety of microelectrode arrays by computer software.151 Three-dimensional PPFs have been generated by rapid thermal pyrolysis of interferometrically-patterned photoresist (as illustrated in Fig. 13). It can be converted to hollow, interconnected 3D multilayered graphene structures having pore sizes of around 500 nm after it was sputtered with nickel, annealed, and finally removed remaining nickel by acidic etching.159
 Fig. 12  (a) Parylene reaction scheme. (b) A schematic of the microelectrode fabrication process from a bare pipette to a final pyrolyzed microelectrode. A bare quartz pipette (far left) is coated with a thin layer of parylene C and subsequently pyrolyzed under an inert atmosphere. The pipette is then masked and insulated with another layer of parylene C to form a carbon electrode (far right). (c) Optical micrographs of pipettes at different stages of this process. From left to right: a bare pipette, a pipette after initial parylene C deposition, after pyrolysis of parylene C, and a final parylene-insulated carbonaceous pipette. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 13  SEM images of porous carbon (A), porous carbon coated with nickel (B), and 3D graphene (C and D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 159, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
A simple time- and cost-saving regeneration method was developed. Though the modified PPF was only heated in an argon atmosphere, it recovered electrochemical properties or even with slight improvements for the Fe(CN)63−/4− redox system. After covalently bound thin organic films were removed, the PPF surface did not show too much change in oxygen content, roughness, and hydrophobicity. The novel regeneration method opened a new gate of PPF application repeatedly.165,166
McCreery, Madou et al. have shown that PPFs are structurally and electrochemically similar to GC.164,167 PPFs, however, have the added advantage of being photo definable, making them easily compatible with photolithographic techniques. This compatibility eliminates the need for complicated and costly fabrication processes and has allowed for some very useful devices to be made. For example, interdigitated microelectrodes have been made from PPFs. In comparison with screen printing techniques, pyrolysis is suitable for the preparation of electrodes with far greater resolution, and thinner thickness and smoother surfaces.64,65,167,168


2.4.2. Carbon films made by radio frequency (RF) sputtering. 
RF sputtering has been developed as a powerful method to prepare ultrasmooth carbon films and nanoparticle-embedded carbon films. The films are deposited at a low temperature of about 200 °C which allows using polymers as substrates. The carbon film obtained is graphite-like and is not amorphous. The graphite-like carbon film (24 S cm−1) has much better conductivity than an amorphous carbon film (∼0.01 S cm−1), and its conductivity is sufficient for electrochemical measurements. RF sputtering is very advantageous for cosputtering various materials in single step. It has been utilized to prepare Pt, Pd, Ni and Cu nanoparticle-embedded graphite-like carbon films.169Fig. 14 illustrated TEM of Pt nanoparticles embedded in graphite like carbon films (Pt-NEGCF). The dark spots correspond to Pt nanoparticles and light parts to a carbon matrix. The RF sputtering method has shown some interesting features. First, these nanoparticle-embedded graphite-like carbon films are very flat and their average surface roughness is usually less than 0.6 nm. It is beneficial for microfabrication and for improving signal-to-noise ratios. Second, the nanoparticles disperse homogeneously in the films and have a narrow size distribution. Third, the sizes of these nanoparticles can be down to a few nanometers. Fourth, the densities of nanoparticles are easily tunable by changing the surface areas of precursors without changing other sputtering parameters. Sixth, the changes in surface area ratios of precursors have little effect on the size of nanoparticles if other sputtering parameters do not change. It facilitates the preparation of a carbon film with different nanoparticle densities but with same average sizes. Finally, RF cosputtering of carbon and metals are achieved at a temperature as low as 200 °C, even for metal with high melting points, such as Pt. For stable metals (e.g. Pt), metal nanoparticle-embedded graphite-like carbon films are obtained. For instable metals (e.g. Ni and Cu), metal oxide and metal hydroxide nanoparticle-embedded in graphite-like carbon films are obtained. These nanoparticle-embedded graphite-like carbon films have been used to detect hydrogen peroxide or carbohydrates with better stability and sensitivity than bulk electrodes.170,171
 Fig. 14  TEM image of the front view of 6.5% Pt-NEGCF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169, copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. 


2.4.3. Diamond. 
In contrast to other carbon materials, diamond in its purest form contains completely sp3 carbon, making it a unique electrode material.172 The application of a diamond film as electrodes has been first demonstrated by Iwaki et al. in 1983173 and as a photoelectrochemistry electrode by Pleskov et al. in 1987.174 Fujishima et al. explored the application of boron doped diamond (BDD) films with good conductivity as electrodes in 1992.175
Swain demonstrated the first application of BDD films in electroanalysis.176 BDD film electrodes exhibit several intriguing features,32,177 (1) wide potential window enabling direct determination of aliphatic amines, polyaromatic hydrocarbons, and sulfur-containing analytes that are not easily detectable at conventional bare electrodes, the electrochemical window can be significantly enlarged up to about 5 V using employing 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroisopropanol as a solvent.178,179 (2) Low background current over a wide potential range leading to higher sensitivity.180 (3) The low electrostatic capacity of the BDD surface dramatically shortening the time to stabilize the background current during amperometric detection. (4) The fouling resistance or easy removal of adsorbents by rinsing BDDE with appropriate solvent or treatment at high anodic or cathodic potential leading to excellent reproducibility. (5) Superb micro structural stability at extreme cathodic and anodic potentials as well as at high current densities providing an ultrastable platform for electroanalysis and surface functionalization.181,182 For example, Ru(tpy)2-modified BDD film electrodes can be cycled to 1.3 V for more than 1 million times with little or no degradation in propylene carbonate and only slightly reduced stability in water and acetonitrile. (6) Insensitivity to the presence of oxygen dissolved in aqueous solution. (7) High mechanical stability, chemical inertness and electrochemical properties enabling it as sharp and wear-resistant tips for SECM studies including SECM-AFM studies, such as probing, manipulating, sculpting, and sensing at single digit nanoscale. (8) High efficiencies for oxidation and reduction.183 (9) Good biocompatibility and (10) facile adjustment of the local pH by electrochemical decomposition of water, providing a simple method for optimized analysis at the source, e.g., river and sea waters.184 Consequently, the BDD film electrode is the most popular diamond electrode and is extensively employed for electroanalysis.
BDD films are generally prepared by microwave plasma-assisted CVD and hot-filament CVD.185 At high [B], it is easier to synthesize poly-(or nano-)crystalline materials than single-crystal BDD. Nanocrystalline BDD films have a smoother surface than pBDD films. BDD films are mostly prepared by CVD under a hydrogen atmosphere, resulting in hydrogen-terminated surfaces. Hydrogen-termination can significantly increase the conductivity of semiconducting BDD electrodes due to the additional surface conductivity. Upon prolonged exposure to ambient air, the hydrogen-terminated surfaces can slowly change to oxygen-terminated surfaces that can be transferred to hydrogen-terminated BDD surfaces by treatment with hydrogen-plasma or hydrogen-flame annealing. Hydrogen-terminated surfaces can rapidly change to oxygen-terminated surfaces by anodic oxidation, oxygen plasma treatment, ultraviolet (UV) ozone photochemical treatment, heat treatment under an O2 atmosphere, boiling in strong acid and oxidation by a strong oxidant. Electrochemical oxidation preferentially forms “C–OH” groups. UV/ozone pretreatment mainly generates “C–O–C” groups. The oxidation by Ce4+, MnO4−, H2O2 and S2O82− form “C–OH” or “C–O–C” groups. O2 plasma treatment forms less oxygen terminated functions and is so harsh that graphitizes the diamond surface.186 Oxygen-terminated BDD electrodes have a much wider electrochemical window and higher surface stability from fouling compared to hydrogen-terminated BDD electrodes. The oxygen-terminated surface is also compatible for surface regeneration by in situ or on-line reactivation. The hydrogen-terminated surfaces can also be easily changed to amine-terminated, carboxyl-terminated, and fluorine-terminated surfaces. The fluorine-terminated surfaces formed through radio-frequency-based plasma fluorination displays the widest potential window for an electrode material in aqueous solutions.
Electrochemical properties of BDD electrodes depend on doping levels, nondiamond impurities (C-sp2 carbon), and surface termination. As crystallographic orientation influences the amount of boron taken up, the poly-(or nano-)crystalline material has a boron content which varies heterogeneously. For BDD, sp2 carbon, residing either at grain boundaries or within the grain itself, can affect electrochemical performance. The effects of [B], sp2 carbon content, and different pretreatment processes on the electrochemical response of both inner and outer sphere ET mediators at oxygen-terminated pBDD electrodes have been investigated. Oxygen-terminated pBDD electrodes with an average [B] of ∼3 × 1020 boron atoms cm−3 (negligible nondiamond carbon content) has the lowest capacitive currents (∼6 μF cm−2), widest solvent windows, and achieved fast (reversible) heterogeneous ET for a wide range of outer-sphere redox couples. Increasing [B] results in more nondiamond carbon incorporation, slightly narrower solvent windows, and higher capacitance. It is impossible to remove nondiamond carbon completely by aggressive acid cleans, acid cycling, or diamond polishing, and thus it had better minimize nondiamond carbon during growth stage. Alumina polishing of lapped, nondiamond carbon free, freestanding BDD electrodes results in a near reversible response (ΔEp of 65 mV) and the fastest reported heterogeneous ET kinetics for Fe(CN)64−/3− at an oxygen-terminated surface. In contrast, anodic polarization increase ΔEp and decrease the currents in magnitude because of a higher prevalence of ether and alcohol groups on the anodically polarized surface.68
pBDD is a heterogeneous material. However, how the local dopant density, and particularly the local density of states at the Fermi level, influences heterogeneous ET rates has never been determined. To disclose the direct correlation between heterogeneous ET kinetics and the local density of states in diamond electrodes, intermittent contact-SECM in substrate generation tip collection mode was explored to map heterogeneous ET rates of the pBDD surface because intermittent contact-SECM can maintain the tip–substrate separation at a small and constant value of 1.0 mm for the entire image for enhancing the dynamic (current) range and spatial resolution, and SECCM was employed as a new, general approach for high spatial resolution capacitance measurements. The combination of intermittent contact-SECM, SECCM, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), and Raman mapping study for the first time clearly reveal that spatial heterogeneous ET rates correlate quantitatively with the local density of states controlled by the local doping levels and no evidence of increasing heterogeneous ET at grain boundaries is obtained (as shown in Fig. 15).69 Further study using SECCM shows that SECCM allows investigating and visualizing complex heterogeneous electrode reactions where other scanning electrochemical probe microscopy techniques would be problematic, such as reactions involving in electrode blocking by rapid surface film formation.187
 Fig. 15  Images (70 mm × 70 mm) of pBDD obtained using (a) FE-SEM recorded with an in-lens detector at 2 kV. (b) Raman mapping, showing the integrated peak area at about 1332 cm−1 as a function of spot position. (c) IC-SECM SG-TC map for the collection of Ru(NH3)62+ (by oxidation), electrogenerated at the surface of pBDD (η = −0.004 V). (d) Calculated k0 values from the currents in (c) using finite element simulations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2012 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Chemically modified electrodes are frequently used for an electrochemical study. The investigation of ET of a surface-tethered compound is critical for designing electrodes. Recently, ET of ferrocene groups tethered to the diamond surfaces via a photochemical grafting process was tested (as shown in Fig. 16).182 In contrast to common phenomena observed for self-assembled monolayers on gold, ET rates are nearly independent of chain length, the ET rates decrease significantly with increasing coverage, and surface functionalization increases the interfacial capacitance at ferrocene-tethered diamond electrodes. Molecular dynamics simulations show that the unexpected phenomena are attributed to a comparatively disordered, less dense distribution of molecules on the surface resulting from the mismatch of the lattice sites and the optimum spacing between alkyl chains. At low coverage, the surface-tethered molecules are highly flexible allowing the ferrocene group to dynamically approach the diamond surface with facile ET. As the coverage increases, steric crowding inhibits the access of ferrocene to surface distance and thus decrease the ET rate. The important role of dynamic molecular disorder have significant implications in the design of electrocatalytically active surfaces on covalently bonded materials relevant for electro- and photocatalysis.182
 Fig. 16  Snapshots of MD simulations using butyl (n = 4, left column) and undecyl (n = 11, right column) chains, and surface coverage. One, 12, and 24 molecules per slab correspond to the coverage of 0.11, 1.3, and 2.7 × 1014 molecules per cm2. The molecular chain and triazole linkage are shown explicitly; to simplify the depiction, the ferrocene group is shown as a green sphere. Red atoms are the diamond surface atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 


2.4.4. Diamond-like carbon (DLC) films. 
DLC is a metastable amorphous carbon with a high fraction of sp3 bonds. Because of higher sp3 C fraction, it has attractive features, such as a wide potential window, low background current, and strong anti-fouling capability.188 The films can be prepared at low temperatures without a catalyst or surface pretreatment by many techniques using a large variety of precursors. Its properties are tunable by changing the sp3 content, the organization of sp2 sites and hydrogen content, as well as by doping different elements, such as N, F, Si or metals. They are much cheaper than diamond and can be easily fabricated into micro-devices with conventional semiconductor technology in mass production. It has been widely used as protective coatings in areas such as optical windows, magnetic storage disks, car parts, biomedical coatings and as micro-electromechanical devices (MEMs).67,188 The diversity of DLC films results in increasing attention for electroanalytical applications. It has been used for humidity sensing,189 brake fluid monitoring,190 stripping voltammetric analysis of heavy metals,191–194 electrode material for electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM),195 optical transparent electrode for spectroelectrochemistry study,196 tip electrode for SECM,197 gas sensors198 and biosensing.199,200
Most DLCs show high resistivity, which limit their electrochemical applications. To enhance conductivity, Niwa et al. recently have introduced a new method, ECR sputtering method, to make conductive DLCs. Carbon films formed by the ECR sputtering method under the appropriate ion irradiation condition not only shows hardness comparable to diamond, but also has electrical conductivity 19 orders of magnitude larger than undoped diamond.91 The film consists of sp2 nanocrystallites having vertically oriented graphene sheets. The adjacent sp2 nanocrystallites are connected by sp3 bonding. The sp3/sp2 ratios are widely controllable. The increase in sp3 concentrations increases film hardness. The wave functions of the electrons of each sp2 nanocrystallites overlap, providing a current path in the film and resulting in high conductivity.201 In contrast to high deposition temperature (600–900 °C) and rough surface (typically around 34 nm) of nanocrystalline diamond film, the ECR sputtering method can fabricate ultrasmooth films with an average roughness of 0.7 Å without heating substrates, allowing to use various materials as substrates, such as plastic.70 Electrochemical studies show that ECR sputtering carbon films have wider cathodic potential window than BDD, comparable anodic potential window to BDD, low background current, and good anti-fouling capability. These outstanding features make ECR sputtering carbon films an intriguing material for electroanalysis. The ECR sputtering carbon films have been used for the detection of beta-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), gamma-aminobutyric acid, glutathione, alkylphenol, serotonin, histamine, azide ions, bisphenol A, DNA bases, nucleotides, DNA methylation, and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).70,202–208
Despite the attractive features of ECR sputtering carbon films, the deposition rate of the ECR sputtering method is low, the ECR sputtering equipment is much more expensive than conventional sputtering equipments, and it is difficult to fabricate hybrid carbon films, such as metal–carbon hybrid films, by ECR sputtering. Recently, an inspiring method, unbalanced magnetron (UBM) sputtering method, has been developed for the preparation of tetrahedral amorphous carbon (ta-C) with high conductivity.209 The UBM sputtering equipment is much cheaper than the ECR sputtering equipment, as well as allows fast deposition on a large sputtering area for cost-effective production of carbon film and cosputtering of multiple materials. Moreover, nanocrystalline graphene structures are observed in the UBM nanocarbon film, which are rarely observed in conventional DLC film (Fig. 17). The UBM sputtering carbon films show a wide potential window and a low background current similar to ECR nanocarbon film electrodes. The structure of the films including their sp2, sp3 and nanocrystalline graphite concentrations and the electrochemical properties of the UBM nanocarbon films can be widely controlled by changing the bias voltages between the target and the substrate. So far, UBM carbon films have been used for the detection of kynurenic acid,13 heavy metals,210 and hydrogen peroxide.211 It shows superior properties for some detection. For example, it can detect kynurenic acid with a superior S/N ratio to the GC and BDD electrodes. These limit of detection (LOD) for Cd and Pb ions at UBM carbon films are about one order of magnitude better than those obtained with a GC electrode due to more homogeneous deposition of metal ions and lower noise levels.15 Interestingly, the nitrogen doping of UBM carbon films can increase sp3 content, widen the electrochemical window, and enhance H2O2 reduction peak current by 4 times.
 Fig. 17  TEM image of UBM nanocarbon film formed with a substrate bias voltage of −75 V. Scale bar, 5 nm. Reprinted from ref. 209, copyright 2014 Elsevier. 


2.4.5. SPEs. 
SPEs are produced via screen printing techniques. SPE is currently extensively used in daily applications in many fields with important advantages in terms of sensitivity, accuracy, reliability, disposability and low cost. As an inexpensive and conductive material, carbon materials can work as ink materials in SPEs. The variety of SPEs could be classified from three aspects: substrate, ink and modifier.
Paper, polymer films, and even flexible and elastic clothing materials can be used as substrates.212 There are still some other interesting substrate materials used in SPEs. A novel temperature controllable device was fabricated based on a 91% alumina substrate. The SPE system had integrated three electrodes with thermocouple and heating elements to achieve temperature control while acting as a sensor.213 A disposable SPE was also fabricated on polyimide film taking BDD powder as ink and compared with conventional carbon ink electrodes. A wide potential window and fouling resistance (advantages of BDD) as well as broad applications in fields of environment, food and biology were described.214 SPEs functionalized with different types of modifiers possessed multiple applications in different fields including environment-related uses, food, biology and pharmacy. In addition, versatile modifiers could be introduced including metals, enzymes, functional carbon materials, polymers, and complexing agents.215
Multiple possibilities in SPEs came into frequent studies to facilitate commercial analysis with convenient and high throughput advantages. The Whitesides group significantly contributed to the development of micro-paper-based analytical devices (μPADs) comprising three-dimensional microfluidic out of paper devices with double-side adhesive tape only. The particular programmed devices achieved an excellent control of fluid movements on paper-based channels (model illustrated in Fig. 18). Operated programmable μPADs using a stylus or a ballpoint pen by pressing ‘on’ buttons could be obtained for the simultaneous detection of glucose, protein, ketones and nitrite by dipping devices directly into the sample.216 To accelerate the progress of μPADs to the market, they had also integrated electrochemical μPADs with commercially available glucometers. A number of compounds relevant to human health in blood or urine samples could be hand-held detected. The device provided slightly less accurate results as compared to commercial analogues, but the problem can be in principle solved by improved engineering.217
 Fig. 18  Programmable μPADs for urinalysis. (A) Schematic of the proposed strategy for using programmable μPADs. (B) Schematic diagram of the layers of paper and tape for testing a sample of urine for any combination of glucose, protein, ketones or nitrite. (C) μPAD that was programmed to run all four assays, and dipped into a sample of artificial urine that contained no glucose, protein, ketones or nitrite. (D) μPAD that was programmed to run all four assays and was dipped into a sample of artificial urine that contained 10 mM glucose, 30 μM BSA, 10 mM aceto acetate, and 300 μM sodium nitrite. The color changes in each test zone indicate the presence of the analyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216, copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Origami paper folding (oPADs) fabricated with Au wires and carbon fibers as working electrodes have also been developed. The electrodes could be designed in wire, mesh and fiber to facilitate different application purposes. Furthermore, working electrodes could be modified with modifiers before device assembly.218 A novel gravity-driven device was also designed by introducing two reservoirs (upper and lower positions). Based on enzyme-loaded electrodes, the devices could constantly detect glucose in urine samples without damaging the nitrocellulose membranes. Furthermore, this type of design could be repeatedly used, showing some promise as a cost effective option with respect to disposable analogues.219

3. Electrochemical bioanalytical and environmental applications of carbon materials
The combination of carbon materials and electrochemistry provided significant advances in the field derived from the excelling electrochemical properties of carbon materials. The next sections disclose a number of relevant electroanalytical applications of different carbonaceous materials based on targets/materials. Different types of carbon materials have been compared and critically discussed for each application.
3.1 Bioanalysis

3.1.1. Small molecules. 
3.1.1.1. DA, uric acid (UA) and AA. 
DA is one of most abundant catecholamine neurotransmitters with an important impact on cognitive and behavioral functions across all animals, including humans. For example, lacking of DA is one of the reasons of Parkinson's disease. Apart from that, UA and AA are significant health biomarkers and will cause overlapping voltammetric response and result in unexpected interferences under simultaneous detections with DA. So far, nearly all the carbon materials had been adopted in such detections, with graphene, CNTs, diamond and their modified carbon electrodes as most popular materials. Vertically orientated knife-edge graphene nanoflake films (Fig. 7) synthesized from novel microwave plasma-enhanced CVD at high speed exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activities and selectivity in the simultaneous determination of DA, AA and UA.94 The high electrocatalytic activity could be ascribed to abundant edge planes and defects resulting from an ultrathin knife-edge structure and a vertical orientation, with a sensing performance comparable to that of EPPG electrodes. The combination of graphene with ZnO nanowires can significantly improve sensitivity for DA detection. Fig. 19 illustrated a schematic representation and SEM images of ZnO nanowire arrays (NWAs) on 3D graphene foams (GFs) utilised for the simultaneous detection of UA, DA and AA. The nanohybrid material could achieve a more sensitive detection of UA, DA and AA (LOD of 1 nM for UA and DA) due to high conductivity and large surface area of graphene combined with the presence of numerous active sites on the surface of ZnO.220 Treated CNTs or the combination of CNTs with advanced analytical devices were also proved effective in such detections. O2-plasma treated CNT nanoweb electrodes enable a highly selective sensing of DA in the presence of AA.221 Selectivity was improved by increasing electroactive sites on CNT sidewalls.
 Fig. 19  (left) Schematic of the ZnO NWA/GF electrode and detection of UA, DA, and AA. (right) SEM images of ZnO NWAs. Diameter of ZnO NWAs, ∼40 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The excellent conductivity and 1D structure of CNTs has been exploited to fabricate a sparse SWCNT network band electrode in which SWCNTs covered only <1% of the insulating substrate (Fig. 20).222,223 The sparse surface coverage and the low intrinsic capacitance of SWCNTs lead to the extremely low background signals of sparse SWCNT network band electrodes and the convergent diffusion, consequently significantly improving detection sensitivity without the use of signal processing or complex potential waveform techniques. LOD for DA detection was found to be ∼5 pM, much lower as compared to the majority of reported electrochemical methods under both stationary and flow conditions. SWCNT electrodes could also be repeatedly used for several months without electrode fouling by coupling the system with microfluidic cells produced by micro-stereolithography (through timely removal of fouling products by the continuous flow of electrolyte and short exposure of electrode to a small volume of DA). The device could also detect DA in artificial cerebral fluid with an LOD of ∼50 pM in 50 μL (∼2.5 fmol).
 Fig. 20  (left) Schematic of the attachment of the microstereolithography flow cell to the underlying electrode plate and tapping mode–atomic force microscopy profile of a typical SWNT network. (right) Typical flow injection analysis (FIA) amperometric response for the detection of 50 μL injection volumes of FcTMA+ in 10 mM KNO3 at concentrations in the range of 10–1000 nM. The inset shows the triplicate current response of 10 nM FcTMA+ in 10 mM KNO3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Core–shell MWCNT/graphene oxide nanoribbons (GONRs) were synthesized under microwave-assisted conditions by unzipping of MWCNTs. The core–shell MWCNT/GONR heterostructure outperformed both MWCNTs and graphene in terms of oxidation current for AA, DA and UA due to the highly unoccupied electronic state density above the Fermi level and plenty of oxygen-based functional groups as well as good conductivity for the CNT core.224 This unique heterostructure is highly promising for sensing applications.
Furthermore, metal-free single-walled carbon nanohorns (SWCNHs) featuring dahlia-like or bud-like aggregates were demonstrated as superior materials in the simultaneous detection of UA, DA and AA. SWCNHs were simply modified on glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs) but greatly improved both potential resolution and currents. As illustrated in Fig. 21, the oxidation potentials of AA, DA and UA were well separated without any overlapping. DA shows a quasi-reversible electrochemical behaviour with a redox potential separation of 22 mV with an additional five time current improvement. Importantly, the electrochemistry of UA becomes reversible, which probably derived from the stabilization of intermediates by SWCNHs.225
 Fig. 21  CVs of UA (100 μM), DA (100 μM), and AA (100 μM) at (A) bare GCE and (B) SWCNH-modified GCE in 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS. Scan rate: 50 mV s−1. Inset in (A) LSVs at the bare GCE (a) and SWCNH-modified GCE (b) in 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS containing 100 μM UA, DA, and AA. Scan rate: 100 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225, copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
Diamond and related electrodes were comprehensively studied in complex DA systems due to their excellent stability and anti-fouling properties. In addition, most studies have focused on minimizing electrode size for better sensitivity and selectivity. Modified BDD sensors for DA detection with considerable selectivity and sensitivity were first reported in 2009. The sensor was synthesized by subsequent electrodeposition of a mixture of sulfobutylether–β-cyclodextrin, N-acetyltyramine and pyrrole. The film obtained from alternated polarization exhibited a smoother surface. N-Acetyltyramine was employed to alleviate surface fouling, while negatively charged sulfobutylether–β-cyclodextrin played an important role in preconcentrating DA and further repulse negatively charged UA and AA. The subsequent electrodeposition of pyrrole remarkably improved permselectivity. The sensor could detect DA within 1.5–2 s with a LOD of 4–5 nM and interferences by AA, UA, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid could be entirely neglected.226 Interestingly, the boron dopant atoms in BDD films has recently been exploited as mask during plasmon etching to avoid a complicated process in the preparation of masks and the removal of templates by using other masks. The reactive ion etching of a heavily doped BDD film forms BDD nanograss arrays. BDD nanograss arrays exhibited faster ET for both UA and DA.227 A BDD micro network film was also fabricated in combination of photolithography and hot-filament CVD. The BDD micro network film exhibited an improved S/N ratio, sensitivity and LOD as compared to a conventional planar BDD due to its sufficient inter element spacing when applied as an electrochemical sensor for UA detection.228
Encouragingly, a recent study has also developed a novel ultramicroelectrode array containing diamond working, counter and reference microelectrodes. Batch production of such diamond ultramicroelectrode arrays can be achieved by standard photolithography processes. The diamond ultramicroelectrode arrays were proved to have a high sensitivity to DA (1 nM) in the presence of AA, 50–1000 times higher to those of macrosized diamond electrodes.229 To avoid recession or protrusion of the electrode surface from the surrounding insulator and make full use of the advantages of diamond electrodes, the first all-diamond tubular hydrodynamic microelectrode was reported in 2011 by using a laser micromachine to define a hole-in-a-sandwich structure, including two layers of insulating diamond and a conduction pBDD inside. The combination of all-diamond working electrodes with flow system results in the eradication of electrode fouling even at relatively high concentrations of DA. This paves the way for online electroanalytical detection.230 Micro BDD electrodes have also been reported to be able to detect UA in real human urine samples without any modification and analyte dilution through coupling them with fast CV. The electrode can be electrochemically activated in situ during analysis of urine samples with less than 0.5 s to both measure UA and electrochemically clean the electrodes. This electrode provided the possibility to continuously monitor UA in urine patients in intensive care units (ICU) where the early diagnosis of acute renal failure can improve survival rates.231
SPEs were also proven to be a good option while integrated with CNTs or graphene. For example, poly-(allylamine) and dodecyl sulfate have been part of polyelectrolyte–surfactant supermolecule assemblies on SPEs. Upon incorporation with CNTs, the composite material exhibited a stable micromolar level detection of DA even in the presence of AA of 100 times concentration.232 GO nanoribbons were dispersed in ionic liquids (ILs) and assembled on SPEs. Compared with unmodified SPEs, GC and HOPG, modified SPEs exhibited high peak currents and significant potential shifts for several electroactive chemicals, especially catecholamines and NADH. The observed high activity resulted from favorable π–π interactions between GO planes and ILs and therefore considered as a promising method for the preparation of novel sensors.233 A comparison between basal-plane SPEs, edge-plane SPEs and commercial graphene SPEs was carefully conducted using different types of electrochemical probes. Graphene SPEs showed distinct characteristics (much higher response current, high reproducibility in most cases) and could be utilized in the detection of AA and DA with a life-time over 3 h.234
In spite of commonly adopted electrodes, other forms of carbon electrodes have also been employed in the detection of DA, UA and AA. EPPG was widely adopted in electroanalysis for common analytes such as simultaneous detection of UA and AA.235 The electrochemical behavior of unmodified EPPG could reflect basic characteristics of edge planes. Compared with GC, BDD and BPPG, it represented a superior electroactivity due to the presence of more edge planes and provided an excellent system for the simultaneous detection of UA and AA with LODs of 50 nM and 120 nM, respectively. PPF was adopted as well for DA detection combined with sinusoidal voltammetry or fast-scan CV with good sensitivity.166,167
Since DA is an electrochemically reversible or quasi-reversible species at carbon electrodes, interdigitated array carbon electrodes fabricated by photolithographic techniques from the carbon film of pyrolyzed 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride on thermally oxidized silicon wafers has been explored to enhance sensitivity.156–158,236 With interdigitated array carbon electrodes, an electroactive species produced at the generator electrode can return to its initial state at the collector electrode. The large number of redox cycling reactions between the generator and collector electrodes increases the currents of both electrodes. Interestingly, the pretreatment of generator electrodes at 1.8 V in 0.1 M sulfuric acid solution significantly enhances the DA response. A low LOD of 10 nM was achieved due to current enhancement by redox cycling and low background noise at the collector electrode. Moreover, the interdigitated array carbon electrodes show high collection efficiencies and enable subfemtomole detection of DA, when it is coupled with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and capillary electrophoresis, indicating that interdigitated array carbon electrodes are promising detectors for enhancing sensitivity of microfluidic devices.
3.1.1.2. NADH. 
NADH is an important coenzyme ubiquitous in cells. It plays key roles as an electron carrier and participates in metabolic redox reactions. Unfortunately, NADH strongly adsorbs on unmodified electrodes during detection and causes fouling. As a result, modified electrodes emerged as a possibility to provide advanced systems for improved detection. Graphene and CNTs were considered as good candidates in NADH detection. The electrochemical behaviour of NADH was studied on reduced graphene sheet modified electrodes. The peak potentials of NADH oxidation was shifted from 0.75 V on unmodified GC electrodes to 0.42 V on graphene-modified electrodes. The negative shift in potential was attributed to the high density of edge-plane-like defective sites on reduced graphene, which provided many active sites for ET to biological species.59
Treated MWCNTs modified on GCEs were demonstrated to facilitate the electrochemical oxidation of NADH at low potentials.237Fig. 22 compared CVs at original, water-boiled and acid-microwaved CNTs in the presence and absence of NADH. Both the treated CNTs showed highly improved oxidation current and lower oxidation peaks toward NADH. The oxidation potential shift in ENADH was due to the redox mediation of traces of quinine species that formed on the surface of treated CNTs, which had facilitated NADH oxidation. The electrodes modified with water-boiled MWCNTs could detect NADH in the range of 10–100 μM with a LOD of 4.0 μM.
 Fig. 22  CVs recorded on GCEs modified with (A) original, (B) water-boiled, and (C) acid-microwaved CNTs in deoxygenated solutions with (curve 1) and without (curve 2) 1.0 mM NADH. Background electrolyte, 0.05 M PBS at pH 7.40. Scan rate = 5.0 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.1.3. Glucose. 
Glucose has been widely studied for its close relationship to diabetes. Based on the needs of in situ monitoring glucose level in blood, food and pharmaceuticals, relevant parameters including sensitivity, stability, portability, fast response and low cost should be taken into consideration to design effective glucose detection systems. A facile strategy to prepare N-doped graphene for glucose detection by nitrogen plasma treatment was reported.238 Nitrogen atoms doped in graphene would form quaternary N, pyridinic N and pyrrolic N (Fig. 23). These types of dopants would increase the density of electronic states in graphene at its Fermi level (opening the band gap of graphene), and greatly catalyze the electrochemical reduction of hydrogen peroxide. The nitrogen-doped graphene modified electrode also displayed fast ET kinetics of glucose oxidase (GOx) and allow sensitive and selective detection of glucose in the presence of UA and AA.
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of N-doped graphene. Gray: carbon atoms, blue: nitrogen atoms, white: hydrogen atoms. A possible defect structure is shown in the middle of the ball-stick model. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Based on biocompatibility, CNTs appeared in in vivo glucose monitoring by coupling with in vivo microdialysis. The enhanced glucose biosensor was fabricated by the hybridization of bioelectrochemically active infinite coordination polymer (ICP) nanoparticles and SWCNTs to form a three-dimensional framework (as shown in Fig. 24). Bioelectrochemically active ICP nanoparticles were synthesized via the self-assembly of NAD+, Tb3+, methylene green (MG), and glucose dehydrogenase (GDH). A higher sensitivity and selectivity to glucose was observed when compared with unmodified ICP biosensors due to mediated ET effects introduced by SWCNTs. The system was suitable for glucose detection in the cerebral system as demonstrated by online in vivo detection in a continuous flow system in the brain of guinea pigs.239 The integration of GDH/MG/SWCNT-modified, L-lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)/MG/SWCNT-modified, and SWCNT-modified indium-tin oxide (ITO) electrodes with microfluidic chip enabled quasi real-time determination of glucose, lactate and ascorbate in rat brain following the global ischemia/reperfusion with little crosstalk.240
 Fig. 24  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of bioelectrochemically active ICP nanoparticles, (B) structure of ICP- (left panel) and ICP/SWCNT- (right panel) based biosensors, (C) SEM images of ICP nanoparticles and ICP/SWCNT nanocomposite (inset), and (D) online electrochemical detecting system for in vivo monitoring. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Electrochemical blood glucose meters lead the main trend in commercial applications. However, GOx possesses an inherent low stability calling for more developments related to non-enzyme glucose sensors. Carbon materials including BDD, PPF and SPEs have been extensively employed in non-enzymatic glucose detection. A BDD nanorod forest electrode was directly fabricated by hot-filament CVD on silicon nanowires without the need of diamond etching. The electrode features a well-defined oxidation peak with remarkably superior activity as compared to planar boron-doped diamond, probably due to the presence of abundant electroactive sites on the mesoporous roughness of nanorod forest. Such biosensors also exhibited good selectivity in the presence of UA and AA without any modification.241
Another non-enzymatic biosensor for glucose detection was designed based on hot-filament CVD of BDD nanoflowers on copper electrodes covered with Cu(OH)2 dendritic architectures and electrostatically self-assembled diamond nanocrystalline seeds. The synergistic effect of Cu(OH)2 and BDD nanoflowers significantly enhanced the electroactive surface area, providing a high sensitivity and a wide dynamic range for non-enzymatic glucose detection.242
PPF materials can also offer interesting possibilities in glucose detection. A type of ultrathin optically transparent carbon electrode was prepared by pyrolyzing adsorbed proteins of different layers. Compared with conventional PPF preparation methods, protein adsorption was more convenient and featured time-, cost-effective, simple environmentally friendly experiments.146
Last but not least, a low cost enzyme-free sensor was also synthesized through hydrogen-evolution-assisted electroplating of porous nickel networks on a screen-printed carbon electrode in an 1 M H2SO4 solution containing 0.2 M NiCl2 at high current density. The porous nickel nanostructure sensor showed a remarkable response to the electrooxidation of glucose as well as excellent selectivity for the detection of 0.25 mM glucose even in the presence of 0.5 mM AA, DA, UA, acetamidophenol, fructose, galactose, and lactose in 0.1 M NaOH at +0.5 V.243
3.1.1.4. H2O2. 
Hydrogen peroxide is a simple molecule in nature but a most widely used oxidizing agent. Besides adoption in chemistry and food, H2O2 was also an important product present in several biological processes. For example, hydrogen peroxide is present in higher concentrations around cancer cells as compared with normal analogues. Examples based on graphene and SPEs with satisfied sensitivity and disposability have been mostly utilized in this regard.
Chemically reduced GO (rGO) exhibited a superior electrochemical activity towards H2O2 with respect to graphite/GC and unmodified GC electrodes.90 The onset potentials of H2O2 oxidation/reduction on GO/GC, graphite/GC, and GC electrodes were 0.20/0.10 V, 0.80/−0.35 V, and 0.70/−0.25 V, respectively. Such significantly lowered over-potential at the GO/GC electrode for H2O2 reduction may lead to high selectivity. SPEs were another option for scientific researchers. Paper-based SPEs have recently received increasing attention, being employed as electrodes in the first paper-based electrochemical microfluidic devices.244 To improve selectivity, SPEs were modified with Prussian blue to allow the selective detection of H2O2 at low detection potential (0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) with good sensitivity. In combination with enzymatic transformations, the application of paper-based electrochemical microfluidic devices for the detection of critical health markers (glucose and lactate) in real world samples was demonstrated for the first time, highlighting the significant potential of microfluidic devices using paper-based SPEs in medical diagnosis.244 To improve the stability of Prussian blue-modified electrodes, a superstable H2O2 transducer was synthesized by using Prussian blue/nickel-hexacyanoferrate bilayer modified SPEs. These modified SPEs possessed an inherently superior stability as well as an improved tolerance to alkaline solutions and iron ligands.245
3.1.1.5. Others. 
In spite of the commonly focused small molecules introduced above, several additional analytes have relevant electrochemical detections. In 2004, Compton's group reported the direct voltammetry detection of four analytes with thiol moieties even in complex biological matrices as first attempt to utilize EPPG in electroanalysis. The reported sensor was simple, sensitive, time saving and showed improved responses as compared to GC and BPPG.246
Carbon fibers were sheathed by platinized vertically aligned CNTs as microelectrode and utilized to monitor O2in vivo. The microelectrode showed a significantly improved performance as compared to carbon fiber electrode on selectivity, sensitivity and reliability.247
Carbon paste electrodes have been extensively considered in the determination of small molecules. A Cu(OH)2-modified carbon IL electrode was designed to allow a simultaneous electrochemical detection of glutathione and glutathione disulfide based on their direct electrochemical oxidation. The interaction of Cu2+ with the thiol group in glutathione could promote a complexation and remarkably decreased the oxidation overpotential of glutathione, which further allowed a separate oxidation of glutathione and glutathione disulfide. The LOD of glutathione and glutathione disulfide were 30 nM and 15 nM, respectively. The biosensor was resistant to some common interferences and did not experience any significant surface fouling during successive scans.248


3.1.2. Biosensors. 
Biosensors comprise a family of analytical devices combining biological components to determine certain substrates. The biological components work as a bioreceptor to recognize target analytes, and then the recognition phenomena are transferred to signals by the transducer part. Biosensors are rapidly developed in types and quantities with the existing growing demand of human daily detection. A wide range of compounds can be detected in applications related to security, disease diagnoses, point-of-care analysis and environmental safety. Subsequent sections will disclose most promising and relevant applications of carbon materials in immunosensing, DNA sensing, and enzymatic biosensing.
3.1.2.1. Immunosensors. 
Electrochemical immunosensors work based on antibody specific recognition of its antigen and subsequently transfer the recognition to amperometric, potentiometric, impedimetric or conductometric signals to quantify antigen concentrations. Advanced carbon materials were frequently employed in immunosensors due to their adsorption characteristics and excellent electrocatalytical performance. For example, a novel flow-through multiplexed immunoassay protocol was reported for simultaneous electrochemical determination of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in biological fluids. This constituted the first report of an immunosensor for two types of simultaneously determined antigens through a specific target recognition. Biofunctionalized magnetic graphene nanosheets have also been considered as probes and multifunctional nanogold hollow microspheres as distinguishable signal tags. The multiplexed electrochemical immunoassay enabled the simultaneous monitoring of AFP and CEA in a single run with wide working ranges of 0.01–200 ng mL−1 and 0.01–80 ng mL−1, respectively. The LOD for both analytes were 1.0 pg mL−1.249
An electrochemically rGO-based electrochemical immunosensing platform for ultrasensitive detection of an antigen was reported.250 The electrochemical detection of the antigen was carried out by sandwich enzyme-linked immune sorbent assay (ELISA) protocol (Fig. 25). The developed electrochemical immunosensor could detect an antigen mouse IgG with a LOD (ca. 100 fg mL−1, corresponds ca. 700 aM). The superior sensitivity was mainly attributed to the high electrochemical activities of electrochemically rGO and low background by employing poly(benzene ring-poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate-N-acryloxysuccinimide) (poly(B.P.N.) layer) and bovine serum albumin (BSA).
 Fig. 25  Scheme of the sandwich ELISA protocol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Rusling's group developed a highly sensitive immunosensor based on SWCNT forest platform and CNT-based bioconjugates with high horseradish peroxidase (HRP)/secondary antibody ratio for prostate specific antigen (PSA) detection (Fig. 26). SWCNTs were reported to facilitate an effective and direct electrical communication between CNTs and HRP. MWCNTs also enabled the labelling of multiple HPR to single secondary antibodies and significantly enhanced the sensitivity.251 The proposed detection strategy resulted in a LOD of 4 pg mL−1 in 10 μL undiluted calf serum, surpassing most commercial immunoassays and literature reported biosensors. By replacing SWCNTs with Au NP modified MWCNTs (also employing HRP-catalyzed precipitation of 4-chloro-1-naphthol), the LOD of PSA immunoassay could be improved to 0.40 pg mL−1.252 These studies pointed out that the coupling of CNT-based electrodes with CNT-based labelling can remarkably enhance detection sensitivity and provide a powerful platform to design high performance bioassays.
 Fig. 26  Illustration of detection principles of SWNT immunosensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251, copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the immobilization of single enzyme on CNTs, a highly sensitive electrochemical immunosensor for CEA biomarker detection (as shown in Fig. 27) was also developed based on the immobilization of two enzymes (GOx and HRP) on CNTs as labels using gold nanoparticle-encapsulated dendrimers as a sensor platform.253 MWCNTs facilitated HRP-electrocatalyzed and thionine-mediated H2O2 reduction was monitored for CEA detection. The encapsulation of gold nanoparticles within the interior of the dendrimer-structure enhanced the conductivity of the sensor and facilitated ET. The local generation of H2O2 by GOx overcame diffusion limitations of H2O2 by directly bringing molecules to HRP with a further increase in sensitivity. The linear dynamic range of the proposed immunosensor covered a 5-order wide concentration range (10.0 pg mL−1 to 50.0 ng mL−1) and CEA could be measured without any required dilution. LOD of the proposed CEA immunosensor was significantly lower as compared to that of conventional ELISA.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of the electrochemical CEA immunosensor and the detection principle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 253, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.2. DNA sensors. 
DNA is considered to play a significant role in genetics and medical diagnosis. The electrochemical detection of DNA has also attracted extensive attention because of high sensitivity, high selectivity and low cost for the detection of selected DNA sequences or mutated genes associated with human diseases.
Among all types of electrochemical DNA sensors, the one based on the direct oxidation of DNA is the simplest. Alternative to modified DNA on gold electrode for mutation recognition, HOPG was considered as a good candidate as a substrate matrix due to its wide potential range for more redox-active species bonding, such as DNA and protein (such as Endo nuclease III). The fabricated sensor did not ask for stringent hybridization conditions and the corresponding electrochemical signal could be enhanced easily by electrocatalysis with ferricyanide.254,255 Graphene was utilized in direct oxidation of DNA as well. The oxidation current signals of the four free bases (i.e., guanine (G), adenine (A), thymine (T), and cytosine (C)) on the graphene electrode were well-separated (Fig. 28, green) compared with GC and graphite/GC electrodes (Fig. 28A and B). The graphene electrode had a higher electrocatalytic activity to G, A, T, and C oxidation.90 Additionally, the electrochemical signals for the single-stranded (ssDNA) and double-stranded (dsDNA) oxidation at the graphene electrode were also separated efficiently. This feature was used for the label-free detection of single mutation polymorphism. Apart from graphene, reduced graphene nanowalls (as illustrated in Fig. 29) were also developed for the first time in an ultra-high-resolution for detection of four bases of DNA by monitoring the oxidation signals of the individual nucleotide bases.256 The linear dynamic detection range of the reduced graphene nanowall electrode for dsDNA was studied in the wide range of 0.1 fM to 10 mM. It was proved an effective label-free sensor on distinguished SNPs of 20 zM oligonucleotides (∼10 DNA per mL) with a specific sequence. Furthermore, anodized epitaxial graphene consisting of more oxygen-related defects was reported to achieve simultaneous detection of all DNA bases with sufficient resolution. The LOD for dsDNA was 1 μg mL−1. Then they demonstrated further that anodized epitaxial graphene could efficiently distinguish dsDNA from ssDNA.257
 Fig. 28  Differential pulse voltammograms (DPVs) of G, A, T, C, respectively, on (A) GC, (B) graphite modified GC, and (C) chemically rGO modified GC. DPVs of a mixture of G, A, T, C (D), ssDNA (E) and dsDNA (F) on electrode depicted above. CR-GO/GC (green), graphite/GC (red) and GC (black). Reprinted with permission from ref. 90, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 29  SEM images of the GO nanowalls deposited on a graphite rod by electrophoretic deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In another example, anodized epitaxial graphene was demonstrated as a robust platform for label-free DNA detection.258 DNA was grafted into two ways: covalent grafting or π–π stacking. By comparison, covalently grafting DNA probe on anodized epitaxial graphene affords a larger dynamic range 5 × 10−14 to 1 × 10−6 M, a more sensitive response than the π–π stacked DNA probe as well. Anodized epitaxial graphene also realized direct voltammetric sensing of single-nucleotide mismatch of DNA hybridization.
Probes that could hybridize partially or completely were also demonstrated effective in DNA electroanalysis, especially combined with graphene. A graphene platform was employed259 to combine with highly selective hairpin-shaped DNA probes for sensitive and rapid detection of single nucleotide polymorphism correlated to the development of Alzheimer's disease. It was found that triple and four layer graphene provided better sensitivity than single-, double-layered graphene and multilayer graphene nanoribbons. Then the same group had produced and characterized four different chemically modified graphene (graphite oxide, GO, chemically rGO and electrochemically rGO) and used them for the covalent immobilization of DNA probes.260 After that they performed and compared impedimetric detection of DNA hybridization and DNA polymorphism for the first time. The results indicated that the best sensitivity and reproducibility was obtained by chemically rGO.
Based on the small diameters and high conductivity of CNTs, an ultrasensitive and reproducible CNT impedance biosensor was developed for DNA detection.261 As illustrated in Fig. 30, it could distinct complementary target DNA as low as 100 aM from non-target DNA. The LOD was reported to be two orders of magnitude superior to that of silicon nanowires and five orders of magnitude lower as compared to CNT network field-effect sensors. The observed ultrahigh sensitivity was attributed to the low resistance of CNTs, the stability of the electrochemical impendence method, a low noise resulting from high-frequency measurements as well as the presence of site-specific electrochemical moieties of probe DNA on CNTs. The detection could also be directly performed in buffer solutions at a physiologically relevant ionic strength. The simple fabrication process without labelling, ultrasensitive and low-cost promised its application as on-chip nanobiosensor on a variety of clinic diagnostics.
 Fig. 30  Attomolar LOD of the CNT–DNA sensor. (a) Magnitude Z-maps and (b) phase Z-maps for various concentrations of complementary target DNA. After each exposure of the sensor to target DNA, the hybrids were melted to return the sensor to its initial state, as shown in Fig. 2a–c. It is apparent that even at a cDNA concentration of 100 am (corresponding to around 1800 molecules in our 30 mL droplet), the sensor response can be discerned unambiguously. Thus, an ultralow LOD is attainable with the CNT impedance biosensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261, copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Except graphene, diamond was another good candidate for DNA electrochemical analysis. BDD was integrated with label-free or labelled DNA detection. For example, a BDD electrode was first modified with a thin layer of positively charged polyethylenimine then connected with a negatively charged ssDNA fragment. When tested with a completely complementary ssDNA, the two DNA fragments hybridized and greatly increased conductive resistance. The label free electrode system could reach a detection for complementary DNA at a concentration of 10−19 g mL−1 by EIS.262 Another label-free DNA detector was fabricated with anodically oxidized BDD electrode by copper enhanced anodic stripping. Compared with blank test without copper enhancement, the sensitivity of guanine detection had increased by 2 orders of magnitude with a LOD of 25 fM. The particular method was suitable to measure the purine content in DNA samples.263 Apart from that, the relation between DNA oxidative damage and electrochemically generated hydroxyl radicals was also demonstrated on BDD electrodes. The biosensor was fabricated by immobilizing dsDNA on the oxidative BDD electrode surface, and monitored different kinds of dsDNA damage that were caused by in situ electrochemically generated hydroxyl radicals. It worked by monitoring concentrations of purinic and pyrimidinic residues on the electrode surface. The particular biosensor can realize direct and fast detection for DNA oxidative damage by hydroxyl radicals.264 For labelled examples, vertically aligned diamond nanowires bonded with nucleic acid molecules using aminophenyl as linker molecules was applied for DNA detection. The aminophenyl linker was immobilized onto vertically aligned diamond nanowires via electrochemical reduction of 4-nitrobenzene diazonium tetrafluoroborate solution and subsequent electrochemical reduction of 4-nitrophenyl groups to aminophenyl groups. The high electric field at the tips of the wires could lead to preferential modification of the nanowire tips, generating a nanometer-sized spacing between single-strand marker DNA molecules covalently bound to aminophenyl groups. DNA spacing control favored the hybridization, resulting in a LOD of 2.0 pM and single-base mismatch discrimination. The sensor furthermore exhibited excellent chemical stability, with no degradation over 30 hybridization/denaturation cycles.265 DNA has also been modified by click chemistry on alkynyl-terminated BDD surfaces in a controlled manner. The reaction between thiolated DNA and alkynyl-terminated BDD surfaces takes place under mild conditions and provided a controllable density of grafted molecules by adjusting the initial concentration of thiolated DNA. The thiol–yne click chemistry method can be considered as promising for the preparation of patterned surfaces of various biologically relevant molecules.266
Compared with BDD, ECR sputtering carbon films are particularly advantageous for the detection of DNA bases, DNA methylation, and SNPs because of much faster ET on ECR sputtering carbon films.70,91,205Fig. 31 illustrated schematic of the electrochemical methylation detection method and square wave voltammograms on ECR sputtering, GC and BDD electrodes. ECR sputtering carbon film was the only one which offered distinguished stripping peaks of C and mC bases. The method solves the conventional problem of mC detection with simple and fast response. The faster ET on ECR sputtering carbon films enables not only the electrochemical detection of SNPs without hybridization, labeling processes, or the use of electrochemical mediators or indicators,204,206 but also quantitative measurement of electro kinetic parameters for all DNA bases for the first time by coupling with a rotating disc electrode. Fig. 32 shows SNP detections on an ECR sputtering carbon film electrode. The direct oxidation of four free bases with outstanding results was attributed to high conductivity and wide potential window of ECR sputtering carbon films. In addition, the ECR sputtering nanocarbon materials are very promising for detecting the electro kinetic parameters of other compounds with high oxidation potentials.207 Niwa et al. have further developed a nitrogen-doped ECR sputtering nanocarbon film. The novel doped electrode showed wider potential window of ∼3.8 V due to higher content of sp3 than a pure one. It was suitable to apply in reduction of H2O2 and oxidation of guanosine and adenosine oxidation with better performance.208
 Fig. 31  Schematic of the electrochemical methylation detection method for single strand oligonucleotides (a) and background-subtracted square wave voltammograms of 100 μM of nucleosides at the ECR sputtering nanocarbon film (b), GC (c), and BDD (d) electrodes, respectively, measured in 50 mM pH 5.0 acetate buffer solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205, copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 32  Detection of SNPs of oligonucleotides including the sequence from codon 248 of the p53 gene by using the ECR nanocarbon film electrode. (a) Background-subtracted square wave voltammograms (SWVs) of wild-type oligonucleotide 5 (1 μM) and its single-base mismatch 6, and the subtraction of the SWVs of 5 and 6 (G → A mutation). (b) Background subtracted SWVs of wild-type 5 (1 μM) and its single-base mismatch 7 and the subtraction of the SWVs of 5 and 7 (C → T mutation). All SWVs were measured in acetate buffer (50 mM, pH 3.3) containing 2 M sodium nitrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204, copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
High sensitive DNA detection could be mediated by immobilized thiolated ssDNA on Au nanoparticles electrodeposited on SPEs and the use of Ru(NH3)63+-encapsulated liposome labelling (as illustrated in Fig. 33). The liposomal assay provided an exceptionally wide dynamic range from 1 to 106 fmol with a LOD of 0.75 aM (equivalent to 5 μL of a 0.15 pM solution), significantly improved in terms of sensitive with respect to previously reported methods. The SPE sensor based on liposome labelling was also cost-effective, offering an attractive platform for the monitoring and surveillance of various food pathogenic bacteria.267
 Fig. 33  Flow diagram displaying the concept behind the competitive assay-based performance of the developed genosensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 267, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.3. Aptasensor. 
Aptamers are artificial functional nucleic acids268–270 that possess high recognition ability to specific targets. By using aptamer-based sensing interfaces (aptasensors), the detections of targets from small molecules to proteins and cells have been successfully realized. Graphene was adopted frequently in aptasensors due to its superior adsorption and special strong π–π interaction with aptamers. Here, only some typical examples will be listed. Wang et al. have reported a sensitive surface plasmon resonance (SPR) electrochemical aptasensor based on graphene for the first time. It was label-free, regenerative and highly sensitive.271 The sensing surface could be easily regenerated by immersing the electrode into thrombin aptamer solution after detection. The detection range could extend up to 200 nM with the LOD down to 0.03 nM.
A sensitive aptasensor based on multivalent recognition and signal amplification was designed for dynamic cell surface N-glycan evaluation (Fig. 34). The immobilization of abundant concanavalin A (Con A) on dendrimer-conjugated rGO modified GCEs could enable multivalent binding between Con A and N-glycan on cell surface, dramatically enhancing the cell capture efficiency.272 Gold nanoparticles can bind plenty of HRP and aptamers, amplify electrocatalytic oxidation signal of hydroquinone, and thus greatly enhance sensitivity. The sensors not only allow dynamic evaluation of cell surface N-glycan expression with a LOD of 10 cells mL−1, but also can monitor the variations of N-glycans on the cell surface by the treatment of inhibitors and enzymes, providing a potential tool for drug screening, clinical diagnosis, and N-glycan-related biological studies.
 Fig. 34  (A) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical aptamer biosensor for dynamic evaluation of cell surface N-glycan expression based on multivalent recognition and dual signal amplification, (B) fabrication of poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimer-conjugated chemically rGO (rGO-DEN), and (C) fabrication procedures of HRP- and aptamer-modified AuNP nanoprobes (HRP–aptamer–AuNPs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 272, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
An efficient, label-free electrochemical aptasensor was developed based on competitive reaction between graphene and target analytes with their corresponding aptamers.273 As shown in Fig. 35, graphene could strongly adsorb on an adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding aptamer (ABA) modified gold electrode and result in a large decrease of the charge transfer resistance of the electrode due to the strong π–π interaction. However, the binding reaction between ABA and ATP inhibited the adsorption of graphene, and nearly recovered the charge transfer resistance. ATP can be successfully detected as low as 15 nM with a detection range from 15 × 10−9 to 4 × 10−3 M. Meanwhile, the method was also adapted for the sensitive detection of Hg2+ with a LOD of 0.5 nM. The suitability of different chemically modified graphene platforms, graphite oxide, GO, thermally rGO and electrochemically rGO, for impedimetric aptasensing of thrombin were investigated for the first time.274 By comparison, GO was the most sensitive surface for the detection of thrombin with the adopted protocol.
 Fig. 35  Electrochemical sensing strategy for the detection of ATP: (A) without target and (B) with target. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.4. Enzymatic sensors. 
Enzymatic sensors play an important role in human daily life. Extensive studies of enzymatic sensors are focused on improving the activity, stability, and direct electrochemistry of enzymes.275,276 A novel electrochemical glucose biosensor was constructed based on graphene for the first time.277 Direct ET of GOx in IL protected graphene film was achieved successfully and GOx bioactivity maintained. The sensor exhibited a linear range of 2–14 mM, good reproducibility, and high stability. Another biosensor based on the immobilization of GOx in a graphene–chitosan nanocomposite was constructed with higher sensitivity.278 The immobilized GOx retained its bioactivity, exhibited a surface confined, reversible two proton and two electron transfer reaction. The biosensor was used for sensitive and selective detection of glucose with a linear range from 0.08 mM to 12 mM.
In addition, the graphene/CNT composite can promote the ET between the active redox centre of GOx–flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and the substrate electrode.279 MWCNT–rGO was demonstrated offering a more favourable environment for ET between the active redox center of GOx and the electrode than rGO, SWCNTs, and MWCNTs.280
Besides GOx, HRP and lactate oxidase were also immobilized on graphene.281,282 The layered and hierarchical graphene–HRP nanostructure electrodes displayed high electrocatalytic activity toward H2O2 with high sensitivity and fast amperometric response.281 These desirable electrochemical performances were attributed to excellent biocompatibility and superb electron transport efficiency of graphene as well as high HRP loading and synergistic catalytic effect of the HRP–graphene bionanocomposites. A novel pH-switchable electrochemical sensing platform which could realize in situ detection of glucose and urea in the same sample was reported for the first time. As illustrated in Fig. 36, the chitosan–rGO (CS–rGO)/Con A composite was modified on the GCE surface.283 The oxidation of glucose by GOx resulted in the decrease in pH, facilitating the ET of Fe(CN)63−. Alternatively, the oxidation of urea by urease resulted in the increase in pH, inhibiting the ET of Fe(CN)63−.
 Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of pH-switchable behavior of Fe(CN)63− on the Con A/CS–rGO/GCE triggered by the enzyme-catalyzed reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
CNTs are also used to immobilize different kinds of enzymes to develop biosensors due to their good biocompatibility.276,284–286 For example, [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum (CaH2ase) immobilized on metallic SWCNT networks exhibited good electrocatalytic activity. It is the first study of the effect of the electronic structure of SWCNTs in enzymatic biosensors. The electrocatalytic H2 production and oxidation currents increased dramatically due to increased active electrode surface area and improved electronic coupling between CaH2ase redox-active sites and the electrode surface.284 Vertically aligned CNT nanoelectrode arrays (VACNT-NEA) were fabricated via photolithography (as shown in Fig. 37) and show sigmoidal cyclic voltammograms with steady state current dominated by radial diffusion. The glutamate biosensor composed of glutamate dehydrogenase covalently attached to the tip of CNTs was able to provide a record low LOD (10 nM). These results demonstrate that CNT nanoelectrodes can be an effective system for the synthesis of enzymatic biosensors and highly sensitive detection.285
 Fig. 37  Schematic of enzyme immobilization on VACNT-NEA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Besides pristine CNTs, modified CNTs have received increasing attention. The covalent attachment of vertically aligned SWCNTs on a GCE or a gold surface by diazonium electrochemistry has been recently reported for the first time (Fig. 38).287 The diazonium modified SWCNTs exhibit the highest direct ET of cellobiose dehydrogenase (CDH) from Phanerochaete sordida (PsCDH) and lower lactose oxidation potential.288 Nitrogen-doped CNTs also showed a very attractive electrochemical performance for the redox reactions, such as H2O2, and were employed to fabricate H2O2-relevant enzymatic sensors at a low potential.289,290
 Fig. 38  Schematic representation of the SWCNT assembly on GCE. (a) Immobilization of unfunctionalized SWCNTs on a GCE modified by a mixed monolayer of phenyl/aniline groups 3:2, obtained by the diazonium reaction. (b) Self-assembly of aniline-functionalized SWCNTs on a bare GCE achieved by the diazonium reaction. (c) SEM image of SWCNTs on a GCE (the SEM image was taken from a 45° tilted view). (d and e) TEM images of SWCNTs on a GCE taken from different tilt angles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287, copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
SWCNHs were also used to immobilize enzymes or proteins to fabricate biosensors.291–295 For example, GOx was immobilized in the Nafion–SWCNH composite which provided biocompatible microenvironment to maintain enzymatic activity.291 The developed glucose biosensor demonstrated high sensitivity, low LOD, and good selectivity. Heme protein myoglobin (Mb) was adsorbed onto the surface of poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS) noncovalently functionalized SWCNHs to fabricate an electrochemical biosensor.293 The proposed biosensor exhibited good electrocatalysis to the reduction of H2O2.
Diamond electrodes have been demonstrated as good choice in enzymatic biosensors with nice biocompatibility and large electrochemical potential window. Significant efforts have been made on improving the connection between enzymes and the surface of BDD electrodes. For instance, polymer bushes were modified on the BDD surface by self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization. The functional polymer brushes could immobilize GOx and serve as electrical wiring to the electrode surface for glucose detection.296 Catalase was covalently attached to a hydrogen-terminated nanocrystalline diamond film surface, and H2O2 was detected based on direct electrochemistry of catalase.297 A planar BDD was treated and functionalized by KOH and 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES), and then was used to attach GOx by glutaraldehyde. The biosensor exhibited better stability when covered with a Nafion film.298
ECR sputtering carbon films were treated with UV/ozone without using mask to obtain thorn-like surface nanostructure with a typical height of ca. 2–3.5 nm (Fig. 39). The formation of thorn-like surface nanostructure is ascribed to the etching rate difference induced by nanometer scale difference of local sp3 content. The maskless UV/ozone treatment of BDD, GC, pyrolyzed polymers based on spin-coated polyimide or vacuum-deposited phthalocyanine films, or DLC films cannot form such a nanostructure because they have relatively homogeneous structures or micrometer-scale crystalline structures. The formation of thorn-like nanostructure enhanced the direct ET current of physically adsorbed bilirubin oxidase by about 30 fold. Moreover, the size, height, and density of thorn-like structures are tunable by changing sputter deposition and UV/ozone etching conditions to obtain a high electrocatalytic current for individual enzyme-based biosensors and biofuel cells.203 A 6.5% Pt nanoparticle-embedded RF sputtering carbon film electrode was designed for the highly sensitive determination of acetylcholine, choline, and glucose based on its excellent electrocatalytic activity toward hydrogen peroxide. In comparison with a bulk platinum electrode, the sensor improves the sensitivity for the determination of acetylcholine and choline by about one order of magnitude.169
 Fig. 39  (A) Schematic of the maskless top-down UV/ozone process on carbon film, (B) bilirubin oxidase (BOD) loaded on the nanostructure and (C) DET of BOD bioelectrocatalysis of original and nanostructure carbon film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
In comparison with single working electrode devices, multiple working electrode devices exhibit some superior features, such as better selectivity, sensitivity, and reliability. By using split disk electrode containing one semicircular electrode modified with a BSA–choline oxidase/Os–polyvinylpyridine based polymer (Os–gel)–HRP bilayer-modified electrode and the other with a BSA–acetylcholine esterase–choline oxidase/Os–gel–HRP bilayer-modified electrode, acetylcholine in cultured sample was selectively detected by subtracting the response of choline at the acetylcholine esterase/choline oxidase modified electrode from that at the choline oxidase-modified electrode.299 By employing both Os–gel–HRP/BSA/glutamate oxidase modified carbon film electrode and Os–gel–HRP/BSA modified carbon film electrode, L-glutamate released from cultured rat cortex cells can be measured with improved signal reliability by stimulating the cells with high concentrations of KCl because the dual electrode method can minimize the effect of double layer capacitance fluctuation upon addition of KCl solution.300 Moreover, the dual electrode method can also remarkably improve sensitivity. LOD of histamine was greatly improved from 190 to 25 nM by employing differential measurement between an Os–gel–HRP–histamine oxidase modified carbon film electrode and an Os–gel–HRP modified carbon film electrode to decrease the baseline noise level (Fig. 40).301 By using an individually addressable multiple carbon microelectrode array, real-time electrochemical imaging of hydrogen peroxide and glutamate has been achieved.302 These studies show that the combination of new carbon materials with multiple working electrode strategy holds great promise.
 Fig. 40  A photograph of microfluidic device for measuring histamine and a schematic representation of the electrochemical cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 301, copyright 2002 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2 Environmental detections

3.2.1. Heavy metal ions. 
Mercury electrodes including the mercury film electrode and the hanging mercury electrode (HMDE) have been electrode materials of choice for anodic stripping analysis of heavy metal ions for many years.303–306 Because of growing concerns on mercury toxicity, other metal modified carbon electrodes have been developed as alternatives to mercury electrodes (Table 2). For example, Au modified carbon electrodes have been developed for the detection, such as Pb2+,307 Hg2+,308 Cu2+,309 and As3+.310,311 Ir,312 Sb,313 Ag,314 Pb,315 Te,316 Cu,317 and Bi318–347 have also been modified on carbon electrodes for heavy metal detection. Among these metal modified carbon electrodes, bismuth modified carbon electrodes have received much attention since first reported. Bismuth is a relatively environmentally benign element with low toxicity and widespread applications in pharmaceuticals and game bullets. It can form multicomponent alloys with various heavy metals including lead, cadmium, thallium, antimony, indium, and gallium. Wang et al. pioneered applications of bismuth-modified carbon electrodes for the electrochemical detection of heavy metal ions. Bismuth-modified carbon electrodes were reported to exhibit a well-defined stripping response (as shown in Fig. 41), excellent resolution of neighboring peaks, large cathodic electrochemical window, wide linear dynamic range, low (nearly flat), background current in the presence of dissolved oxygen and high sensitivity.319,320 Such excelling properties make bismuth-modified carbon electrodes highly attractive for on-site environmental analysis, decentralized clinical metal testing, and food analysis as well as electrochemical detection of heavy metal ions.318Table 2 summarizes representative types of bismuth-modified carbon electrodes and their applications in environmental analysis. In most cases, the detections of heavy metal ions could be achieved by ex situ pre-plating of bismuth or in situ simultaneous electrodeposition of target heavy metals and bismuth on carbon substrates such as GC, SPEs, pencil-based graphite, CPE, and BDD electrodes. The utilization of membrane plasticizer-based CPEs as carbon substrates can further inhibit hydrogen evolution and significantly improve reproducibility.321 Recently, a wireless method for the electrolytic sampling of heavy metals using bipolar electrochemistry has been smartly developed. Bismuth was asymmetrically modified onto GC beads using bipolar electrochemistry. The resulting Janus particles enable the wireless electroaccumulation of heavy metal ions in the bismuth film, thus providing an efficient approach for accumulation and analysis of trace metal.322
Table 2 Applications of metal modified carbon electrodes in electroanalysis




Fabrication
Substrate
Analyte
Technique
DLa
Ref.





a Anodic stripping voltammetry.
b Potentiometric stripping analysis.
c Square-wave anodic stripping voltammetry.
d Differential pulse anodic stripping voltammetry.
e Current–time.
f Constant current stripping chronopotentiometric.
g Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy.






Ex situ Hg film
C fiber
Pb2+
ASVa
5 nM

306




Ex situ Au film
SPEs
Pb2+
PSAb
0.1 ppb

307



Au–Pt NPs
GC
Hg2+
SWASVc
0.008 ppb

308



Bi–Au NPs
CPE
Cu2+
ASV
0.28 ppb

309




In situ Au film
BDD
As3+, As5+
DPASVd
0.005 ppb, As3+

310



0.08 ppb, As5+


Ir-implated
BDD
As3+
FIA
20 nM (1.5 ppb)

312




In situ Sb film
GC
Cd2+, Pb2+
ASV
0.7 ppb, Cd2+

313



0.9 ppb, Pb2+


Ag NPs
SPEs
Sb3+
ASV
6.79 × 10−10 M

314




Ex situ Pb film
GC
Ni2+
DPASV
3.9 × 10−11 M

315




In situ Te film
GC
Cd2+, Pb2+
ASV
0.5 ppb, Cd2+

316



0.8 ppb, Pb2+



Ex situ Cu film
GC
Hg2+, Pb2+
ASV
0.1 ppb, Hg2+

317



0.06 ppb, Pb2+



In situ Bi film
GC, C fiber
Zn2+, Cd2+, Tl+,
SWASV
0.3 ppb, Pb2+

320




In situ Bi film
N,S-doped graphene
Pb2+
DPASV
0.016 ppb, Cd2+

331



0.018 ppb, Pb2+



In situ Bi film
GC
Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+
PSA
0.2 ppb, Cd2+

332



0.8 ppb, Pb2+



In situ Bi film
BDD
Pb2+
SWASV
0.18 ppb

333



Bi NPs
BDD
Cd2+, Pb2+
SWASV
2.3 ppb, Cd2+

334



1.9 ppb, Pb2+



Ex situ Bi film
CP
Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+
SWASV
0.1 ppb, Zn2+

335



0.22 ppb, Cd2+


0.44 ppb, Pb2+


Bi powder
CP
Cd2+, Pb2+
SWASV
1.2 ppb, Cd2+

336



0.9 ppb, Pb2+


BiPO4
TFCC
Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+
SWASV
8 ppb, Zn2+

327



4 ppb, Cd2+


2 ppb, Pb2+


Bi–Sb film
GC
Cd2+
SWASV
0.15 ppb

337



Bi–Sn film
GC
Zn2+, Cd2+
DPASV
0.31 ppb, Zn2+

338



0.86 ppb, Cd2+


Bi2S3 NPs
GC
H2O2

I–Te
2.5 μM

339




In situ Bi film
SPEs
Cd2+, Pb2+
DPASV
0.042 ppb, Cd2+

340



0.089 ppb, Pb2+



In situ Bi film
GC
Tl+
SWASV
10.8 nM

329




Ex situ Bi film
GC
Cr3+, Cr6+
SWASV
1.12 nM, Cr3+

341



1.40 nM, Cr6+



In situ Bi film
SPEs
Zn2+
SWASV
2.0 ppb

342




Ex situ Bi film
TFCSP
Pb2+
SWASV
0.3 ppb

323




Ex situ Bi film
SPM
Cd2+
SWASV
1.3 ppb

343



Bi2O3
GCISP
Cd2+, Pb2+
CCSCPf
16 ppb, Cd2+

325



8 ppb, Pb2+


Bi2O3
SPEs
Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+
SWASV
5 ppb, Cd2+

326



10 ppb, Pb2+


30 ppb, Zn2+



In situ Bi film
GC
Cu2+
SWASV
1.4 ppb

344




Ex situ Bi film
GC
Pb-GSH
DPASV
—

345



Bi NPs
SPEs
Phenolic compounds

I–T
26 nM, catechol

346



62 nM, phenol


Nafion-coated Bi
GC
Cd2+, Pb2+
ASV-ICP-MSg
36.2 ± 2.2 ppt, Cd2+

328




In situ Bi film
GC
Cd2+
DPASV
2.5 ppm

347





 Fig. 41  Stripping voltammograms of lead, cadmium, and zinc at GC (A) and carbon-fiber (B) electrodes coated with bismuth (a) and mercury (b) films. Solutions, 0.1 M acetate buffer (pH 4.5) containing 50 μg L−1 lead(II), cadmium(II), and zinc(II), along with 400 μg L−1 bismuth (a) or 10 mg L−1 mercury (b). Deposition for 120 s at −1.4 V; “cleaning” for 30 s at +0.3 V. Square-wave voltammetric stripping scan with a frequency of 20 Hz, potential step of 5 mV, and amplitude of 25 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320, copyright 2000 American Chemical Society. 
Another strategy is based on the direct immobilization of bismuth-containing substrates including bismuth powder,336 bismuth nanopowder,324 bismuth oxide,325,326 and bismuth phosphate327 on carbon electrodes. The latter strategy is simpler and particularly attractive for in field monitoring. The use of certain polymers (e.g. Nafion) was reported to be able to improve selectivity.328 Several approaches have also been developed to improve sensitivity including ultrasound-assisted deposition procedures, rotating electrodes and electrically-heated electrodes.329,330 The use of hot bismuth electrode operation resulted in a remarkable (10–16 fold) increase in stripping peaks for Pb, Zn and Cd, while retaining a low background.
Other types of carbon materials have been employed for rapid and precise detection of heavy metals. BDD electrodes were adopted a lot in heavy metal detections due to a wide potential window. A new manufacturing process for electrochemical BDD film microcells micromachined by a femtosecond laser was developed to overcome time-consuming manufacturing processes associated with photolithographic techniques. This direct machining method only required one fast step to prepare electrochemical microcells with various structures in the absence of chemical reagents by changing the program control of the laser. The as-prepared BDD film microcells can simultaneously detect four heavy metal ions of the European Water Framework Directive (WFD), namely Cd2+, Ni2+, Pb2+ and Hg2+, at the nanomolar level.348
To optimize pHs in the vicinity of a detector electrode for strong signals, BDD ring disk electrodes were smartly employed (as shown in Fig. 42). The electrochemical oxidation of water on the BDD ring electrode generated a flux of protons to fine-tune the local pH at the BDD disk electrode, increasing local hydrogen ion concentration over 4 orders of magnitude. The outstanding stability of BDD could ensure stable pH in the vicinity of the BDD disk electrode surface over 600 s. Such pH tuning strategies could detect mercury ions on disk electrodes in pH 6.4 solutions with stripping responses approaching those in a pH 2 bulk solution.349 The methodology holds a great promise for in situ measurements at the source (e.g., river and sea waters) where the pH conditions are not ideal.
 Fig. 42  (left) Mercury stripping peaks recorded on the disk of the ring disk electrode at 0.1 V s−1 in 1 mM Hg2+ solutions at pH 2.0 (black line) and pH 6.4 (red line) but with iring = +50 μA to generate a local pH of 2.0 over the disk electrode; middle, schematic of the coplanar ring disk electrode geometry (not to scale) under constant current conditions where H+ is generated at the ring and Hg is detected at the disk; (right) axisymmetrical r–z H+ concentration profile for H+ generation at the pBDD ring electrode at t = 60 s, for iring = +50 μA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Graphene was simultaneously doped with nitrogen and sulfur with sulfated-reducing bacteria by microbial respiration under mild conditions. The bio-treated graphene can increase sensitivity for the electrochemical detection of Cd2+ and Pb2+.331 Apart from graphene, SPEs were also widely used for heavy metal detection. A disposable SPE modified with Fe3O4-room temperature IL was designed for As(III) detection to avoid strong acid conditions in commonly used gold electrodes. The cost-effective electrode performed better than the gold electrode and reached a LOD of 8 × 10−4 ppb.350 Ag+ is another frequently detected metal ion. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) was covalently grafted onto SWCNTs with controllable thickness. The composite film could selectively detect Ag+ in the presence of common transition metal ions with a LOD of 0.1 mg L−1.351


3.2.2. Other applications. 
SPEs based on textile printed with commercial carbon inks had found applications for future security and military use. Compared with common cotton or polyester substrates, GORE-TEX fabric used widely for outdoor sports wear is an excellent material of SPEs for reliable detection of 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT) and 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) explosives.352 Plastic was considered as one of the most practical substrate materials for SPEs due to its low cost and accessibility. A series of flexible SPEs were fabricated with different kinds of plastics, Mylar, polyethylene naphthalate, and Kapton. All of them were resistant to mechanical changes of bending or rolling and present reliable detections for TNT and nitronaphthalene.353
BDD, CNTs and graphene have also been adopted to fabricate ion selective electrodes (ISE). The BDD electrode was employed for glass-free pH sensing with excellent stability and selectivity and low background current. It showed high accuracy in the presence of alkali cations and can detect pH of tap water.354 A disposable all-solid-state SPE was applied as calcium ion-selective electrode by electrodepositing graphene from GO. It was insensitive to light, oxygen and redox species, and showed stable results in calcium ion detection in the range of 10−5.6 to 10−1.6 M with a LOD of 10−5.8 M.355
BDD was considered as a good candidate for oxygen-related electroanalysis due to its wide potential window. Pt nanoparticles were electrodeposited on pBDD disk electrode surfaces to detect dissolved oxygen concentration in aqueous solution. It responded to aqueous pH values in the 4–10 range.356 Ozone was detected with O-terminated BDD microelectrodes without electrolyte media. The method showed excellent stability and sensitivity as high as 0.185 μM without interference of dissolved oxygen and chlorine.357 Furthermore, SWCNHs were simply modified on GCE and allowed dihydroxybenzene electrochemistry with higher current and lower peak separation between anodic and cathodic potentials with respect to the unmodified electrode. The simultaneous detection of o-, m- and p-dihydroxybenzene was possible using linear sweep voltammetry. Hydroquinone, catechol and resorcinol could also be determined with a LOD of 0.1 μM, 0.2 μM and 0.5 μM, respectively, in a novel study which illustrates the potential of nanocarbon materials in isomer electroanalysis.358

4. Conclusions and perspectives
With a wide potential window, chemical and electrochemical inertness, low capacitance, biocompatibility and low cost, carbon materials have been extensively used in electroanalysis with highly promising applications. With the development of new technologies and synthetic approaches, various new carbon materials, particularly carbon nanomaterials such as CNTs and graphene, appears continuously. In contrast to the properties of bulk carbon materials, the properties of carbon nanomaterials significantly depends on structures, size, composition, orientation, defects, assembly and their interaction with analytes. The properties of carbon nanomaterials are also very sensitive to functionalization, either by covalent functionalization or non-covalent functionalization. These result in rich electroanalytical properties. It will arouse much research interests in synthesizing new carbon materials, exploring the electrocatalytic properties of carbon materials for sensitive and selective detection, developing new high resolution techniques to map activity distribution, fabricating robust carbon-based nanotips, using carbon nanomaterials to achieve direct electrochemistry, preparing transparent carbon electrodes for spectroelectrochemical studies, revealing reaction mechanisms, and so on. New findings of high electroactivity of basal planes and the easy loss of electroactivity of basal planes by adsorption will attract much attention to explore the electroactivity of basal planes for sensing and develop a new approach to preserve the electroactivity of basal planes. Most graphene materials used for electroanalysis were synthesized by the violent oxidation of graphite powder by strong oxidants and are a mixture of nanoparticles with different compositions and sizes, it requires the design of well-controllable methods to synthesize monodispersed conductive graphene. rGO often have low conductivity but can frequently promote ET. Further studying ET-enhancing mechanisms potentially may facilitate the design of better materials. CVD and sputtering techniques have been successfully utilized to synthesize some unique carbon materials and will play important roles in creating new materials to increase sensitivity, expand potential window, and develop transparent sensors. The combination of different materials, the doping/functionalization of carbon materials, or the assembly of carbon materials into 3D nanostructures may lead to superior electroanalytical properties. Superhard carbon films may find applications in the development of robust sensors and devices. Carbonaceous materials with wide electrochemical windows can significantly expand the number of detectable analytes in aqueous solution and minimize the use of toxic solvents. Carbon materials with antifouling properties, such as diamond electrodes will significantly improve the reproducibility and the feasibility of on-line detections. The strong adsorption capability of some carbon materials will be utilized to remove interferences, immobilize other reagents, and extract target analytes. Some carbon materials could provide reversible electrochemical properties of some compounds that generally show irreversible electrochemistry in traditional electrodes. The utilization of high resolution mapping techniques will help to clarify the electrocatalytic mechanisms. Electrospinning is one of the most promising techniques to prepare fibers from carbon nanomaterial composites. Such electrospun carbon nanomaterial composite fibers may be used to construct ultramicroelectrode-based sensors for single cell studies, in vivo analysis and scanning probe microscopy for imaging analysis. Laser technique will be explored as a powerful technique for fabricating carbon microelectrode array sensors and disposable carbon electrodes. The micro or nanofabricated carbon-based materials will find attractive applications as detectors of microfluidic devices and various biosensors. 3D printing techniques will receive increasing attention for preparing carbon-based microchips, portable sensors, and wearable sensors.
Carbon materials, such as carbon fibers and graphene, may be used for bipolar electrochemical study.359 Some carbon materials, such as fluorescent carbon materials, will be utilized for multimodal electroanalysis. Carbon-based transparent electrodes will be explored for photoelectrochemistry, spectroelectrochemistry, and electrochemiluminescence360,361 study. For practical applications, efforts are required to improve reproducibility as well as to develop devices for complex samples and intelligent sensors (i.e. disposable sensors and devices for point of care testing, environment monitoring, and intelligent agriculture). To develop carbon-based implantable sensors, additional work should be directed to assess the biocompatibility of carbon nanomaterials and to determine any possible toxicity and health risks.
Numerical approaches362–366 have also received increasing attention in electrochemical study. Undoubtedly, computational methods will play increasingly important roles in revealing reaction mechanisms and kinetics, predicting new properties and designing new materials. Coupling experiments with advanced techniques and theoretical modeling may reveal further relationships between the structure, composition and size as well as electrochemical properties of carbonaceous materials to advance their electrochemical applications and uses.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21475123 and 21175126) and Chinese Academy of Sciences Visiting Professorships for Senior International Scientists (No. 2013T2G0024).
Notes and references
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
C. Amatore, S. Arbault, M. Guille and F. LemaÎtre, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2585–2621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Huang, Y. Liu and T. Y. You, Anal. Methods, 2010, 2, 202–211 RSC .
P. Yu, X. L. He and L. Q. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5959–5968 RSC .
S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
D. A. Brownson, C. W. Foster and C. E. Banks, Analyst, 2012, 137, 1815–1823 RSC .
Z. C. Zhang, S. Han, C. Wang, S. P. Li and G. B. Xu, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 1732–1755 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, F. H. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501–1246509 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Q. Liu, R. M. Konik, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8134–8156 RSC .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 CAS .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
A. D. Roberts, X. Li and H. F. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4341–4356 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu and X. B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. H. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. J. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 5, 3783 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Zheng, J. Chen, J. Liu, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3892–3896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Q. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J. M. Savéant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. X. Lin, L. Chen, S. Y. Ding, Z. C. Lei, D. Y. Liu, X. Y. Cao, H. J. Liang, Y. B. Jiang and Z. Q. Tian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 399–411 RSC .
V. Sgobba and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 165–184 RSC .
H. S. Peng, X. M. Sun, F. J. Cai, X. L. Chen, Y. C. Zhu, G. P. Liao, D. Y. Chen, Q. W. Li, Y. F. Lu, Y. T. Zhu and Q. X. Jia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 738–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Avouris, M. Freitag and V. Perebeinos, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 341–350 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397–2409 RSC .
Q. Y. He, S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin and H. Zhuang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
L. H. Tang, Y. Wang and J. H. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6954–6980 RSC .
F. Perreault, A. F. d. Faria and M. Elimelech, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5861–5896 RSC .
C. A. Martinez-Huitle and E. Brillas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1998–2005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Kinoshita, Carbon, Electrochemical and Physicochemical Properties, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  1988 Search PubMed .

          R. L. McCreery, in Eelectroanalytical Chemistry, ed. A. J. Bard and M. Dekker, New York,  1991, vol. 17 Search PubMed .

          C. A. L. Leon and L. R. Radovic, in Chemstry and Physics of Carbon, ed. P. A. Thrower and M. Dekker, New York,  1994, vol. 24 Search PubMed .
K. Pecková, J. Musilová and J. Barek, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2009, 39, 148–172 CrossRef .
I. Švancara, K. Vytřas, K. Kalcher, A. Walcarius and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 7–28 CrossRef .
I. Švancara, A. Walcarius, K. Kalcher and K. Vytřas, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2009, 7, 598–656 CrossRef .
S. Girousi and Z. Stanic, Curr. Anal. Chem., 2011, 7, 80–100 CrossRef CAS .
I. Švancara and J. Zima, Curr. Org. Chem., 2011, 15, 3043–3058 CrossRef .
H. P. Cong, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295–7325 RSC .
D. A. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6944–6976 RSC .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, B. Khezri, Z. Sofer, R. D. Webster and M. Pumera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 12899–12904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. L. D. Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Saito, Y. Usui, K. Aoki, N. Narita, M. Shimizu, K. Hara, N. Ogiwara, K. Nakamura, N. Ishigaki, H. Kato, S. Taruta and M. Endo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1897–1903 RSC .
J. Liu, N. P. Wickramaratne, S. Z. Qiao and M. Jaroniec, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. G. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Baptista, S. A. Belhout, S. Giordani and S. J. Quinn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4433–4453 RSC .
X. W. Mao, G. C. Rutledge and T. A. Hatton, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 405–432 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Ji and C. E. Banks, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22306–22309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. S. Lai, A. N. Patel, K. McKelvey and P. R. Unwin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5405–5408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. M. Neumann, C. Batchelor-McAuley, C. Downing and R. G. Compton, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 7320–7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Patel, S. Y. Tan, T. S. Miller, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 11755–11764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ronald, N. M. Pontikos and R. L. McCreery, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 4617–4622 CrossRef .
I. F. Hu, D. H. Karweik and T. Kuwana, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1985, 188, 59–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ranganathan, T.-C. Kuo and R. L. McCreery, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 3574–3580 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Rice and R. L. McCreery, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 1637–1641 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Kneten and R. L. McCreery, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 2518–2524 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Jaworski and R. L. McCreery, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 369, 175–181 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Hsueh and A. Brajter-Toth, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 1570–1575 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Granger, M. Witek, J. S. Xu, J. Wang, M. Hupert, A. Hanks, M. D. Koppang, J. E. Butler, G. Lucazeau, M. Mermoux, J. W. Strojek and G. M. Swain, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 3793–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Pleskov, M. D. Krotova, V. G. Ralchenko, A. V. Saveliev and A. D. Bozhko, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2007, 43, 827–836 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. M. Li, H. B. Feng, J. Lu and J. H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782–2789 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Valota, I. A. Kinloch, K. S. Novoselov, C. Casiraghi, A. Eckmann, E. W. Hill and R. A. W. Dryfe, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8809–8815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2256–2260 RSC .
A. G. Güell, K. E. Meadows, P. V. Dudin, N. Ebejer, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 220–224 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Nugent, K. S. V. Santhanam, A. Rubio and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ranganathan and R. L. McCreery, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 893–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sánchez-Molas, J. Cases-Utrera, P. Godignon and F. J. d. Campo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 186, 293–299 CrossRef .
J. J. Blackstock, A. A. Rostami, A. M. Nowak, R. L. McCreery, M. R. Freeman and M. T. McDermott, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 2544–2552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yang, L. Haubold, G. DeVivo and G. M. Swain, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 6240–6248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Hutton, J. G. Iacobini, E. Bitziou, R. B. Channon, M. E. Newton and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 7230–7240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. V. Patten, K. E. Meadows, L. A. Hutton, J. G. Iacobini, D. Battistel, K. McKelvey, A. W. Colburn, M. E. Newton, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7002–7006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Jia, D. Kato, R. Kurita, Y. Sato, K. Maruyama, K. Suzuki, S. Hirono, T. Ando and O. Niwa, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 98–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Davies, M. E. Hyde and R. G. Compton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5121–5126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Goncalves, C. Batchelor-McAuley, A. A. Barros and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14213–14219 CAS .
C. Batchelor-McAuley, L. M. Goncalves, L. H. J. Xiong, A. A. Barros and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 9037–9039 RSC .
A. N. Patel, M. G. Collignon, M. A. O'Connell, W. O. Y. Hung, K. McKelvey, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20117–20130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Patel, K. McKelvey and P. R. Unwin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20246–20249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. McCreery and M. T. McDermott, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 2602–2605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Rec., 2009, 9, 211–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Zhu, S. J. Guo, Y. X. Fang and S. J. Dong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2429–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, S. Alwarappan, Z. F. Chen, X. X. Kong and C. Z. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1829–1833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. H. Zhang, C. Wang and Z. Wang, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2014, 42, 136–144 CAS .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146–4157 RSC .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Paton, E. Varria, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O'Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O'Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. Mendoza-Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J. Pennycook, C. Downing, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. J. Low, F. C. Walsh, M. H. Chakrabarti, M. A. Hashim and M. A. Hussain, Carbon, 2013, 54, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Xu, Y. Y. Wei, H. Y. Sun, Z. Li, X. L. Zhao and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5716 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. Y. Shi, P. Ma, S. A. Peng, X. Y. Liu and T. C. Ye, Small, 2014, 10, 1761–1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. Y. Shi, X. Y. Wang, S. A. Peng and S. Q. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2987–2990 RSC .
M. Zhou, Y. M. Zhai and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5603–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Niwa, J. B. Jia, Y. Sato, D. Kato, R. Kurita, K. Maruyama, K. Suzuki and S. Hirono, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7144–7145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Yang, D. Y. Guo, L. Su, P. Yu, D. Li, J. S. Ye and L. Q. Mao, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1912–1915 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Lin, C. S. Liao, J. H. Jhang and Y. C. Tsai, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2153–2156 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Shang, P. Papakonstantinou, M. McMullan, M. Chu, A. Stamboulis, A. Potenza, S. S. Dhesi and H. Marchetto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3506–3514 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Analyst, 2006, 131, 15–21 RSC .
D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8986–8988 RSC .
S. Banerjee, J. Shim, J. Rivera, X. Z. Jin, D. Estrada, V. Soloyeva, X. Q. You, J. Pak, E. Pop, N. Aluru and R. Bashir, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 834–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bonanni, A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4197–4204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1200–1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Jia, J. Campos-Delgado, M. Terrones, V. Meunier and M. S. Dresselhaus, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 86–95 RSC .
X. T. Jia, J. Campos-Delgado, E. E. Gracia-Espino, M. Hofmann, H. Muramatsu, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, M. Endo, J. Kong, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2009, 27, 1996–2002 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3110–3116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Ma, A. S. Foster, A. V. Krasheninnikov and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 205416 CrossRef .
C. W. Zhou, J. Kong, E. Yenilmez and H. J. Dai, Science, 2000, 290, 1552–1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Wang, X. L. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. L. Wang, J. Guo and H. J. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1787–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Yan, J. W. Miao, Z. H. Yang, F. X. Xiao, H. B. Yang, B. Liu and Y. H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3295–3346 RSC .
C. B. Jacobs, M. J. Peairs and B. J. Venton, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 662, 105–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Chen, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. X. Kang, S. C. Zhang, H. H. Xie, D. Liu, Q. C. Zhao, Q. W. Li and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5898–5922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kimura, J. Goto, S. Yasuda, S. Sakurai, M. Yumura, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3150–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Wang, D. Q. Zhang, J. Yang, D. Luo, Z. W. Xu, J. K. Wei, J. Q. Wang, Z. Xu, F. Peng, X. M. Li, R. M. Li, Y. L. Li, M. H. Li, X. D. Bai, F. Ding and Y. Li, Nature, 2014, 510, 522–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hitosugi, W. Nakanishi, T. Yamasaki and H. Isobe, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 492 CrossRef .
L. Kavan and L. Dunsch, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 974–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4970–4978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Crevillén, M. Ávila, M. Pumera, M. C. González and A. Escarpa, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 7408–7415 CrossRef PubMed .
B. G. Wei, J. Wang, Z. Chen and G. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9779–9785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Merkoçi, M. Pumera, X. Llopis, B. Pérez, M. d. Valle and S. Alegret, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24, 826–838 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Banks, A. Crossley, C. Salter, S. J. Wilkins and R. G. Compton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2533–2537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Bowling, R. T. Packard and R. L. McCreery, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 1217–1223 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Rice and R. L. McCreery, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 1637–1641 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, M. Vosguerichian and Z. N. Bao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1727–1752 RSC .
L. Siegert, D. K. Kampouris, J. Kruusma, V. Sammelselg and C. E. Banks, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 48–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera and H. Iwai, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 554–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, H. Iwai and Y. Miyahara, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1770–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. K. Chng and M. Pumera, Chem. –
Asian J., 2011, 6, 2304–2307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1786–1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera and Y. Miyahara, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 260–265 RSC .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 10946–10949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. E. Stuart and M. Pumera, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 804–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. E. Stuart and M. Pumera, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 1019–1021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. E. Stuart and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5544–5548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. K. Chng and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 781–784 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. K. Chng and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Scott and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 426–428 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. E. Stuart and M. Pumera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5530–5534 CAS .
M. Pumera, Chem. Rec., 2012, 12, 201–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fairman, S. S. C. Yu, G. Z. Liu, A. J. Downard, D. B. Hibbert and J. J. Gooding, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 1357–1365 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Kaplan, P. H. Schmidt, C.-H. Chen and W. M. Walsh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 36, 867–869 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rojo, A. Rosenstratten and D. Anjo, Anal. Chem., 1986, 58, 2988–2991 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tabei, M. Morita, O. Niwa and T. Horiuchi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 334, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Morton, C. A. Morris, M. A. Derylo, R. Thakar and L. A. Baker, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5447–5452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Alharthi, T. E. Benavidez and C. D. Garcia, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3320–3327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, X. Song, K. Kinoshita, M. Madou and R. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2314–2319 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Larsen, A. Argyraki, L. Amato, S. Tanzi, S. S. Keller, N. Rozlosnik and R. Taboryski, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, B5–B7 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Campo, P. Godignon, L. Aldous, E. Pausas, M. Sarrión, M. Zabala, R. Prehn and R. G. Compton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, H63–H68 CrossRef .
E. D. Spoerke, R. Polsky, D. B. Burckel, D. R. Wheeler and B. C. Bunker, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2894–2898 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kostecki, X. Song and K. Kinoshita, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, E29–E31 CrossRef CAS .
K. Torbensen, J. Iruthayaraj, M. Ceccato, M. Kongsfelt, T. Breitenbach, S. U. Pedersen and K. Daasbjerg, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18172–18180 RSC .
Y. Matsuo, K. Iwasa, Y. Sugie, A. Mineshige and H. Usami, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4009–4014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Donner, H. W. Li, S. S. Yeung and M. D. Porter, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 2816–2822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, G. M. Swain, M. D. Porter and J. Zak, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 14–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Liu, O. Niwa, R. Kurita and T. Horiuchi, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 1315–1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Niwa and M. Morita, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
O. Niwa and H. Tabel, Anal. Chem., 1994, 66, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xiao, T. E. Beechem, M. T. Brumbach, T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, J. R. Michael, C. M. Washburn, J. Wang, S. M. Brozik, D. R. Wheeler, D. B. Burckel and R. Polsky, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3573–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Walker, D. A. V. Bout and K. J. Stevenson, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1604–1610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schreiber, T. Lutz, G. P. Keeley, S. Kumar, M. Boese, S. Krishnamurthy and G. S. Duesberg, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 6186–6190 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Morton, C. A. Morris, M. A. Derylo, R. Thakar and L. A. Baker, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5447–5452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. J. A. Schueller, S. T. Brittain and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 477–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Heo, D. S. Shim, G. T. Teixidor, S. Oh, M. J. Madou and H. Shin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, J76–J80 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Gross and A. J. Downard, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2397–2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Zachek, P. Takmakov, B. Moody, R. M. Wightman and G. S. McCarty, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 6258–6265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Hebert, B. Snyder, R. L. McCreery, W. G. Kuhr and S. A. Brazill, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 4265–4271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Benavidez and C. D. Garcia, Electrophoresis, 2013, 34, 1998–2006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. You, O. Niwa, M. Tomita and S. Hirono, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 2080–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. You, O. Niwa, Z. L. Chen, K. Hayashi, M. Tomita and S. Hirono, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 5191–5196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. You, O. Niwa, M. Tomita, H. Ando, M. Suzuki and S. Hirono, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. T. Luong, K. B. Male and J. D. Glennon, Analyst, 2009, 134, 1965–1979 RSC .
M. Iwaki, S. Sato, K. Takahashi and H. Sakairi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1983, 209–210, 1129–1133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Pleskov, A. Y. Sakharova, M. D. Krotova, L. L. Bouilov and B. V. Spitsyn, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1987, 228, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. Patel, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, Denki Kagaku, 1992, 60, 659 CAS .
G. M. Swain and R. Ramesham, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Einaga, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2010, 40, 1807–1816 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Waldvogel and B. Elsler, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 434–443 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kirste, G. Schnakenburg, F. Stecker, A. Fischer and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 971–975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Batchelor-McAuley, I. B. Dimov, L. Aldous and R. G. Compton, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 19891–19895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Ruther, M. L. Rigsby, J. B. Gerken, S. R. Hogendoorn, E. C. Landis, S. S. Stahl and R. J. Hamers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5692–5694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Ruther, Q. Cui and R. J. Hamers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5751–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Read, E. Bitziou, M. B. Joseph and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 367–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhou and J. F. Zhi, Talanta, 2009, 79, 1189–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Charrier, S. Lévy, J. Vigneron, A. Etcheberry and N. Simon, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2011, 20, 944–950 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Patten, S. C. S. Lai, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5427–5432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Zeng, V. F. Neto, J. J. Gracio and Q. H. Fan, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2014, 43, 12–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lee and S. P. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 108, 450–454 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Noh, A. Bordeanu, J. K. Lee and J. C. Pyun, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, e243 CrossRef .
K. Yoo, B. Miller, X. Shi and R. Kalishi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, C95–C101 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Khun and E. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2890–2898 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Liu and E. Liu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 198, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zeng, E. Liu, S. N. Tan, S. Zhang and J. Gao, Electroanalysis, 2002, 14, 1294–1298 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Moon, S. Park, Y. K. Lee, G. S. Bang, Y. K. Hong, C. Park and J. C. Jeon, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 464, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
N. Menegazzo, M. Kahn, R. Berghauser, W. Waldhauser and B. Mizaikoff, Analyst, 2011, 136, 1831–1839 RSC .
P. Tamiasso-Martinhon, H. Cachet, C. Deslouis and V. Vivier, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1074–1076 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Kiesele, F. Mett and P. Tschuncky, US, 6607642, B1,  2003 .
K. Honda, M. Yoshimatsu, K. Kuriyama, R. Kuwabara, H. Naragino, K. Yoshinaga, T. Kondo and A. Fujishima, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2011, 20, 1110–1120 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Kim, A. Bordeanu and J. C. Pyun, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 1394–1398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hirono, S. Umemura, M. Tomita and R. Kaneko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. You, O. Niwa, T. Horiuchi, M. Tomita, Y. Iwasaki, Y. Ueno and S. Hirono, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4796–4799 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ueda, D. Kato, R. Kurita, T. Kamata, H. Inokuchi, S. Umemura, S. Hirono and O. Niwa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4840–4846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kato, N. Sekioka, A. Ueda, R. Kurita, S. Hirono, K. Suzuki and O. Niwa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6681–6684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kato, N. Sekioka, A. Ueda, R. Kurita, S. Hirono, K. Suzuki and O. Niwa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3716–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kato, K. Goto, S. Fujii, A. Takatsu, S. Hirono and O. Niwa, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 7595–7599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kato, M. Sumimoto, A. Ueda, S. Hirono and O. Niwa, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10607–10613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamata, D. Kato, S. Hirono and O. Niwa, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 9845–9851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamata, D. Kato, H. Ida and O. Niwa, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2014, 49, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yanagisawa, R. Kurita, T. Kamata, D. Kato and O. Niwa, Electrochemistry, 2014, 82, 949–953 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kamata, D. Kato, S. Umemura and O. Niwa, Anal. Sci., 2015, 31, 651–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Hart and S. A. Wring, Trends Anal. Chem., 1997, 16, 89–103 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Jenkins, C. Y. Song, S. Fares, H. Cheng and D. Barrettino, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137, 222–229 CrossRef .
T. Kondo, H. Sakamoto, T. Kato, M. Horitani, I. Shitanda, M. Itagaki and M. Yuasa, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1546–1549 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Renedo, M. A. Alonso-Lomillo and M. J. A. Martinez, Talanta, 2007, 73, 202–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, Z. H. Nie, C. M. Cheng, E. Carrilho, B. J. Wiley and G. M. Whitesides, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 2499–2504 RSC .
Z. H. Nie, F. Deiss, X. Y. Liu, O. Akbulut and G. M. Whitesides, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 3163–3169 RSC .
S. E. Fosdick, M. J. Anderson, C. Renault, P. R. DeGregory, J. A. Loussaert and R. M. Crooks, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lankelma, Z. H. Nie, E. Carrilho and G. M. Whitesides, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4147–4152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Yue, S. Huang, J. Chang, C. Heo, F. Yao, S. Adhikari, F. Gunes, L. C. Liu, T. H. Lee, E. S. Oh, B. Li, J. J. Zhang, T. Q. Huy, N. V. Luan and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1639–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. M. Zhang, P. Sherrell, J. M. Razal, X. F. Huang, A. I. Minett and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 44–48 CAS .
D. Vilela, A. Ansón-Casaos, M. T. Martínez, M. C. González and A. Escarpa, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 2006–2014 RSC .
S. Sansuk, E. Bitziou, M. B. Joseph, J. A. Covington, M. G. Boutelle, P. R. Unwin and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 163–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Sun, C. T. Chang, H. H. Lee, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. K. Sham and W. F. Pong, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7788–7795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zhu, H. J. Li, W. X. Niu and G. B. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 940–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Shang, Y. Liu, K. A. Mahmoud, S. Hrapovic, Y. L. Liu, H. A. Moynihan, J. D. Glennon and J. H. T. Luong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 4089–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wei, C. Terashima, M. Lv, A. Fujishima and Z. Z. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3624–3626 RSC .
D. B. Luo, L. Z. Wu and J. F. Zhi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6488–6490 RSC .
W. Smirnov, N. J. Yang, R. Hoffmann, J. Hees, H. Obloh, W. Müller-Sebert and C. E. Nebel, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 7438–7443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Hutton, M. Vidotti, J. G. Iacobini, C. Kelly, M. E. Newton, P. R. Unwin and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5804–5808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kiran, E. Scorsone, P. Mailley and P. Bergonzo, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10207–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Cortez, M. Ceolín, O. Azzaroni and F. Battaglini, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8011–8018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Valentini, D. Roscioli, M. Carbone, V. Conte, B. Floris, G. Palleschi, R. Flammini, E. M. Bauer, G. Nasillo and E. Caponetti, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5823–5831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Randviir, D. A. Brownson, J. P. Metters, R. O. Kadara and C. E. Banks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4598–4611 RSC .
R. T. Kachoosangi, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 741–747 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tabel, M. Takahashi, S. Hoshino, O. Niwa and T. Horiuchi, Anal. Chem., 1994, 66, 3500–3502 CrossRef .
M. Wooten and W. Gorski, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1299–1304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. H. Li and Y. H. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Lu, H. J. Cheng, P. C. Huang, L. F. Yang, P. Yu and L. Q. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 4007–4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Lin, P. Yu, J. Hao, Y. X. Wang, T. Ohsaka and L. Q. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3895–3901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Luo, L. Z. Wu and J. F. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2121–2128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sim, J. H. Kim, S. K. Lee, M. J. Song, D. H. Yoon, D. S. Lim and S. I. Hong, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 7219–7223 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Niu, M. B. Lan, H. L. Zhao and C. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3561–3569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Dungchai, O. Chailapakul and C. S. Henry, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5821–5826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Sitnikova, A. V. Borisova, M. A. Komkova and A. A. Karyakin, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2359–2363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Moore, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Analyst, 2004, 129, 755–758 RSC .
L. Xiang, P. Yu, M. N. Zhang, J. Hao, Y. X. Wang, L. Zhu, L. M. Dai and L. Q. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 5017–5023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Safavi, N. Maleki, E. Farjami and F. A. Mahyari, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 7538–7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, D. P. Tang, R. Niessner, G. N. Chen and D. Knopp, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5407–5414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. J. Haque, H. Park, D. Sung, S. Jon, S. Y. Choi and K. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 1871–1878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, B. Munge, V. Patel, G. Jensen, A. Bhirde, J. D. Gong, S. N. Kiim, J. Gillespie, J. S. Gutkind, F. Papadimitrakopoulos and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11199–11205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Akter, M. A. Rahman and C. K. Rhee, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 6407–6415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jeong, R. Akter, O. H. Han, C. K. Rhee and M. A. Rahman, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 1784–1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Gorodetsky and J. K. Barton, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7917–7922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Gorodetsky, A. K. Boal and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12082–12083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi and R. Rahighi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2904–2916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Lim, H. Y. Hoh, P. K. Ang and K. P. Loh, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 7387–7393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dubuisson, Z. Y. Yang and K. P. Loh, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2452–2460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2356–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bonanni, A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1668–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kurkina, A. Vlandas, A. Ahmad, K. Kern and K. Balasubramanian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3710–3714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weng, J. F. Zhang, H. Li, L. P. Sun, C. H. Lin and Q. Q. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 7075–7083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hasoň, H. Pivoňková, V. Vetterl and M. Fojia, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 2391–2399 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. B. Oliveira and A. M. Oliveira-Brett, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4896–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Yang, H. Uetsuka and C. E. Nebel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 887–893 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meziane, A. Barras, A. Kromka, J. Houdkova, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 194–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Liao and J. A. A. Ho, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2470–2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Ellington and J. W. Szostak, Nature, 1990, 346, 818–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tuerk and L. Gold, Science, 1990, 249, 505–510 CAS .
D. L. Robertson and G. F. Joyce, Nature, 1990, 344, 467–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Z. Zhu, L. Han, L. H. Jin, M. Zhou and S. J. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7794–7796 RSC .
X. J. Chen, Y. Z. Wang, Y. Y. Zhang, Z. H. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. L. Li and J. H. Li, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4278–4286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Xu, L. Han, M. Zhou, C. Z. Zhu and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 7301–7307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Loo, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 143–147 RSC .
Q. Zhang, L. Zhang and J. H. Li, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2013, 41, 641–649 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Li, Y. Chen, Y. H. Ma, J. G. Shi, Y. X. Wang, C. H. Qi and Q. S. Li, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2014, 42, 759–765 CAS .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, J. F. Song, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2378–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Kang, J. Wang, H. Wu, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and Y. H. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 901–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wooten, S. Karra, M. G. Zhang and W. Gorski, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 752–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Simonov, W. Grosse, E. A. Mashkina, B. Bethwaite, J. Tan, D. Abramson, G. G. Wallace, S. E. Moulton and A. M. Bond, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 3264–3273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, J. S. Cheng, L. H. Tang, X. F. Liu, Y. Z. Liu, J. H. Li and J. H. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3366–3372 CrossRef CAS .
P. Labroo and Y. Cui, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 852–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Song, H. Y. Liu, H. L. Tan, F. G. Xu, J. B. Jia, L. X. Zhang, Z. Li and L. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 1980–1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Svedružić, J. L. Blackburn, R. C. Tenent, J. D. R. Rocha, T. B. Vinzant, M. J. Heben and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4299–4306 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Gholizadeh, S. Shahrokhian, A. I. zad, S. Mohajerzadeh, M. Vosoughi, S. Darbari, J. Koohsorkhi and M. Mehran, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5932–5938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kowalewska and P. J. Kulesza, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 9564–9571 CAS .
O. A. d. Fuentes, T. Ferri, M. Frasconi, V. Paolini and R. Santucci, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3457–3461 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Tasca, W. Harreither, R. Ludwig, J. J. Gooding and L. Gorton, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3042–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, S. J. Jiang, Z. Hu and S. Q. Liu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4292–4298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Goran, J. L. Lyon and K. J. Stevenson, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8123–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Liu, L. H. Shi, W. X. Niu, H. J. Li and G. B. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 23, 1887–1890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Shi, X. Q. Liu, W. X. Niu, H. J. Li, S. Han, J. A. Chen and G. B. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 1159–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Liu, H. J. Li, F. A. Wang, S. Y. Zhu, Y. L. Wang and G. B. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2194–2199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Li, H. M. Guan, S. Y. Zhu, M. R. H. S. Gilani, H. Saima, G. B. Xu and Y. J. Tong, J. Electrochem., 2014, 20, 501–505 CAS .
S. Y. Zhu and G. B. Xu, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2538–2549 RSC .
A. A. Reitinger, N. A. Hutter, A. Donner, M. Steenackers, O. A. Williams, M. Stutzmann, R. Jordan and J. A. Garrido, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2979–2986 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartl, E. Schmich, J. A. Garrido, J. Hernando, S. C. R. Catharino, S. Walter, P. Feulner, A. Kromka, D. Steinmuller and M. Stutzmann, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 736–742 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Bai, T. B. Xu, J. H. T. Luong and H. F. Cui, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4910–4918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Niwa, T. Horiuchi, R. Kurita and K. Torimitsu, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 1126–1132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kurita, H. Tabei, K. Hayashi, T. Horiuchi, K. Torimitsu and O. Niwa, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 441, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kurita, K. Hayashi, T. Horiuchi, O. Niwa, K. Maeyama and K. Tanizawa, Lab Chip, 2002, 2, 34–38 RSC .
K. Hayashi, T. Horiuchi, R. Kurita, K. Torimitsu and O. Niwa, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2000, 15, 523–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jagner, Analyst, 1982, 107, 593–599 RSC .
D. W. M. Arrigan, Analyst, 1994, 119, 1953–1966 RSC .
F. Scholz and B. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1994, 23, 341–347 RSC .
A. S. Baranski, Anal. Chem., 1987, 59, 662–666 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and B. M. Tian, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 1529–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Gong, T. Zhou, D. D. Song, L. Z. Zhang and X. L. Hu, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 567–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sahoo, A. K. Satpati and A. V. R. Reddy, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 25794–25800 RSC .
Y. Song and G. M. Swain, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 2412–2420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Mays and A. Hussam, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 646, 6–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Ivandini, R. Sato, Y. Makide, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6291–6298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Hocevar, I. Švancara, B. Ogorevc and K. Vytřas, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 8639–8643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Renedo and M. J. A. Martínez, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 820–826 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tyszczuk-Rotko, R. Metelka, K. Vytřas and M. Barczak, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 2049–2056 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, M. Q. Xu, J. F. Liu and G. C. Zhao, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 6572–6579 Search PubMed .
V. Jovanovsk, N. I. Hrastnik and S. B. Hočevar, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 57, 1–4 CrossRef .
A. Economou, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 1341–1346 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. M. Lu, S. B. Hocevar and P. A. M. Farias, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 3218–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, S. Han, L. Z. Hu, Y. L. Yuan, J. G. Wang and G. B. Xu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2013, 405, 3427–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sopha, J. Roche, I. Švancara and A. Kuhn, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10515–10519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. M. Lu, S. B. Hocevar and B. Ogorevc, Electroanalysis, 2001, 13, 13–16 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Lee, H. M. Lee, Y. R. Uhm, M. K. Lee and C. K. Rhee, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1920–1923 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Kadara and I. E. Tothill, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 623, 76–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. O. Kadara, N. Jenkinson and C. E. Banks, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 2410–2414 CAS .
N. A. Malakhova, N. Y. Stojko and K. Z. Brainina, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Cao, O. Jimenez, F. M. Zhou and M. T. Xu, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 17, 945–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. O. Jorge, M. M. M. Neto and M. M. Rocha, Talanta, 2007, 72, 1392–1399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. U. Flechsig, O. Korbout, S. B. Hočevar, S. Thongngamdee, B. Ogorevc, P. Gründler and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2002, 14, 192–196 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Guo, F. Xiao, Q. Liu, H. F. Liu, Y. L. Guo, J. R. Gong, S. Wang and Y. Q. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3499 Search PubMed .
S. B. Hocevar, J. Wang, R. P. Deo and B. Ogorevc, Electroanalysis, 2002, 14, 112–115 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kruusma, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379, 700–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Toghill, G. G. Wildgoose, A. Moshar, C. Mulcahy and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1731–1737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, L. Z. Hu, S. Han, Y. L. Yuan, J. G. Wang and G. B. Xu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 738, 41–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Hočevar, I. Švancara, K. Vytřas and B. Ogorevc, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 706–710 CrossRef .
W. J. Yi, Y. Li, G. Ran, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 544–548 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Li, W. W. Zhu, J. H. Luo and H. Q. Luo, Analyst, 2012, 137, 614–617 RSC .
A. K. Dutta, S. K. Maji, K. Mitra, A. Sarkar, N. Saha, A. B. Ghosh and B. Adhikary, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 578–585 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huangfu, L. Fu, Y. Z. Li, X. L. Li, H. J. Du and J. S. Ye, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 2238–2243 CrossRef .
E. O. Jorge, M. M. Rocha, I. T. Fonseca and M. M. M. Neto, Talanta, 2010, 81, 556–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Tan, L. Y. Ge and W. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 8844–8847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zaouak, L. Authier, C. Cugnet, A. Castetbon and M. Potin-Gautier, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 689–695 CrossRef CAS .
C. Prior, C. E. Lenehan and G. S. Walker, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 598, 65–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alberich, N. Serrano, C. Ariño, J. M. Díaz-Cruz and M. Esteban, Talanta, 2009, 78, 1017–1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, M. Cadevall, M. Guix, J. Ros and A. Merkoçi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 40, 57–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tesařová, A. Heras, Á. Colina, V. Ruiz, I. Švancara, K. Vytřas and J. López-Palacios, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 608, 140–146 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sbartai, P. Namour, A. Errachid, J. Krejči, R. Šejnohová, L. Renaud, M. L. Hamlaoui, A. S. Loir, F. Garrelie, C. Donnet, H. Soder, E. Audouard, J. Granier and N. Jaffrezic-Renault, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4805–4811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Read, E. Bitziou, M. B. Joseph and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 367–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, X. Y. Yu, S. Q. Xiong, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 2673–2680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yang, D. L. Meng, J. H. Sun, Y. Huang, Y. Huang and J. X. Geng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7686–7694 CAS .
M. C. Chuang, J. R. Windmiller, P. Santhosh, G. V. Ramírez, M. Galik, T. Y. Chou and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 2511–2518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, K. Cizek, B. Long, K. McAferty, C. G. Campbell, D. R. Allee, B. D. Vogt, J. L. Belle and J. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137, 379–385 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fierro, N. Mitani, C. Comninellis and Y. Einaga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16795–16799 RSC .
J. F. Ping, Y. X. Wang, Y. B. Ying and J. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 3473–3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hutton, M. E. Newton, P. R. Unwin and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 1023–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. shii, T. A. Ivandini, K. Murata and Y. Einaga, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 4284–4288 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Zhu, W. Y. Gao, L. Zhang, J. M. Zhao and G. B. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 198, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saqib, J. P. Lai, J. M. Zhao, S. P. Li and G. B. Xu, ChemElectroChem, 2015 DOI:10.1002/celc.201500182 .
Z. Y. Liu, W. J. Qi and G. B. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3117–3142 RSC .
L. Z. Hu and G. B. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3275–3304 RSC .
O. V. Klymenko, I. Svir and C. Amatore, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2237–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Amatore, O. Klymenko and I. Svir, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1170–1173 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, O. Klymenko and I. Svir, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1165–1169 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, O. V. Klymenko and I. Svir, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 2792–2798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Klymenko, I. Svir, A. I. Oleinick and C. Amatore, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 845–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Wei Zhang
	Wei Zhang received her MSc from Harbin Engineering University in 2009 majored in Applied Chemistry. In 2009, she joined Professor Guobao Xu's group at the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry and worked as a research associate. Her research interests include carbon nanomaterials, capacitors, silica nanoparticles, tantalum electrodes, hazardous substance electrochemical detections, as well as electrogenerated chemiluminescence of tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) and luminol.

Shuyun Zhu
	Shuyun Zhu received her MSc from the University of Science and Technology of China and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. She is currently working as a college teacher in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Qufu Normal University. Her research interests include single-walled carbon nanohorns, solid-phase extraction, electrochemical, colorimetric and fluorescent biosensors based on aptamers, DNA and enzymes.

Rafael Luque
	Rafael Luque has published more than 250 peer-reviewed papers. He is an Editorial Board member of Chemical Society Reviews, Catalysis Communications and Sustainable Chemical Processes as well as Editor of Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical, Series Editor of Topics in Current Chemistry, Editor-in-chief of the Porous section of Materials and Deputy Head of Departamento de Quimica Organica. He has received several awards including the Green Talents from BMBF in Germany, the TR35 Spain from Technology Review and MIT and very recently the RSC Environment, Sustainability and Energy Early Career Award from RSC as well as Visiting Professorships at HKUST, the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Universidade de Pelotas under Cienciasem Fronteiras Program.

Shuang Han
	Shuang Han obtained her BSc in chemistry from Northeast Normal University and PhD under the guidance of Professor Guobao Xu from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. After postdoctoral research at Technical University of Denmark, she joined Shenyang University of Chemical Technology. Her research involves in the synthesis and applications of graphene-based functional nanomaterials, coreactants of tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) electrochemiluminescence, rotating ring-disk electrodes, plasticizer-based electrodes, diazonium electrochemistry, and biosensors.

Lianzhe Hu
	Lianzhe Hu obtained his BSc from Jilin University and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. After postdoctoral research in King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) and The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, he is currently doing postdoctoral research in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include electrochemistry, DNA machines and switches, DNA nanotechnology, fluorescent nanoclusters, bioimaging, hydrogen peroxide-mediated boronate deprotection, biocatalysis, and enzyme mimetics.

Guobao Xu
	Guobao Xu received BSc, MSc and PhD from Jilin University, Xiamen University, CIAC, respectively. He did postdoctoral research at the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and JST-NTT. He currently is FRSC, CChem, CSci, Assoc. Editor of Anal. Methods, and Vice-Chair of Division 6 of ISE. His research interests include electrochemiluminescence, carbon nanohorns, wireless POCT devices, seed-mediated and solvothermal synthesis of metal nanocrystals, hydrothermal synthesis of microbeads, molecular imprinting, titanium dioxide nanotubes and biosensors. He has won Young Scholar Award of Chinese Chemical society, Second Class Award of National Natural Science of China, and SCOPUS Young Researcher Gold Award in Materials Science.


GC20	
	Conventional polisha	CVb	
	0.005 ± 0.003	
	
50

GC20	
	Ultraclean polish	CV	0.51	0.14	52 mV	
51 and 52

HOPG basal plane	
	
	CV	0.0014	<10−7	
	
53 and 54

HOPG basal plane	
	Freshly cleaved	SECCMc voltammetry	>0.5	
	
	
47

HOPG edge plane	
	
	
	
	0.06–0.1	
	
53

Carbon fiber 60 μm	
	Polishing	UMEd CV	0.5 ± 0.06	
	
	
55

Carbon fiber 7 μm	
	Freshly cut	UME CV	1.22 ± 0.07	
	
	
56

Nanocrystal diamond B-doped	
	
	CV	0.012–0.017	0.017–0.019	7.3 × 10−5–3.2 × 10−4 cm s−1	
57

Nanocrystal diamond N-doped	
	
	CV	0.1	
	
	
58

rGSFse	Chemical reduction	Modified on GC	CV	0.18	0.049	0.25 cm s−1	
59

Monolayer graphene	Mechanical exfoliation of natural graphite	Deposited on silicon/silicon oxide wafers	CV	
	1.2 × 10−3	
	
60

o-SGNFf	
	Immobilized on GC	CV	
	6.9 × 10−3	
	
61

f-SGNF	High temperature-annealed stacked graphene nanofibers	Immobilized on GC	CV	
	0.2 × 10−3	
	
61

SWNTs	Catalytic chemical vapor deposition	On Pd thin film	SECCM	10 ± 5	
	
	
62

MWNT microbundle electrodes	
	
	CV	
	0.5	30 mV	
63

PPFg	Pyrolyzed positive photoresist AZ4330	
	CV	0.020	0.012	
	
64

PPF	Microfabricated PPF disk electrodes (AZ4562)	
	CV	
	0.014 ± 0.007	
	
65

ECFsh	Evaporation vacuum chamber	
	CV	
	2.9 × 10−2	
	
66

ta-C: Ni	Deposited by pulsed laser-arc	
	CV	>0.1	0.005–0.015	
	
67

BDD	
	Polycrystalline oxygen-terminated BDD electrodes	CV	>0.1	0.04 (D) 0.06 (E)	
	
68

High doped facets of BDD	
	
	SECMj	3.3 ± 1.5 × 10−2	9.7 ± 4.0 × 10−2	
	
69

Low doped facets of BDD	
	
	SECM	0.7 ± 0.3 × 10−2	2.2 ± 0.8 × 10−2	
	
69

ECRk-75	ECR sputtering method	
	CV	
	1.22	472 mV	
70

ECR-20	ECR sputtering method	
	CV	
	0.24	464 mV	
70


 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of (A) a six-layer step edge and (B) cyclic voltammograms obtained from basal plane pyrolytic graphite (BPPG) and edge plane pyrolytic graphite (EPPG) electrodes in 1 mM ferricyanide in (0.1 M KCl). Scan rate, 100 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of nanotrench fabrication and cyclic voltammograms for the reduction of 1 mM [Ru(NH3)6]3+ at the HOPG electrode after each step nanotrench fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71, copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammograms of adenine (A) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (pH 6.85) on EPPG (a), Au (b), GC (c), BPPG (d), BDD (e), and Pt (f). Scan rate, 50 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reduction of 2 mM [Ru(NH3)6]3+/2+ at HOPG. SECCM maps of (a) topography (z-piezo position), (b) the AC component of the conductance current, and (c) surface redox activity recorded at −0.25 V. (d) Normalized activity histogram. (e) AFM image of the area of interest. (f) Line scan along the arrow of the AFM image. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  CVs for the oxidation of 10 μM DA in 0.15 M pH 7.2 PBS at 0.1 V s−1 on (a) GC, (b) pBDD, (c) basal plane of HOPG (ZYA grade), (d) BPPG, and (e) EPPG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Mother of all graphitic forms. Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D buckyballs, rolled into 1D nanotubes or stacked into 3D graphite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78, copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Different magnification transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of MGNFs and (B) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MGNFs deposited for 30 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94, copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of graphene and Al2O3 dielectric layer nanopore-based structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the experimental setup for SECCM imaging and SECCM electrochemical current maps for the reduction of 0.5 mM Ru(NH3)63+ in pH 7.2 PBS containing 25 mM KCl in metallic and semiconducting SWCNT devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Preparation of the W–Co nanocrystal catalyst and the template growth of a SWNT with specified (n, m). Reprinted with permission from ref. 114, copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammograms of CNTs (MWCNT-A) with different ratios of NG impurities of 10 M [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− in 0.05 M PBS (pH 7.2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Parylene reaction scheme. (b) A schematic of the microelectrode fabrication process from a bare pipette to a final pyrolyzed microelectrode. A bare quartz pipette (far left) is coated with a thin layer of parylene C and subsequently pyrolyzed under an inert atmosphere. The pipette is then masked and insulated with another layer of parylene C to form a carbon electrode (far right). (c) Optical micrographs of pipettes at different stages of this process. From left to right: a bare pipette, a pipette after initial parylene C deposition, after pyrolysis of parylene C, and a final parylene-insulated carbonaceous pipette. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of porous carbon (A), porous carbon coated with nickel (B), and 3D graphene (C and D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 159, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM image of the front view of 6.5% Pt-NEGCF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169, copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Images (70 mm × 70 mm) of pBDD obtained using (a) FE-SEM recorded with an in-lens detector at 2 kV. (b) Raman mapping, showing the integrated peak area at about 1332 cm−1 as a function of spot position. (c) IC-SECM SG-TC map for the collection of Ru(NH3)62+ (by oxidation), electrogenerated at the surface of pBDD (η = −0.004 V). (d) Calculated k0 values from the currents in (c) using finite element simulations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2012 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  Snapshots of MD simulations using butyl (n = 4, left column) and undecyl (n = 11, right column) chains, and surface coverage. One, 12, and 24 molecules per slab correspond to the coverage of 0.11, 1.3, and 2.7 × 1014 molecules per cm2. The molecular chain and triazole linkage are shown explicitly; to simplify the depiction, the ferrocene group is shown as a green sphere. Red atoms are the diamond surface atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  TEM image of UBM nanocarbon film formed with a substrate bias voltage of −75 V. Scale bar, 5 nm. Reprinted from ref. 209, copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Programmable μPADs for urinalysis. (A) Schematic of the proposed strategy for using programmable μPADs. (B) Schematic diagram of the layers of paper and tape for testing a sample of urine for any combination of glucose, protein, ketones or nitrite. (C) μPAD that was programmed to run all four assays, and dipped into a sample of artificial urine that contained no glucose, protein, ketones or nitrite. (D) μPAD that was programmed to run all four assays and was dipped into a sample of artificial urine that contained 10 mM glucose, 30 μM BSA, 10 mM aceto acetate, and 300 μM sodium nitrite. The color changes in each test zone indicate the presence of the analyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216, copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (left) Schematic of the ZnO NWA/GF electrode and detection of UA, DA, and AA. (right) SEM images of ZnO NWAs. Diameter of ZnO NWAs, ∼40 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (left) Schematic of the attachment of the microstereolithography flow cell to the underlying electrode plate and tapping mode–atomic force microscopy profile of a typical SWNT network. (right) Typical flow injection analysis (FIA) amperometric response for the detection of 50 μL injection volumes of FcTMA+ in 10 mM KNO3 at concentrations in the range of 10–1000 nM. The inset shows the triplicate current response of 10 nM FcTMA+ in 10 mM KNO3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  CVs of UA (100 μM), DA (100 μM), and AA (100 μM) at (A) bare GCE and (B) SWCNH-modified GCE in 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS. Scan rate: 50 mV s−1. Inset in (A) LSVs at the bare GCE (a) and SWCNH-modified GCE (b) in 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS containing 100 μM UA, DA, and AA. Scan rate: 100 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225, copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  CVs recorded on GCEs modified with (A) original, (B) water-boiled, and (C) acid-microwaved CNTs in deoxygenated solutions with (curve 1) and without (curve 2) 1.0 mM NADH. Background electrolyte, 0.05 M PBS at pH 7.40. Scan rate = 5.0 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of N-doped graphene. Gray: carbon atoms, blue: nitrogen atoms, white: hydrogen atoms. A possible defect structure is shown in the middle of the ball-stick model. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of bioelectrochemically active ICP nanoparticles, (B) structure of ICP- (left panel) and ICP/SWCNT- (right panel) based biosensors, (C) SEM images of ICP nanoparticles and ICP/SWCNT nanocomposite (inset), and (D) online electrochemical detecting system for in vivo monitoring. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Scheme of the sandwich ELISA protocol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Illustration of detection principles of SWNT immunosensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251, copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of the electrochemical CEA immunosensor and the detection principle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 253, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Differential pulse voltammograms (DPVs) of G, A, T, C, respectively, on (A) GC, (B) graphite modified GC, and (C) chemically rGO modified GC. DPVs of a mixture of G, A, T, C (D), ssDNA (E) and dsDNA (F) on electrode depicted above. CR-GO/GC (green), graphite/GC (red) and GC (black). Reprinted with permission from ref. 90, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  SEM images of the GO nanowalls deposited on a graphite rod by electrophoretic deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Attomolar LOD of the CNT–DNA sensor. (a) Magnitude Z-maps and (b) phase Z-maps for various concentrations of complementary target DNA. After each exposure of the sensor to target DNA, the hybrids were melted to return the sensor to its initial state, as shown in Fig. 2a–c. It is apparent that even at a cDNA concentration of 100 am (corresponding to around 1800 molecules in our 30 mL droplet), the sensor response can be discerned unambiguously. Thus, an ultralow LOD is attainable with the CNT impedance biosensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261, copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic of the electrochemical methylation detection method for single strand oligonucleotides (a) and background-subtracted square wave voltammograms of 100 μM of nucleosides at the ECR sputtering nanocarbon film (b), GC (c), and BDD (d) electrodes, respectively, measured in 50 mM pH 5.0 acetate buffer solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205, copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Detection of SNPs of oligonucleotides including the sequence from codon 248 of the p53 gene by using the ECR nanocarbon film electrode. (a) Background-subtracted square wave voltammograms (SWVs) of wild-type oligonucleotide 5 (1 μM) and its single-base mismatch 6, and the subtraction of the SWVs of 5 and 6 (G → A mutation). (b) Background subtracted SWVs of wild-type 5 (1 μM) and its single-base mismatch 7 and the subtraction of the SWVs of 5 and 7 (C → T mutation). All SWVs were measured in acetate buffer (50 mM, pH 3.3) containing 2 M sodium nitrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204, copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 33  Flow diagram displaying the concept behind the competitive assay-based performance of the developed genosensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 267, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  (A) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical aptamer biosensor for dynamic evaluation of cell surface N-glycan expression based on multivalent recognition and dual signal amplification, (B) fabrication of poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimer-conjugated chemically rGO (rGO-DEN), and (C) fabrication procedures of HRP- and aptamer-modified AuNP nanoprobes (HRP–aptamer–AuNPs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 272, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Electrochemical sensing strategy for the detection of ATP: (A) without target and (B) with target. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of pH-switchable behavior of Fe(CN)63− on the Con A/CS–rGO/GCE triggered by the enzyme-catalyzed reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematic of enzyme immobilization on VACNT-NEA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Schematic representation of the SWCNT assembly on GCE. (a) Immobilization of unfunctionalized SWCNTs on a GCE modified by a mixed monolayer of phenyl/aniline groups 3:2, obtained by the diazonium reaction. (b) Self-assembly of aniline-functionalized SWCNTs on a bare GCE achieved by the diazonium reaction. (c) SEM image of SWCNTs on a GCE (the SEM image was taken from a 45° tilted view). (d and e) TEM images of SWCNTs on a GCE taken from different tilt angles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 287, copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 39  (A) Schematic of the maskless top-down UV/ozone process on carbon film, (B) bilirubin oxidase (BOD) loaded on the nanostructure and (C) DET of BOD bioelectrocatalysis of original and nanostructure carbon film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 40  A photograph of microfluidic device for measuring histamine and a schematic representation of the electrochemical cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 301, copyright 2002 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



Ex situ Hg film	C fiber	Pb2+	ASVa	5 nM	
306


Ex situ Au film	SPEs	Pb2+	PSAb	0.1 ppb	
307

Au–Pt NPs	GC	Hg2+	SWASVc	0.008 ppb	
308

Bi–Au NPs	CPE	Cu2+	ASV	0.28 ppb	
309


In situ Au film	BDD	As3+, As5+	DPASVd	0.005 ppb, As3+	
310

0.08 ppb, As5+
Ir-implated	BDD	As3+	FIA	20 nM (1.5 ppb)	
312


In situ Sb film	GC	Cd2+, Pb2+	ASV	0.7 ppb, Cd2+	
313

0.9 ppb, Pb2+
Ag NPs	SPEs	Sb3+	ASV	6.79 × 10−10 M	
314


Ex situ Pb film	GC	Ni2+	DPASV	3.9 × 10−11 M	
315


In situ Te film	GC	Cd2+, Pb2+	ASV	0.5 ppb, Cd2+	
316

0.8 ppb, Pb2+

Ex situ Cu film	GC	Hg2+, Pb2+	ASV	0.1 ppb, Hg2+	
317

0.06 ppb, Pb2+

In situ Bi film	GC, C fiber	Zn2+, Cd2+, Tl+,	SWASV	0.3 ppb, Pb2+	
320


In situ Bi film	N,S-doped graphene	Pb2+	DPASV	0.016 ppb, Cd2+	
331

0.018 ppb, Pb2+

In situ Bi film	GC	Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+	PSA	0.2 ppb, Cd2+	
332

0.8 ppb, Pb2+

In situ Bi film	BDD	Pb2+	SWASV	0.18 ppb	
333

Bi NPs	BDD	Cd2+, Pb2+	SWASV	2.3 ppb, Cd2+	
334

1.9 ppb, Pb2+

Ex situ Bi film	CP	Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+	SWASV	0.1 ppb, Zn2+	
335

0.22 ppb, Cd2+
0.44 ppb, Pb2+
Bi powder	CP	Cd2+, Pb2+	SWASV	1.2 ppb, Cd2+	
336

0.9 ppb, Pb2+
BiPO4	TFCC	Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+	SWASV	8 ppb, Zn2+	
327

4 ppb, Cd2+
2 ppb, Pb2+
Bi–Sb film	GC	Cd2+	SWASV	0.15 ppb	
337

Bi–Sn film	GC	Zn2+, Cd2+	DPASV	0.31 ppb, Zn2+	
338

0.86 ppb, Cd2+
Bi2S3 NPs	GC	H2O2	
I–Te	2.5 μM	
339


In situ Bi film	SPEs	Cd2+, Pb2+	DPASV	0.042 ppb, Cd2+	
340

0.089 ppb, Pb2+

In situ Bi film	GC	Tl+	SWASV	10.8 nM	
329


Ex situ Bi film	GC	Cr3+, Cr6+	SWASV	1.12 nM, Cr3+	
341

1.40 nM, Cr6+

In situ Bi film	SPEs	Zn2+	SWASV	2.0 ppb	
342


Ex situ Bi film	TFCSP	Pb2+	SWASV	0.3 ppb	
323


Ex situ Bi film	SPM	Cd2+	SWASV	1.3 ppb	
343

Bi2O3	GCISP	Cd2+, Pb2+	CCSCPf	16 ppb, Cd2+	
325

8 ppb, Pb2+
Bi2O3	SPEs	Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+	SWASV	5 ppb, Cd2+	
326

10 ppb, Pb2+
30 ppb, Zn2+

In situ Bi film	GC	Cu2+	SWASV	1.4 ppb	
344


Ex situ Bi film	GC	Pb-GSH	DPASV	—	
345

Bi NPs	SPEs	Phenolic compounds	
I–T	26 nM, catechol	
346

62 nM, phenol
Nafion-coated Bi	GC	Cd2+, Pb2+	ASV-ICP-MSg	36.2 ± 2.2 ppt, Cd2+	
328


In situ Bi film	GC	Cd2+	DPASV	2.5 ppm	
347


 	Fig. 41  Stripping voltammograms of lead, cadmium, and zinc at GC (A) and carbon-fiber (B) electrodes coated with bismuth (a) and mercury (b) films. Solutions, 0.1 M acetate buffer (pH 4.5) containing 50 μg L−1 lead(II), cadmium(II), and zinc(II), along with 400 μg L−1 bismuth (a) or 10 mg L−1 mercury (b). Deposition for 120 s at −1.4 V; “cleaning” for 30 s at +0.3 V. Square-wave voltammetric stripping scan with a frequency of 20 Hz, potential step of 5 mV, and amplitude of 25 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320, copyright 2000 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 42  (left) Mercury stripping peaks recorded on the disk of the ring disk electrode at 0.1 V s−1 in 1 mM Hg2+ solutions at pH 2.0 (black line) and pH 6.4 (red line) but with iring = +50 μA to generate a local pH of 2.0 over the disk electrode; middle, schematic of the coplanar ring disk electrode geometry (not to scale) under constant current conditions where H+ is generated at the ring and Hg is detected at the disk; (right) axisymmetrical r–z H+ concentration profile for H+ generation at the pBDD ring electrode at t = 60 s, for iring = +50 μA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
