On the influence of multiple cations on the in-gap states and phototransport properties of iodide-based halide perovskites   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CP03555E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CP03555E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 24444-24452On the influence of multiple cations on the in-gap states and phototransport properties of iodide-based halide perovskites†

        
          
            Doron 
            Azulay‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Igal 
            Levine‡
c, 
      
        
          
            Satyajit 
            Gupta
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Einav 
            Barak-Kulbak
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Achintya 
            Bera
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Granit 
            San
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shir 
            Simha
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Cahen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Oded 
            Millo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gary 
            Hodes
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Isaac 
            Balberg
          
        
      *a
aThe Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. E-mail: balberg@mail.huji.ac.il
bAzrieli, Jerusalem College of Engineering, Jerusalem 9103501, Israel
cDept. of Materials & Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. E-mail: gary.hodes@weizmann.ac.il
Received 
      5th June 2018
    , Accepted 4th September 2018First published on 17th September 2018AbstractIn-gap states in solar cell absorbers that are recombination centers determine the cell's photovoltaic performance. Using scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), temperature-dependent photoconductivity and steady-state photocarrier-grating measurements we probed, directly and indirectly, the energies of such states, both at the surface and in the bulk of two similar, but different halide perovskites, the single cation MAPbI3 (here MAPI) and the mixed cation halide perovskite, FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 (here MCHP). We found a correlation between the energy distribution of the in-gap states, as determined by STS measurements, and their manifestation in the photo-transport parameters of the MCHP absorbers. In particular, our results suggest that the in-gap recombination centers in the MCHP are shallower than those of MAPI. This can be one explanation for the better photovoltaic efficiency of the former.
I. Introduction
The relation between the electronic structure and the stunning performance of devices based on alkylammonium lead triiodide perovskites, mainly methylammonium lead iodide (MAPI) and/or formamidinium lead iodide (FAPI), is a matter of intense debate, which has led to many suggestions. However, clear conclusions that may provide guidelines for the search for similar, preferably Pb-free, materials, are scarce. Among the puzzles involved is the improvement of solar cells based on mixed cation halide perovskites (MCHPs), FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, where mainly the monovalent cation is a mixture of two or more different cations and the halide anions are often also mixed, in comparison with a variety of single (monovalent) cation halide perovskites (MAPIs).1–5 One solution to this puzzle might be the general theoretical predictions of Kim et al.6,7 and Yin et al.8 for the energetic location of the in-gap states in MAPI and/or MCHP, which we partially test here experimentally. In ref. 6–8 it was concluded from calculations that, in general, there is a near-absence of deep defect states within the band gap in MAPIs. It was further concluded that in mixed anion materials, there are shallow levels that can merge into the conduction band.7 There are already some experimental studies on different types of halide perovskites, employing a number of experimental methods, that suggest the presence of relatively shallow (see below) defect states.9–12 However, no connection was made there between the detected states and the phototransport properties that are relevant to the solar cell performance, except for a general statement that “states, located at the bottom of the conduction band (CB) and shallow sub-band gap states contribute to the charge dynamics”.9 Noting the superior performance found in solar cells based on the MCHP materials in comparison with the more intensively-studied MAPI ones, this is quite a remarkable conclusion, because it connects the composition of the materials not only with their electronic structure, as in the theoretical works, but also with their charge kinetics. However, until now, no proof or specific argument for this connection has been provided.
One way to test the conclusion of the presence of relatively shallow defect states is to verify experimentally that there is a significant difference between both the electronic structure and charge dynamics of the MAPIs and the MCHPs. As far as we know, no such comparative study has been reported. In particular, while indirect, macroscopic experimental evidence for shallow defects in halide perovskite materials has been presented,10,11 no combination of a direct experimental determination of the energy of the recombination centers and its consistency with the macroscopically-observed charge dynamics has been presented for halide perovskites. Thus, we set out to test the suggestion in ref. 9 mentioned above, specifically that shallow sub-band gap states contribute to charge dynamics, by a combination of direct microscopic and indirect macroscopic optoelectronic studies in the expectation that the results of such a study will improve our understanding of these promising materials. In the present work, we establish a connection between the energetic distribution of the in-gap states and their manifestation in the phototransport parameters of the MAPI and MCHP solar cell absorbers. Our results confirm the importance of the latter in that they can yield superior solar cell performance.
In Section II we review the concepts to be used in our study and present the simplest possible recombination model and expected temperature dependence of the kinetic-dynamic processes of that model. In this way, we provide a macroscopic tool that associates the microscopic in-gap states directly with solar cell performance. A short account of that connection and the experimental details of our study are given in the ESI.†
Our experimental results and their analyses are described in Section III. In particular, we compare them with the solution of the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) model.13,14 We show that one can distinguish between shallow and deep recombination centers by STS results and the trends of the temperature dependence of the phototransport properties in the above two cases. The SRH model equations and the parameters that we use for that comparison are given in the ESI.† Our conclusions are presented in Section IV.
II. Phototransport in a semiconductor with a single recombination center type
In this section, we review briefly the basic concepts of the SRH model and the relevant phototransport properties that determine operational parameters of a photovoltaic cell, such as its efficiency. We will demonstrate how the phototransport dependence on temperature differs in the cases of deep and shallow recombination centers, providing a tool to distinguish between the two types of centers. A detailed account of the model-calculations that we used is given in the ESI.† The experimental results from the STS and temperature-dependent phototransport measurements are then compared with the results from the model.
MAPI and MCHP are photovoltaic materials that, in a full solar cell stack configuration, form the “i” of a p-i-n junction15 leading to a strong photovoltaic effect. In this study we focus solely on the phototransport properties of these absorbers, which are by definition photoconductors, and use a device configuration with two symmetrical, ohmic contacts, without the formation of any rectifying junction. For the sake of simplicity and clarity, we will use a photoconductor model to describe MAPI and MCHP. In this model it is assumed that there is one (effective) recombination center, with one corresponding energy level, Er. The center and the energy level can be taken to represent the entire population of recombination centers in the photoconductive material.13,14 Note that agreement between experimental results and results from such a model does not imply or prove that there is a single kind of recombination center in the actual system.16–19 However, where applicable (see the ESI†), this model captures the basic kinetic (electronic) processes in the optoelectronic material that is considered. The conclusions of this model will be applied to single and mixed MAPI films, to provide insight into the performance of the corresponding solar cells.
We start with the basic electronic structure of a photoconductor that assumes a single effective kind of a recombination center, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the simplest model of the electronic level structure of a photoconductor: recombination of photogenerated carriers takes place via the centers at energy Er. The figure represents a p-type semiconductor as the Fermi energy, EF, is closer to the valence band edge Ev than to the conduction band edge, Ec. The figure represents also a p-type photoconductor, in the sense that Er lies above EF. (closer to the vacuum level) so that in the temperature range and for the excitation intensity range used, there is a larger steady state concentration of the holes (open circles) at Er and at Ev, and a smaller steady state concentration of the electrons (full circles) at Er and at Ec. G represents the rate at which electron–hole pairs are generated upon illumination, Re is the basic electron-to-trap center recombination rate and Rh is the basic hole-to-trap center recombination rate. 
Throughout the following discussion we will assume (in accordance with our previous16 and present findings) that the Fermi energy, EF, lies deep in the band gap and that the material is a weakly doped p-type semiconductor (i.e., that Ec − EF > EF − Ev ≫ kT, where kT is the thermal energy). We will further assume, for simplicity, that the capture coefficients of the electrons and the holes by the centers, Ce, and Ch, are equal (we note that if the ratio of capture coefficients, Ce/Ch is different from unity, the curves in Fig. S1 and S2 of the ESI† would be shifted up or down, but the trends of T-dependence would remain the same). We further define 3 types of in-gap states, as follows: in-gap states which act as recombination levels are considered here as deep if Ec − Er, Er − Ev >12kT, and as shallow, if either Ec − Er or Er − Ev < 12kT, (however still > 6kT), while tail states (in-gap states that do not act as recombination centers) are defined here as in-gap states positioned less than 6kT from the CB or VB edge. In this study we further assume that for the light intensities used here, given by an optical generation with a rate G, p and n, the densities of free holes and free electrons, respectively, are orders of magnitude larger than the densities of the equilibrium (dark) free carriers in the bands. We use the common definition of the hole and electron lifetimes as13,20τh = p/G, and τe = n/G.The other parameters involved in the phototransport are the mobilities of the holes and the electrons, μh and μe. Hence, phototransport is characterized by the μhτh and μeτe products. These two quantities determine the single-carrier diffusion lengths21,22Lh = (kTμhτh/e)1/2 and Le = (kTμeτe/e)1/2where e is the elementary electronic charge.
In the ESI† we present an example of the calculated temperature dependences of the μτ products within the framework of the typical single recombination level system shown in Fig. 1. The experimentally-observed behavior will be compared below with the results of the calculated dependences (that are detailed in the ESI†) and the results of the STS measurements. This comparison will lead to a self-consistent conclusion of the difference in the depths (although not yet of the densities) of the recombination level Er, in the MAPIs and the MCHPs.
III. Results and discussion
Spectroscopic and phototransport measurements were performed on our solution-fabricated MAPI and MCHP films. In Fig. 2 we show the optical absorbance for both types of films. The results correspond to onset of band-gap absorption at 775 and 756 nm (1.60 eV and 1.64 eV) for the MAPI and MCHP films, respectively (deduced from their respective Tauc plots, Fig. 2b). As seen in Fig. 2, we could not, within the resolution of this measurement, find evidence for the presence of in-gap states, i.e., in the longer (than the band gap) wavelength regime; the features above 800 nm are not an indication for actual sub-band gap states, but rather a result of optical interference of the incident beam with the sample.
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical transmittance (corrected for reflection) of the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) films, used in this study. (b) Corresponding Tauc plots to determine the direct optical bandgaps for the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) films from the data in (a). 
Photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra show (Fig. 3) the band gap emission peaks at 775 and 765 nm, (1.60 and 1.62 eV) for MAPI and MCHP, respectively. Again, no indication for PL signals at lower energies, that could be construed as evidence for the involvement of in-gap states, was found.
 Fig. 3  Photoluminescence spectra for the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) films. The inset presents a blow-up of the peak spectral region. 
In contrast to these pure optical techniques, photo(electrical) transport properties are known to be more sensitive to in-gap states, even when the density of the states that is involved is orders of magnitude smaller than the effective densities of states at the band edges (typically, 1016 cm−3 for the in-gap states, which should be compared with a few times 1018 to 1019 cm−3 for the DOS at the VB and CB edges, respectively).13,16,22,23 Correspondingly, we carried out photocurrent spectroscopy (PCS)24 to look for the presence of in-gap states. The results, shown in Fig. 4, indicate a photoconductivity threshold at 1.47 ± 0.02 eV for MAPI and slightly higher threshold energy 1.51 ± 0.02 eV for MCHP films. These values were obtained by extrapolation of the linear part of the photoconductivity rise to zero photocurrent. The shift of the MCHP to ∼40 meV higher energies compared to the MAPI is consistent with shifts in the optical transmittance and PL spectra. The lower values of PCS-extracted ‘band gaps’ than those extracted from optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra, may be due to the higher sensitivity of the former method, that would allow the detection of tail states that are not resolved in the absorption measurements, as is shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Moreover, by plotting the PCS data on a semi-log scale, we see that the MCHP sample has a slightly broader tail than the MAPI (Fig. S3, ESI†) one. In addition, the band gaps extracted from STS (see below), which is also sensitive to in-gap and tail states, are close to the PCS-derived gaps.
 Fig. 4  Normalized photocurrent at the peak of the photocurrent spectrum, for the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) used in the present study. Dashed lines represent extrapolation of the linear part of the photoconductivity rise to zero photocurrent. 
Tahara et al.10 attributed the inability to observe shallow or deep in-gap states in their initial study, using conventional methods such as described above (UV-Vis, PL and PCS), to the very low concentration of such states, where “very low” obviously refers to “below the detection limit of the method used”. Then, indeed, they found evidence for the shallow recombination level states using the more sophisticated method of PC beat spectroscopy. Still, their method, similar to the three methods we used (Fig. 2–4), was an indirect one in the sense that all involve convolution of the data, averaged over area and physical properties, system parameters and instrumental response function, to conclude the presence of a low concentration of states (as defined earlier in this paragraph) in general and their energy position in particular.
In contrast to the above macroscopic optical and combined optoelectronic measurements, STS is a direct, local, microscopic surface measurement that enables determination of not only the band gap and relative position of the Fermi level, but also the presence of states within the energy gap, as we found for hydrogenated microcrystalline silicon (μc-Si:H),25 CdSe26 and Si27 nanocrystals. Two typical dI/dV−V tunneling spectra measured on an MAPI film are shown in Fig. 5. The measurements were carried out on two MAPI films, each from a separate preparation batch. For a given sample, STS spectra were taken at different locations on the surface of each film. The band gap, extrapolated27 from six such tunneling spectra taken at different locations (where every curve was the average of 300 measured current, I, values for every bias voltage, V, value) is 1.53 ± 0.05 eV. The band edges, Ec and Ev, (from which the gaps are determined) are defined as the onset of observable density of states (DOS), as marked by the dashed lines in the figure. The Fermi level position (at V = 0) is closer to the valence band edge than to the conduction band edge, indicating a p-type semiconductor with EF − Ev = 0.45 eV, consistent with our previous determination of majority and minority carriers in the bulk.28 These results confirm our previous conclusion from surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements,16 regarding the p-type nature of our MAPI films. However, as shown in Fig. 5, the STS results do not show evidence for in-gap states for these samples.
 Fig. 5  Two scanning tunneling spectra (left panel) and a topographic image, obtained using atomic force microscopy (right panel), for an MAPI film. The dashed lines mark the average conduction-band (CB) and valence-band (VB) onsets, and the Fermi energy (EF) is at V = 0. The tunneling spectra show that the material is a p-type semiconductor with an energy gap of 1.53 ± 0.05 eV (the error was determined from the variations between the different spectra). No signature of in-gap states is seen. 
Unlike the above results on the MAPI, our STS results for MCHP (Fig. 6) show strong evidence for the presence of shallow in-gap states, as manifested by the spectral feature, clearly observed adjacent to the conduction band edge. The corresponding band gaps, 1.50 ± 0.10 eV, were extracted using exactly the same procedure as described above for the MAPI films, but here the conduction band edge (marked by the dashed lines) was defined as the voltage where the STS signal starts sharply rising after the in-gap spectral features that we ascribe to in-gap states (for a summary of the different band gap values, extracted from each of the methods listed above, see Table S1 in the ESI†). We also note that the separation between the Fermi energy and the onset of the valence band, EF − Ev, is about 0.6 eV rather than the 0.45 eV that we found for the MAPI, suggesting that the MCHP is more intrinsic-like than the MAPI, but still remains p-type, which may partially explain the superior performance of MCHP cells in the commonly used p-i-n cell configuration for the HaPs. Such in-gap states were observed in all the tunneling spectra acquired from the two MCHP films measured, one from each of two separate preparations. Also here, the results were extracted from measurements that were done on 6 different locations on the surface and on each location some 300 data sets were acquired.
 Fig. 6  Two scanning tunneling spectra (left panel) and a topographic image, obtained using atomic force microscopy (right panel), for an MCHP film studied in this work. The dashed lines mark the average CB and VB onsets, and the Fermi energy (EF) is at V = 0. The tunneling spectra show a p-type semiconductor with an energy gap of 1.50 ± 0.1 eV. The important finding is the presence of in-gap states at about 0.25 ± 0.1 eV below the conduction band edge. 
While the positions of the band gap onsets are well-reproduced in all the tunneling spectra that we measured, the supra-bandgap spectral features do exhibit spatial variations. This is evident by the difference between the blue and red curves, which were measured at different locations, presented in Fig. 5 and 6. This reflects spatial variations of the local DOS along the sample surface, and/or variations in coupling between the tip and the different electronic levels.29 Note, for example, that the two smeared shoulders seen above the conduction band onset for the blue curve in Fig. 5 appear to evolve into one large shoulder in the red curve.
The fact that the defect states in the MCHP are well above the Fermi level, implies that in the dark these states are practically empty of electrons (i.e., they are almost entirely filled with holes) and thus allow the electron to tunnel to them. The fact that the sample bias is positive further suggests that electrons tunnel from the tip to these states. Under illumination, one expects that in view of the above (i.e., the in-gap states will act as electron traps), the electron lifetime τe should be smaller than that of the holes τh. However, the lifetime depends also on the capture coefficients of the carriers. On the other hand, in our phototransport experiments, we measure photoconductivity and ambipolar diffusion lengths which depend also on the mobilities of the two carriers (μe and μh). Moreover, the results from the measurements provide combinations of the mobility lifetime products of the two carriers, so a priori we cannot separate lifetime and mobility. To try to correlate our phototransport results with the presence of the shallow states that we concluded from the STS measurements, we carried out phototransport measurements (photoconductivity [PC] and steady state photocarrier grating [SSPG]) as a function of temperature and interpreted them in light of a simple model that involved states that are all at the same energy level (see ESI†), as explained below.
Correspondingly, we performed the PC and SSPG measurements on our MAPI and MCHP films between 190–310 K, extending earlier such measurements of ours on MAPI samples.16 Note that the temperature range is completely within the range of existence of the tetragonal phase, relevant to solar cell use. Then, using eqn (S8) and (S9) in the ESI,† which describe the relation between the experimentally-measured quantities and the μτ products of the two types of carriers, we derived the temperature dependence of these μτ products. These can be compared with results from theory, in this case the earlier-mentioned SRH model of the single trap level (as given by Fig. S1 and S2 in the ESI†). The main consequence of our solutions for this model, presented in the ESI,† is that changing the position of Er in the gap yields a qualitative change in the μτ temperature dependence for electrons and holes. In particular, these changes depend on whether the in-gap state levels are shallow or deep. Our calculations show a clear change in the trend of the temperature dependence of the μτ products with the position of Er. These products decrease with (or are independent of) temperature in the case of deep level states, while they clearly increase with temperature in the case of shallow level states (see Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†).
The temperature dependence of the μτ products that we obtained for the MAPI and MCHP samples is shown in Fig. 7 and 8, respectively. For the sake of completeness, we also present the same data in terms of the hole and electron diffusion lengths, as defined in Section II. To characterize the various results, we associate the upper curves in the upper data points in the figures with the electrons and the lower data points with the holes. This will be justified a posteriori by fitting the data to be consistent with the presence of recombination centers that are adjacent to the edge of the conduction band. The temperature dependence of the MCHP electron μτ product is stronger (>1 order of magnitude) than that of the MAPI one, although both show a tendency to increase with temperature. For the μτ products of holes, if anything, there is possibly a decrease with increasing temperature for the MAPI film which (within the experimental error of the measurement) is insignificant. For the MCHP film, a slight increase of the hole μτ product is observed, significantly above the experimental error, especially pronounced at the T = 193 K point.
 Fig. 7  Measured temperature dependence of the two-carrier mobility-lifetime (μτ) products (filled symbols), and the corresponding diffusion lengths (open symbols) in an MAPI film. The values shown were determined by applying eqn (S8) and (S9) to the results, obtained from the measured photoconductivity and SSPG experiments,31–36 as described briefly in the ESI.† Based on the above characterization and our calculation results shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI,† we assign the black (red) data points to the electrons (holes). The error bars are calculated based on the error in the determination of LD in the SSPG measurements, as described in the ESI.† 
 Fig. 8  Temperature dependence of carrier mobility lifetime (μτ) products (filled symbols) and the corresponding diffusion lengths (open symbols) in an MCHP sample. The values shown were calculated from eqn (S8) and (S9) using the results obtained from the measured photoconductivity and SSPG. Based on our characterization and the calculation results shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI,† we assign the black (red) data points to the electrons (holes). Note the significant stronger temperature dependence for electrons in comparison with the one shown in Fig. 7 for the MAPIs. The error bars are calculated based on the error in the determination of LD in the SSPG measurements, as described in the ESI.† 
Based on our calculations and the discussion presented in the ESI,† our finding that the μτ products for MAPI are nearly T-independent is in agreement with the presence of an effective recombination level (remember that the model is for one effective level) that is relatively deep (≫12kT) inside the MAPI bandgap (see Fig. S1, ESI†), consistent with our previous evaluation of the energy position of this level, at 0.6–0.8 eV below the CB, which was based on the light intensity dependences of μτ.16 Importantly, the absence of in-gap states in the tunneling spectra (Fig. 5) is consistent with the absence (or very low density) of shallow recombination centers in the MAPI films. In contrast, the temperature dependence of the μτ products found for MCHP films (Fig. 8) is consistent with the presence of shallow states (as shown in the results given in Fig. S2, ESI†), and seen in our STS results (Fig. 6). We note here that the mobilities of the charge carriers, for which the temperature dependencies are rather weak (i.e. proportional to T−1.5)30 in the temperature range used here, cannot explain the strong μτ rise in Fig. 8. Furthermore, if one assumes a mobility that decreases with increasing temperature,30 the temperature increase of τ (the one that is calculated in the ESI†), which is associated with Er, would be even more pronounced than in the case of a temperature-independent mobility.
The agreement that can be shown (see part 1 of the ESI†) between the phototransport and the STS results for MCHP, i.e. the relatively strong T-dependence of the μτ products shown in Fig. 8, which is consistent with the experimental evidence for shallow in-gap states in the MCHP from the STS results shown in Fig. 6, is relevant also to the operation of the corresponding MAPI- and MCHP-based solar cells. For the MAPI films, we do not observe evidence of a deep level in the STS results. In principle, this may be due to their low concentration and/or a low tunneling probability between the tip and these states. We further note here that although we observe evidence for tail states in both types of the studied samples, our claim here is that these tail states are not the relevant in-gap states that were found in the STS measurements and they are not the in-gap states responsible for the phototransport dependence on T. We come to these conclusions based on:
(1) the STS results do not show a tail or even a shoulder, as expected for tail states, but rather a clear peak;
(2) our experimental results (and also those obtained by Hutter et al.23) fit theoretical predictions using the simplest single level recombination model (and not a model with only tail states, which is much more complicated20,37);
(3) we previously found16 that the power law exponent of the photoconductivity dependence on light intensity fits the single level model which is practically temperature independent whereas the power law exponents for tail states have a more complicated temperature dependence.37
Based on the results shown in Fig. 8, we propose that the two questions, i.e., the existence of electrically-active shallow levels, and their relevance to phototransport, can be answered positively by comparing results from theory with experimental ones: the μτ of the electrons in MCHP increases strongly with temperature (Fig. 8), compared with the very mild increase of the electrons μτ of MAPI (Fig. 7). Calculations, based on the single recombination state model, shown in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†), show the trends of the μτ products as a function of temperature. From these trends, we see that the experimental results are consistent with Er close to Ec in MCHP, while for MAPI, it is deeper in the band gap. Connecting these conclusions to the fact that MCHP-based solar cells have a performance that is better than that of MAPI-based ones,1–5 we associate this result, at least partially, with the shallow nature of the in-gap states in MCHP, compared to the deeper in-gap states in MAPI.
Recalling that the observed temperature dependence, shown in Fig. 7 and 8, cannot be attributed to variation in the mobility, as the T−1.5 temperature dependence of the halide perovskites is by now well-established,30,38,39 we need to be cautious with detailed quantitative comparisons of the results in Fig. 7 and 8 with the predictions in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†), because we arrived at the latter using a simple, and likely oversimplified model. The real material is undoubtedly more complicated. For example, even within the single level model we can change the ratio of capture coefficients, Ce/Ch, to improve the “agreement” between model predictions and experimental results. On the other hand, the fact that in our simulations we have used reasonable literature-based parameters to obtain results that are in semi-quantitative agreement with the results of Fig. 7 and 8, together with the fact that we could obtain the results that are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†) only by using an Er that lies 0.2 eV below Ec (which is plausible based on the STS data (cf.Fig. 6)), shows that these results capture the essence of the phototransport in the materials that we studied.
As to the details of Fig. 7 and 8, the diffusion lengths are within the range noted in other works, as derived from measurements on films fabricated from solution.15,23,40,41 In particular, the electron diffusion length varies from ∼600 to ∼400 nm for the MAPI, when it is cooled down from 300 to 180 K, while for the MCHP a more dramatic change occurs, as the electron diffusion length decreases from ∼1400 to ∼300 nm over the same temperature range. While the electron diffusion length is significantly larger in MCHP than in MAPI, the values for the holes are quite similar in the two materials, about ∼200 nm at 300 K. Hence, considering the importance of the absorber's μτ (i.e., of LD) for the solar cell efficiency and the fact that it may be determined by the minority carriers of the smaller LD,16,18 our experimental finding that the electron diffusion length is ∼2 times larger in MCHP than in MAPI films may also explain the higher efficiency of the MCHP cells than that of the MAPI ones.
IV. Summary and conclusions
Based on our study, the differences in the in-gap electronic energy levels between MAPI and MCHP can be represented as shown in Fig. 9. From the combined STS, photoconductivity and SSPG results we conclude that for MCHP the recombination level, Er, is relatively shallow (close to the conduction band), Ec − Er ∼ 0.2–0.3 eV. On the other hand, for MAPI, following our photoconductivity and SSPG results, we conclude that the (effective) recombination level, Er, lies much deeper in the gap (closer to the mid-gap). We found that an effective single-energy level model captures the basic properties of the phototransport features of the materials. In particular, considering that the operational parameters of the solar cells, such as the energy conversion efficiency, are also determined by the mobility-lifetime products of the absorber, we note that the μτ products reflect, to a first approximation, the underlying photophysical processes of these materials, as relevant to their use as absorbers in solar cells.
 Fig. 9  Suggested single-level recombination models for MAPI (left; also shown in Fig. 1) and MCHP (right). Here ge(T) (the red arrow in the right panel) is the thermally-induced excitation from the recombination level to the conduction band edge that is given by the thermal emission, ge(T) in the simple Shockley–Read–Hall model (see ESI† for details). While ge(T) is negligible in the case of MAPI, it is dominant in the case of MCHP over the temperature range that we studied. 
The observed differences in the in-gap states distribution in MAPI and MCHP and their corresponding influence on the recombination processes provide new physical insights into the electronic and photo-transport properties of these materials and emphasize the need for the understanding of these properties in the halide perovskites.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
At the Hebrew University this work was supported in part by ISF grant #661/16 and the Harry de Jur Chair in Applied Science (O.M.) and the Enrique Berman Chair in Solar energy research (I.B.). At the Weizmann Institute of Science this work was supported, in part by its Sustainability and Energy Research Initiative, SAERI (GH) and by grants from the Israel Ministry of Science and Technology. DC held the Schaefer Chair of Energy Research.
References
Y. Sun, J. Peng, Y. Chen, Y. Yao and Z. Liang, Triple-Cation Mixed-Halide Perovskites: Towards Efficient, Annealing-Free and Air-Stable Solar Cells Enabled by Pb(SCN)2 Additive, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46193 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte and B. Rech, 
            et al., A Mixed-Cation Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskite Absorber for Tandem Solar Cells, Science, 2016, 351(6269), 151–155 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano and J.-P. Correa Baena, 
            et al., Efficient Luminescent Solar Cells Based on Tailored Mixed-Cation Perovskites, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(1), e1501170 Search PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, 
            et al., Cesium-Containing Triple Cation Perovskite Solar Cells: Improved Stability, Reproducibility and High Efficiency, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(6), 1989–1997 RSC .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, M. Wright, K. H. Chan, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, Single vs. Mixed Organic Cation for Low Temperature Processed Perovskite Solar Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 1510–1521 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K.-H. Hong, The Role of Intrinsic Defects in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(8), 1312–1317 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, C.-H. Chung and K.-H. Hong, Systematic Analysis of the Unique Band Gap Modulation of Mixed Halide Perovskites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(6), 4423–4428 RSC .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Unusual Defect Physics in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell Absorber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104(6), 63903 CrossRef .
P. Piatkowski, B. Cohen, C. S. Ponseca, M. Salado, S. Kazim, S. Ahmad, V. Sundström and A. Douhal, Unraveling Charge Carriers Generation, Diffusion, and Recombination in Formamidinium Lead Triiodide Perovskite Polycrystalline Thin Film, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(1), 204–210 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tahara, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Experimental Evidence of Localized Shallow States in Orthorhombic Phase of CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Thin Films Revealed by Photocurrent Beat Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(10), 5347–5352 CrossRef .
J. W. Rosenberg, M. J. Legodi, Y. Rakita, D. Cahen and M. Diale, Laplace Current Deep Level Transient Spectroscopy Measurements of Defect States in Methylammonium Lead Bromide Single Crystals, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122(14), 145701 CrossRef .
H.-S. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, The Identification and Characterization of Defect States in Hybrid Organic–inorganic Perovskite Photovoltaics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(1), 112–116 RSC .

          R. H. Bube, Photoelectronic Properties of Semiconductors, Cambridge University Press,  1992 Search PubMed .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken,  2007 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Elucidating the Charge Carrier Separation and Working Mechanism of CH3NH3PbI(3−x)Cl(x) Perovskite
Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3461 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Levine, S. Gupta, T. M. Brenner, D. Azulay, O. Millo, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and I. Balberg, Mobility–Lifetime Products in MAPbI3 Films, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(24), 5219–5226 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Balberg, Y. Dover, E. Savir and P. von Huth, Basic Physics of Phototransport as Manifested in Thin Films of In-Doped CdTe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82(20), 205302 CrossRef .
K. Misiakos and F. A. Lindholm, Analytical and Numerical Modeling of Amorphous Silicon p-i-n Solar Cells, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 64(1), 383–393 CrossRef .
I. Balberg, R. Naides and G. San, Temperature Dependence of the Phototransport Properties in C 60 Films, Fullerene Sci. Technol., 1998, 6(1), 39–57 CrossRef .

          A. Rose, Concepts in Photoconductivity and Allied Problems, Interscience, New York,  1963 Search PubMed .

          J. W. Orton and P. Blood, The Electrical Characterization of Semiconductors: Measurement of Minority Carrier Properties, Academic Press,  1990 Search PubMed .

          R. A. Smith, Semiconductors, Cambridge University Press,  1978 Search PubMed .
E. M. Hutter, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks and T. J. Savenije, Charge Carriers in Planar and Meso-Structured Organic–Inorganic Perovskites: Mobilities, Lifetimes, and Concentrations of Trap States, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(15), 3082–3090 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Wolf, O. Millo and I. Balberg, Phototransport Spectroscopy of Ensembles of Si Quantum Dots, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113(14), 144314 CrossRef .
D. Azulay, I. Balberg, V. Chu, J. P. Conde and O. Millo, Current Routes in Hydrogenated Microcrystalline Silicon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71(11), 113304 CrossRef .
B. Alperson, I. Rubinstein and G. Hodes, Identification of Surface States on Individual CdSe Quantum Dots by Room-Temperature Conductance Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63(8), 81303 CrossRef .
O. Ashkenazi, D. Azulay, I. Balberg, S. Kano, H. Sugimoto, M. Fujii and O. Millo, Size-Dependent Donor and Acceptor States in Codoped Si Nanocrystals Studied by Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(45), 17884–17892 RSC .
A. Zohar, I. Levine, S. Gupta, O. Davidson, D. Azulay, O. Millo, I. Balberg, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, What is the Mechanism of MAPbI3 P-Doping by I2? Insights from Optoelectronic Properties, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(10), 2408–2414 CrossRef .
Y. Bekenstein, K. Vinokurov, S. Keren-Zur, I. Hadar, Y. Schilt, U. Raviv, O. Millo and U. Banin, Thermal Doping by Vacancy Formation in Copper Sulfide Nanocrystal Arrays, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(3), 1349–1353 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Temperature-Dependent Charge-Carrier Dynamics in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Thin Films, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(39), 6218–6227 CrossRef .
D. Ritter, E. Zeldov and K. Weiser, Steady-State Photocarrier Grating Technique for Diffusion Length Measurement in Photoconductive Insulators, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49(13), 791 CrossRef .
I. Balberg, A. E. Delahoy and H. A. Weakliem, Self-Consistency and Self-Sufficiency of the Photocarrier Grating Technique, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53(11), 992 CrossRef .
L. Yang, A. Catalano, R. R. Arya and I. Balberg, Effect of Low-Level Boron Doping and Its Implication to the Nature of Gap States in Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57(9), 908 CrossRef .
C. Longeaud, A. Fath Allah, J. Schmidt, M. El Yaakoubi, S. Berson and N. Lemaitre, Determination of Diffusion Lengths in Organic Semiconductors: Correlation with Solar Cell Performances, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 253–257 CrossRef .
M. Goerlitzer, N. Beck, P. Torres, J. Meier, N. Wyrsch and A. Shah, Ambipolar Diffusion Length and Photoconductivity Measurements on “midgap” Hydrogenated Microcrystalline Silicon, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80(9), 5111 CrossRef .
A. S. Al-Kabbi, K. Sharma, G. S. S. Saini and S. K. Tripathi, Determination of the Transport Parameters of Nanocrystalline CdSe:Cu Thin Films, Phys. Scr., 2013, 87(2), 25604 CrossRef .
I. Balberg, Y. Dover, R. Naides, J. P. Conde and V. Chu, State Distribution in Hydrogenated Microcrystalline Silicon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69(3), 35203 CrossRef .
M. Karakus, S. A. Jensen, F. D’Angelo, D. Turchinovich, M. Bonn and E. Cánovas, Phonon–Electron Scattering Limits Free Charge Mobility in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(24), 4991–4996 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Savenije, C. S. Ponseca, L. Kunneman, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, Y. Tian, Q. Zhu, S. E. Canton, I. G. Scheblykin and T. Pullerits, 
            et al., Thermally Activated Exciton Dissociation and Recombination Control the Carrier Dynamics in Organometal Halide Perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(13), 2189–2194 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Hybrid Perovskites for Photovoltaics: Charge-Carrier Recombination, Diffusion, and Radiative Efficiencies, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49(1), 146–154 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Webber, C. Clegg, A. W. Mason, S. A. March, I. G. Hill and K. C. Hall, Carrier Diffusion in Thin-Film CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Measured Using Four-Wave Mixing, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111(12), 121905 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp03555e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the simplest model of the electronic level structure of a photoconductor: recombination of photogenerated carriers takes place via the centers at energy Er. The figure represents a p-type semiconductor as the Fermi energy, EF, is closer to the valence band edge Ev than to the conduction band edge, Ec. The figure represents also a p-type photoconductor, in the sense that Er lies above EF. (closer to the vacuum level) so that in the temperature range and for the excitation intensity range used, there is a larger steady state concentration of the holes (open circles) at Er and at Ev, and a smaller steady state concentration of the electrons (full circles) at Er and at Ec. G represents the rate at which electron–hole pairs are generated upon illumination, Re is the basic electron-to-trap center recombination rate and Rh is the basic hole-to-trap center recombination rate.	 
τh = p/G, and τe = n/G.
Lh = (kTμhτh/e)1/2 and Le = (kTμeτe/e)1/2

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical transmittance (corrected for reflection) of the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) films, used in this study. (b) Corresponding Tauc plots to determine the direct optical bandgaps for the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) films from the data in (a).	 

 	Fig. 3  Photoluminescence spectra for the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) films. The inset presents a blow-up of the peak spectral region.	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalized photocurrent at the peak of the photocurrent spectrum, for the MAPI (black) and MCHP (red) used in the present study. Dashed lines represent extrapolation of the linear part of the photoconductivity rise to zero photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 5  Two scanning tunneling spectra (left panel) and a topographic image, obtained using atomic force microscopy (right panel), for an MAPI film. The dashed lines mark the average conduction-band (CB) and valence-band (VB) onsets, and the Fermi energy (EF) is at V = 0. The tunneling spectra show that the material is a p-type semiconductor with an energy gap of 1.53 ± 0.05 eV (the error was determined from the variations between the different spectra). No signature of in-gap states is seen.	 

 	Fig. 6  Two scanning tunneling spectra (left panel) and a topographic image, obtained using atomic force microscopy (right panel), for an MCHP film studied in this work. The dashed lines mark the average CB and VB onsets, and the Fermi energy (EF) is at V = 0. The tunneling spectra show a p-type semiconductor with an energy gap of 1.50 ± 0.1 eV. The important finding is the presence of in-gap states at about 0.25 ± 0.1 eV below the conduction band edge.	 

 	Fig. 7  Measured temperature dependence of the two-carrier mobility-lifetime (μτ) products (filled symbols), and the corresponding diffusion lengths (open symbols) in an MAPI film. The values shown were determined by applying eqn (S8) and (S9) to the results, obtained from the measured photoconductivity and SSPG experiments,31–36 as described briefly in the ESI.† Based on the above characterization and our calculation results shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI,† we assign the black (red) data points to the electrons (holes). The error bars are calculated based on the error in the determination of LD in the SSPG measurements, as described in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 8  Temperature dependence of carrier mobility lifetime (μτ) products (filled symbols) and the corresponding diffusion lengths (open symbols) in an MCHP sample. The values shown were calculated from eqn (S8) and (S9) using the results obtained from the measured photoconductivity and SSPG. Based on our characterization and the calculation results shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI,† we assign the black (red) data points to the electrons (holes). Note the significant stronger temperature dependence for electrons in comparison with the one shown in Fig. 7 for the MAPIs. The error bars are calculated based on the error in the determination of LD in the SSPG measurements, as described in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 9  Suggested single-level recombination models for MAPI (left; also shown in Fig. 1) and MCHP (right). Here ge(T) (the red arrow in the right panel) is the thermally-induced excitation from the recombination level to the conduction band edge that is given by the thermal emission, ge(T) in the simple Shockley–Read–Hall model (see ESI† for details). While ge(T) is negligible in the case of MAPI, it is dominant in the case of MCHP over the temperature range that we studied.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp03555e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
