Incorporation of graphene nanodots and oxygen defects triggers robust coupling between solar energy and reactive oxygen   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA10114C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10114C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5426-5435Incorporation of graphene nanodots and oxygen defects triggers robust coupling between solar energy and reactive oxygen†

        
          
            Yuchen 
            Hao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Dong
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xiuying 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hongchao 
            Ma
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiufang 
            Zhang
          
        
      
School of Light Industry and Chemical Engineering, Dalian Polytechnic University, Dalian 116034, P. R. China. E-mail: dongxl@dlpu.edu.cn
Received 
      23rd November 2016
    , Accepted 2nd February 2017First published on 2nd February 2017AbstractEfficient coupling between solar energy and active oxygen-related radicals plays a very important role in promoting photocatalytic oxidation processes; however, the poor solar energy harvesting, serious carrier recombination and especially sluggish interfacial reaction kinetics always make this process very inefficient. Here we report for the first time that the synergy mechanism between surface oxygen defects and graphene nanodots over the TiO2 photocatalyst boosts the solar-to-chemical energy conversion and hence enables the ultra-efficient photocatalytic decomposition of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). As a proof of concept, the surface oxygen defect incorporation not only can effectively suppress surface charge recombination, but also can promote the chemisorption of oxygen and hence enables robust H2O2 evolution over the TiO2 photocatalyst through visible–near-infrared illumination. The graphene nanodots (GDs), which were originally synthesized via an electrochemical tailoring method and possess excellent peroxidase activity can substitute Fe3+ to trigger robust solid–gas interfacial Fenton-like reaction (the rigorous reaction environment of the classic Fenton reaction greatly limits its implementation under ordinary air conditions). In addition, the excellent photophysical properties of GDs also can act as a sensitizer to further optimize the light harvesting performance of the resultant hybrid from the UV to NIR region. As a surprising achievement, the robust interfacial Fenton-like reaction, broader optical window and efficient charge separation endow the hybrid catalyst with ultra-efficient energy coupling between photons, excitons and oxygen-related radicals, and hence enable excellent photocatalytic oxidation activity for the decomposition of various VOCs.
1. Introduction
Efficiently coupling solar energy into chemical reactions, such as water splitting, CO2 reduction and pollutant decontamination to achieve fast environmental remediation and clean fuel generation is a promising strategy to overcome environmental deterioration and energy shortage.1–8 In principle, the photons can be harvested by semiconductor photocatalysts and immediately convert into excitons, then the photoexcitons will fast transfer to the active center and turn on chemical reactions on the catalyst surface.9,10 However, this process in some solid–gas-interfacial heterocatalyses, such as air pollutant degradation is still very inefficient.6 For example, since the TiO2 photocatalyst was reported by Fujishima and Honda in 1972, it has been applied in our daily life for VOC degradation.11–13 However, its efficiency is still limited by some serious problems, and the most general one is the poor solar energy harvesting.14–17 As is well known, the conventional TiO2 possesses a large band-gap energy, which is very unfavorable for the utilization of visible light. To address this issue, decorating some sensitizers that act as an exciton donor or introducing oxygen-defect states into the energy band gap can be considered as two effective strategies.18,19 However, the efficient enhancement for solar energy harvesting efficiency via the synergistic effect between the oxygen vacancies and sensitizers over the TiO2 photocatalyst has never been investigated.
Besides solar energy harvesting, the inefficient free radical evolution owing to the sluggish surface reaction kinetics also greatly limits the photooxidation activity of TiO2 photocatalysts. In principle, the fundamental mechanism of VOC decomposition is a free radical chain reaction, and hence an efficient energy coupling between excitons and oxygen-related species (such as ˙O2− and ˙OH) is also very important.20–22 In this regard, considering that TiO2 is capable of producing H2O2via a photocatalytic reduction process, coupling the interfacial Fenton reaction with the TiO2-based photocatalytic system, which can efficiently speed up the conversion from photogenerated H2O2 to oxygen-related species by the reaction between H2O2 and Fe3+, can be considered as a novel and ingenious strategy to promote the generation of oxygen-related species.23 Unfortunately, the classic Fenton reaction is dependent on a suitable reaction environment, such as an aqueous-phase medium and rigorous pH range (pH = 2.5–5.0), which is unrealistic for the practical VOC decomposition under ordinary air conditions.24–26 In addition, too much Fe3+ load/doping will inevitably impair the light-harvesting performance and/or charge separation efficiency, which are very unfavorable for the efficient utilization of solar energy. Moreover, the inefficient H2O2 evolution over the pure TiO2 catalyst owing to the poor oxygen absorption ability and excessive surface carrier annihilation cannot provide abundant reactants for the interfacial Fenton reaction.23 Recently, Li et al. successfully constructed the interfacial Fenton reaction over alkalinized-C3N4via Fe3+ deposition, however, its activity is still limited by the mediocre photoelectric conversion efficiency.6 How to construct a solid–gas interfacial Fenton-like reaction over the TiO2 photocatalyst and simultaneously realize the optimization for solar energy harvesting and charge separation efficiency? Finding a novel bifunctional co-catalyst to substitute Fe3+ (activate the interfacial Fenton-like reaction and act as the sensitizer), and simultaneously boost H2O2 generation over the TiO2 photocatalyst can be considered as a promising strategy.
Recently, incorporating oxygen defects into the TiO2 photocatalyst has been reported to realize the effective enhancement of light harvesting performance via introducing oxygen-defect states into the TiO2 energy band gap.19 Besides, the surface oxygen vacancies also can achieve an efficient capture of photoelectrons and chemisorption of oxygen species, which can provide an ingenious strategy to promote H2O2 evolution over the TiO2 catalyst.27–31 In addition, graphene nanodots, as a graphene-based zero-dimension material, have been verified to act as an excellent sensitizer to donate hot electrons into the conduction band of TiO2 under light irradiation owing to its excellent photoelectric conversion properties.32,33 Moreover, the abundant surface functional groups of graphene nanodots endow it with excellent peroxidase activity, which can efficiently catalyze the conversion of H2O2 to ˙OH.34,35 However, ingeniously utilizing its chemical catalytic properties to boost the solid–gas interfacial photooxidation process was still ignored. Besides, most of the synthesis routes of graphene nanodots need to provide strong acidic conditions, which is dangerous and uneconomic (Table S2†). Therefore, to explore a simple, environmentally friendly, and low-cost strategy to synthesise high quality graphene nanodots is very much necessary but poses large challenges.
Herein, we demonstrate the construction of a solid–gas interfacial Fenton-like reaction and simultaneously enhance the light utilization efficiency from the UV to near-infrared region over a TiO2-based photocatalyst via the collaborative effect between anchored GDs and surface O-vacancies. In detail, the surface O-vacancies which possess excellent electron capture and oxygen absorption ability can endow the hybrid catalyst with robust H2O2 evolution efficiency. The graphene nanodots, which were originally synthesized via a novel electrochemical tailoring method and exhibit excellent peroxidase activity (by chemical catalysis; rapidly convert H2O2 into ˙OH) can act as a trigger to activate the interfacial Fenton-like reaction. Besides, the surface oxygen defects and anchored GDs also can collectively endow the resultant hybrid with excellent solar energy harvesting performance and remarkable carrier separation efficiency. As a gratifying achievement, the efficient energy coupling between photons, excitons and oxygen-related species make the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid exhibit excellent photocatalytic oxidation activity towards various VOC decontamination processes.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Preparation of ultrasmall graphene nanodots (GDs)
The fabrication of ultra-small graphene nanodots with sizes of sub-3 nm from typical carbon paper was achieved by a facile electrochemical tailoring method (purchased from Qingdao Jinrilai Graphite Co., Ltd; 1 mm thick). During this process, two carbon paper strips (5 cm × 1 cm × 1 mm; Fig. S1a†) were inserted into water/ethanol solution serving as the anode and cathode, and a bias of 30 V was applied between the two electrodes using a direct current power supply. The positive and negative terminals were exchanged every 1 hour. After a continuous stirring for six hours, a dark yellow solution was formed in the reaction cell. Then the dark yellow mixture solution was collected by centrifugation and opened to air under low temperature (50 °C) to remove the ethanol. Finally, the GDs were successfully obtained by drying the above solution under vacuum conditions.
2.2 Preparation of GDs–TiO2−x hybrid materials
Typically, 400 mg of commercial TiO2 catalyst (P25) were fully dispersed in 30 mL methanol and ultrasound-treated for 30 min. Next, a certain amount of GDs (2 mg, 4 mg and 8 mg) were added to the as-obtained TiO2 suspension and stirred for 1 h, followed by ultrasound treatment for 30 min. The suspension was then transferred to a Teflon-sealed autoclave and maintained at 170 °C for 6 h to achieve the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid material. Finally, the obtained products were collected, washed with water, and freeze dried.
2.3 Preparation of TiO2−x materials with different O-vacancy concentrations
Typically, 400 mg of the commercial TiO2 catalyst (P25) were fully dispersed in 30 mL methanol or water/methanol mixture (1:1) or pure water and ultrasound treatment for 30 min. Then the mixture solution was transferred to a Teflon-sealed autoclave and maintained at 170 °C for 6 h. Finally, the obtained products were collected, washed with water, and dried under 60 °C.
2.4 Preparation of conventional graphene nanodots
200 mg of graphite oxide (synthesized through chemical exfoliation of graphite powders using a modified Hummers' method) were dispersed in 500 mL of deionized water and treated with ultrasound (200 W, 40 kHz) for 2.5 h, the mixture was centrifuged at 6000 rpm to collect the supernatant liquid and vacuum dried to obtain small size graphene oxide sheets. Then, 30 mL of as-prepared small size graphene oxide sheet solution (0.5 mg mL−1) was first mixed with 8 mL concentrated nitric acid and 3 mL sulphuric acid; after ultrasound treatment for 1 h, the mixture was transferred to a 110 °C oil bath and stirred for 24 h. After cooling to room temperature, the mixture was placed under mild ultrasonication for 20 min. Then sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) was added to the solution mixture until pH = 8. Finally, the mixture was filtered through a 0.22 μm microporous membrane and the final product solution was further dialyzed in a dialysis bag (retained molecular weight: 1000 Da), and light yellow solution of GDs was obtained.
2.5 Characterization
The TEM analyses were performed on a JEOL JEM-2100F transmission electron microscope. The SEM images were taken using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (JSM-7800F, JEOL). The crystallinity and the purity of the as-prepared samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis on a Shimadzu XRD-6100 diffractometer at 40 kV and 40 mA with Cu Kα radiation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was performed on a Thermo VG ESCALAB-250 system with Al-Kα and Mg-Kα sources operated at 15 kV. Light absorption properties were evaluated by UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-vis DRS, CARY 100 & 300, VARIAN), and BaSO4 was used as the reflectance standard. The PL spectra of the photocatalysts were obtained using a Hitachi F-7000 fluorescence spectrophotometer. ESR spectra were recorded on a JES-FA200 electron spin resonance spectrometer operating at room temperature.
2.6 Photocatalytic activity evaluation
All the photocatalytic VOC degradation experiments were conducted at room temperature under simulated sunlight or simulated visible light (420 nm-cut) irradiation of a 300 W Xe lamp. Before the reaction, 50 mg of the as-prepared catalyst was spread evenly on a glass slide and put into the reaction cell. The reaction cell was first vented with artificial air (Voxygen:Vnitrogen = 1:4, and contains a certain amount of steam) or Ar (contains a certain amount of steam) for 15 min to eliminate the interference of atmospheric CO2 on the measurement. Then isopropanol (IPA) (ca. 1500 μmol) was injected into the vessel. After the IPA solution volatilized completely and the concentration of IPA in the reactor became stabilized, the photocatalytic experiments were conducted under light irradiation. The comparison experiments were conducted using the same procedure with the addition of a sacrificial agent. A gas chromatograph (GC-2014, Shimadzu Corp.) equipped with a FID detector was used to detect the concentrations of acetone and CO2.
2.7 Photoelectrochemical measurements
The photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out in a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell using an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660E). The platinum sheet, saturated calomel electrode and modified glassy carbon were used as the counter, reference, and working electrodes, respectively. For the modification of the working electrode, 4 mg of catalysts and 30 μL of Nafion solution (5 wt%) were dispersed in 1 mL of water–ethanol solution in a volume ratio of 1:3. After ultrasonication for 20 min, an aliquot of 5 μL mixture solution was pipetted onto the glassy carbon electrode (the diameter is 3 mm) to achieve the catalyst loading, and finally dried under room temperature. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 was conducted in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution under simulated sunlight or visible light irradiation. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted with an alternating current signal (10 mV) in the frequency range of 0.1–105 Hz at open circuit potential (OCP). The Mott–Schottky plot was obtained at a frequency of 100 Hz in the dark.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Fabrication of ultrasmall graphene nanodots (GDs)
As the precursor of ultrasmall graphene nanodots, the graphite paper was prepared from natural squama graphite via thermal expansion and mechanical preforming. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 1a and b) reveal that the graphite paper is composed of many ultrathin graphite sheets, which are attributed to the efficient thermal expansion from squama graphite. In addition, the ultra-thin thickness of every subunit can be fully confirmed by the high-resolution TEM image (Fig. 1c). Besides, the incontrovertible evidences obtained from the XRD pattern (Fig. S1b†) and FT-IR spectra (Fig. S1c†) further confirmed that no other impurities are present in the graphite paper, which could effectively ensure the pure phase of the as-prepared GDs.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM, (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of graphite paper. (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM images of the as-prepared graphene nanodots (GDs). (f) Schematic diagram of the preparation of graphene nanodots via the electrochemical tailoring method. 
Subsequently, the ultrasmall graphene nanodots (GDs) were originally produced using a novel electrochemical tailoring method in which the graphite paper served as both the anode and cathode of an electrochemical device, with water/ethanol as the electrolyte. During this process, the ultrasmall GDs are released by oxidation of the graphite anode by O˙ and OH˙ radicals. In addition, the abundant surface hydrophilic groups over the resulting nanodots, such as CO, –COOH and –OH make it directly disperse in aqueous solution (Fig. S5† inset). The TEM images (Fig. 1d and S4†) show that the exfoliated GDs obtained from the electrochemical tailoring method were uniform and monodispersed. The HRTEM image (Fig. 1e) of some typical GDs reveals a clear lattice spacing of around 0.21 nm, which agrees well with the (200) spacing of graphitic carbon. Ultraviolet-visible spectra of the as-prepared GDs display two characteristic absorption bands at 260 and 375 nm attributed to the quantum confinement effect (Fig. S5†). In addition, more sufficient evidence from the XRD pattern (Fig. S6†) and Raman spectra (Fig. S7†) further confirm that the pure phase GDs were successfully synthesized. More importantly, this simple acid-free synthesis route could efficiently avoid the interference from inorganic salts and other impurities, and hence save the tedious purification process.
3.2 Synthesis route and characterization of the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid
In the co-assembly process, we use a novel solvothermal strategy to simultaneously ensure the uniform deposition of GDs and the formation of surface oxygen defects (Fig. 2a). The surfaces of GDs, which possess abundant –COOH and/or –OH groups, can drive a steady load over the TiO2−x surface via hydrogen bonds.33 In addition, the reduction action of methanol could induce the escape of surface oxygen atoms from TiO2 and hence introduce oxygen defects into the titanium dioxide catalyst. As revealed by TEM images, compared with the flat and smooth surface of pure TiO2 material (Fig. 2c), the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid contains numerous small pits and black spots on the catalyst surface (Fig. 2b). Concomitant with the pits, the obvious local lattice deletion/dislocation (orange arrows) induced by surface O atoms escape and many anchored GDs (blue circle) can be observed in the resultant hybrid (Fig. 1e and f), while only a relatively regular atomic arrangement in the crystal lattice can be observed on the pure TiO2 surface (Fig. 1d). In addition, we can easily find two different lattice distances of 0.21 nm and 0.189 nm in the HRTEM image (Fig. 1f inset), which can be attributed to the (200) spacing of graphitic carbon and (200) spacing of TiO2, highlighting the anchoring of GDs on the TiO2−x surface.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid; (b) TEM images of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid; (c) TEM images of the as-prepared TiO2. The small pits and surface GDs are marked by orange and blue circles, respectively. (d) HRTEM images of pure TiO2. (e and f) HRTEM images of GDs–TiO2−x. The obvious lattice disorders induced by defects are marked by orange arrows. Scale bars, 20 nm (b) and (c), 10 nm (d)–(f), and 2 nm (f) inset. (g) Raman spectrum of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x and pure TiO2. (h) ESR spectrum of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x and pure TiO2. 
Besides, we also performed XRD analysis to determine the structural phases of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid (Fig. S10†). Compared with the pure TiO2, the diffraction peak at around 25° became more distinct after GD incorporation, which is mainly owing to the peak superposition between titanium dioxide and graphene nanodots, indicating the successful synthesis of the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid. As revealed by the FT-IR spectrum (Fig. S11†), after the GDs were loaded on the titanium dioxide surface, the C–H stretching peak at 1405 cm−1, C–O bending peak at 1620 cm−1 and CO vibrational stretching peak at 1712 cm−1 belonging to GDs can be observed. In addition, two extra characteristic peaks can be found in the Raman spectra after GD deposition (Fig. 2g), which can be attributed to the G peaks (1600 cm−1) and D peaks (1360 cm−1) of graphene nanodots, suggesting the formation of the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid. Moreover, Raman spectroscopy also revealed a significant peak broadening and shifting after the solvothermal process, which is mainly due to the presence of lattice disorder resulting from phonon confinement or nonstoichiometry as a result of oxygen vacancy incorporation.36 To further verify the successful incorporation of oxygen vacancies into the titanium dioxide crystal, electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy (Fig. 2h) was performed and the spectra are shown in Fig. 2h. Obviously, the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid exhibits a symmetrical ESR signal at g = 2.002, manifesting the electron trapping at oxygen vacancies. Although the solvothermal process could induce the formation of a large number of surface oxygen vacancies, the valence state of Ti atoms has not been altered, which can be confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. S12†). Taken together, the surface oxygen vacancies and graphene nanodots indeed can be incorporated into the TiO2 catalyst via the solvothermal process.
3.3 Triggering the robust interfacial Fenton-like reaction
Constructing the interfacial Fenton-like reaction can efficiently boost the energy coupling between excitons and oxygen-related radicals via enhancing the conversion efficiency from photoelectrons, O2 and H2O to ˙OH. However, to effectively realize this process, two factors must be fulfilled: (i) robust H2O2 evolution and (ii) an efficient reaction trigger. Interestingly, the synergistic effect between surface oxygen vacancies and graphene nanodots can meet these factors perfectly. Specifically, to gain insight into the peroxidase-like activity of the as-prepared GDs, the time-dependence of H2O2 and ˙OH contents in aqueous hydrogen peroxide solution after the introduction of GDs was measured and is shown in Fig. 3a. Obviously, after GDs were added, H2O2 was quickly decomposed and the ˙OH contents significantly increase, indicating that the as-prepared GDs indeed possess excellent peroxidase activity and can efficiently catalyze the conversion from H2O2 to ˙OH.37–39 Moreover, we also found that the GDs prepared by electrochemical tailoring (EC-GDs) exhibit better peroxidase activity than that of conventional GDs (C-GDs, synthesized by a chemical oxide, Fig. S14†). According to the previous research study,35 these results mainly owing to the as-prepared EC-GDs possess more abundant surface ketonic groups (–CO) and carboxylic groups (OC–O–) than C-GDs (confirmed by the FT-IR spectrum; Fig. S15†), which could provide more catalytically active sites and substrate binding sites for H2O2 catalytic decomposition, respectively, and thereby enabling the robust conversion of H2O2 to ˙OH. Besides, in the Fenton-like process, the efficient H2O2 evolution via the photocatalytic reduction reaction is also very important, which means that there is a supply of abundant reactants for ˙OH generation. Very interestingly, surface oxygen defect engineering over the TiO2 photocatalyst can skillfully achieve the efficient acceleration for H2O2 evolution. As shown in Fig. 3c, after introducing O-vacancies into the TiO2 surface by solvothermal reduction (confirmed by the room-temperature ESR spectrum, Fig. 3b), the H2O2 generation efficiency in solid–gas interface can be remarkably enhanced, which is about 3 times higher than that of the pure TiO2 catalyst. In this regard, the electron capture ability of surface oxygen vacancy, which can effectively suppress charge recombination between photoexcited electrons and holes and hence provide more electrons for O2 reduction, is one of the most important factors.30,40,41 Besides, the surface Ti atoms with low coordination numbers (realized by O atoms escape) can provide more coordinatively unsaturated sites for the chemisorption of oxygen species (Fig. 3d) and thus efficiently promote H2O2 evolution, which also can be considered as the other very important reason for the enhancement of H2O2 production efficiency by introducing surface O-vacancies.31,42
 Fig. 3  (a) Time-dependence of the H2O2 contents in 2 mL aqueous hydrogen peroxide solution (H2O2 50 mM; ABTS 2.5 mM) by using EC-GDs as the catalyst, and the absorbance at 417 nm by using EC-GDs and C-GDs as catalysts. Note: the H2O2 contents were measured using the DPD method,37 the contents of ˙OH can be indirectly reflected by the absorbance at 417 nm.34,35 (b) ESR spectrum of different samples. (c) H2O2 evolution performance under simulated sunlight irradiation of the TiO2-based photocatalyst with different surface O-vacancy concentration. Note: the as-prepared samples were first irradiated with gaseous IPA and steam, then they were dispersed into ultra-pure water, and finally the filtrates of suspensions were measured for H2O2 by utilizing the redox titration with KMnO4; the different O-vacancies were realized by the solvothermal treatment with different methanol ratios. (d) High-resolution O 1s XPS spectra of different samples. (e) H2O2 production performance over the TiO2−x-based photocatalyst with different GD loads. (f) Comparison of absorbance intensity at 417 nm. The experiments were carried out in 2 mL aqueous APTS solution under simulated sunlight irradiation. 
Interestingly and importantly, after depositing GDs on the TiO2−x surface, the H2O2 evolution performance was significantly limited; and, after the loads of GDs up to 2.0% (wt%), no obvious H2O2 generation can be found (Fig. 3e). This phenomenon can be reasonably explained as that the generated H2O2via the photoreduction process quickly reacts with GDs and converts into ˙OH. To further confirm this conversion process, the ˙OH evolution performance over the TiO2−x photocatalyst with different GD loads were measured under simulated sunlight irradiation (Fig. 3f). As expected, with the increase of GD loads, the ˙OH evolution performance further enhanced, indicating that the GDs indeed can catalyze the efficient conversion of photogenerated H2O2 to ˙OH and hence induce the robust interfacial Fenton-like reaction. In addition, in order to investigate the important role of surface O-vacancy for the Fenton-like reaction, we also compared the ˙OH generation efficiency of EC-GDs–TiO2 and EC-GDs–TiO2−x catalysts (Fig. S16†). As a result, the ˙OH generation efficiency over the EC-GDs–TiO2−x hybrid is more than 2 times higher than that of EC-GDs–TiO2, indicating that the poor H2O2 evolution efficiency of the conventional TiO2 catalyst seriously impede the interfacial Fenton-like reaction. Moreover, compared with the C-GD loaded TiO2−x catalyst, the EC-GDs–TiO2−x hybrid exhibits better˙OH evolution performance under the same conditions (Fig. S17†), revealing that the robust catalysis activity of graphene nanodots for H2O2 decomposition is also a very important factor for the interfacial Fenton-like reaction. According to the aforesaid insight, we can speculate that the efficient interfacial Fenton-like reaction over the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid is benefited from the synergistic effect between efficient H2O2 evolution and powerful H2O2 catalysis conversion.
In order to further verify the important role of interfacial Fenton-like reaction for VOC photocatalytic degradation, we investigated the active species of TiO2−x and GDs–TiO2−x catalysts for gaseous isopropanol (IPA) decomposition by a method of introducing a scavenger and an inert atmosphere (note that the degradation of IPA can be considered as a model reaction for photocatalytic oxidation of VOCs, which includes a single-photon route to generate acetone and a multi-photon route to release CO2). In particular, coumarin (Cou) acted as the ˙OH scavenger and argon was used to remove the O2 in the reaction system.43 For the pure TiO2−x catalyst, only hole-induced ˙OH plays a very important role in IPA degradation. In stark contrast, the electron-induced free radicals, such as ˙O2− and ˙OH only exhibit a very poor effect in this process (Fig. 4a and b). Apparently, after the GDs were loaded on the TiO2−x surface, both electron-induced ˙O2−/˙OH and hole-induced ˙OH played important roles in IPA decomposition. More specially, after the coumarin (Cou) was added into the reaction system, the acetone evolution performance was reduced about 235 μmol for GDs–TiO2−x, while only 90 μmol for pure TiO2−x. This indicates that the ˙OH evolution efficiency increased about 2.6 times with the assistance of GDs, which further verified that the robust interfacial Fenton-like reaction was successfully activated by surface-anchored GDs.
 Fig. 4  (a) IPA photodegradation with the reactive-species scavenger. (b) IPA photodegradation under an Ar atmosphere. (c) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum of different samples. (d) EIS spectrum of different samples. (e) Photocurrent densities versus the voltage measured from different samples under simulated sunlight irradiation. (f) Amperometric I–t curves for GDs–TiO2, TiO2−x and the pure TiO2 catalyst under visible light simulated sunlight (top) and simulated sunlight (bottom) illumination. 
3.4 Boosting photo-exciton energy coupling
For the sunlight-driven VOC decomposition, efficient solar energy harvesting and charge separation are also very important, which are the preconditions for further energy coupling between excitons and oxygen-related species. To better depict this process, first, the light-harvesting performance was investigated. As indicated by the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum (Fig. 4c), after introducing surface oxygen vacancies into the TiO2 catalyst, the as-prepared sample exhibits a very strong tail absorption (Urbach tail) from the visible to near-infrared (NIR) region, which mainly owing to the mid-gap electronic states were successfully incorporated into the energy band gap of TiO2.44,45 More importantly, after depositing GDs on the TiO2−x surface, the light harvesting ability of the resulting hybrid was further enhanced, highlighting the pivotal role of GDs as photo-sensitizers, which can generate hot electrons under light excitation and quickly donate them to the conduction band of TiO2−x. Accordingly, the oxygen defects and graphene nanodots can synergistically endow the resulting sample with excellent light harvesting performance from the UV to near-infrared (NIR) region. On the other hand, compared with the pure TiO2 catalyst, the abundant surface oxygen vacancies over the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid can efficiently capture photogenerated electrons and hence suppress surface carrier recombination (Fig. 4d and S18†).30
Benefited from the high light harvesting performance and charge separation efficiency, the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid exhibits excellent photoelectric conversion efficiency. As shown in Fig. 4e, the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid exhibits a high photocurrent density of 0.087 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V versus the SCE under simulated sunlight irradiation, which is 1.64 and 3.1 times higher than that of TiO2−x and pure TiO2, respectively. Moreover, the time-dependent photocurrent measurements of the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid display a highly stable and sensitive photocurrent density under on/off cycles of simulated sunlight illumination (Fig. 4f). More importantly, GDs–TiO2−x realizes a significant photocurrent response under visible light, while no obvious photocurrent response can be found over the pure TiO2 catalyst, which incontrovertibly indicates that the O-vacancies and GD incorporation can lead to a synergistic broadening for optical window. In summary, the incorporation of surface oxygen defects and graphene nanodots can simultaneously endow the resultant hybrid with excellent photoelectric conversion efficiency, thereby ensuring more sufficient photoexciton supply for the further interfacial Fenton-like reaction.
3.5 Efficient enhancement for photocatalytic oxidation activity
Thanks to the excellent solar energy harvesting performance and robust interfacial Fenton-like reaction, the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid realized ultra-efficient coupling between solar energy and active oxygen-related radicals, and hence expected to achieve an excellent photocatalytic oxidation activity towards VOC degradation. To assess its practical efficiency, first, the optimal GDs–TiO2−x sample with the most suitable GD loads was explored, and only 2% GD loaded sample exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity (Fig. 5a). As a satisfactory achievement, the optimal GDs–TiO2−x hybrid exhibits excellent IPA degradation efficiency under simulated sunlight irradiation, and acetone (Fig. 5b) and CO2 (Fig. 5c) evolution rates are up to 282 μmol h−1 and 13 μmol h−1, which are 6.2 and 6.9 times higher than that of the pure TiO2 catalyst. In addition, the acetone evolution performance does not exhibit any significant loss after 8 cycles of repetition tests, which means that the catalyst possesses excellent catalytic stability (Fig. 5d). More remarkably, this rational design endows the catalyst with excellent photocatalytic activity under visible light (Fig. S19†), while no obvious photocatalytic activity for IPA degradation can be observed over the pure TiO2 catalyst. Moreover, the photocatalytic degradation experiments for other main indoor VOCs, such as acetone, acetaldehyde, toluene and acetic acid, further confirmed that the introduction of GDs and surface O-vacancies can achieve the unprecedented enhancement for the photocatalytic activity of VOC degradation (Fig. 5e). According to all the above experimental results and discussions, we can suggest that the coupling efficiency between solar energy and active oxygen-related radicals indeed can be enhanced by the synergistic effect between oxygen defects and graphene nanodots, and thereby enables excellent photooxidation performance for VOC degradation (Table S3†).
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocatalytic IPA degradation performance over the TiO2−x-based hybrid with different GD loads. (b) and (c) Comparison of acetone and CO2 evolution efficiency over different samples under simulated sunlight irradiation. (d) Multi-cycle IPA photocatalytic degradation by using GDs–TiO2−x as the catalyst. (e) Comparison of CO2 generation from various VOCs over GDs–TiO2−x and pure TiO2 catalysts. (f) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of the entire interfacial Fenton-like reaction. 
According to all the above results and discussions, the charge generation, transmission and utilization mechanism over GDs–TiO2−x in VOC decomposition can be summarized in Fig. 5f and S23.† Under light irradiation, TiO2−x can absorb photons and convert them into electrons and holes, meanwhile, the GDs can act as a sensitizer to generate hot electrons and inject them into the conduction band of TiO2−x. Subsequently, the surface oxygen defects over the TiO2−x catalyst can efficiently absorb dioxygen and capture photoelectrons to generate abundant H2O2 through oxygen reduction reactions. Finally, the surface anchored GDs can efficiently catalyze the robust conversion from photogenerated H2O2 to ˙OH, in which the surface –CO groups over GDs act as the catalytically active sites and the OC–O– groups serve as the substrate binding sites, and hence further boost the photocatalytic oxidation process.35 As a result, this novel interfacial Fenton-like reaction induced by surface O-defects and GDs endowed the as-prepared hybrid with remarkable coupling efficiency between solar energy and reactive oxygen, making the prepared hybrid a better candidate than classical Fe-based TiO2 photocatalysts (Fig. S24†).
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we for the first time demonstrated the simultaneous implementation of the robust interfacial Fenton-like reaction and excellent solar energy conversion over the TiO2-based photocatalytic system by the introduction of graphene nanodots and surface oxygen defects. In detail, the surface O-vacancies which possess excellent electron capture and oxygen absorption ability can efficiently promote H2O2 generation over the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid. The graphene nanodots which were first synthesized through tailoring carbon paper and exhibit excellent peroxidase activity can catalyze the efficient conversion of photogenerated H2O2 to ˙OH. Thus, the interfacial Fenton-like reaction was successfully constructed by the synergy between GDs and surface O-vacancies. Moreover, we also verified for the first time that the introduction of oxygen vacancy and GDs can simultaneously endow the hybrid photocatalyst with excellent solar energy conversion efficiency. As a result, the efficient energy coupling between photons, excitons and oxygen-related species over the GDs–TiO2 hybrid catalyst realized by the novel synergistic effect between oxygen defects and graphene nanodots make the hybrid sample exhibit excellent photocatalytic performance for VOC degradation. The synergistic strategy between oxygen defects and graphene nanodots developed in this work is not only adaptable to the photocatalytic system with TiO2 as the absorber, but also can be applied to other metal oxides for boosting coupling between solar energy and reactive oxygen.
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 21476033) and Cultivation Program for Excellent Talents of Science and Technology Department of Liaoning Province (no. 201402610).
Notes and references
L. Zhang, M. S. Tse, O. K. Tan, Y. X. Wang and M. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4497–4507 CAS .
S. E. Guo, Z. P. Deng, M. X. Li, B. J. Jiang, C. G. Tian, Q. J. Pan and H. G. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1830–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, T. Wang, X. X. Chang, L. Zhang and J. L. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5851–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 CAS .
J. G. Ran, T. Y. Ma, G. P. Gao, X. W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3708–3717 CAS .
Y. X. Li, S. X. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. Wang, Y. P. Bi, Y. F. Zhang and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13289–13297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Liu, D. Y. Zhu, Y. N. Xin and B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13626–13635 CAS .
Y. K. Zhao, Y. D. Liu, X. Q. Du, R. X. Han and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19308–19314 CAS .
J. G. Ran, J. Zhang, J. G. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
S. Dilger, S. Landsmann, M. Trottmann and S. Pokrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17087–17095 CAS .
Y. Li, H. W. Ji, C. C. Chen, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12636–12640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Liu, A. W. Tang, Q. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11327–11339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Hu, W. Zhou, K. F. Zhang, X. C. Zhang, L. Wang, B. Jiang, G. H. Tian, D. Y. Zhao and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7495–7502 CAS .
T. Z. Xu, H. Zheng, P. Y. Zhang, W. Lin and Y. Sekiguchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19115–19122 CAS .
Y. F. Xu, C. Zhang, L. X. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, H. L. Yao and J. L. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2410–2417 CAS .
M. Tsuji, D. Shimamoto, K. Uto, M. Hattori and H. Ago, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14649–14656 CAS .
A. Li, P. Zhang, X. Chang, C. Wei, T. Wang and J. Gong, Small, 2015, 11, 1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, T. Wu, K. Wu, K. Oikawa, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arsac, D. Bianchi, J. Chovelon, C. Ferronato and J. Herrmann, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 4202–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Lin, J. L. Long, Q. Gu, W. W. Zhang, R. S. Ruan, Z. H. Li and X. X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9468–9474 RSC .
G. H. Moon, W. Y. Kim, A. D. Bokare, N. E. Sung and W. Y. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4023–4028 CAS .
J. J. Pignatello, E. Oliveros and A. MacKay, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 36, 1–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Dyes Pigm., 2008, 76, 714–720 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, L. Zhu, N. Wang, H. Tang, M. Cao and Y. She, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1786–1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Xu, W. S. Yang, Q. Guo, D. X. Dai and X. M. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30982–30989 RSC .
A. Sinhamahapatra, J. P. Jeon and J. S. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3539–3544 CAS .
M. A. Rahman, S. Bazargan, S. Srivastava, X. Y. Wang, M. Abd-Ellah, J. Thomas, N. F. Heinig, D. Pradhan and K. T. Leung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3363–3373 CAS .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Y. Li, H. C. Ye, S. M. Chen, H. X. Ju, D. L. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Ye, C. M. Wang, Q. Xu, J. F. Zhu, L. Song, J. Iang and Y. J. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8928–8935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, X. Yan, L. L. Li and X. Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kong, J. Tang, Y. Y. Zhang, T. Jiang, X. G. Gong, C. X. Peng, J. Wei, J. P. Yang, Y. C. Wang, X. B. Wang, G. F. Zheng, C. Selomulya and D. Y. Zhao, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 171–178 CAS .
H. J. Sun, N. Gao, K. Dong, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6202–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Sun, A. D. Zhao, N. Gao, K. Li, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7176–7180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leshuk, R. Parviz, P. Everett, H. Krishnakumar, R. A. Varin and F. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1892–1895 CAS .
H. Bader, V. Sturzenegger and J. Hoigne, Water Res., 1988, 22, 1109–1115 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, T. Wang, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, H. Jiang, Q. Yu, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8123–8132 CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Kofuji, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13454–13459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. J. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Jiang, Y. P. Zhang, J. Jiang, Y. S. Rong, Y. C. Wang, Y. C. Wu and C. X. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22619–22624 CAS .
K. Zhao, L. Z. Zhang, J. J. Wang, Q. X. Li, W. W. He and J. J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15750–15753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, K. Wang, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dette, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, C. S. Kley, P. Punke, C. E. Patrick, P. Jacobson, F. Giustino, S. J. Jung and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, Y. F. Liu, J. Wang, R. L. Zong, W. Q. Yao, J. Wang and Y. F. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13943–13950 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10114cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM, (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of graphite paper. (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM images of the as-prepared graphene nanodots (GDs). (f) Schematic diagram of the preparation of graphene nanodots via the electrochemical tailoring method.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the GDs–TiO2−x hybrid; (b) TEM images of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x hybrid; (c) TEM images of the as-prepared TiO2. The small pits and surface GDs are marked by orange and blue circles, respectively. (d) HRTEM images of pure TiO2. (e and f) HRTEM images of GDs–TiO2−x. The obvious lattice disorders induced by defects are marked by orange arrows. Scale bars, 20 nm (b) and (c), 10 nm (d)–(f), and 2 nm (f) inset. (g) Raman spectrum of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x and pure TiO2. (h) ESR spectrum of the as-prepared GDs–TiO2−x and pure TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Time-dependence of the H2O2 contents in 2 mL aqueous hydrogen peroxide solution (H2O2 50 mM; ABTS 2.5 mM) by using EC-GDs as the catalyst, and the absorbance at 417 nm by using EC-GDs and C-GDs as catalysts. Note: the H2O2 contents were measured using the DPD method,37 the contents of ˙OH can be indirectly reflected by the absorbance at 417 nm.34,35 (b) ESR spectrum of different samples. (c) H2O2 evolution performance under simulated sunlight irradiation of the TiO2-based photocatalyst with different surface O-vacancy concentration. Note: the as-prepared samples were first irradiated with gaseous IPA and steam, then they were dispersed into ultra-pure water, and finally the filtrates of suspensions were measured for H2O2 by utilizing the redox titration with KMnO4; the different O-vacancies were realized by the solvothermal treatment with different methanol ratios. (d) High-resolution O 1s XPS spectra of different samples. (e) H2O2 production performance over the TiO2−x-based photocatalyst with different GD loads. (f) Comparison of absorbance intensity at 417 nm. The experiments were carried out in 2 mL aqueous APTS solution under simulated sunlight irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) IPA photodegradation with the reactive-species scavenger. (b) IPA photodegradation under an Ar atmosphere. (c) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum of different samples. (d) EIS spectrum of different samples. (e) Photocurrent densities versus the voltage measured from different samples under simulated sunlight irradiation. (f) Amperometric I–t curves for GDs–TiO2, TiO2−x and the pure TiO2 catalyst under visible light simulated sunlight (top) and simulated sunlight (bottom) illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocatalytic IPA degradation performance over the TiO2−x-based hybrid with different GD loads. (b) and (c) Comparison of acetone and CO2 evolution efficiency over different samples under simulated sunlight irradiation. (d) Multi-cycle IPA photocatalytic degradation by using GDs–TiO2−x as the catalyst. (e) Comparison of CO2 generation from various VOCs over GDs–TiO2−x and pure TiO2 catalysts. (f) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of the entire interfacial Fenton-like reaction.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta10114c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
