Redox-induced thermocells for low-grade heat harvesting: mechanism, progress, and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA05742E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05742E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 20730-20755Redox-induced thermocells for low-grade heat harvesting: mechanism, progress, and their applications

        
          
            Xinrui 
            He
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hailong 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhipeng 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xing 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhirong 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Niu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Jiang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Chao 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aClean Energy Materials and Engineering Center, State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. E-mail: niuyi@uestc.edu.cn; jiangj@uestc.edu.cn; cwang@uestc.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Precision Measurement Technology and Instruments, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
cJiangsu Key Laboratory of Hazardous Chemicals Safety and Control, College of Safety Science and Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 210009, China
Received 
      20th July 2022
    , Accepted 21st August 2022First published on 14th September 2022AbstractThe evolutionary success of heat recovery technology plays an important role in global sustainable energy solutions. Low-grade heat (below 200 °C) from solar radiation, industry, and the human body is usually discarded without any recovery effort. The ever-increasing energy crisis has motivated the development of high-performance thermoelectric generators to recover this low-grade heat. Compared to solid-state thermoelectric devices, the newly emerged redox-induced thermocells based on ion transport have provided another cheap, flexible, and scalable way for directly converting thermal energy into electrical energy. Therefore, we provide a comprehensive description of this emerging and promising system in this review. First, the background and underlying fundamentals are provided. The subsequent sections summarize the process regarding their electrolytes, electrode materials, and separators. Thereafter, cell configuration, integrated devices, and their applications such as power supply, temperature sensing, heat removal and recovery, and photothermal seawater desalination are emphasized. Finally, we highlight the future challenges and opportunities for high-performance redox-induced thermocells.
1. Introduction
The massive consumption of coal, petroleum, and other energy sources as well as environmental pollution is one of the most critical issues for modern society.1–8 With the world committed to drastic cuts in carbon emissions, efficient utilization of sustainable and clean energy is now more important than ever. Currently, low-grade heat is widespread in industrialized society, and it will have a dramatic impact on the economy and environment by harvesting and converting it into electricity.9–15
To date, solid-state thermoelectric devices that can directly harvest low-grade heat for electrical power have been extensively studied.16–19 Unfortunately, they are hampered by poor performance at low temperature, high cost, and materials containing toxic or rare elements.20,21 On the other hand, the thermal power (or the Seebeck coefficient) directly reflects the variation of output voltage with the temperature difference. A larger Seebeck coefficient results in a better thermoelectric figure of merit and greater thermoelectric performance of the materials. The measurement of the Seebeck coefficient has important practical significance for the development of new thermoelectric materials. However, the Seebeck coefficient of solid-state materials is only about 100 to 200 μV K−1.22–24 It's difficult to generate a useful voltage of 1 to 5 V.25–27 Therefore, only a few materials represented by Bi2Te3 have been applied in commercial applications.28,29 Very recently, there have been several breakthroughs in redox-induced thermocells, which are also called thermo-electrochemical cells,30 thermocells,31,32 and thermogalvanic cells. This thermocell is based on ion transport characteristics, offering another cheap, flexible, and scalable way to directly convert thermal energy into electrical energy.33,34 Besides, the Seebeck coefficient of redox-induced thermocells can reach about 1 mV K−1,20,35–38 and a small amount of integration can produce considerable output voltage.39
As shown in Fig. 1, the number of publications and citations per year has been increasing since 2000, especially in 2021. However, there are few review articles on this system, and this review is dedicated to providing a comprehensive description of this emerging and promising system along with the mechanism, progress, and applications (inset Fig. 1). The fundamental principles are firstly introduced, both the thermogalvanic effect and several parameters (like the Seebeck coefficient, conductivity, and thermal conductivity) determining the thermoelectric properties. Then, electrolytes including aqueous electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, and gel or quasi-solid-state electrolytes are summarized. It is worth noting that due to the thermogalvanic effect, all electrolytes contain redox couples. Next, we move to describe the basic electrodes, except for some polymer and metal-based electrodes, and the related studies in this section are still mainly concerned with carbon materials. In the following section, separators or membranes, which can effectively maintain the temperature gradient and ion concentrations, are discussed. After that, we describe various cell configurations and testing techniques, followed by advanced applications such as power supply, temperature sensing, heat removal and recovery, and photothermal seawater desalination for harvesting low-grade heat, which have a significant impact on future practical applications. Finally, we propose the challenges and opportunities for high-performance redox-induced thermocells in future applications.
 Fig. 1  Total number of publications and citations per year. These data are provided according to the Web of Science. (Inset shows a summary of the whole review). 
2. Fundamentals of the redox-induced thermocell
In general, the thermogalvanic effect is driven by the entropy change during the redox reaction.40–45 As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the thermocell consists of an electrolyte containing redox couples and two electrode materials.46–49 A reversible electrochemical redox reaction will take place at the electrode/electrolyte interface when the two electrodes are held at different temperatures, thus forming the potential difference. The hot electrode tends to undergo an entropy-increasing reaction, while the cold electrode vice versa. Internal mass transfer occurs through convection, diffusion, and redox reactions. When there is a persistent temperature gradient, the reaction can be sustained by connecting the entire system to an external load.50–53
 Fig. 2  (a) Composition and working principle of the redox-induced thermocell, and (b) its equivalent circuit.49 Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
They are usually divided into p-type and n-type in Fig. 3a and b. Take the p-type thermocell for example, the Seebeck coefficients of p-type thermocells are negative, which means that the oxidation reaction occurs on the hot side with the loss of electrons, and the electrons flow through the external circuit to the cold side, where the reduction reaction occurs on the cold side. The p–n types of the thermocells depend on the p–n types of redox couples. The common p-type redox couples are [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−, [FeBr4]2−/[FeBr4]−, and [FeCl4]2−/[FeCl4]−, and n-type redox couples include [Co(bpy)3]3+/[Co(bpy)3]2+, Fe3+/Fe2+, Zn2+/Zn, Cu2+/Cu, and I−/I3−.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of p-type thermocells and (b) n-type thermocells. Mm+ and Mn+ represent redox couples. 
The performance of the thermocell is mainly evaluated from the following parameters. The first one is the Seebeck coefficient Se, which directly reflects the variation of output voltage with the temperature difference. The Seebeck coefficient is an intrinsic property of the material. For a given redox reaction, the Seebeck coefficient can be expressed as follows:54 (1)where n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction, F is the Faraday constant, A and B represent the oxidized and reduced species, SA and SB are partial molar entropies, ŜA and ŜB are the respective Eastman entropies, and e is the entropy of electron transfer in the external circuit. The Eastman entropy is attributed to the interaction of ions and their solvated shell with the solution, and this value is negligible compared to SA and SB. Similarly, the value of electron transport entropy is ∼μV K−1, which can be also considered negligible.55,56 Therefore, the Seebeck coefficient can be approximated as:54,57 (2)
Researchers propose a mathematical model to explain this phenomenon.58 ΔSrc in the substituted inert complex of one-electron reduction is derived only from the entropy change of the solvated shell around the ligand:59 (3)where e is the elementary charge, N is Avogadro's constant, ε is the dielectric constant of the solvent, and rox and rred are the effective radii of oxidized and reduced substances. The experimental phenomenon of Migita et al. is in good agreement with eqn (3).60 It indicates that the size and symbol of Se are related to the entropy change of the solvent around the metal complex in different oxidation states.
In addition to the Seebeck coefficient (Se), the performance of the redox-induced thermocell is also related to ionic conductivity (σ) and thermal conductivity (κ), which are derived from the solid-state thermoelectric device:40 (4)
The ionic conductivity is affected by three internal resistances: ohmic resistance, activation resistance and mass transfer resistance. Ohmic resistance consists of electrode and electrolyte resistance. Activation resistance arises from the activation barrier of the reaction at the electrode. Mass transfer resistance refers to ionic diffusion and convection at the electrode-electrolyte interface and in the bulk electrolyte. Thermal conductivity determines the transmission of the actual temperature difference, including heat conduction and heat convection.10 Compared with the solid-state thermoelectric system, the modified ZT expression of the thermocell is shown below:61,62 (5)where z is the ionic charge, c is the concentration of the redox couples, R is the gas constant, and Dlim is the limiting diffusion coefficient.
The final parameter is thermoelectric conversion efficiency, also known as power conversion efficiency:63 (6)where Pmax is the maximum output power, and Pheat is the thermal power flowing through the thermocell. Voc is the open-circuit voltage, Isc is the short circuit current, κ is the thermal conductivity of the electrolyte, A is the cross-section electrode area, d is the electrode spacing, and ΔT/d is the temperature gradient between the electrodes.
The efficiency of the Carnot cycle is the limited efficiency of evaluating heat engines, which is also applicable to the redox-induced thermocell. Therefore, the relative efficiency of the Carnot cycle ηr is also used to evaluate the performance of liquid thermoelectric devices: (7)
3. Progress of redox-induced thermocells
3.1 Optimizing electrolytes
Currently, the electrolytes used in thermocells mainly include aqueous electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, and quasi-solid-state electrolytes. It is worth noting that due to the thermogalvanic effect, all electrolytes contain redox couples. In the following, we will give a detail introduction about the electrolytes.

3.1.1 Aqueous electrolytes. 
According to thermodynamic theory, the Seebeck coefficient (Se) is related to the solvent-dependent entropy difference (ΔSrc). Additionally, ΔSrc depends strongly on the nature of redox couples themselves as well as the types of solvent and solute surrounding the electrolytes. Such relationships suggest that Se needs to be improved by choosing redox couples or optimizing the electrolyte. Practically, redox couples with high absolute charges and complex structures possess larger Se as shown in Table 1. For example, p-type [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− (Se = −1.4 mV K−1, 0.4 M in water50), n-type Sn4+/Sn2+ (Se = 1.13 mV K−1, 0.2 M in water64) and Fe(ClO4)2/Fe(ClO4)3 (Se = 1.76 mV K−1, 0.8 M in water65) exhibit larger Se in aqueous electrolytes. In contrast, for Cu2+/Cu (Se = 0.81 mV K−1, 0.7 M CuSO4 containing 0.1 M H2SO4 solution66), Fe3+/Fe2+ (Se = 0.54 mV K−1, 0.5 M in water67), and I−/I3− (Se = 0.51 mV K−1, 0.4 M in water68), the Seebeck coefficients are smaller.
Table 1 Comparison of Se with different redox couples




Redox couples
Absolute charges and structure
Seebeck coefficient (mV K−1)
Ref.




[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−
High absolute charges and complex structures
−1.40

50



Fe(ClO4)2/Fe(ClO4)3
High absolute charges and complex structures
1.76

65



Sn4+/Sn2+
High absolute charges
1.13

64



Cu2+/Cu
Low absolute charges and simple structures
0.81

66



Fe3+/Fe2+
Low absolute charges and simple structures
0.64

67



I−/I3−
Low absolute charges and simple structures
0.51

68





To further boost Se, extensive experiments have been conducted to optimize electrolytes. For example, Aldous et al. used a range of Fe3+/Fe2+ systems with different coordination environments and ascertained that Se can be significantly increased from +0.18 ± 0.04 mV K−1 for ammonium iron(II/III) sulphate to +1.46 ± 0.02 mV K−1 for acidified iron(II/III) trifluoromethanesulfonate.69 Besides, mixing methanol into [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous solution can also dramatically improve the Seebeck coefficient,65 which leads to the rearrangement of the solvation shell in the electrolyte environment. Consequently, the absolute Seebeck coefficient changes from 1.43 mV K−1 to 2.9 mV K−1 as shown in Fig. 4a. When the temperature difference is 4.1 K, the corresponding maximum power density is obtained at 0.64 mW m−2 K−2, which is approximately 1.8 times than that of the pure aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 4b). Furthermore, a variety of organic additives, such as acetone, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), isopropyl alcohol (IPA), N,N-dimethylformamide (N,N-DMF), ethanol, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), methanol, N-methylformamide (NMF), propylene glycol (PG), and ethylene glycol (EG), were also tested. It has been proven that the additives with Hildebrand solubility ranging from 19.7 to 34.9 MPa1/2 can improve the Seebeck coefficient. However, there is a large structural difference in Fig. 4c between the above substances. It is uncertain whether other factors jointly determine the Seebeck coefficient.
 Fig. 4  (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous and methanol added electrolyte system at different ΔT, the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se). (b) Voltage (black dashed line) and power density (blue dashed line) versus current density for a 15 wt% methanol added electrolyte system.65 Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Structures of different organic additives. 
The concentration ratio difference (ΔCr) is another key parameter causing Se change in electrolytes. In most situations, it is difficult for ΔCr to establish a persistent concentration gradient in the electrolyte, which is thermodynamically unstable and spontaneously homogeneous. Yamada et al. proposed a supramolecular methodology to enhance the ΔCr.59 α-Cyclodextrin was added to the electrolyte and can encapsulate I3− to form an α-cyclodextrin-I3− complex, whose equilibrium is shifted to the complexation at lower temperatures and inverted at elevated temperatures in Fig. 5a. This temperature-dependent host–guest complexation provides a concentration ratio difference, leading to the Seebeck coefficient improving from 0.86 mV K−1 to 1.97 mV K−1 in Fig. 5b. This result indicates the importance of properly choosing temperature-sensitivity substances to optimal Se.
 Fig. 5  (a) A schematic figure of a supramolecular thermocell in the combination of α-CD and I−/I3− redox couples. (b) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the I−/I3− and α-CD added electrolyte system at different ΔT; the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se).59 Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectra of Fe(CN)64− and Fe(CN)63− in an electrolyte with different addition amounts of Gdm+. (d) Schematic of guanidinium cations (Gdm+) inducing Fe(CN)64− crystallization in the [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− system. (e) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the thermocell and crystallization-boosted thermocell at different ΔT; the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se). (f) Comparison of ηr and Se values for various LTC systems obtained by electrolyte and electrode optimization; the dashed line shows the predicted commercialization threshold, ∼5%.52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020, AAAS. 
Strikingly, combining the synergy of ΔSrc and ΔCr, Zhou et al. proposed a thermosensitive crystallization strategy in Cu2+/Cu,66 I−/I3−,68 and [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− (ref. 52) aqueous systems to increase the Seebeck coefficient. They added (NH4)2SO4 into Cu2+/Cu solution, CsCl into I−/I3− solution, and Gdm+ into [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− solution, respectively. Finally, the effective enhancement of ΔSrc and ΔCr is caused by the rearrangement of the solvation shell and crystallization and dissolution of precipitates.
Taking the [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous system as an example as shown in Fig. 5c, the UV-vis test showed that when Gdm+ is added to the system, the absorption band of [Fe(CN)6]4− has an obvious shift, while the band position of [Fe(CN)6]3− remains almost unchanged, which leads to an entropy difference (ΔSrc). On the other hand, it enables a concentration gradient (ΔCr) by selectively inducing [Fe(CN)6]4− crystallization via guanidinium cations (Gdm+) in Fig. 5d. Specifically, [Fe(CN)6]4− crystalizes on the cold side and then spontaneously precipitates via gravity and redissolves on the hot side, resulting in a lower local concentration of [Fe(CN)6]4− near the cold electrode and a higher local concentration of [Fe(CN)6]4− near the hot electrode. The crystallization and dissolution kinetics of the precipitates is quite quick to ensure continuous progress. Consequently, the absolute Seebeck coefficient is improved from 1.40 mV K−1 to 3.73 mV K−1 in Fig. 5e. Intriguingly, lower κeff and higher σeff were also obtained in the [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− system after the thermosensitive crystallization strategy. As a result, a high Carnot efficiency of ηr = 11.1% in Fig. 5f near room temperature is obtained, which exceeds the predicted threshold for commercialization.
Similar Seebeck coefficient improvements were also confirmed in the Cu2+/Cu66 and I−/I3− (ref. 68) aqueous systems, which changes from 0.81 mV K−1 to 1.66 mV K−1 and 0.51 mV K−1 to 1.2 mV K−1, respectively. This thermosensitive crystallization strategy offers an ingenious way to decouple the interdependence of electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, and the Seebeck coefficient to gain excellent thermocells. However, since the precipitated crystals can only be accumulated at the bottom by gravity, the whole structure needs to be placed in an appropriate position to work, which has limitations in practical applications. When the heat conduction direction of the device changes or the device cannot remain stable (i.e., the precipitated crystal jitter), the performance of the thermocell cannot be maintained.


3.1.2 Ionic liquid electrolytes. 
Since the boiling point of water is 100 °C, it limits the operating temperature of the aqueous electrolyte. As an alternative, ionic liquids (ILs) have a higher boiling point, high ionic conductivity, low thermal conductivity, and no-inflammability, making them promising electrolyte candidates.70,71 Interestingly, due to the complexity of ionic liquids themselves, it may lead to a greater entropy difference, thus increasing the Seebeck coefficient.72
In 2009, Katayama et al. reported that dissolving [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− in 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide (BMPTFSA) IL can achieve an Se of −1.49 mV K−1.60 Furthermore, they found that more redox couples are available in ILs, including [Fe(Cp)2]+/[Fe(Cp)2], [Fe(bpy)3]3+/[Fe(bpy)3]2+, [FeCl4]−/[FeCl4]2−, [FeBr4]−/[FeBr4]2−, and [Cr(bpy)3]3+/[Cr(bpy)3]2+. These results indicate that ILs have another ability to dissolve redox couples that are unstable or insoluble in aqueous systems. Based on the above, they tested Se and confirmed that Se depends on the charge and size of redox couples themselves, which was similar to the aqueous electrolyte. Yamoato et al. confirmed the importance of the strength of these interactions and the polarization or spatial configuration of the redox ions.
Inspired by such predictions, Pringle et al. dissolved [Co(bpy)3]3+/[Co(bpy)3]2+ in [C2mim][NTf2], [C4mpyr][NTf2], [C2mim][B(CN)4], and [C2mim][eFAP] ILs, respectively.73 The Seebeck coefficients were improved to 1.5–2.2 mV K−1 in Fig. 6a. Another interesting finding is that the ΔSrc based on the Co complex is higher than that of Cr-based or Fe-based complexes. This is related to the variation in the spin state on the central Co3+/2+ in Fig. 6b. The reduction of Co3+ to Co2+ is accompanied by a transition from low to high spin, which produces a change in the metal–ligand bond. Therefore, it disrupts the solvent structure and obtains a larger entropy difference.74
 Fig. 6  (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.01 M [Co(bpy)3]3+/[Co(bpy)3]2+ in an ionic liquid electrolyte system at different ΔT; the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se).73 Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Electronic configuration of Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions and spin state of Co2+ and Co3+ ions. Abbreviations: HS, high spin; LS, low spin.74 Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Currents in thermocells of 0.4 M I3−/I− containing [C1C2Im][BF4], [C1C2Im][N(Tf)2], [C1C4Pyrr][N(Tf)2], [C2,2,2,(101)][N(Tf)2] ILs, Thot = 130 °C, and Tcold = 30 °C.62 Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) Two-dimensional cluster analysis. Four identified natural clusters (classes) are presented in the data. Colors represent the autoscaled values of the selected descriptors and experimentally determined Se values and two-dimensional cluster analysis for all ILs from both training and validation sets.75 Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the nature of redox couples, the properties of ILs are also important. These influences were found by dissolving I−/I3− redox couples in [C1C2Im][BF4], [C1C2Im][N(Tf)2], [C1C4Pyrr][N(Tf)2], and [C2,2,2,(101)][N(Tf)2] ILs as shown in Fig. 6c.62 It can be concluded from Table 2 that the Seebeck coefficient and maximum power of the devices are also related to the cation and anion properties of ILs themselves. Later, Sosnowsla et al. confirmed this prediction by using quantitative structure–property relationship (QSPR) and read-across techniques as shown in Fig. 6d.75 The most important factors affecting the Seebeck coefficient are the size, symmetry, branching of cations, and the vertical electron binding energy of anions in ILs. The cations are small, relatively symmetric, and less branched and the anions possess high vertical electron binding energy, resulting in a high Seebeck coefficient.
Table 2 The effect of cations and anions on the Seebeck coefficient and maximum power




Ionic electrolytes
Seebeck coefficient (mV K−1) (±0.02)
Power (mW m−2), Thot = 130 °C, Tcold = 60 °C
Redox couples
Ref.




[C2mim][BF4]
0.23
16
0.4 M I−/I3−

58



[C2mim][NTf2]
0.13
3.5
0.4 M I−/I3−


[C4mpyr][NTf2]
0.13
2.6
0.4 M I−/I3−


[C2mim][B(CN)4]
0.10
3.4
0.4 M I−/I3−


[C2mim][DCA]
−0.07
0.6
0.4 M I−/I3−


[C2mim][eFAP]
1.82
22
0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3

73



[C2mim][NTf2]
1.66
133
0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3


[C2mim][B(CN)4]
1.59
165
0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3




The above studies give the key parameters that influence Se in ILs, such as the absolute charge and size of redox couples, and the properties of cations or anions in ILs. Although, Sosnowsla et al. provided a facile method to predict the Se using computational chemistry. It is worth noting that this prediction is limited by less experimental data. Subsequently, the amount of data can be expanded, and the applicability of this method in the aqueous electrolyte can be verified, and then new techniques can be developed to predict the influence of other parameters on the Seebeck coefficient.
However, compared to aqueous electrolytes, IL electrolytes exhibit lower power density due to the slow diffusion rate. A further improvement is to mix ILs with molecular organic solvents to achieve high power density. Fig. 7a and b ascertain that the addition of propylene carbonate (PC) to the [C4mim][NTf2] IL significantly increased the current and power of the device due to the lower viscosity.76 Such a strategy has also been successfully applied in the MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4] and DMSO–[C2mim][eFAP] IL systems as shown in Fig. 7c.77 Since the viscosity of MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4] (15 mPa at 30 °C) is lower than that of DMSO–[C2mim][eFAP](43 mPa at 30 °C), the highest power density of 880 mW m−2 is obtained containing 3:1 (v/v) MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4] as shown in Fig. 7d. The significant power enhancement compared to the single solvent or IL systems results from a combination of superior ionic conductivity and higher diffusion coefficients.
 Fig. 7  (a) Current density versus cell voltage for the neat imidazolium IL electrolytes. (b) Current density versus cell voltage for the 1:1 imidazolium IL:PC and neat PC electrolytes.76 Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEC performance of 0.1 M [CoII/III(bpy)3](NTf2)2/3 in the MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4] mixtures. (d) TEC performance of 0.1 M [CoII/III(bpy)3](NTf2)2/3 in the DMSO–[C2mim][eFAP] mixtures.77 Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Quasi-solid-state electrolytes. 
Quasi-solid electrolytes are considered to be safer and more reliable as well as flexible than ILs.78 They have the characteristics to capture more complex heat sources and avoid leakage risks. In addition, they can also maintain a larger thermal gradient throughout thermocells by eliminating thermal convection.
Chen et al. prepared a quasi-solid-state thermocell by in situ free-radical polymerization of polyacrylamide (PAAm) in the presence of acidified-single-walled carbon nanotubes (a-SWCNTs) and then introduced a Sn4+/Sn2+ redox couple via ion exchange.79 The resultant thermocell exhibits an excellent Se of 1.59 ± 0.07 mV K−1 at a Sn4+/Sn2+ concentration of 0.2 M and an a-SWCNT content of 0.6 wt% as well as high flexibility and stretchability.
Besides, poly(vinyl alcohol) PVA is another promising matrix candidate for quasi-solid-state thermocells due to its biocompatibility, non-toxicity, non-corrosiveness, and excellent water solubility. Zhou et al. prepared n-type PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+ (PFC) and p-type PVA-[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− (PPF) gel electrolytes via a facile mixing method.80 As shown in Fig. 8a, when a laser transited through the gels, significant light scattering is observed, indicating the homogeneity of the gels. Unlike a fluid electrolyte, this gel electrolyte has a good mechanical strength of 0.1 mPa and can be pulled up to 2–4 times the original state as shown in Fig. 8b. The Seebeck coefficients of PFC and PPF are 1.02 mV K−1 and −1.21 mV K−1, respectively, which are close to the values of aqueous electrolytes. Because of the desirable mechanical and thermoelectric properties, it is conducive to collecting body heat for the direct power supply of wearable devices.
 Fig. 8  (a) Photographs of laser-irradiated samples of (a1) a PFC gel, (a2) aqueous FeCl2/FeCl3, (a3) a PPF gel, and (a4) aqueous K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6. (b) Stress–strain curves for PFC and PPF gel films.80 Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Photographs of the freestanding gel on a fingertip prepared with 5.5 wt% agar agar and 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6.81 Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Preparation of the PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+ gel electrolyte. (e) Stress–strain curves (PVA content: 5 wt%, FeCl2/FeCl3 concentration: 1 M, and Mw = 85–124 kDa).82 Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Except for polyacrylamide (PAAM) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), poly (sodium acrylate) and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) are also suitable media for preparing gel electrolytes. They also show compatibility with redox couples and do not impede mass transport. Aldous et al. reported a polyanionic polymer-based gel electrolyte by simply mixing 5.5 wt% poly(sodium acrylate) beads into 0.1 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− as shown in Fig. 8cvia agitating and ultrasonic processing.81 Its Seebeck coefficient is −1.09 ± 0.04 mV K−1.
Combining the above two gels, Chen et al. exhibited n-type PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+ and p-type CMC-[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− electrolytes.82 The mechanical properties and flexibility of the PVA-based electrolyte are greatly increased owing to the chemical crosslinking with glutaraldehyde (GA) as shown in Fig. 8d. As shown in Fig. 8e, with the help of GA, the electrolyte shows less than 10% plastic deformation (over 60 cycles) by repeated bending and twisting. These results increase the potential of gel electrolytes in wearable applications and even epidermal devices. Consequently, the n-type cell shows an excellent Seebeck coefficient (0.85 mV K−1) and output current density (1.74 A m−2 K−1), comparable to those of the optimized p-type cell (−1.22 mV K−1 and 1.85 A m−2 K−1).
Another typical example of quasi-solid-state electrolytes was the use of the cellulose matrix.83 Cellulose was chosen as the polymer matrix as it does not suffer from the problems of brittleness, water loss, and volume shrinkage. Furthermore, the three-dimensional honeycomb-like structure can anchor water and provides additional heat transfer pathway as well as ion diffusion channels. When the cellulose concentration varied from 2.5 wt% to 20 wt%, it shows a transition from “soft sponge” to “tough rubber” with no fluid leakage. Finally, the optimized device exhibits a Seebeck coefficient of −1.38 mV K−1 and a specific power output of 0.062 mW m−2 K−2.
Undoubtedly, the choice of a gel matrix (like PAAm, PVA, CMC, and cellulose) is of critical importance in quasi-solid electrolyte thermocells. Except for the above matrix, other gels have been verified to be unsuitable for this system, such as polysaccharides (food-grade agar), protein (food-grade gelatine powder), and nanomaterials (fumed silica).73 Consequently, the mechanism of matrix selection should be clarified. Firstly, gel matrixes cannot destroy redox couples and they should be compatible with redox couples. Then, they cannot hinder transport and should have desirable mechanical properties.
Meanwhile, the same problem of relatively low power density has been also found in quasi-solid electrolytes.45 Therefore, the design of a quasi-solid-state electrolyte should not only ensure that it has the stretchability to adapt to a dynamic interface but also have the mechanical toughness to maintain physical integrity. Furthermore, it should allow high-concentration electrolytes to optimize the conductivity and improve the power density.
The aforesaid sluggish ion transport was overcome by the synergy of thermodiffusion and thermogalvanic effects as shown in Fig. 9a. It made breakthroughs in both the Seebeck coefficient (17.0 mV K−1) and power output (0.66 mW m−2 K−2) in a flexible quasi-solid-state system.84 The ionic thermoelectric material is a gelatin matrix modulated with ion providers (KCl, NaCl, and KNO3) for the thermodiffusion effect and a redox couple [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− for the thermogalvanic effect (abbreviated as gelatin-x KCl-m/n FeCN4−/3−, x is KCl and m/n are K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 molar concentrations, respectively). This device measures the maximum output power density at 0.66 mW m−2 K−2 with the optimized combination (gelatin–KCl–FeCN4−/3−, x = 0.8 M and m/n = 0.42/0.25 M), which is one or two orders of magnitude higher than the previously reported value.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synergistic effect for both thermodiffusion and thermogalvanic effects. Gelatin–KCl–FeCN4−/3− (x = 0.8 M and m/n = 0.42/0.25 M).84 Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (b) Power density and current density versus potential for 0.4 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−/3 M NaCl at different ΔT. (c) The thermocell with a thickness of 3 mm and a width of 5 mm lifts a bag of oranges with a weight of 1.5 kg and its stress–strain curves.85 Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Photos showing the cutting and compressing process performed on the 0.01 M–0.25 h PAAm/Fe–Alg hydrogel.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. (e) Photograph of the soft and stretchable organohydrogel thermocell. (f) Schematic illustration of the organohydrogel thermocell containing crosslinked networks, EG, and water upon a temperature gradient. (g) Comparison of working temperature and Pmax/(ΔT)2 for various quasi-solid-state thermocells.87 Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
And another interesting high-concentration double-network electrolyte was obtained by Wu et al.85 Unlike previous jello-like, brittle, physically cross-linked ionic thermoelectric materials, these robust double networks are capable of loading high-concentration electrolytes (0.4 M) and contribute to high ionic conductivity. Thus, it can be calculated from Fig. 9b that the maximum output power density is 0.61 mW m−2 K−2 at a temperature difference of 40 K, almost equal to the highest value of 0.66 mW m−2 K−2 reported by Liu et al.85 These double-network electrolytes also exhibit desirable mechanical properties. A piece of thermocell with a thickness of 3 mm and a width of 5 mm can lift a bag of oranges with a weight of 1.5 kg. More intriguing, it can be stretched to a strain of 217%, with a Young's modulus of 150 kPa and a high strength of 1190 kPa as shown in Fig. 9c. Even when the thermocell undergoes repeated cutting, it keeps physical integrity and continuously provides stable electricity, indicating its great potential as a solid electrolyte for flexible all-solid-state thermocells. Furthermore, Chen et al. regulated the thermogalvanic effect and mechanical robustness in detail for flexible quasi-solid-state thermocells.86 The optimized Fe3+/Fe2+ based thermocell exhibits a high Seebeck coefficient of 1.43 mV K−1 and a significantly improved fracture toughness of 3555 J m−2, and thereby can maintain a stable thermo-electrochemical performance against various harsh mechanical stimuli as shown in Fig. 9d.
Another most attractive feature of quasi-solid-state electrolytes is their wide operating temperature range. As mentioned above, the operating temperature of IL-based thermocells can be increased beyond 100 °C, but that below 0 °C has not been reported. Due to the complicated bond valence mode in the gel matrix, the operating temperature of the quasi-solid-state electrolyte device can be broadened to below 0 °C by regulating the gel matrix. Chen et al. showed an organohydrogel thermocell as shown in Fig. 9e to extend the operating temperature to −30 °C.87 This thermocell was realized by introducing a synergistic chaotropic effect to destruct a strong hydrogen bond and increase the entropic elasticity of polymers as shown in Fig. 9f, thereby enlarging the entropy difference as well as the operating temperature of the device. Finally, the maximum power density of the thermocell reaches 0.1 mW m−2 K−2. Compared with various reported quasi-solid-state thermocells in Fig. 9g, even at −30 °C, this device maintains a relatively high power density of 0.012 mW m−2 K−2.
Despite the greatly improved mechanical properties and thermoelectric performance, additional parameters should also be concerned for quasi-solid-state electrolytes, including high strength, self-healing, frost resistance, and heat resistance. The corresponding strategies to improve these four properties are as follows:
(1) Introducing multiple covalent bonds and non-covalent bonds into the gel network. An effective energy dissipation model and a dense and uniform three-dimensional network structure are constructed to significantly improve the fracture strength of the gel.
(2) By introducing dynamic cross-linking (non-covalent or dynamic covalent) into the gel, bond breaking and formation are in a reversible dynamic equilibrium.88,89 When hydrogels are damaged by external forces and produce cracks, the fixed water in the gel network helps to create mobile phases around the cracks. However, unreacted groups or uncross-linked reactants always exist in the network structure, which can react and crosslink again at the interface, thus filling and bridging cracks. Then the three-dimensional network structure is restored, and finally, the cracks in the appearance disappear and complete the self-healing process.
(3) A binary mixture of heat resistance and antifreeze polyol and water is used instead of pure water or alcohol. This mixture forms a dense hydrogen bonding network that firmly anchors water molecules within the three-dimensional network and effectively inhibits the freezing and volatilization of water molecules. The environmental stability of the gel material is significantly improved and the working temperature range of the material is also extended.90,91
In addition, thermocells made of quasi-solid electrolytes are the most promising devices to power wearable devices. Due to their direct contact with human skin, future research should focus on the biocompatibility and comfort of these quasi-solid substrates. The main research progress of the electrolytes of thermocells is given above. We list the comparison of typical electrolytes in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of typical electrolytes for thermocells




Electrolytes
Advantages
Disadvantages




Aqueous electrolyte
Fast ion diffusion and compatibility with many redox couples
Low boiling point, easy to leak, and poor mechanical properties


Ionic liquid electrolyte
Higher boiling point, high ionic conductivity, low thermal conductivity, and non-inflammability
Slow diffusion rate, easy to leak, and poor mechanical properties


Solid-state electrolyte
Flexible, good mechanical properties, adjustable temperature range, low thermal conductivity, safer
Poor transport properties and compatibility of the matrix and redox couples





3.2 Modifying electrode materials
It can be concluded from the working principle that, except for electrolytes containing redox couples, electrodes are also the key factors affecting device performance. The electrode is generally related to the specific surface area and catalytic behavior. In previous studies, noble metal platinum has been widely used because of its high catalytic activity, which can reduce the charge transfer overpotential.92,93 However, the high cost limits further investigations. After the discovery of noble metal platinum, carbon materials with a large specific surface area and fast electron transfer made them an ideal electrode to construct high-performance thermocells. The majority of research has focused on nanotubes, graphene, their derivatives, etc. In addition, some other electrodes that are relatively less reported were also introduced e.g., polymer and metal electrodes. It is noteworthy that, if not particularly indicated, the following are all based on aqueous [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− redox couple systems.

3.2.1 Carbon materials. 
The presence of carbon materials could provide a high specific surface area and fast redox electron transport in the device. For example, as shown in Fig. 10a, Baughman et al. used carbon multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs) as the electrode to harvest low-grade waste heat.50 The MWNTs have a high specific surface area (278 m2 g−1) and high conductivity (100 S cm−1), which significantly improves the current density and overall efficiency compared to conventional Pt foil. Under a temperature difference of 60 K, the Voc is 70.4 mV and the jsc is stable at 55.7 A m−2 as shown in Fig. 10b. Additionally, the flexible MWNT thin-film cell as shown in Fig. 10c is encapsulated and wrapped in a cooling tube for real utilization. The cell produces a Voc of 21 mV and a power density of 0.18 mW m−2 K−2 at a temperature difference of 15 K. Chen et al. applied 1-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP) to disperse the SWNT and rGO composite as shown in Fig. 10d.94 It can be seen from Fig. 10e that controlling the composition and thickness of the SWNT–rGO composite can tailor the porosity for thermocell applications, thus obtaining high thermoelectric properties. The optimized SWNT–rGO composite is applied in a novel stacked electrode, and Parea/ΔT2 (1.9 mW m−2 K−2) and Pmass/ΔT2 (49 mW kg−1 K−2) are about 380% and 280% higher than those of previously reported SWNT–rGO composite electrodes. Intriguingly, the Carnot efficiency is 2.63%, almost double the highest reported value and within the range for commercial viability of these devices.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the MWNT electrode. The average MWNT diameter is 10 nm. (b) Voc and jscversus time for a coin cell with the MWNT electrode. ΔT = 60 °C. (c) Schematic assembly of the thin thermocell wrapped around a pipe carrying cool, flowing liquid. Two layers of Nomex are used to separate the two electrodes. The distance between electrodes is approximately 0.2 cm and the real thermocell is wrapped around a stainless-steel pipe to generate power.50 Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (d) Micrographs of films of SWNTs (top) and the 90% SWNT-10% rGO composite (bottom). (e) Power density generated using various electrode compositions at ΔT = 31 °C.94 Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to rigid materials, carbon-based flexible materials have also been demonstrated to be effective for wearable devices. For instance, Kim et al. introduced carbon nanotubes (CNTs) into activated carbon fiber fabric (ACT) as shown in Fig. 11a.95 This thermocell possesses improved performance as well as flexibility, making it compatible with a bent heat source to collect heat from the human body. Due to the improved charge transfer at the interface, under cold weather conditions (a surrounding temperature of 5 °C), the thermocell generates a short-circuit current density of 0.39 A m−2 and a maximum power density of 0.46 mW m−2 from body heat (temperature of 36 °C) as shown in Fig. 11b. For practical use, the thermocell charges a capacitor when worn on a T-shirt and also can power a typical commercial light-emitting diode (LED) (Fig. 11c). Furthermore, Kim et al. fabricated planar and cylindrically wound carbon nanotube (CNT) aerogel sheet electrodes to harvest low-grade heat as shown in Fig. 11.96 The optimal thermocell utilizes the geometry of a cylindrical cell and removes low activity carbonaceous impurities that limit electron transfer kinetics. In addition, catalytic platinum nanoparticles were used to decorate CNT sheets and mechanically compressed to tune conductivity and porosity. According to these strategies, a record Carnot-relative efficiency (3.95%) and maximum power density (6.6 W m−2) for a temperature difference of only 51 °C are achieved simultaneously.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic depicting the structure of the flexible thermocell and (b) its cell potential and specific output versus current density at the steady state from body heat. (c) Thermocell charges a capacitor when worn on a T-shirt and powers a typical commercial light-emitting diode.95 Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2014, Tsinghua University Press. (d) Photographs of cell components and the cylindrically wound carbon nanotube (CNT) aerogel sheet electrode.96 Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
The above studies mainly focused on the performance of carbon electrodes in aqueous p-type [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− redox couples. However, the integration of a combination of p- and n-type cells in series provides good contact between the electrodes and current collectors and is simple to fabricate. Therefore, significant development of excellent n-type redox couples like Fe3+/Fe2+, Zn2+/Zn, Cu2+/Cu, and I−/I3− on carbon electrodes is required. Equally, flexible electrodes need to be further explored to meet the collection of complex heat sources and applications in wearable electronic devices.


3.2.2 Conductive polymers. 
In addition to carbon-based materials, some conducting polymers are also viewed as attractive candidates for thermocells due to their high abundance, low-temperature synthesis (<100 °C), and processability through a printing technique.56
A previous study demonstrated that a film of conducting polymer (PEDOT) on stainless steel utilizing Con(bpy)3(NTf2)n in the [C2mim][B(CN)4] IL improved the thermogalvanic device efficiency.97 Later, Crispin et al. deposited the conductive polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-tosylate (PEDOT-Tos) onto the insulator and investigated the effect of electrode thickness in relation to performance as shown in Fig. 12a.56 They clarified that PEDOT-Tos does not form any insulating oxide surface layer, thus forming an intimate relationship with the electrolyte. Besides, [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− effectively increases the surface area of the PEDOT-Tos electrode by partially permeating the plastic electrode by diffusion. Finally, the power generated by the PEDOT-Tos based thermocell reaches a similar value to that of the platinum electrode. To clarify the mechanism, they further systematically studied the electrical conductivity, the density of states Ns(E), and the rate of electron transfer ko to the reactant as shown in Fig. 12b.98 The results manifest that there is a strong correlation between the electronic transport within the PEDOT–PSS electrode and that of organometallic molecules in solution. This phenomenon is due to the direct involvement of the electron transfer through percolation-based charge transport in the polymer electrode. Recently, a more advanced 3D printing technique was reported by Chen et al., to produce conductive polymer materials.99 It allows the direct printing of PEDOT:PSS with controlled line spacing and interlayer spacing porosity to produce well-defined structures. Accordingly, the electrode displays comparable performance in both n-type (PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+) and p-type (CMC-[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−) gel electrolytes, which exhibits an enhanced current from 8.2 A m−2 to 13.0 A m−2 and power density from 12.2 mW m−2 to 25 mW m−2 for n-type and 15.2 A m−2 to 27.5 A m−2 and power density from 30.2 mW m−2 to 70 mW m−2 for p-type.
 Fig. 12  (a) comparison of maximum power as a function of PEDOT-Tos thickness and the platinum electrode.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram of charge transport (pink arrows) within the polymer electrode and the electron transfer (green arrows) at the polymer electrolyte interface for poor-conducting, intermediate-conducting, and high-conducting PEDOT–PSS electrodes. The blue “snake” lines (on the left-hand side) mimic the aggregates of PEDOT chains that display short-range order through π–π stacks.98 Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2018, PNAS. (c) Voltage (straight line) and power density (dashed line) versus current density of the Pt, Ni, and carbon electrodes.100 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Current–voltage and power–voltage curves for LTC and TC-LTC using different electrodes at a ΔT of 70 K. The best performance of the device was obtained using a 3D multi-structured Cu electrode.66 Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagrams of hybrid thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs). (f) Voltage (straight line) and power density (dashed line) versus current density of the Pt, W, and GC electrodes at ΔT = 50 K.102 Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 


3.2.3 Metal-based materials. 
Analogously, metal-based electrodes like Ni, Cu, and W electrodes have been developed. Ni-based thermocells display a similar performance to that of Pt foil as shown in Fig. 12c.100 And they are a promising alternative to Pt or nanostructured carbon electrodes under alkaline conditions. The Cu electrode also shows the advantages for thermocells. As can be seen in Fig. 12d, Duan et al. reported a basic Cu electrode with a power density of 0.06 W m−2, which was effectively improved to 0.75 W m−2 after modification into a 3D multi-structured Cu electrode.66 Homoplastically, a 2D Au/Cu electrode was modified to a 3D Au/Cu electrode, and a 1072% improvement in power density was found.101 These indicate that by optimizing the structure of the electrodes, their power density can be effectively improved. For another W-based electrode, the Seebeck coefficient can be enhanced by two synergistic reactions as shown in Fig. 12e:102 the redox reaction of the electrolyte and the oxidation reaction of tungsten electrodes. The developed tungsten electrode-based hybrid thermocell generates a Seebeck coefficient of 1.66 mV K−1 and power output of 425 mW m−2, which is 70% higher than that of platinum or carbon electrodes as shown in Fig. 12f. This study presents a new type of thermocell among metal-based electrodes, in which a redox reaction takes place for both the electrode and electrolyte. Generally, there are different valence states for most metal-based electrodes, and this strategy provides another method to improve the performance of thermocells.
One key target for improving the performance of thermocells is the development of electrodes, combined with advanced electrode synthesis and the design with tailored compositions and structures. The well-designed pore size, thickness, and morphology of the electrodes have a significant impact on the performance of the device. Furthermore, engineering strategies like elemental doping,103–105 vacancy creation,106,107 pore/hole generation,108,109 phase engineering,110,111 interlayer engineering,112,113 and heterostructure construction114,115 can further optimize the micro- and electronic structures, resulting in a desirable output power density. Intriguingly, a new modification strategy is provided in which the redox reaction occurs simultaneously in both the electrode and electrolyte, which provides an idea for the future development of metal electrodes. Meanwhile, all the above-mentioned research studies focus on symmetric electrodes, and asymmetric electrodes needed to be developed in the future.

3.3 Adding separators or membranes
Beyond the electrodes and electrolytes, separators or membranes used in electrochemical energy storage devices have high porosity, low resistance, good elasticity, and aprotic solvent retention performance, creating additional challenges for achieving high-performance thermocells.116–118 For thermocells, cross-device heat conduction is one of the main causes of low device efficiency. Therefore, inserting a separator or membrane between the two electrodes can effectively maintain the gradient of temperature and ion concentration, thus improving thermoelectric performance.
MacFarlane et al. embedded a poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) membrane into a 0.7 M I−/I3− aqueous electrolyte thermocell to reduce the effect of convective currents.119 At a ΔT of 12 K, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) can be increased from 1.3 mV to 2.8 mV as shown in Fig. 13a, with the membrane position at x = 5 mm. The corresponding power density is 254 nW cm−2, which is 78% higher than that of the traditional thermocell. According to these data, thermal resistance models based on infrared thermography are presented in Fig. 13b. The results show that the PVDF membrane is to hinder the heat dissipation between the electrodes when is placed equidistant between the two electrodes, keeping the electrodes closer to the applied external temperature values. Zhang et al. also implanted a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane with a micropore-widespread diaphragm into an Fe3+/Fe2+-based PVA-gel.23 This membrane forms a thermal barrier between the two halves and effectively improves the Seebeck coefficient from 0.58 mV K−1 to 0.79 mV K−1 by reducing its thermal conductivity from 1.22 Wm−1 K−1 to 0.93 Wm−1 K−1.
 Fig. 13  (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of thermocells and membrane-thermocells at different ΔT. (b) Infrared thermography of thermocells and membrane-thermocells. The series I, II, III, and IV represent no membrane, the membrane closer to the cold electrode, the membrane at the center between the electrodes, and the membrane closer to the hot electrode respectively.119 Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Illustration of the thermocell structure, which consists of a thermal separator (colored green) attached to the cold-side thermocell electrode. (d) Comparison of power densities with/without a thermal separator.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of the heat-triggered concentration gradient-boosted thermocell (HT-TCC) in the hibernating state (I) and working state (II). The closed heat-triggered membrane (HTM) makes the HT-TCC in an open-circuit state and hibernates in peacetime. Once being heat-triggered, the HTM can quickly open, making the HT-TCC harvest heat for driving the alarm.120 Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Baughman et al. demonstrated the effective effect of membrane addition on the device as shown in Fig. 13c.67 The addition of an electrolyte-filled thermal separator in the cold plate caused the interelectrode temperature drop shift toward the cold side, resulting in a larger volume of the electrolyte at higher temperatures that facilitate rapid ion transport. The power density of a single device is 12 W m−2 as shown in Fig. 13d. This work will be useful to optimize the future performance of TECs when used in conjunction with the optimized formulations of redox couples.
Interestingly, a heat-triggered membrane synthesized from wood pulp paper (WPP) and cyclohexane was used as the start switch in [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous solution as shown in Fig. 13e.120 In particular, the concentration ratios of 0.7 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/0.7 mM [Fe(CN)6]3− on the hot side and 0.7 M [Fe(CN)6]3−/0.7 mM [Fe(CN)6]4− on the cold side are 1000. Due to the concentration gradients (ΔCr), the output voltage and power density enable 4.5 times and one order of magnitude enhancement up to 512.5 mV and 45.9 W m−2.
Compared to electrode materials and electrolytes, the research on separators or membranes is still relatively less. The above studies confirm that the addition of a separator or membrane is beneficial to the device's performance. However, detailed parameters such as thickness, porosity, and stability need to be studied more extensively. Secondly, it has been reported that thermocells can work well in high or low temperature environments, and their capabilities should be considered when selecting separators for a real environment. If the temperature is too high, there is a risk of spontaneous combustion. All these issues point to screening suitable separators or membranes for thermocells.
4. Thermocell configuration and applications
4.1 Cell configuration
Up until now, a variety of cell configurations have been explored, and we divided them into two types: laboratory basic research devices (U-type) and practical application devices (straight-type). However, the actual thermoelectric performance obtained by the two types is quite different, which is caused by the electrode spacing. U-type devices represent larger spacing, while straight-shaped devices represent smaller spacing. Larger spacing results in a smaller temperature gradient within the electrolyte and a larger time constant for thermally induced diffusion.121 Specifically, laboratory basic research is shown in Fig. 14a–e (ref. 50, 59, 63 and 122–125) these devices one side is cooled with circulating liquid and the other side is heated with electric heat tape or warming water. The thermocouple is inserted near the electrode of each half-cell that regulates the power applied to the heating tape to reach a preset temperature. Most of them are only suitable for basic research due to the complexity of device testing and connection. Moreover, in a real-world environment, there is no heat source matching the above configuration, so they cannot be used directly.
 Fig. 14  (a) Cross-sectional view through the vertical axis of the thermogalvanic cell. (1) Brass bolts; (2) warm water inlet; (3) warm water outlet; (4) cool water inlet; (5) cool water outlet; (6) miniature bead thermistors; (7) metal foil electrodes; (8) neoprene gaskets; (9) filling port and plug with capillary (a static meniscus therein indicates that there are no leaks). Area of each electrode = 1.00 cm2.63 Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 1986, Elsevier. (b) Schematic of the H-shaped cell used.59 Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) The designed cylindrical cell, made of Teflon, incorporates two electrodes and the insert that holds the electrolyte.124 Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2014, Electrochemical Society. (d) Schematic assembly of the coin-like thermocell. Each buckypaper electrode is 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm and attached to the package with Ag paste. The electrodes are separated by five layers of Nomex HT4848 soaked with the electrolyte. The cells are sealed with pneumatic crimping. The cell diameter is 2.0 cm and height is 0.2 cm.50 Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic drawing of the measurement setup and photograph of the thermoelectrochemical cell.125 Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (f) Photograph of a single planar cell. The cross-sectional area of the cell is 2.6 cm2, and the distance between the two electrodes is 1.5 cm.52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020, AAAS. (g) Illustration of the thermocell structure, which consists of two Ti current collectors (colored metallic gray), two thermocell electrodes (colored black), a thermal separator (colored green) attached to the cold-side thermocell electrode, a 2.6 mm thick plate spacer made of polyether ether ketone (colored dark yellow) that defines the electrolyte volume at the cell center, and two rubber O-rings. The carbon electrodes are 1 cm2 in area and have a thickness ranging from 0.10 to 0.34 mm.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
With the rapid development of thermocells, another type as shown in Fig. 14f and g (ref. 52 and 67) is designed to realize practical use. The thermocell in Fig. 14f is based on a poly(methyl methacrylate) frame and sealed with graphite plate electrodes. A temperature gradient is formed across the whole cell by placing an electrical heating plate at the bottom and a water-cooled plate on the top. Finally, as shown in Fig. 14g, another structure consists of two Ti current collectors, two thermocell electrodes, and a thermal separator, which can be assembled just using screws. Compared to previously reported thermocells, these two structures are simpler and more controllable. Moreover, it can be easily disassembled for the replacement of single parts when it is out of order. Intriguingly, in a real-world environment, a small number of cells integrated using the structure of Fig. 14f and g could directly drive various electronic devices.
Some basic testing skills like cell orientation, electrode size, electrode spacing, and temperature should also be noted. Baughman et al. used a variety of nanocarbon-based materials to clarify these parameters.125 They elucidate that the open-circuit potential is independent of the cell orientation, and that short-circuit current and discharge behavior may be significantly affected by the cell orientation. The power generation is limited by the smaller area electrode, while the power output is hardly affected by the size of the larger area counter electrode.125 Of note, these conclusions only apply to [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− redox couples. As we know, there are many other redox couples, and it is not clear whether these conclusions can be applied to others as well. Indeed, cell orientation has a dramatic influence on the performance of the thermosensitive crystallization strategy. Therefore, these basic parameters should be fully considered in the subsequent cell configuration.
In terms of quasi-solid-state electrolytes, most of them can be used as a basic framework due to their solid-like properties, which serve the dual purpose of a solid electrolyte and a thermoelectric generator. A typic sketch depicting the structure of the quasi-solid-state thermocell is provided in Fig. 15a.126 It is fabricated by sandwiching a piece of a quasi-solid-state electrolyte film between two electrodes. Recently, a quasi-solid-state thermocell based on a hydrogel fiber electrolyte was proposed in Fig. 15b.127 Pure polyacrylamide (PAAM) hydrogel fibers are freeze-dried and cut into aerogel segments. Then, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)/carbon nanotube (CNT) composites are bonded with the aerogel. Finally, the fiber thermocell can be obtained by injecting the electrolyte containing redox couples into the above module.
 Fig. 15  (a) Sketch of the quasi-solid-state thermocell and photograph of the actual device in the inset.126 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Soft and stretchable thermogalvanic fabric woven out of p/n alternating hydrogel-based fibers. Inset shows the optical image of a 1 m long hydrogel fiber.127 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of the test platform used for thermoelectric measurements, “top and bottom”.126 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic of the test platform used for thermoelectric measurements, “left and right”.125 Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
All the quasi-solid-state electrolyte-based thermocells are flexible, compared with aqueous or IL-based thermocells. They can capture more complex heat sources and avoid leakage risks and can be used as a wearable device to collect heat from the human body. However, more attention should be paid to the connection between two components. It should be noted that there are two modes for the testing measurements of the quasi-solid-state thermocells: temperature gradients are established by heating plates and radiators at “top and bottom” (Fig. 15c) or “left and right” (Fig. 15d). The temperature control in both modes is realized by a Peltier heater and Peltier cooler and recorded by thermocouples.
4.2 Integrated device and its application
Since the output voltage of a single unit is quite small, it is necessary to integrate it into practical applications. The main integration methods include two types: one is a zigzag-shaped connection of the same single cells in series, and the other is a combination of p- and n-type cells in series. Similar to the solid-state thermoelectric devices, they can achieve power generation without any noise or vibration, showing many advantages such as high sensitivity to temperature change and emission-free operation. Such features can support the thermocell application in many aspects.

4.2.1 Power supply. 
Most of the applications for thermocells are related to surrounding waste heat and converting it into electricity for power supply. For example, Zhou et al. fabricated a prototype module containing 50 cells (1 cm2 area and 0.5 cm thickness) connected by Cu wires in series as shown in Fig. 16a.40 The single cell consists of a graphite electrode and 0.4 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous electrolyte mixed with urea (24 M) and GdmCl (2.6 M). At a ΔT of 18 K, the device gains a Voc of 3.4 V and Isc of 1.2 mA and can directly power an LED array as shown in Fig. 16b. A similar process is used to design a crystallization-boosted thermocell module by connecting 20 cells (size ∼ 1.4 cm × 5 cm × 2 cm) as shown in Fig. 16c.51 The single cell consists of a graphite electrode and 0.4 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous electrolyte with 3 M GdmCl. The module possesses a Voc of 3.1 V, Isc of 120 mA and Pmax of 96 mW at a ΔT of 50 K. It can drive various electronic devices like electric fans, LED arrays, and thermohydrometers to work properly (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the structure and a photograph of the module. (b) Left: schematic of the structure and a photograph of the module. The temperatures of the cold and hot water were controlled at approximately 278 and 333 K, respectively. Right: harvesting heat energy from the human body. The module was placed on a steel platform as a heat sink with a temperature of approximately 298 K and then covered by one hand.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Photograph of a crystallization-boosted thermocell module containing 20 units in series. (d) The module can directly power various electronic devices, including an electric fan, LED array, and thermohydrometer.52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020, AAAS. (e) The voltage and current generated by the thermocell from body heat. The inset shows a photograph of the wearable thermocell on a hand.80 Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (f) The module can directly power various electronic devices, including an electric fan, LED array, and thermohydrometer.127 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Wearable devices are ubiquitous in our daily lives, and human bodies are a natural heat source. Therefore, some thermocells use the temperature difference between the skin surface and the ambient atmosphere to provide self-powered systems for wearable electronic devices. Benefitting from the flexibility of the gel-based electrolyte, its integrated devices have been used for body-heat collection. For instance, Zong et al. demonstrated three pairs of BC-[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− in series and could generate an open circuit voltage of 269 mV using human body heat.128 Liu et al. designed a thermocell with a watch-strap shape and attached 5 straps of thermocell arrays (6 p–n pairs) on a wrist.82 These 30 p–n pairs (n for PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+ and p for CMC-[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−) can charge a 470 mF supercapacitor during long-term wear. Zhou et al. used 59 n-type PFC(PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+) and 59 p-type PPF(PVA-[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−).80 When the device is put on a hand as shown in Fig. 16e, a Voc of about 0.7 V and Isc of 2 μA can be generated at an ambient temperature of 5 °C. The corresponding maximum output power is 0.3 μW. Ho et al. presented all-soft and stretchable thermogalvanic gel fiber as shown in Fig. 16f.127 The monolithic p–n alternating thermogalvanic fiber is composed of p-type (0.1 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−) and n-type (0.1 M Fe3+/Fe2+) segments. The thermogalvanic fabric can generate an open-circuit voltage of around 0.7 V in a cold ambient atmosphere on irregular skin surfaces, and 0.5 V on a dynamic moving elbow.


4.2.2 Temperature sensing. 
Thermocells are also expected to replace low-power sensors for real-time temperature monitoring because of the sensitivity of thermal voltage to the temperature gradient. Bai et al. established a self-powered body temperature monitoring system based on an Fe3+/Fe2+-based gel thermoelectric patch as shown in Fig. 17a.23 When sticking the patch on the heat source, the current output reaches 80% of the maximum value within 2 s, and the temperature detection limit is 0.1 K. The gel patch achieves a rapid response/recovery, low detection limitation, and satisfactory cycling stability to the temperature difference, implying a great feasibility for body health monitoring. Yu et al. used a thermocell in a forest fire alarm system as shown in Fig. 17b, which is very reliable without regular maintenance.120 Importantly, with the existence of stable heat sources, they can serve as both a fire sensor and a power supply for wireless devices. When fire combustion or precombustion occurs, the rising temperature triggers the thermocell fast driving the wireless device to warn the monitoring device and locate the fire, realizing an early and real-time forest fire location alarm.
 Fig. 17  (a) Panoramic view of the gel-based thermoelectric patch for body temperature monitoring and its magnified current response curve vs. time. Insets: current–time curve under a temperature difference of 0.1 K.23 Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Concept of a forest fire alarm strategy, including the thermocell serving as both a fire sensor and a power supply, and wireless communication as the alarming means.120 Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Demonstration of the hydrogel thermocell on a cell phone battery. The other two images represent evaporative cooling while simultaneously converting a portion of the waste heat into electricity.51 Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic drawing of the designed integrative photothermal evaporator/thermogalvanic cell.130 Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 


4.2.3 Heat removal and recovery. 
The first heat removal and recovery system was developed by Cola et al.129 They used flow thermocells to allow cooling and power harvesting to occur in parallel. An optimized flow thermocell generated a power of 88 μW with a power density of 0.05 W m−2 and achieved a heat transfer of 450 W m−2 K−1 in parallel. Pu et al. reported a smart thermogalvanic hydrogel film as shown in Fig. 17c, in which the ions and water undergo two separate thermodynamic cycles: thermogalvanic reaction and water-to-vapor phase transition.51 When the hydrogel is attached to a heat source, it can achieve efficient evaporative cooling while simultaneously converting a portion of the waste heat into electricity. When the hydrogel was attached to a cell phone, it successfully decreased the temperature of the battery by 20 °C and retrieved electricity of 5 μW at a discharging rate of 2.2C.


4.2.4 Photothermal seawater desalination. 
Photothermal seawater desalination technology is a solar-driven interfacial water evaporation system, which performs photothermal conversion at a thermal concentrated interface. Therefore, the temperature gradient is constructed between the air–liquid interface and the bulk solution of water. This temperature gradient can be collected and converted using a thermocell. Based on the Cu2+/Cu redox couple, Ho et al. designed an integrated photothermal evaporator/thermocell with desired optical, heat, water, and electrochemical management for synergistic steam-electricity production as shown in Fig. 17d.130 This cell greatly suppresses heat losses and achieves a solar thermal conversion efficiency of up to 91.4% with a maximum power output of about 1.6 mW m−2. Shen et al. added I−/I3− redox couples into seawater and the peak output electric power of the thermocell is 0.5 mW m−2 under one-sun illumination.131 Zhou et al. combined a thermocell and reverse electrodialysis to extract energy from temperature and salinity gradients simultaneously.132 Because of the synergistic ion transport effect, the steam-electricity cogeneration system achieves 1.4 kg m−2 h−1 vapor and 1.11 W m−2 electricity under one sun illumination.
As can be seen from the above results, both single cells and integrated devices have experienced rapid development from the initial basic research to the current small-scale application. Since integrated devices involve connection issues, the choice of the substrate and connecting wire is also a consideration to minimize heat loss during transmission. In addition, the low heat transfer from the devices themselves is not yet satisfactory to collect low-grade heat from data centers and electronic devices. Thus, it mostly utilizes natural environments that do not require heat dissipation. Considering the human body as a natural heat source, the comfort and non-toxicity of self-powered wearable devices will also be an important concern.

5. Conclusion and outlook
The global energy crisis has stimulated the development of thermoelectric technology to realize the efficient utilization of low-grade heat. The conventional solid-state materials or devices, however, suffer from complex interrelationships among thermoelectric parameters, and a low Seebeck coefficient limiting the above requirements. Within the last few years, research on thermocells has become a very dynamic and fast process in component development, which stems from their ion transport characteristics. Based on the current research, they are now expected to be applied in power supply, for replacing low-power temperature sensors for real-time temperature monitoring, in heat removal and recovery and photothermal seawater desalination. In this review, we introduce the fundamental principles of redox-induced thermocells and then focus on the recent advanced progress regarding their electrolytes, electrode materials, and separators. After that, we describe various cell configurations and testing techniques, followed by their advanced applications. A detailed comparison of different devices is shown in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of thermoelectric properties and integrated devices discussed above




Electrode
Redox couples
Electrolyte or electrolyte with additives
Seebeck coefficient (mV K−1)
Power output (mW m−2 K−2)
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Ionic conductivity (S m−1)

ZT


η
r (%)
Integrated device
Ref.




MWNT buckypaper
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.40
0.38 ΔT = 60 °C






1.4



50



SWNT–rGO
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.40
0.34 ΔT = 31 °C






2.63



94



CNTs-ACT
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.40
0.04 ΔT = 3.4 °C











95



CNT aerogel sheets
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.43
2.49 ΔT = 51.4 °C






3.95



96



PEDOT-Tos
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.43 to −1.50
0.46 ΔT = 30 °C











56



PEDOT–PSS
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.43 to −1.46
0.48 ΔT = 30 °C











98



Ni-based
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.40
0.59 ΔT = 38 K











100



W-based
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.66
0.17 ΔT = 50 °C











102



Activated carbon cloth
0.9 M HN4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution
−1.43
1.80 ΔT = 81 °C






0.4



67



Activated carbon cloth
0.5 M (NH4)4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6
Aqueous solution
−1.4










2.18 V, ΔT = 21 °C, 14 p–n cells

67



Activated carbon cloth
0.5 M FeSO4/Fe2(SO4)3
Aqueous solution
0.5












Graphite plates
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution + 3 M GdmCl
−3.73
7.08 ΔT = 50 °C
0.4
36
0.4
11.1
3.1 V, ΔT = 50 K, 20 single cells

52



Graphite
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution + 24 M urea and 2.6 M GdmCl
−4.20
1.10 ΔT = 10 K
1.0
0.05


0.79
3.4 V, ΔT = 18 K, 50 single cells

40



Platinum disk
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Aqueous solution + methanol
−2.90
0.64 ΔT = 4.1 °C


0.15







65



Graphite plate
0.4 M I−/I3−
Aqueous solution + 2.4 M CsCl
1.20
0.30 ΔT = 50 K
0.53
0.256


0.3



68



Platinum wires
I−/I3− (KI = 10 mM, KI3 = 2.5 mM)
Aqueous solution + α-CD and KCl
2.00
0.8 μW ΔT = 34 K
About 0.65
3.5
0.005





59



3D multi-structured Cu
Cu2+/Cu
0.7 M CuSO4 + 0.1 M H2SO4 + (NH4)2SO4
1.66
0.71 ΔT = 38 K











66



Platinum
0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3
MPN
2.19
0.11 ΔT = 70 °C











73



Pt black
0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3
3:1 (v/v) MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4]
About 1.70
0.18 ΔT = 70 °C


About 45







77



Au
I−/I3−
10 wt% PNIPAM
−1.91


0.4–0.5
About 0.1




1.0 V, ΔT = 5 °C, 50 p–n cells

128



Au
I−/I3−
3 wt% PNIPAM
0.71












3D hierarchical Au/Cu foils
K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Gelatin–KCl
−17.00
8.9 ΔT = 6 °C








2.8 V, ΔT ≈ 10 K, 24 i-TE cells

101



Nickel foil
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Cellulose
−1.32 to −1.4
0.062 ΔT = 50 °C


0.25







83



a-SWCNT
0.2 M SnCl4/SnCl2
PAAm
1.59




13.47







79



Au/Cr
0.1 M FeCl2/FeCl3
PVA + HCl
1.02
0.04
1.88
1.0




0.85 V, ΔT = 12 °C, 59 p–n cells

80



Au/Cr
0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
PVA
−1.21
0.01
1.85
0.6






PEDOT/PSS-EFG
1 M FeCl2/FeCl3
PVA + 0.08 M HCl
0.85
0.38 ΔT = 10 °C
1.02
0.4




0.35 V, ΔT = 10 K, 18 p–n cells

82



PEDOT/PSS-EFG/CNT
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
CMC
−1.22
0.72 ΔT = 10 °C










Cu
0.42/0.25 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
Gelatin–0.8 M KCl
−17.00
0.66 ΔT = 8 K
0.15
1.0




2.2 V, ΔT = 10 K, 25 single cells

84



Platinum wires
0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]/NaCl
Double network hydrogel
−1.40
0.61 ΔT = 40 K
0.13
5.0
0.07
1.38



85



Platinum
0.01 M FeCl2/FeCl3
PAAm
1.43






0.0028





86



Copper foils
0.18 M FeCl2/FeCl3
P(AM-coDMAEA-Q)/EG
2.02
0.012–0.1
0.43
1.0







87



PDMS/CNT composite
0.1 M FeCl2/FeCl3
PAAm
1.24










0.7 V in a cold ambient atmosphere (∼10 °C)

127



PDMS/CNT composite
0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]
PAAm
−1.05














Despite the achievements discussed in this review, there exists substantial space for the development of high-performance redox-induced thermocells. Specifically, more systematic studies are required for electrolytes and electrode materials. In the electrolytes, there are various redox couples to choose from, and the parameters such as the central atom, ligand, absolute charge, and configuration of these redox couples affect the Seebeck coefficient. In addition to the more studied [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−, other redox couples also need to be explored systematically. Additives in the electrolyte that can rearrange the redox couples and adjust the viscosity of the solution are more promising. It should be noted that the selected additives should not destroy the redox couples themselves. The tailorable and unique properties of ionic liquids continue to drive their implementation in the electrolyte over high temperatures. The subsequent focus should be placed on solving sluggish ion transport problems to improve output power. Besides, quasi-solid-state electrolytes play a key role in securing high device safety. It would involve a series of complex chemical and physical phenomena at the interface of electrode/electrolyte during the redox process. During this process, the interface faces poor conductivity, stability, and stacking. It is much more promising to utilize in situ characterization techniques to monitor the dynamic changes of the interface between the electrode and electrolyte in real time to guide the subsequent research.
Similarly, electrodes also play a key role in high-performance devices. The well-designed pore size, thickness, and morphology of the electrodes have a significant impact on the performance of the device. Furthermore, engineering strategies like elemental doping, vacancy creation, pore/hole generation, phase engineering, interlayer engineering, and heterostructure construction can further optimize the micro- and electronic structure. In addition, there is still much work to be done for achieving flexible structure electrodes with high mechanical strength, flexibility, and low cost.
On the other hand, the trend for the development of thermocells requires the integration of all components into a single unit. Advanced packing techniques like 3D printing, screening printing, textile integrated, etc. need to be further studied. And the other most important problem is that the device needs to be subjected to a constant temperature gradient to make use of low-grade heat. This leads to the use of low-grade heat that is transient or can only be used in certain scenarios. Therefore, if one wants to make consistent use of low-grade heat, there is a need to combine devices with storage devices (like batteries or supercapacitors). At present, most of the distributed structures are adopted with low energy conversion efficiency. Therefore, further research needs to focus on the realization of integrated devices based on liquid thermoelectric conversion and energy storage.
In general, further work should include a clear direction to explore better transmission and/or conductivity of redox couples and the electrolyte/electrode material, for more fully optimized ion Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and thermal conductivity, thus improving the quality factor of the ions. Second, additional strategies, such as introducing additives or membranes into liquid thermoelectric devices, have also proven effective. The design of devices and materials, and the selection of appropriate solvents, substrates, active ions, and electrodes according to different thermal diffusion or thermoelectric effects are all issues. More importantly, efforts should be made in the practical application of the device to achieve its commercialization in the future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
Part of the work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62174022, 62104032, U20A20213 and 61727818), the Department of Science and Technology of Sichuan Province (No. 2021JDTD0030), the Chengdu Science and Technology Project (No. 2020-GH02-0065-HZ), the National Science and Technology Major Project (J2019-V-0006-0100), the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (No. 2019QNRC001), and the AECC Sichuan Gas Turbine Research Establishment (WDZC-2020-3-2).
References
I. Zvonareva, X.-Z. Fu, D. Medvedev and Z. Shao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 439–465 RSC .
H. Busch, S. Ruggiero, A. Isakovic and T. Hansen, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 151, 111535 CrossRef .
P. Fantke, C. Cinquemani, P. Yaseneva, J. De Mello, H. Schwabe, B. Ebeling and A. A. Lapkin, Chem, 2021, 7, 2866–2882 CAS .
A. Kumar, P. Daw and D. Milstein, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 385–441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, H. Liu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13174–13212 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, Y. Dou, Z. Wu, Y. Tian, K.-H. Ye, Z. Lin, S. X. Dou and S. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 957–999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mu, Y. Mu, X. Wang, X. Wu, C. Pang, Y.-T. Huang and S.-P. Feng, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1146–1153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, J. Zhang, R. Hu and D. Xu, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabl5318 CrossRef CAS .
C. Forman, I. K. Muritala, R. Pardemann and B. Meyer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 1568–1579 CrossRef .
J. Duan, B. Yu, L. Huang, B. Hu, M. Xu, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Joule, 2021, 5, 768–779 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jeong, J. Noh, M. Z. Islam, K. Kim, A. Sohn, W. Kim and C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011016 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X. Zhang, S. D. Lacey, R. Mi, X. Zhao, F. Jiang, J. Song, Z. Liu, G. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Yao, S. Das, R. Yang, R. M. Briber and L. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 608–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Gunathilaka, J. M. Pringle and L. A. O'Dell, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Härtel, M. Janssen, D. Weingarth, V. Presser and R. van Roij, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2396–2401 RSC .
A. Datas, A. López-Ceballos, E. López, A. Ramos and C. del Cañizo, Joule, 2022, 6, 418–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roychowdhury, T. Ghosh, R. Arora, M. Samanta, L. Xie, K. Singh Niraj, A. Soni, J. He, V. Waghmare Umesh and K. Biswas, Science, 2021, 371, 722–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chang, M. Wu, D. He, Y. Pei, C.-F. Wu, X. Wu, H. Yu, F. Zhu, K. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Huang, J.-F. Li, J. He and L.-D. Zhao, Science, 2018, 360, 778–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jiang, Y. Yu, J. Cui, X. Liu, L. Xie, J. Liao, Q. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Ning, B. Jia, B. Zhu, S. Bai, L. Chen, J. Pennycook Stephen and J. He, Science, 2021, 371, 830–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bu, X. Zhang, B. Shan, J. Tang, H. Liu, Z. Chen, S. Lin, W. Li and Y. Pei, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf2738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, Y. Yang, H.-W. Lee, H. Ghasemi, D. Kraemer, G. Chen and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, H. Zhu, Z. Ding, Z. Liu, A. Gamage Geethal, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2019, 365, 495–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhao and Z. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 401–422 RSC .
C. Bai, Z. Wang, S. Yang, X. Cui, X. Li, Y. Yin, M. Zhang, T. Wang, S. Sang, W. Zhang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 37316–37322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Xu, L. Wu, Y. An, Y. Sun, T. Meng, H. Dou, Y. Xuan and X. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mu, Z. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Fu and Z. Hu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Q. Li, S. Wang, W. Liu, N. X. Fang and S.-P. Feng, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106738 CrossRef CAS .
B. Iezzi, K. Ankireddy, J. Twiddy, M. D. Losego and J. S. Jur, Appl. Energy, 2017, 208, 758–765 CrossRef .
A. Montecucco, J. Siviter and A. R. Knox, Appl. Energy, 2014, 123, 47–54 CrossRef .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. H. Alzahrani, J. J. Black, D. Goonetilleke, J. Panchompoo and L. Aldous, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 58, 76–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Black, T. Murphy, R. Atkin, A. Dolan and L. Aldous, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20768–20777 RSC .
Z. Lei, W. Gao, W. Zhu and P. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2201021 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Dupont, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6288–6302 RSC .
T. Ding, K. H. Chan, Y. Zhou, X.-Q. Wang, Y. Cheng, T. Li and G. W. Ho, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Hudak and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A572 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, L. Liu, H. Lim, Y. Qiao and X. Chen, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 805–811 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Kim, H. T. Lin and C. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600546 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Y. Yang, H. Huang, J. Zheng, G. Liu, T. H. To and B. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabj3019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taheri, D. R. MacFarlane, C. Pozo-Gonzalo and J. M. Pringle, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2788–2796 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, G. Feng, B. Yu, J. Li, M. Chen, P. Yang, J. Feng, K. Liu and J. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5146 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rajan, I. S. McKay and S. K. Yee, Trends Chem., 2022, 4, 172–174 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, L. Zhu, X.-Q. Wang, K. H. Chan, X. Lu, Y. Cheng and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802397 CrossRef .
H. Zhou and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1424–1428 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Hupp and M. J. Weaver, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23, 3639–3644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, P. C. Sherrell, L. Liu, Y. Wang and J. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100669 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3985–3994 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Eastman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1926, 48, 1482–1493 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, Y. Hoshino, F. Gao, K. Hayashi, Y. Miura, N. Kimizuka and T. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17318–17322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Massetti, F. Jiao, A. J. Ferguson, D. Zhao, K. Wijeratne, A. Würger, J. L. Blackburn, X. Crispin and S. Fabiano, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 12465–12547 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, B. A. Cola, N. Haram, J. N. Barisci, S. Lee, S. Stoughton, G. Wallace, C. Too, M. Thomas, A. Gestos, M. E. d. Cruz, J. P. Ferraris, A. A. Zakhidov and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 838–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pu, Y. Liao, K. Chen, J. Fu, S. Zhang, L. Ge, G. Conta, S. Bouzarif, T. Cheng, X. Hu, K. Liu and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, J. Duan, H. Cong, W. Xie, R. Liu, X. Zhuang, H. Wang, B. Qi, M. Xu, L. Wang Zhong and J. Zhou, Science, 2020, 370, 342–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Buckingham, K. Laws, J. T. Sengel and L. Aldous, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6062–6074 RSC .
W. D. G. Gonçalves, C. Caspers, J. Dupont and P. Migowski, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2020, 26, 100404 CrossRef .
A. Gunawan, C.-H. Lin, D. A. Buttry, V. Mujica, R. A. Taylor, R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2013, 17, 304–323 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wijeratne, M. Vagin, R. Brooke and X. Crispin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19619–19625 RSC .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6260–6262 RSC .
S. Sahami and M. J. Weaver, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1981, 122, 171–181 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10502–10507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Migita, N. Tachikawa, Y. Katayama and T. Miura, Electrochemistry, 2009, 77, 639–641 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, Y. Dai, J. Yu, C. Liu, S. Wang, S. P. Feng and M. Ni, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 161–175 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane, R. H. Baughman, L. Jin, N. Li and J. M. Pringle, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Quickenden and C. F. Vernon, Sol. Energy, 1986, 36, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, Y. Xue, L. Wang, X. Wang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3376–3380 RSC .
T. Kim, J. S. Lee, G. Lee, H. Yoon, J. Yoon, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, H. Xiao, Y. Zeng, S. Liu, D. Wu, P. Liu, J. Guo, W. Xie, J. Duan and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106795 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Kim, N. Li, T. J. Kang, J. Chen, J. M. Pringle, M. Zhang, A. H. Kazim, S. Fang, C. Haines, D. Al-Masri, B. A. Cola, J. M. Razal, J. Di, S. Beirne, D. R. MacFarlane, A. Gonzalez-Martin, S. Mathew, Y. H. Kim, G. Wallace and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605652 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Zhuang, W. Xie, H. Jin, R. Liu, B. Yu, J. Duan, L. Huang and J. Zhou, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 3, 100737 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Buckingham, F. Marken and L. Aldous, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2717–2726 RSC .
M. J. Earle, J. M. S. S. Esperança, M. A. Gilea, J. N. Canongia Lopes, L. P. N. Rebelo, J. W. Magee, K. R. Seddon and J. A. Widegren, Nature, 2006, 439, 831–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chiappe and D. Pieraccini, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2005, 18, 275–297 CrossRef CAS .
S. Beil, M. Markiewicz, C. S. Pereira, P. Stepnowski, J. Thöming and S. Stolte, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13132–13173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2639–2645 RSC .
M. Li, M. Hong, M. Dargusch, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 561–574 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sosnowska, M. Barycki, A. Gajewicz, M. Bobrowski, S. Freza, P. Skurski, S. Uhl, E. Laux, T. Journot, L. Jeandupeux, H. Keppner and T. Puzyn, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 1591–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, D. Al-Masri, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Faraday Discuss., 2016, 190, 205–218 RSC .
M. A. Lazar, D. Al-Masri, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1404–1410 RSC .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 RSC .
L. Liang, H. Lv, X.-L. Shi, Z. Liu, G. Chen, Z.-G. Chen and G. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2750–2760 RSC .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Mo, Y. Zhou, S. Li, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12050–12053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, J. J. Black and L. Aldous, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 482–492 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Zhou, M. A. Buckingham, L. Aldous, P. C. Sherrell, G. G. Wallace, G. Ryder, S. Faisal, D. L. Officer, S. Beirne and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002539 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, G. W. Greene, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 654–658 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Han, X. Qian, Q. Li, B. Deng, Y. Zhu, Z. Han, W. Zhang, W. Wang, S.-P. Feng, G. Chen and W. Liu, Science, 2020, 368, 1091–1098 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, W. Gao and P. Wu, Joule, 2021, 5, 2211–2222 CrossRef .
P. Peng, J. Zhou, L. Liang, X. Huang, H. Lv, Z. Liu and G. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, Z. Lei, C. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104071 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jing, H.-Y. Mi, Y.-J. Lin, E. Enriquez, X.-F. Peng and L.-S. Turng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20897–20909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, X. Zhao, X. Jiang, A. Wu, H. Ding, Y. Zhong, J. Li, J. Pan, B. Liu and H. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900848 CrossRef .
Y. Tu, Q. Chen, S. Liang, Q. Zhao, X. Zhou, W. Huang, X. Huang and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18746–18754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Xie, A. Kretzschmann, K. Koynov, H.-J. Butt and S. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mua and T. I. Quickenden, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2558–2564 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shindo, M. Arakawa and T. Hirai, J. Power Sources, 1998, 70, 228–234 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Romano, N. Li, D. Antiohos, J. M. Razal, A. Nattestad, S. Beirne, S. Fang, Y. Chen, R. Jalili, G. G. Wallace, R. Baughman and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6602–6606 CrossRef CAS .
H. Im, H. G. Moon, J. S. Lee, I. Y. Chung, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 443–452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Im, T. Kim, H. Song, J. Choi, J. S. Park, R. Ovalle-Robles, H. D. Yang, K. D. Kihm, R. H. Baughman, H. H. Lee, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Abraham, N. Tachikawa, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2527–2532 RSC .
K. Wijeratne, U. Ail, R. Brooke, M. Vagin, X. Liu, M. Fahlman and X. Crispin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 11899 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, G. G. Wallace, S. Beirne and J. Chen, iScience, 2021, 24, 103466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Jung, J. Kwon, J. Lee, I. K. Han, K.-S. Kim, Y. S. Kim and Y.-T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2021, 494, 229705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Li, X. Zhang, B. Deng, C. Han and W. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103666 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Jung, J. Kwon, J. Lee, B.-J. Lee, K.-S. Kim, D.-S. Yu and Y.-T. Kim, Appl. Energy, 2021, 299, 117334 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, R. He, H. Li, Y. Chen, T. Kong, K. Li, H. Ju, J. Zhu, W. Zhu and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10954–10958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Wang, W. Tian, A. Meng, Z. Li, S. Li, L. Wang and G. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 303, 120933 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Hou, Z. Zhou and R. Lv, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2105410 CrossRef CAS .
T. Su, C. Men, L. Chen, B. Chu, X. Luo, H. Ji, J. Chen and Z. Qin, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2103715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, P. Zhai, J. Hou, J. Zhao and J. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102359 CrossRef CAS .
L. Garzón-Tovar, J. Pérez-Carvajal, A. Yazdi, J. Hernández-Muñoz, P. Tarazona, I. Imaz, F. Zamora and D. Maspoch, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9512–9516 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Liang, C. Xiao, X. Hua, Z. Li, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600437 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Z. Lai, X. Zhang, Z. Fan, Q. He, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 243–256 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, M. Qiao, Q. Shao, Y. Pi, X. Zhu, Y. Li and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4933 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-F. Que, F.-D. Yu, X.-L. Sui, L. Zhao, J.-G. Zhou, D.-M. Gu and Z.-B. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Shi and X. Sun, Chem, 2020, 6, 817–819 CAS .
H. Liu, J. Cheng, W. He, Y. Li, J. Mao, X. Zheng, C. Chen, C. Cui and Q. Hao, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 304, 120935 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, L. Wang, L. Wang, M. Liao, L. Ye, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, B. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114612 CAS .
D. Lu, Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, D. T. Ho, G. Sheng, L. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Li, L. Cao, U. Schwingenschlögl, J. Ma and Z. Lai, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2109718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, Q. Chen, M. Hong, W. Xie, S. Jing, Y. Bao, G. Chen, Z. Pang, L. Hu and T. Li, Mater. Today, 2022, 54, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Yao, Z. Liang, Y. Wen, Z. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Liu and M. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 885–896 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Hasan, S. M. Said, M. F. M. Sabri, A. S. A. Bakar, N. A. Hashim, M. M. I. M. Hasnan, J. M. Pringle and D. R. MacFarlane, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29328 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, W. Yang, J. Li, W. Xie, H. Jin, R. Liu, H. Wang, X. Zhuang, B. Qi, S. Liu, L. Huang, B. Hu, J. Duan and J. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26119–26126 RSC .
G. Qian, X. Yu, Z. Li, J. Wu, R. Huang and Y. Lu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 217, 113005 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Romano, S. Gambhir, J. M. Razal, A. Gestos, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2012, 109, 1229–1235 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, S. Hwang and H. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135651 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jiao, T. J. Abraham, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, D3061–D3065 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kang, S. Fang, M. E. Kozlov, C. S. Haines, N. Li, Y. H. Kim, Y. Chen and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 477–489 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kundu and T. S. Fisher, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 357–369 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, X.-Q. Wang, C. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Lu, J. He and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, B. Yu, K. Liu, J. Li, P. Yang, W. Xie, G. Xue, R. Liu, H. Wang and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Kazim, A. S. Booeshaghi, S. T. Stephens and B. A. Cola, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1381–1389 RSC .
F. L. Meng, M. Gao, T. Ding, G. Yilmaz, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002867 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, Z. Ning, B. Fu, S. Ma, Z. Wang, L. Shu, L. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Xu, P. Tao, C. Song, J. Wu, T. Deng and W. Shang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6514–6521 RSC .
H. Wang, W. Xie, B. Yu, B. Qi, R. Liu, X. Zhuang, S. Liu, P. Liu, J. Duan and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100481 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Total number of publications and citations per year. These data are provided according to the Web of Science. (Inset shows a summary of the whole review).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Composition and working principle of the redox-induced thermocell, and (b) its equivalent circuit.49 Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of p-type thermocells and (b) n-type thermocells. Mm+ and Mn+ represent redox couples.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

[Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−	High absolute charges and complex structures	−1.40	
50

Fe(ClO4)2/Fe(ClO4)3	High absolute charges and complex structures	1.76	
65

Sn4+/Sn2+	High absolute charges	1.13	
64

Cu2+/Cu	Low absolute charges and simple structures	0.81	
66

Fe3+/Fe2+	Low absolute charges and simple structures	0.64	
67

I−/I3−	Low absolute charges and simple structures	0.51	
68


 	Fig. 4  (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− aqueous and methanol added electrolyte system at different ΔT, the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se). (b) Voltage (black dashed line) and power density (blue dashed line) versus current density for a 15 wt% methanol added electrolyte system.65 Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Structures of different organic additives.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A schematic figure of a supramolecular thermocell in the combination of α-CD and I−/I3− redox couples. (b) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the I−/I3− and α-CD added electrolyte system at different ΔT; the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se).59 Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectra of Fe(CN)64− and Fe(CN)63− in an electrolyte with different addition amounts of Gdm+. (d) Schematic of guanidinium cations (Gdm+) inducing Fe(CN)64− crystallization in the [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3− system. (e) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the thermocell and crystallization-boosted thermocell at different ΔT; the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se). (f) Comparison of ηr and Se values for various LTC systems obtained by electrolyte and electrode optimization; the dashed line shows the predicted commercialization threshold, ∼5%.52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.01 M [Co(bpy)3]3+/[Co(bpy)3]2+ in an ionic liquid electrolyte system at different ΔT; the slope of lines represents the Seebeck coefficients (Se).73 Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Electronic configuration of Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions and spin state of Co2+ and Co3+ ions. Abbreviations: HS, high spin; LS, low spin.74 Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Currents in thermocells of 0.4 M I3−/I− containing [C1C2Im][BF4], [C1C2Im][N(Tf)2], [C1C4Pyrr][N(Tf)2], [C2,2,2,(101)][N(Tf)2] ILs, Thot = 130 °C, and Tcold = 30 °C.62 Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (d) Two-dimensional cluster analysis. Four identified natural clusters (classes) are presented in the data. Colors represent the autoscaled values of the selected descriptors and experimentally determined Se values and two-dimensional cluster analysis for all ILs from both training and validation sets.75 Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

[C2mim][BF4]	0.23	16	0.4 M I−/I3−	
58

[C2mim][NTf2]	0.13	3.5	0.4 M I−/I3−
[C4mpyr][NTf2]	0.13	2.6	0.4 M I−/I3−
[C2mim][B(CN)4]	0.10	3.4	0.4 M I−/I3−
[C2mim][DCA]	−0.07	0.6	0.4 M I−/I3−
[C2mim][eFAP]	1.82	22	0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3	
73

[C2mim][NTf2]	1.66	133	0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3
[C2mim][B(CN)4]	1.59	165	0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3

 	Fig. 7  (a) Current density versus cell voltage for the neat imidazolium IL electrolytes. (b) Current density versus cell voltage for the 1:1 imidazolium IL:PC and neat PC electrolytes.76 Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEC performance of 0.1 M [CoII/III(bpy)3](NTf2)2/3 in the MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4] mixtures. (d) TEC performance of 0.1 M [CoII/III(bpy)3](NTf2)2/3 in the DMSO–[C2mim][eFAP] mixtures.77 Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photographs of laser-irradiated samples of (a1) a PFC gel, (a2) aqueous FeCl2/FeCl3, (a3) a PPF gel, and (a4) aqueous K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6. (b) Stress–strain curves for PFC and PPF gel films.80 Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Photographs of the freestanding gel on a fingertip prepared with 5.5 wt% agar agar and 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6.81 Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Preparation of the PVA-Fe3+/Fe2+ gel electrolyte. (e) Stress–strain curves (PVA content: 5 wt%, FeCl2/FeCl3 concentration: 1 M, and Mw = 85–124 kDa).82 Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synergistic effect for both thermodiffusion and thermogalvanic effects. Gelatin–KCl–FeCN4−/3− (x = 0.8 M and m/n = 0.42/0.25 M).84 Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (b) Power density and current density versus potential for 0.4 M [Fe(CN)6]4−/[Fe(CN)6]3−/3 M NaCl at different ΔT. (c) The thermocell with a thickness of 3 mm and a width of 5 mm lifts a bag of oranges with a weight of 1.5 kg and its stress–strain curves.85 Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Photos showing the cutting and compressing process performed on the 0.01 M–0.25 h PAAm/Fe–Alg hydrogel.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. (e) Photograph of the soft and stretchable organohydrogel thermocell. (f) Schematic illustration of the organohydrogel thermocell containing crosslinked networks, EG, and water upon a temperature gradient. (g) Comparison of working temperature and Pmax/(ΔT)2 for various quasi-solid-state thermocells.87 Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

Aqueous electrolyte	Fast ion diffusion and compatibility with many redox couples	Low boiling point, easy to leak, and poor mechanical properties
Ionic liquid electrolyte	Higher boiling point, high ionic conductivity, low thermal conductivity, and non-inflammability	Slow diffusion rate, easy to leak, and poor mechanical properties
Solid-state electrolyte	Flexible, good mechanical properties, adjustable temperature range, low thermal conductivity, safer	Poor transport properties and compatibility of the matrix and redox couples

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the MWNT electrode. The average MWNT diameter is 10 nm. (b) Voc and jscversus time for a coin cell with the MWNT electrode. ΔT = 60 °C. (c) Schematic assembly of the thin thermocell wrapped around a pipe carrying cool, flowing liquid. Two layers of Nomex are used to separate the two electrodes. The distance between electrodes is approximately 0.2 cm and the real thermocell is wrapped around a stainless-steel pipe to generate power.50 Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (d) Micrographs of films of SWNTs (top) and the 90% SWNT-10% rGO composite (bottom). (e) Power density generated using various electrode compositions at ΔT = 31 °C.94 Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic depicting the structure of the flexible thermocell and (b) its cell potential and specific output versus current density at the steady state from body heat. (c) Thermocell charges a capacitor when worn on a T-shirt and powers a typical commercial light-emitting diode.95 Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2014, Tsinghua University Press. (d) Photographs of cell components and the cylindrically wound carbon nanotube (CNT) aerogel sheet electrode.96 Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) comparison of maximum power as a function of PEDOT-Tos thickness and the platinum electrode.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram of charge transport (pink arrows) within the polymer electrode and the electron transfer (green arrows) at the polymer electrolyte interface for poor-conducting, intermediate-conducting, and high-conducting PEDOT–PSS electrodes. The blue “snake” lines (on the left-hand side) mimic the aggregates of PEDOT chains that display short-range order through π–π stacks.98 Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2018, PNAS. (c) Voltage (straight line) and power density (dashed line) versus current density of the Pt, Ni, and carbon electrodes.100 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Current–voltage and power–voltage curves for LTC and TC-LTC using different electrodes at a ΔT of 70 K. The best performance of the device was obtained using a 3D multi-structured Cu electrode.66 Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagrams of hybrid thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs). (f) Voltage (straight line) and power density (dashed line) versus current density of the Pt, W, and GC electrodes at ΔT = 50 K.102 Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc) of thermocells and membrane-thermocells at different ΔT. (b) Infrared thermography of thermocells and membrane-thermocells. The series I, II, III, and IV represent no membrane, the membrane closer to the cold electrode, the membrane at the center between the electrodes, and the membrane closer to the hot electrode respectively.119 Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Illustration of the thermocell structure, which consists of a thermal separator (colored green) attached to the cold-side thermocell electrode. (d) Comparison of power densities with/without a thermal separator.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of the heat-triggered concentration gradient-boosted thermocell (HT-TCC) in the hibernating state (I) and working state (II). The closed heat-triggered membrane (HTM) makes the HT-TCC in an open-circuit state and hibernates in peacetime. Once being heat-triggered, the HTM can quickly open, making the HT-TCC harvest heat for driving the alarm.120 Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Cross-sectional view through the vertical axis of the thermogalvanic cell. (1) Brass bolts; (2) warm water inlet; (3) warm water outlet; (4) cool water inlet; (5) cool water outlet; (6) miniature bead thermistors; (7) metal foil electrodes; (8) neoprene gaskets; (9) filling port and plug with capillary (a static meniscus therein indicates that there are no leaks). Area of each electrode = 1.00 cm2.63 Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 1986, Elsevier. (b) Schematic of the H-shaped cell used.59 Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) The designed cylindrical cell, made of Teflon, incorporates two electrodes and the insert that holds the electrolyte.124 Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2014, Electrochemical Society. (d) Schematic assembly of the coin-like thermocell. Each buckypaper electrode is 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm and attached to the package with Ag paste. The electrodes are separated by five layers of Nomex HT4848 soaked with the electrolyte. The cells are sealed with pneumatic crimping. The cell diameter is 2.0 cm and height is 0.2 cm.50 Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic drawing of the measurement setup and photograph of the thermoelectrochemical cell.125 Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (f) Photograph of a single planar cell. The cross-sectional area of the cell is 2.6 cm2, and the distance between the two electrodes is 1.5 cm.52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020, AAAS. (g) Illustration of the thermocell structure, which consists of two Ti current collectors (colored metallic gray), two thermocell electrodes (colored black), a thermal separator (colored green) attached to the cold-side thermocell electrode, a 2.6 mm thick plate spacer made of polyether ether ketone (colored dark yellow) that defines the electrolyte volume at the cell center, and two rubber O-rings. The carbon electrodes are 1 cm2 in area and have a thickness ranging from 0.10 to 0.34 mm.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Sketch of the quasi-solid-state thermocell and photograph of the actual device in the inset.126 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Soft and stretchable thermogalvanic fabric woven out of p/n alternating hydrogel-based fibers. Inset shows the optical image of a 1 m long hydrogel fiber.127 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of the test platform used for thermoelectric measurements, “top and bottom”.126 Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic of the test platform used for thermoelectric measurements, “left and right”.125 Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the structure and a photograph of the module. (b) Left: schematic of the structure and a photograph of the module. The temperatures of the cold and hot water were controlled at approximately 278 and 333 K, respectively. Right: harvesting heat energy from the human body. The module was placed on a steel platform as a heat sink with a temperature of approximately 298 K and then covered by one hand.40 Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Photograph of a crystallization-boosted thermocell module containing 20 units in series. (d) The module can directly power various electronic devices, including an electric fan, LED array, and thermohydrometer.52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2020, AAAS. (e) The voltage and current generated by the thermocell from body heat. The inset shows a photograph of the wearable thermocell on a hand.80 Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (f) The module can directly power various electronic devices, including an electric fan, LED array, and thermohydrometer.127 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Panoramic view of the gel-based thermoelectric patch for body temperature monitoring and its magnified current response curve vs. time. Insets: current–time curve under a temperature difference of 0.1 K.23 Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Concept of a forest fire alarm strategy, including the thermocell serving as both a fire sensor and a power supply, and wireless communication as the alarming means.120 Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Demonstration of the hydrogel thermocell on a cell phone battery. The other two images represent evaporative cooling while simultaneously converting a portion of the waste heat into electricity.51 Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic drawing of the designed integrative photothermal evaporator/thermogalvanic cell.130 Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

MWNT buckypaper	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.40	0.38 ΔT = 60 °C	
	
	
	1.4	
	
50

SWNT–rGO	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.40	0.34 ΔT = 31 °C	
	
	
	2.63	
	
94

CNTs-ACT	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.40	0.04 ΔT = 3.4 °C	
	
	
	
	
	
95

CNT aerogel sheets	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.43	2.49 ΔT = 51.4 °C	
	
	
	3.95	
	
96

PEDOT-Tos	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.43 to −1.50	0.46 ΔT = 30 °C	
	
	
	
	
	
56

PEDOT–PSS	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.43 to −1.46	0.48 ΔT = 30 °C	
	
	
	
	
	
98

Ni-based	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.40	0.59 ΔT = 38 K	
	
	
	
	
	
100

W-based	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.66	0.17 ΔT = 50 °C	
	
	
	
	
	
102

Activated carbon cloth	0.9 M HN4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution	−1.43	1.80 ΔT = 81 °C	
	
	
	0.4	
	
67

Activated carbon cloth	0.5 M (NH4)4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6	Aqueous solution	−1.4	
	
	
	
	
	2.18 V, ΔT = 21 °C, 14 p–n cells	
67

Activated carbon cloth	0.5 M FeSO4/Fe2(SO4)3	Aqueous solution	0.5	
	
	
	
	

Graphite plates	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution + 3 M GdmCl	−3.73	7.08 ΔT = 50 °C	0.4	36	0.4	11.1	3.1 V, ΔT = 50 K, 20 single cells	
52

Graphite	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution + 24 M urea and 2.6 M GdmCl	−4.20	1.10 ΔT = 10 K	1.0	0.05	
	0.79	3.4 V, ΔT = 18 K, 50 single cells	
40

Platinum disk	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Aqueous solution + methanol	−2.90	0.64 ΔT = 4.1 °C	
	0.15	
	
	
	
65

Graphite plate	0.4 M I−/I3−	Aqueous solution + 2.4 M CsCl	1.20	0.30 ΔT = 50 K	0.53	0.256	
	0.3	
	
68

Platinum wires	I−/I3− (KI = 10 mM, KI3 = 2.5 mM)	Aqueous solution + α-CD and KCl	2.00	0.8 μW ΔT = 34 K	About 0.65	3.5	0.005	
	
	
59

3D multi-structured Cu	Cu2+/Cu	0.7 M CuSO4 + 0.1 M H2SO4 + (NH4)2SO4	1.66	0.71 ΔT = 38 K	
	
	
	
	
	
66

Platinum	0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3	MPN	2.19	0.11 ΔT = 70 °C	
	
	
	
	
	
73

Pt black	0.1 M CoII/III(bpy)3(NTf2)2/3	3:1 (v/v) MPN–[C2mim][B(CN)4]	About 1.70	0.18 ΔT = 70 °C	
	About 45	
	
	
	
77

Au	I−/I3−	10 wt% PNIPAM	−1.91	
	0.4–0.5	About 0.1	
	
	1.0 V, ΔT = 5 °C, 50 p–n cells	
128

Au	I−/I3−	3 wt% PNIPAM	0.71	
	
	
	
	

3D hierarchical Au/Cu foils	K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Gelatin–KCl	−17.00	8.9 ΔT = 6 °C	
	
	
	
	2.8 V, ΔT ≈ 10 K, 24 i-TE cells	
101

Nickel foil	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Cellulose	−1.32 to −1.4	0.062 ΔT = 50 °C	
	0.25	
	
	
	
83

a-SWCNT	0.2 M SnCl4/SnCl2	PAAm	1.59	
	
	13.47	
	
	
	
79

Au/Cr	0.1 M FeCl2/FeCl3	PVA + HCl	1.02	0.04	1.88	1.0	
	
	0.85 V, ΔT = 12 °C, 59 p–n cells	
80

Au/Cr	0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	PVA	−1.21	0.01	1.85	0.6	
	

PEDOT/PSS-EFG	1 M FeCl2/FeCl3	PVA + 0.08 M HCl	0.85	0.38 ΔT = 10 °C	1.02	0.4	
	
	0.35 V, ΔT = 10 K, 18 p–n cells	
82

PEDOT/PSS-EFG/CNT	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	CMC	−1.22	0.72 ΔT = 10 °C	
	
	
	

Cu	0.42/0.25 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	Gelatin–0.8 M KCl	−17.00	0.66 ΔT = 8 K	0.15	1.0	
	
	2.2 V, ΔT = 10 K, 25 single cells	
84

Platinum wires	0.4 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]/NaCl	Double network hydrogel	−1.40	0.61 ΔT = 40 K	0.13	5.0	0.07	1.38	
	
85

Platinum	0.01 M FeCl2/FeCl3	PAAm	1.43	
	
	
	0.0028	
	
	
86

Copper foils	0.18 M FeCl2/FeCl3	P(AM-coDMAEA-Q)/EG	2.02	0.012–0.1	0.43	1.0	
	
	
	
87

PDMS/CNT composite	0.1 M FeCl2/FeCl3	PAAm	1.24	
	
	
	
	
	0.7 V in a cold ambient atmosphere (∼10 °C)	
127

PDMS/CNT composite	0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6]/K3[Fe(CN)6]	PAAm	−1.05	
	
	
	
	


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
