Co@N-CNT/MXenes in situ grown on carbon nanotube film for multifunctional sensors and flexible supercapacitors   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR03641F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR03641F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 14460-14468Co@N-CNT/MXenes in situ grown on carbon nanotube film for multifunctional sensors and flexible supercapacitors†

        
          
            Qiufan 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Jiaheng 
            Liu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Guofu 
            Tian
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Daohong 
            Zhang
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Materials Science of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission & Ministry of Education, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430074, China. E-mail: Zhangdh27@163.com
Received 
      7th June 2021
    , Accepted 24th July 2021First published on 26th July 2021AbstractThe rapid development of human–machine interfaces and artificial intelligence is dependent on flexible and wearable soft devices such as sensors and energy storage systems. One of the key factors for these devices is the design of a flexible electrode with high sensitivity, fast response time, and a wide working range. Here, we report the fabrication of strain sensors and all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors using Co@N-CNT/MXenes as an electrode material. The manufactured sensor shows a high tensile range (strain up to 200%) and high stability. The resistance change caused by the fingers touching the sensor can be used to transmit the Morse code information. Flexible supercapacitors serving as power supply demonstrate excellent cycling stability (85000 cycles) and coulombic efficiency (99.7%) for their high surface area and pseudocapacitance. A self-powered integrated system composed of the strain sensor and flexible supercapacitor is fabricated and operates stably in a wide strain sensing test range. Moreover, the flexible solar-charging self-powered integrated system could be attached to the human body for stable human motion detection. This study clearly shows that appropriate selection of a single functional material to enable it to be used in multi-functional sensors and supercapacitors can simplify the process and reduce the cost of manufacturing wearable devices.
Introduction
Recently, multifunctional wearable electronic devices have attracted extensive attention as one of the next-generation core technologies. Wearable devices are required to maintain mechanical stability under different deformations during body movement and have the ability to detect environmental changes such as temperature, pressure, and strain.1–3 Flexible and wearable sensors have become a research hotspot that can efficiently capture and transform human physiological parameters into electronic signals, allowing for the monitoring of diverse physiological signals.4–6 With the rapid development of a flexible/wearable sensor, high-performance energy storage devices for powering an integrated sensor device in the form of an all-in-one system have become a research hotspot.7–10 However, there are only a few reports of using a single active material in a multi-functional integrated device. Ha et al. reported the fabrication of a multifunctional sensor and all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors (SCs) using only a polydimethylsiloxane coated microporous polypyrrole/graphene foam composite as a common material. Zhu's group reported the fabrication of a dual-parameter sensor for both pressure and temperature by using poly(3,4-ethyl-enedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate-coated polyurethane foam.11 Guan et al. fabricated an integrated self-powered integrated system composed of a sensor and a flexible all-solid-state SC based on a poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly(acrylic amide-acrylic acid)/glycerol/NaCl double network ionic organohydrogel.12 The fabrication of the novel material for energy storage devices can be also very useful for wireless powering of the active multifunctional devices via integration.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are porous crystalline materials with adjustable size and cavity shape constructed by integrating metal ions or clusters assembled with organic linkers.13 The advantages of high surface area and adjustable, porous structures give MOFs great potential in the field of electrochemistry and the MOFs are promising precursors for the fabrication of target products.14 Combining the MOF derivative with two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, is an effective strategy to obtain high-performance sensors and energy storage devices. As a new emerging group in the 2D material family with unique structure and electronic properties, MXenes have shed new light on energy-related applications for their rich surface chemistry, excellent electrical conductivity and high structural stability.15–17 Carbon nanotubes/MXene (CNT/MXene) composites have shown promise for application in sensors, SCs and electrocatalysis.18–20 Direct growth of CNTs on the MXenes can ensure the strong interaction between the CNTs and MXenes, facilitating fast electron transfer. It is also promising as a pseudocapacitive electrode material for SC applications.21–23 Flexibility is often a key requirement for electrodes intended for wearable applications. The carbon nanotube (CNT) film has high flexibility, mechanical strength and durability, and has many important applications in sensors and energy storage devices.24–26 We have reported SCs based on carbon nanotube film.27–29 Furthermore, CNTs can also act as response materials to respond to changes in temperature, light and strain.13
Here we report the development of a highly flexible self-powered sensor system consisting of a high sensitivity sensor and a stretchable symmetrical SC with Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT single electrode material. The unique sensor can precisely respond to strains up to 200%. The solar-charging self-powered integrated SC can provide a stable 1.0 V output to power the sensor and detect various human motions. This study clearly shows that appropriate selection of a single functional material to enable it to be used in multi-functional sensors and SCs can simplify the process and reduce the cost of manufacturing wearable devices.
Experimental
Production of CNT film
The CNT film was fabricated by the CVD method where ethanol, ferrocene, and thiophene were used as a carbon source, a catalyst precursor, and a promotor, respectively. Briefly, the feedstock of ethanol containing 1.2 vol% ferrocene and 0.4 vol% thiophene, carried by Ar/H2, was injected at the rate of 20 mL h−1 into a reactor at high temperature (>1100 °C). CNTs were synthesized and entangled in the hot zone forming a stocking-like aerogel. This thin CNT aerogel was blown out continuously from the reactor and collected by a wheel rotating perpendicularly to the gas flow, which formed macroscopic CNT films. These CNT films can be further densified by using volatile solutions to enhance their mechanical and physical properties.
Synthesis of Ti3C2Tx
Ti3C2Tx was synthesized by exfoliating commercial Ti3AlC2 powders similar to the previous work. 1 g of the Ti3AlC2 (Nanjing XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd) powder was distributed in 40 mL of 30 wt% HF solution, and the mixture was stirred for 6 h at 30 °C. The resulting powder was rinsed with deionized water several times until the pH of the centrifugal supernatant was above 6. The obtained wet sediments were then delaminated by ultrasonication under the protection of Ar gas for 1 h. The mixture was centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 10 min, and the supernatant was delaminated Ti3C2Tx.
Synthesis of ZIF8/ZIF67/MXenes
The CNT film was immersed in 30 mL (5 mg mL−1) of layered Ti3C2Tx solution for 2 hours and then removed and dried to obtain CNT@MXenes. Then, CNT@MXenes were mixed with 7.449 g of zinc nitrate and 100 mL of methanol, and magnetically stirred until uniformly dispersed. Meanwhile, 8.21 g of 2-methylimidazole was dispersed in 100 mL of methanol and added to the above solution. After 1 h of stirring, the solution was allowed to stand for 24 h, and then the resulting gray precipitate was centrifuged, washed with methanol, and dried under vacuum at 60 °C to obtain ZIF-8/MXenes. 0.5 g of the synthesized ZIF-8/MXene gray powder was accurately weighed and dissolved in 150 ml of methanol and 1.64 g of 2-methylimidazole was dissolved in 50 ml of methanol, and both were mixed by ultrasound. Then, 0.45 g of cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (Co(NO3)2·6H2O) was added to the solution dissolved in ZIF8/MXenes, stirred quickly to allow it to fully react, and finally distributed the dissolved 2-methylimidazole solution and stirred at a constant speed for 24 h. After 24 hours of stirring, the resulting solution was centrifuged and washed with methanol several times and dried in a vacuum drying oven at 60 °C; finally, a purple powder sample was obtained.
Synthesis of Co@N-CNT/MXenes
An appropriate amount of the above powder was placed in a magnetic boat, and then the magnetic boat was transferred to the tube furnace. The furnace tube was sealed and closed by the feeding end, and the sample area was thoroughly purged with nitrogen; the flow of nitrogen was ensured throughout the reaction process. After the purification was complete, the tube furnace was started and the conditions for carbonization at 800 °C for 5 h and the heating time for 2 h were set. All samples used for further characterization were processed in ambient air without any further chemical substance processing.
Characterization
The synthesized products were characterized using X-ray diffraction, FT-IR, and X-ray photoelectron emission spectroscopy (XPS) studies. The morphologies of the samples were determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Electrochemical tests for CV, EIS, and GCD measurements were performed on an electrochemical workstation (Ivium, CompactState. 10800).
Three-electrode electrochemical measurements
The electrochemical performances of the electrode materials were first measured in a three-electrode system with a 3 M LiCl electrolyte solution. A platinum plate and a silver/silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl) were used as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively.
Preparation and waterproof packaging of an all-solid-state film SC
The Co@N-CNT/MXene electrodes were coated with PVA/LiCl three times and dried at 60 °C for 1 h. Two PVA/LiCl coated films were placed in parallel together, followed by coating with PVA/LiCl again to produce an all-solid-state film SC. The final all-solid-state SC was assembled from the PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte-impregnated Co@N-CNT/MXene electrodes placed face-to-face. The SC was sealed using polyimide tapes in a sandwich fashion.
Preparation of the strain sensor
The Co@N-CNT/MXene and CNT film electrodes were coated with PVA three times and dried at 60 °C for 1 h, respectively. Two PVA-coated films were placed in parallel on the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) together, followed by coating with PVA again to produce a strain sensor. The strain sensor was sealed using polyimide tapes in a sandwich fashion.
Calculations
The specific capacitance was calculated from the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves based on the following formula: C = I × Δt/S × ΔV(1)where I (A) is the constant discharging current, Δt (s) is the discharging time, ΔV (V) is the discharging potential range, and S (cm2) is the surface area of the electrode and/or device. The areal energy density and power density of the devices were obtained from the following equations: E = 1/2C × ΔV2(2) P = E/t(3)where C is the specific capacitance obtained from eqn (1) and ΔV (V) is the voltage window.
Results and discussion
A schematic diagram of the fabrication of the flexible Co@N-CNT/MXenes on CNT film is shown in Fig. 1. Aqueous Ti3C2Tx MXene ink was exploited by synthesizing the delaminated MAX-Ti3AlC2 MXene nanosheet suspension for fabricating a scalable Ti3C2Tx MXenes/CNT electrode by the facile painting method. The positively charged Zn2+ ions were deposited onto the oxygen-containing groups of MXenes through electrostatic interaction. Then, 2-methylimidazole was added to allow for the coordination reaction with Zn2+ and in situ growth of ZIF-8 nanoparticles on the MXenes. Finally, the Co2+ ions and 2-methylimidazole were added to obtain ZIF-67/ZIF-8 grown on the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. Co@N-CNT/MXenes were obtained from ZIF-67/ZIF-8/MXenes after high-temperature annealing under an N2 atmosphere. During this process, the Zn ions liberated from ZIF-8 were evaporated at high temperatures, and owing to the catalytic effect of the Co species, the organic ligands hosted in ZIF-67/ZIF-8 were transformed into the N-doped carbon nanotube (N-CNT) and were obtained Co@N-CNT/MXene materials. The strategy of this work is based on a pyrolysis process of predesigned bimetallic Zn/Co MOF, during which Co can be reduced by carbonization of the organic linker and Zn is selectively evaporated at high temperatures above 800 °C. The mixing of Zn as a “fence” is to expand the distance of adjacent Co atoms in space.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure for Co@N-CNT/MXenes on the CNT film. 
TEM and SEM were used to investigate material morphologies before and after the manufacturing process. Initially, Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were obtained by etching and exfoliating the MAX phase Ti3AlC2 using HCl and LiF. The successful exfoliation of Ti3C2Tx was revealed by the nanosheet morphology with a lateral size of hundreds of nanometers observed in the scanning electron microscopic (SEM) image (Fig. 2a). The rich oxygen-containing functional groups and fluorine on the surface of 2D Ti3C2 (Fig. S1†) facilitate the nucleation and growth of ZIF-67/ZIF-8. After electrophoretic deposition, the bald CNT surface (Fig. 2b) became undulant, suggesting the successful coating of the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheet (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, Ti3C2Tx/CNT presented a higher conductivity (494 S cm−1) than that of the pure CNT film (9.06 S cm−1) (Fig. S2†). High conductive Ti3C2Tx layers provided a fast electron passageway on the surface of the cross-linked CNT scaffold, which was favorable for adjusting the local electric field uniformly. Fig. 2d demonstrates that ZIF-8 was successfully grown on the Ti3C2Tx/CNT film. As revealed in Fig. 2e, ZIF-67/ZIF-8 polyhedra with sizes of tens of nanometers were in situ grown on the nanosheets in the presence of Co2+ and 2-methylimidazole. The final products (denoted as Co@N-CNT/MXenes) were obtained by pyrolysis of ZIF-67@ZIF-8/MXenes under an N2 atmosphere (Fig. 2f). The high conductive Co@N-CNT/MXenes had abundant surface active sites and metallic conductive superficialities, suggesting a capable host for electron and ion transportation. From the high-resolution transmission electron microscopic (TEM) image (Fig. 2g), it can be seen that the Co nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼10 nm were embedded on the tip of the carbon nanotubes and the carbon nanotubes had a diameter of ∼15 nm. The lattice fringe spacing of the Co nanoparticles was about 0.204 nm, corresponding to the (111) plane of metallic Co, which was consistent with the X-ray diffraction (XRD) result (Fig. 2l). In order to further analyze the distribution of each element in the material, the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) was performed. As shown in Fig. 2h, C, N, Co and Ti elements in the composite material are uniformly distributed throughout the material, which proves the successful growth of the material. The Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film electrode can be scaled up to large continuous sheets, for example, 600 × 200 mm, as shown in Fig. 2i. From Fig. 2j and k, the Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film could easily be folded into different shapes, which was favorable for applications in flexible or uniquely shaped batteries. The evolution of the crystalline structures of Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Co@N-CNT/MXenes were investigated by their XRD patterns (Fig. 2l). The diffraction peaks at 44.2°, 51.5° and 76° can be indexed to the (111), (200) and (220) planes of metallic cobalt (JCPDS 89-4307). The diffraction peak centered at 26.4° was ascribed to the (002) plane of graphitic carbon. The characteristic peaks for Ti3C2Tx MXenes can be found at 36.2°, 41° and 61.4°, further verifying the successful incorporation of Ti3C2Tx MXenes. The surface chemistry of Co@N-CNT/MXenes was further investigated using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Compared with Ti3C2Tx MXenes, Co@N-CNT/MXenes clearly shows the Co peak and N peak as well the sharp C peak (Fig. 2m). The high-resolution C 1s spectrum was deconvoluted into three peaks, corresponding to C–C (284.6 eV), C–N (285.6 eV) and C–O (288.5 eV), respectively (Fig. 2n). The high-resolution of the N 1s spectrum (Fig. 2o) was deconvoluted into four peaks: pyridinic-N (397.2 eV), pyridinic-N (398.8 eV), graphitic-N (400.9 eV), and Ti–N (396.2 eV), and the Ti–N can be attributed to the N-doping in the Ti3C2Tx MXene structure. The high-resolution Co 2p spectrum (Fig. 2p) exhibits an obvious metallic Co signal peak located at a binding energy of around 780.7 eV, indicating the dominated Co0 species in the Co@N-CNT/MXene composite. The peaks at 785.8, 796.6 and 802.7 eV can be ascribed to CoCxNy, Co–Ny and shakeup satellite peak, respectively.30–32 The XPS results confirm the presence of chemical bonding of Co–N, which could act as potential active sites for the electrochemical reaction. The FTIR and Raman results of Co@N-CNT/MXenes and Ti3C2Tx MXenes are shown in Fig. S3.† The specific surface area of the Co@N-CNT/MXene electrode was determined by nitrogen adsorption–desorption measurements (Fig. S4†). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of the electrode was calculated to be around 25 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the (a) Ti3C2Tx MXenes, (b) pure CNT film, (c) Ti3C2Tx MXenes/CNT film, (d) ZIF-8/MXenes/CNT film, (e) ZIF-67/ZIF-8/MXenes/CNT film and (f) Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film. (g) TEM images of Co@N-CNT. (h) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding element mapping of C, N, Co and Ti, respectively; the scale bar is 500 nm. (i) Optical images of the Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film. (j and k) Different shapes folded from the Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film. (l) XRD patterns of the as-synthesized Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Co@N-CNT/Ti3C2Tx MXenes. (m) XPS spectra of Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Co@N-CNT/MXenes; (n) C 1s of Ti3C2Tx and Co@N-CNT/MXenes; (o) N 1s of Co@N-CNT/MXenes; and (p) Co 2p of Co@N-CNT/MXenes. 
Sensor preparation and application
The Co@N-CNT/MXene and CNT film electrodes were coated with PVA three times and dried at 60 °C for 1 h, respectively. Two PVA-coated films were placed in parallel together on the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), followed by coating with PVA again to obtain the strain sensor. The strain sensor was sealed using polyimide tapes in a sandwich fashion. Fig. 3a demonstrates that the set of measurement configurations for the sensor is well established. The gauge factor (GF) for determining the sensitivity of the sensor can be calculated by GF = (ΔR/R0)/ε, where ΔR, R0, and ε correspond to the change in the resistance, the initial resistance (the resistance before the extension), and the applied strain, respectively. When step-wise strain is applied (Fig. 3b), the sensors respond with a generally stable step-wise increase of resistance. Besides, the relative resistance change (ΔR/R0) remained almost unchanged at the same tensile strain, indicating excellent electromechanical stability. As presented in Fig. 3c, the ΔR/R0 increased linearly. Initially, the GF was 2.95 in the strain range of 3–20%, it increased slightly to 5.42 for the strain range of 20–100%, and then increased suddenly to 11.01 under the strain range of 100–200%. It can be seen that the ΔR/R0 value of the Co@N-CNT/MXene sensor is slightly lower than that of the Ti3C2Tx-MXene sensor at low stretch rates, and the GF value of the Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensor demonstrates a more stable increase. The change in resistance during the deformation process can be explained by the change in the 3D conductive interconnection network between MXene nanosheets, Co@N-CNT and the PVA hydrogel. First, the MXene nanosheets are interconnected in the hydrogel matrix to form a 3D conductive network framework for the electron transport, so as to obtain good conductivity. Then, the MXene nanosheets slide under a small strain, and the spacing between the MXene nanosheets gradually increases, resulting in increased resistance. When MXene nanosheets are subjected to a large stretch, they separate from each other, which greatly disrupts the conduction path of the electron transport between MXene nanosheets, resulting in relatively high GF. In addition, the fracture between the synthetic material and the substrate as the stretch rate increases will also cause a sudden increase in the GF value. The addition of Co@N-CNT increases the path of electron conduction between materials enhances conductivity and significantly reduces the GF value of the sensor device. When a wide range of strain was applied on the Co@N-CNT/MXene sensor (Fig. 3d), it showed a reversible behavior with nearly negligible hysteresis with a constant applied voltage of 0.1 V. The Co@N-CNT/MXene sensor exhibits an elastic behavior and excellent recovery after the strain is released; it also displays the highly repeatable result in different dynamic stretching frequencies and cyclic testing (Fig. 3e and f).
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of the setup for the measurements of ΔR/R0 as a function of applied strain. (b) Resistance response of the MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensor stretched from 3% to 10%, respectively. Step-wise test from 3 to 10% of Ti3C2Tx MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene sensors. (c) Gauge factor (GF) of Ti3C2Tx MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensors, respectively. (d) Resistance response of repeated stretching tests of the Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensors at different strains (5%, 100%). (e) Dynamic test. (f) Resistance response of the Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensor with applied tensile strain between 0 and 50% for 600 cycles. 
Integration of a flexible solar-charging self-powered SC
Before fabrication of a flexible solid-state SC, the electrochemical performances of the as-fabricated MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene electrodes were first investigated in a three-electrode system with a 3 M LiCl electrolyte (Fig. S5 and 6†). The Co@N-CNT/MXene electrodes were coated three times with PVA/LiCl and dried at 60 °C for 1 h. Two PVA/LiCl coated films were placed in parallel together, followed by coating with PVA/LiCl again to produce an all-solid-state film SC. The final all-solid-state SC was assembled from the PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte-impregnated Co@N-CNT/MXene electrodes placed face-to-face. The SC was sealed using polyimide tapes in a sandwich fashion.
To evaluate the electrochemical performances of the flexible and symmetric SC, CV and GCD, measurements in a voltage range from 0 to 1 V were carried out. The CV curves (Fig. 4a) exhibit an obvious rectangular shape, attributed to the electric double layer mechanism. Even at high scan rates, the quasi-rectangle shapes are well maintained, indicating excellent rate performance of the Co@N-CNT/MXene SC. The GCD curves of the device demonstrate symmetric triangular shapes with no apparent internal resistance drop (Fig. 4b). Fig. 4c shows the calculated specific capacitances of the SC were from 97.7 F g−1 to 74 F g−1 for different currents. These values are much higher than the recently reported values for other materials, such as MXene-graphene (2.18 μW h cm−2 at 0.06 mW cm−2),33 activated carbon cloth@Ti3C2Tx (4.5 μW h cm−2 at 0.779 mW cm−2),34 MXene-coated cotton (2 μW h cm−2 at 5.3 mW cm−2),35 MXene/bacterial cellulose paper (5.54 μW h cm−2 at 2 mW cm−2)36 and Ni/MXene/PI laser (2.62 μW h cm−2 at 1.3 mW cm−2).37 To exhibit the energy-storage profile of the SC, energy density is plotted against power density in a Ragone chart (Fig. 4d). The energy density was 13.7 μW h cm−2 at a low power density of 0.5 mW cm−2; the values are superior to those for MXene-based SCs. The practical application is that two devices can be connected in series or in parallel to achieve higher operating voltage or current (Fig. S7a and b†). We further investigate the mechanical stability under different bending angles (45°, 90°, 135°, 180°) (Fig. 4e) and dynamic bending frequencies (Fig. S7c, d and S8†); the CV curves demonstrate excellent flexibility and electrochemical stability. The cycling durability was further explored at a current of 3 A g−1 for 85000 cycles (Fig. 4f). The capacity retained 92.7% of its original value and the coulombic efficiency of the SC device maintained 99.7%, indicating decent stability of the as-fabricated Co@N-CNT/MXene SC. To build a solar-charging self-powered system, the as-fabricated SC should serve as the energy storage module and the commercial Si-solar cell should work as the energy conversion component. As shown in Fig. 4g, the solar-SC can be charged to 1 V in 8 s, demonstrating a fast photoelectric conversion rate. Then, the solar-SC was discharged at different currents from 0.1 to 0.5 mA, and the diploid discharge time implies a favorable rate performance. We further investigated the mechanical stability of the integrated system. Fig. 4h shows the solar-charging/discharging (at a constant current of 0.2 mA) profiles under various bending angles (0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, and 180°). The roughly superposed charging/discharging curves demonstrate excellent flexibility and electrochemical stability of our self-powered unit. The solar-charging durability was further explored by repeated solar-charging/discharging the device for 100 cycles (Fig. 4i). The capacity was retained 82% of its original value after 100 solar-charging/discharging cycles, indicating superior solar-charging stability of the self-powered unit.
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical characteristics of the Co@N-CNT/MXene symmetric SC. (a) CV curves; (b) GCD curves at different currents; (c) the specific capacitance and capacitance retention as a function of currents. (d) Ragone plots of the SC device. (e) CV curves under different bending states (from 0° to 180°); (f) coulombic efficiency and capacitance of the SC. (g) GCD curves at the same light intensity and different discharge currents. GCD curves at the same light intensity and different bending angles from 0° to 180° (h) and a bending angle of 120° for 100 cycles (i). 
In order to evaluate the practical application of the integrated sensor system, SCs and strain sensors were stacked and connected by silver wires. The sensor can be driven by the solar-charged SC at a constant voltage of 0.8 V for detecting pressure and strain response. The electrical signal in Fig. 5a records the bending of the wrist when waving the hand, showing a repeatable and regular pulse shape. Fig. 5b demonstrates the human pulse monitoring data. The pulse image and the peak value in the dashed frame clearly show the typical characteristics of the pulse waveform, such as percussion wave (P1 wave), tidal wave (P2 wave), and diastolic waves, indicating the high sensitivity of the integrated system. Fig. 5c delivers the resistance when swallowing. The results reflect that the integrated system can perform well in the detection of various human movements. In addition, the application of signal transmission to the pressure sensing response of the integrated device is also carried out. In response to finger tapping and pressing, this can be used to represent the point (lasting approximately 0.3 s) and dash (1 s) code of the telegraph Morse shock (Fig. 5d). The signal interval of the same letter is 2 s, and the signal interval between letters is 3 s. As an example, Fig. 5e shows the Morse code for “MXENE”. Furthermore, the strain sensor can also accurately track the signals when varying degrees of finger bending (Fig. 5f). All these results prove the stable sensing performance of the integrated device under dynamic tensile and compressive strain and can be used in a variety of situations, such as identifying human motion and pressure pulses with high sensitivity and repeatability.
 Fig. 5  Body movement sensing. Resistance signals for (a) making a fist; (b) pulse beating; (c) swallowing; (d) resistance signals of tapping and pressing on the sensor, (e) telegraphic Morse code for “MXENE” by tapping and pressing the sensor. (f) Pulse test of the sensor at different finger bending angles. 
To demonstrate the potential in energy storage, the SC charged by the Si-solar cell was able to drive the as-fabricated sensor successfully. The fabrication process of the stretchable strain sensor and stacked flexible SC is schematically illustrated in Fig. 6a and b. Co-NCNT@MXene and pure CNT thin-film electrodes and the PVA gel electrolyte are used to manufacture dual-mode sensors for pressure and strain measurement. The stretchable strain sensor is also coated with PDMS. Fig. 6b shows a stacked flexible SC prepared using synthetic Co-NCNT@MXenes as an electrode and LiCl/PVA gel electrolyte. Here, the gel electrolyte without PDMS coating gives the SC certain mechanical strength. Then, the manufactured multi-function sensor (i.e. dual-mode sensor and strain sensor) is integrated with the manufactured SC for wireless power supply, as shown in Fig. 6c. When the flexible SC was fully charged by a solar cell (Fig. 6d), it could be powerful enough to drive the strain sensor as a wearable integrated system to detect human activities. This indicated that using a solar-charge SC as a substitute for a conventional energy unit as the driving source was feasible and durable. Fig. 6e confirms that the flexible integrated system assembly of the solar-SC and sensor could operate stably to detect human motion.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of strain sensor and (b) flexible all-solid-state SC with a PDMS film. (c) Integration of the Si-solar cell, the wearable strain sensor and the SC attached on a human body. (d) Circuit diagram of the test. Photograph of the flexible integrated system with the Si-solar cell placed on the coated surface and the SC and sensor attached to the skin. Digital images and corresponding time–current response curves of the integrated system in human motion monitoring. (e) Digital image and corresponding time–resistance response curves of the integrated system in human motion monitoring. 
Conclusions
In this research, we fabricated a self-powered sensing system, which consists of using a polydimethylsiloxane coated Co@N-CNT/MXenes/carbon nanotube film as a common material to prepare strain sensors and the all-solid-state flexible SC. Co@N-CNT/MXenes grow in situ on the CNT film as a common active material to retain the excellent mechanical properties and electrical conductivity of CNT. Co@N-CNT/MXenes have an excellent layered structure and carbon nanotube channels to help electron conduction and electrolyte ion diffusion. The Co@N-CNT/MXenes//CNT sensor shows high stability and a large sensing range of up to 200% strain. The sensor has been proved to measure the finger joint movement or pulse response and can be used as a pressure sensor. Co@N-CNT/MXenes can be grown in situ on the CNT film, coated with the LiCl/PVA electrolyte and prepared into a symmetric SC. The SC shows an extremely high capacitance performance of 97.7 F cm−2 at a current intensity of 0.1 mA and a stable output voltage of 1 V, enabling it to maintain a high energy density (13.7 μW h cm−2 at 0.5 mW cm−2) and excellent cycle performance (the discharge retention rate is 92.7% after 85000 cycles of charging at a current density of 1.5 mA cm−2). At the same time, the device can be directly powered by solar cells to achieve independent operation. These encouraging results indicate that self-powered sensors can be used in mobile wearable devices in the next generation of high-performance, flexible, and lightweight mobile monitoring devices.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51702369 and 51873233), Hubei Provincial Natural Science Foundation (2018CFA023), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (CZZ21009 and CZP20006).
Notes and references
H. Park, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Hong, G. Lee, D. S. Kim, J. h. Oh, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, S. Y. Oh, J. Y. Yun and J. S. Ha, Microporous Polypyrrole-Coated Graphene Foam for High-Performance Multifunctional Sensors and Flexible Supercapacitors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707013 CrossRef .
D. H. Ho, Q. Sun, S. Y. Kim, J. T. Han, D. H. Kim and J. H. Cho, Stretchable and Multimodal All Graphene Electronic Skin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2601–2608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Choi, O. K. Park, C. Choi, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, D. J. Lee, M. Kim, W. Hyun, S. J. Kim, H. J. Hwang, S. H. Kwon, T. Hyeon, N. Lu and D. H. Kim, Cephalopod-Inspired Miniaturized Suction Cups for Smart Medical Skin, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 80–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Lou, Y. Zheng, K. Wang, L. Zhao, W. Han, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Biomimetic, biocompatible and robust silk Fibroin-MXene film with stable 3D cross-link structure for flexible pressure sensors, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, Y. Ma, L. Li, M. Zhu, Y. Yue, W. Liu, L. Wang, S. Jia, C. Li, T. Qi, J. Wang and Y. Gao, Bioinspired Microspines for a High-Performance Spray Ti3C2Tx MXene-based piezoresistive sensor, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2145–2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Wang, Z. Lou, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Plant-Based Modular Building Blocks for “Green” Electronic Skins, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804510 CrossRef .
M. S. Kim, J. W. Kim, J. Yun, Y. R. Jeong, S. W. Jin, G. Lee, H. Lee, D. S. Kim, K. Keum and J. S. Ha, A rationally designed flexible self-healing system with a high performance supercapacitor for powering an integrated multifunctional sensor, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 146018 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, H. Kim, M. Vosgueritchian, S. Cheon, H. Kim, J. H. Koo, T. R. Kim, S. Lee, G. Schwartz, H. Chang and Z. Bao, Stretchable Energy-Harvesting Tactile Electronic Skin Capable of Differentiating Multiple Mechanical Stimuli Modes, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7324–7332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ha, S. Lim, J. Park, D. S. Um, Y. Lee and H. Ko, Bioinspired Interlocked and Hierarchical Design of ZnO Nanowire Arrays for Static and Dynamic Pressure-Sensitive Electronic Skins, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2841–2849 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Tien, S. Jeon, D. I. Kim, T. Q. Trung, M. Jang, B. U. Hwang, K. E. Byun, J. Bae, E. Lee, J. B. H. Tok, Z. Bao, N. E. Lee and J. J. Park, A Flexible Bimodal Sensor Array for Simultaneous Sensing of Pressure and Temperature, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 796–804 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Zang, F. J. Zhang, D. Z. Huang, X. K. Gao, C. A. Di and D. B. Zhu, Flexible suspended gate organic thin-film transistors for ultra-sensitive pressure detection, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Huang, S. J. Peng, J. F. Gu, G. Q. Chen, J. H. Gao, J. Zhang, L. X. Hou, X. X. Yang, X. C. Jiang and L. H. Guan, Self-powered integrated system of a strain sensor and flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor by using a high performance ionic organohydrogel, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2085–2096 RSC .
Q. Wang, J. Liu and X. Ran, High-performance flexible self-powered strain sensor based on carbon nanotube/ZnSe/CoSe2 nanocomposite film electrodes, Nano Res., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s12274-021-3453-5 .
Q. Wang, X. Ran, W. Shao, M. Miao and D. Zhang, High performance flexible supercapacitor based on metal-organic-framework derived CoSe2 nanosheets on carbon nanotube film, J. Power Sources, 2021, 490, 229517 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hl, A. Rf and A. Xs, Electrical insulating MXene/PDMS/BN composite with enhanced thermal conductivity for electromagnetic shielding application, Compos. Commun., 2020, 23, 100593 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, N. Kong, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, S. Seyedin, P. A. Lynch, S. Qin, M. Han, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Scalable Manufacturing of Free-Standing, Strong Ti3C2Tx MXene Films with Outstanding Conductivity, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Han, Y. Feng, B. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Ma and C. Liu, Flexible, Robust, and Multifunctional Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Film with Alternating Cellulose Nanofiber and MXene Layers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4895–4905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kim, B. J. Lee, K. Maleski, Y. Chae, Y. Lee, Y. Gogotsi and C. W. Ahn, Microsupercapacitor with a 500 nm gap between MXene/CNT electrodes, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105616 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, D. Luo, J. Wang, Z. Sun, G. Cui, Y. Chen, T. Wang, L. Zheng, Y. Zhao, L. Shui, G. Zhou, K. Kempa, Y. Zhang and Z. Chen, Strain Engineering of a MXene/CNT Hierarchical Porous Hollow Microsphere Electrocatalyst for a High-Efficiency Lithium Polysulfide Conversion Process, Angew. Chem., 2021, 60, 2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, J. Shen, G. Ge, Y. Zhang, W. Jin, W. Huang, J. Shao, J. Yang and X. Dong, Stretchable Ti3C2Tx MXene/Carbon Nanotube Composite Based Strain Sensor with Ultrahigh Sensitivity and Tunable Sensing Range, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, X. Hu, K. Li, J. Sun, Z. Liu, B. An, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Self-assembly of dendritic-lamellar MXene/Carbon nanotube conductive films for wearable tactile sensors and artificial skin, Carbon, 2020, 164, 111–120 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liang and I. Zhitomirsky, MXene-carbon nanotube composite electrodes for high active mass asymmetric supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10335–10344 RSC .
X. Gao, X. Du and T. S. Mathis, Maximizing ion accessibility in MXene-knotted carbon nanotube composite electrodes for high-rate electrochemical energy storage, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Shi and T. Wang, Black phosphorus-carbon nanotube gas sensor for detection of dimethyl methylphosphonate, Mater. Lett., 2021, 293, 129728 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, G. Yu and X. Wei, Fabric/multi-walled carbon nanotube sensor for portable on-site copper detection in water, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2019, 2, 711–719 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Rahm, F. Torres-Canas, P. Gupta, P. Poulin and N. T. Alvarez, Inkjet Printed Multi-walled Carbon Nanotube Sensor for the Detection of Lead in Drinking Water, Electroanalysis, 2020, 32, 1533 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Liang, D. Zhang and M. Miao, Flexible supercapacitors based on carbon nanotube-MnO2 nanocomposite film electrode, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang and L. Zhao, A dynamic stretchable and self-healable supercapacitor with a CNT/graphene/PANI composite film, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22329–22334 RSC .
Q. Wang, X. Liang and D. Zhang, Multifunctional supercapacitor based on 2D nanosheets on flexible carbon nanotube film, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 9312–9321 RSC .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu and L. Zheng, Single Cobalt Atoms with Precise N-Coordination as Superior Oxygen Reduction Reaction Catalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Yuan, F. Lyu, Q. Zhong, H. Hu, Q. Pan and Q. Zhang, Integrating MXene nanosheets with cobalt-tipped carbon nanotubes for an efficient oxygen reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1281–1286 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, C. Wu, T. Duan and L. Song, In Situ Growth of Cobalt Nanoparticles Encapsulated Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanotubes among Ti3C2Tx (MXene) Matrix for Oxygen Reduction and Evolution, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800392 CrossRef .
Y. Yue, N. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Wang, W. Liu, C. Luo, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Rao, X. Hu, J. Su and Y. Gao, Highly Self-Healable 3D Microsupercapacitor with MXene-Graphene Composite Aerogel, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4224–4232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Shao, J. Guo, S. Zhang and Y. Lu, A MXene-Coated Activated Carbon Cloth for Flexible Solid-State Supercapacitor, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1901003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Chen, H. Wang and X. Xiao, All-MXene Cotton-Based Supercapacitor-Powered Human Body Thermal Management System, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 648 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Jiao, A. G. Zhou, M. Z. Wu and H. B. Hu, Kirigami Patterning of MXene/Bacterial Cellulose Composite Paper for All-Solid-State Stretchable Micro-Supercapacitor Arrays, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900529 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, M. Hu, R. Qin and G. Shan, Laser-Cutting Fabrication of Mxene-Based Flexible Micro-Supercapacitors with High Areal Capacitance, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 658 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr03641f‡ The authors contribute equally to the work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
C = I × Δt/S × ΔV	(1)
E = 1/2C × ΔV2	(2)
P = E/t	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure for Co@N-CNT/MXenes on the CNT film.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the (a) Ti3C2Tx MXenes, (b) pure CNT film, (c) Ti3C2Tx MXenes/CNT film, (d) ZIF-8/MXenes/CNT film, (e) ZIF-67/ZIF-8/MXenes/CNT film and (f) Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film. (g) TEM images of Co@N-CNT. (h) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding element mapping of C, N, Co and Ti, respectively; the scale bar is 500 nm. (i) Optical images of the Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film. (j and k) Different shapes folded from the Co@N-CNT/MXenes/CNT film. (l) XRD patterns of the as-synthesized Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Co@N-CNT/Ti3C2Tx MXenes. (m) XPS spectra of Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Co@N-CNT/MXenes; (n) C 1s of Ti3C2Tx and Co@N-CNT/MXenes; (o) N 1s of Co@N-CNT/MXenes; and (p) Co 2p of Co@N-CNT/MXenes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of the setup for the measurements of ΔR/R0 as a function of applied strain. (b) Resistance response of the MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensor stretched from 3% to 10%, respectively. Step-wise test from 3 to 10% of Ti3C2Tx MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene sensors. (c) Gauge factor (GF) of Ti3C2Tx MXene and Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensors, respectively. (d) Resistance response of repeated stretching tests of the Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensors at different strains (5%, 100%). (e) Dynamic test. (f) Resistance response of the Co@N-CNT/MXene strain sensor with applied tensile strain between 0 and 50% for 600 cycles.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical characteristics of the Co@N-CNT/MXene symmetric SC. (a) CV curves; (b) GCD curves at different currents; (c) the specific capacitance and capacitance retention as a function of currents. (d) Ragone plots of the SC device. (e) CV curves under different bending states (from 0° to 180°); (f) coulombic efficiency and capacitance of the SC. (g) GCD curves at the same light intensity and different discharge currents. GCD curves at the same light intensity and different bending angles from 0° to 180° (h) and a bending angle of 120° for 100 cycles (i).	 

 	Fig. 5  Body movement sensing. Resistance signals for (a) making a fist; (b) pulse beating; (c) swallowing; (d) resistance signals of tapping and pressing on the sensor, (e) telegraphic Morse code for “MXENE” by tapping and pressing the sensor. (f) Pulse test of the sensor at different finger bending angles.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of strain sensor and (b) flexible all-solid-state SC with a PDMS film. (c) Integration of the Si-solar cell, the wearable strain sensor and the SC attached on a human body. (d) Circuit diagram of the test. Photograph of the flexible integrated system with the Si-solar cell placed on the coated surface and the SC and sensor attached to the skin. Digital images and corresponding time–current response curves of the integrated system in human motion monitoring. (e) Digital image and corresponding time–resistance response curves of the integrated system in human motion monitoring.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr03641f
‡ The authors contribute equally to the work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
