Hierarchical photocatalysts  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00838G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00838G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2603-2636Hierarchical photocatalysts

        
          
            Xin 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiaguo 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Mietek 
            Jaroniec
          
          
        
      *e
aCollege of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, P. R. China
bKey Laboratory of Energy Plants Resource and Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Biomass Energy of Guangdong Regular Higher Education Institutions, Institute of New Energy and New Materials, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Material Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, P. R. China. E-mail: jiaguoyu@yahoo.com
dDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
eDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242, USA. E-mail: jaroniec@kent.edu
Received 
      29th November 2015
    First published on 10th March 2016AbstractAs a green and sustainable technology, semiconductor-based heterogeneous photocatalysis has received much attention in the last few decades because it has potential to solve both energy and environmental problems. To achieve efficient photocatalysts, various hierarchical semiconductors have been designed and fabricated at the micro/nanometer scale in recent years. This review presents a critical appraisal of fabrication methods, growth mechanisms and applications of advanced hierarchical photocatalysts. Especially, the different synthesis strategies such as two-step templating, in situ template-sacrificial dissolution, self-templating method, in situ template-free assembly, chemically induced self-transformation and post-synthesis treatment are highlighted. Finally, some important applications including photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, photocatalytic H2 production and photocatalytic CO2 reduction are reviewed. A thorough assessment of the progress made in photocatalysis may open new opportunities in designing highly effective hierarchical photocatalysts for advanced applications ranging from thermal catalysis, separation and purification processes to solar cells.
Xin Li
Xin Li received his BS and PhD degrees in Chemical Engineering from Zhengzhou University in 2002 and South China University of Technology in 2007, respectively. Then, he joined South China Agricultural University as a faculty member, and became an associate professor of Applied Chemistry in 2011. During 2012–2013, he worked as a visiting scholar at the Electrochemistry Center, the University of Texas at Austin, U.S.A. His research interests include photocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, adsorption and the development of photocatalysts, related materials and devices.
Jiaguo Yu
Jiaguo Yu received his BS and MS in Chemistry from Central China Normal University and Xi'an Jiaotong University, respectively, and his PhD in Materials Science in 2000 from the Wuhan University of Technology. In 2000, he became a Professor of the Wuhan University of Technology. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong from 2001 to 2004, visiting scientist from 2005 to 2006 at the University of Bristol, and visiting scholar from 2007 to 2008 at the University of Texas, Austin. His research interests include semiconductors, photocatalysis, photocatalytic hydrogen production, solar fuels, dye-sensitized solar cells, adsorption, CO2 capture, graphene and related topics.
Mietek Jaroniec
Mietek Jaroniec received his MS and PhD from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland, in 1972 and 1976, respectively. Since 1991 he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio (USA). Before joining Kent State he was a Professor of Chemistry at M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland. His research interests revolve primarily around inter-disciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry, and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at the gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, adsorbents, and catalysts. At Kent State he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.
1. Introduction
As a green and promising technology, heterogeneous photocatalytic reduction and oxidation reactions, based largely on semiconductors and solar energy, have recently attracted extensive interest in the fields of energy, materials, environment and chemistry.1–7 Since the Fujishima–Honda effect of TiO2 photoelectrode was first reported in 1972,8 many achievements in the development of novel semiconductor photocatalysts for various photocatalytic applications have been made.9–16 Hundreds of new semiconductor materials are currently available for diversified and multifunctional applications, including oxides of the metallic elements with d0 and d10 configurations,2,5,17–20 sulfides,21–26 (oxy)nitrides,12,17,27–30 metal-free semiconductors,31–36 plasmonic metals37–43 and elemental photocatalysts.44–48 However, none of these photocatalysts completely satisfies all practical requirements such as long lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, small band gap optimal for full utilization of solar light energy, relatively high safety, low cost, high efficiency and stability, which greatly hinders their practical applications.2 Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop highly efficient and stable visible-light-driven photocatalysts by optimizing the existing synthesis strategies through coupling them with nanocarbons, adding co-catalysts, constructing appropriate heterojunctions, designing all-solid-state Z-schemes, and more.2,49–59 Typically, these engineering strategies to modify heterogeneous photocatalysts with enhanced activity can be divided into two types: structural and compositional optimizations.51 Especially, as the photocatalytic properties of semiconductors are strongly dependent on their crystal morphologies and structural features at the nanometer level, optimization and control of the structural properties of a given semiconductor is crucial for enhancing its photocatalytic performance. So far, numerous promising structure-engineering strategies have been proposed for the preparation of highly efficient photocatalysts with desirable structure and morphology. Among them, the self-assembly synthesis of hierarchical semiconductor nanostructures has turned out to be a feasible strategy to efficiently prevent aggregation and enhance the quantum efficiency of the specific photocatalysts due to their unique shape- and structure-dependent catalytic properties.
Since the pioneering work by Yang et al. in 1998 reporting the formation of hierarchical ordered oxides with three-dimensional structures,60 a significant progress has been made in the design and synthesis of hierarchical functional nanomaterials with controllable morphology, nanocrystallinity, composition, exposure of facets, dimensionality, microstructure, and more, for enhancing catalytic activity and selectivity.61 In particular, the work by Zhang and Yu on the sonochemical synthesis of hierarchically porous titania spheres, which showed an enhanced activity toward photodegradation of n-pentane in air,62 initiated a number of publications on the design and fabrication of novel inorganic semiconductor materials with hierarchical superstructures through the oriented assembly of nanosized building blocks such as nanorods, nanotubes, and nanoplates.63–67 These so-called “hierarchical photocatalysts” are usually referred to as the nanostructured semiconductors having multidimensional domains at different levels or multimodal pore structures. Several typical hierarchical nanostructures (such as urchin-like, brush-like, flower-like, tree-like, dendritic and branched structures) composed of different nanosized building blocks are shown in Fig. 1. Generally, hierarchically porous structures of photocatalysts can be created by mimicking the marvelous hierarchical and fractal structures such as trees and the surface structures of plant leaves existing in nature (Fig. 2).68 Importantly, hierarchical photocatalysts such as those shown in Fig. 1 possess readily accessible and interconnected porous networks and high specific surface areas, which not only enhance the efficiency of light harvesting and adsorption of reactants, but also facilitate the transport of guest species to the binding sites. Thus, the synergetic effects of different dimensional levels and multimodal pore structures often lead to significant enhancement of the performance of hierarchical photocatalysts. These outstanding features of hierarchical nanostructured semiconductors make them promising candidates for heterogeneous photocatalysis. To date, a large number of important papers have been published on the design of hierarchical photocatalysts with multiple porous structures and enhanced efficiency. Despite some excellent reviews devoted to hierarchical semiconductors such as TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO, only a fraction of important topics referring to their preparation and applications in photocatalysis69–74 and photoelectrochemistry75 has been apprised. In recent years, there has been a great deal of enthusiasm in exploiting hierarchically nanostructured semiconductor photocatalysts, which resulted in many significant achievements. Thus, we believe that a comprehensive and inspiring review on this subject is timely to promote further developments in this important, exciting and still emerging area of research.
 Fig. 1  Typical hierarchical structures of photocatalysts. 
 Fig. 2  Example of hierarchical structures in nature. 
In this review, we thoroughly summarize recent developments in the area of hierarchically nanostructured semiconductors for various photocatalytic applications. A special emphasis is directed toward better understanding of the design, fabrication, performance and applications of hierarchical semiconductor photocatalysts. The advantages of hierarchical structures are first briefly discussed in the context of heterogeneous photocatalysis. Then, the fabrication strategies and growth mechanism of hierarchical photocatalysts are presented. Also, various applications of hierarchical photocatalysts for degradation of pollutants, air purification, H2 production, and CO2 reduction are reviewed, and future research challenges are discussed.
2. Fundamentals of heterogeneous photocatalysis
2.1 Thermodynamics of heterogeneous photocatalysis
The fundamentals of heterogeneous photocatalysis have been widely elaborated elsewhere.74,76,77 As shown in Fig. 3, a given photocatalyst, when exposed to an appropriate light source, can be excited by the photons with energy equal to or greater than its corresponding band-gap energy, which leads to the generation of photo-induced electron/hole (e−/h+) pairs, instead of producing thermal energy through the recombination of photogenerated e− and h+ in the bulk. Some charge carriers can migrate to the surface and initiate a series of chemical reactions with the adsorbed species on the surface of the catalyst, resulting for instance in the degradation of pollutants, reduction of CO2 and O2, evolution of H2 and O2, or formation of organic compounds. From thermodynamic viewpoint, the surface reduction and oxidation reactions can be driven by the photogenerated e− and h+, respectively, only when their reduction and oxidation potentials lie between the conduction band (CB) and the valence band (VB) potentials. The potentials of typical reactions are given in Fig. 3 and Table 1. The redox potentials of metal species at different pH values in an aqueous solution must be chosen on the basis of their corresponding Pourbaix diagram, whereas all other redox potentials shown in Table 1 exhibit the same linear pH dependence with a slope of −0.059 V, apart from E0′(O2/O2−) which is pH-independent.78 For example, to achieve overall water splitting over a semiconductor, its conduction band potential must be more negative than that of H2 generation and its valence band potential must be more positive than that required for O2 generation.2,5,6 Similarly, to achieve the photocatalytic degradation of a given pollutant, the photogenerated e− and h+ on the surface of a semiconductor should have suitable reduction and oxidation ability to react with the adsorbed species (O2, OH−, etc.) on the surface of the catalyst and generate free radicals (O2˙−, ˙OH, etc.), which could then act as reactive species and further degrade the adsorbed organic pollutants.26,79 Additionally, as shown in Fig. 3 and Table 1, it is clear that the multielectron reduction reactions of O2 and CO2 are thermodynamically more favorable than their corresponding single-electron processes on the surface active sites of semiconductors, due to the smaller negative reduction potentials of multielectron processes.1,80 Interestingly, the four-electron oxidation reaction of water can be easily realized as compared with the single-electron oxidation reaction of OH− (the formation of hydroxyl radicals) in aqueous solution, due to the super-high oxidation potentials of the latter.
 Fig. 3  Redox potentials of different species in heterogeneous photocatalysis. 
Table 1 Standard redox potentials for selected species97




Reaction

E
0(V) vs. NHE at pH = 0




Superscripta denotes the standard redox potentials in basic solutions (pH = 14).E0(pH) = E0(pH = 0) − 0.059 pH.




H2


2H+ + 2e− → H2(g)
0






O2 and N2


O2(g) + e− → O2−(aq)
−0.33


O2(g) + H2O + 2e− → HO2−(aq) + OH−
−0.0649a


O2(g) + H+ + e− → HO2˙(aq)
−0.046


HO2−(aq) + H2O + e− → ˙OH + 2OH−
0.184a


O2−(aq) + H2O + e− → HO2−(aq) + OH−
0.2a


O2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2(aq)
0.695


2H2O(aq) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 4H+
1.229


OH− + h+ → ˙OH
2.69


4OH−(aq) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 2H2O
0.401


N2(g) + 2H2O + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH4OH(aq)
0.092


O3(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → O2(g) + H2O
2.075






Metal-ions


MoO42− + 4H2O + 6e− → Mo(s) + 8OH−
−0.913a


Co(OH)2 + 2e− → Co(s) + 2OH−
−0.733a


Ni(OH)2 + 2e− → Ni(s) + 2OH−
−0.72a


Cu2O(s) + H2O + 2e− → 2Cu(s) + 2OH−
−0.365a


Co2+ + 2e− → Co(s)
−0.277


Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni(s)
−0.257


Mo3+ + 3e− → Mo(s)
−0.2


AgI + e− → Ag(s) + I−
−0.1522


AgBr + e− → Ag(s) + Br−
0.0711


AgCl + e− → Ag(s) + Cl−
0.2223


Sn4+ + 2e− → Sn2+
0.15


Cu2+ + e− → Cu+
0.159


BiOCl + 2H+ + 3e− → Bi(s) + H2O + Cl−
0.1697


Bi3+ + 3e− → Bi(s)
0.308


Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu(s)
0.340


Cu+ + e− → Cu(s)
0.520


PdCl42− + 2e− → Pd(s) + 4Cl−
0.64


PtCl42− + 2e− → Pt(s) + 4Cl−
0.758


Rh3+ + 3e− → Rh(s)
0.76


Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+
0.771


Ag+ + e− → Ag(s)
0.7991


IrCl63− + 3e− → Ir(s) + 6Cl−
0.86


Pd2+ + 2e− → Pd(s)
0.915


[AuCl4]− + 3e− → Au(s) + 4Cl−
0.93


NiO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → Ni2+ + 2H2O
1.593






CO2


CO2 + e− → CO2−
−1.9


2CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HOOCCOOH(aq)
−0.481


CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(aq)
−0.199


CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → CO(g) + H2O
−0.11


CO2(g) + 4H+ + 4e− → C(s) + 2H2O
0.206


CO2(g) + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO(aq) + H2O
−0.07


CO2(g) + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH(aq) + H2O
0.03


CO2(g) + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4(g) + 2H2O
0.169


2CO2(g) + 8H2O + 12e− → C2H4(g) + 12OH−
0.07


2CO2(g) + 9H2O + 12e− → C2H5OH(aq) + 12OH−
0.08


3CO2(g) + 13H2O + 18e− → C3H7OH(aq) + 18OH−
0.09






Other


N2H4(aq) + 4H2O + 2e− → 2NH4+ + 4OH−
0.1


H2S(g) + 2h+ → S(s) + 2H+
0.144


SO2(aq) + 4H+ + 4e− → S(s) + 2H2O
0.50


H3AsO3(aq) + H2O + 2h+ → H3AsO4(aq) + 2H+
0.56


NO2(g) + H2O + h+ → NO3−(aq) + 2H+
0.80


NO(g) + 2H2O(l) + 3h+ → NO3−(aq) + 4H+
0.957


H2O2(aq) + H+ + e− → H2O + OH−
1.14


Cr2O72− + 14H+ + 6e− → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
1.36


HO2˙ + H+ + e− → H2O2(aq)
1.44


H2O2(aq) + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O
1.763




Thus, the thermodynamic driving forces in photocatalytic processes are strongly dependent on the relative relationships between the CB/VB potentials of the semiconductor photocatalysts used and the redox potentials of reversible target reactions. Thus, the more negative CB positions of semiconductors are beneficial for reduction reactions, while the more positive VB positions of semiconductors are favorable for oxidation reactions. The band positions (at pH = 7 in aqueous solution) for some important semiconductor photocatalysts and their potential applications are listed in Fig. 4. As depicted in Fig. 4, it is clear that the ideal energy band diagram of TiO2 should ensure the simultaneous formation of holes, ˙OH radicals, O2− and H2O2 at pH = 7, all of which have been proven to play an important role in the photocatalytic oxidative degradation of organic compounds.74,79,81 Furthermore, TiO2 itself is also relatively inexpensive, highly stable and readily available, and therefore it is commonly used as the best semiconductor material for environmental photocatalysis.74 Importantly, the primary oxidants in the photocatalytic degradation of intractable organic pollutants have proven to be the free ˙OH radicals, which are thought to be more reactive than the surface-bound analogues because of their reorganization energy.82,83 Accordingly, it is readily accepted that all semiconductors with sufficient positive VB potentials for producing the ˙OH radicals, such as WO3, ZnO, SnO2, SrTiO3, BiVO4, Bi2WO6, BiOCl and BiOBr (on the left side of Fig. 4), are promising photocatalyst candidates for the photodegradation of organic pollutants. However, the electron transfer from CB to dissolved oxygen molecule has been generally recognized as the rate-determining step in the solar photocatalytic mineralization of organic pollutants.83,84 Thus, enhancement of the photocatalytic activity of a photocatalyst toward degradation of pollutants can be achieved by enhancing O2 reduction reactions.84 For example, although the photogenerated electrons in WO3 cannot drive the single-electron reduction reaction of O2, they can efficiently promote the formation of H2O2 over WO3 through the multielectron reduction of O2.80 More interestingly, the use of Pt nanoparticles as cocatalysts in the case of WO3 has been found to accelerate the multielectron O2 reduction, which resulted in highly efficient and durable decomposition of organic compounds.80 In contrast, the photocatalysts with more negative CB positions could produce photogenerated electrons with strong reduction ability, which could efficiently enhance H2 evolution and CO2 reduction. These reductive photocatalysts include Ta3N5, TaON, CdS, C3N4, SiC, ZnS, BiOCl, Si, Bi2S3 and Cu2O (on the right side of Fig. 4). It is well known that the use of appropriate cocatalysts (or electrocatalysts) could greatly increase their photocatalytic performance toward CO2 reduction or H2 generation.1,2,52,74,85–89 However, for this kind of photocatalysts, it has been demonstrated that the hole removal rate is the key efficiency-limiting step for photo-driven solar-fuel production.90 Therefore, optimization of the hole transfer step (for instance, by loading suitable hole-transfer/hole-storage cocatalysts and by using appropriate electron donors) may offer potential opportunities for achieving higher quantum efficiency for solar-fuel generation.33,90–93
 Fig. 4  Band positions and potential applications of some typical photocatalysts (at pH = 7 in aqueous solutions). 
Note that some of the aforementioned two kinds of photocatalysts, such as Ta3N5, TaON, CdS, C3N4, SiC, ZnS, BiOCl, SrTiO3, ZnO and TiO2, can be utilized as potential photocatalysts for overall water splitting because they have suitable CB and VB positions for H2 and O2 evolution, respectively. Therefore, from the thermodynamic viewpoint, a perfect match of the energy levels and the redox potentials is very crucial for achieving high efficiency of photocatalytic processes. However, as can be seen from Fig. 4 semiconductors with more negative CB and more positive VB levels generally possess much wider band gaps, which will significantly reduce the utilization efficiency of visible light in the renewable solar energy production (which accounts for about 43% of solar energy), thus leading to the low solar energy conversion efficiency. Hence, numerous efforts have been undertaken to fabricate new visible-light photocatalysts through different strategies such as energy-band engineering or solid-solution methods.2,13,30,94,95 However, the amounts of introduced crystal/lattice defects during narrowing the band gaps of wide-band semiconductors should be carefully controlled, because the excessive defects could act as new charge recombination centers and greatly reduce the photocatalytic activity.2,96 Furthermore, the introduced donor or acceptor levels could also reduce the oxidation or reduction ability of newly fabricated visible-light photocatalysts, respectively, which can diminish their photocatalytic performance. Consequently, the obvious contradiction between the redox abilities (determined by the CB/VB levels) and absorption capacity of visible light (determined by the value of band gaps) should be carefully optimized and balanced in the development of visible-light-driven semiconductor photocatalysts.
2.2 Kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalysis
However, the suitable thermodynamic properties (including band gaps and CB/VB levels) do not guarantee good photocatalytic efficiency. This is because the overall photocatalytic performance of semiconductor photocatalysts can be significantly influenced by many other factors including the structure at micro- and nano-levels, adsorption capacity, surface/interface morphology, cocatalysts, crystallinity and composition of the materials, besides their band-gap properties.2 So far, it is well known that the complicated charge-carrier dynamics and surface reaction kinetics mainly lead to the low quantum efficiency in the multi-step processes of heterogeneous photocatalysis.84,98 As shown in Fig. 5, it is commonly accepted that the mechanism governing heterogeneous photocatalysis consists of four consecutive tandem steps: (1) light harvesting; (2) charge excitation/separation; (3) charge migration, transport and recombination; and (4) charge utilization (surface electrocatalytic reduction and oxidation reactions). Therefore, the overall photocatalysis efficiency is strongly dependent on the cumulative effects of these four consecutive steps, which can be expressed by eqn (1):2 ηc = ηabs × ηcs × ηcmt × ηcu(1)where ηc is the solar energy conversion efficiency, ηabs is the light absorption efficiency, ηcs is the charge excitation/separation efficiency, ηcmt is the charge migration and transport efficiency, and ηcu is the charge utilization efficiency for photocatalytic reactions.
 Fig. 5  Four different stages in heterogeneous photocatalysis. 
Clearly, a loss in the partial efficiency at each stage will add to the decrease in the overall photocatalytic efficiency. Firstly, the flat and smooth surface of photocatalysts is beneficial for light reflection, which is not advantageous for light harvesting or absorption. It is believed that the porous photocatalysts with hierarchical macro/mesopores or appropriate inner structures allow the multiple reflections and scattering of light inside their pore channels as well as within the interiors of cavities, which results in enhanced light harvesting and offers more photogenerated electrons and holes to improve the catalytic activity.32,99,100 Secondly, a quick recombination kinetics of photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the bulk or on the surface of a semiconductor is another major limiting factor in achieving high photocatalytic efficiency, which is one of the most important, difficult and challenging scientific issues in heterogeneous photocatalysis.2 Finally, the low specific surface area and significant agglomeration of nanostructured particles not only greatly decrease the surface reduction and oxidation kinetics, but also increase the reagents' diffusion barriers, which are all unfavorable for the enhancement of photocatalytic efficiency. On the one hand, for uphill reactions such as water splitting and CO2 reduction, the slow surface multi-electron reaction kinetics could lead to the inevitable accumulation of photogenerated electrons and holes on the surface of photocatalysts, which would accelerate the unexpected charge carrier recombination and the photocorrosion process of photocatalysts themselves, and consequently reduce their photoactivity.1,2 On the other hand, for the photodecomposition of organic compounds in aqueous solutions or in the gas phase, the enhanced adsorption and diffusion kinetics of reactants in a porous photocatalyst could also greatly improve the photocatalytic efficiency due to the reduced mass-transport barriers and higher chemical activation rates of the adsorbed species.83
All these highlighted kinetic factors in heterogeneous photocatalysis have been shown to significantly influence the overall efficiency of the existing photocatalysts. From the viewpoint of their practical use, these factors should be minimized or efficiently controlled to further enhance and optimize the photocatalytic processes. There is some consensus in the photocatalysis-related literature52,101–103 that as compared to the thermodynamic factors, the aforementioned kinetic factors (such as charge carrier kinetics, surface reaction kinetics, adsorption and diffusion kinetics) are considered to be more important in the design and development of highly efficient photocatalysts.
3. Advantages of hierarchical photocatalysts
Various technologies and methods have been proposed to deal with the challenges related to the aforementioned thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of heterogeneous photocatalysis. Among them, the fabrication of hierarchical photocatalysts at the micro/nanometer scales has been identified as a promising strategy to simultaneously solve all of the aforementioned problems at different stages of photocatalysis processes, as shown in Fig. 5. Clearly, the properly designed hierarchical structures (including porosity and morphology) of photocatalysts can not only enhance light harvesting and improve molecular diffusion/transport kinetics, but also increase the surface area and the amount of active sites, which accelerate the surface reaction kinetics. Additionally, the conduction and valence bands of hierarchically assembled nanomaterials can be adjusted by reducing the size of building blocks to the nanoscale level and taking advantage of the quantum size effect.104 Some distinct advantages of hierarchical structures that lead to enhancement of the overall photocatalytic efficiency are summarized in Fig. 6 and discussed below.
 Fig. 6  Significance of hierarchical nanostructures in enhancing photocatalysis. 
3.1 Improved molecular diffusion/transport
The design and formation of novel hierarchical morphologies and interconnected porous networks can also result in the creation of more efficient channels for the transport of reactant molecules to reactive sites present on the pore walls, which facilitate diffusion.62,105,106 According to IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) pores can be classified into three categories: micropores (below 2 nm in diameter), mesopores (between 2 and 50 nm) and macropores (greater than 50 nm).107 It is well known that the diffusion of organic molecules within microporous channels (<2 nm), such as those in zeolites, can be hindered.108 To efficiently improve the diffusion of reactant molecules and the possibility of recycling and reuse of photocatalysts, semiconductor materials with ordered mesopores and large surface areas have been widely utilized to fabricate the advanced composite photocatalysts.109,110 Although mesopores improve the accessibility of molecules to/from catalytic sites, the relatively slow mass transport, small specific surface area, and reduced mesostructural order can still limit the practical applications of mesoporous photocatalysts.111 To overcome these limitations, the hierarchically ordered macro–mesoporous composite photocatalysts have been extensively fabricated by creating structures with inter- and intra-particle porosity.68,112–115 Importantly, the hierarchical structures with pores of different sizes feature excellent transport paths, which can not only greatly reduce the length of the mesopore channels, but also increase the accessible surface area of the composite photocatalysts.111 Thus, in the case of hierarchical photocatalysts with properly interconnected pores of different sizes, the reactant molecules (guest species) can easily diffuse into the reaction sites and the products can also freely move out of them (see Fig. 7).106,116
 Fig. 7  Three-dimensional mesoporous architecture in the TiO2 nanocrystalline thin film with a continuous and periodically porous network that offers transport routes for gaseous reactants to move in and out of the framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. 
It was revealed that the diffusion and transport rates of large molecules in media featuring large mesopores (>10 nm) and macropores (>50 nm) are comparable to those in open media.106,108 For example, the physical adsorption mechanism of the popular methylene blue (MB) molecules (with a size of 1.43 nm × 0.6 nm × 0.4 nm) in micropores resembles pore filling, which is governed by stronger interactions between MB and micropore walls, resulting in the hindered transport of this dye.117 However, the efficient transport of MB molecules to the surface binding sites can be easily achieved in the materials with hierarchical mesopores (>14 nm) and macropores (>50 nm).114 Thus, the improved transfer and diffusion of the reactant and product molecules are beneficial for the enhancement of photocatalytic performance.
3.2 Enhanced light harvesting
It is known that the overall photocatalytic efficiency could be greatly enhanced by increasing the light-harvesting ability of photocatalysts. However, the improvement of light harvesting efficiency is still one of the main challenges in the design of highly active photocatalysts. The efforts made so far toward enhancing the light-harvesting ability of heterogeneous photocatalytic systems have remained insufficient. One of the promising ways of improving light absorption of photocatalysts is through the design and fabrication of hierarchical macroporous or mesoporous architectures, which recently attracted a great deal of attention.112 In general, the hierarchically structured photocatalysts with 3D morphologies can be constructed through different methods such as the self-assembly of nanosized building blocks or templating methods.70 The hierarchically porous core–shell and hollow structures created during the formation of photocatalysts could increase the number of light traveling paths, which results in the enhancement of interaction time and absorption efficiency inside pores as compared to the nonporous photocatalysts. For example, it was shown that porous TiO2 and WO3 with (semi-)hollow structures exhibited a greatly enhanced photocatalytic degradation activity due to more efficient utilization of light through its multiple reflections in the hollow structures (see Fig. 8A).100,118
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the reflecting and scattering effects in hollow (A) and hierarchical (B) microspheres. Panel B, reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, the urchin-like hierarchical Fe3O4@Bi2S3 core–shell structures,120 Co3O4 particles,121 CdS@ZnO and CdS@Al2O3 heteroarrays122 also showed significantly enhanced photocatalytic degradation and H2-evolution activities, respectively. It is believed that enhanced light absorption is due to the so-called light-scattering effects, which play the key role in enhancing the light harvesting efficiency of hierarchically structured photocatalysts (see Fig. 8B).119 For example, the transmission spectra of films (Fig. 9) clearly show that a hierarchically micro–nanoporous TiO2 film exhibited much higher light-collection efficiency than a nanostructured film due to the improved light scattering effects.123 Similarly, a polished planar Si surface applied in organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells shows a significant light reflectance ranging from 15 to 30% in the solar spectrum (400–1100 nm), whereas the reflectance of hierarchical Si surfaces is reduced to less than 10% due to a significant improvement in light trapping.124 Obviously, the intrinsic interconnected accessible mesopore channels and the formation of hierarchical structures are the crucial factors to promote the light-harvesting efficiency. In contrast, it was demonstrated that a drop of 20–30% in the photocatalytic activity was observed in the absence of light-penetrating and gas-diffusing macrochannels, further indicating the beneficial effects of macrochannels.112,114 Therefore, the fabrication of hierarchically ordered macro-/mesoporous materials has been considered as one of the most popular approaches to enhance the overall light utilization efficiency due to the improved light scattering and increased light-harvesting ability.114
 Fig. 9  UV-vis transmission spectra of a hierarchically micro–nanoporous TiO2 film (1), and a nanostructured film (2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright © 2008, Elsevier Inc. 
3.3 Increased surface area
Apart from improving light harvesting and mass transport, increasing the surface area of semiconductors has also been proven to be one of the most efficient approaches for enhancing photocatalytic activity.112,115,125 Although it is well known that macro/mesoporous materials exhibit smaller surface areas as compared to microporous materials,126–129 the majority of photocatalysts with hierarchical macro/mesopores still possess considerably high specific surface area (∼50–500 m2 g−1).68 Interestingly, the specific surface area of some hierarchically porous carbons can reach 800–2800 m2 g−1.130–132 Typically, three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical nanostructures have many unique features including high surface to volume ratios, large accessible surface area, and better permeability, which could not only provide abundant active adsorption sites and photocatalytic reaction sites,120 but also improve uniformity of the distribution of active sites in the as-prepared photocatalysts. Furthermore, it was also reported that the hierarchical photocatalysts exhibited lower apparent activation energy than the photocatalysts with destroyed macrochannels in the case of photocatalytic decomposition of acetone in air.114 For example, the hierarchically porous Ni(OH)2 and NiO nanosheets with the surface areas of 201 and 127 m2 g−1, respectively, can be fabricated through the template-free hydrothermal reaction-precipitation route.133 The resulting materials showed better adsorption capacities for N2 and Congo red (CR) than the conventional NiO (SBET = 2.5 m2 g−1) due to the increased surface areas (Fig. 10). Similarly, it was recently demonstrated that the hierarchical γ-Al2O3 exhibited a unique hierarchical nanostructure and high surface area (≈140 m2 g−1), leading to much higher adsorption of CO2 and pollutants in air and water, respectively.134,135 Importantly, the hierarchically macro–mesoporous Pt/γ-Al2O3 composite microspheres with high surface area also showed higher catalytic activity for oxidative decomposition of HCHO at room temperature, due to the improved diffusion of reactants and products, and the high dispersion of accessible catalytic Pt nanoparticles.136 More interestingly, the hierarchical Pt/AlOOH nanoflakes with high specific surface area and large pore volume showed higher catalytic activity toward decomposition of HCHO at room temperature due to the presence of abundant surface hydroxyls and excellent adsorption performance of HCHO.137 The superstructures of TiO2 nanocrystals supported on the hierarchical flower-like AlOOH also exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity toward degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) in aqueous solution in comparison to P25 and pure TiO2 powders due to their hierarchical structures with high surface area, which were easily accessible to light and reactants.138 All these factors can substantially improve the surface reaction kinetics, and considerably reduce the surface recombination of charge carriers, which is crucial for achieving superior photoactivity of these hierarchical photocatalysts.
 Fig. 10  (a) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and (b) adsorption isotherms for Congo red (CR) (T = 25 °C; adsorbent dose = 200 mg L−1; CR concentration = 15–50 mg L−1 and pH 7) of samples I (hierarchically porous Ni(OH)2 nanosheets) and II (hierarchically porous NiO nanosheets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Inc. 
Furthermore, the enhanced efficiency for collection, transfer and separation of charge carriers can also be partially achieved in the hierarchical heterostructured nanocomposites.139–142 In addition, the hierarchical photocatalysts fabricated by self-assembly of nanosized building blocks can avoid the agglomeration and sintering problems observed in the case of conventional nanosized photocatalysts. Importantly, the hierarchical photocatalysts with self-supported structures generally exhibit a uniform particle size distribution in the range of micrometers, which is more beneficial for the recovery, reuse and recycling of photocatalysts from aqueous suspensions after the photocatalytic reaction than in the case of nanosized particles.143 Considering the role of the aforementioned factors in increasing photocatalytic activity, it is reasonable to accept that the design of hierarchical nanoarchitectures is a promising strategy to develop highly efficient photocatalysts through optimization of the photocatalytic activity of the existing semiconductors. Typically, the superior photocatalytic performance of the hierarchical micro/nanostructures can be related to their unique structural features, which can suppress the aggregation of micro/nanoscale building blocks, increase specific surface area and the amount of active reaction sites, and reduce the diffusion barrier. All these advantages of hierarchical nanoarchitectures lead to their widespread applications in various fields of photocatalysis. An optimal photocatalyst should be hierarchically porous with interconnected macropores (enabling good light-harvesting, molecular diffusion and gas/liquid flow rates) and mesopores (ensuring high surface area and substrate–gas contact).114 Various fabrication methods and growth mechanisms of hierarchical nanostructures have been proposed, which will be presented in the following section.
4. Strategies for fabrication of hierarchical photocatalysts
The above discussion shows that hierarchical nanostructures play a very important role in enhancing light-absorption capacity and photocatalytic efficiency. So far, a great number of hierarchical semiconductor nanostructures have been rationally designed and fabricated. Generally, the 3D hierarchical micro/nanocomposite structures are fabricated via the self-assembly of nanosized building blocks (including nanoparticles, 1D nanowires, and 2D nanosheets). For example, many interesting hierarchical semiconductor photocatalysts including branched 1D or 2D nanojunctions (Fig. 11),144–150 brush-like structures,142,151–153 3D flower-like microspheres,114,154–158 hierarchical “forest-like” nanostructures (Fig. 12)159 and hierarchical photonic crystals (PCs, Fig. 13)160–169 have been developed by different groups. However, it is very difficult to directly design and fabricate various kinds of hierarchical photocatalysts with highly controlled hierarchical morphologies. Thus, it is necessary to develop a simple and low-cost method to prepare photocatalysts with high crystallinity and hierarchical nanostructures. Some so far reported methods to prepare hierarchical semiconductor structures are summarized in Fig. 14, which shows that these methods can be classified into three types: templating strategies (two-step template method and in situ template-sacrificial dissolution), template-free strategies (self-templating strategy, in situ template-free assembly, chemically induced self-transformation), and post-synthetic treatment.
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM images of ZnO nanorods hydrothermally grown on the TiO2 nanofibers; (b) typical high magnification SEM image and model (inset) of the as-grown Cu2O nanosheet–nanowires. Panel a, reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. Panel b, reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of a “forest-like” photocatalyst created by mimicking nature; (b) top view SEM image of a hierarchical “forest-like” TiO2 nanofiber/ZnO nanorod/CuO nanoparticle photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright © 2012, Elsevier Inc. 
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of the ZnGa2O4 photonic crystals prepared by using polystyrene spheres as templates; (b) TiO2-PC spheres obtained by spray and sacrificing template methods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169 (a) and ref. 166 (b). Copyright © 2014 and 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 14  Synthesis methods of hierarchical nanostructures. 
4.1 Two-step template method
The template strategy is one of the most important and commonly used methods to synthesize hierarchical nanostructured materials owing to its distinct advantages including good reproducibility, large scale synthesis and abundant types of physical templates.170 In general, the pre-existing nanostructured templates with various morphologies are required in the synthesis process to control the oriented growth of hierarchical nanomaterials. According to the physical properties of the employed templates, the templating synthesis can generally be sorted into three categories: hard templating (nanocasting), soft templating and bio-templating. Normally, the inorganic and organic mesostructured frameworks with relatively rigid shapes can be utilized as the so-called “hard templates” to fabricate 3D hierarchically macro/mesoporous materials, such as zeolites, alumina membranes, polystyrene latex (PSL),171 metal oxides (such as Fe2O3 and CaCO3), poly-(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), and ordered mesoporous carbon and silica spheres (SBA-15, MCM-41, and KIT-6).172 For example, various hierarchically porous TiO2 or ZnO spheres can be fabricated by using SiO2 microspheres as templates, which exhibit greatly improved photocatalytic property due to the formation of controlled macroporosity.62,173–176 In comparison to the hard templates, soft templates are highly deformable and easily removable. Thus, various soft templates such as block copolymers (e.g., Pluronics P123, F127, PEG or F108), microemulsions (micelles and vesicles), ionic liquids,177 hydrogels (sol–gel networks), surfactants (e.g., sodium dedecyl sulfate (SDS) and cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)), and even gas bubbles178–180 have been widely utilized in the synthesis process to reduce the interfacial energy barrier for sequential nucleation-growth,170,181 and create hierarchical structures. Furthermore, the nanoporous g-C3N4 photocatalysts with enhanced photocatalytic activities could be also prepared through the soft templating including P123,182 bubbles,183,184 and ionic liquids.185 In future, it is also expected that macro/mesoporous photocatalysts with hierarchical architectures can be created through a combination of hard and soft templating methods.71,186 Additionally, biomaterial-based templates involving natural leaves187 butterfly wings,188 legume,189 rice-husk,190 silk fibroin191 and cellulose192 have been widely used to fabricate hierarchical photocatalysts with improved photocatalytic activity. For example, a kind of legume has been chosen as a bio-template to synthesize the film of ZnAl-layered double hydroxide. A detailed strategy for bio-templated fabrication of ZnAl-LDH film and the resulting calcination product (hierarchical mixed metal oxide (MMO) framework) is shown in Fig. 15. It was found that the bio-templated ZnAl-MMO framework exhibits 2.4 times higher BET specific surface area and much wider pore size distribution than the conventional ZnAl-MMO powder, which resulted in enhanced photocatalytic performance toward decomposition of organic compounds.189 In this aspect, the biomaterial-based templating synthesis represents a promising direction for future research in hierarchical nanomaterials since the cheap and abundant bio-templates can be obtained through green approaches. Importantly, the removal of bio-templates can also be easily realized under relatively mild conditions.170
 Fig. 15  (A) Optical photograph of legume; low (B) and high (C) magnification SEM images of the tubular trichome on the surface of legume; (D) schematic illustration of a legume-templating ZnAl-layered double hydroxide and hierarchical mixed metal oxide (MMO) framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 
          In situ template-sacrificial dissolution
Usually hard templating includes two steps: the surface coating of the template with nanocrystals and the template removal by calcination or etching. Although this two-step method has been widely used to prepare hierarchical photocatalysts, the post-synthetic removal of the templates through high-temperature calcination or etching is generally costly, and problematic from “green” chemistry viewpoint. In contrast, the one-step in situ template-sacrificial dissolution method avoids these problems because it can be performed under significantly milder conditions (e.g., room temperature). For example, the fabrication of hierarchically nanoporous TiO2 hollow microspheres could be carried out in pure water by using SiO2 microspheres as templates and TiF4 as the precursor at 60 °C.176 As shown in Fig. 16, the shells of hierarchically nanoporous TiO2 hollow microspheres are composed of many small TiO2 spherical particles with diameters of about 100 nm. The corresponding SEM and TEM images in Fig. 16 partially confirm the presence of hierarchically nanoporous structures. It is believed that many smaller primary crystallites aggregate and form these small spherical particles within microspheres. The inter-aggregation among these spherical particles results in the formation of larger pores with a size of 10 to 110 nm.
 Fig. 16  (a and b) SEM, (c) FESEM, and (d) TEM images of hierarchically nanoporous TiO2 hollow microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society. 
The formation mechanism of hollow TiO2 microspheres is attributed to the following hydrolysis and dissolution reactions occurring in the reaction system (see Fig. 17): TiF4 + 4H2O → TiO2·2H2O + 4HF(2) SiO2 + 4HF → SiF4 + 2H2O(3)
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the formation of hierarchically nanoporous TiO2 hollow microspheres obtained through the template-directed deposition and in situ template-sacrificial dissolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society. 
The hydrolysis of TiF4 leads to the production of HF and TiO2 sol. The produced HF will dissolve the SiO2 template to form SiF4. Therefore, with increasing reaction time and continuous hydrolysis of TiF4, the increasing concentration of HF results in the gradual dissolution of SiO2 cores and the formation of TiO2 hollow spheres with movable SiO2 cores inside. Finally, the SiO2 cores will be completely dissolved by HF, resulting in the formation of TiO2 hollow spheres.
Additional photocatalytic experiments indicate that the prepared TiO2 hollow microspheres can be easily separated and re-used from the aqueous solution by sedimentation or filtration after the photocatalytic reaction. Therefore, the prepared TiO2 hollow spheres are advantageous in comparison to the conventional powder photocatalysts used in environmental purification. These hierarchically hollow TiO2 microspheres are also useful as catalysts, catalyst supports, and materials for solar cells, separations and nanotechnology.
4.3 Self-templating strategy
Both hard templating and in situ sacrificial-template dissolution methods have drawbacks related to the high cost of templates, unexpected morphological changes during template removal, presence of heterogeneous impurities and tedious synthetic procedures. All these disadvantages may limit the large-scale fabrication of photocatalysts by using the aforementioned methods.193 Thus, it is impractical to synthesize hierarchical photocatalysts on a large scale for industrial applications using these methods. Because of this, tremendous efforts have been undertaken to develop simple, facile, low-cost, “green”, and template-free routes for fabrication of hierarchical micro/nanostructures of various materials.194,195 Among them, the self-templating strategy is one of the most simple and effective routes to fabricate various hierarchical photocatalysts. For example, the popular CdS photocatalysts could be fabricated through a simple anion exchange by treating Cd(OH)2 nanostructures with a solution containing S2− ions.22,196,197 Recently, Xiang et al. demonstrated that the hierarchical Cd(OH)2 nanosheet-based assemblies could be constructed by the hydrothermal treatment of Cd(OH)2 precipitates. Then, the hierarchically porous CdS nanosheet-assembled flowers could be synthesized by a simple ion-exchange strategy using Cd(OH)2 nanosheet-based material and Na2S as precursors. The detailed formation mechanism is shown in Fig. 18.198 Similarly, CdIn2O4 hollow spheres with higher photocatalytic efficiency toward decomposition of methylene blue (MB) in aqueous solutions can be synthesized by using CdO and In2O3 nanoparticles as self-templates.199 Furthermore, it is known that the hierarchical BiOX nanostructures can be easily fabricated. The latter have been used as self-templates to obtain various photocatalysts such as Bi2WO6 hollow microspheres,200 Bi2S3 nanocrystals/BiOCl hybrid architectures201 and Ag/AgBr/BiOBr hybrids202via a simple in situ ion exchange. In addition, the hollow TiO2 nanostructures can be fabricated by a facile fluoride-free self-templated synthesis method based on an inside-out Ostwald ripening mechanism, in the presence of H2O2.203 In this case, H2O2 acts as a coordination agent and interface stabilizer playing versatile roles in the self-assembly of microspheres as well as in their transformation into hollow nanostructures.203 Thus, it is expected that more and more hierarchical photocatalysts could be fabricated through the self-templating strategy in the future.
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis route for porous CdS nanosheet-assembled flowers; SEM images of the Cd(OH)2 intermediates (b) and the as-prepared CdS products (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright © 2013, Elsevier Inc. 
4.4 
          In situ template-free assembly
Another typical template-free route is the in situ template-free assembly. For example, the hierarchically macro/mesoporous amorphous titania can be easily fabricated at room temperature by simple dropwise addition of tetrabutyl titanate to pure water (see Fig. 19).114 The formation of hierarchically macro/mesoporous titania is due to the spontaneous self-assembly of amorphous TiO2 particles in alkoxide–water mixed solution without the presence of organic additives or templates. Calcination was shown to have a great effect on the photocatalytic activity and structure of titania. The sample calcined at 300 °C exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity toward decomposition of acetone in air due to the appearance of anatase phase, large specific surface area and its hierarchically macro-/mesoporous structure (Fig. 20). The photocatalytic activity of the samples prepared at 400 and 500 °C was slightly reduced due to the decreased specific surface area, but it was still higher than that of the commercial-grade Degussa P25 TiO2 powder (P25). For the samples prepared at temperatures exceeding 500 °C, the photocatalytic activity was obviously smaller due to the destruction of hierarchically macro/mesoporous structures and a drastic decrease in the specific surface area (see Fig. 20). This hierarchically macro–mesoporous network with open and accessible pores was preserved up to 500 °C, indicating its relatively high thermal stability. Even for samples prepared at 800 °C the macroporous channel structure was still observed.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of the as-prepared (a) and calcined hierarchically macro-/mesoporous TiO2 samples at (b) 300, (c and d) 500 and (e) 800 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 20  Comparison of the photocatalytic activity of P25, as-prepared and calcined hierarchically macro-/mesoporous TiO2 samples at 300, 400, 500, 600, 700 and 800 °C for photocatalytic decomposition of acetone in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To further investigate the positive effects of hierarchically macro/mesoporous structures on the photocatalytic performance, the hierarchically macro/mesoporous TiO2 samples calcined at 300 °C were ground into fine powders to destroy their hierarchically macro/mesoporous structure. Then, their photocatalytic performance was measured, which indicated a decrease (about 23%) in the photocatalytic performance of the ground TiO2 sample. The above result and discussion imply that hierarchically macro/mesoporous structures indeed enhance the photocatalytic activity of titania materials. This is due to the enhanced transport of gas molecules in the catalyst. In nature, such hierarchically porous networks have been also developed to achieve rapid gas exchange over a large surface area. For example, lungs of animals and gills of fish have such hierarchical network-structures, which allow for a rapid exchange of air. Therefore, it is not surprising that hierarchically macro/mesoporous structures can greatly enhance the photocatalytic performance of photocatalysts.
The formation mechanism of the hierarchically macro–mesoporous TiO2 can be deduced on the basis of the SEM images shown in Fig. 21. First, a direct contact between tetrabutyl titanate (TBOT) droplets and water rapidly produces a thin semi-permeable titania membrane on the external surface of TBOT droplets (see Fig. 21a and b). This membrane separates TBOT and water, and compartmentalizes the subsequent hydrolysis and condensation reactions. Then, the inward reactions proceed slowly. Meanwhile, water gradually diffuses into the interior of the TBOT droplet through the outer membrane and further reacts with TBOT until all TBOT is completely hydrolyzed. During hydrolysis and condensation reactions, the microphase-separated regions of TiO2 nanoparticles and water/alcohol channels within the TBOT droplets are formed due to the hydrodynamic flow of the solvent (see Fig. 21c). The key factor in the synthesis of the hierarchically macro–mesoporous TiO2 is the lack of stirring.
 Fig. 21  The formation mechanism of the hierarchically macro/mesoporous amorphous titania. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Besides TiO2, the fabrication of other hierarchical semiconductors through the in situ template-free assembly has been also widely investigated. For example, the sea-urchin shaped Bi2S3/CdS hierarchical heterostructures composed of Bi2S3 nanorods and CdS nanoparticles grown on their surfaces (see Fig. 22a) were successfully synthesized via a convenient one-pot growth rate controlled route.204 The proposed formation mechanism as shown in Fig. 22b involves a fast formation of the initial sea-urchin shaped Bi2S3 nanoflowers, followed by the gradual growth of numerous CdS nanoparticles on Bi2S3 nanoflowers. Similarly, a 3D hierarchical rutile TiO2 mesocrystalline photocatalyst with higher BET specific surface area (16 m2 g−1) was self-assembled under microwave-hydrothermal conditions using 1D rutile nanowires with a high average aspect ratio (267; defined as the length of the major axis divided by the width of the minor axis) obtained from TiCl3 as the only reactant (as shown in Fig. 23a).205 Furthermore, 3D-hierarchical well-crystallized Cu3SnS4 flower-like microspheres with thin nanoplates as building blocks (as shown in Fig. 23b) were successfully created through a solvothermal process, which involves aggregation, self-assembly, transformation and ripening.206 In addition, dendritic α-Fe2O3 hierarchical structures with superior photocatalytic degradation efficiencies toward Congo red were created through a one-step facile template-free and surfactant-free hydrothermal route (see Fig. 24a).148 The aforementioned superior photocatalytic activity was probably due to the efficiently enhanced light harvesting and exposed surface sites because of their multi-stage branch-type morphology. It is believed that these α-Fe2O3 dendritic structures form via a three step process under hydrothermal conditions (see eqn (4)). In the first step [Fe(CN)6]3− ions are slowly converted into Fe3+ ions; this step may determine the growth process because of the weak dissociation tendency of [Fe(CN)6]3− ions. During this growth process (see Fig. 24b), the branched α-Fe2O3 nanostructures with enhanced surface area are obtained if small outgrowths are formed and continue to grow into larger branches. Next, new outgrowths can be formed on these branches and become sub-branches; such growth leads to the complex dendritic crystals as shown in Fig. 24b.148 Thus, it is highly desirable to develop a simple, low-cost, environmentally friendly aqueous solution route for the large-scale synthesis of these hierarchical micro/nanostructures at room temperature under ambient conditions, without using any template, organic solvents, additive or surfactants during the entire process. [Fe(CN)6]3− → Fe3− → FeOOH/Fe(OH)3 → α-Fe2O3(4)
 Fig. 22  (a) SEM images of the samples prepared by using a 2:1 molar ratio of Bi2S3 and CdS; (b) illustration of the morphological evolution process of the sea-urchin shaped Bi2S3/CdS hierarchical heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of the self-assembled rutile by microwave heating of TiCl3 at 200 °C for 1 min; (b) SEM images of Cu3SnS4 synthesized at 200 °C for 12 hours. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205 (a) and ref. 206 (b). Copyright © 2010 and 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of a single dendritic α-Fe2O3 micro-/nano-structure; (b) schematic illustration of growth of the as-synthesized dendritic α-Fe2O3 nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.5 Chemically induced self-transformation
The chemically induced self-transformation207–211 method has been also widely applied to fabricate various hierarchically hollow microspheres, including CaCO3, TiO2, SnO2, Al2O3 and WO3.207,212–214 The mechanism of chemically induced self-transformation (CIST) differs from the in situ template-free assembly, which refers to the spontaneous self-assembly of nanosized building blocks around the primary nuclei, while in CIST the hierarchical nanostructures such as hollow interiors are created via chemical etching of the primary particles. In general, the etching agents such as HF or OH− are in situ produced during the synthesis process. For example, SnO2 hollow microspheres were obtained by hydrolysis of SnF2 at 180 °C.207 Clearly, the primary SnO2 particles can be in situ transformed into hollow microspheres via the fluoride-mediated self-transformation process. Also, hollow TiO2 microspheres consisting of anatase nanocrystals with exposed (001) facets (ca. 20%) were synthesized by using a slightly modified fluoride-mediated self-transformation strategy (see Fig. 25).211
 Fig. 25  SEM images of the fluoride-mediated TiO2 samples: (a) overall view of TiO2 microspheres; (b) image of a few microspheres showing their unique structure consisting of primary TiO2 nanoparticles; (c) a single microsphere with visible hollow structure; (d) a portion of the microsphere shell composed of nanosized polyhedra with exposed (001) facets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
It was shown that the addition of ethanol can efficiently increase the percentage of exposed (001) facets and the average size of the shell-forming TiO2 nanoparticles. Furthermore, the self-transformation process can be further enhanced by increasing the concentration of H2SO4.99 The formation mechanism of the self-templated hollow spheres has been proposed based on a stepwise chemically induced self-transformation (CIST) process, as shown in Fig. 26.215 Clearly, in the fluoride mediated self-transformation process, HF plays an important role in the dissolution of interior of particles and the fabrication of hollow structures. To avoid the strong etching effect of HF, the well-defined anatase hollow microspheres can be fabricated in the presence of urea.216 Later, it was suggested that a combined mechanism should be considered to better understand the complex formation process of hierarchical structures.177,217–219
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the fluoride-induced self-transformation synthesis of hollow TiO2 anatase microspheres. 
4.6 Post-synthesis treatment
The self-etching process, as an efficient strategy to fabricate hierarchical structures, recently has attracted a lot of attention. For example, the hierarchically mesoporous F–TiO2 hollow microspheres prepared by enhanced HF etching exhibited higher photocatalytic activity toward degradation of MB than P25.99 In this case the H2SO4 concentration was controlled because sulfuric acid plays an important role in the self-etching formation of hollow and mesoporous structures. Furthermore, the photocatalysts with hierarchical structures can be formed through the selective oxidative etching221 and chemical etching.222,223 It is anticipated that the surface-protected etching strategy can be further applied for producing hierarchical high-quality semiconductors for photocatalytic applications.224,225
Anatase TiO2 hollow spheres can be easily prepared by self-transformation of amorphous TiO2 solid spheres in an NH4F aqueous solution at 180 °C for 12 h (see Fig. 27).220 It was shown that F− plays an important role in the formation of TiO2 hollow spheres. The F− induced hollowing of TiO2 solid spheres promoted the transformation of amorphous TiO2 phase to anatase nanocrystals. The formation of TiO2 hollow spheres is due to localized Ostwald ripening and chemically induced self-transformation.
 Fig. 27  Formation mechanism of anatase TiO2 hollow spheres prepared by hydrothermal treatment of amorphous TiO2 solid spheres in NH4F aqueous solution. The left and right panels respectively show the TEM images and the corresponding XRD patterns of the intermediate products obtained at 180 °C for different time periods (scale bar: 100 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright © 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Applications of hierarchical photocatalysts
Based on the above analysis, it is clear that the hierarchical photocatalysts possess a lot of obvious advantages for photocatalytic applications. So far, the hierarchical photocatalysts have been applied in various photocatalytic reactions. Here, we will highlight the recent progress in the research on hierarchical photocatalysts used for photocatalytic H2 production, CO2 reduction and degradation of pollutants (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  Photocatalytic applications of hierarchical nanostructures. 
5.1 Degradation of pollutants
With the rapid growth of population and accelerating industrialization, environmental contamination has become a major threat to public health all over the world. Since the first report on heterogeneous photocatalytic remediation of environmental pollutants (CN− in water) on titania by Frank and Bard in 1977,226 the heterogeneous photocatalysis has been widely used in widespread environmental purification such as air and water purification.4,13–15,83,143,227,228 In particular, it was shown that some typical features such as phase structures, exposed facets, crystallinity, surface area, crystalline size and shape are critical for the enhancement of photocatalytic efficiency in the degradation of pollutants in water or air. Thus, a variety of ways for increasing the photodecomposition efficiency of pollutants over semiconductors have been exploited.4,79,83,229–234 Among them, particular attention has been given to the formation of hierarchical photocatalysts featuring superior adsorption capacity of pollutants, light-harvesting ability and recycling capability (see Table 2).
Table 2 Hierarchical photocatalysts for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants




Material
Hierarchical morphology
Synthesis method
Growth mechanism
Target pollutant
Activity (kapp, 10−3 min−1)
Ref. (year)




Photodegradation of gaseous pollutants


TiO2
Macro–mesoporous structure
Sol–gel reactions/calcination
Surfactant template
Ethylene(g)
15 min/42%

112 (2005)


TiO2
Macro–mesoporous structure
Template-free sol–gel reactions
Self-assembly
Acetone(g)
(6.13)

114 (2007)


TiO2
Macro/mesoporous structures
Hydrothermal treatment


Acetone(g)
(10.2)

236 (2012)


TiO2
Worm-like macroporous
Template-free hydrothermal approach
Packed aggregates of particles
HCHO(g)
60 min/90.6%

244 (2015)


BiOI/BiOCl
Flower-like
Room temperature template free method
Self-assembly of nanoplates
NO(g)
150 s/54.6% (200)

336 (2012)






Aqueous-phase photodegradation of methyl orange (MO)


TiO2
Nanoporous hollow microspheres
Low-temperature template method

In situ template-sacrificial dissolution
MO
(16.1)

176 (2008)


TiO2
Hierarchical microspheres
One step hydrothermal route
Self-assembly of nanotubes
MO
50 min/100%

337 (2015)


TiO2/ZnO
Hedgehogs and fan blades
Solvothermal method
Ostwald ripening
MO
30 min/97% (0.117)

338 (2015)


ZnO–SnO2
Hollow spheres, hierarchical nanosheets
Hydrothermal method


MO
30 min/100%

339 (2007)


ZnIn2S4
Marigold-like microspheres
Hydrothermal method
Self-assembly of nanosheets
MO
3 h/100%

266 (2009)


Bi2S3
Flower-like morphology
Reflux method
Self-assembly of nanorods
MO
97%/97% (77.6)

340 (2013)


BiOBr
3-D microspherical architectures
Solvothermal synthesis
Self-assembly of nanosheets
MO
5 h/100%

341 (2008)


β-Ag2WO4
Porous hollow nanospheres
Precipitation reaction
Self-assembly of nanoparticles
MO
330 min/90%

342 (2013)


CdS
Dendritic nanoarchitectures
Template-free hydrothermal route
Self-assembly of nanoparticles
MO
80 min/85% (34.6)

343 (2009)






Aqueous-phase photodegradation of methylene blue (MB)


F–TiO2
Mesoporous hollow microspheres
Hydrothermal treatment
Self-etching mechanism by HF
MB
6 h/92%

99 (2008)


TiO2/graphene
Ordered macro–mesoporous frameworks
Sol–gel template synthesis
Confinement self-assembly
MB
90 min/90% (71)

111 (2011)


SnO2
Hierarchical nanostructures
Hydrothermal process
Self-assembly of nanosheets
MB
20 min/99%

344 (2014)


SnO2/a-Fe2O3
Branched nanoheterostructures
Hydrothermal strategy
Epitaxial growth of SnO2 nanorods
MB
4 h/87%

345 (2010)


γ-Fe2O3/ZnO
Double-shelled hollow structures
Hydrothermal-hydrolysis-calcination
Growth of ZnO flakes
MB
50 min/95.2%

346 (2012)


WO3
Porous flower-like structures
Hydrothermal treatment
Self-assembly of nanoplates
MB
60 min/80%

347 (2012)


ZnIn2S4
Porous submicrospheres
Template-free, microwave-solvothermal approach
Self-assembly of nanofibers
MB
(7.5)

105 (2007)






Aqueous-phase photodegradation of rhodamine B (RhB)


TiO2
Hollow microspheres with exposed (001) facets
Hydrothermal strategy
Morphology control by NH4HF2
RhB
2 h/80% (50)

348 (2010)


TiO2
Porous hollow microspheres/chains
Hydrothermal approach
Fluoride-mediated self-transformation strategy
RhB
90 min/90%

216 (2009)


Titanate/N-doped anatase
Flower-like hierarchical spheres
Hydrothermal approach
Self-assembly of nanosheets
RhB
60 min/100%

349 (2015)


ZnO
Hollow spheres
Hydrothermal strategy
Carbon sphere template
RhB
(1222)

350 (2008)


TiO2/AlOOH
Flower-like boehmite superstructures
Hydrothermal treatment

In situ transformation of Al(OH)3 microspheres
RhB
60 min/92%

138 (2009)


WO3
Hollow shells
Annealing of acid-treated precursors


RhB
150 min/100%

351 (2008)


WO3
Flower-like assemblies
Template-free hydrothermal treatment
Self-assembly of nanoplates
RhB
5 h/60% (175)

315 (2009)


WO3
Sphere-like micropatterns
Hydrothermal reaction
Self-assembly of nanorods
RhB
210 min/84%

352 (2013)


BiVO4/Bi2O2CO3
Nanosheet-based hierarchical structure
Template-free hydrothermal approach
Urea-assisted hydrolysis reactions
RhB
60 min/97%

302 (2011)


Bi2O2CO3
Flower-like microspheres
Two-step hydrothermal method
Self-assembly of nanosheets
RhB
75 min/95%

321 (2012)


BiOCl
3D microspheres
Hydrothermal method
Self-assembly of nanoplatelets
RhB
80 min/100%

353 (2013)


BiOClxBr1−x
3D flower-like structure
Room-temperature procedure


RB
120 s/100%

289 (2013)


BiOBr
Flower-like microspheres
Solvothermal synthesis/surfactant
Self-assembly of nanosheets
RB
50 min/95% (7.71)

296 (2012)


Ag/AgBr/BiOBr
Flower-like microspheres
Solvothermal method and in situ ion exchange reaction
Self-assembly of nanosheets
RB
4 min/93% (396)

202 (2011)


Bi2S3/CdS
Urchin-like nanoflowers
Template-free hydrothermal method
Self-assembly of nanorods
RhB
80 min/85%

204 (2014)


Fe3O4@Bi2S3
Urchin-shaped core/shell structures
Solvothermal reaction under ultrasound irradiation
Growth of Bi2S3 nanorods
RhB
6 h/100%

120 (2012)


g-C3N4–BiOCl
Flower-like clusters
Chemical deposition-precipitation
Self-assembly of BiOCl nanoplates
RhB
60 min/100% (117)

354 (2014)






Aqueous-phase photodegradation of other organic and inorganic pollutants


F-doped TiO2
Nanoporous spheres
Template-free hydrothermal approach
Self-etching by HF
4-Chlorophenol
6 h/50%

106 (2006)


AgI/BiOI
Hierarchical microspheres
Solvothermal approach and in situ ion exchange reaction
Self-assembly of nanosheets
2,4-Dichlorophenol
60 min/77.7%

355 (2013)


NiO/TiO2
Porous flower-like superstructures
Template-free hydrothermal treatment



p-Chlorophenol
180 min/95%

356 (2010)


Amorphous Fe2O3
Hollow spheres
Hydrothermal treatment
Self-assembly of nanoparticles
Salicylic acid
110 min/75%

357 (2007)


α-Fe2O3
Hollow spheres
Microwave-assisted solvothermal method
Self-assembly of nanosheets
Salicylic acid
80 min/65%

358 (2008)


CdS/ZnO
Nanotree-like structures
Hydrothermal-chemical bath method
Seeded growth process
Thioanisole
2 h/60%

145 (2014)


α-Fe2O3/CdS
Microflowers
Chemical bath method
Growth of CdS nanoparticles
Cr(VI)
120 min/100%

359 (2013)


g-C3N4/SnS2
3D flower-like microsphere
Solvothermal method
Self-assembly of SnS2 nanoflakes
Cr(VI)
50 min/100% (458.2)

334 (2014)





5.1.1 Wide band-gap TiO2 for photodegradation. 
Among hierarchical photocatalysts shown in Table 2, titania is most often investigated due to its biological compatibility, strong oxidizing power, low cost, and long-term stability.235 It was demonstrated that various hierarchical nanostructures or macro/mesopores in TiO2 photocatalysts could increase their photo-degradation efficiency and selectivity due to the positive synergistic effect of adsorption, light absorption and charge separation.68,236 So far, a variety of 3D hierarchical TiO2 microarchitectures with exposed facets or hollow structures have been studied as photocatalysts for photocatalytic oxidative decomposition of pollutants (formaldehyde, acetone, toluene and NOx) in air under ambient conditions.68,114,116,205,209,220,235–244 First, applications of hierarchical TiO2 photocatalysts in the degradation of pollutants in air will be highlighted.
A trimodally hierarchically macro-/mesoporous TiO2 was fabricated by a simple hydrothermal treatment of the precipitate obtained from tetrabutyl titanate in pure water (see Fig. 29).68 The prepared TiO2 samples at 180 °C showed hierarchically trimodal pore-size distribution in the meso-/macroporous region, containing small intraparticle mesopores with sizes of ca. 3–7 nm, larger interparticle mesopores with sizes of ca. 20–40 nm, and macropores with sizes of ca. 0.5–3 μm. Especially the sample of TiO2 at 180 °C for 24 h exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity, which was about three times higher than that of Degussa P-25 (see Fig. 30).
 Fig. 29  SEM images of sponge-like hierarchically meso-/macroporous TiO2 prepared at 180 °C for 24 d. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 30  Comparison of the photocatalytic activity of P25 and sponge-like hierarchically meso-/macroporous TiO2 prepared at 180 °C and different hydrothermal time periods for photocatalytic oxidation decomposition of acetone in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Also, hierarchically flower-like TiO2 superstructures (HFTS) consisting of anatase TiO2 nanosheets with 87% exposed (001) facets were prepared by alcohothermal treatment of titanate nanotubes in a HF–H2O–C2H5OH mixed solution (see Fig. 31).242 The photocatalytic performance was evaluated for photocatalytic oxidative decomposition of acetone in air under UV light, indicating that the photocatalytic activity of HFTS was much higher than that of P25 and tubular shaped TiO2 particles (TSTP) obtained in pure water. The enhanced photocatalytic activity is due to the combined effect of highly exposed (001) facets, hierarchically porous structure, and the increased light-harvesting capability.242
 Fig. 31  SEM (a), high magnification SEM (b), TEM (c), and HRTEM (d) images of HFTS. The inset in (a) is a magnified image of an individual spherical superstructure. (e) Comparison of the photocatalytic activity of HFTS, TSTP, and P25 for photocatalytic decomposition of acetone in air. (f) Dependence of the produced CO2 concentration on irradiation time for HFTS, TSTP, and P25. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Inc. 
Apart from the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in air, the hierarchical TiO2 photocatalysts have also been widely applied in the photocatalytic oxidation of organics in water. Unfortunately, it is still a challenge to achieve high selectivity for hierarchical TiO2 photocatalysts in water. Although the selective photocatalysis is of particular significance because it might provide potential opportunities for achieving the selective separation processes, selective oxidation of targeted organics from a liquid mixture,245 with TiO2 as a typical photocatalyst, generally exhibits a very poor photocatalytic selectivity, due to the nonselectivity of OH radicals with strong oxidizing power.149 Thus, it is urgent to improve the selectivity of TiO2-based photocatalysts. For example, the hierarchical flower-like TiO2 microsphere films were hydrothermally prepared on the Ti foil in a dilute HF aqueous solution.149 In a typical preparation, the cleaned Ti foil was simply treated at 180 °C for 1 h in 60 mL of 0.02 M HF aqueous solution. The prepared flower-like TiO2 microspheres consisted of many TiO2 nanocrystals with exposed (ca. 30%) (001) facets (see Fig. 32). Interestingly, the selectivity of the TiO2 film samples for photocatalytic decomposition of two azo dyes in water can be tuned by changing the exposed facets of TiO2 microspheres and the etching degree of (001) facets. Furthermore, the percentage of exposed (001) facets can be slightly controlled by adjusting the hydrothermal reaction time.
 Fig. 32  SEM images (a and b) of the TiO2 films composed of flower-like TiO2 microspheres with exposed (001) facets prepared by hydrothermal treatment of Ti foil at 180 °C for 1 h. The inset in (a) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the TiO2 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Generally, the photocatalytic selectivity of the TiO2 sample is mainly related to its adsorption selectivity towards contaminants. The adsorption selectivity of TiO2 to charged species can be controlled by changing its surface charge. The isoelectric point of TiO2 in water is at ca. pH 5.8. Thus, under acidic conditions, TiO2 surface with positive charge will selectively adsorb negatively charged pollutants, resulting in the selective adsorption and degradation of pollutants (Fig. 33). Contrarily, the alkaline conditions are beneficial for adsorption and degradation of positively charged pollutants. Therefore, the photocatalytic selectivity of TiO2 toward degradation of pollutants can be easily tuned by changing the pH value of aqueous solution (Fig. 34).
 Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the selective adsorption of pollutants on the TiO2 surface. (A) and (B) Represent negatively and positively charged pollutants, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 34  Comparison of photocatalytic activity and selectivity of the TiO2 films prepared at 180 °C for 1 h (T1) towards degradation of MO and MB before (T1-F) and after NaOH washing (T1-OH). The photocatalytic activity and selectivity is defined by the apparent rate constant (k) and the ratio (r) of k, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Clearly, the surface chemistry of TiO2 samples at the atomic level plays a key role in tuning the photocatalytic and adsorption selectivity. Another example shows that the hollow TiO2 microspheres (HTS) with different surface chemistry exhibit tunable photocatalytic selectivity toward decomposition of azo dyes in water.211 The fluorinated HTS are favorable for the photocatalytic decomposition of methyl orange (MO) in comparison to methylene blue (MB). In contrast, the surface-modified HTS by either NaOH washing or calcination at 600 °C can efficiently remove the surface-bonded fluoride species and increase the amount of surface hydroxyl groups, thus facilitating the selective degradation of MB over MO. It is believed that the surface rehydroxylation could promote the selective adsorption of MB molecules, thus leading to the decomposition of selected azo dyes. Therefore, the proposed methods for controlling hierarchical assembly, exposed facets, and surface chemistry of TiO2 materials might open new avenues for designing selective photocatalysts towards decomposition of pollutants.


5.1.2 Visible-light photocatalysts for photodegradation. 
The wide band gaps of some semiconductors including TiO2 and ZnS significantly limit the efficiency of visible-light absorption. Therefore, great efforts have been undertaken to design and explore the flower-like microspherical photocatalysts with improved visible-light performance. Therefore, various elements have been doped into the wide-band-gap TiO2 microspheres to enhance their visible-light activity.246–250 So far, a number of doped TiO2 with hierarchical structures and visible-light activity have been developed. For example, Fe-doped TiO2 porous microspheres have been proven to exhibit excellent photodegradation activity toward MB under visible light.251 Furthermore, a high percentage of (001) facets in the Fe-doped TiO2 nanosheet-type building blocks can promote the dissociation of the adsorbed MB molecules, thus further enhancing their photoactivity for MB degradation.252 Apart from doping of metal cations, doping of non-metal elements has been shown to be one of the promising strategies to improve the visible-light activity of hierarchical TiO2.253 Fan and co-workers studied the influence of (N, I) co-doping on the photocatalytic properties of biogenic TiO2 materials with hierarchical architectures under visible light.254 It was shown that nitrogen and iodine, contained in plants, can act as self-doping agents in the synthesis of the biogenic-TiO2 to induce a red shift of the band gap absorption edge, leading to a significant improvement in the photocatalytic activity of this material toward degradation of MB under visible light irradiation. Similarly, N–F co-doping was used to efficiently enhance the photocatalytic degradation of MO over mesoporous TiO2 nanobelts.255 In addition, N- and C-doped ZnO hierarchical photocatalysts have been found to exhibit better absorption of light in both visible and ultraviolet regions due to their smaller band gaps through generating vacant states above the Fermi level.256 Especially, C doping was successful in developing the potentially promising ZnO-based hierarchical photocatalysts because it causes a more efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs as compared to N and S doping.256 For instance, the hierarchical flower-like Zn5(CO3)2(OH)6 superstructures composed of porous nanosheets can be engineered through a PEG-mediated organic–inorganic interfacial cooperative self-assembly strategy.257 The subsequent annealing in air can be used to efficiently transfer Zn5(CO3)2(OH)6 nanosheets into the resultant hierarchical flower-like C-doped ZnO superstructures (ZnO flowers) assembled from porous nanosheets (Fig. 35A).257 The UV-vis absorption spectra of ZnO flower-like samples obtained at varying calcination temperatures (Fig. 35B) exhibit significantly enhanced absorption in the UV and visible-light regions as compared to commercial ZnO. The corresponding pore size distributions (Fig. 35C) further confirm the porous structure of ZnO flowers with both the larger mesopores (20–50 nm) and macropores (up 200 nm). The photocatalytic decomposition of the RhB dye in aqueous solutions (Fig. 35D) indicates that the ZnO flowers obtained at 500 °C exhibited high activity due to the enhanced light absorption over a wide range of wavelengths.257
 Fig. 35  (A) SEM images of the as-prepared ZnO obtained by calcination at 500 °C; (B) UV-vis absorption spectra of ZnO flower-like samples calcined at various calcination temperatures: (a) 300, (b) 400, (c) 500, (d) 600, (e) 700 °C and (f) commercial ZnO; (C) the corresponding pore size distribution curves for ZnO flowers calcined at various calcination temperatures; (D) comparison of the apparent rate constants (k) for the ZnO flower-like samples calcined at various temperatures under visible-light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, the increased density of the surface vacancies such as oxygen present in hierarchical photocatalysts can also efficiently promote the visible-light absorption, charge separation and photochemical redox reactions.258–261
Numerous highly efficient non-doped and hierarchical 3D microspheres with visible-light activity have been fabricated through the self-assembly of nanosheets/nanoplates. For example, the urchin-like CdS nanoflowers, made of CdS nanorods via a facile solvothermal synthesis in a mixed amine/water phase, exhibit high photocatalytic activity for degradation of acid fuchsin under visible light.262 Also, the fabrication of In-containing (such as CuInS2,263 ZnIn2S4,105,264–269 CdS,262 In2S3,270,271 CdIn2S4,272,273 SnIn4S8,274 and InVO4275) and Bi-containing hierarchical semiconductor microspheres composed of 2D nanosheets can be easily achieved due to their layered structures. Especially, the Bi-containing hierarchical semiconductors with low toxicity and cost (such as Bi2MoO6,276 BiVO4,277–280 sensitized BiOCl,201,281–283 Bi2WO6,284–288 BiOClxBr1−x,289,290 BiOI,291–295 BiOBr,296–301 BiVO4/Bi2O2CO3,302 C-doped and N-doped Bi2O2CO3303–309) have attracted a lot of attention in the field of photocatalytic degradation due to their narrow band gaps. Recently, other 3D hierarchical microspheres obtained by the self-assembly of 0D nanoparticles,310–314 1D nanorods204 or 2D nanoplates/nanosheets315 have also been successfully synthesized and applied in the photodegradation of pollutants under visible-light irradiation. In future, more attention should be given to the engineering/modification of these Bi-containing semiconductors to further enhance their photocatalytic properties.316–319 It is highly expected that the photoactivity of these hierarchical Bi-containing photocatalysts can also be enhanced through engineering heterojunctions with 2D graphene and other semiconductors.288,320–327
In addition, the enhanced activity has also been achieved for multifunctional composite microspheres with magnetic cores328–330 or heterojunctions.141,325,331–335 In future, it is highly desirable that the hierarchically structured microspheres can be further optimized to maximize the combined effects of the high surface area, superior scattering effect and charge separation performance. It should be also noted from Table 2 that the relationships between the hierarchical nanostructures and the main active species (such as ˙OH radicals, O2− and H2O2) have been ignored in many reports, which deserve more attention in future studies.

5.2 Photocatalytic H2 generation
It is generally accepted that hydrogen energy is one of the most promising green fuels. As a better alternative for classical fuels, hydrogen energy can become a promising next-generation energy carrier if it is generated via a sustainable energy technology.2,25,360 Especially, the photocatalytic hydrogen generation from water splitting using solar energy and semiconductors has proven to be a promising strategy for solving the global energy crises and environmental pollution since the pioneering report in 1972 on the photoelctrocatalytic H2 evolution over TiO2.8 In recent years, various types of heterogeneous photocatalysts have continuously emerged due to their excellent photocatalytic activity and photostability.2,5,6,361,362 Among the reported heterogeneous photocatalysts, sulfide semiconductors exhibit the highest photocatalytic H2-evolution activity, especially under visible-light irradiation.22,23,25,26,198,363–366 Thus, some typical hierarchical sulfide photocatalysts are listed in Table 3 and will be discussed in this section.
Table 3 Hierarchical sulfide-based photocatalysts for photocatalytic H2 generation




Material
Hierarchical morphology
Synthesis method
Growth mechanism
Cocatalyst
Sacrificial agent

R
H2 (μM h−1 g−1)/QE (%, 420 nm)
Ref. (year)




Single-compound photocatalysts


CdS
Nanoporous nanosheet
Precipitation and anion-exchange method
Cd(OH)2 intermediates
10 wt% Pt
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
4100/60.34

22 (2007)


CdS
Flower-like microspheres
Hydrothermal and anion-exchange method
Self-assembly of nanosheets
0.5 wt% Pt
10 vol% lactic acid
9374/24.7

198 (2013)


CdS
Nanoporous nanosheet
Precipitation and anion-exchange method
Cd(OH)2 intermediates
10 wt% Pt
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
4100/60.34

22 (2007)






Solid solution photocatalysts


Cu (2 atom%)-doped ZnS
Hollow particles
Anion-exchange method
Chemical etching


0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S
6500/

368 (2008)


ZnIn2S4
Flower-like microspheres
Template-free hydrothermal method
Aggregation of flakes
1.0 wt% Pt
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
8420/34.3

265 (2011)


ZnIn2S4
Marigold flower-like morphology
Hydrothermal method
Self-assembly of nanoplates


H2S-saturated NaOH (0.25 M)
10574/

369 (2011)


ZnIn2S4
Porous submicrospheres
Polyol-mediated hot-injection
Self-assembly of nanosheets
3.0 wt% Pt
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
1150/

264 (2013)


ZnIn2S4
Microspheres
Microwave hydrothermal method
Self-assembly of nanosheets
0.2 wt% Pt + 0.5 wt% carbon QDs
10 vol% triethanolamine
1032.2/2.2

269 (2014)


CdxZn1−xS
Volvox-like nanospheres
Template-free




0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
1766.4/

370 (2014)


Zn0.8Cd0.2S
Micro-flowers and microspheres
Solvothermal
Self-assembly of nanorods
1 wt% Pt
0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S
5000/

371 (2013)






Composite photocatalysts


CuS (5.9%)–ZnxCd1−xS
Nanospheres
Heating in ethylene glycol


1 wt% Pt
0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S
2464/19.1

372 (2009)


ZnxCd1−xS/bacterial cellulose
Bionanocomposite foams
Solvothermal/ion exchange
Seeded growth


0.05 M Na2SO3 and 0.05 M Na2S
1450/12

373 (2015)


Carbon nanofiber@ZnIn2S4
Core–shell nanoarchitectures
Solvothermal process

In situ growth of ZnIn2S4 nanosheets
15 wt% carbon nanofibers
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
3166/25.35

374 (2014)


In2S3/ZnIn2S4
Microflower morphology
Ion-exchange route
Self-assembly of nanoplates
1 wt% Pt
0.25 M K2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
678/1.4

375 (2013)


ZnIn2S4/MoS2
Flower-like microspheres
Solvothermal process
Self-assembly of nanosheets
15 wt% MoS2
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
975/

376 (2014)


CdS/ZnS/In2S3
Microspheres
Template-free sonochemistry synthesis
Self-assembly of nanoparticles


1.4 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S
8100/40.9

333 (2012)


CdS@ZnO
Core–shell nanourchins
Hydrothermal
Self-assembly of CdS nanowires


0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
10080/15

122 (2012)


CdS/g-C3N4 (2 wt%)
Core/shell nanowires
Solvothermal and chemisorption method


0.6 wt% Pt
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
4152/4.3

377 (2013)




Hierarchical single-component sulfides and their heterojunctions have been widely applied in photocatalytic H2 evolution. For example, Domen et al. demonstrated that nanoporous CdS nanosheets and hollow nanorods can be prepared at room temperature via a two-step process involving the self-templating synthesis of Cd(OH)2 intermediates followed by their subsequent S2−/OH− ion-exchange conversion.22 The resulting CdS photocatalysts loaded with monodisperse 3–5 nm Pt nanocrystals featured an apparent quantum yield of about 60.34% at 420 nm. Recently, Xie et al. demonstrated that the CdS–mesoporous ZnS core–shell particles exhibited a 56-fold enhancement in the visible-light H2-evolution rate as compared to the pure CdS.367 Hierarchically porous CdS nanosheet-type flower-like structures were synthesized by a simple ion-exchange strategy using analogous Cd(OH)2 structures and Na2S as precursors (see Fig. 36A). The resulting photocatalysts exhibited a high H2-production activity (468.7 μmol h−1) with an apparent quantum efficiency (QE) of 24.7% at 420 nm, which is 3 times higher than that of pure CdS nanoparticles (Fig. 36B).198 This study indicates that the hierarchical self-assembled porous nanosheets facilitate the separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs and enhance light-absorption and adsorption on active sites. Interestingly, the multi-armed CdS nanorods were fabricated via a solvothermal method using dodecylamine as solvent (Fig. 37a).378 The CdS nanorods with 0.23 wt% Pt co-catalyst exhibited a high H2-production rate of 1.21 mmol h−1 with a H2-production quantum efficiency (QE) of 51% at 420 nm (Fig. 37b).378 The high surface area, large pore volume and high crystallinity are thought to be the key factors behind this great performance. In addition, the CdS-based heterostructured photocatalysts with hierarchical structures (such as CdS quantum dots–TiO2/titanate nanosheets,379,380 CdS/graphene nanosheet-type composites381–383 and CdS decorated 1D ZnO nanorods-2D graphene hybrids151) also exhibited greatly enhanced visible-light H2-evolution activity due to promoted charge separation and larger active surface area. Especially, the hierarchical sulfide-based photocatalysts based on multiple hybrids deserve more attention.
 Fig. 36  (A) High-magnification SEM images of porous CdS nanosheet-type flower-like assemblies; (B) photocatalytic production of H2 from aqueous lactic acid solutions over (a) the porous CdS nanosheet-type assemblies and (b) CdS nanoparticles under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright © 2013, Elsevier Inc. 
 Fig. 37  (a) TEM images of the multi-armed rods (sample R140); (b) effect of the Pt loading content on the H2-production rate of the R140 sample in aqueous lactic acid solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 378. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Also, the hierarchical solid-solution semiconductors have been proven to be highly active H2-evolution photocatalysts. For example, Zhang et al. demonstrated that the nanoporous single-crystal-like CdxZn1−xS nanosheets with hierarchical structures and adjustable composition can be obtained through a facile cation-exchange strategy of hybrid ZnS–diethylenetriamine nanosheets.384 The results showed that the H2-evolution rate of porous Zn0.5Cd0.5S nanosheets was about 2.5 times higher than that of Zn0.5Cd0.5S nanorods due to the stronger absorption ability of photons, larger active surface area and faster charge transfer and separation. In another example, it was found that the Cu-doped ZnS hollow nano-solid-solution exhibited a very high H2-evolution rate under xenon lamp irradiation, which was 6 and 130 times higher than that of pure “ZnS-shell” and co-precipitated ZnS particles, respectively.368 Importantly, the Cu doping generated high visible-light H2-evolution activity. Similarly, CuS/ZnS porous nanosheet-type photocatalysts were fabricated by a simple hydrothermal and cation exchange reaction between preformed ZnS(en)0.5 nanosheets and Cu(NO3)2 (Fig. 38A and B).385 The results showed that the as-prepared CuS (2 mol%)/ZnS porous nanosheets exhibited a high H2-production rate of 4147 μmol h−1 g−1 (Fig. 38C), with a H2-production quantum efficiency of 20% at 420 nm.385
 Fig. 38  (A and B) CuS/ZnS porous nanosheet-type photocatalysts fabricated by a hydrothermal and cation exchange method using pre-prepared ZnS(en)0.5 nanosheets and Cu(NO3)2 as precursors. (C) Comparison of the visible-light photocatalytic H2-production rate obtained on CuS/ZnS porous composite nanosheets and ZnS samples using Na2S and Na2SO3 as sacrificial solution. The nominal molar ratios of Cu/Zn were 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 5 mol%, and the obtained samples were labeled as CZ0 (ZnS), CZ0.5, CZ1, CZ2, CZ3 and CZ5, respectively. (D) Visible-light induced interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) mechanism from the valence band of ZnS to the CuS clusters in the CuS/ZnS system for photocatalytic H2-production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 385. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
The enhanced visible-light H2-evolution activity is closely associated with the synergistic effect of the photoinduced interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) from the valence band of ZnS to CuS, which in addition to the low-cost of CuS/Cu2S cocatalysts is an advantage of these materials (Fig. 38D). Furthermore, the Bi-doped ZnS hollow spheres showed greatly enhanced UV and visible-light photocatalytic H2-production activity.386 It seems that the promoted separation and suppressed recombination rate of photo-generated electron–hole pairs are responsible for a significant enhancement in the photoactivity due to the Bi doping. In addition, various kinds of hierarchical ZnIn2S4 microspheres264,265,269,369,387–389 and heterojunctions374–376,390–392 were shown to have improved light-absorption and charge-separation abilities, thus receiving a lot of attention in photocatalytic H2 evolution. For example, Li et al. demonstrated that carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and Pt co-decorated ZnIn2S4 microspheres can be fabricated through a facile microwave hydrothermal method followed by chemical reduction deposition (Fig. 39a).269 The resulting composite photocatalysts exhibited a high photocatalytic H2 production rate of 1032.2 mmol h−1 g−1 with an apparent quantum efficiency of 2.2% (420 nm) in triethanolamine aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation (Fig. 39b). It is believed that the significantly improved H2-evolution activity can be attributed to the synergistic effect of high crystallinity, enhanced light harvesting, high electrical conductivity of CQDs, and the vectorial electron transfer. Future efforts should be focused on further enhancement of the photocatalytic H2-evolution activity of these promising sulfide solid solutions with hierarchical structures through different engineering strategies to narrow their large band gaps by doping, to promote charge separation by forming heterojunctions and to accelerate the surface reaction kinetics by employing appropriate co-catalysts.
 Fig. 39  (a) Possible positions of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and platinum nanoparticles (NPs) deposited on the surface of ZnIn2S4 microspheres (ZIS MSs), (b) comparison of the photocatalytic H2 production activities of the ZIS, CZIS, Pt/ZIS, and Pt/C-ZIS samples in aqueous triethanolamine under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, the formation of nanostructures composed of nanorod trunks and nanosheet branches has also been extensively achieved.147,150,159,374,393,394 For example, hierarchical brush-like composites of reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–TiO2 nanowire arrays were fabricated via an in situ controlled growth process and subsequent calcination.152 It was suggested that the enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance originated from the combined effect of the increased surface active sites, improved charge separation and enhanced light utilization efficiency. Recently, a hierarchical “forest-like” TiO2 nanofiber/ZnO nanorod/CuO nanoparticle photocatalyst was synthesized by a facile three-step method: electrospinning, hydrothermal and photodeposition (Fig. 11).159 The enhanced light harvesting, increased specific surface area and suppressed recombination of electrons and holes are responsible for the much higher photocatalytic hydrogen generation rate. All these kinds of branched 1D or 2D nanojunctions deserve more attention in future studies. In particular, it is expected that more tree-like hierarchical nanostructures will be developed using methods with or without templates.
5.3 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
The depletion of fossil fuels and the increase of atmospheric CO2 level accompanying their combustion have increased interest in the capture and utilization of the most abundant greenhouse gas CO2. Among various technologies, the photoconversion of CO2 into useful solar fuels is thought to be one of the best solutions because it could not only reduce the atmospheric concentration of CO2 and global warming, but also partly address energy demands and crisis.1,395,396 Therefore, since the first demonstration of photocatalytic CO2 reduction by Inoue and co-workers in 1979,397 many rapid and significant advancements have been made during the last two decades on the development of efficient and feasible photocatalysts for conversion of anthropogenic CO2 into chemical or solar fuels.1,16,395,396,398–402 Generally, the CO2 photocatalytic conversion efficiency is determined by multiple factors including charge transfer/separation efficiency, photostability, CO2 adsorption and visible-light harvesting capacity, surface reaction kinetics and suppressed undesirable reactions.1,403–411 Fortunately, the photocatalysts with hierarchical nano/micro architectures usually display a large surface area, high CO2 adsorption capacity, fast mass transport, and fast charge transfer and separation, allowing one to achieve superior photocatalytic performance of CO2 conversion to energy-bearing carbon fuels.200 Consequently, increasing attention has been given to the development of various hierarchical photocatalysts for photocatalytic reduction of CO2.200,273,412–415
Herein, we will highlight several typical hierarchical structures widely applied in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, including 3D hierarchical microspheres, hetero-structured nanocomposites, yolk/shell structures and hollow structures (see Table 4). Firstly, 3D hierarchical semiconductor microspheres such as CdIn2S4,273 Bi2S3,416 Bi2WO6,200 TiO2,413 and ZnTe417 were shown to have superior activity and selectivity toward photodriven CO2 reduction due to their advanced spherical and macro/mesoporous structures. For example, a series of alkaline tantalates MTaO3 (M = Li, Na, K) with hierarchical porosity were synthesized using activated carbonized tree trunks as templates.418 It is believed that the existence of macroporous networks in the tree trunk derived alkaline tantalates results in enhanced CO2 photoreduction performance, which can significantly improve light harvesting and accelerate gas diffusion. Secondly, the hierarchical hetero-structured photocatalysts403,404,419–422 and nanocarbon-supported semiconductors (such as graphene/CdS nanorods,405 graphene/C3N4,412 graphitic carbon/TiO2,414,423–426) have been also employed to improve CO2 adsorption and promote charge transfer and separation, thus resulting in the enhancement of activity toward CO2 photoconversion. Thirdly, the hollow200,424,432 and yolk/shell structures427 have been fabricated and applied in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. For example, In et al. reported that the CH4 production rate over hetero-structured CuO–TiO2−xNx hollow nanocubes was 2.5 times higher than that of Degussa P25 TiO2 under the same experimental conditions, due to the increased absorbance below 500 nm and the formation of p–n junctions.432 Recently, it was reported that hierarchical amine-functionalized titanate nanosheet-based yolk@shell microspheres were synthesized via one-pot organic amine mediated anhydrous alcoholysis of titanium(IV) butoxide (Fig. 40a–c). The resulting hierarchical amine-functionalized titanate nanosheet-based yolk@shell microspheres displayed highly selective photoreduction of CO2 to dominant CH3OH under visible-light irradiation (Fig. 40d).427 The enhanced activity can be attributed to the strong visible light absorption, high CO2 adsorption capacity and excellent light-harvesting performance. As a consequence, this study would provide some new ideas for constructing highly efficient and cost-effective CO2 reduction photocatalysts by coupling the adsorptive groups into the semiconductors with multilevel interior structures. The synergistic optimization and integration of light-harvesting centers, charge transportation channels, adsorption centers and the catalytic active centers in one material play a crucial role in achieving highly functional and efficient photocatalysts for CO2 reduction.427 Recently, Yuan et al. synthesized the core–shell TiO2@insulating SiO2 composites via a simple sol–gel method and applied them in the photoreduction of CO2 with water vapor under simulated solar light irradiation.433 The resulting hierarchical TiO2@SiO2 composites exhibited significantly improved photoactivity and selectivity for CO formation due to the enhanced adsorption capacity of CO2 and better separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Importantly, the SiO2 shell layer can also greatly inhibit the competitive H2 formation on the TiO2 surface. It is anticipated that the activity and selectivity of semiconductors for photoreduction of CO2 to solar fuels could be finely tuned through fabricating the hierarchical silica coating layer. In addition, as can be seen from Table 4 the loading of a suitable co-catalyst into hierarchical semiconductors seems to be very promising to further boost the photocatalytic activity and selectivity through improving the reaction pathways and kinetics.
Table 4 Hierarchical photocatalysts for photocatalytic CO2 reduction




Material
Hierarchical morphology
Synthesis method
Growth mechanism
Cocatalyst
Light source
Mass [g]/systems/volume [mL]
Selected products (activity) [μM h−1 g−1]
Ref. (year)




Gas–solid systems for CO2 photoreduction


Titanate nanosheets
Yolk@shell microspheres
Hydrothermal treatment
Organic amine mediated anhydrous alcoholysis


300 W Xe lamp, ≥400 nm
0.1/CO2 and H2O vapor/200 mL
CH3OH (2.1)

427 (2015)


2D Ti0.9O2–graphene
Hollow spheres
Microwave irradiation technique
Layer-by-layer assembly


300 W xenon lamp
0.01/CO2 and H2O vapor/230 mL
CO (8.91), CH4 (1.14)

424 (2012)


TiO2–graphene
2D sandwich-like hybrid nanosheets
Hydrothermal approach

In situ loading of TiO2 nanoparticles


300 W xenon lamp
0.1/CO2 and H2O vapor/230 mL
CH4 (8), C2H6 (16.8)

425 (2013)


TiO2–graphene
Worm-like mesoporous architecture
Nanocasting route




300 W xenon lamp
0.1/CO2 and H2O vapor/1500 mL
CO (10.06), CH4 (1.54)

428 (2013)


Graphene–g-C3N4
Sandwich-like nanostructures
Impregnation–thermal reduction strategy




15 W daylight bulb
CO2 and H2O vapor
CH4 (0.587)

412 (2015)


SrTiO3
Leaf's 3D architecture
Sol–gel method/calcination
Leaves template growth
1 wt% Au
300 W Xe lamp, ≥420 nm
0.05/CO2 and H2O vapor
CO (0.35), CH4 (0.23)

429 (2013)


TiO2
Microspheres with hierarchical nanostructure






40 W Hg lamp
0.2/CO2 and H2O vapor/230 mL
CO (2.32), CH4 (0.94), H2 (2.03)

413 (2014)


NaTaO3
Hierarchical porous anatomy


Tree trunks as templates
1 wt% Au
200 W Hg–Xe lamp
0.05/CO2 and H2O vapor/390 mL
CO (0.173), CH4 (0.036)

418 (2015)


Zn1.7GeN1.8O
Sheaf-like, hyperbranched




1 wt% Pt and 1 wt% RuO2
300 W Xe lamp, >420 nm
0.05/CO2 and H2O vapor/390 mL
CH4 (0.009)

430 (2012)






Suspension systems for CO2 photoreduction


ZnO/ZnTe
Hierarchical superstructures
Hydrothermal approach




300 W xenon lamp, ≥420 nm
0.01/CO2 saturated water solution/80 mL
CH4 (44.56)

431 (2015)


Bi2WO6
Hollow microspheres
Anion exchange approach
Microscale Kirkendall effect


300 W Xe arc lamp, ≥420 nm
0.2/CO2 saturated water solution/100 mL
CH3OH (16.3)

200 (2012)


Bi2S3
Urchin-like microspheres
Template-free solvothermal method
Self-assembly of nanorods


250 W Hg lamp
0.1/CO2 saturated methanol solution/10 mL
HCHO (175)

416 (2013)


ZnTe
Hollow and mesoporous microspheres
Hydrothermal approach
Nucleation process/Ostwald ripening


300 W xenon lamp, >420 nm
0.01/CO2 saturated water solution/80 mL
CH4 (1.05)

417 (2015)




 Fig. 40  FESEM (a and b) and TEM (c) of the typical sample TN200 (200 °C, alcohothermal method); (d) comparison of the CH3OH generation rate for various samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 427. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, we reported a highly efficient direct Z-scheme CdS–WO3 photocatalyst by depositing CdS nanoparticles on the surface of hierarchical WO3 hollow spheres used for photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm) irradiation434 (see Fig. 41). The prepared direct Z-scheme heterostructured CdS–WO3 samples showed higher photocatalytic selectivity to CH4 formation (see Fig. 42a) and higher photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity than single-phase CdS or WO3 photocatalysts. The optimized 5 mol% CdS-hierarchical WO3 heterostructured sample showed the highest CH4 production rate of 1.02 μmol h−1 g−1 (see Fig. 42b), exceeding the rates of WO3 and CdS samples by about 100 and 10 times, respectively. The enhanced photocatalytic activity can be attributed to the Z-scheme mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction, which can be supported by hydroxyl radical experiments and photocurrent response analysis results. As a consequence, the as-prepared CdS–WO3 hierarchical Z-scheme photocatalysts exhibit significantly enhanced activity for selective reduction of CO2 to CH4, due to the improved separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. In future, more extensive efforts are needed to focus on the promising application of hierarchical Z-scheme heterostructured photocatalysts in the selective photocatalytic reduction of CO2. This study also highlights that the photocatalytic enhancement mechanism for CO2 reduction over hierarchical photocatalysts deserves more attention.
 Fig. 41  SEM (a) and high-magnification SEM mages (b) of hierarchical WO3 hollow spheres: EDS elemental mapping of W (c), O (d), Cd (e), and S (f) of the 5 mol% CdS–WO3 sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 42  (a) GC spectra of CO2 reduction on the 5 mol% CdS–WO3 sample at different irradiation times, (b) comparison of the photocatalytic CH4 production rate of Cx (x = 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 100, the nominal molar ratios of CdS to (WO3 + CdS)) and CdS–WO3 nanoparticle composite (N5) samples under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
6. Conclusions and perspectives
Although hierarchical nanostructures have been widely investigated in different fields of photocatalysis owing to their unique properties such as increased light harvesting, charge separation, mass transport and adsorption capacity, many challenges still remain in fabricating these hierarchical photocatalysts through simple and facile synthesis strategies and in better understanding their photocatalytic enhancement mechanisms. First, this review presents a systematic discussion of the thermodynamics and kinetics of heterogeneous photocatalysis, and then thoroughly summarizes the design, controllable synthesis, growth mechanism and various applications of hierarchical photocatalytic nanostructures. In each section, some important achievements and typical examples coming from our group and other research teams are included and discussed.
Among various types of hierarchical nanostructured photocatalysts, the hierarchical nanostructures based on multi-dimensional hybridization of building blocks are very interesting, and deserve more attention in future. Especially, some novel hierarchical structures constructed through 2D nanosheets with exposed facets seem to be more suitable for the enhancement of photocatalytic performance due to the ultrathin 2D structures and exposed high-energy facets.149,211 In addition, the specially designed porous mesocrystals and photonic crystal structures also hold great potential in photocatalysis because they have been shown to exhibit high photocatalytic activity. In future, the development of mesocrystals and photonic crystal structures through simple and facile methods may open an exciting avenue to accelerate their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Although a variety of synthesis methods have been developed, it is still challenging to perform a large-scale, high-yield synthesis of hierarchical semiconductors through the biotemplating and template-free self-assembly strategies. The hierarchical structures in nature are earth-abundant, cost-effective, efficient and robust, and nature provides numerous excellent bio-templates for rational designing nature-inspired hierarchical photocatalytic nanomaterials. In future, the template-free synthesis of these high-activity photocatalysts with hierarchical porous structures and high surface areas would be desirable. Furthermore, the insufficient number of biotemplates and inadequate understanding of the template-free self-assembly render the rational design of hierarchical semiconductors in desired ways and the further optimization of photocatalytic performance difficult, which should be solved urgently in future. In this regard, more attention should be paid to the better understanding of the fundamental principles and theories of the assembly, growth, and processing of nanostructured building blocks, which is beneficial for rational controlling and designing hierarchical photocatalysts with multifunctional coupling. Also, there are limited reports on the functional modification of hierarchical nanostructures. Thus, different modification strategies such as doping, forming hetero-junctions and the loading of suitable co-catalyst should be widely investigated. Especially, it is expected that spatially separated dual co-catalysts,2 earth-abundant metal-based co-catalysts (such as NiS435 and MoS22) and metal-free co-catalysts (such as graphene436 and carbon quantum dots35) could be loaded to the hierarchical photocatalysts to further enhance their photocatalytic performance.
It has been demonstrated that hierarchically porous materials still hold great promise in different photocatalytic applications and may offer some exciting opportunities to construct highly efficient and stable photocatalysts. In future, it is expected that more and more non-TiO2 hierarchically structured visible-light photocatalysts will be exploited and applied in various photocatalytic processes. This article shows only some typical examples of their applications in different areas of photocatalysis. There are very few reports on the applications of hierarchically structured semiconductors in CO2 photoreduction and photocatalytic organic synthesis. Therefore, it is highly expected that the inexpensive hierarchically structured semiconductors with high activity will be explored and applied in photocatalytic CO2 reduction and organic synthesis.145,151,437 More importantly, the fundamentals of hierarchical photocatalysts, such as the effects of hierarchical nanostructures on the formation of active species (such as ˙OH radicals, O2− and H2O2) and selectivity of CO2 photoreduction, should be deeply investigated, which will further promote the rational design and wide applications of these multifunctional materials.
Furthermore, these hierarchically micro–meso–macrostructured photocatalysts also have great potential applications in thermal catalysis,136,243 adsorption separation,133,134,438–441 electrochemical supercapacitors,442 electrocatalysis,443,444 solar cells,445 and purification processes. Especially, these hierarchical photocatalysts could also be used to fabricate functional inorganic membranes,445 and could be employed as templating materials to explore new advanced materials.
In addition, the rational design and photocatalytic applications of more environmentally friendly and “green” hierarchical semiconductors are still highly expected. More efforts should be undertaken toward a detailed study of hierarchical structure/function relationships and the mechanism of photocatalytic processes based on photo-generated charge transfer and separation kinetics. We hope that the present review will stimulate scientific interest in the controllable synthesis and modification of hierarchical nanostructures, as well as in their advanced environmental and energy-related applications.
Acknowledgements
J. Yu would like to thank the 973 Program (Grant No. 2013CB632402), NSFC (21433007, 51320105001, 51372190, and 51272199), the Deanship of Scientific Research of King Abdulaziz University (No. 90-130-35-HiCi), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 2015-III-034), Self-determined and Innovative Research Funds of SKLWUT (2015-ZD-1) and the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province of China (No. 2015CFA001). X. Li would like to thank the Industry and Research Collaborative Innovation Major Projects of Guangzhou (201508020098), NSFC (20906034) and the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Material Synthesis and Processing (Wuhan University of Technology) (2015-KF-7) for their support.
Notes and references
X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2014, 57, 70–100 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
A. Bard and M. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoffmann, S. Martin, W. Choi and D. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rajeshwar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 765–787 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
Y. Moriya, T. Takata and K. Domen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1957–1969 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
A. Di Paola, E. Garcia-Lopez, G. Marci and L. Palmisano, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211, 3–29 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Chen and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5089–5121 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Ueda, H. Kato and I. Mikami, Catal. Lett., 1998, 53, 229–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, F. Duan, Y. Zheng and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12866–12871 CAS .
S. Zhu, T. Xu, H. Fu, J. Zhao and Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 6234–6239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang and L. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1672–1690 CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 110–117 CrossRef .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, D. Jing, Z. Zhou and L. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2278 Search PubMed .
J. Yuan, J. Wen, Q. Gao, S. Chen, J. Li, X. Li and Y. Fang, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1680–1689 RSC .
Q. Li, X. Li, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500010 Search PubMed .
G. Hitoki, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 736–737 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1698–1699 RSC .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1139 CrossRef .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, X. Li, Q. Gao, J. Yuan, J. Wen, Y. Fang, W. Liu, S. Zhang and Y. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2798–2806 CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Q. Gao, X. Li, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Fang and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10999–11005 CAS .
Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, F. Dong and W. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10383–10390 RSC .
X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Yu and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21337–21354 RSC .
F. Wang, C. Li, H. Chen, R. Jiang, L.-D. Sun, Q. Li, J. Wang, J. C. Yu and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5588–5601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu, Q. Li and B. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1111–1120 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou, F. Wang, F. Dong, W. Li, H. Li and G. R. Patzke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11065–11072 CAS .
F. Dong, T. Xiong, Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhou, X. Feng and Z. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10386–10389 RSC .
B. X. Li, T. Gu, T. Ming, J. X. Wang, P. Wang, J. F. Wang and J. C. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8152–8162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. C. Yu, D. Xia, P. K. Wong and Y. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 8724–8732 CAS .
D. Xia, Z. Shen, G. Huang, W. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 6264–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 409–414 CrossRef .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070–9073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, P. Niu and H.-M. Cheng, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 885–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, G. Li, H. Li and Y. Lu, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 26–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11350–11366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. Joachim Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934–3951 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
M. Cargnello and B. T. Diroll, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 97–105 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
P. Yang, T. Deng, D. Zhao, P. Feng, D. Pine, B. F. Chmelka, G. M. Whitesides and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 282, 2244–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, J. C. Yu, L. Z. Zhang, X. C. Wang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2414–2415 RSC .
L. Z. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2078–2079 RSC .
G. J. D. Soler-illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093–4138 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-B. Yao, H.-Y. Fang, X.-H. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3764–3785 RSC .
X. Du and J. He, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3984–4002 RSC .
X.-Y. Yang, Y. Li, A. Lemaire, J.-G. Yu and B.-L. Su, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 2265–2307 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and Y. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10582–10589 CAS .
Y. Li, Z.-Y. Fu and B.-L. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4634–4667 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. A. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876–3893 RSC .
N. D. Petkovich and A. Stein, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3721–3739 RSC .
H. Wang and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 123–133 CrossRef .
P. S. Kumar, J. Sundaramurthy, S. Sundarrajan, V. J. Babu, G. Singh, S. I. Allakhverdiev and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3192–3222 CAS .
J. Wen, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Fang, J. Xie and Y. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2049–2070 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3887–3901 CAS .
A. J. Bard, Science, 1980, 207, 139–144 CAS .
A. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. Yates Jr, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Wood, Biochem. J., 1988, 253, 287–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
R. Abe, H. Takami, N. Murakami and B. Ohtani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7780–7781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima, T. Rao and D. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and Y. Nosaka, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, Y. Park, W. Kim and W. Choi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 15, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, Q. Jin, A. Iwaszuk and M. Nolan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12077–12086 CAS .
Y. Zhong, J. Yuan, J. Wen, X. Li, Y. Xu, W. Liu, S. Zhang and Y. Fang, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 18260–18269 RSC .
J. Wen, X. Li, H. Li, S. Ma, K. He, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, W. Liu and Q. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 204–212 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, J. Yu and S. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 461, 56–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Akple, J. Low, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, J. Yu and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, Y. Xia, S. Zhu, S. Zheng, Y. He, J. Bi, M. Liu and L. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, Z. Chen, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7708–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Shi, F. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Han, C. Ding, S. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7295–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pastor, F. M. Pesci, A. Reynal, A. D. Handoko, M. Guo, X. An, A. J. Cowan, D. R. Klug, J. R. Durrant and J. Tang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5922–5926 RSC .
G. Liu, T. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Meng, D. Hao, K. Chang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13561–13565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. X. Ouyang, Y. P. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Queisser and E. E. Haller, Science, 1998, 281, 945–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard, R. Parsons and J. Jordan, Standard potentials in aqueous solution, CRC Press,  1985 Search PubMed .
S. Pasternak and Y. Paz, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2059–2070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Pan, X. Zhang, A. J. Du, D. D. Sun and J. O. Leckie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11256–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Li, Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, Y. N. Huo, H. Li and Y. F. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Anderson and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2611–2616 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rothenberger, J. Moser, M. Graetzel, N. Serpone and D. K. Sharma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 8054–8059 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
X. Hu, J. C. Yu, J. Gong and Q. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2444–2448 CAS .
W. Ho, J. C. Yu and S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1115–1117 RSC .
K. Sing, D. Everett, R. Haul, L. Moscou, R. Pierotti, J. Rouquerol and T. Siemieniewska, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 603–619 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Rolison, Science, 2003, 299, 1698–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou and H. Fu, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 885–894 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, D. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3983–3992 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 590–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Wang, J. C. Yu, C. M. Ho, Y. D. Hou and X. Z. Fu, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2552–2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xi and J. H. Ye, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8719–8725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, Y. Su and B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1984–1990 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yuan, T. Z. Ren and B. L. Su, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1462–1465 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, X. C. Wang and X. Z. Fu, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1523–1530 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pelekani and V. L. Snoeyink, Carbon, 2000, 38, 1423–1436 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, H. Yu, H. Guo, M. Li and S. Mann, Small, 2008, 4, 87–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiong, F. Dong and Z. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 56307–56312 RSC .
S. Luo, F. Chai, L. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Li, X. Liu and Z. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4832–4836 RSC .
R. Edla, N. Patel, M. Orlandi, N. Bazzanella, V. Bello, C. Maurizio, G. Mattei, P. Mazzoldi and A. Miotello, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 475–484 CrossRef .
D. Barpuzary, Z. Khan, N. Vinothkumar, M. De and M. Qureshi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 150–156 CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Zhai, J. He, L. Jiang, Z. Liu, S. Nishimoto, T. Murakami, A. Fujishima and D. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 83, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
W.-R. Wei, M.-L. Tsai, S.-T. Ho, S.-H. Tai, C.-R. Ho, S.-H. Tsai, C.-W. Liu, R.-J. Chung and J.-H. He, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3658–3663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Xu, Small, 2007, 3, 1618–1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Chen and Z. Li, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2010, 55, 3164–3169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Li, Q. Xia and H. Xi, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2007, 27, 869–876 CrossRef .
X. Li, Z. Li, Q. Xia, H. Xi and Z. Zhao, Adsorpt. Sci. Technol., 2006, 24, 363–374 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and Z. Li, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2010, 55, 5729–5732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gorka and M. Jaroniec, Carbon, 2011, 49, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Wickramaratne and M. Jaroniec, Carbon, 2013, 51, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choma, J. Gorka, M. Jaroniec and A. Zawislak, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cheng, Y. Le, W. Cai and J. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 889–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Cai, Y. Z. Hu, J. G. Yu, W. G. Wang, J. B. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 7066–7073 RSC .
W. Cai, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4587–4594 RSC .
L. Nie, A. Meng, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3215 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 306–312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Yu, B. Cheng and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17527–17535 CAS .
F. Dong, X. Feng, Y. Zhang, C. Gao and Z. Wu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11714–11723 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Ji, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, Y. Zhu, D. Shi, P. Zhang, X. Cao and B. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8078–8086 RSC .
K. Ji, J. Deng, H. Zang, J. Han, H. Arandiyan and H. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 285–295 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deo, D. Shinde, A. Yengantiwar, J. Jog, B. Hannoyer, X. Sauvage, M. More and S. Ogale, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17055–17062 RSC .
F. Wu, W. Liu, J. Qiu, J. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Fang, S. Zhang and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 425–435 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 327–343 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M.-Q. Yang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7193–7198 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, S.-F. Hung, H. B. Tao, J. Miao, H. B. Yang and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14950–14961 RSC .
Y. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Yan and Z. Huo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 195–198 RSC .
Y. Jiao, Y. Liu, F. Qu and X. Wu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 575–580 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4532–4534 RSC .
T. J. Athauda, J. G. Neff, L. Sutherlin, U. Butt and R. R. Ozer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6916–6925 Search PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, G. Tian, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, C. Tian and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4366–4374 CAS .
R. Wang, J. Guo, D. Chen, Y.-E. Miao, J. Pan, W. W. Tjiu and T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19375–19380 RSC .
J. Hou, Y. Qu, D. Krsmanovic, C. Ducati, D. Eder and R. V. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2418–2423 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Shi, Y. Tang and G. Jiang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 132, 236–239 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, X.-Y. Lu, Y. Pei, H. Chua, B. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Yang and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37431–37436 RSC .
Y. Qiu and X. Li, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 14537–14541 RSC .
T.-W. Sun, Y.-J. Zhu, C. Qi, G.-J. Ding, F. Chen and J. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 463, 107–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, Z. Liu and D. D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13998–14008 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Chen, X. Quan and Y. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 44, 451–455 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Li, X. Z. Zhen, S. G. Meng, J. J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Z. Fu and D. Z. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 9911–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Cai, Z. G. Xiong, X. M. Lu and J. H. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 545–553 CAS .
T. Huo, X. Zhang, X. Dong, X. Zhang, C. Ma, G. Wang, H. Ma and M. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17366–17370 CAS .
S. G. Meng, D. Z. Li, X. Z. Zheng, J. X. Wang, J. Chen, J. L. Fang, Y. Shao and X. Z. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2744–2747 CAS .
Q. Yang, M. Li, J. Liu, W. Shen, C. Ye, X. Shi, L. Jiang and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 541–547 CAS .
X. Z. Zheng, S. G. Meng, J. Chen, J. X. Wang, J. J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Z. Fu and D. Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21263–21273 CAS .
S. G. Meng, D. Z. Li, P. Wang, X. Z. Zheng, J. X. Wang, J. Chen, J. L. Fang and X. Z. Fu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17021–17028 RSC .
X. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Shao, M. He, P. Wang, X. Fu and D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15796–15802 CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
F. Iskandar, A. B. D. Nandiyanto, K. M. Yun, C. J. Hogan, Jr., K. Okuyama and P. Biswas, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1408–1412 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gu and F. Schuth, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 313–344 RSC .
X. Li, X. Liu, Y. Ma, M. Li, J. Zhao, H. Xin, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Li and Q. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1424–1428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Bai and D. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 234–238 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dilger, M. Wessig, M. R. Wagner, J. S. Reparaz, C. M. S. Torres, Q. Liang, T. Dekorsy and S. Polarz, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 4593–4601 CAS .
J. Yu, W. Liu and H. Yu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 930–934 CAS .
J. Di, J. Xia, Y. Ge, L. Xu, H. Xu, M. He, Q. Zhang and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15864–15874 CAS .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, T. Bian, L. Shang, H. Yu, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9872–9874 RSC .
J. L. Pagano, T. Bansagi, Jr. and O. Steinbock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9900–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, G. Chen, J. Wu, H. Dong and G. Xiong, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132, 304–314 CrossRef .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3430–3432 RSC .
J. Xia, L. Xu, J. Zhang, S. Yin, H. Li, H. Xu and J. Di, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10132–10141 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1547–1550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kimura, N. Miyamoto, X. Meng, T. Ohji and K. Kato, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 1486–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, X. Li, T. Fan, F. E. Osterloh, J. Ding, E. M. Sabio, D. Zhang and Q. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 951–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chao, Z. Shenmin, C. Zhixin, Z. Wang, G. Jiajun and Z. Di, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8367–8378 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Zhao, M. Wei, J. Lu, Z. L. Wang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4009–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, B. Du, Y. Yan, H. Li, D. Zhang and T. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2377–2385 CAS .
X. Fei, W. Li, Z. Shao, S. Seeger, D. Zhao and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15781–15786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1673–1679 RSC .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Yan, S. X. Ouyang, J. Gao, M. Yang, J. Y. Feng, X. X. Fan, L. J. Wan, Z. S. Li, J. H. Ye, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6400–6404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 494–507 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Xia, C. Xu, J. Murowchick and X. Chen, Catal. Today, 2014, 225, 64–73 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, J. Yu and S. Mann, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 122, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138, 299–303 CrossRef .
J. Yu, B. Huang, Z. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and P. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10548–10552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9729–9731 RSC .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 97–99 RSC .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, P. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Lou, J. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7054–7056 RSC .
T. Quang Duc, L. Thanh Son and H. Huu Thu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 4274–4278 RSC .
Y. Shi, Y. Chen, G. Tian, H. Fu, K. Pan, J. Zhou and H. Yan, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 12396–12404 RSC .
D. Zhang, G. Li, F. Wang and J. C. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 1759–1763 RSC .
F. Chen, J. Zai, M. Xu and X. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4316–4323 CAS .
J. Yu, H. Guo, S. A. Davis and S. Mann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2035–2041 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, B. Cheng, J. Yu and W. Ho, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 301, 522–530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, S. Liu and M. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2050–2057 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Yu and S. Mann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10712–10717 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, S. Liu and H. Yu, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Fan and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 597–602 CrossRef CAS .
L. Si, Z. a. Huang, K. Lv, H. Ye, K. Deng and Y. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 612, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lv, B. Cheng, J. Yu and G. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5349–5362 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Yu and S. Mann, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 325606 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, W. Z. Wang, H. L. Xu, S. M. Sun and M. Shang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1776–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-P. Zhu, N.-C. Bing, L.-L. Wang, H.-Y. Jin, G.-H. Liao and L.-J. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 2959–2965 RSC .
P. Hu, D. Hou, Y. Wen, B. Shan, C. Chen, Y. Huang and X. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1963–1969 RSC .
J. G. Yu and J. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 5860–5867 RSC .
S. Sun, X. Song, C. Kong and Z. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6616–6620 RSC .
J. Cao, B. Xu, H. Lin, B. Luo and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 185, 91–99 CrossRef .
H. Zeng, W. Cai, P. Liu, X. Xu, H. Zhou, C. Klingshirn and H. Kalt, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1661–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Ge and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2867–2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Pan, X. Z. Wang, Q. Huang, C. Shen, Z. Y. Koh, Q. Wang, A. Engel and D. W. Bahnemann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 303–304 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, K. Lv and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Y. Guo, C.-H. Liu and P.-X. Gao, Front. Chem., 2013, 1, 18 Search PubMed .
D. Chatterjee and S. Dasgupta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2005, 6, 186–205 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, B. Cheng, S. Cao and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 380–388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Du, Y. Jiang, C. Shen, K. Liang and A. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2135–2144 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xiong, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2155–2163 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Y. Bai, H. He, W. Fan, L. Zhu and W. Zhou, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2178–2185 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Yu, K. Wang, G. Yang and H. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2211–2218 CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Yu, S. Liu, P. Zhai and B. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 160–166 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Yu, Q. Xiang and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119, 109–116 CrossRef .
J. Yu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and B.-L. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6743–6750 CAS .
J. Yu, L. Yue, S. Liu, B. Huang and X. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 334, 58–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, D. Zhang, J. C. Yu and M. K. H. Leung, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 4276–4281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu and L. Shi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 326, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lv, Q. Xiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2011, 32, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nie, J. Yu and J. Fu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1983–1989 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, W. Ho, J. Wang, P. Zhang and J. Yu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2366–2377 CAS .
S. Liu, C. Liu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3193–3200 RSC .
Y. Huang, W. Ho, Z. Ai, X. Song, L. Zhang and S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Li, J. H. Xu, W. L. Dai, H. X. Li and K. N. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 85, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L.-M. Liu, X.-F. Lang, H.-Y. Wang, X. W. Lou and E. S. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2592–2597 CAS .
S. Hoang, T. Q. Ngo, S. P. Berglund, R. R. Fullon, J. G. Ekerdt and C. B. Mullins, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2270–2276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. Li, S. Liu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2433–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tong, J. Zhang, B. Tian, F. Chen and D. He, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 155, 572–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu and H. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16255–16258 RSC .
J.-M. Wu and B. Qi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 666–673 CAS .
N. Shi, X. Li, T. Fan, H. Zhou, J. Ding, D. Zhang and H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 172–180 CAS .
Z. He, W. Que, J. Chen, X. Yin, Y. He and J. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6815–6825 Search PubMed .
W. Yu, J. Zhang and T. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 220–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, C. Li, J. Yu and Q. Xiang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2533–2541 RSC .
Y. Wu and G. Lu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4165–4175 RSC .
Z. Han, L. Liao, Y. Wu, H. Pan, S. Shen and J. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 217, 100–106 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xu, T. Xu, J. Lu, S. Gao, N. S. Hosmane, B. Huang, Y. Dai and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1128–1134 CAS .
H. Jiang, H. Dai, X. Meng, K. Ji, L. Zhang and J. Deng, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 326–334 CrossRef CAS .
W.-T. Yao, S.-H. Yu, S.-J. Liu, J.-P. Chen, X.-M. Liu and F.-Q. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11704–11710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y. Xu, Y. Song, C. Wu, M. Zhang and Y. Xie, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4003–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shang, C. Zhou, T. Bian, H. Yu, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4552–4558 CAS .
B. Chai, T. Y. Peng, P. Zeng, X. H. Zhang and X. J. Liut, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6149–6155 CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Shao, T. Chen, M. Sun and X. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4433–4440 CAS .
Y. Chen, R. Huang, D. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Liu, X. Li and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2273–2279 CAS .
F. Li, J. Luo, G. Chen, Y. Fan, Q. Huang, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1144–1150 CAS .
Q. Li, C. Cui, H. Meng and J. Yu, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1766–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, Y. Xu, R. Xu, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1930–1934 CAS .
S. Rengaraj, S. Venkataraj, C.-w. Tai, Y. Kim, E. Repo and M. Sillanpaa, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5534–5541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, T. W. Ng, W. K. Ho, J. Huang, S. Liang, T. An, G. Li, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 129, 482–490 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, X. Yin, F. Xin, Y. Bi, Y. Liu and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 288, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Li, W. Teng, Q. Zhao, Y. Shi, R. Yue and Y. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 244, 681–688 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Cao and L. Feng, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1705–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, K. Pan, Y. Dong, C. Tian and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 887–892 RSC .
A. Zhihui and L. Shuncheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 280, 354–359 CrossRef .
K. Ji, H. Dai, J. Deng, H. Zang, H. Arandiyan, S. Xie and H. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168, 274–282 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Dai, J. Deng, L. Zhang and C. T. Au, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2317–2325 RSC .
D. K. Ma, S. Wang, P. Cai, J. L. Jiang, D. P. Yang and S. M. Huang, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 962–963 CrossRef CAS .
J. Saihua, Z. Keqing, S. Yongqian, L. Siuming, X. Haiyan, H. Yuan and G. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 290, 313–319 CrossRef .
H. Lu, L. Xu, B. Wei, M. Zhang, H. Gao and W. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 303, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, J. Hu, S. Cong, Z. Zhao and X. Qiu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174, 105–112 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, L. Zhou, H. Xu and W. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2526–2532 RSC .
Y. Huang, Z. Ai, W. Ho, M. Chen and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6342–6349 CAS .
D. Ma, S. Huang, W. Chen, S. Hu, F. Shi and K. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4369–4374 CAS .
L. Zhi, C. Feitai, G. Yuanpeng, L. Yang, F. Pengfei and W. Shaojie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7027–7030 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, F. Dong, F. Wang and Z. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16623–16631 CAS .
H. Gnayem and Y. Sasson, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gnayem and Y. Sasson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19201–19209 CAS .
X. Xiao and W.-D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5866–5870 RSC .
G. Wu, J. Wang, D. F. Thomas and A. Chen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xi, A. Zhihui, J. Falong and Z. Lizhi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 747–753 Search PubMed .
D. K. Ma, S. M. Zhou, X. Hu, Q. R. Jiang and S. M. Huang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 140, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-C. Liu, D.-K. Ma, Y.-Y. Hu, Y.-W. Zeng and S.-M. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11927–11934 CAS .
Y. Huo, J. Zhang, M. Miao and Y. Jin, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 334–341 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, Z. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8039–8043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, S. Yin, H. Li, H. Xu, L. Xu and Y. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5249–5258 RSC .
Y. Feng, L. Li, J. Li, J. Wang and L. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 192, 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, M. Wen, B. Jiang, G. Li and J. C. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211, 104–111 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guohua, W. Xiaohong, W. Zhen, L. Xia, X. Xiaoguang, H. Ruanbing, T. Bolin, W. Rijing, W. Sheng, W. Tao and C. Wenxing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 1, 2406–2410 Search PubMed .
P. Madhusudan, J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu and G. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 286–295 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, H. Liu, W.-K. Ho, M. Fu and Z. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 214, 198–207 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, T. Xiong, Z. Zhao, Y. Sun and M. Fu, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10522–10532 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Liu, F. Dong and M. Fu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 408, 33–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, R. Wang, X. Li and W.-K. Ho, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 319, 256–264 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, T. Xiong, R. Wang, Y. Sun and Y. Jiang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6631–6642 RSC .
F. Dong, Y. Sun, M. Fu, W.-K. Ho, S. C. Lee and Z. Wu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 766–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiong, H. Huang, Y. Sun and F. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6118–6127 CAS .
J. Cao, L. Ren, N. Li, C. Hu and M. Cao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12619–12623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuhan, Z. Fang and P. Daocheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22619–22623 RSC .
M. Kaur and C. M. Nagaraja, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18257–18263 RSC .
C. Yu, F. Cao, X. Li, G. Li, Y. Xie, J. C. Yu, Q. Shu, Q. Fan and J. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 219, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, K. Yang, Y. Xie, Q. Fan, J. C. Yu, Q. Shu and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2142–2151 RSC .
J. Yu and L. Qi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 169, 221–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, W. An, L. Liu, J. Hu and Y. Liang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 280, 417–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, Y. Cui, Y. Wang, Y. Li, L. Hu, J. Sun and J. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 249, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, J. Xia, S. Yin, H. Xu, L. Xu, Y. Xu, M. He and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5340–5351 CAS .
M. Shang, W. Wang, S. Sun, J. Ren, L. Zhou and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20228–20233 CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Wang, H. Mao, Y. Lu, J. Lu, J. Huang, Z. Ye and B. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12698–12706 CAS .
P. Madhusudan, J. Yu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and G. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 14345–14353 RSC .
Y. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhou, S. Guoabc and L. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8273–8280 CAS .
Z.-R. Tang, Q. Yu and Y.-J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 58448–58452 RSC .
H. Huang, K. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Zhang and N. Tian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 49386–49394 RSC .
X. Gao, H. B. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Zhong, Y. Hu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5917–5921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Jiao, X. Yu, Z.-Q. Liu, P.-Y. Kuang and Y.-M. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 16239–16249 RSC .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-F. Ma, Y. Zhang, L.-L. Li, L.-J. You, P. Zhang, Y.-T. Zhang, J.-M. Li, M. Yu, J. Guo, H.-J. Lu and C.-C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3179–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, F. He, J. Zhang, L. Li, F. Li, L. Chen and Y. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 515–522 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Yao and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5971–5979 RSC .
Z. H. Ai, L. Z. Zhang, S. C. Lee and W. K. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20896–20902 CAS .
B. Ma, J. Guo, W.-L. Dai and K. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123, 193–199 CrossRef .
Z. Shen, G. Chen, Q. Wang, Y. Yu, C. Zhou and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2010–2017 RSC .
M. Sun, Q. Yan, T. Yan, M. Li, D. Wei, Z. Wang, Q. Wei and B. Du, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31019–31027 RSC .
C. Xing, Y. Zhang, Z. Wu, D. Jiang and M. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 2772–2780 RSC .
F. Dong, Y. Sun, M. Fu, Z. Wu and S. C. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 219, 26–34 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wu, Y. Qiu, M. Xi, X. Li and C. Cen, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 4766–4773 RSC .
R. Zha, R. Nadimicherla and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6565–6574 CAS .
W.-W. Wang, Y.-J. Zhu and L.-X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Y. Cao and D. Jia, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 404, 110–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. Shi, J. Lin, D. Chen, J. Gao, Z. Huang, X. Ding and C. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2937–2941 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Fu, P. Wang, H. Yu and J. Yu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 165602 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Wang, D. S. Li, L. Guo, F. Fu, Z. P. Zhang and Q. T. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5984–5990 CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Jiao, Z. Zhang, F. Qu, A. Umar and X. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2174–2184 CAS .
M. Niu, F. Huang, L. Cui, P. Huang, Y. Yu and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 681–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Yu, Y. Hu, C. Guo, F. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 183–187 RSC .
Y. Qiu, G.-L. Xu, Q. Kuang, S.-G. Sun and S. Yang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 826–832 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, Q. Xiang, J. Ran and S. Mann, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 872–879 RSC .
Y. Qiu, L. Wu, J. Li and X. Li, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu and X. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4902–4907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Di and Y. Jinhua, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1922–1928 CrossRef .
S. K. Biswas and J.-O. Baeg, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3177–3188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, Z. Jiao, G. Lu, W. Ren, J. Ye and Y. Bi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9472–9475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chang, Y. Xie, J. Zhang, J. Chen, C. Li, J. Wang, J. Luo, B. Deng and X. Hu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28519–28528 RSC .
H. Cheng, W. Wang, B. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Zhan, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7131–7136 CAS .
J. G. Yu, W. G. Wang and B. Cheng, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 2499–2506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li, Y. Chu, Y. Liu and L. H. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2123–2127 CAS .
S.-W. Cao and Y.-J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6253–6257 CAS .
S. Zhang, W. Xu, M. Zeng, J. Li, J. Xu and X. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 13417–13424 RSC .
J. Yuan, J. Wen, Y. Zhong, X. Li, Y. Fang, S. Zhang and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18244–18255 CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2664–2672 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and F. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2708–2713 RSC .
J. Jin, J. Yu, G. Liu and P. K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10927–10934 CAS .
J. Yu, Y. Yu, P. Zhou, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156, 184–191 CrossRef .
H. Yu, F. Chen, F. Chen and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Xie, Z. B. Yu, G. Liu, X. L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1895–1901 CAS .
T. Arai, S.-i. Senda, Y. Sato, H. Takahashi, K. Shinoda, B. Jeyadevan and K. Tohji, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1997–2000 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Chaudhari, A. P. Bhirud, R. S. Sonawane, L. K. Nikam, S. S. Warule, V. H. Rane and B. B. Kale, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2500–2506 RSC .
H. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Liu, J. Ge, M. Lan, C. Wang, J. Geng and P. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 811–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Li, J. Chen, L. Li, J. Zhao and Z. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 578, 571–576 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang and R. Xu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 8495–8503 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Z. Geng, J. Gao, R. Xuan, P. Liu, Y. Wang, K. Huang, Y. Wan and Y. Xua, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1709–1716 CAS .
Y. Chen, G. Tian, Z. Ren, K. Pan, Y. Shi, J. Wang and H. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13841–13849 CAS .
Z. Mei, S. Ouyang, D.-M. Tang, T. Kako, D. Golberg and J. Ye, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 2687–2690 RSC .
G. Tian, Y. Chen, Z. Ren, C. Tian, K. Pan, W. Zhou, J. Wang and H. Fu, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1291–1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Zhang, Y. H. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. G. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CAS .
J. G. Yu, Y. F. Yu and B. Cheng, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11829–11835 RSC .
H. N. Kim, T. W. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3111–3118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Y. Tang, K. Muellen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 734–738 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Jia, A. Kolpin, C. Ma, R. C.-T. Chan, W.-M. Kwok and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1185–1188 RSC .
K. Chang, Z. Mei, T. Wang, Q. Kang, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7078–7087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, J. Zhang, X. Wu, W. Zhao and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 897–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Q. Li and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4774–4779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, J. Cui, Y. Yue, X. Zhang, X. Xia, H. Liu and S. Lui, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 109–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, J. Zai, Y. Yuan and X. Qian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 16986–16993 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, G. Chen, Y. Yu, X. Zhou and Y. Teng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18579–18586 RSC .
N. S. Chaudhari, S. S. Warule and B. B. Kale, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12182–12187 RSC .
J. Zhou, G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, X. Y. Meng, Y. H. Shi, X. R. Cao, K. Pan and H. G. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2237–2239 RSC .
Q. Liu, H. Lu, Z. Shi, F. Wu, J. Guo, K. Deng and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17200–17207 CAS .
L. Wei, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, H. Wu, R. Yuan and Z. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 521–527 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, Y. Sun, M. Zhang, J. Mu, P. Zhang, Z. Guo and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 606–618 RSC .
L. Chenxing, M. Zhijun, D. Guoping and Q. Jianrong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 314, 481–489 CrossRef .
L. Yuan and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 154–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marszewski, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 261–278 RSC .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 CAS .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. Liu, B. Cheng, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, J. Yu, J. Zhang, J. Zhang and G. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7950–7953 RSC .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M.-Z. Wu and Y.-P. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Lei, Y. Huang, Y. Fang, Y. Xu, L. Zhu and X. Li, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2011, 20, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Chen, H. Li, J. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Liu and J. Zhou, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2011, 20, 413–417 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Jin, B. Cheng and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3407–3416 CAS .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu and W. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4244–4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Low, B. Cheng, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Energy Storage Materials, 2016, 3, 24–35 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, F. Dong and W. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Akple, J. Low, Z. Qin, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, J. Yu and S. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2127–2134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhang, X. Shen, P. Peng, L. Xiong and Y. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2229–2236 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
B. Fang, A. Bonakdarpour, K. Reilly, Y. Xing, F. Taghipour and D. P. Wilkinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15488–15498 CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1528–1547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Li, S. Zhao, Z. Sun, M. Hong and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15764–15768 CAS .
J. Chen, S. Qin, G. Song, T. Xiang, F. Xin and X. Yin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 15133–15138 RSC .
M. F. Ehsan, M. N. Ashiq and T. He, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 6186–6194 RSC .
H. Zhou, P. Li, J. Guo, R. Yan, T. Fan, D. Zhang and J. Ye, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 113–120 RSC .
S.-W. Cao, X.-F. Liu, Y.-P. Yuan, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-S. Liao, J. Fang, S. C. J. Loo, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 940–946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Li, C. Zhang, L. Cui, S. Kang, X. Li and L. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 130, 277–284 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Liu, D. Luo, J. Li, Y. Huang, H. Li, Y. Fang, Y. Xu and L. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 180, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xi, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9057–9061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Q. Zhang, S. Kang, B. Li, X. Li and Y. Wang, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, M49–M52 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, S. Yan, S. Bao, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1743–1749 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Gui, S. P. Chai, B. Q. Xu and A. R. Mohamed, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 122, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Xia and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8166–8175 CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Zuo, F. Wang, J. Yao, B. Li, S. Kang, X. Li and L. Cui, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 3286–3291 CAS .
H. Zhou, J. J. Guo, P. Li, T. X. Fan, D. Zhang and J. H. Ye, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1667 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, Z. Tian, X. Chen, J. Gao and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2033–2038 RSC .
M. F. Ehsan and T. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 345–352 CrossRef .
S.-I. In, D. D. Vaughn, II and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3915–3918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, C. Han, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 265–273 CAS .
J. Jin, J. Yu, D. Guo, C. Cui and W. Ho, Small, 2015, 11, 5262–5271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu and R. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 779–793 CrossRef CAS .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
X. Li, B. Weng, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64484–64493 RSC .
R. Chen, J. Yu and W. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11682–11690 CAS .
J. R. Ge, K. J. Deng, W. Q. Cai, J. G. Yu, X. Q. Liu and J. B. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 401, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Le, D. Guo, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 274, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Wang, J. B. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. G. Yu and W. Q. Cai, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 233, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sheng, D. Jingjing, M. Jaroniec and Q. Shi Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9409–9413 Search PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 931–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhong, E. K. Kim, J. P. McGann, S.-E. Chun, J. F. Whitacre, M. Jaroniec, K. Matyjaszewski and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14846–14857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, Q. L. Li, J. J. Fan and B. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9161–9163 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xin Li
	Xin Li received his BS and PhD degrees in Chemical Engineering from Zhengzhou University in 2002 and South China University of Technology in 2007, respectively. Then, he joined South China Agricultural University as a faculty member, and became an associate professor of Applied Chemistry in 2011. During 2012–2013, he worked as a visiting scholar at the Electrochemistry Center, the University of Texas at Austin, U.S.A. His research interests include photocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, adsorption and the development of photocatalysts, related materials and devices.

Jiaguo Yu
	Jiaguo Yu received his BS and MS in Chemistry from Central China Normal University and Xi'an Jiaotong University, respectively, and his PhD in Materials Science in 2000 from the Wuhan University of Technology. In 2000, he became a Professor of the Wuhan University of Technology. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong from 2001 to 2004, visiting scientist from 2005 to 2006 at the University of Bristol, and visiting scholar from 2007 to 2008 at the University of Texas, Austin. His research interests include semiconductors, photocatalysis, photocatalytic hydrogen production, solar fuels, dye-sensitized solar cells, adsorption, CO2 capture, graphene and related topics.

Mietek Jaroniec
	Mietek Jaroniec received his MS and PhD from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland, in 1972 and 1976, respectively. Since 1991 he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio (USA). Before joining Kent State he was a Professor of Chemistry at M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland. His research interests revolve primarily around inter-disciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry, and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at the gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, adsorbents, and catalysts. At Kent State he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.

 	Fig. 1  Typical hierarchical structures of photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  Example of hierarchical structures in nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Redox potentials of different species in heterogeneous photocatalysis.	 


H2
2H+ + 2e− → H2(g)	0


O2 and N2
O2(g) + e− → O2−(aq)	−0.33
O2(g) + H2O + 2e− → HO2−(aq) + OH−	−0.0649a
O2(g) + H+ + e− → HO2˙(aq)	−0.046
HO2−(aq) + H2O + e− → ˙OH + 2OH−	0.184a
O2−(aq) + H2O + e− → HO2−(aq) + OH−	0.2a
O2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2(aq)	0.695
2H2O(aq) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 4H+	1.229
OH− + h+ → ˙OH	2.69
4OH−(aq) + 4h+ → O2(g) + 2H2O	0.401
N2(g) + 2H2O + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH4OH(aq)	0.092
O3(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → O2(g) + H2O	2.075


Metal-ions
MoO42− + 4H2O + 6e− → Mo(s) + 8OH−	−0.913a
Co(OH)2 + 2e− → Co(s) + 2OH−	−0.733a
Ni(OH)2 + 2e− → Ni(s) + 2OH−	−0.72a
Cu2O(s) + H2O + 2e− → 2Cu(s) + 2OH−	−0.365a
Co2+ + 2e− → Co(s)	−0.277
Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni(s)	−0.257
Mo3+ + 3e− → Mo(s)	−0.2
AgI + e− → Ag(s) + I−	−0.1522
AgBr + e− → Ag(s) + Br−	0.0711
AgCl + e− → Ag(s) + Cl−	0.2223
Sn4+ + 2e− → Sn2+	0.15
Cu2+ + e− → Cu+	0.159
BiOCl + 2H+ + 3e− → Bi(s) + H2O + Cl−	0.1697
Bi3+ + 3e− → Bi(s)	0.308
Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu(s)	0.340
Cu+ + e− → Cu(s)	0.520
PdCl42− + 2e− → Pd(s) + 4Cl−	0.64
PtCl42− + 2e− → Pt(s) + 4Cl−	0.758
Rh3+ + 3e− → Rh(s)	0.76
Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+	0.771
Ag+ + e− → Ag(s)	0.7991
IrCl63− + 3e− → Ir(s) + 6Cl−	0.86
Pd2+ + 2e− → Pd(s)	0.915
[AuCl4]− + 3e− → Au(s) + 4Cl−	0.93
NiO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → Ni2+ + 2H2O	1.593


CO2
CO2 + e− → CO2−	−1.9
2CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HOOCCOOH(aq)	−0.481
CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(aq)	−0.199
CO2(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → CO(g) + H2O	−0.11
CO2(g) + 4H+ + 4e− → C(s) + 2H2O	0.206
CO2(g) + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO(aq) + H2O	−0.07
CO2(g) + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH(aq) + H2O	0.03
CO2(g) + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4(g) + 2H2O	0.169
2CO2(g) + 8H2O + 12e− → C2H4(g) + 12OH−	0.07
2CO2(g) + 9H2O + 12e− → C2H5OH(aq) + 12OH−	0.08
3CO2(g) + 13H2O + 18e− → C3H7OH(aq) + 18OH−	0.09


Other
N2H4(aq) + 4H2O + 2e− → 2NH4+ + 4OH−	0.1
H2S(g) + 2h+ → S(s) + 2H+	0.144
SO2(aq) + 4H+ + 4e− → S(s) + 2H2O	0.50
H3AsO3(aq) + H2O + 2h+ → H3AsO4(aq) + 2H+	0.56
NO2(g) + H2O + h+ → NO3−(aq) + 2H+	0.80
NO(g) + 2H2O(l) + 3h+ → NO3−(aq) + 4H+	0.957
H2O2(aq) + H+ + e− → H2O + OH−	1.14
Cr2O72− + 14H+ + 6e− → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O	1.36
HO2˙ + H+ + e− → H2O2(aq)	1.44
H2O2(aq) + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O	1.763

 	Fig. 4  Band positions and potential applications of some typical photocatalysts (at pH = 7 in aqueous solutions).	 
ηc = ηabs × ηcs × ηcmt × ηcu	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Four different stages in heterogeneous photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 6  Significance of hierarchical nanostructures in enhancing photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 7  Three-dimensional mesoporous architecture in the TiO2 nanocrystalline thin film with a continuous and periodically porous network that offers transport routes for gaseous reactants to move in and out of the framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the reflecting and scattering effects in hollow (A) and hierarchical (B) microspheres. Panel B, reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  UV-vis transmission spectra of a hierarchically micro–nanoporous TiO2 film (1), and a nanostructured film (2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright © 2008, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and (b) adsorption isotherms for Congo red (CR) (T = 25 °C; adsorbent dose = 200 mg L−1; CR concentration = 15–50 mg L−1 and pH 7) of samples I (hierarchically porous Ni(OH)2 nanosheets) and II (hierarchically porous NiO nanosheets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM images of ZnO nanorods hydrothermally grown on the TiO2 nanofibers; (b) typical high magnification SEM image and model (inset) of the as-grown Cu2O nanosheet–nanowires. Panel a, reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. Panel b, reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of a “forest-like” photocatalyst created by mimicking nature; (b) top view SEM image of a hierarchical “forest-like” TiO2 nanofiber/ZnO nanorod/CuO nanoparticle photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright © 2012, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of the ZnGa2O4 photonic crystals prepared by using polystyrene spheres as templates; (b) TiO2-PC spheres obtained by spray and sacrificing template methods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169 (a) and ref. 166 (b). Copyright © 2014 and 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Synthesis methods of hierarchical nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Optical photograph of legume; low (B) and high (C) magnification SEM images of the tubular trichome on the surface of legume; (D) schematic illustration of a legume-templating ZnAl-layered double hydroxide and hierarchical mixed metal oxide (MMO) framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) SEM, (c) FESEM, and (d) TEM images of hierarchically nanoporous TiO2 hollow microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society.	 
TiF4 + 4H2O → TiO2·2H2O + 4HF	(2)
SiO2 + 4HF → SiF4 + 2H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the formation of hierarchically nanoporous TiO2 hollow microspheres obtained through the template-directed deposition and in situ template-sacrificial dissolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis route for porous CdS nanosheet-assembled flowers; SEM images of the Cd(OH)2 intermediates (b) and the as-prepared CdS products (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright © 2013, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of the as-prepared (a) and calcined hierarchically macro-/mesoporous TiO2 samples at (b) 300, (c and d) 500 and (e) 800 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  Comparison of the photocatalytic activity of P25, as-prepared and calcined hierarchically macro-/mesoporous TiO2 samples at 300, 400, 500, 600, 700 and 800 °C for photocatalytic decomposition of acetone in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 21  The formation mechanism of the hierarchically macro/mesoporous amorphous titania. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
[Fe(CN)6]3− → Fe3− → FeOOH/Fe(OH)3 → α-Fe2O3	(4)

 	Fig. 22  (a) SEM images of the samples prepared by using a 2:1 molar ratio of Bi2S3 and CdS; (b) illustration of the morphological evolution process of the sea-urchin shaped Bi2S3/CdS hierarchical heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of the self-assembled rutile by microwave heating of TiCl3 at 200 °C for 1 min; (b) SEM images of Cu3SnS4 synthesized at 200 °C for 12 hours. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205 (a) and ref. 206 (b). Copyright © 2010 and 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of a single dendritic α-Fe2O3 micro-/nano-structure; (b) schematic illustration of growth of the as-synthesized dendritic α-Fe2O3 nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright © 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  SEM images of the fluoride-mediated TiO2 samples: (a) overall view of TiO2 microspheres; (b) image of a few microspheres showing their unique structure consisting of primary TiO2 nanoparticles; (c) a single microsphere with visible hollow structure; (d) a portion of the microsphere shell composed of nanosized polyhedra with exposed (001) facets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the fluoride-induced self-transformation synthesis of hollow TiO2 anatase microspheres.	 

 	Fig. 27  Formation mechanism of anatase TiO2 hollow spheres prepared by hydrothermal treatment of amorphous TiO2 solid spheres in NH4F aqueous solution. The left and right panels respectively show the TEM images and the corresponding XRD patterns of the intermediate products obtained at 180 °C for different time periods (scale bar: 100 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright © 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  Photocatalytic applications of hierarchical nanostructures.	 

Photodegradation of gaseous pollutants
TiO2	Macro–mesoporous structure	Sol–gel reactions/calcination	Surfactant template	Ethylene(g)	15 min/42%	
112 (2005)
TiO2	Macro–mesoporous structure	Template-free sol–gel reactions	Self-assembly	Acetone(g)	(6.13)	
114 (2007)
TiO2	Macro/mesoporous structures	Hydrothermal treatment	
	Acetone(g)	(10.2)	
236 (2012)
TiO2	Worm-like macroporous	Template-free hydrothermal approach	Packed aggregates of particles	HCHO(g)	60 min/90.6%	
244 (2015)
BiOI/BiOCl	Flower-like	Room temperature template free method	Self-assembly of nanoplates	NO(g)	150 s/54.6% (200)	
336 (2012)


Aqueous-phase photodegradation of methyl orange (MO)
TiO2	Nanoporous hollow microspheres	Low-temperature template method	
In situ template-sacrificial dissolution	MO	(16.1)	
176 (2008)
TiO2	Hierarchical microspheres	One step hydrothermal route	Self-assembly of nanotubes	MO	50 min/100%	
337 (2015)
TiO2/ZnO	Hedgehogs and fan blades	Solvothermal method	Ostwald ripening	MO	30 min/97% (0.117)	
338 (2015)
ZnO–SnO2	Hollow spheres, hierarchical nanosheets	Hydrothermal method	
	MO	30 min/100%	
339 (2007)
ZnIn2S4	Marigold-like microspheres	Hydrothermal method	Self-assembly of nanosheets	MO	3 h/100%	
266 (2009)
Bi2S3	Flower-like morphology	Reflux method	Self-assembly of nanorods	MO	97%/97% (77.6)	
340 (2013)
BiOBr	3-D microspherical architectures	Solvothermal synthesis	Self-assembly of nanosheets	MO	5 h/100%	
341 (2008)
β-Ag2WO4	Porous hollow nanospheres	Precipitation reaction	Self-assembly of nanoparticles	MO	330 min/90%	
342 (2013)
CdS	Dendritic nanoarchitectures	Template-free hydrothermal route	Self-assembly of nanoparticles	MO	80 min/85% (34.6)	
343 (2009)


Aqueous-phase photodegradation of methylene blue (MB)
F–TiO2	Mesoporous hollow microspheres	Hydrothermal treatment	Self-etching mechanism by HF	MB	6 h/92%	
99 (2008)
TiO2/graphene	Ordered macro–mesoporous frameworks	Sol–gel template synthesis	Confinement self-assembly	MB	90 min/90% (71)	
111 (2011)
SnO2	Hierarchical nanostructures	Hydrothermal process	Self-assembly of nanosheets	MB	20 min/99%	
344 (2014)
SnO2/a-Fe2O3	Branched nanoheterostructures	Hydrothermal strategy	Epitaxial growth of SnO2 nanorods	MB	4 h/87%	
345 (2010)
γ-Fe2O3/ZnO	Double-shelled hollow structures	Hydrothermal-hydrolysis-calcination	Growth of ZnO flakes	MB	50 min/95.2%	
346 (2012)
WO3	Porous flower-like structures	Hydrothermal treatment	Self-assembly of nanoplates	MB	60 min/80%	
347 (2012)
ZnIn2S4	Porous submicrospheres	Template-free, microwave-solvothermal approach	Self-assembly of nanofibers	MB	(7.5)	
105 (2007)


Aqueous-phase photodegradation of rhodamine B (RhB)
TiO2	Hollow microspheres with exposed (001) facets	Hydrothermal strategy	Morphology control by NH4HF2	RhB	2 h/80% (50)	
348 (2010)
TiO2	Porous hollow microspheres/chains	Hydrothermal approach	Fluoride-mediated self-transformation strategy	RhB	90 min/90%	
216 (2009)
Titanate/N-doped anatase	Flower-like hierarchical spheres	Hydrothermal approach	Self-assembly of nanosheets	RhB	60 min/100%	
349 (2015)
ZnO	Hollow spheres	Hydrothermal strategy	Carbon sphere template	RhB	(1222)	
350 (2008)
TiO2/AlOOH	Flower-like boehmite superstructures	Hydrothermal treatment	
In situ transformation of Al(OH)3 microspheres	RhB	60 min/92%	
138 (2009)
WO3	Hollow shells	Annealing of acid-treated precursors	
	RhB	150 min/100%	
351 (2008)
WO3	Flower-like assemblies	Template-free hydrothermal treatment	Self-assembly of nanoplates	RhB	5 h/60% (175)	
315 (2009)
WO3	Sphere-like micropatterns	Hydrothermal reaction	Self-assembly of nanorods	RhB	210 min/84%	
352 (2013)
BiVO4/Bi2O2CO3	Nanosheet-based hierarchical structure	Template-free hydrothermal approach	Urea-assisted hydrolysis reactions	RhB	60 min/97%	
302 (2011)
Bi2O2CO3	Flower-like microspheres	Two-step hydrothermal method	Self-assembly of nanosheets	RhB	75 min/95%	
321 (2012)
BiOCl	3D microspheres	Hydrothermal method	Self-assembly of nanoplatelets	RhB	80 min/100%	
353 (2013)
BiOClxBr1−x	3D flower-like structure	Room-temperature procedure	
	RB	120 s/100%	
289 (2013)
BiOBr	Flower-like microspheres	Solvothermal synthesis/surfactant	Self-assembly of nanosheets	RB	50 min/95% (7.71)	
296 (2012)
Ag/AgBr/BiOBr	Flower-like microspheres	Solvothermal method and in situ ion exchange reaction	Self-assembly of nanosheets	RB	4 min/93% (396)	
202 (2011)
Bi2S3/CdS	Urchin-like nanoflowers	Template-free hydrothermal method	Self-assembly of nanorods	RhB	80 min/85%	
204 (2014)
Fe3O4@Bi2S3	Urchin-shaped core/shell structures	Solvothermal reaction under ultrasound irradiation	Growth of Bi2S3 nanorods	RhB	6 h/100%	
120 (2012)
g-C3N4–BiOCl	Flower-like clusters	Chemical deposition-precipitation	Self-assembly of BiOCl nanoplates	RhB	60 min/100% (117)	
354 (2014)


Aqueous-phase photodegradation of other organic and inorganic pollutants
F-doped TiO2	Nanoporous spheres	Template-free hydrothermal approach	Self-etching by HF	4-Chlorophenol	6 h/50%	
106 (2006)
AgI/BiOI	Hierarchical microspheres	Solvothermal approach and in situ ion exchange reaction	Self-assembly of nanosheets	2,4-Dichlorophenol	60 min/77.7%	
355 (2013)
NiO/TiO2	Porous flower-like superstructures	Template-free hydrothermal treatment	
	
p-Chlorophenol	180 min/95%	
356 (2010)
Amorphous Fe2O3	Hollow spheres	Hydrothermal treatment	Self-assembly of nanoparticles	Salicylic acid	110 min/75%	
357 (2007)
α-Fe2O3	Hollow spheres	Microwave-assisted solvothermal method	Self-assembly of nanosheets	Salicylic acid	80 min/65%	
358 (2008)
CdS/ZnO	Nanotree-like structures	Hydrothermal-chemical bath method	Seeded growth process	Thioanisole	2 h/60%	
145 (2014)
α-Fe2O3/CdS	Microflowers	Chemical bath method	Growth of CdS nanoparticles	Cr(VI)	120 min/100%	
359 (2013)
g-C3N4/SnS2	3D flower-like microsphere	Solvothermal method	Self-assembly of SnS2 nanoflakes	Cr(VI)	50 min/100% (458.2)	
334 (2014)

 	Fig. 29  SEM images of sponge-like hierarchically meso-/macroporous TiO2 prepared at 180 °C for 24 d. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Comparison of the photocatalytic activity of P25 and sponge-like hierarchically meso-/macroporous TiO2 prepared at 180 °C and different hydrothermal time periods for photocatalytic oxidation decomposition of acetone in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM (a), high magnification SEM (b), TEM (c), and HRTEM (d) images of HFTS. The inset in (a) is a magnified image of an individual spherical superstructure. (e) Comparison of the photocatalytic activity of HFTS, TSTP, and P25 for photocatalytic decomposition of acetone in air. (f) Dependence of the produced CO2 concentration on irradiation time for HFTS, TSTP, and P25. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 32  SEM images (a and b) of the TiO2 films composed of flower-like TiO2 microspheres with exposed (001) facets prepared by hydrothermal treatment of Ti foil at 180 °C for 1 h. The inset in (a) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the TiO2 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the selective adsorption of pollutants on the TiO2 surface. (A) and (B) Represent negatively and positively charged pollutants, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  Comparison of photocatalytic activity and selectivity of the TiO2 films prepared at 180 °C for 1 h (T1) towards degradation of MO and MB before (T1-F) and after NaOH washing (T1-OH). The photocatalytic activity and selectivity is defined by the apparent rate constant (k) and the ratio (r) of k, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 35  (A) SEM images of the as-prepared ZnO obtained by calcination at 500 °C; (B) UV-vis absorption spectra of ZnO flower-like samples calcined at various calcination temperatures: (a) 300, (b) 400, (c) 500, (d) 600, (e) 700 °C and (f) commercial ZnO; (C) the corresponding pore size distribution curves for ZnO flowers calcined at various calcination temperatures; (D) comparison of the apparent rate constants (k) for the ZnO flower-like samples calcined at various temperatures under visible-light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Single-compound photocatalysts
CdS	Nanoporous nanosheet	Precipitation and anion-exchange method	Cd(OH)2 intermediates	10 wt% Pt	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	4100/60.34	
22 (2007)
CdS	Flower-like microspheres	Hydrothermal and anion-exchange method	Self-assembly of nanosheets	0.5 wt% Pt	10 vol% lactic acid	9374/24.7	
198 (2013)
CdS	Nanoporous nanosheet	Precipitation and anion-exchange method	Cd(OH)2 intermediates	10 wt% Pt	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	4100/60.34	
22 (2007)


Solid solution photocatalysts
Cu (2 atom%)-doped ZnS	Hollow particles	Anion-exchange method	Chemical etching	
	0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S	6500/	
368 (2008)
ZnIn2S4	Flower-like microspheres	Template-free hydrothermal method	Aggregation of flakes	1.0 wt% Pt	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	8420/34.3	
265 (2011)
ZnIn2S4	Marigold flower-like morphology	Hydrothermal method	Self-assembly of nanoplates	
	H2S-saturated NaOH (0.25 M)	10574/	
369 (2011)
ZnIn2S4	Porous submicrospheres	Polyol-mediated hot-injection	Self-assembly of nanosheets	3.0 wt% Pt	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	1150/	
264 (2013)
ZnIn2S4	Microspheres	Microwave hydrothermal method	Self-assembly of nanosheets	0.2 wt% Pt + 0.5 wt% carbon QDs	10 vol% triethanolamine	1032.2/2.2	
269 (2014)
CdxZn1−xS	Volvox-like nanospheres	Template-free	
	
	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	1766.4/	
370 (2014)
Zn0.8Cd0.2S	Micro-flowers and microspheres	Solvothermal	Self-assembly of nanorods	1 wt% Pt	0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S	5000/	
371 (2013)


Composite photocatalysts
CuS (5.9%)–ZnxCd1−xS	Nanospheres	Heating in ethylene glycol	
	1 wt% Pt	0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S	2464/19.1	
372 (2009)
ZnxCd1−xS/bacterial cellulose	Bionanocomposite foams	Solvothermal/ion exchange	Seeded growth	
	0.05 M Na2SO3 and 0.05 M Na2S	1450/12	
373 (2015)
Carbon nanofiber@ZnIn2S4	Core–shell nanoarchitectures	Solvothermal process	
In situ growth of ZnIn2S4 nanosheets	15 wt% carbon nanofibers	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	3166/25.35	
374 (2014)
In2S3/ZnIn2S4	Microflower morphology	Ion-exchange route	Self-assembly of nanoplates	1 wt% Pt	0.25 M K2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	678/1.4	
375 (2013)
ZnIn2S4/MoS2	Flower-like microspheres	Solvothermal process	Self-assembly of nanosheets	15 wt% MoS2	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	975/	
376 (2014)
CdS/ZnS/In2S3	Microspheres	Template-free sonochemistry synthesis	Self-assembly of nanoparticles	
	1.4 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M Na2S	8100/40.9	
333 (2012)
CdS@ZnO	Core–shell nanourchins	Hydrothermal	Self-assembly of CdS nanowires	
	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	10080/15	
122 (2012)
CdS/g-C3N4 (2 wt%)	Core/shell nanowires	Solvothermal and chemisorption method	
	0.6 wt% Pt	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	4152/4.3	
377 (2013)

 	Fig. 36  (A) High-magnification SEM images of porous CdS nanosheet-type flower-like assemblies; (B) photocatalytic production of H2 from aqueous lactic acid solutions over (a) the porous CdS nanosheet-type assemblies and (b) CdS nanoparticles under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright © 2013, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) TEM images of the multi-armed rods (sample R140); (b) effect of the Pt loading content on the H2-production rate of the R140 sample in aqueous lactic acid solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 378. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 38  (A and B) CuS/ZnS porous nanosheet-type photocatalysts fabricated by a hydrothermal and cation exchange method using pre-prepared ZnS(en)0.5 nanosheets and Cu(NO3)2 as precursors. (C) Comparison of the visible-light photocatalytic H2-production rate obtained on CuS/ZnS porous composite nanosheets and ZnS samples using Na2S and Na2SO3 as sacrificial solution. The nominal molar ratios of Cu/Zn were 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 5 mol%, and the obtained samples were labeled as CZ0 (ZnS), CZ0.5, CZ1, CZ2, CZ3 and CZ5, respectively. (D) Visible-light induced interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) mechanism from the valence band of ZnS to the CuS clusters in the CuS/ZnS system for photocatalytic H2-production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 385. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Possible positions of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and platinum nanoparticles (NPs) deposited on the surface of ZnIn2S4 microspheres (ZIS MSs), (b) comparison of the photocatalytic H2 production activities of the ZIS, CZIS, Pt/ZIS, and Pt/C-ZIS samples in aqueous triethanolamine under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Gas–solid systems for CO2 photoreduction
Titanate nanosheets	Yolk@shell microspheres	Hydrothermal treatment	Organic amine mediated anhydrous alcoholysis	
	300 W Xe lamp, ≥400 nm	0.1/CO2 and H2O vapor/200 mL	CH3OH (2.1)	
427 (2015)
2D Ti0.9O2–graphene	Hollow spheres	Microwave irradiation technique	Layer-by-layer assembly	
	300 W xenon lamp	0.01/CO2 and H2O vapor/230 mL	CO (8.91), CH4 (1.14)	
424 (2012)
TiO2–graphene	2D sandwich-like hybrid nanosheets	Hydrothermal approach	
In situ loading of TiO2 nanoparticles	
	300 W xenon lamp	0.1/CO2 and H2O vapor/230 mL	CH4 (8), C2H6 (16.8)	
425 (2013)
TiO2–graphene	Worm-like mesoporous architecture	Nanocasting route	
	
	300 W xenon lamp	0.1/CO2 and H2O vapor/1500 mL	CO (10.06), CH4 (1.54)	
428 (2013)
Graphene–g-C3N4	Sandwich-like nanostructures	Impregnation–thermal reduction strategy	
	
	15 W daylight bulb	CO2 and H2O vapor	CH4 (0.587)	
412 (2015)
SrTiO3	Leaf's 3D architecture	Sol–gel method/calcination	Leaves template growth	1 wt% Au	300 W Xe lamp, ≥420 nm	0.05/CO2 and H2O vapor	CO (0.35), CH4 (0.23)	
429 (2013)
TiO2	Microspheres with hierarchical nanostructure	
	
	
	40 W Hg lamp	0.2/CO2 and H2O vapor/230 mL	CO (2.32), CH4 (0.94), H2 (2.03)	
413 (2014)
NaTaO3	Hierarchical porous anatomy	
	Tree trunks as templates	1 wt% Au	200 W Hg–Xe lamp	0.05/CO2 and H2O vapor/390 mL	CO (0.173), CH4 (0.036)	
418 (2015)
Zn1.7GeN1.8O	Sheaf-like, hyperbranched	
	
	1 wt% Pt and 1 wt% RuO2	300 W Xe lamp, >420 nm	0.05/CO2 and H2O vapor/390 mL	CH4 (0.009)	
430 (2012)


Suspension systems for CO2 photoreduction
ZnO/ZnTe	Hierarchical superstructures	Hydrothermal approach	
	
	300 W xenon lamp, ≥420 nm	0.01/CO2 saturated water solution/80 mL	CH4 (44.56)	
431 (2015)
Bi2WO6	Hollow microspheres	Anion exchange approach	Microscale Kirkendall effect	
	300 W Xe arc lamp, ≥420 nm	0.2/CO2 saturated water solution/100 mL	CH3OH (16.3)	
200 (2012)
Bi2S3	Urchin-like microspheres	Template-free solvothermal method	Self-assembly of nanorods	
	250 W Hg lamp	0.1/CO2 saturated methanol solution/10 mL	HCHO (175)	
416 (2013)
ZnTe	Hollow and mesoporous microspheres	Hydrothermal approach	Nucleation process/Ostwald ripening	
	300 W xenon lamp, >420 nm	0.01/CO2 saturated water solution/80 mL	CH4 (1.05)	
417 (2015)

 	Fig. 40  FESEM (a and b) and TEM (c) of the typical sample TN200 (200 °C, alcohothermal method); (d) comparison of the CH3OH generation rate for various samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 427. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  SEM (a) and high-magnification SEM mages (b) of hierarchical WO3 hollow spheres: EDS elemental mapping of W (c), O (d), Cd (e), and S (f) of the 5 mol% CdS–WO3 sample. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) GC spectra of CO2 reduction on the 5 mol% CdS–WO3 sample at different irradiation times, (b) comparison of the photocatalytic CH4 production rate of Cx (x = 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 100, the nominal molar ratios of CdS to (WO3 + CdS)) and CdS–WO3 nanoparticle composite (N5) samples under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
