Recent progress in emerging metal and covalent organic frameworks for electrochemical and functional capacitors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA00652E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA00652E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8832-8869Recent progress in emerging metal and covalent organic frameworks for electrochemical and functional capacitors

        
          
            Chengang 
            Pei†
a, 
      
        
          
            Min Sung 
            Choi†
b, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            Yu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Huaiguo 
            Xue
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bao Yu 
            Xia
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Ho Seok 
            Park
          
        
      *bd
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute for Innovative Materials and Energy, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225002, Jiangsu, China. E-mail: yxypz15@yzu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), 2066, Seoburo, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. E-mail: phs0727@skku.edu
cKey Laboratory of Material Chemistry for Energy Conversion and Storage (Ministry of Education), Hubei Key Laboratory of Material Chemistry and Service Failure, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), 1037 Luoyu Road, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: byxia@hust.edu.cn
dDepartment of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology (SAIHST), Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seoburo, Jangan-gu, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea
Received 
      23rd January 2021
    , Accepted 4th March 2021First published on 4th March 2021AbstractRecently, metal and covalent organic frameworks (MOFs and COFs) and their derivatives have received significant attention as advanced electrode materials owing to their diverse topology, tunable porosity, well-defined crystalline structure, and abundant redox active sites. Herein, we provide a systematic and comprehensive review of the key fundamental aspects of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives, which can be classified into 12 types. The chemical and physical features, energy storage mechanisms, and structure/property correlations of the 12 types of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives are discussed by targeting performance- and functionality-oriented supercapacitor (SC) applications. In addition to the controllable structure and adjustable surface chemistry of pristine MOFs and COFs, chemical modification by metallization, carbonization, activation, metal and non-metal doping, and hybridization for the rational design of derived materials are addressed. Recent advances and challenges in the SC applications of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives are discussed by covering performance-oriented SCs, including electrochemical double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors, and hybrid SCs, and functionality-oriented SCs, such as flexible, micro, and self-powered SCs. Finally, our perspective on the current impediments and future direction of this field is provided to facilitate the practical applications of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage devices are considered as promising systems to address the current environmental issues related to fossil fuels and CO2 emission and to meet the increasing demands from emerging markets such as future electronics and electrical vehicles.1–5 In particular, supercapacitors (SCs), as a type of electrochemical energy storage device, are attractive because their rate capability and cycle stability are better than those of batteries.6–9 However, the low energy density of SCs, resulting from the intrinsic physical charge storage on or near the electrode surface, limits their practical applications. Considering that the electrochemical performance of SCs strongly depends on the active materials of the electrode and the corresponding charge storage mechanism,10 emerging materials with high capacitance, fast charge storage kinetics, and electrochemical stability are needed to overcome the limited energy density. In contrast to the electrochemical double-layer capacitor (EDLC), which is based on a large surface area porous carbon, pseudocapacitors (PCs) can store charges on or near the surface of electrode materials through the faradaic redox reaction;11–13 thus, PCs represent a chemical strategy whereby a higher capacitance can be achieved for greatly improved energy density of SCs. The energy density of SCs can be further improved with electrode materials that are either active in organic or ionic liquid electrolytes with a wide potential window or configured into asymmetric and hybrid SCs using counter electrodes with different working potentials and distinct charge storage mechanisms.14
Recently, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs), representing burgeoning families of porous crystalline materials (PCMs), have received significant attention as advanced electrode materials owing to their tunable framework structures, unique porous characteristics, well-defined crystalline structures, and large surface areas. Since the discovery of MOFs in 199515 and COFs in 2005 by Yaghi et al.,16 various PCMs have been exploited for energy storage applications, as shown in Fig. 1. In order to improve the low electrical conductivity of most pristine MOFs, nanoporous carbon (NPC) derived from MOF-5 was first applied for the electrode materials of EDLCs, delivering a high capacitance of 204 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1.17 In 2010, the pseudocapacitive Ni–Zn–Co oxide/hydroxide derived from MOF-5 with Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and Co(NO3)2·6H2O exhibited a specific capacitance of 946 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1.18 In 2012, pristine Co8-MOF-5 was first used as an electrode material, exhibiting EDLC features with a capacitance of 0.49 F g−1 at 25 mV s−1.19 Subsequently, the pseudocapacitance of pristine MOF-71 was first observed, characterized by a capacitance of 206.67 F g−1 at 0.6 A g−1.20 In 2015, polyaniline (PANI) deposited Co-MOF (ZIF-67) coated on carbon cloth (CC) was used as a conductive porous electrode in flexible SCs owing to its outstanding mechanical flexibility and electrochemical properties.21 In particular, the discovery of a conductive Ni3(HITP)2 MOF further improved the electrochemical performances of SCs.8 Compared with MOFs, the history of COFs in the field of SCs is short because of their late discovery, but their development is very rapid. Unlike MOF materials, pristine DAAQ-TFP COF can be directly applied as electrode materials of SCs.22 Owing to the intrinsic redox reactivity of anthraquinones, its pseudocapacitive performance is much higher than that of similar DAB-TFP COFs. In 2016, the conductive COF, polyporphyrin (TThPP) linked by four thiophenephenyl groups, was synthesized to develop TThPP//activated carbon (AC) hybrid SCs with a capacitance of 63.41 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1.23 In 2017, COF-derived carbons were also developed for EDLC electrodes.24 Both pristine MOFs and COFs can act as charge storage materials through the incorporation of redox active sites, and as the templates or precursors of their derivatives such as porous carbons, transition metal-based materials, and their composites.25–27 Moreover, chemical modifications such as the incorporation of metal/non-metal ions and hybridization with other nanomaterials have been investigated to further improve their energy storage performance.28–33
 Fig. 1  Historical advance in MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for application of SCs. 
Herein, we comprehensively review the recent progress in the rational design of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for high-energy and functional SCs. In the past few years, many MOFs and COFs have been investigated, demonstrating outstanding performances for various applications, such as electrocatalysis, energy conversion and storage, sensing, and separation.34–57 Recently, the characteristics of core–shell structured MOFs,43 pristine MOFs and COFs,34 MOF-based composites,44,58 MOF-derived carbons,47,59 porous COFs,46 crystalline COFs,48 and bulk COFs and COF nanosheets49 have been summarized with a focus on their wide range of energy-related applications such as water splitting reactions, nanoreactors, lithium ion batteries, lithium–air batteries, and SCs. Although MOFs, COFs, and their related materials for energy storage applications have already been discussed,34–57,60 a comprehensive and systematic review focusing on the recent progress of performance- and functionality-oriented applications of SCs has not been attempted. Therefore, this review first discusses the detailed classification, the design of charge storage sites, the corresponding charge storage mechanism, and the specific applications of MOFs and COFs in high-energy and functional SCs. Then, the relationship between structure and electrochemical properties, the charge storage mechanism determined by ex situ and in situ/operando measurements, and the performance enhancement of MOFs and COFs by chemical modifications, including metal or non-metal ion incorporation and hybridization with other nanomaterials, are discussed in Section 2. The special applications of MOFs and COFs in high-energy SCs, including EDLCs, PCs, and hybrid SCs, and functional SCs, such as flexible, micro, and self-powered SCs, are discussed in Section 3. Finally, we provide our perspective on the current challenges and future directions of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for practical SC applications.
2. The features, modification, and energy storage mechanism of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives
The microscopic and macroscopic structures and surface chemistry of MOFs and COFs can be controlled by modifying the type of their organic linkers or metallic centers and the synthesis conditions. In this review, MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives are classified into 12 types, as shown in Fig. 2. Pristine ① MOFs and ② COFs can be directly used as EDLCs or pseudocapacitive electrodes of SCs. Their derivatives can be obtained from various chemical modifications of MOFs and COFs, such as carbonization, activation, metal etching, metallization, calcination, heteroatom incorporation, and hybridization. The porous carbons derived from MOFs and COFs ③ via simple carbonization and ④ via activation and metal etching strategies possess improved electrical conductivities and surface areas. The organic linkers of MOF and COF can be used as carbon precursors, and their frameworks can act as templates to construct replicas of the porous structure using additional carbon precursors. ⑤ Transition metal oxide/carbon composites can be synthesized following the metallization of MOFs, which can then be used to obtain ⑥ porous transition metal-based materials by subsequent calcination and the complete removal of carbons. In order to further control the chemical composition, metal atoms (Mn2+, Zn2+, Al3+, Cu2+, and Co2+) and/or non-metal atoms (S, Se, B, N, P, F, and C)28,61–76 can be incorporated into ⑦ pristine MOFs/COFs and their derivatives such as ⑧ porous carbons and ⑨ transition metal-based materials. The hybridization of MOFs and COFs with ⑩ carbon materials, ⑪ conducting polymers, and ⑫ other transition metal-based materials is also a promising strategy to improve the capacitive performance. In comparison to the similar materials prepared by other methods,77–82 the synthesis process of the derivatives based on MOFs and COFs is more complicate and tedious, but these derivatives have their own advantages, including the unique porous structure and morphology which are controlled replicating the framework skeleton of MOFs or COFs. Moreover, the derivatives with multi-compositions, such as heteroatom doped carbons and metal oxides/carbon composites can be directly obtained from MOFs or COFs.
 Fig. 2  The synthesis, structures, and chemical modifications of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives. 
2.1. Structure and property of pristine MOFs and COFs
MOFs are structured inorganic–organic infinite frameworks assembled via the interaction of metal nodes (metal ions or metal clusters) with organic linkers. As shown in Fig. 2, MOFs are constructed by linking inorganic and organic units via coordination configurations, metallic bonds, hydrogen bonds, or van der Waals forces. By contrast, COFs are ordered honeycomb-structured materials entirely composed of two distinct components: linkers (building units) and linkages (bonds formed between those units upon reticulation). COFs can be obtained by linking organic ligands via strong covalent bonds with light elements. As shown in Fig. 3, various redox active sites, such as metallic elements (type 1: open metal sites and transition metal in organic ligands) and organic ligands (type 2: organic functional groups and heteroatom-containing groups such as CO, N–H, CN, and C–P) can be incorporated in the form of multivalent transition metals and redox active moieties of organic ligands. Several important parameters, such as synthesis methods and conditions83–85 and organic/inorganic linkers,84,86 determine the macro- and microscopic structures and chemistry of MOFs and COFs. Therefore, MOFs and COFs are characterized by structural and compositional diversities arising from the varied combinations of metals with ligands and linkers with linkages, respectively. The relationship between the structure and electrochemical performance, heteroatoms, including metal ions (Ni2+, Fe2+), properties of these materials for SC applications is discussed in this section.
 Fig. 3  Storage sites of MOFs and COFs and the corresponding energy storage mechanisms of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives which are classified in Fig. 2. 

2.1.1 Structure and chemistry and their correlation with electrochemical properties of pristine MOFs. 
The porous and crystalline structure, morphology, and chemical composition of ① pristine MOFs are deterministic factors that can be used to improve the electrochemical performance of SCs, such as their capacitance, rate capability, and cyclic stability. These factors can be controlled by varying the synthesis parameters and building units. More than 20000 MOFs can be synthesized by nucleation and growth processes.54 The most prevalent synthesis methods of MOFs and COFs are solution-based hydrothermal and solvothermal processes in which the main parameters are reaction temperature, pressure, and the applied solvents. Most MOFs are microporous materials with average pore diameters ranging from 0.6 to 2.0 nm. Such limited pore size can hinder mass/ion transfer into the framework, thus deteriorating the specific capacitance of the MOFs at high rates and over long cycles. Considering that the growth of the mesopores is determined by the vertex connections,87 reducing the number of vertex connections can effectively increase the mesopore size of the polyhedron. Accordingly, MOF-919 with an internal pore diameter of 6.0 nm was prepared with the least connectivity of three-connecting (3-c) vertices and two-connecting (2-c) vertices to construct cages with an expanded size. In addition to controlling the porous structure of the MOF during synthesis, the template method can be used to create new pores.88 Hierarchically porous UiO-66 (HP-UiO-66) was prepared using UiO-66 with a pore size of 0.6 nm as a template in an acidic aqueous solution. The as-prepared HP-UiO-66 with additional mesopores has a larger specific surface area (874 m2 g−1) than UiO-66 (490 m2 g−1). Thus, the specific capacitance of the HP-UiO-66 electrode (849 F g−1) was determined to be greater than that of UiO-66 (102 F g−1) at 0.2 A g−1 owing to the hierarchical porous structure of the mesopores and micropores. In a previous study, 23 types of nanocrystalline MOFs, including nMOF-5, nMOF-74, nMOF-801, nUiO-67, nMOF-801, nMOF-867, and nHKUST-1, were developed with different crystallite sizes, linker shapes and lengths, and metal unit nuclearities.89 Particularly, nHKUST-1 with a crystal size of 100 nm has a larger surface area (1470 m2 g−1) than the bulk HKUST-1, delivering a maximum capacitance of 2.334 mF cmareal−2. In particular, nMOF-867, which is similar to nUiO-67 in structure and chemical composition, delivered the highest stack and areal capacitance of 0.644 mF cmstack−3 and 5.085 mF cmareal−2, respectively, among the 23 samples. Moreover, the sp2 nitrogen atoms in nMOF-867 strengthened its interaction with ions, thus improving the SC performance.
In contrast to the bulk structure, nanostructured MOFs have certain advantages for SC applications owing to their large specific surface areas, short diffusion lengths, and plentiful exposed active sites. For instance, Yan et al. synthesized an accordion-like Ni-MOF superstructure ([Ni3(OH)2(C8H4O4)2(H2O)4]·2H2O), which has a larger surface specific area (117.42 m2 g−1) than its bulk counterpart (99.53 m2 g−1).90 The resulting Ni-MOF exhibited high specific capacitances of 988 and 823 F g−1 at 1.4 and 7.0 A g−1, respectively. Two-dimensional (2D) Co-MOF ultrathin nanosheets [Co2(OH)2BDC, BDC = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate] with a thickness of approximately 2 nm were also prepared using a facile surfactant-assisted one-pot hydrothermal synthesis, delivering a maximum capacitance of 1159 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1.91 Wei et al. synthesized a Ni-based MOF of [Ni3(OH)2(C8H4O4)2·(H2O)4]·2H2O (Ni-MOF-24) with a loosely packed sheet-like structure to facilitate charge transfer and ion diffusion.92 Meanwhile, the relationship between the crystal structure and electrochemical performance was investigated by controlling the synthesis time (12 h and 24 h). Ni-MOF-24 contains more (100) facets and less (020) facets than Ni-MOF-12. Given that the exposed (100) facets act as the dominant redox active sites, the enhanced pseudocapacitive performance of Ni-MOF-24 was attributed to the unique layered structure and abundant exposed (100) facets. Thus, this Ni-based MOF in 6 M KOH exhibited a high specific capacitance of 1127 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1via the intercalation and deintercalation of OH− in a similar manner to Ni(OH)2 and high rate capacitance of 668 F g−1 at 10 A g−1 along with cycling stability of 90% after 3000 cycles. 2D layered Ni-MOFs with a one-dimensional (1D) chain structure were used as the positive electrode for hybrid SCs.93 These MOFs are characterized by an electronic conducting path, an adequate interlayer spacing for ion diffusion, and an abundance of active sites; thus, their specific capacities are enhanced.
The chemical structure of MOFs, consisting of ligand and metal element, plays a significant role in the electrochemical performances of SCs, which can be improved by modifying the redox active sites such as metal ions and functional groups. Yang et al. developed ultrathin layer-structured NiCo-MOFs with the thickness of 1.74 to 3.87 nm in order to provide short diffusion pathways for ion transport and fast charge transfer.94 Notably, NiCo-MOFs contain abundant redox pairs of Co2+/Co3+ and Ni2+/Ni3+ with the aid of OH− anions to achieve a high specific capacitance of 1202.1 F g−1, which is greater than those of Ni-MOF and Co-MOF, because of their bimetallic composition. However, it is difficult to clarify the effect of MOF chemistry on SC performance because different proportions of metal elements and ligands also affect crystallinity, porosity, and morphology. Nonetheless, Ni-MOFs with different structures were synthesized by adjusting the molar ratios of trimesic acid and nickel ion (Ni2+) through a facile hydrothermal process.95 As the molar ratio of the trimesic acid to Ni2+ increased from 1:6 to 1:1, the structure of the Ni-MOF changed from a porous nanosheet to a spherical structure along with a reduced surface area. The electrochemical performance of the Ni-MOF prepared with a specific ratio of 1:6 is the highest because of its optimized composition and structure.
Conductive MOFs have been exploited for SC applications to address the technical limitations caused by low electrical conductivity. For instance, Ni3(HITP)2 MOF showed an electrical conductivity of 5000 S m−1, which is higher than those of ACs and holey graphite (nearly 1000 S m−1), owing to the unique π-conjugated stacked 2D layers with 1D cylindrical channels.8 A high specific surface area of 630 m2 g−1 with a pore size of approximately 1.5 nm was also achieved. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of Ni3(HITP)2 in a symmetrical cell exhibited nearly rectangular and triangular shapes in the potential window of 1.0 V, respectively, without the change in the valence state of Ni element. Consequently, neat Ni3(HITP)2 assembled symmetric cells delivered an areal capacitance of ∼18 μF cm−2, outperforming carbon-based EDLCs except for holey graphene.96 The long-term stability of Ni3(HITP)2 electrode over 10000 cycles was achieved at 2 A g−1 to demonstrate EDLC feature.The merit of conductive MOFs is the reduced portion of inactive materials, thus increasing the energy density of SCs.


2.1.2 Structure and chemistry and their correlation with electrochemical properties of pristine COFs. 
The synthesis process of ② pristine COFs is similar to that of organic polymers. Crystallinity is a challenge of COFs because the formation of amorphous or low-crystalline materials is thermodynamically favorable when strong covalent bonds are created to stabilize the primitive occupancies. Through dynamic combinatorial chemistry, extended crystalline materials can be obtained if the bonds connecting the building elements are reversible within a certain range of reaction rates. Crystalline COFs are considered promising electrode materials owing to their chemical stability and high electron density along the crystalline channels.97,98 For instance, Bhaumik et al. synthesized crystalline TFP-NDA-COF (TFP: 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol; NDA: 1,5-diaminonaphthalene) via the solvothermal Schiff base condensation.98 This COF delivered a specific capacitance of 379 F g−1 and an energy density of 48.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 247 W kg−1 because of the facile π conjugation, large surface area, and redox active N doping. However, COFs tend to form irreversible connections under mild conditions, which are not conducive for the synthesis of highly crystalline materials.
Considerable efforts have been devoted to resolving this crystallinity issue. However, polycrystalline powders or films with small crystallites typically form because nucleation and growth are difficult to control. During the growth of COFs, both polymerization and crystallization can occur. Dichtel et al.99 prepared 2D COFs using a two-step procedure by slowly adding monomers as nanoparticle seeds and obtained micrometer-sized single crystals. Yaghi et al. also demonstrated that the formation of imine bonds can be controlled by adding excess aniline as a nucleation inhibitor and a competitive regulator,100 which results in reversible bond formation and improves the self-correction of crystal defects. Finally, large, high-quality single crystals can be obtained by optimizing the crystal growth. The design principle and general approach for most COFs were proposed by Yaghi et al. In brief, a target-networked topology needs to be identified and chosen in the first step.101 In the second step, the topology is deconstructed into its fundamental geometric units in which the as-formed geometric units of the molecules act as linkers in the third step. Finally, single crystals of COFs can be produced with strong covalent bonds between the linkers, as confirmed by X-ray or electron diffraction. As shown in the classification of COFs, molecular reactions occurring under reversible conditions are important for the formation of selected linkages by solvothermal processes with catalysts.
For the hydrothermal, solvothermal, and chemical precipitation approaches of COFs, the reaction temperature and time, atmospheric pressure, and solvent type are the major factors. In particular, it often takes 2 to 9 days to synthesize COFs in a sealed vessel, where the pressure inside the sealed vessel affects the reaction yield and crystallinity. For instance, the optimal pressure is 150 mTorr in the vacuum line before sealing the vessel at a given volume (ca. 10 cm3).16 The solvent governs the solubility of the reactants, which may affect the reversibility of the reactions. Accordingly, chemical precipitation approaches take place below or at the boiling point under ambient pressure, which simplifies the synthesis equipment. Microwave-assisted, electrochemical, and mechanochemical syntheses have also been developed to replace the tedious conventional synthesis route. For example, Cooper et al. synthesized 2D COF-5 via the microwave-assisted method for 20 min, which is faster than that achieved by the solvothermal synthesis.102 The resulting 2D COF-5 showed a larger surface area (2019 m2 g−1) than COF-5 (1590 m2 g−1) obtained via the solvothermal method. Despite the short synthesis time, the increased surface area of 2D COF-5 improved its capacitive performance due to the increased number of exposed active sites.
Crystalline COFs have advantages such as a large surface area, adjustable pore size from micropores to mesopores, and compositional diversity. Moreover, COFs can be designed with clear polygonal pore shapes such as hexagonal, tetragonal, trigonal, rhombic, and kagome structures.46 Therefore, the selection of topological structure and the control of experimental conditions are of vital importance in the design of COFs.103–105 For instance, Yang et al. synthesized redox-active COFs via the aldehyde-amine condensation reaction of 1,4-piperazinedicarboxaldehyde (PDC) and melamine (MA), where the triazine units act as redox active sites to facilitate fast surface faradaic reactions.106 In particular, the C–H⋯H hydrogen bonds of 2D PDC-MA-COF contribute to the prevention of interlayer slip and the maintenance of ordered porous structure for fast ion diffusion and charge transfer.

2.2 Modifications and derivatives of MOFs and COFs for performance enhancement
In addition to the intrinsic porosity, crystallinity, chemical structure, and morphology of pristine ① MOFs and ② COFs, their electrochemical performance can also be dramatically improved by the following chemical modifications and transformations: (1) the synthesis of porous carbons, metal oxides, and metal oxide/carbon composites derived from MOFs and COFs by thermal treatment, (2) the incorporation of metal or non-metal heteroatoms to tune the surface chemical state, and (3) hybridization with other nanomaterials, such as carbon nanomaterials, transition metal-based materials, and organic materials. These strategies can provide multiple electroactive sites, rapid electron/ion conducting pathways, and electrochemical and mechanical stabilities for improved SC performance. Each strategy is discussed in detail below.

2.2.1 Porous carbons, metal oxides, and their composites derived from MOFs and COFs. 
Porous carbons derived from MOFs and COFs. 
Porous carbons ③ and ④ can be derived using MOFs and COFs as templates or as carbon precursors by direct carbonization. The as-derived carbons have advantages in terms of the replicated controlled porous structure, morphology, and high electrical conductivity. First, MOFs and COFs can be used as templates to synthesize nanoporous carbons with additional carbon sources from carbonization and the removal of metal elements.17,107 Khan et al. prepared carbon nanospheres by the pyrolytic conversion of MOF-5 encapsulated AC composites,107 followed by the leaching of ZnO from the carbon matrix by acid treatment. Second, porous carbons can be directly derived from MOFs using organic linkers as the carbon sources. Yamauchi et al. reported the direct deposition of ZIF-8 derived carbons (Z8Cs) onto electrodes.108 The carbonized Z8Cs showed a large specific surface area of 754 m2 g−1 with an average diameter of less than 2 nm, delivering maximum energy and power densities of 2.87 mW h cm−3 and 687.6 mW cm−3, respectively. Na et al. synthesized C350 and C1400 using ZIF-8 with particle sizes of 350 nm and 1400 nm, respectively, as the carbon precursors.109 The specific surface area of C350 (754.15 m2 g−1) is larger than that of C1400 (684.14 m2 g−1), demonstrating the effect of particle size on the porous structure. Accordingly, the large surface area of C350 delivered a greater specific capacitance (389 F g−1) than C1400 (105 F g−1). In addition to the effect of particle size on the porous structure of the NPC derived from ZIF-8 (Fig. 4A),110 the carbonization temperature was controlled to further improve the capacitance. NPC nanoparticles have an average size of approximately 1 μm and a polyhedral shape with sharp edges. Accordingly, the large specific surface area of NPC (1523 m2 g−1) was attributed to the particle shape as a minor contribution and to the microporous structure inside the particles as a major contribution. At the carbonization temperature of 800 °C, the maximum capacitance of NPC is 251 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1.
 Fig. 4  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of synthesis of NPC materials derived from ZIF-8; (b) SEM image and (c) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm of large-sized NPC (inset: pore size distribution of the NPC). Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of NiO/NiCo2O4 (1:1); (b) FESEM and (c) TEM images of an individual NiO/NiCo2O4 (1:1) hollow nanowire. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) (a) Schematic description of NiO/CNF composite synthesis; (b) high-magnification TEM image for a single nanofiber and a single particle; (c) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Metal oxides and their composites derived from MOFs and COFs. 
Along with the carbon source, MOFs can be used as the metal precursor to synthesize ⑥ porous metal oxides owing to their tunable chemical composition, morphology, and porous structure. Porous metal oxides can be synthesized by calcination, where organic linkers are decomposed and metal species are grown into porous metal oxides. Various MOF-derived metal oxides, including Co3O4,111–114 Mn2O3,115 NiCo2O4,116 Co3O4/NiO/Mn2O3,82 ZnO/ZnCo2O4/NiO,117 CuCo2O4,118 CoMoO4,119 and NixCo3−xO4,120 have been developed for high-capacitance SC electrodes. For instance, hierarchical ultrathin Co3O4 nanosheets were derived from the Co-based MOF (UPC-9) for use in pseudocapacitive electrodes, delivering a high specific capacitance of 1121 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 because of the hierarchical meso/macroporous structure and abundant redox active sites.111 Wu et al. synthesized hollow NiO/NiCo2O4 hybrid metal oxides derived from MOF-74-Ni/Co (Ni/Co ratio in solution of 2:2), as shown in Fig. 4B.121 The hybrid metal oxides are porous with the inherent structure of MOF-74-Ni/Co; specifically, they are hollow nanowires consisting of small nanoparticles. Because of the hollow structure and the functional bimetals, NiO/NiCo2O4 delivered a specific capacitance of 732.0 C g−1 at 1 A g−1.
When organic ligands are not decomposed but carbonized under an inert atmosphere, ⑤ transition metal oxide/carbon composites can be directly derived from MOFs. The resulting metal oxide/carbon composites include FexOy/porous carbon and Cr2O3/porous carbon,122 NPC/Co3O4,123 NiO/carbon nanofiber (CNF),124 Fe3O4/carbon,125 NPC/MnO2,126 Mn2O3/porous carbon,127 NiCo2O4/NPC,128 and Co3O4/carbon.129,130 These composites exhibit synergistic effects arising from the high-capacitance metal oxides and highly conductive, large surface area carbon materials for enhanced SC performance. Dilute NiO nanoparticles were decorated onto CNF (Ni/CNF) by the pyrolysis of Ni and Zn-based MOF fibers (Fig. 4C).124 The electrical conductivity and porosity of NiO/CNF were modulated by combining CNF with NiO nanoparticles. The NiO particles were deposited on the CNF interconnected networks to achieve an enhanced capacitance of 234 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1. The porous Co3O4/carbon nanowire arrays (NAs), which were derived by annealing Co-MOF under an Ar atmosphere, achieved a specific capacitance of 1.32 F cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, which is larger than that of bare Co3O4 NAs.130 The high capacitance of the composites was attributed to the enhanced electrical conductivity of the interconnected carbon NAs and the hierarchical porous structure. Zhi et al. synthesized a porous Fe3O4/carbon composite, which was derived from Fe-MOF through a controlled incomplete annealing process.125 The resulting composites achieved a specific capacitance of 139 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, much higher than that of bare Fe3O4 (80 F g−1). Han et al. prepared nanoporous carbon/Co3O4 composites derived from zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 (ZIF-67) for superior pseudocapacitive performance of SCs.123 Notably, the metallic hydroxide composites derived from MOFs were investigated to improve the electrochemical performance of SCs, such as hollow Co(VO3)2–Co(OH)2,131 hierarchical Ni(OH)2,132 and Co–Ni double hydroxide,133–135 spear-shaped Mn/Ni bimetallic hydroxide,136 The bimetallic NiCo-layered double hydroxides (LDH) showed an enhanced specific capacity of 1272 C g−1 at 2 A g−1 owing to the multiple oxidation states of Ni2+/Ni3+ and Co2+/Co3+.137 Co–Mn LDH with the interlayer spacing of 1.08 nm could be synthesized in manganese sulfate solution, and it delivered the areal capacity of 582.07 mC cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2.138


2.2.2 Metal and non-metal heteroatom incorporation into MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives. 
There are two kinds of heteroatom incorporation into MOFs and COFs: the incorporation of metal ions (Ni2+, Fe2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Al3+, Cu2+, and Co2+)28,61–76,139 and non-metal atoms (S, Se, B, N, P, F, and C).73,140–156 Heteroatom incorporation can modify the bond configurations and electronic structure and even change the major charge storage mechanism. For example, metal alloys can be formed by the incorporation of metal ions, which act as the dominant active sites for fast faradaic reactions.71,157 Covalent or ionic bonds can be formed by the incorporation of non-metal atoms, and the oxidized state of these bonded atoms can strongly influence the capacitive performances of electrodes. Compared with the incorporation of heteroatoms into MOFs, the modification of COFs for SC applications is still in its infancy.
Modification of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives by metal ions. 
⑦ By incorporating metal ions into pristine MOFs and COFs while preserving their specific porous structure, the as-modified materials can provide improved electrical conductivity, electrochemical activity, and stability for SC applications; these improved properties result from the “double function mechanisms” of the different components.158 For instance, Xu et al. synthesized a mesoporous Fe-doped Co-MOF in the ionic liquid/supercritical CO2/surfactant emulsion system.62 Co/Fe-MOF showed a higher specific capacitance and better cyclic stability than Fe-MOF and Co-MOF, which was attributed to the optimized electrochemical activity caused by the double components of Fe and Co. The coexistence of Fe and Co offsets the inadequate activities of the single element; thus, the full potential of each element is utilized for enhanced SC performance.
In addition to modifying pristine MOFs and COFs, ⑨ metal ions can also be incorporated into their derivatives. Guo et al. synthesized hierarchical core–shell hollow Fe/Co sulfide NAs supported on a conductive nickel foam (Fe–Co–S/NF) by the etching/ion-exchange reaction of Co-MOF with sulfurization.73 The resulting Fe–Co–S/NF exhibited a specific capacitance of 2695 F g−1, and the as-fabricated hybrid cells of Fe–Co–S/NF//reduced graphene oxide (rGO) achieved a high energy density of 43.6 W h kg−1 with a long-term cycling stability of 89.6% after 5000 GCD cycles.
The incorporation of Ni into MOFs and COFs can also enhance the pseudocapacitive performance of the resulting materials.28,68,74,75 As reported by Wang et al., the heterostructured Ni/Co-N-350@CC derived from ZIF-L@CC achieved enhanced conductivity by embedding the Ni-doped Co metals into the dominant Co2N phase for fast charge transfer.68 Owing to the high electrical conductivity and surface exposed electroactive sites, Ni/Co-N-350//porous carbon asymmetric SC cells delivered an energy density of 20.40 W h kg−1 at a power density of 9.85 kW kg−1. Similarly, the incorporation of Ni into the COF can increase its electrical conductivity while maintaining the unique flower-like microsphere structure.28 The possible charge storage mechanism of this Ni-COF is based on the conversion of hydroquinone to benzoquinone by two-electron transfer during the charging process and the reverse reaction during the discharge process. Ni coordination favors the reversible conversion of hydroquinone into benzoquinone, facilitating charge transfer. Zeng et al. synthesized a layered Co-doped Ni-MOF using a simple solvothermal method.159 After Co doping, the electrode material retained the original crystalline structure of Ni-MOF, thus improving its electrochemical performance. The Ni@CoNi-MOF film delivered a high volumetric capacity of 813 C cm−3 with good rate and cyclic performances for volumetric-energy-dense SCs.74
In order to improve the low electrical conductivity of pristine MOFs, the structure was delicately modified by incorporating exotic metal ions. He et al. incorporated Co2+ into Ni-MOF through a hydrothermal method to construct a dandelion-like hollow Ni/Co-MOF with low crystallinity.76 The resulting Ni/Co-MOF exhibited a high specific capacitance of 758 F g−1 and outstanding rate and cyclic capabilities owing to the increased electrical conductivity and the dandelion-like structure. Liu et al. prepared Co-doped Cu-MOF/Cu2+1O (Co/Cu-MOF/Cu2+1O) in a star anise structure using an in situ reverse transformation process.65 The Co/Cu-MOF/Cu2+1O//AC hybrid cells showed a high capacitance of 82.14 F g−1 and a large energy density of 25.67 W h kg−1.
The layered Ni-MOF was modified by incorporating Zn2+ to further improve its electrochemical performance.72 The larger Zn2+ atom partially substituted the Ni2+ atom to increase the lattice spacing for enhanced ion diffusion and OH− intercalation/deintercalation, and the surface structure changed in order to reduce the degree of crystallinity. The Zn-doped Ni-MOF exhibited a high specific capacitance of 1620 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 along with a cyclic stability of 91% over 3000 cycles. Cai et al. prepared a honeycomblike Zn-doped Ni-MOF using a microwave-assisted method.66 The electrode materials exhibited superior electrochemical properties owing to the unique hierarchical structure, where the surface was modified with an optimized Zn2+ doping content. These features were attributed to the synergistic effects of the complex composition, which provides electrochemically active sites for fast surface redox reactions, and the specific morphology, which shortens the ion diffusion pathways.
Modification of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives by non-metal heteroatoms. 
In the presence of non-metallic additives, including sulfur and selenium, the metallic elements of MOFs can be converted into other metallic compounds, such as metal sulfides and metal selenides.140,147,149 In addition to metal ions, pristine MOFs and COFs can be modified by non-metal heteroatoms such as S, Se, B, P, F, and C to change the surface states and the electronic structure.141,143,145,152,154–156,160,161 Since the electronegativity and atomic radius of heteroatoms differ from those of the O atom, the resulting bond configurations are expected to improve the electrochemical performance of SCs. Additionally, heteroatom doping can increase the wettability of the electrode surface and electrical conductivity for fast charge transfer.
⑧ Heteroatom-doped carbon materials without metal elements can be directly derived from pristine COFs and MOFs because their organic linkers contain the source of heteroatoms such as N and B. Heteroatom doping into porous carbon during calcination can provide pseudocapacitance to increase the specific capacitance of non-doped carbons. As reported by Kong et al., a ZIF-8 derived nitrogen-doped carbon electrode showed a high specific capacitance of 495 F g−1 with a high rate capability and cyclic stability owing to the unique porous structure and the exposed active sites caused by N doping.164 Carbons co-doped with O and N by the K2CO3-assisted pyrolysis of AQ-COF at 850 °C, denoted as ONC-T1-850, showed a porous structure after carbonization.165 The COF acted as a template to provide a porous architecture and to prevent deterioration into a non-porous structure. The resulting ONC-T1-850 featured a large specific surface area of 3451 m2 g−1 and N and O co-doping for an improved capacitance. Liang et al. uniformly decorated Nb2O5 quantum dots (QDs) on ZIF-8 derived nitrogen doped carbon (NQD-NC) for hybrid SCs.67 The NQD-NC electrodes achieved a specific capacitance of 259 mA h g−1 after 550 cycles with a low cut-off potential of 0.1 V in the half cell. The NOQ-NC//AC hybrid cells delivered a maximum energy density of 76.9 W h kg−1 at a power density of 450 W kg−1. This superior performance was attributed to the porous structure of N-doped carbon and the uniform distribution of Nb2O5 QDs. Co-ZIF derived nanoporous materials, which are composed of N-doped carbon and cobalt oxides,166 delivered a high areal capacitance of 1177 mF cm−2 with a cyclic stability of 94% after 20000 cycles and an energy density of 1.32 mW h cm−3. COF-derived N-doped carbon also delivered a high specific capacitance of 234 F g−1 owing to the bimodal meso- and microporous structure and N doping.24 Park et al. prepared chemically-activated nanoporous N-doped carbon polyhedrons (A-NCP) from ZIF-8 for capacitive deionization (Fig. 5A).109 The A-NCP achieved a high specific capacitance of 118 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and a high desalination capacity of 24.4 mg g−1 at 1.2 V, which was attributed to the abundant micropores, opened nanoporous channels, and increased electrical conductivity caused by N doping.
 Fig. 5  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of activated nanoporous carbon polyhedron from Zn-MOF; (b) SEM images of A-NCP; (c) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm curves. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of PPF-3 nanosheets and 2D CoSNC nanocomposites; (b) AFM image of 2D CoSNC nanocomposites. Inset: statistical analysis of the thickness of 2D CoSNC nanocomposites measured in AFM images; (c) TEM image of a typical 2D CoSNC nanocomposite. Top inset: TEM image taken from the white square in the main panel. Bottom inset: SAED pattern of 2D CoSNC nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (C) (a) Schematic of experiment procedure; (b) SEM image of as-prepared 2rGO/Ni2P; (c) TEM image of 2rGO/Ni2P. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (D) (a) Graphic illustration of the fabrication and application of the rGO@C/Fe3C material; (b) SEM image of Fe3C/rGO; (c) TEM image of Fe3C/rGO. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Non-metal ion incorporation into metal oxide/carbon composites. 
⑨ Non-metallic heteroatoms can be incorporated into transition metals and their composites by the process of carbonization, sulfurization, selenylation, phosphidation, and fluoridation.140,141,144,155,161,163,167 The electronic structure and electrochemical property of the resulting material can be modified by controlling the precursor content and the annealing temperature. Moreover, the resulting porous structure can facilitate ion diffusion and access to storage sites to further improve capacitor performance. Jiang et al. synthesized MnO2@NiCo-LDH-CoS2 from MnO2@ZIF-67 by combining a hydrothermal process with sulfidation.26 The as-obtained MnO2@NiCo-LDH-CoS2 showed a high specific capacitance of 1547 F g−1 with high rate capability and cyclic stability because of the unique MnO2 nanocage and NiCo-LDH nanotube structures and the enhanced electrical conductivity and structural stability caused by the uniformly dispersed CoS2. The MnO2@NiCo-LDH-CoS2//AC hybrid cells achieved maximum energy and power densities of 50 W h kg−1 and 9658 W kg−1, respectively. As demonstrated by Zhang et al., nanocomposites of CoS1.097 nanoparticles and nitrogen-doped carbon (2D CoSNC) derived from PPF-3 nanosheets were synthesized by the co-occurring sulfidation and carbonization during thermal activation,85 resulting in a square-like morphology with a lateral size of 1.4 ± 0.3 μm (Fig. 5B). The specific capacitance of the 2D CoSNC nanocomposites is 360.1 F g−1 at 1.5 A g−1, which is 34 times larger than that of bulk CoSNC; this is because of the 2D ultrathin layered structure that shortens the ion diffusion pathways and increases the amount of surface exposed redox-active sites, as well as the electrically conductive N-doped carbon. Yang et al. prepared a series of NiS2/CoS2/NC by the carbonization and sulfidation of binary Ni/Co-MOF.142 The optimized NiS2/CoS2/NC-500 showed the highest capacitance of 1325 F g−1 and the best capacitance retention of 75% after 5000 cycles owing to the robust rod-like structure and high electrical conductivity of N-doped carbons. The Ni-MOF-74 derived α-NiS nanorods deposited on reduced graphene oxide (R–NiS/rGO) has a strong affinity for OH− in the KOH electrolyte, indicating fast surface redox reactions.143 In particular, rod-like aggregated NiS nanoparticles possess a mesoporous architecture, which delivered a specific capacity of 744 C g−1 at 1 A g−1. Xia et al. synthesized Co–Ni–B–S by the boronization and sulfurization of Co-Ni MOFs.156 The capacitance was varied by changing the structure according to the ratio of Co to Ni. The optimized Co–Ni–B–S (Co:Ni = 1:4) delivered a maximum capacitance of 1281 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, and asymmetric cells achieved an energy density of 50 W h kg−1 at a power density of 857.7 W kg−1. Lei et al. used Co-MOF on carbon fiber (CC@Co-MOF) as a precursor,168 which was further treated with a source of Ni ions using a hydrothermal process to obtain CC@Co-MOF@NiCo-LDH. Finally, CC@NiCo-LDH/Co9S8 with a honeycomb structure was synthesized via sulfurization of Co-MOF. The outstanding performance of CC@Co-MOF@NiCo-LDH was attributed to the interaction and composition of the NiCo-LDH and Co9S8.
Transition metal selenides derived by the selenylation of MOFs were developed to markedly improve the electrochemical activity and stability of transition metal oxides and hydroxides. MOF-derived transition metal selenides can preserve the intrinsic porous structure of the MOF and maintain a large surface area, which facilitates the generation of new active sites by incorporating Se atoms. Accordingly, CoSe2 nanosheet arrays deposited on CC, which were derived from Co-MOF by selenylation at 450 °C under an argon atmosphere, delivered a specific capacitance of 713.9 F g−1 at 1 mA cm−2 along with a capacitance retention of 92.4% after 5000 cycles at 5 mA cm−2.140 The pseudocapacitive feature of porous CoSe2 was associated with the two pairs of redox peaks originating from the conversion of Co2+/Co3+ and Co3+/Co4+. Xu et al. synthesized CoSe2 embedded on N-doped carbon (CoSe2/NC) as pseudocapacitive materials.141 The resulting CoSe2/NC features an open framework structure and N atoms.
Transition metal phosphides synthesized by the phosphidation of MOFs are featured with high capacitance, metalloids, and high thermal stability.163,167 The reversibility and cycling stability of nickel phosphides, an example of transition metal phosphides, is very low. These MOF-derived nickel phosphides achieved improved reversibility and cyclic stability by coupling with conductive carbon materials.163,167 As shown in Fig. 5C, rGO/Ni2P composites can be derived from graphene oxide (GO)/Ni-MOF by in situ phosphidation.163 The maximum specific capacitance of rGO/Ni2P is 890 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 because of the porous structure inherited from Ni-MOF and the incorporation of rGO with Ni2P.
Transition metal carbides obtained by carbonization possess increased electrical conductivity. Wang et al. derived Fe3C/rGO from rGO/Fe-MOFs by carbonization at 700 °C under an Ar atmosphere (Fig. 5D).161 The polyhedral Fe3C nanoparticles were evenly distributed on the rGO surface, and the electrical conductivity of Fe3C/rGO was improved because of the enhanced density of states due to the Fe–C bond, resulting in enhanced electrochemical properties; the specific capacitance of rGO/Fe3C was 95.3 and 63.4 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 20 A g−1, respectively, and the capacity retention was 81.5% after 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1.


2.2.3. Hybridization with carbon nanomaterials, conducting polymers, transition metal-based materials. 
Although MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives have their unique porous structure and controllable composition, their properties can be synergistically improved by hybridizing with other materials for energy storage applications. Hybridization with carbon nanomaterials,70,169–177 organic conducting polymers,178–182 and transition metal-based nanomaterials,183 is discussed in this section.
Hybridization with carbon nanomaterials. 
⑩ Hybridization with carbon nanomaterials, such as AC, graphene, carbon nanotube (CNT), and CNF, can resolve the issues of low electrical conductivity and electrochemical stability of MOFs and COFs. Lei et al. studied the growth of electrically conductive DAAQ-BTA COF film on 3D graphene (COFDAAQ-BTA-3DG), where access to electrochemically active DAAQ moieties was facile compared with 2D COF powder.177 The COFDAAQ-BTA-3DG electrode delivered a specific capacitance of 31.7 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2 with a capacitance retention of 7.6 mF cm−2 after 2000 cycles. Wei et al. synthesized TpPa-COF/single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) by the in situ polymerization of TpPa-COFs.184 The hybrid electrode achieved an enhanced specific capacitance of 153 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 due to the high electrical conductivity of SWCNTs. COFs were hybridized with CNF through the in situ solid-state inclusion method to improve the electrical conductivity of the COF.30 The hybrid materials with π–π interactions between DqTp and CNF delivered a high areal capacitance of 464 mF cm−2.
The 2D/2D COF-GO hybrid was investigated as a high-performance SC electrode owing to its large surface area, abundant active sites, and doped heteroatom.185 Sun et al. prepared conjugated COF/graphene composites, where COFs and amine-functionalized graphene were crosslinked with CN linkages.186 These conductive graphene and active COF composites achieved a specific capacitance of 533 F g−1 in a 1.0 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. In order to enhance the low electrical conductivity and cyclic stability of ZIF-67, cobalt-based ZIF-67 was deposited on the flexible CC.187 The hybrid showed an approximate threefold enhancement in electrical conductivity, delivering a maximum capacitance of 1756 mF cm−2 with a capacitance retention of 103% over 15000 cycles. Shi et al. prepared a sandwiched Co/Zn–S@rGO composite film through an in situ hydrothermal process.169 The porous structure was constructed by incorporating Co/Zn–S into rGO layers while the rGO layers were prevented from restacking, thus providing short ion diffusion pathways and a large available surface area to improve the capacitive performance. Rajak et al. prepared a 2D layered Na/Zn-MOF using a slow diffusion technique, which was hybridized with conductive rGO to improve the electrical conductivity (Fig. 6A).188 The hybrids possess an irregular flower structure formed by the aggregation of irregularly shaped Na/Zn-MOF with a diameter of 5 to 40 nm and wrinkled rGO. The unique flower-like structure of the Na/Zn-MOF/rGO hybrid was attributed to the shortened ion diffusion pathways and the easily accessible storage sites for enhanced capacitive performance. Accordingly, the hybrid delivered a maximum specific capacitance of 435.2 F g−1 at 1.6 A g−1 with no significant capacitance loss after 4000 cycles.
 Fig. 6  (A) (a) A plausible schematic diagram of the formation of Na/Zn-MOF/rGO; (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Na/Zn-MOF/rGO. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Preparation illustration of Cu-CAT-NWAs/PPy; (b) lateral SEM and (c) TEM images of Cu-CAT nanowires. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) A schematic illustration of the formation of ultrathin Cu-MOF@δ-MnO2 nanosheets; (b) typical SEM image and (c) TEM images of ultrathin Cu-MOF@δ-MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the MnS/MoS2/C hybrid material; (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of MnS/MoS2/C hybrid. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hybridization with conducting polymers. 
⑪ Hybridization with conducting polymers has been investigated to increase the specific capacitance, electrical conductivity, and mechanical flexibility of MOFs and COFs, while preserving the intrinsic porous structure of MOFs and COFs.29,33,182,189–193 Qi et al. prepared a MOF (UiO-66)/polypyrrole (PPy) hybrid coated on carbon fibers, which delivered an energy density of 0.8 μW h cm−1 for high performance flexible fiber SCs. Park et al. reported the use of intrinsically conductive Cu-MOF NAs on a self-supported PPy membrane (Cu-CAT-NWAs) for a flexible SC electrode (Fig. 6B).33 The Cu-MOF NWAs exhibited high electrical conductivity and abundant active sites, while the conducting polymers provided an efficient charge transfer and extra capacitance. An exceptional areal capacitance of 252.1 mF cm−2 was achieved with an energy density of 22.4 μW h cm−2 owing to the high conductivity and active surface area of Cu-MOF. The hierarchical ZnO@MOF@polyaniline (ZnO@MOF@PANI) core–shell nanoarrays were also exploited, delivering a specific capacitance of 340 F g−1.180 Moreover, COF-derived carbons coated with PPy exhibited a high capacitance of 2.55 F cm−3 due to its bimodal porous structure and large surface area.192
Hybridization with transition metal-based materials. 
To effectively utilize the merits of MOFs and COFs, ⑫ hybrids with high capacitance transition metal-based materials, including transition metal oxides/hydroxides,194–198 transition metal sulfides,153,183 and transition metal carbides,199,200 are discussed.
The hybridization of MOFs and their derivatives with transition metal oxide/hydroxides is effective in significantly improving the capacitance of SCs owing to the abundant redox active sites of transition metals and the intrinsic porous structure of MOFs. For instance, an in situ epoxide precipitation method was applied to synthesize the SnO2 quantum dots@ZIF-8 hybrids.195 This electrode showed a high specific capacitance of 931 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1. Pang et al. synthesized ultrathin Cu-MOF@δ-MnO2 nanosheets,194 where the Cu-MOF nanoparticles were uniformly grown onto the δ-MoO2 nanosheets under reflux condenser at 85 °C with stirring (Fig. 6C). The as-obtained Cu-MOF@δ-MnO2 exhibited an enhanced capacitance of 340 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 because the large interfacial area conferred by the wrinkled δ-MnO2 nanosheets and the porous structure of Cu-MOF facilitated ion diffusion. MOF-derived metal oxides can also be hybridized with exotic metal oxides to achieve the pseudocapacitive feature of multi-metallic ion coordination. Xu et al. demonstrated the decoration of ZIF-67 derived NiCo2O4 nanoflakes onto Co3O4 nanowires to obtain a Co–Co3O4@ZIF-NiCo2O4 electrode.201 According to the apparent oxidation/reduction peaks arising from the abundant redox couples of Co2+/Co3+ or Ni2+/Ni3+, the electrode delivered a specific capacity of 3.37 C cm−2 at 4 mA cm−2 along with a high rate capability and cyclic stability. Furthermore, the asymmetric cells exhibited an energy density of 50.6 W h kg−1 at a power density of 856 W kg−1. In addition to MOF-derived metal oxides, MOF- or COF-derived nanoporous carbons can be hybridized with transition metal oxides for SC applications. Yang et al. prepared MoO2@Cu@C composites by the thermal annealing of a polyoxometalates (POM)/MOF template,196 where the Mo-based POMs acted as the secondary building units of Cu-based MOFs. The micro/mesopores and the well-dispersed MoO2 phase in the porous carbon matrix allowed MoO2@Cu@C to deliver a capacitance of 28.56 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which is greater than that of MoO2 nanorods (27.14 mA h g−1 at 1 mA cm−2). Duan et al. also prepared core–shell ZnO@C nanorods from ZnO@ZIF-8, followed by the decoration of NiCo2O4 nanosheets through a co-electrodeposition method.202 The as-obtained ZnO@C@NiCo2O4 showed a higher areal capacitance (3.18 F cm−2) than ZnO@NiCo2O4 (2.68 F cm−2) at 6 mA cm−2.
Transition metal hydroxides have the advantages of flexible anion exchangeability and high electrochemical activities.3,203 Li et al. reported a conductive 2D Ni-catecholate (Ni-CAT) nanocone decorated onto the NiCo layer double hydroxide (NiCo-LDH).197 Owing to its unique flower-like structure and chemical coupling, the structural integrity of the hybrid was dramatically improved. The redox peaks were associated with the pseudocapacitance resulting from the exposed active sites of the flower-like hybrids. The specific capacitance of NiCo-LDH@Ni-CAT was 882 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is higher than those of NiCo-LDH and Ni-CAT. As demonstrated by Han et al., the deposition of 2D Ni-CAT nanorods and NiCo-LDH on nickel foam (NF) was accomplished through a two-step hydrothermal method.198 The as-obtained Ni-CAT/NiCo-LDH/NF nanoarrays exhibited a specific capacitance of 3200 mF cm−2 (or 2133 F g−1), which is higher than those of NiCo-LDH and Ni-CAT, owing to the abundant active sites created by multiple metallic ions, fast electronic transport, and nanoarray architecture.
Among the transition metal dichalcogenides, the pseudocapacitive performance of 2D molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) is superior to those of the corresponding oxides or hydroxides.204,205 The individual nanosheets of MoS2 with an interlayer distance of 0.615 nm can be exfoliated to accelerate ion diffusion and to utilize the active Mo center with changeable oxidation states.206 However, the restacking of MoS2, which is commonly observed in 2D nanomaterials, deteriorates the active sites and ion accessibility.207 This issue can be resolved through the hybridization of MoS2 with MOFs. For example, Lin et al. synthesized a MnS/MoS2/C hybrid via calcination and sulfidation (Fig. 6D), where the MnS nanorods and MoS2 nanoflakes were tightly coupled with the in situ formed carbon.153 The exposed crystalline facets of MoS2 acting as the active sites for OH− adsorption were considered a pseudocapacitive feature. Thus, the MnS/MoS2/C hybrid exhibited a high specific capacitance of 1162 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and a high rate capacitance of 880 F g−1 at 10 A g−1. When MoS2 was decorated onto Ni-MOF with a skeleton structure, the hybrid electrode delivered a specific capacitance of 1590.24 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1.183 The energy density of the MoS2@Ni-MOF//AC asymmetric cells was 72.93 W h kg−1 at 375 W kg−1 owing to the strongly coupled hybrids.
Among the transition metal carbides, MXenes, a new family of 2D layered materials, are considered as promising pseudocapacitive materials owing to their high metallic conductivity, hydrophilicity, and reversible faradaic redox reaction.208–211 The hybridization of highly conductive MXenes with pristine MOFs has been conducted to achieve structural integrity and abundant active metal centers. For example, Lin et al. deposited Co-MOF/Ti3C2Tx onto NF to produce a binder-free electrode for SCs199 in which the mesoporous structure of Co-MOF/Ti3C2Tx accelerated ion diffusion and provided a percolated charge transfer pathway. Wang et al. synthesized Ni-MOF-derived NiO/Ti3C2Tx hybrids by the calcination of Ni-MOF/Ti3C2Tx.200 The NiO/Ti3C2Tx hybrid delivered a specific capacity of 630.9 C g−1, superior to those of pure NiO (376.8 C g−1) and Ti3C2Tx (37.9 C g−1) at 1 A g−1, and cyclic stability was preserved up to 92.9% after 5000 cycles. These features were attributed to the hybridization of the 2D conductive Ti3C2Tx with the redox-active NiO.

2.3 Energy storage mechanism and analysis of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives
The energy storage mechanisms of EDLCs, PCs, and batteries depend on the porosity, microstructure, and surface chemistry of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives. In contrast to the non-faradaic features of EDLC materials, the redox charge storage of pseudocapacitive and battery-type electrodes has been revealed through the faradaic process. Furthermore, in situ/operando and computational analyses have been applied to elucidate the respective charge storage mechanism, including the changes in the microstructure, morphology, and surface chemistry of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives during the charge/discharge process.

2.3.1 Energy storage mechanism of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives. 
Rechargeable batteries store charges inside the internal structure of active materials through the faradaic reaction, where the chemical composition changes during charging and discharging and depends on the state of charge. The redox charge storage mechanism of battery-type electrodes is associated with a high energy density, but their power and cyclic performances are lower than those of SCs. Although EDLCs store charges more quickly for longer cycles than batteries do, the energy density of EDLCs is lower, limiting their practical applications.3,212–214 PCs have been investigated to improve the specific capacitance of electrodes owing to their high energy density due to the faradaic reaction at the surface.215 MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives can provide these types of charge storage mechanisms by changes in their microstructure and surface chemistry.
Pristine MOFs, COFs, and their derived porous carbons are classified as EDLC materials (①, ②, ③, and ④) because they have a large surface area and controllable porous structure without the redox active sites. Hao et al. prepared a series of C3-symmetric benzotrithiophene tricarbaldehyde (BTT)-based COFs, including BTT-TAB COF and BTT-DADP COF, which were further treated with an ionothermal process using ZnCl2 at 700 °C for 20 h to improve the electrical conductivity and surface area.25 The resulting BTT-DADP COF-700-based SCs showed a triangular GCD profile with typical EDLC characteristics and delivered the highest capacitance of 115 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1. The electrochemical performance of the COFs was found to depend on the sp2 carbon content.
In order to improve the specific capacitance, most of the MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives have been investigated as high capacity pseudocapacitive (①, ②, ⑤, ⑥, ⑦, ⑧, ⑨, ⑩, ⑪, ⑫) and battery-type materials (⑤, ⑥, ⑨, ⑫).22,29,103,106,137,139,141,199,200,216–218 Furthermore, the dominant redox active sites of non-metal (S, Se, B, N, P, F, and C) doped MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives (⑧ and ⑨) are associated with the heteroatom-containing functional groups. MOFs and COFs can directly show pseudocapacitance arising from the heteroatom-containing functional groups of organic linkers, such as CN, C–N, B–N, BN, and B–O.101 COF materials are composed of linkers and linkages, and these materials typically exhibit redox activity, so they can support faradaic reactions as SC electrode materials. Dichtel et al. found a β-ketoenamine-linked 2D COF capable of reversible faradaic processes, which is the first COF to exhibit well-defined, facile redox processes.22 Moreover, Khayum et al. synthesized β-ketoenamine-linked Dq1Da1Tp COF from anthraquinone (Dq) and π-electron-rich anthracene (Da).103 The Da linker improved the mechanical robustness of the free-standing 2D sheet via the noncovalent interaction between crystallites, while Dq acted as the electrochemical active sites. In the CV curves, the obvious redox peaks were assigned to the reversible switching of CO to C–OH of the Dq linker with the electron transfer process as follows:  
A triazine-based COF linked by imine bonds with interlayer H-bonding can be synthesized using a Schiff-base condensation reaction.106 The CV curves of the pristine COF showed clear redox peaks resulting from the transition of aromatic and quinone structures in the triazine units.  
The pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism of ⑧ heteroatom-doped carbon materials derived from MOFs and COFs was investigated to develop high energy SCs.24,63,219 Bandosz et al. suggested that the faradaic reactions of N-doped carbon occur on the pyrrolic-N, pyridinic-N, and pyrone oxygen at the edges of the graphene sheets and that the electrons are transported through the conjugated structure with the pyridine-N-oxide and quaternary-N inside the pores.216 Moreover, Yu et al. prepared N-doped porous CNFs containing only quaternary-N and pyridinic-N.220 A high reversible capacitance of 202 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 was achieved in 6.0 M aqueous KOH through a pseudocapacitive mechanism. Cazorla-Amoros et al. synthesized N-CNTs by chemical vapor deposition to investigate the roles of the pyrrolic, pyridinic, and quaternary N groups in both acidic and basic electrolytes.221 The quaternary-N played a role in improving the capacitance by interacting with the anions in both electrolytes.221 The enhanced capacitance of hierarchical N-doped porous carbon derived from an ellipsoidal Al-based MOF (Al-BTC, BTC = trimesic acid) was attributed to the abundant active sites located at the edges of the carbon network (N-6 and N-5), as shown in the following reaction (C* represents the carbon network):139C*H−NH2 + 2OH− ↔ C*NH + 2H2O + 2e−C*−NH2 + 2OH− ↔ C*−NHOH + H2O + 2e−
The variation in the valence states of metal elements is associated with the faradaic reactions. Such redox-active sites are included in the transition metal-containing composites (⑤, ⑥, ⑨, ⑪, and ⑫), including MOFs, metal oxides/hydroxides, and modified metal oxides by sulfidation, selenylation and phosphidation. For instance, layered manganese-1,4 benzenedicarboxylic acid-based MOFs [Mn(BDC)·nDMF]n (Mn-MOFs) showed a high capacitance of 10.25 mF cm−2 at 1 A g−1 owing to the oxidation state variation of Mn.217 The redox peak was attributed to the transformation of Mn2+ and Mn3+ in the alkaline electrolyte, as shown below:Mn(II)s + OH− ↔ Mn(II)(OH)ad + e−Mn(II)(OH)ad ↔ Mn(III)(OH)ad + e−
In order to ensure the redox storage behavior of Mn-MOF 140, the contribution of the capacitive- and diffusion-controlled processes to the total capacity was measured, and the diffusion-controlled process was dominant.
In addition to pristine MOFs, their metal oxide derivatives were used to reveal the redox charge storage features of transition metal elements. For example, 3D nanoporous Co3O4 derived from ZIF-67 MOF achieved a high specific capacitance of 504 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1.222 The pair of redox peaks in the CV curves was attributed to the change in the valence state of Co through the redox reaction of Co3O4 with OH− anions as below:Co3O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ 3CoOOH + e−CoOOH + OH− ↔ CoO2 + H2O + e−
Other transition metal-based materials, where the electronic structure is modified by the sulfidation, selenylation, and phosphidation of MOF derivatives, also show faradaic charge storage arising from the variation in the oxidation state of the metal centers. For instance, CoSe2/NC, prepared by a facile one-step selenylation, exhibited obvious redox peaks in the CV curves.141 As determined by XRD analysis, these peaks were attributed to the evolution of CoSe2 into CoOOH, as shown in the following equations:2CoSe2 + 2H2O + O2 → 2Co(OH)2 + 4SeCo(OH)2 + OH− ↔ CoOOH + H2O + e−CoOOH + 2OH− ↔ CoO2 + 2H2O + 2e−
Among the hybrid materials, transition metal oxides/hydroxides, disulfides, and carbides serve as the redox active centers of the battery-type storage mechanism (⑤, ⑥, ⑨, and ⑫). The co-existence of multi-phase metal oxides/hydroxides is capable of providing abundant redox storage sites. Co3O4 nanograin-decorated Co(OH)2 nanosheets (CNG/Co(OH)2) derived from ZIF-67 were synthesized using a one-pot hydrothermal conversion process.218 This CNG/Co(OH)2 exhibited a high capacitance of 184.9 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 owing to the synergistic effects of the hexagonal layered structure and the co-existence of redox active Co3O4 and Co(OH)2. In particular, the two oxidation peaks located at 0.06 V and 0.25 V are indicative of the faradaic reaction of Co3O4 and Co(OH)2, respectively, as shown below:Co(OH)2 + OH− ↔ CoOOH + H2O + e−Co3O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ 3CoOOH + e−
Similarly, a change in the valence state of metal elements was found for bimetallic metal oxides and hydroxides, and they exhibited pseudocapacitive behavior. NiCo-layered double hydroxide microspheres derived from Ni-MOFs exhibited an outstanding capacitance of 1272 C g−1 at 2 A g−1 because of both the Ni and Co elements.137 Two pairs of CV peaks were assigned to the reversible redox reactions of Ni2+/Ni3+ and Co2+/Co3+, as shown in the following reactions:Ni(OH)2 + OH− ↔ NiOOH + H2O + e−Co(OH)2 + OH− ↔ CoOOH + H2O + e−CoOOH + 2OH− ↔ CoO2 + 2H2O + 2e−
The CV curves of MnS/MoS2/C hybrids derived from Mn/Mo-MOF showed redox peaks in aqueous KOH electrolytes in the potential range of 0 to 0.7 V vs. Hg/HgO.127 The battery-type faradaic reaction was attributed to the valence state changes of Mn and Mo, as described below:153MnS + OH− ↔ Mn(OH)S + e−Mn(OH)S + OH− ↔ MnOS + H2O + e−(MoS2) + K+ + e ↔ MoS−SK+
Along with oxides and disulfides, transition metal carbides also interact with alkali metal ions through the redox reaction. The NiO/Ti3C2Tx hybrid, integrating porous Ni-MOF derived NiO microspheres with Ti3C2Tx MXenes,200 operated under a battery-type mechanism with non-linear characteristics and voltage plateaus in the GCD profile as follows:NiO + OH− ↔ NiOOH + e−Ti3C2(OH) + K+ + e− ↔ KTi3C2(OH)


2.3.2 Fundamental understanding of the charge storage mechanism from ex situ and in situ/operando measurements and computational calculations. 

In situ/operando and computational studies are needed to understand the complicated charge storage mechanism of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives in order to exploit their chemistry for the rational design of new structures. Advanced analytical techniques described in this section include X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, Raman and UV spectroscopies, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, and density functional theory (DFT) calculation.

Ex situ and in situ/operando synchronous XAS is an advanced tool used to investigate changes in the local structure and chemistry of specific atoms. X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) provides the bonding configuration and the oxidation state change of the specific atoms, while extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) reflects the structure and chemistry change near the elements. As shown in the ex situ XAS results of conductive Ni3(HITP)2 MOF (Fig. 7A),8 the local coordination environment of the Ni atoms was monitored in a 1 M TEABF4/ACN electrolyte. No obvious change in the oxidation state of the Ni atom was found; thus, the active site near 0.7 V was ascribed to a ligand interacting with Ni in contrast to the redox active sites of the metal element in other MOFs. Moreover, the EDLC feature of Ni3(HITP)2 was dominant within the potential range of 0.02–0.6 V and 0.02–0.5 V for the cathodic and anodic cycles, respectively. The symmetric cell showed a specific capacitance of 102 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 in the potential window of 1.0 V, but a clear polarized CV curve was observed above 1.5 V with a specific capacitance of 117 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 5000 cycles. While the capacitance loss at 1.5 V after 5000 cycles was attributed to the loss of the faradaic process, the capacitance loss at 1.0 V after 5000 cycles was associated with the loss of the double-layer capacitance. Above the potential of 1.5 V, the performance degradation of the symmetric cell was ascribable to the destruction of the negative electrode during the irreversible reduction process, which was indicated by a notable change in the Ni K-edge XANES spectra of Ni3(HITP)2 relative to pristine electrodes. The capacitance loss was prominent at 1.5 V after 5000 cycles, but the capacitance of the cells did not fall below 1.0 V.
 Fig. 7  (A) (a) Molecular structure of Ni3(HITP)2; (b) Ni K-edge XANES and (c) k3-weighted Fourier transform of the EXAFS of Ni3(HITP)2, positive and negative electrodes of cell after cycling at 2 A g−1 between 0.0 V and 1.0 V over 10000 cycles. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (B) (a) The reaction mechanism diagram of NiCo2S4; (b) different charge and discharge states and (c) the related in situ XRD patterns at different states. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (C) (a) Wireframe view of 3D Ni-DMOF-ADC along the (1, 0, 0) surface; (b) Raman spectra of DMOF-ADC electrode from 5000th, 10000th, 15000th cycle; (c) FTIR of DMOF-ADC converted material. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (D) (a) Schematic illustration of the structural advantages of NiCo2S4–Ni9S8–C DYMs electrode; (b) energy distribution curves of (b) NiCo2S4 and (c) Ni9S8. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 

Ex situ XPS was used to understand the changes in the electronic valence, surface composition, and chemical bonds of the electrode materials. For instance, Sheberla et al. analyzed the XPS data of Ni3(HITP)2 in a two-electrode configuration to study the stability of positive and negative electrodes after deep cycles.8 The binding energy of Ni 2p3/2 for both electrodes was slightly up-shifted by <0.5 eV, which was ascribed to the ligand field change around the Ni atom, indicating the geometrical distortion at Ni and a small change in Ni3(HITP)2 stacking. The slight shift in the Ni 2p3/2 peak at less than 0.5 eV suggested that the faradaic reaction above 1.0 V originated from the ligand effect and was not associated with the change in the Ni oxidation state.

Ex situ and in situ XRD are powerful tools for the analysis of the micro- and crystalline structures of MOFs and COFs. The structural robustness of Co2+/Zn2+ incorporated conductive Ni-MOFs after a long cyclic test was verified.32 The flower-like morphology of Zn/Ni-MOF and Co/Ni-MOF was able to provide sufficient free space to buffer strains during cyclic testing. Accordingly, the structural and morphological stabilities of Co/Ni-MOFs and Zn/Ni-MOFs were preserved after 5000 cycles. However, the reflection peaks of Ni-MOF disappeared due to damage to the crystalline structure. Wang et al. also monitored the change in the crystalline structure of the hollow NiCo2S4 nanocages derived from Co-based ZIF-67 using in situ XRD (Fig. 7B).148 At different potentials of the GCD curve, no additional peaks appeared, implying a single-phase insertion/desertion mechanism. Moreover, the (004) peak of NiCo2S4 reversibly changed during the charging/discharging process, and the change in the related lattice spacing was attributed to the insertion/extraction of OH−.
Raman spectroscopy can be used to investigate the electronic and chemical structures of the electrode materials. Liu et al. synthesized highly porous 65Ni-MOF-74 (65% Ni and 35% Co)-derived double hydroxide (65Ni-MDH) using a facile hydrothermal process.225 In an asymmetric cell of 65Ni-MDH paired with N-doped porous carbon (N-C), the CV curves were characterized by the combined EDLC and faradaic mechanisms of the two electrodes. In situ Raman spectroscopy was used to investigate the phase evolution of 65Ni-MOF-74 during the formation of MDH. The typical characteristic peaks of 65Ni-MOF-74 gradually disappeared within 60 min immersion in KOH, and the new peaks at 510, 1350, and 1610 cm−1 were attributed to the formation of MDH after 60 min. Moreover, the two peaks corresponding to the A1g and Eg modes of the Ni–Co hydroxide framework appeared at ∼550 cm−1 and ∼485 cm−1, respectively. In situ Raman spectroscopy was used to elucidate the cyclic stability of MDH due to the optimized redox active sites of the Ni and Co elements. Liu et al. prepared nickel-based, pillared DABCO-MOFs (DMOFs, DABCO: 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]-octane) with a functionalized ADC (9,10-anthracenedicarboxylic acid) (DMOF-ADC). The electrochemical performance of DMOF-ADC was improved by converting DMOFs to nickel hydroxides functionalized with carbonate ions.223 The pseudocapacitive charge storage of DMOF-ADC SCs was confirmed by Raman spectroscopy at different cycles and by FT-IR spectroscopy after the cycling test (Fig. 7C). After the DMOF-ADC electrode was cycled in 2 M KOH, the resulting Raman spectra were nearly unchanged. The intensity of the broad hump (ranging from 400 to 650 cm−1) representing the Ni–O stretching vibrations gradually reduced, and the sharp band at ∼1055 cm−1 was assigned to the CO32− species, indicating the existence of turbostratic nickel hydroxide from incorporating carbonate ions into the Ni(OH)2 layer spacing. The difference between the pristine and cycled DMOF-ADC is that the weak Ni–ligand bond is broken and replaced by strong Ni–OH ionic/covalent bonds during the charge and discharge processes. In the FT-IR analysis, the broad band at 3640 cm−1 was assigned to the O–H stretching vibration of Ni(OH)2, and the band at 1380 cm−1 was assigned to CO32−, indicating the presence of carbonate ions within the Ni(OH)2 structure.
Computational simulations can be used to verify the experimental results and to guide the experiments by providing theoretical knowledge. In particular, MD and DFT simulations can be applied to investigate the changes in the electronic density and structure of the MOFs and COFs to establish a foundation for the charge storage mechanism. Feng et al. used MD simulations to study the solid–liquid interface of the EDL formed by conductive MOFs (Ni3(HITP)2) and ionic liquids ([EMIM][BF4]).226 From a microscopic view of mass and energy transfer at the interface, the capacitive characteristics were accurately predicted and found to agree with experimental measurements. Notably, the charge transfer ability can be evaluated from the minimum energy barrier for electron transfer from the Fermi level (Ef) to the solid surface, or it can be evaluated from the work function (Ew),227 where the Ew value is calculated according to the equation Ew = Evac − Ef (Evac is the energy level of vacuum). Zhou et al. calculated Ef and Ew of NiCo2S4 and Ni9S8 to understand the effect of the hetero-interface of the NiCo2S4–Ni9S8–carbon double layered yolk–shell microsphere (NiCo2S4–Ni9S8–C DYM) electrode on capacitive performance (Fig. 7D).224 The Ew value of NiCo2S4 is lower than that of Ni9S8, implying that the flow of free energy can balance Ef during the formation of interfaces. The self-built hetero-interfacial electric field in the NiCo2S4–Ni9S8–C DYM electrode becomes conductive to promote ion diffusion and electron transfer during the charge/discharge process. Therefore, the improved electrochemical performance of NiCo2S4–Ni9S8–C DYMs was attributed to the double-layered yolk–shell and porous structure facilitating fast electrolyte diffusion. Alkordi et al. used DFT and the density of states (DOS) to determine the interfacial interaction and electrical conductivity of HKUST-1/graphene nanocomposites.170 The two possible interaction modes are related to the short O–H⋯π interaction and the π–π interaction between the BTC linker and the graphene (G) substrate. The calculated energy demonstrated that pristine G physically adsorbs MOF. No significant changes in DOS were observed for G after adsorbing Cu-paddlewheel in either of the two orientations, including the OH⋯π interaction and π–π interaction between the BTC linkers and G, indicating minor perturbations to the DOS. The Fermi level of the system is slightly below the Dirac point of the system, which can be interpreted in terms of p-doping of the system compromising the Cu-paddlewheel@G in one of the possible MOF–G interactions. The small change in energy does not imply a major change in the electronic properties of G, and therefore, it can be concluded that charge transport through the G sheets is the dominant contribution to charge transport through the composite.

3. Application of MOFs and COFs in high energy and functional SCs
3.1 High energy SCs
As discussed above, the low energy density of SCs limits their practical applications in future electronic devices, electrical vehicles, and renewable energy storage systems. Because the energy density of SCs is proportional to the capacitance of the electrode, it can be greatly improved by developing advanced electrode materials with a large surface area, abundant storage sites, and high electrical conductivity. By precisely controlling the structure and chemistry of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives, the specific capacitance of electrodes can be enhanced for high-energy SCs. EDLC-type electrodes of pristine MOFs, COFs, and their derived porous carbons are discussed in Section 3.1.1, while the pseudocapacitive MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives are addressed along with details on redox active sites in Session 3.1.2. Hybrid SCs, which combine the EDLC- or PC-type electrode with a battery-type electrode in a single cell to confer the benefits of high cell voltage and enhanced capacitance, are introduced in Section 3.1.3. In this section, we focus on the research trends of MOFs and COFs based on the SC type such as EDLCs, pseudocapacitors, and hybrid SCs.

3.1.1 MOFs and COFs for EDLCs. 
Porous or nanostructured carbons such as AC, CNFs, CNTs, and graphenes have been exploited as the typical electrode materials of EDLCs. Considering a large surface area and tuneable porous structure, pristine ① MOFs, ② COFs, and ③ and ④ their derived carbon materials are considered as the promising candidate of EDLC electrodes (Table 1). However, the capacitance enhancement is limited by the intrinsic areal capacitance of 10 to 40 μF cm−2 based on EDLC mechanism.228 Although the energy density of EDLC can increase enlarging cell voltage in organic or ionic liquid electrolytes, the capacitance of electrode materials is usually lower than that in aqueous electrolytes. The fast charge storage kinetics allows EDLCs to have opportunities for high power and fast charging applications,229 including the internet of things (IoTs), self-powered systems, and ripple and noise filtering in electronic circuits, that pseudocapacitors and hybrid SCs cannot afford. However, most MOFs and COFs are not highly electronically conductive. Moreover, the micropore size of MOFs and COFs is not suitable for the rapid ion transport when the charging and discharging rates are very high.230 Either electrically conducting MOFs and COFs or the conversion into graphitic carbons that retain their skeleton structure have been investigated to improve electrical conductivity,231–233 while the construction of hierarchical porous structure has been employed to facilitate ionic transport.222,234
Table 1 Electrochemical performances of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for EDLCs




Materials
Electrolyte
Capacitance (Cs)
Cs retention%/cycles/current density
Energy density
Ref.




e-JUC-511
1 M NBu4PF4/ACN
5.46 mF cm−2/1000 mV s−1
∼100/10000/—
0.27 mW h cm−3

235



NPC-2
1 M H2SO4
199.9 F g−1/0.05 A g−1
79/10000/2 A g−1
—

236



B-N-C-1000
6 M KOH
230 F g−1/5 A g−1
83.48/1400/20 A g−1
—

63



APC
6 M KOH
270 F g−1/1 A g−1
91.1/5000/0.5 A g−1
18.38 W h kg−1

237



BTT-DADP COF-700
EMIMBF4
∼79 F g−1/10 A g−1
77.5/10000/10 A g−1
—

25



Porous carbon
Na2SO4/PVA
38.6 F g−1/1 A g−1
94.8/10000/10 A g−1
17.37 W h kg−1

238



Ni3(HITP)2
1 M TEABF4/ACN
111 F g−1/0.05 A g−1
90/10000/2 A g−1
—

8



Cu-CAT NWAs
3 M KCl
202 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
80/5000/—
2.6 W h kg−1

239



GNRib
1 M H2SO4
193 F g−1/10 mV s−1
—/—/—
—

240



NPCs
0.5 M H2SO4
238 F g−1/20 mV s−1
—/—/—
19.6 W h kg−1

241



Co8-MOF-5
0.1 M TBAPF6
3.27 F g−1/25 mV s−1
92/1000/10 mA g−1
—

19



C800
1 M H2SO4
188 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1
—/—/—
—

242



NPC
1 M H2SO4
204 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1
—/—/—
—

17





In 2012, Co8-MOF-5 (Zn3.68Co0.32O(BDC)3(DEF)0.7) was firstly employed as electrode materials of EDLCs in 0.1 M TBAPF6 in acetonitrile.19 The CV curves showed nearly rectangular shape between the potential of −1 V and 0.2 V in a three-electrode configuration, but the curve shape was distorted at the scan rate of 200 mV s−1 due to the low electrical conductivity. The specific capacitance of Co8-MOF-5 electrode was approximately 3.27 F g−1 at 25 mV s−1, 1.3 times higher than that of carbon black electrode. Meanwhile, the cyclic stability was confirmed showing only 8% degradation after 1000 charge/discharge cycles at 10 mA g−1.
Xu et al. developed electronically conductive Cu catecholate (Cu-CAT) MOFs as electrode materials of EDLCs (Fig. 8A).239 The rod- like Cu-CAT uniformly grown on the surface of carbon paper was compared with Cu-CAT powder using polymer binder. In a three-electrode configuration, the Cu-CAT nanowire array (NWA) electrode exhibited the capacitance of 200 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in an aqueous 3 M KCl electrolyte, much greater than 75 F g−1 of powdery sample due to the low intrinsic resistance and fast charge transfer. In a symmetrical cell, the Cu-CAT NWA electrodes exhibited EDL capacitance of 120 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in the potential window of 0.8 V with the rate capability of 55% from 0.25 to 5 A g−1. The gravimetric power density is approximately 0.2 kW kg−1. Yamauchi et al. reported the 3D interwoven hybrid of ZIF-67 and CNT (ZIF-67/CNT), where CNTs acted as the conductive bridge to connect the MOF nanocrystal neighbors.174 The nanoarchitectured hybrid preserved the porosity of ZIF-67, improving the electrical conductivity of electrodes. The ZIF-67/CNT hybrid displayed a rectangular-shaped CV in an aqueous 1 M NaCl electrolyte, delivering the specific capacitance of 149.2 F g−1 which was higher than pristine ZIF-67 (36.3 F g−1) and CNT (74.2 F g−1).
 Fig. 8  (A) (a) Crystal structure of Cu-CAT viewed along the c-axis; (b) N2 sorption isotherms of Cu-CAT at 77 K; (c) GCD curves at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (B) (a) The crystal structure of MOF-74; (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms and (c) GCD curves of CNRod, GNRib and MPC. Reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (C) (a) Crystal structure of COFs series; (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm and (c) CV curves of e-JUC-511. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (D) (a) Crystal structure and (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of BTT-based COFs; (c) specific capacitances of BTT-based COFs at different current densities with the typical GCD curves as inset. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
For the case of MOF-derived carbons, NPCs were derived from Zn4O(OOCC6H4COO)3 MOF-5 using furfuryl alcohol as the carbon precursor via heat treatment at 1000 °C.17 In XRD spectra, two broad peaks at 25° and 40° corresponding to carbon are found without the peaks of Zn species. The BET surface area and pore volume of the resulting NPCs were 2872 m2 g−1 and 2.06 cm3 g−1, respectively. The NPC electrode-based SC symmetric cells showed the typical EDLC features of CV and GCD profiles in 1 M H2SO4 between −0.5 V and 0.5 V, delivering the high specific capacitances of 204 and 159 F g−1 at 5 and 50 mV s−1, respectively. Then, various porous carbons derived from MOFs have been developed as electrode materials for EDLCs. The furfuryl alcohol was selected as carbon sources using MOF-5.243 The NPCs treated at 650 °C exhibited the highest specific capacitances of 222 F g−1 at 50 mA g−1 due to a large surface area of 1521 m2 g−1 and sufficient carbonization degree. Gao et al. synthesized three kinds of carbon materials with different pore structures via a calcination of MOF-5 and other additive carbon sources.244 In particular, MOF-5 derived carbon (MAC-A) with carbon tetrachloride and ethylenediamine achieved a large surface area of 2222 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 1.14 cm3 g−1 after activation process. The MAC-A delivered the specific capacitance of 271 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH at the potential from −1 to 0 V. Moreover, the organic electrolyte was applied to enlarge the potential window for the enhanced energy density. Consequently, the specific capacitance was 168 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 in 1.5 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate acetonitrile (Net4BF4) with the potential window of 2.4 V. This MAC-A electrode achieved the higher energy densities of 31.2 W h kg−1 in 1.5 M Net4BF4 than 9.4 W h kg−1 in 6 M KOH.
The nanostructured carbons have also been derived from MOFs. For instance, 2D graphene nanoribbons (GNRib) are synthesized by exfoliating carbon nanorods (CNRod) derived from MOF-74-Rod (Fig. 8B).240 The width of the fold GNRib was in a range of 50 to 70 nm and they contained the thickness of 1.5 to 4.5 nm indicating two to six layers, confirming a 2D geometry. The symmetrical SC cell was tested in 1.0 M H2SO4 electrolyte, demonstrating the quasi-rectangular shape from 0 to 1.0 V and the specific capacitance of 193 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1. Except for zinc-based MOFs, MOFs including other transition metals tend to form metal elements or metal oxide particles during heat treatment. Accordingly, the etching of particles leads to the formation of macropores, which can provide the available surface area and the fast ion transporting path for the improved SC performance.237,241 The 2D Cu-MOF was synthesized and used as the precursor of Cu@C.237 After the etching of Cu nanoparticles, the activated porous carbon (APC) was derived demonstrating the obvious meso- and macro-porous structure with a large surface area of 2491 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 1.50 cm3 g−1. For practical applications, two portions of APC nanosheets with equivalent capacities are assembled into symmetric SC (CR2032 coin-type) cells with 6 M KOH electrolyte. The symmetric SC cell achieved the specific capacitance of 67.5 and 42 F g−1 at 0.5 and 10 A g−1, respectively, with the potential window of 1.4 V, and the capacitance retention of 62% for a good rate capability. The APC-based SC cells showed the maximum energy and power densities of 18.38 W h kg−1 and of 6881 W kg−1, respectively, which are much higher than those of other carbon materials in the Ragone plot. These performances are attributed to the large surface area, optimized porosity, and good electrical conductivity.
Similarly, pristine COFs and their derived carbons have been explored as EDLC electrodes. Fang et al. designed a series of COFs as JUC-510, JUC-511, and JUC-512, which were exfoliated into 2D nanosheets (Fig. 8C).235 Among them, 2D JUC-511 possessed a large surface area of 842 m2 g−1 and an average pore size of 3.4 nm. In the coin-type cell with organic electrolyte of 1 M NBu4PF4/ACN, the CV curves of JUC-511 electrode showed no redox peaks representing the typical EDLC feature in the potential window of 1.3 V. Moreover, the specific capacitance reached up to 5.46 mF cm−2 at 1000 mV s−1 with almost 100% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. The SCs cell exhibited the maximum power and energy densities of 4.08 W cm−3 and 0.26 mW h cm−3, respectively, confirming the potential of high power SCs.
The carbonization of COFs while preserving the metal elements was also employed to derive porous or nanostructured carbons in a similar manner to MOFs. However, the resulting carbons could be agglomerated, often impeding the ion and electron transport. In order to resolve this issue, Kong et al. synthesized the core–shell structured Cu@B-N-COFs consisting of Cu core and B,N-co doped COF shell and B, N-co doped carbons (B-N-C) through the pyrolysis of Cu@B-N-C and the etching of Cu cores.63 Owing to this cavity structure with the size of 0.02 to 10 μm, the B-N-C-1000 possessed a large specific surface area of 399.4 m2 g−1 with a large number of mesopores. Along with the quasi-rectangular CV shape in 0.1 M KOH with the potential window from −1.0 to 0 V, the specific capacitance of B-N-C-1000 was 230 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 and 192 F g−1 after 1400 cycle at 20 A g−1. Hao et al. reported a C3-symmetric benzotrithiophene tricarbaldehyde based COFs (BTT-COF), which was further crosslinked by aminobenzene derivatives (DADP) as shown in Fig. 8D.25 The electrochemical performance was measured using symmetric cells (CR-2032 coin-cell) in 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIMBF4) electrolyte with the potential window of 3.5 V. The layer structured BTT-DADP-COF-700 with a specific surface area of 1816 m2 g−1 and pore size of 2.17 nm showed a quasi-rectangular CV curves and triangle-shape GCD curves, indicating typical EDLC behaviors. Moreover, the BTT-DADP-COF-700 showed the specific capacitance about 115 F g−1, and the capacitance retention was about 77.5% over 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1, which was attributed to the proper pore size and the favourable interaction.


3.1.2 MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for pseudocapacitors. 
In order to increase the specific capacitance through the faradaic redox reaction, the pseudocapacitive ① MOFs, ② COFs, and their derivatives, including ⑤ metal oxides/carbon composites, ⑥ MOFs derived metal oxides, ⑦, ⑧, and ⑨ metal or non-metal doped MOFs, COFs or derivatives, and ⑩, ⑪, and ⑫ hybridization with other compounds, have been developed through either incorporating the redox active sites or hybridizing with high capacitance materials as shown in Fig. 3. In this section, we focus on the recent trend of pseudocapacitive MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for high capacitance SCs as summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Electrochemical performances of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for pseudocapacitors




Materials
Active site
Electrolyte
Capacitance (Cs)
Cs retention%/cycles/current density
Energy density
Ref.




Ni-CoN@NC
Ni3N + CoN
1 M KOH
993 F g−1/1 A g−1
96.4/5000/10 A g−1
37.1 W h kg−1

250



Ni-MOF nanosheet
Ni3(OH)2(C2H6O4S)2
2 M KOH
1518.8 F g−1/1 A g−1
95.5/10000/20 A g−1
50.8 W h cm−2

251



PPNF@Co-Ni MOF
Ni3-xCox(OH)2(H2O)2(L)2
3 M KOH
1096.2 F g−1/1 A g−1
—/—/—
93.6 W h kg−1

252



NiCo-LDH/10
Ni(OH)2 + Co(OH)2
3 M KOH
1272 C g−1/2 A g−1
—/—/—
36.1 W h kg−1

137



Zr-NDI-scu-MOF
NDI
1 M H2SO4
30.75 F g−1/1 A g−1
∼100/5000/5 A g−1
472 mW h kg−1

253



NiCo-LDH/NCF
Ni(OH)2 + Co(OH)2
2 M KOH
756 C g−1/0.5 A g−1
81.7/5000/5 A g−1
41.5 W h kg−1

75



Co2(OH)2BDC
Co(II)-L + Co(OH)2
3 M KOH
1120 F g−1/1 A g−1
96.7/6000/2 A g−1
2.85 mW h cm−3

91



Ni/P/N/C-500
Different metal (Ni) state
6 M KOH
2887.87 F g−1/1 A g−1
90/1000/10 A g−1
—

254



Ni-MOF
Ni(II)s
3 M KOH
977.04 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
92.34/5000/0.5 A g−1
55.26 W h kg−1

255



CTAs@NCBs-700(T)
N functional groups
1 M H2SO4
244 F g−1/0.67 A g−1
98.5/10000/20 mA cm−2
—

256



CoSNC
CoS2
2 M KOH
383 F g−1/1 A g−1
91/10000/10 A g−1
—

257



2D-CMO
CoO + NiO
4 M KOH
2098 mF cm−2/1 mA cm−2
92/4200/20 mA cm−2
36.4 W h kg−1

258



ZnO@C@NiCo2O4
NiCo2O4
2 M KOH
2650 F g−1/5 A g−1
76/4000/10 mA cm−2
—

202



Nanoporous Co3O4
Co3O4
6 M KOH
504 F g−1/5 A g−1
—/—/—1
36 W h kg−1

222



MOF@Co1−xS@C
CosII + CoS
6 M KOH
13.14 F cm−2/2 mA cm−2
96.5/10000/0.5 A cm−2
270 mW h cm−2

259



DAAQ-TFP
Anthraquinone subunits
1 M H2SO4
40 F g−1/0.1 A g−1
∼100/5000/0.1 A g−1
—

22



v-CNS-RGO-3
B-doped carbon nanosheets
6 M KOH
∼162 F g−1/1 A g−1
∼100/3000/10 A g−1
—

185



Ni-COF
Ni(II)
3 M KOH
1257 F g−1/1 A g−1
94/10000/1 A g−1
130 W h kg−1

28





The pristine MOFs often exhibit pseudocapacitance arising from their inherent active sites of transition metal elements and ligands. For instance, a D2 symmetric catechol based linker of dibenzo[g,p]chrysene-2,3,6,7,10,11,14,15-octaol (8OH-DBC) coordinating with four Cu centres was incorporated to construct 3D Cu-DBC MOF.245 The CV curves of Cu-DBC electrodes exhibited two pairs of redox peaks indicating the existence of a faradic reaction. Resulting from the synergistic action of the high electrical conductivity and the reversible redox reaction from both ligand and Cu centers, the symmetric SC cell of Cu-DBC achieved the maximum energy and power densities of 13.8 W h kg−1 and 5.0 kW kg−1, respectively, in aqueous NaCl electrolyte (1 mol L−1). Furthermore, the capacitance retention was nearly 80% at 5 A g−1 after 2000 cycles. Liu et al. designed a pseudocapacitive Co-based layered MOF (Co-LMOF) with the size ranging from 35 to 250 nm.246 The Co-LMOF obtained a high specific capacitance of 2474 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in the potential window of 0 to 0.5 V from the active Co element in the system and the capacitance retention of 94.3% after 2000 cycles in aqueous 1 M KOH electrolyte. Liu et al. also reported the pillared Ni-based MOFs with 9,10-anthracenedicarboxylic acid (Ni-DMOF-ADC). The electrochemical performance was confirmed in a three-electrode system in 2 M KOH with the potential window of 0.5 V (Fig. 9A). The clear redox peaks observed in CV curves are attributed to the intercalation/deintercalation of OH− during the charge/discharge process along with the reversible valence state of Ni2+/Ni3+. The specific capacitances were 552 and 395 F g−1 at 1 and 50 A g−1, respectively, with the capacitance retention of 71.6%, implying a fast charge storage kinetics. Sun et al. synthesized a hierarchically structured Co-MOF supported on NF (Co-MOF/NF) via a one-step solvothermal process.247 The CV curves of Co-MOF showed the obvious redox peaks of Co element in a three-electrode cell, using 2 M KOH as the electrolyte, Pt plate as a counter electrode, and Hg/HgO as a reference electrode. The specific capacitance of electrode was 13.6 F cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2, which was much higher than that of Co-MOF powder. The asymmetric SC cell (Co-MOF/NF//AC) in 2 M KOH electrolyte exhibited a high energy density of 1.7 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 4.0 mW cm−2, preserving the capacitance up to 69.70% over 2000 cycles.
 Fig. 9  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of DMOFs; (b) FESEM images of Ni-DMOF-ADC; (c) CV curves for Ni-DMOF-ADC, Ni-DMOF-TM and Ni-DMOF-NDC; (d) GCD curves of Ni-DMOF-ADC at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of the Ni/Co-LDH; (b) SEM image of the Ni/Co-LDH-7:3; (c) CV curves of blank Ni net and MOF derived various Ni/Co-LDH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1; (d) GCD curves of the Ni/Co-LDH-7:3 electrode at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (C) (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes of hierarchically porous CTAs@NCBs; (b) TEM image of CTAs@NCBs700(T); (c) CV and (d) GCD curves of CTAs@NCBs-700(T). Reproduced with permission.256 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
The synergetic incorporation of bimetallic elements into MOF is regarded as an effective approach to further improve the pseudocapacitive performances.62,94,248 Xiao et al. synthesized the trinuclear M3(μ3-OH) (Ni2+ and Co3+) cluster in MOFs through the pseudomorphic transformation process to produce the hierarchical Ni/Co-LDH microspheres (Fig. 9B).249 The electrochemical performance was confirmed using a three-electrode configuration in 6 M KOH with the potential of 0.5 V. The specific capacitances of 1652 and 1300 F g−1 were delivered at 1 and 25 A g−1, respectively, along with the capacitance retention of 78.7% and cyclic stability of almost 100% after 2000 cycles at 5 A g−1. These results are attributed to the hierarchical porous structure, the fast charge transfer kinetics, and the pseudocapacitance of μ3-OH groups in M3(μ3-OH) cluster. The mesoporous dual-metal Co and Fe containing MOFs were developed by incorporating Co and Fe as the active sites.62 The as-fabricated Co/Fe-MOF electrode exhibited the higher capacitance of 319.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 than those of two monometallic MOFs in 1 M LiOH electrolyte with the potential window from 0 to 0.6 V.
In order to improve the electrical conductivity, conductive carbon materials such as graphenes and CNTs are hybridized with MOFs. The lamellar nickel-based Ni-MOFs were nucleated and closely adhered to the glucose modified liquid-exfoliation graphene (GM-LEG), thereby producing the GM-LEG@Ni-MOF electrode.260 The pseudocapacitance arising from the conversion between Ni2+ and Ni3+ was observed in the CV curves in 3 M KOH aqueous solution. The GM-LEG@Ni-MOF delivered the specific capacitance of 987.6 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 with the cycling stability of 85.6% after 3000 cycles. Moreover, the composites of Ni-doped MOF (MOF-5Ni50%, where Ni50% represents the content of doping Ni and others are the portion of the metal nitrate salt and BDC) with rGO are synthesized in gram scale quantities.64 Owing to the hybridization of Ni element and conductive rGO, MOF-5Ni50%/rGO-based SCs exhibited a 2-electron redox reaction of Ni elements for the improved capacitances. Similarly, the Ni/Co-MOF-rGO nanocomposite delivered the high specific capacitance of 860 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 owing to the hybridization with electronically conductive rGO and the redox active Ni and Co elements.261 Yamauchi et al. reported 3D MOFs interwoven by CNTs that act as the conductive bridge to connect the MOF nanocrystal neighbors.174 Thus, the 3D MOF/CNT hybrids achieved the hierarchical structure with the improved electrical conductivity and efficient redox active sites.
In addition to carbon nanomaterials, conducting polymers and metal oxides have been hybridized with MOFs. For instance, the pseudocapacitive conductive PPy was employed to hybridize with EDLC type UiO-66 (a kind of Zr-based MOF) in the presence of dopamine additive, producing UiO-66/PPy deposited on flexible carbon fibers (CFs@UiO-66/PPY) via a one-pot electrodeposition process.190 Owing to the improved electrical conductivity, the electrode exhibited the specific capacitance of 90 to 50 F g−1 at 5 to 100 mV s−1, as measured by a three-electrode system in 3 M KCl electrolyte with the potential window of −0.5 to 0.5 V. Moreover, the cyclic stability reached 96% after 1000 cycles at 100 mV s−1 with the capacitance retention of 82%. To increase the utilization efficiency and pseudocapacitive behaviours of MOFs, the pseudocapacitive ZIF-PPy hybrid, connecting ZIF-67 framework with conductive PPy tube, was developed.262 The microstructured hybrid achieved the large surface area from MOFs and the high electrical conductivity from PPy for the fast electron transfer. The electrode delivered the high capacitance of 597.6 F g−1via a three-electrode configuration in 1 M Na2SO4, arising from the pseudocapacitance of PPy. The bimetallic MOFs with a flowerlike nanosheet structure were grown on preoxidized polyacrylonitrile nanofibers (PPNF) (PPNF@Co-Ni MOF).252 The synergistic effect of multi-components not only improves the electronic conductivity, but also increases the redox activity. The KOH-activated CNF embedded with rGO (CNF-G) was employed as a negative electrode in the asymmetric PPNF@Co-Ni MOF//CNF-G cell with a PVA-KOH solid-state electrolyte. The resulting asymmetric cells delivered a maximum energy density of 93.6 W h kg−1 at the power density of 1600.0 W kg−1.
The combination of MOF with other metal compounds is also an effective approach to improve the electrochemical performance. For an instance, Wang et al. synthesized Co-MOF/Ti3C2Tx@Ni foam composite on Ni foam via in situ hydrothermal method.199 The electrode materials exhibited a gravimetric capacitance of 3741 F g−1 at 3 mA cm−2 in three-electrode system with 3 M KOH, demonstrating a cyclic stability of 92.1% after 3000 cycles at 6 mA cm−2. The enhanced performance of Co-MOF/Ti3C2Tx@Ni composite was associated with the improved conductivity, abundant active sites of Co element and titanium carbide, and the interlayer voids.
The mesoporous framework of MOF-derived carbon often acts as highly efficient pathways for fast ion diffusion and facile access to storage site, while their micropores provide abundant adsorption sites. In particular, carbon materials derived from MOFs can often exhibit the high pseudocapacitance owing to the presence of non-metallic heteroatoms. For instance, Duan et al. reported the 3D porous N-doped carbon connected by carbon tube arrays (CTA@NCBs-700) derived from ZnO@ZIF-8 at 700 °C, which contained micro- and mesopores for fast ion diffusion and charge transfer (Fig. 9C).256 As measured by a three-electrode system in 1 M H2SO4 in the potential range of 1.0 V, CV curves showed the redox humps arising from the N containing groups. CTA@NCBs-700 delivered the volumetric capacitance of 10.2 and 5.8 F cm−3 at 0.03 and 5.6 A cm−3, respectively, with the capacitance retention of 59.1% from 1 to 200 mA cm−2. The cyclic stability was 98.5% after 10000 cycles at 20 mA cm−2 without the significant destruction of nanoarrays structure. The N-doped carbon nanoparticles (NCPPs)/graphitic carbon nitride (g-CN) composite with a hierarchically porous structure was synthesized through the co-calcination of ZIF-8 derived Zn-NCPPs with urea and glucose.164 The content of the pyridinic N was greatly increased by adding urea and glucose as N precursors, providing the active sites. A pair of weak redox peaks was found in a three-electrode tests suggesting the existence of faradic reaction. Moreover, a coin-type symmetrical SCs exhibited the high capacitances of 349.7 and 261.2 F g−1 at 0.5 and 5 A g−1, respectively, in 1 M H2SO4 due to the hierarchical porous structure and the pyridinic N.
Hollow particle-based N-doped CNFs (HPCNFs-N) were designed via the electrospinning method followed by carbonization.263 The HPCNFs-N electrode exhibited the typical pseudocapacitive behaviour at the working window of 0.0 to 1.0 V, along with the small redox peaks resulting from N-containing groups. The assembled SC cells showed the high specific capacitances of 307.2 and 193.4 F g−1 at 1.0 and 50.0 A g−1, respectively, delivering the enhanced energy density of 10.96 W h kg−1 in 2 M H2SO4. Jeon et al. reported the hierarchically structured carbonized isoreticular MOF (CIRMOF-3-950) prepared via a self-sacrificial templating method and the carbonization at 950 °C.264 The assembled symmetric coin cells in 1 M H2SO4 achieved a high specific capacitance of 239 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 with the potential window of 1.0 V, and no obvious decay of capacitance was found after 10000 cycles at 50 mV s−1. The high capacitance was associated with the pseudocapacitive quaternary N.
The electrical conductivity of electrode materials can be increased by coupling transition metal oxides with carbon nanomaterials. The metal oxide/carbon composites can be directly synthesized by the carbonization of single MOF. Haldorai et al. reported the nanoporous carbon and cobalt oxide (NPC–Co3O4) composite obtained from ZIF-67 with the spherical polydispersed morphology.123 The CV curves were close to a rectangular shape implying a good capacitive performance. NPC-Co3O4 delivered the specific capacitance of 885 F g−1 at 2.5 A g−1 in 0.1 M KOH at the working voltage of 1.0 V, which is attributed to the redox activity of Co3O4 coupling with high surface area and electronic conductivity of NPC. Various metal compounds can be also derived from MOFs, like metal oxides/hydroxides and non-metallic ion doped transition metal compounds, where their morphologies are preserved. Wang et al. designed a series of NiCo-LDH derived from NiCo-MOF via the facile solvothermal method.137 The CV curves of NiCo-LDH showed the obvious redox peaks through the faradic reaction. The NiCo-LDH//CNT asymmetric SCs were fabricated to measure the practical performances in 3 M KOH at the working voltage of 1.3 V. The SC cells delivered the high energy density of 36.1 W h kg−1 at a power density of 649 W kg−1 owing to the large surface area, the abundant redox sites, and the well-defined layered structure of NiCo-LDH. The carbon skeleton was incorporated in the composite of CoSe2 embedded into the N-doped carbon nanosheet (CoSe2/NC), which was prepared by one-step carbonization and selenylation.141 The crystalline CoSe2 was randomly deposited on amorphous N-doped carbon. The redox behaviours of CoSe2/NC-400 was associated with the variation in the valence states of Co2+/Co3+/Co4+. The specific capacity was 120.2 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 6 M KOH in a three-electrode configuration. The CoSe2/NC-400//AC cells obtained an energy density of 40.9 W h kg−1 at 980 W kg−1 due to the open space of crossing triangular nanosheets, the electronic conductivity of the N-doped carbon, and the redox activity of CoSe2. The multi-components of Ni, P, N, and O were uniformly incorporated into the carbon materials (Ni/P/N/C) using [Ni3(H2O)(bpy)3(L1)] as the template.254 After the activation at 500 °C, Ni/P/N/C-500 preserved the hierarchical structure. The pseudocapacitive metal elements of Ni/P/N/C-500 were associated with the high capacitance of 2887.87 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 6 M KOH with the working voltage of 0.5 V in a three-electrode system. These performances originated from the hierarchical porous structure and distributed multi-components. Other MOF-derived metal oxides, such as CuO/Cu2O,265 hollow NiCo2O4 nanoarrays,116 NiCo2O4 nanosheet decorated Co3O4 nanoarrays,266 Mn2O3 nanowires, NiGa2O4 hollow spheres,267 Fe2O3 nanocubes,268 and Ni–Zn–Co oxide/hydroxide,18 have been investigated to develop the high performance SCs owing to the morphological control and abundant active sites of metal oxides.
The pristine and modified COFs are considered as a strong candidate of pseudocapacitive electrode owing to its tunable porous structure and redox active sites. Dichtel et al. firstly incorporated the redox active DAAQ moieties into a 2D COF by the linkage of β-ketoenamines, where the COFs are constructed by 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (TFP).22 The as-obtained DAAQ-TFP COF with the pore size of 2 nm showed the redox reaction through the facile protonation/deprotonation of quinone moieties in 1 M H2SO4. This electrode delivered the specific capacitances of 31 to 49 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 10 cycles, demonstrating the maximum energy density of 31 W h kg−1 and no obvious change after 5000 cycles. Three COFs were synthesized through the condensation reaction between tripyridine–triazine–triamine and three different trialdehydes containing 1-OH/2-OH/3-OH groups.269 The 1-OH COF exhibited the best electrochemical performance among three samples in 1 M H2SO4 with the potential range from 0 to 0.8 V. The redox peaks in the CV curves were particularly attributed to the faradic reaction, where the pyridyl, triazine, Schiff and hydroxyl moieties act as the redox-active sites. The solid-state cell consisting of PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte and 1-OH COF electrode showed the specific capacitance of 92 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2 with the capacitance retention of 83% after 10000 cycles. Kuo et al. designed a hollow microtubular 2,4,6-tris(4-formylphenyl)triazine and 2,5-diaminohydroquinone dihydrochloride-based COF (TPT-DAHQ COF) via an Ostwald ripening.270 The existence of N and O heteroatoms of TPT-DAHQ COF allows the CV curves to show the distinct redox humps correlated with pseudocapacitance in 1 M KOH. The specific capacitance of 256 and 131 F g−1 was achieved at 0.5 and 20 A g−1, respectively. After 1850 charging/discharging cycles at 10 A g−1, 98.8% of the initial capacitance was maintained and the energy density was 43 W h kg−1.
In a similar manner to pristine MOFs, the SC performances of COFs are limited by the low electrical conductivity. The chemical modifications of COFs, such as the introduction of metal atoms and the composite with conductive materials, have been widely investigated to resolve this problem. For instance, Kuo et al. demonstrated the blade-like crystalline tetraphenyl-p-phenylenediamine-based COFs (TPPDA-TPTPE COFs) as shown in Fig. 10A.271 The electrochemical performance was measured by a three-electrode system in 1 M KOH with the potential range from −0.92 to 0.18 V. The existence of redox humps in CV curves originated from N doping. The specific capacitance of TPPDA-TPTPE COFs was 237.1 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 along with the capacitance retention of 86.2% over 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. Gu et al. introduced the Ni element into the COF to construct the conductive Ni-COF with a square-planar Ni(II) coordination geometry as shown in Fig. 10B.28 The abundant redox centres of spherical flower-like morphology Ni-COF are associated with the obvious pseudocapacitance in the GCD curves, delivering the high capacitance of 1257 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 3 M KOH with the potential range of 0 to 0.6 V. The cyclic stability of 94% was observed after 10000 cycles at 1 A g−1. Furthermore, the asymmetric AC//Ni-COF cells achieved a high capacitance of 417 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 enlarging the potential window of 1.5 V for the high energy density of 130 W h kg−1 at a power density of 839 W kg−1. Awaga et al. reported the in situ solid-state polymerizations inside the nanochannels of COFs to improve the electrical conductivity.272 The electrical conductivity of PEDOT@AQ-COF was 1.1 S cm−1, one order greater than that of AQ-COF. The abundant redox-active sites of AQ units and β-ketoenamine and the high electrical conductivity of PEDOT@AQ-COF resulted in obtaining a high specific capacitance of 1663 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with the rate capability of 60% from 1 to 500 A g−1, which was measured by a three-electrode configuration in 1 M H2SO4 with the potential range from −0.2 to 0.6 V.
 Fig. 10  (A) (a) Crystal structure, (b) TEM image, (c) CV curves and (d) GCD profiles of TPPDA-TPTPE COF. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) The stick model with regular microporous structure, and (b) SEM image of Ni-COF; (c) CV curves at scan rates from 5 to 30 mV s−1; (d) Energy density of Ni-COF. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) (a) Schematic of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing functional groups in ONCs; (b) HRTEM images of ONC-T1-850; (c) CV curves of ONC-T0-700, ONC-T0-850, ONC-T1-700 and ONC-T1-850; (d) GCD profiles of ONC-T1-850 at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, the derivatives of COFs have been also investigated as the high capacitance electrode materials. For instance, Shiraki et al. designed a microporous N-doped carbon via a facile carbonization of an azine-linked 2D COF (ACOF1).24 As measured by a three-electrode configuration in 6 M KOH with the potential window from −1.0 to 0 V, the capacitive contribution of carbonized ACOF1 was coupled with EDLC and PC as shown in the deviation from the rectangular CV shape. Owing to its porous structure and the doping effect of N atoms, the carbonized ACOF1 achieved a high capacitance of 234 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, preserving 71.3% of the initial capacitance at 50 A g−1.
In order to further improve the electrochemical performance, conducting PPy was hybridized with the carbon material derived from COF.192 In a three-electrode system in 1 M KOH with the potential ranges from −0.8 to 0.1 V, the microporous carbon/PPy (MCPC/PPy6) delivered the high specific capacitance of 2.55 and 1.34 F cm−2 at 3 and 25 mA cm−2, respectively, owing to the doping and de-doping of PPy. The specific capacitance increased up to the retention of 120% after 1000 cycles due to the activation of electrode and was preserved even after 5000 cycles. Awaga et al. designed O and N co-doped porous carbon thin sheets via a salt-assisted pyrolysis method using AQ-COF (containing 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone, triformylphloroglucinol, and dimethylacetamide) as the precursor (Fig. 10C).165 The porous carbons, which were denoted as ONC-T1-n (n represents the temperature), were tested via a three-electrode system in 1 M H2SO4 with the potential window of 0.6 V. The ONC-T1-850 exhibited a higher capacitance of 1711 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 than that of ONC-T1-700 due to the more O- and N-containing groups, achieving the remarkable cyclic stability of 100.5% after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1. As further verified by a two-electrode configuration in 1 M H2SO4, the symmetric SCs cell based on ONC-T1-850/CNT film achieved the highest specific capacitances of 780 and 700 F g−1 at 0.1 and 1 A g−1, respectively, owing to the porous structure and co-doping.


3.1.3 MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for hybrid SCs. 
Although the intrinsic areal capacitance of PCs is much higher than that of EDLCs, their energy density is still much lower than those of batteries. In order to further improve the energy density of SCs while preserving the high power density and long cyclability, the hybrid system has been investigated by a combination of the EDLC or pseudocapacitive materials with battery materials. Some MOFs, COFs and derivatives, including ⑤ metal oxide/carbon composites, ⑥ MOFs derived metal oxides, ⑨ heteroatom-doped transition metal-based materials, and ⑫ MOF/COF hybridized with transition metal-based materials, have been applied for hybrid SCs. Moreover, the cell voltage of the hybrid systems can be enlarged for the high energy density of SCs. Table 3 summarizes the capacitive performances of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for hybrid SCs.
Table 3 Electrochemical performances of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for hybrid SCs




Cathode
Anode
Electrolyte
Capacitance (Cs)
Cs retention%/cycles/current density
Energy density
Ref.




NiCo2O4@Ni-MOF
AC
PVA/KOH
41.5 mA h g−1/2 mA cm−2
∼100/6000/8 mA cm−2
32.6 W h kg−1

274



Co3O4@NiCo2O4
AC
1 M KOH
151.3 C g−1/1 A g−1
89.5/10000/10 A g−1
36 W h kg−1

266



ZDPC-2
MoS2-ZIF
1 M LiPF6 (EC/DEC: 1/1)
—/—
81/10000/2 A g−1
155 W h kg−1

275



GW-MSNGOHS
GW-YS-NFOHS
6 M KOH
140.2 mA h g−1/1 A g−1
92.1/10000/18 A g−1
118.97 W h kg−1

267



65Ni-MDH
N–C
2 M KOH
215 F g−1/2 A g−1
91.3/1000/13.5 A g−1
81 W h kg−1

225



ZIF-LDH/GO
ZIFC/G
6 M KOH
142.1 F g−1/1 A g−1
81.2/3000/5 A g−1
50.5 W h kg−1

31



MOF-NPC/MnO2
MOF-NPC
1 M Na2SO4
—/—
87.3/3000/5 A g−1
76.02 W h kg−1

126



Mn2O3@NF
MC
PVA/LiCl
317.5 F g−1/0.4 Ag−1
86.73/5000/12 A g−1
112.82 W h kg−1

127



ADC-OH/rGO
ADC-C/rGO
2 M KOH
—/—
95/10000/20 A g−1
59 W h kg−1

276



CNG/Co(OH2
MPRGO
PVA/KOH
58.9 mA h g−1/4 A g−1
91/5000/16 A g−1
37.6 W h kg−1

218



Mn-MOFs
rGO
2 M KOH
211.4 F g−1/5 A g−1
81.18/10000/10 A g−1
66 W h kg−1

217



NiMOF
CNTs-COOH
3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6
96.7 mA h g−1/1 A g−1
90.6/3000/10 A g−1
55.8 W h kg−1

93



Na0.5MnO2
rGO@C/Fe3C
1 M Na2SO4
38.5 mA h g−1/1 A g−1
73.1/5000/10 A g−1
46.16 W h kg−1

161



Ni–Co–S/ACC
AC
PVA/KOH
177 F g−1/1 A g−1
82/10000/5 A g−1
30.1 W h kg−1

273



TM-nanorods
TM-NPCs
—
161 F g−1/1 A g−1
83.2/10000/10 A g−1
47.1 W h kg−1

277





The Ni-MOF [Ni3(OH)2(C8H4O4)2·(H2O)4]·2H2O was applied for alkaline battery-SC hybrid cells (Fig. 11A), configuring Ni-MOF as the battery-type positive electrode and CNT-COOH as the capacitor-type negative electrode.93 The high specific capacities of 96.7 and 79.8 mA h g−1 arising from the rapid redox reaction of MOF with Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− were observed at 1 and 10 A g−1, respectively, in 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6 solution with the maximum potential window of 1.4 V. The Ni-MOF//CNT-COOH hybrid cells achieved the energy density of 55.8 W h kg−1 at the power density of 7 kW kg−1 owing to the enlarged potential window. Chen et al. prepared the layered Co/Ni-MOF with the synergistic action of the diatoms, where Co and Ni elements improve the electrical conductivity and specific surface area of MOF.32 The hybrid SCs were assembled configuring Co/Ni-MOF as the battery-type positive electrode and CNT-COOHs as the capacitor-type negative electrode. The hybrid SCs delivered the energy density of 61.8 W h kg−1 at the specific power of 725 W kg−1 in 3 M KOH with potential window of 1.5 V.
 Fig. 11  (A) (a) View of the structure of Ni-MOF along the b axis; (b) SEM images of Ni-MOF; (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of the assembled Ni-MOF//CNT-COOH cell. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Structure and (b) TEM image of Co–Ni–S–B (inset: SEM image of Co–Ni–S–B); (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of the asymmetric Co–Ni–B–S/NF//AC/NF device. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) Schematic illustration of Zn/Ni-MOF; (b) SEM image of Zn/Ni-MOF@PPy; (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of the hybrid SC cells compared with previously reported ones. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) (a) Structure and (b) SEM image of PDC-MA-COF; (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of PDC-MA-COF//AC ASC. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
By modulating the electrochemical properties of electrode materials, heteroatom-doped transition metal composites derived from MOFs can show the improved electrochemical performances of hybrid SCs. Liu et al. synthesized hollow and ultrathin nickel cobalt sulfides (Ni–Co–S) nanosheet arrays deposited on electrochemically activated carbon cloth, using the MOF as the precursor.273 The hybrid SCs are assembled, configuring the AC on electrochemical activated carbon cloth (AC/ACC) as the negative electrode and the Ni–Co–S/ACC-160 as the battery-type positive electrode with the PVA–KOH gel with the potential window of 1.6 V. The hydrophilicity, high electronic conductivity, and enriched redox active sites of the Ni–Co–S/ACC-160 contributed to achieving the high energy density of 30.1 W h kg−1 of hybrid SCs at the specific power of 800.2 W kg−1. The battery-type NiCo-LDH/N-doped carbon foam (NiCo-LDH/NCF) was applied for hybrid SCs.75 The NiCo-LDH/NCF//AC asymmetric cells achieved the high specific capacitance of 199 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 2 M KOH with the potential window of 1.5 V, delivering the maximum energy density of 41.5 W h kg−1 at 750 W kg−1 and the cyclic stability of 80.4% over 10000 cycles.
Xia et al. reported the cobalt/nickel boride/sulfide (Co–Ni–S–B) via a boronization and subsequent sulfurization of Co-Ni MOF (Fig. 11B).156 The optimized ratio of Co to Ni (1:4) allows the Co–Ni–S–B to achieve the maximum capacitance of 1281.2 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in a three-electrode system in 6 M KOH with the potential window from −0.1 to 0.65 V. The asymmetric SC cells, integrating Co–Ni–S–B as the high capacitance electrode material with the capacitive AC electrode, showed the clear redox peak of CV curves arising from the faradic reaction of metal species. The areal capacitance of 1203 mF cm−2 at 3 mA cm−2 was achieved along with the capacitance retention of 87.7% after 5000 cycles at 12 A g−1, and the energy density was 50 W h kg−1 at the power density of 857.7 W kg−1.
Transition metal oxides/carbon composites and transition metal oxides derived from MOFs have been applied for the battery-type electrode materials of hybrid SCs. Yin et al. reported the in situ growth of NiO/C on rGO (NiO/C/rGO) via a simple pyrolysis of Ni-MOF (terephthalic acid as the linkers),278 which acted as battery-type electrode to improve the capacitive performance for hybrid SCs. The NiO/C/rGO electrode showed the presence of a pair of well-defined redox peaks in 6 M KOH in a three-electrode system, which was attributed to the redox reaction of Ni2+ with OH−. This electrode delivered the specific capacity of 496 C g−1 at 1 A g−1 with the working voltage of 0.6 V. The assembled coin-cell type SCs including NiO/C/rGO as the positive electrode and social cost of carbon (SCC) as the negative electrode achieved the high capacity of 172.2 C g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 6 M KOH with the applied potential window of 1.5 V, owing to the high electrical conductivity, good wettability, and rapid faradic reactions. Accordingly, the hybrid SCs achieved the energy density of 35.8 W h kg−1 at 749.1 W kg−1. Saleki et al. reported the double shelled CuCo2O4 hollow spheres obtained from Cu–Co glycerate@Cu–Cu ZIF, which contain the large surface area of 93 m2 g−1 and high porosity.118 CuCo2O4 showed a pair of redox peaks corresponding to the faradic reaction of Co4+/Co3+ and Cu+/Cu2+ redox pairs in 3 M KOH via a three-electrode configuration. And the specific capacity was 701 C g−1 at 2 A g−1 in the working voltage of 0.5 V. The asymmetric SC including rGO as the EDLC electrode and CuCo2O4 as the battery-type electrode achieved the specific capacity of 173 C g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, demonstrating the maximum energy density of 38.4 W h kg−1 at 800 W kg−1.
Jiao et al. synthesized the Zn/Ni-MOF@PPy hybrid through the partial substitution of Ni2+ maintaining the crystal structure (Fig. 11C).191 The PPy increased the electrical conductivity and changed the layer spacing for the fast ion diffusion. Combining the EDLC-type CNTs-COOH with the battery-type Zn/Ni-MOF@PPy hybrid, the assembled coin-type hybrid cells showed the specific capacitance of 160.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 3 M KOH with the potential window of 1.4 V. The clear redox peaks in CV curves are attributed to the superposition of the faradic reactions of Zn/Ni-MOF and PPy. Moreover, the hybrid cells achieved the high energy density of 55.3 W h kg−1 at the power density of 699 W kg−1. Liu et al. reported the MOF-74 derived double hydroxides with 65%Ni–35%Co (65Ni-MDH).225 The hybrid SCs, integrating 65Ni-MDH as the battery-type electrode and N-doped carbon as the capacitor electrode in 2 M KOH, achieved the long-term stability of 91.3% over 10000 cycles at 13.5 A g−1. And the cells achieved the high energy density of 81 W h kg−1 at the power density of 1.9 kW kg−1. A lithium-ion hybrid SC (Li-HSC) was assembled using the hierarchically structured carbon coated WO3 as the cathode and the MOF derived N-doped carbon as the anode with the electrolyte of 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC (1:1 w/w) with the potential window of 3.0 V.279 The Li-HSC showed the high energy density of 157 W h kg−1 at the power density of 173.6 W kg−1 along with the cyclic stability of 88.3% over 3000 cycles at 5 A g−1. By controlling the morphology, microstructure, and chemical composition, various MOF-derived materials, such as MnO2 nanoparticles embedding on carbon nanosheets,280 Ni–Co oxide onion,281 microspherical Ni2P/C,167 hierarchical Co/CoP,282 nanoporous CuCo2O4 hollow spheres,118 Nb2O5 quantum dots on N-doped carbon,67 rGO/C/Fe3C,161 porous NiCo2S4 and N-doped carbon,144 have been developed to achieve a high energy of hybrid SCs.
The COFs can be also chemically modified to develop the high capacitance electrodes for hybrid SCs. For instance, Yang et al. reported the 2D PDC-MA-COF with the abundant redox active sites of triazine units (Fig. 11D).106 As measured by three-electrode configuration in 6 M KOH with the potential window of 0.5 V, 2D PDC-MA-COF exhibited the maximum capacitance of 335 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 owing to the large surface area and the redox transition of aromatic and quinone structure in the triazine units. Moreover, the cyclic stability of PDC-MA-COF was 78% of its initial capacitance after 9000 cycles at 5.0 A g−1. The assembled PDC-MA-COF//AC cells showed the enlarged potential window of 1.5 V for the improved energy density of 29.2 W h kg−1.

3.2 Functional SCs
The high power, long-term stability, and simplified configuration of SCs have extended their application range into functional devices, such as flexible SCs,283,284 microsupercapacitors (MSCs),285–287 and self-powered integrated systems.287,288 In addition to energy storage performance, the electrode materials of flexible SCs should provide high flexibility, bending properties, mechanical stability, good electrochemical stability, and long-term cyclability, even under mechanical and electrochemical stresses. Meanwhile, flexible devices should also satisfy the requirements of energy devices operating under some special conditions.289 The electrode materials of SCs require compatibility with the fabrication process for patterning and the on-chip integration of MSCs and self-powered systems. Long-term cyclability and high energy density are the most important parameters for the design of functional SCs. In this section, the application of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives in flexible SCs, MSCs, and self-powered devices are summarized.

3.2.1 MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for flexible SCs. 
Rapid advances in wearable and portable electronics have driven the demand on the flexible energy storage devices, where electrodes, electrolytes, current collectors, and packaging shell are flexible and deformable to various shapes. Generally, most MOFs, COFs and their derivatives are prepared in powder form, which is very hard to be directly applied for flexible SC electrode. In order to solve this issue, the mechanically robust and conductive substrates can be used to fabricate flexible film type electrode through a pasting or coating of powdery MOFs or COFs. Either growing or depositing MOFs, COFs and their derivatives onto the carbon-based matrix,293,295 the as-obtained film can be assembled into the flexible SC electrodes. Moreover, MOFs, COFs and their derivatives can be hybridized with conducting polymers,33,262 where the flexibility and conductivity of flexible electrode are obtained from the entanglement of polymer matrices. As summarized in Table 4, the electrochemical performances and flexibility of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives have been evaluated to highlight the recent progress of this field.
Table 4 Electrochemical performances of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for flexible SCs




Materials
Electrolyte
Capacitance (Cs)
Cs retention%/cycles/current density
Cs retention%/bending angle
Ref.




HC-40-4
EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP
201 F g−1/0.5 A g−1
80.1/10000/50 A g−1
100/180°

290



CNF@c-MOF
PVA/KCl
96 mF cm−2/0.2 mA cm−2
90/10000/1 A g−1
∼100/180°

291



NiCo2O4@Ni-MOF//AC
PVA/KOH
41.5 mA h g−1/2 mA cm−2
∼100/6000/8 mA cm−2
∼100/180°

274



CT-DqTp
PVA/H2SO4
12 mF cm−2/0.39 mA cm−2
80/2500/—
—/—

103



C-M/G-40//N-M/G-40
PVA/H2SO4
426.5 mF cm−2/1.2 mA cm−2
93/3000/2.4 mA cm−2
97.5/180°

292



rGO/Fe2O3
PVA/KOH
250 mF cm−3/6.4 mA cm−3
96.3/5000/50.4 mA cm−3
∼100/—

293



Ni-MOF//AC
PVA/KOH
230 mF cm−2/1.0 mA cm−2
92.8/5000/5 mA cm−2
∼100/180°

90



N-GQD@cZIF-8/CNT
PVA/H2SO4
400 F g−1/0.3 A g−1
82/5000/—
∼100/180°

294



MSC//AC
PVA/KOH
246 F g−1/5 A g−1
111.9/5000/—
95/135°

259



4 h-Cu-CAT-NWAs/PPy
PVA/LiCl
209 F g−1/5 A g−1
90/8000/—
∼100/180°

33



CC@CoO@S–Co3O4//CC@carbon
PVA/KOH
1.99 F cm−3/2 mA cm−2
87.9/5000/5 mA cm−2
∼100/—

295



CTAs@NCBs-700/T
PVA/H3PO4
580 mF cm−2/1 mA cm−2
95.5/8000/30 mA cm−2
∼100/180°

256



MoO2@Cu@C
PVA/KOH
7.49 mA h g−1/0.25 A g−1
91/5000/1 A g−1
∼100/180°

196



g-C34N6-COF
PVA/LiCl
15.2 mF cm−2/2 mV s−1
93.1/5000/2 mA cm−2
∼100/180°

296



Ni(OH)2–MnO2/C
PVA/KOH
530.0 mF cm−3/2.24 mA cm−3
86.7/10000/11.2 mA cm−3
∼100/—

297



MnOx–MHCF//AC
PVA/KOH
175 mF cm−2/0.5 mA cm−2
94.5/10000/5 mA cm−2
∼100/180°

298



ZIF−PPy
PVA/Na2SO4
225.8 mF cm−2/0.4 mA cm−2
—/—/—
∼100/180°

262





MOFs and their derived materials have been applied for the electrode materials of flexible SCs. Yamauchi et al. introduced the conductive PPy grown onto the ZIF-67 to construct a 3D cross-linked network (Fig. 12A).262 This 3D structure promotes the charge transfer between MOF particles and endows the flexibility while maintaining the high porosity of the MOFs. The symmetrical flexible SC cells were assembled using ZIF-PPy-2 as both negative and positive electrodes and PVA/NaSO4 gel as the solid-state electrolyte with the applied potential window of 0.6 V. The flexible SCs delivered the specific capacitance of 225.8 mF cm−2 at 0.4 mA cm−2 for the high energy density of 0.0113 mW h cm−2 at a specific power of 0.12 mW cm−2. The slight change in the CV curves was observed under various bending conditions confirming the flexibility and mechanical robustness of ZIF-PPy-2. 4 h-Cu-CAT-NWAs/PPy (4 h represents the hydrothermal reaction time) with the integrated hybrid architecture of conductive Cu-CAT MOF NWAs onto the freestanding PPy membrane was designed as both electrodes of symmetrical flexible SCs with PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte.33 The conductive Cu-MOFs provided high electronic conductivity and large active surface area, while the PPy membrane afforded the mechanical flexibility of electrode, efficient charge transfer, and extra capacitance. Hence, the SC cells achieved the maximum energy and power densities of 22.4 mW h cm−2 and 1.1 mW cm−2, respectively. Nearly no change in capacitance was found at various bending and twisting conditions with respect to the normal condition. Also, the derivatives of MOFs could be employed to construct flexible SCs. Wang et al. prepared hollow and porous NiCo2O4 on a flexible CC substrate (CC@NiCo2O4) via a facile two-step method as shown in Fig. 12B.116 The MOF-derived NiCo2O4 nanostructured arrays offered the rich active sites and short ion diffusion paths. The flexible asymmetric SC was assembled using the CC@NiCo2O4 as the cathode and a nitrogen-doped carbon flakes on carbon cloth (CC@NC) as the anode with PVA/KOH solid-state electrolyte. The CC@NiCo2O4//CC@NC full cell delivered the maximum energy and power densities of 31.9 W h kg−1 and of 22.9 kW kg−1, preserving 86.7% of the initial capacitance after 20000 cycles at 5 mA cm−2 even at the bent or twisted states. Liu et al. reported a nitrogen-rich porous carbon-graphene aerogel (C/NG-A) derived from the Co-based MOF, which was followed by the etching of Co by HCl (Fig. 12C).299 The C/NG-A electrode achieved the maximum specific capacitance of 421 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 1.0 M H2SO4 in the potential ranges from −1.0 to 0 V. To evaluate the flexibility of C/NG-A, the symmetric SC was assembled with 1.0 M PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte. No obvious change was observed from CV curves at 100 mV s−1 under different bending angles from 0° to 180°. The cyclic performance of the SC cell was up to 99.7% after 20000 cycles at 20 A g−1, demonstrating the maximum energy and power densities of 33.89 W h kg−1 and 25000 W kg−1, respectively.
 Fig. 12  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of ZIF-PPy; (b) TEM image of ZIF-PPy-2; (c) Ragone plots and comparisons of flexible ZIF-PPy-2 SCs; (d) CV curves of flexible ZIF-PPy-2 SCs at 5 mV s−1 subjected with different bending angles. Reproduced with permission.262 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow NiCo2O4 from 2D Co-MOF; (b) SEM image of NiCo2O4; (c) Ragone plots and (d) cycling test (inset: the flat, bending and twisting states) of the CC@NiCo2O4//CC@NC full cell. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) Schematic of the formation process of CoOx/NG-A and C/NG-A; (b) TEM image of CoOx/NG-A; (c) Ragone plot and comparison of C/NG-A SSCs; (d) bending test of C/NG-A SSCs. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (D) (a) Schematic construction process for flexible CHCM SCs; (b) the cross-section SEM image of CHCM; (c) tensile strength of CNTF, COF, COF@CNTF and CHCM; (d) GCD curve of CHCM at different bending angles. Reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
COFs and their derivatives can be applied for flexible SC electrode owing to their porous structure, intrinsic redox activity, and flexibility. Kurungot et al. prepared 2D DqTp COF via the solid-state molecular mixing process.103 The high mechanical strength of DqTp COF originated from the interlocked packing of the crystallites through the π–π stacking of electron rich anthracene. The flexible symmetric SC cells were assembled using the free-standing COF sheets as two electrodes and the PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte. The highest energy density of 0.43 mW h cm−2 with the maximum specific power of 980 mW cm−2 was achieved owing to the high surface area and integrated redox moieties. The DAQ-Tp COF@hydroxyl-ended hyperbranched polymer (OHP) complex on CNT films (CNTF), as denoted as CHCM, was employed as the electrode of the symmetrical flexible SC with H3PO4/PVA gel electrolyte (Fig. 12D).300 The CHCM electrode was mechanically robust because the elongation was improved by the high breaking strain of the flexible OHP chains between COF and CNTF and the high tensile strength was attributed to the strong π–π interaction between CNTF and COF. This electrode was flexible at various bending states demonstrating that the serially connected five cells could light up a 1.5 V LED.
The nanocrystalline MOFs and COFs possess abundant grain boundaries and vacancies, which can hinder the flow of electron and the assembly into the free-standing flexible electrodes. Accordingly, hybridizing MOF and COF skeletons with conductive polymers, including poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT),29 polyaniline,178 poly ortho-aminophenol (POAP),182,301 and polypyrrole,190,191 can effectively improve the flexibility of electrode materials. For instance, the PEDOT modified COFs were synthesized by a facile electropolymerization of EDOT in the pores of COF films, showing the enhanced electrical conductivity and mechanical robustness of the framework.29 The high volumetric energy density and cyclic stability of COF/PEDOT film were attributed to the outstanding electrical conductivity and porous structure of COFs. Duan et al. demonstrated the all-solid-state fiber SCs based on CF@UiO-66/PPY electrodes with the PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte.190 The flexible SCs delivered the high specific capacitance of 206 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1 in the potential range from 0 to 1.0 V. The maximum energy and power densities of 0.8 μW h cm−1 and 132 μW cm−1 were achieved along with the long cyclic stability of 96% after 1000 cycles at 10 mV s−1. Even at various bending angles and temperatures, the flexible cells showed no capacitance degradation.


3.2.2 MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for MSCs. 
MSC, as miniatured energy storage devices with high capacitance, fast charge/discharge rate, and long term cyclability, are particularly attractive for high power applications. Especially, the miniaturized electronics calls for the development of miniaturized energy-storage cells, which can enable sustained, autonomous operation of electronic devices for applications like wearable gadgets and wireless sensor networks.287 The MSC based on porous carbon electrode can show the good cycle life (more than 1000000 cycles) and high power density.303 On a basis of the pseudocapacitive behavior of electrode materials for MSC, the change of oxidation state is caused by the rapid surface oxidation reaction, while no phase transitions occur during the cyclic measurement.
Although the MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives have the potential to apply for MSCs, their structures can be damaged during the fabrication process such as the sputtering and etching. 2D Co-MOF and Ni-MOF were prepared by 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyl-phenyl)-porphyrin (TCPP) ligand and metal ions with the help of 4,40-bipyridine (BPY) molecules as shown in Fig. 13A.292 The 2D MOF and GO suspension in DMF were filtered and reduced to prepare 2D MOF/rGO hybrid papers of Ni-MOF/rGO-40 and Co-MOF/rGO-40 (40 represents the mass ratio of GO). In-plane flexible MSCs were fabricated by sputtering and plasma etching of the hybrid papers of Ni-MOF/rGO-40 and Co-MOF/rGO-40 with H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte. The output voltage and discharge time of the MSCs could be controlled by the parallel and/or serial interconnections. The g-C34N6-COF linked by unsubstituted CC bonds was designed to construct MSCs (Fig. 13B).296 The polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film and LiCl/PVA gel were used as the substrate and electrolyte, respectively. The interdigital electrode of g-C34N6-COF was fabricated by a mask-assisted vacuum filtration method and further assembled into a MSC cell. The resulting cells delivered a large energy density of 7.3 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.05 W cm−3 with no obvious capacitance decay after the bending test. Wu et al. reported the selective growth of conductive Ni-catecholate-based MOF (Ni-CAT MOF) on 3D laser scribed graphene (LSG) for MSC applications (Fig. 13C).304 The LSG films revealed an interlaced porous morphology with thin graphene sheets. In the three-electrode system with 3 M LiCl electrolyte, the LSG/Ni-CAT electrode exhibited a high areal capacitance of ∼8.5 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, which was greater than 2.7 mF cm−2 of the bare LSG electrode. The MSC cells with the LiCl/PVA electrolyte delivered the maximum energy and power densities of 4.1 μW h cm−2 and 7 mW cm−2, respectively.
 Fig. 13  (A) (a) Schematic of the synthesis route of the flexible 2D-MOF/rGO paper; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of the rGO paper and 2D Co-MOF/rGO hybrid paper; (c) GCD curves of single micro-SCs, two SCs in parallel, and two SCs in series (inset: SCs connected in series and in parallel). Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Synthetic procedures of g-C34N6-COF; (b) magnified top-view SEM image of g-C34N6-COF/CNT hybrid (inset: the preparation of and the optical photograph of COF-MSC); (c) Ragone plots of g-C34N6-COF/CNT compared with some reported lectures. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) Schematic and structural illustration, (b) SEM image of LSG/Ni-CAT MOF; (c) the areal Ragone plot of LSG/Ni-CAT MOF MSCs compared with other reported interdigitated MSCs. Reproduced with permission.302 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.3 MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives for self-powered SCs. 
The advance in the self-powered micro–nano devices is regarded as a promising solution for the efficient utilization and practical application of electronic systems such as smart sensors, internet of things (IoT), health monitoring, infrastructure, nanogenerator and wireless sensor networks.286–288 Highly efficient energy storage devices that can be integrated with energy scavenging/harvesting devices are needed to generate self-powering system utilizing thermal, solar and mechanical energy.286 Thus, the self-powered system can be constructed by integrating the SCs with nanogenerator and solar cell to power portable electronic devices. For instance, Banerjee et al. improved the electrical conductivity of COFs by the in situ inclusion of CNTs via an intermolecular π–π interaction (Fig. 14A).30 Arising from the combination of COFs (DqTq or DqDaTp) and CNF, DqTq-CNF and DqDaTp-CNF could deliver the specific capacitance of 464 mF cm−2 and 364 mF cm−2, respectively, at 0.25 mA cm−2 in 1 M H2SO4. A monolithic photovoltaic self-charging power pack was designed by integrating the mechanically robust DqDaTp-CNF SCs with the perovskite solar cell. The photon energy was converted to electrical energy by solar cell, while the DqDaTp-CNF SCs was efficiently charged and attained a large photocharge window of 0.8 V within 100 s. The as-fabricated self-charging power pack delivered the areal capacitance of 42 mF cm−2 at 0.25 mA cm−2 after photocharging for 300 s. The discharging time increased with the time of photovoltaic charging, which signifies the practical utilization of the as-designed self-charging power pack as a real-life device for the uptake of solar energy and the future operation in wearable electronics. Yao et al. fabricated the flexible fiber-shaped coaxial asymmetric SCs,305 which integrated CNT fibers@ZnCo2O4@Zn–Co sulfide hybrid arrays as the positive electrode, CNT fibers@hydrogenated-Co3O4@Co/N-doped porous carbon as the negative electrode, and PVA/KOH as the solid–gel electrolyte (Fig. 14B). The asymmetric SC cells delivered the energy density of 32.01 μW h cm−2 at the power density of 698.42 μW cm−2 with the potential window of 1.4 V. The flexibility of the SC cell was further confirmed demonstrating 93.9% of capacitance retention after repeated bending of 5000 cycles. Flexible triboelectric nanogenerators (FTENG) were designed for energy harvesting to enhance the lifetime of SCs, because the electric output durability of FTENG is more than 100000 cycles. The CV curves of the self-charging power system confirm the stable output from FTENG, demonstrating the increase in voltage to 2.8 V after nearly 6531 s and the specific capacitance of 78.9 mF cm−2.
 Fig. 14  (A) (a) DFTB model structures of COF-CNF hybrid; (b) TEM image of DqDaTp-CNF; (c) diagrammatic representation of PSC; (d) discharging of the photocharged SC device. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (B) (a) SEM images of ZnCo2O4@Zn–Co–S HA; (b) SEM images of as-prepared CNTFs@H–Co3O4@CoNC HA. Inset: enlarged SEM image; (c) Ragone plot of the FASC device; (d) charging/discharging curves of the as-prepared FASCs charged by the FTENG. Reproduced with permission.305 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 

4. Summary and outlook
This review article focused on the structure and chemistry of various MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives to improve the capacitive performance of high-energy and functional SCs. The corresponding energy storage mechanisms of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives, including non-faradaic EDLC and faradaic pseudocapacitors, were discussed based on 12 classifications. These charge storage mechanisms were fundamentally understood using the results of ex situ and in situ/operando analyses and computational calculations. Along with the controllable porous framework structure, the capacitive behaviors of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives can be dramatically improved by adjusting their microstructure and morphology. Moreover, compositional control is an effective strategy to achieve abundant redox active sites as well as to increase electrical conductivity. For instance, metallic or non-metallic heteroatom incorporation and hybridization with carbon materials, conducting polymers, and transition metal-based materials have been investigated to tune the electronic structure to achieve abundant storage sites and high electrical conductivity and to provide electrochemical and mechanical stabilities. To exploit the full potential of these MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives, electrodes have been designed for applications in high-energy SCs including EDLCs, pseudocapacitors, hybrid SCs, and functional SCs, including flexible symmetric/asymmetric SCs, self-powered SCs, and MSCs.
Since the first application of MOFs in 2008 and COFs in 2013, these materials have greatly progress in enhancing the electrode performance of SCs, as demonstrated by the recent trend in this field. As introduced above, the promising MOFs, COFs and their derivatives have been developed for the application of high performance and functional SCs. MOF-5, MOF-74, ZIF-67, COF-5, and various MOFs including metal centers (Ni, Co, Mn, Fe, Cu, etc.) can be directly used as the active materials of electrodes or act as the templates to design their derivatives. Nonetheless, the rational design of emerging MOFs, COFs and their derivatives with high conductivity, abundant active sites and 3D hierarchical structure needs to be further investigated as future direction. However, the following technical challenges, which can be perceived as guidelines for future directions, need to be addressed in order to facilitate the transition of these materials into industrial and practical applications.
(1) Pristine MOFs and COFs possess controllable porosities, microstructures, and chemical compositions. However, their direct utilization as electrode materials for SCs is still in the early phase, and is limited by insufficient capacitance, low electrical conductivity, and low electrochemical stability. New MOFs and COFs and their optimizations in terms of multi-composition and hierarchical structure need to be investigated. Moreover, there are many opportunities to hybridize these frameworks with other materials, which would result in synergistic effects to achieve capacitive performances that can satisfy all the requirements of the target applications.
(2) Along with the development of new and optimized MOF and COF materials, a fundamental understanding of the associated charge storage mechanisms is necessary for the rational design of electrode materials. By combining in situ/operando analyses with computational simulations, correlations between structure/chemistry and property can be determined and insight into the energy storage mechanism can be gained to maximize the utilization and stability of storage sites such as metal centers and functional ligands.
(3) In addition to synthesis development and fundamental investigations, the fabrication process needs to be developed and optimized to achieve thick and porous electrodes based on MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives. During the fabrication process, the intrinsic properties and porous structure of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives should be preserved, thus minimizing the portion of inactive materials in the electrodes. Printing is proposed as a process to assemble MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives into functional devices such as flexible SCs, MSCs, and self-powered electronics.
(4) Cell design and engineering play a significant role in maximizing the electrochemical performance of MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives at the cell level. Most MOFs and COFs have been explored in aqueous electrolytes, so they need to be further investigated regarding organic and ionic liquid electrolytes in a gel or the solid state for high energy density. Moreover, hybrid cell configurations integrating MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives with pairing electrodes need to be explored for high-performance SCs.
(5) To date, most MOFs, COFs, and their derivatives have been produced in the laboratory. Thus, scalable processes for the synthesis of high-quality materials need to be developed for industrial and practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2020M2D8A2070866). X. Yu acknowledges the support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21805239), the Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (18KJB150034) and ‘Six Talent Peaks Project’ of Jiangsu Province (XCL-103).
Notes and references
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, eaan8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Choudhary, C. Li, J. Moore, N. Nagaiah, L. Zhai, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605336 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kim, W. Song, D.-Y. Son, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2942–2964 RSC .
I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. Velazquez Abad, P. Balcombe, P. E. Dodds, P. Ekins, N. Shah and K. R. Ward, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 463–491 RSC .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, C.-H. Kim, M. C. Hersam, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700285 CrossRef .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C.-J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dincă, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boukhalfa, D. Gordon, L. He, Y. B. Melnichenko, N. Nitta, A. Magasinski and G. Yushin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2495–2503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, M. Yu, R. P. Sahu, I. K. Puri and I. Zhitomirsky, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903848 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Z. Cai, C. Wang, Y. Bi, L. Qian, Y. Hao, L. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, X. Lei, Z. Huo, W. Liu, H. Wang, X. Sun and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1732–1739 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nakhanivej, X. Yu, S. K. Park, S. Kim, J.-Y. Hong, H. J. Kim, W. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, J. E. Yang, C. Wolverton, J. Kong, M. Chhowalla and H. S. Park, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 156–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, B. Guan, W. Xiao and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500981 CrossRef .
O. M. Yaghi, G. Li and H. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Gao and J. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3017–3024 CrossRef CAS .
R. Díaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126–128 CrossRef .
D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, H. Ahn and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163–165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. E. Silberstein, T. Thanh-Tam, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16821–16824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, S. Zhang, L. Han, Z. Zhang, Z. Xue, J. Gao, Y. Li, C. Huang, Y. Yi, H. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5366–5375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, J. Yang, N. Nakashima and T. Shiraki, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 17504–17510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, J. Ning, X. Cao, X. Li and L. Hao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11618–11622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, F. Huang, F. Rong, P. He, R. Que and S. P. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12018–12028 RSC .
J. Cai, Y. Song, X. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Yi, J. Sun and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1757–1766 RSC .
T. Li, W.-D. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, C. Cheng, H. Zhu, X. Yan, Z. Li and Z.-G. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19676–19681 RSC .
C. R. Mulzer, L. Shen, R. P. Bisbey, J. R. McKone, N. Zhang, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 667–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Mohammed, V. Vijayakumar, A. Halder, M. Ghosh, M. Addicoat, U. Bansode, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30828–30837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, L. Ge, X. Wei, B. Wu, J. Ran, H. Wang and T. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16865–16872 RSC .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, D. Chen, C. Yan, Y. Hu, Q. Zhang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1094–1102 RSC .
R. Hou, M. Miao, Q. Wang, T. Yue, H. Liu, H. S. Park, K. Qi and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1901892 CrossRef .
X. Gao, Y. Dong, S. Li, J. Zhou, L. Wang and B. Wang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 81–126 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Zhou, J. Wang and X. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 15394–15406 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, C.-S. Liu and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 416, 213341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7301–7327 RSC .
A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 86 CrossRef .
R. Zhao, Z. Liang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2235–2259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 292–318 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mehtab, G. Yasin, M. Arif, M. Shakeel, R. M. Korai, M. Nadeem, N. Muhammad and X. Lu, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 21, 632–646 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, X. Xiao and H. Pang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 99–116 RSC .
X. Yang, Z. Zhao, X. Yu and L. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1490–1493 RSC .
S. Sundriyal, H. Kaur, S. K. Bhardwaj, S. Mishra, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 369, 15–38 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, G. Zhao, S. Gong, N. Zhang and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4426–4430 RSC .
K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti, J. Kim, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2796–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
J. Li, X. Jing, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3565–3604 RSC .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
X. Xiao, L. Zou, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 301–331 RSC .
J. Zhou and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6927–6945 RSC .
W. Zhao, J. Peng, W. Wang, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 377, 44–63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Song, X. Li, Q. Sun, N. Cheng, S. Lawes and X. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 35–62 CrossRef .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
M. Wang, H. Guo, R. Xue, Q. Li, H. Liu, N. Wu, W. Yao and W. Yang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2984–2997 CrossRef CAS .
W. `Du, Y.-L. Bai, J. Xu, H. Zhao, L. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 281–295 CrossRef .
S. Wu, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 697–716 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, H. Zhang, H. Mei and D. Sun, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 420, 213438 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boorboor Ajdari, E. Kowsari, M. Niknam Shahrak, A. Ehsani, Z. Kiaei, H. Torkzaban, M. Ershadi, S. Kholghi Eshkalak, V. Haddadi-Asl, A. Chinnappan and S. Ramakrishna, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213441 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xing, K. Guo, Z. Zou, M. Cai, J. Du and C. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7046–7049 RSC .
H. Yu, H. Xia, J. Zhang, J. He, S. Guo and Q. Xu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 834–836 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, X. Zhang, L. Xing, J. Liu, A. Kong and Y. Shan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 298, 210–218 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Banerjee, D. E. Lobo, R. Middag, W. K. Ng, M. E. Shaibani and M. Majumder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3655–3664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, L. Cui, B. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Jia, W. Yang, J. M. Razal and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3815–3827 RSC .
Y. Chen, D. Ni, X. Yang, C. Liu, J. Yin and K. Cai, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 278, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Cai, G. Fang, Y. Cai, A. Pan and S. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17838–17847 RSC .
X. Liu, W. Zang, C. Guan, L. Zhang, Y. Qian, A. M. Elshahawy, D. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2462–2469 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nadeem, G. Yasin, M. H. Bhatti, M. Mehmood, M. Arif and L. Dai, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Romero, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, A. Ribera, R. Mas-Ballesté, T. F. Otero, I. Manet, F. Licio, G. Abellán, F. Zamora and E. Coronado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4343–4351 RSC .
J. Wang, Q. Zhong, Y. Xiong, D. Cheng, Y. Zeng and Y. Bu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 483, 1158–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. Zheng, P. Xiong, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19005–19010 RSC .
K. Le, M. Gao, W. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Wang, F. Wang, V. Murugadoss, S. Wu, T. Ding and Z. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 323, 134826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, C. Zhou, S. Xu, X. Ye, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhou, N. Hu and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Shi, Y. Chen, D. Li, Z. He, C. Wang, L. Guo and J. Ma, Carbon, 2020, 165, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Sui, F. Wei, J. Qi, Q. Meng, Y. Ren and Y. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 531, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai, M.-H. Whangbo and B. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, L. Chen, M. Du, Y. Song, Z. Wu and Q. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135869 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Liu, R. Bayaniahangar, H. Li, C. Lu, N. Xu, Z. Yao, Y. Qiao, D. Zhang and P. Pour Shahid Saeed Abadi, Carbon, 2020, 159, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, K. Jiang, M. Tahir, X. Wu, F. Idrees, M. Shen and C. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 371, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Chen, M. Yang and H. Li, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3101–3110 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Selvaraj, A. Muthusamy, C. Inho, H.-J. Kim, K. Senthil and K. Prabakar, Carbon, 2021, 174, 463–474 CrossRef CAS .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16068 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, J. Gao and D. Jiang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 905–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cao, M. Zhao, Y. Yu, B. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Yang, X. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6924–6927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Embrechts, M. Kriesten, M. Ermer, W. Peukert, M. Hartmann and M. Distaso, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 7336–7348 RSC .
Q. Liu, Y. Song, Y. Ma, Y. Zhou, H. Cong, C. Wang, J. Wu, G. Hu, M. O'Keeffe and H. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 488–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, D. Chen, H. Quan, R. Zou, W. Wang, X. Luo and L. Guo, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4144–4153 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, P. Gu, S. Zheng, M. Zheng, H. Pang and H. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19078–19085 RSC .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, Y. Xu, H. Xue, C. Liu and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1319–1328 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, P. X. Xiong, C. Zheng, H. Y. Qiu and M. D. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16640–16644 RSC .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, C. Yan, D. Chen, Y. Hu and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13344–13351 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhang, H. Hou and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2063–2071 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, Y. Dong, C. Liu, W. Wei, D. Liu and P. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 518, 57–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, X. Zhao, Z. Qiao, J. Jung, Y. Zhu, Y. Lu, L. L. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3317 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Segura, M. J. Mancheño and F. Zamora, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5635–5671 RSC .
S. K. Das, K. Bhunia, A. Mallick, A. Pradhan, D. Pradhan and A. Bhaumik, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 266, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Evans, L. R. Parent, N. C. Flanders, R. P. Bisbey, E. Vitaku, M. S. Kirschner, R. D. Schaller, L. X. Chen, N. C. Gianneschi and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2018, 361, 52–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, E. A. Kapustin, S. X. Yin, L. Liang, Z. Zhou, J. Niu, L. H. Li, Y. Wang, J. Su, J. Li, X. Wang, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, J. Sun and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2018, 361, 48–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355, eaal1585 CrossRef PubMed .
N. L. Campbell, R. Clowes, L. K. Ritchie and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 204–206 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khayum M, V. Vijayakumar, S. Karak, S. Kandambeth, M. Bhadra, K. Suresh, N. Acharambath, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28139–28146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Halder, M. Ghosh, A. Khayum M, S. Bera, M. Addicoat, H. S. Sasmal, S. Karak, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10941–10945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, H. Xu, X. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Wu, H. Liu, C. Gu, R. Fu and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6814–6818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, F. Lu, R. Xue, B. Ma, Q. Li, N. Wu, H. Liu, W. Yao, H. Guo and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26355–26363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Khan, A. Badshah, I. Khan, D. Zhao and M. A. Nadeem, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 253, 169–176 CrossRef .
Y. Li, T. Park, M. Kim, H. Xie, J. W. Yi, J. Li, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, J. Na and Y. Yamauchi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 10283–10289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Henzie, T. Park, J. Wang, C. Young, H. Xie, J.-W. Yi, J. Li, M. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Yamauchi and J. Na, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 176–181 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Kamachi, N. L. Torad, S. M. Hwang, Z. Q. Sun, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19848–19854 RSC .
Z. Xiao, L. Fan, B. Xu, S. Zhang, W. Kang, Z. Kang, H. Lin, X. Liu, S. Zhang and D. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41827–41836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wei, Z. Zhou, X. Zhao, W. Zhang and C. An, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23721–23730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, Z. Fang, Z. Li, W. Xu, M. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Wang, D. Zhao and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7235–7241 RSC .
Y. Tao, Y. Wu, H. Chen, W. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Tong, G. Pei, Z. Shen and C. Guan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maiti, A. Pramanik and S. Mahanty, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 450–461 RSC .
C. Guan, X. Liu, W. Ren, X. Li, C. Cheng and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602391 CrossRef .
C. Huang, C. Hao, Z. Ye, S. Zhou, X. Wang, L. Zhu and J. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 10114–10128 RSC .
F. Saleki, A. Mohammadi, S. E. Moosavifard, A. Hafizi and M. R. Rahimpour, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 83–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhao, S. Zhao, J. Zhou, C. Chen, K. Tao, R. Liu and L. Han, J. Power Sources, 2019, 430, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, M. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Pan, L. Zhu and S. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20145–20152 RSC .
C. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Cui, D. Yu, X. Zhang, X. Shu, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8396–8404 RSC .
A. Farisabadi, M. Moradi, S. Hajati, M. A. Kiani and J. P. Espinos, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 192–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Haldorai, S. R. Choe, Y. S. Huh and Y.-K. Han, Carbon, 2018, 127, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, F. Yang, H. Hu, S. Lee, Y. Wang, H. Zhao, D. Zeng, B. Zhou and S. Hao, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 583–592 CrossRef CAS .
W. Meng, W. Chen, L. Zhao, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Fu, F. Geng, J. Yu, X. Chen and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, X. Zhao, L. Jin, F. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Dong and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 322, 582–589 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Javed, H. U. Shah, N. Shaheen, R. Lin, M. Qiu, J. Xie, J. Li, R. Raza, W. Mai and C. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
C. Young, R. R. Salunkhe, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, Z. Huang, J. Henzie and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11834–11839 RSC .
E. Dai, J. Xu, J. Qiu, S. Liu, P. Chen and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 12588 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Xiao, X. Lv, L. Qian, S. Yuan, S. Wang and P. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16516–16523 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Chen, C. Guan, Y. Wu, C. Yang, Z. Shen and Q. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18440–18444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, B. Xu, S. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Mei, W. Fan, M. Zhang, L. Zhang and D. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Lu, J. Yang, X. Zhu, Y. Zheng, G. Lou, Y. Wu, Q. Wu, Z. Shen and Z. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 581, 455–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Zhao, W. Wei, Y. Li and L. Mi, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 831, 154794 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Z. Shen, Z. Pan, Z. Kou, X. Liu, H. Zhang, Q. Gu, C. Guan and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802002 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Guo, W. Yao, L. Zhang, M. Wang, T. Fan, W. Yang and W. Yang, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 601, 125011 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramachandran, Y. C. Lan, Z. X. Xu and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6633–6643 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Gao, C. Guan, Y. Hu and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23236–23243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jiang, J. Cai, J. Pan, S. Guo, Y. Sun, L. Li and X. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 432, 102–111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, S. Li, J. Wen, P. Gui and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35927–35935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Miao, X. Xiao, Y. Gong, K. Zhu, K. Cheng, K. Ye, J. Yan, D. Cao, G. Wang and P. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9365–9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Guo, L. Yue, N. Wu, Q. Li, W. Yao, R. Xue, M. Wang and W. Yang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3764–3773 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qu, L. Zhang, W. Meng, Z. Liang, B. Zhu, D. Dang, S. Dai, B. Zhao, H. Tabassum, S. Gao, H. Zhang, W. Guo, R. Zhao, X. Huang, M. Liu and R. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4003–4012 RSC .
M. Zhou, H. Zhao, F. Ko, P. Servati, A. Bahi, S. Soltanian, F. Ge, Y. Zhao and Z. Cai, J. Power Sources, 2019, 440, 227146 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bahaa, J. Balamurugan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8620–8632 RSC .
C. Chen, M.-K. Wu, K. Tao, J.-J. Zhou, Y.-L. Li, X. Han and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5639–5645 RSC .
D. Guo, X. Song, L. Tan, H. Ma, H. Pang, X. Wang and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42621–42629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Liu, H. Y. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Y. Liu and M. R. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 9666–9678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, J. Luo, Y. Qian, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Qiu, X. Li, C. Fang, J. Han and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801080 CrossRef .
K. Tao, X. Han, Q. Cheng, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, Q. Ma and L. Han, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 12584–12591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tao, X. Han, Q. Ma and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 3496–3502 RSC .
P. Wang, C. Li, W. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Wu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 612–615 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Yan, J. Y. Long, Q. F. Zhou, Y. Gong and J. H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5390–5405 RSC .
Q. Yang, Y. Liu, M. Yan, Y. Lei and W. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 666–676 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, L. Deng, H. Li, Y. Bao, Z. Xiao, B. Li, Q. Zhou, Y. Geng and L. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 275, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Luo, R. Hou, S. Zaman, K. Qi, H. Liu, H. S. Park and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Samuel, B. Joshi, M.-W. Kim, Y.-I. Kim, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 657–665 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, X. Zhang, W. Zhu, K. He, D. Su, A. Mendoza-Garcia, S. F. Ho, G. Lu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15026–15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, L. Zeng, G. Cheng, L. Yu and H. Zeng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 605–609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Li, J. Li, S. Yin, D. Shen, C. Li, P. Huo, H. Wang, Y. Yan and S. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122242 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tan, X. Chen, H. Wan, B. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Li, C. Wang, Y. Gan, P. Liang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Miao, J. Jiang, P. A. van Aken and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227403 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Kim, J. H. Kim and H. S. Park, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122996 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lv, Q. Zhong and Y. Bu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, Q. Chen, X. Shen, Z. Xu, C. Xu, Z. Ji and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 651–661 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, Y. Wu, R. Kitaura and K. Awaga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26829–26837 RSC .
Y. Song, M. Zhang, T. Liu, T. Li, D. Guo and X. X. Liu, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Wang and Y. An, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5511–5518 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Y. Liu, L. Xiao, M. Yan, H. Bai, F. Zhu, Y. Lei and W. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 354, 716–726 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xin, Y. Liu, H. T. Niu, H. Y. Bai and W. D. Shi, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227772 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. A. Safy, R. R. Haikal, B. Elshazly, A. Hamdy, F. Ali, A. A. Maarouf and M. H. Alkordi, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 8 Search PubMed .
L. Xin, Q. Liu, J. Liu, R. Chen, R. Li, Z. Li and J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 215–224 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, M. Zhang, P. Wu, Y.-J. Tang, S.-L. Li, F.-C. Shen, X.-L. Wang, X.-P. Zhou and Y.-Q. Lan, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, C. Li, C. Wang, L. Ji, Y. V. Kaneti, H. Huang, T. Yang, K. C. W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13949–13954 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, F. Zhou, W. Ma and H. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 263, 85–93 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiang, Q. Dai, J.-F. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6253–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zha, L. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Li, Q. Pan, P. Hu and S. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17837–17843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. Yao, Y. Lu, X. Hua, J. Liu, Z. Yang, H. Wei and Y. Mai, Mater. Lett., 2019, 236, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, Y. Zhu, Y. Yan, Y. Min, J. Fan, Q. Xu and H. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. He, Y. Liu, N. Kazantseva, P. Saha and Q. Cheng, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 35, 124–131 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, X. Xu, J. Kim, V. Malgras, R. Mo, C. Li, Y. Lin, H. Tan, J. Tang, L. Pan, Y. Bando, T. Yang and Y. Yamauchi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1433–1437 RSC .
M. Naseri, L. Fotouhi, A. Ehsani and S. Dehghanpour, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 484, 314–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yue, X. Wang, T. Sun, H. Liu, Q. Li, N. Wu, H. Guo and W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121959 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Q. Zhang, N. Hu, X. Zhang, Y. Mai, J. Liu, X. Hua and H. Wei, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 2269–2273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, A. Klechikov, C. Moise, M. Prodana, M. Enachescu and A. V. Talyzin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1034–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Q. Wu, L. Han, S. Wang, S. Fang, Z. Zhang and S. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 27290–27294 RSC .
J. Ma, J. Li, R. Guo, H. Xu, F. Shi, L. Dang, Z. Liu, J. Sun and Z. Lei, J. Power Sources, 2019, 428, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1725–1736 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. Fan, H. Yang, H. Xiao and Y. Xiao, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 17389–17395 RSC .
K. Qi, R. Hou, S. Zaman, Y. Qiu, B. Y. Xia and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18021–18028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, G. Chen, D. Chen, J. Pei and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23744–23752 RSC .
D. J. Kim, J. W. Yoon, C. S. Lee, Y.-S. Bae and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 833–838 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, S. Mondal, A. Halder, A. Banerjee, D. Ghoshal, A. Paul and S. Malik, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 93, 448–457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Cao, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Xue, Q. Xu and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17329–17336 RSC .
Y. Gao, J. Wu, W. Zhang, Y. Tan, J. Zhao and B. Tang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Sun, P. Han, J. Wang, X. Ding, X. Zhang and H. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 490–498 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Li, S. Zhao, C. Chen, J. Zhou, K. Tao and L. Han, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 13596–13602 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Li, J.-J. Zhou, M.-K. Wu, C. Chen, K. Tao, F.-Y. Yi and L. Han, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 6202–6205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ramachandran, K. Rajavel, W. Xuan, D. Lin and F. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 14425–14431 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramachandran, C. Zhao, M. Rajkumar, K. Rajavel, P. Zhu, W. Xuan, Z.-X. Xu and F. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 322, 134771 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, B. Wu, L. Ge, L. Wu, H. Wang and T. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10878–10884 RSC .
W. Zeng, L. Wang, H. Shi, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, H. Wang, F. Gong, T. Wang and H. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8233–8241 RSC .
J. Qu, Q. Zhang, X. Li, X. He and S. Song, Appl. Clay Sci., 2016, 119, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. H. Xu, F. Lu, Z. Zhu, J. Y. Dong, D. L. Fang, J. Zhou, Y. J. Yang, Y. T. Zhong, S. M. Chen, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and X. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1475–1484 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mahmood, M. G. Kim, S. Yun, S.-M. Bak, X.-Q. Yang, H. S. Shin, W. S. Kim, P. V. Braun and H. S. Park, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2269–2277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, J. Zhu, R. Wang, Y. Deng, S. Zhang, C. Yao, Y. Li, X. Li and C. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125592 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2014, 111, 16676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Conway, V. Birss and J. Wojtowicz, J. Power Sources, 1997, 66, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seredych, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1475–1488 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Shinde, Y. Seo, S. Lee, H. Kim, Q. N. Pham, Y. Won and S. C. Jun, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 122982 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lee and J. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 115–124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. Liu, J. Li, X. Sun, J. Shen, W. Han and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1751–1754 RSC .
L.-F. Chen, X.-D. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, M. Kong, Q.-F. Guan, P. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7092–7102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ornelas, J. M. Sieben, R. Ruiz-Rosas, E. Morallon, D. Cazorla-Amoros, J. Geng, N. Soin, E. Siores and B. F. Johnson, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11343–11346 RSC .
R. R. Salunkhe, J. Tang, Y. Kamachi, T. Nakato, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6288–6296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qu, Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, D. Chen, R. Zou, K. S. Walton and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, A. Li, C. Lu, T. Zhai, S. Lu, W. Li and W. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125316 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qu, B. Zhao, Y. Jiao, D. Chen, S. Dai, B. M. deglee, Y. Chen, K. S. Walton, R. Zou and M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1263–1269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bi, H. Banda, M. Chen, L. Niu, M. Chen, T. Wu, J. Wang, R. Wang, J. Feng, T. Chen, M. Dinca, A. A. Kornyshev and G. Feng, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, Y. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Su, Z. Diao and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14581–14589 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Liu and M. A. Anderson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Hase, T. Konishi, A. Okui, Y. Nakamichi, H. Nara and T. Uemura, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2003, 123, 517–524 CrossRef .
J. Peng, W. Zhang, P. Yu, H. Pang, M. Zheng, H. Dong, H. Hu, Y. Xiao, Y. Liu and Y. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2467–2470 RSC .
J. Yang, Z. Ma, W. Gao and M. Wei, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Feng, T. Lei, M. R. Lukatskaya, J. Park, Z. Huang, M. Lee, L. Shaw, S. Chen, A. A. Yakovenko, A. Kulkarni, J. Xiao, K. Fredrickson, J. B. Tok, X. Zou, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, J. Li, S. Zhu, L. Ma and N. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 491–498 CrossRef .
H. Yi, H. Wang, Y. Jing, T. Peng and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yusran, H. Li, X. Guan, D. Li, L. Tang, M. Xue, Z. Zhuang, Y. Yan, V. Valtchev, S. Qiu and Q. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhong, M. Kitta and Q. Xu, Chem.–Asian J., 2019, 14, 3583–3589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-X. Li, B.-L. Yang, K.-Y. Zou, L. Kong, M.-L. Yue and H.-H. Duan, Carbon, 2019, 144, 540–548 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, T. Wang, Z. Wen and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Li, K. Ding, H.-R. Tian, M.-S. Yao, B. Nath, W.-H. Deng, Y. Wang and G. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702067 CrossRef .
P. Pachfule, D. Shinde, M. Majumder and Q. Xu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 718–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Torad, R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Li, H. Hamoudi, M. Imura, Y. Sakka, C.-C. Hu and Y. Yamauchi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7895–7900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Gao and H. Guo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3599–3606 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Zhou, Z. Xie, Y. Li, Y. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Ma, O. Terasaki and L. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Shi, C. Zhai, M. Cheng, Q. Liu and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4585–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, H. Wen, M. Ma, W. Wang, L. Yang, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Cheng, X. Sun and Y. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10499–10502 RSC .
C. Ye, Q. Qin, J. Liu, W. Mao, J. Yan, Y. Wang, J. Cui, Q. Zhang, L. Yang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4998–5008 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y. Mei, S. Yuan, H. Mei, B. Xu, Y. Bao, L. Fan, W. Kang, F. Dai, R. Wang, L. Wang, S. Hu, D. Sun and H.-C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7024–7030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Luo, Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Wang and R. Wang, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 382–392 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Li, L. Yu, X. Liu, J. Yang and M. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1803–1806 RSC .
D. Tian, N. Song, M. Zhong, X. Lu and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1280–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mallick, H. Liang, O. Shekhah, J. Jia, G. Mouchaham, A. Shkurenko, Y. Belmabkhout, H. N. Alshareef and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1883–1886 RSC .
F. Yu, X. Xiong, L.-Y. Zhou, J.-L. Li, J.-Y. Liang, S.-Q. Hu, W.-T. Lu, B. Li and H.-C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2875–2883 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Liu and H. Pang, Small, 2019, 15, e1902463 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Tang, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Shi, D. Wei and H. Duan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 75–84 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Q. Du, H. Zhao, S. Hou, Y. Shen, H. Li, X. Kong, W. Sun, B. Zhang, S. Li, F. Huo and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17958–17964 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Luo, P. Tang, X. Ye, X. Peng, H. Tang, S.-G. Sun and J. Fransaer, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 311–321 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lee, J. Moon, J. T. Park and J. H. Kim, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3773–3785 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, W. Wei, M. Zhang, S. Jiao, Y. Shi and S. Ding, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2169–2177 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rahmanifar, H. Hesari, A. Noori, M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali and M. F. Mousavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 275, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, J. Tang, H. Qian, S. Hou, Y. Bando, M. S. A. Hossain, L. Pan and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38737–38744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, Y. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1777–1783 RSC .
J.-W. Jeon, R. Sharma, P. Meduri, B. W. Arey, H. T. Schaef, J. L. Lutkenhaus, J. P. Lemmon, P. K. Thallapally, M. I. Nandasiri, B. P. McGrail and S. K. Nune, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7214–7222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5293–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Q. Ma and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14156–14163 RSC .
A. Mohammadi Zardkhoshoui and S. S. Hosseiny Davarani, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1643–1656 RSC .
Y. Zhang, R. Lin, Y. Fu, X. Wang, X. Yu, J. Li, Y. Zhu, S. Tan and Z. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 228, 9–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haldar, R. Kushwaha, R. Maity and R. Vaidhyanathan, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 490–497 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. M. El-Mahdy, Y.-H. Hung, T. H. Mansoure, H.-H. Yu, T. Chen and S.-W. Kuo, Chem.–Asian J., 2019, 14, 1429–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. M. El-Mahdy, M. G. Mohamed, T. H. Mansoure, H.-H. Yu, T. Chen and S.-W. Kuo, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14890–14893 RSC .
Y. Wu, D. Yan, Z. Zhang, M. M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7661–7665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, Y. Zheng, L. Cui, D. Jia, D. Wei, R. Zheng, C. Barrow, W. Yang and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 461–469 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Cai, X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Yang and J. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37675–37684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, R. Zhao, X. Zhang, W. Li, R. Xu, G. Diao and M. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 7–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, C. Qu, B. Zhao, Z. Liang, H. Chang, S. Kumar, R. Zou, M. Liu and K. S. Walton, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5029–5038 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qu, Z. Hang, Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, B. Zhu, D. Dang, S. Dai, Y. Chen, R. Zou and M. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, e1800285 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Huo, J. Gao, Z. Yu, F. Ran, L. Guo, S. Lou, T. Mu, X. Yin, Q. Wang and G. Yin, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 801, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Li, L. Wang, Q. Cai, Q. Li, B. Gao, X. Zhang, K. Huo and P. K. Chu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16761–16768 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, K. Jayaramulu, J. Sunil, S. Kment, P. Gomez-Romero, C. Narayana, R. Zboril and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900532 CrossRef .
B. Y. Guan, A. Kushima, L. Yu, S. Li, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605902 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Elayappan, P. A. Shinde, G. K. Veerasubramani, S. C. Jun, H. S. Noh, K. Kim, M. Kim and H. Lee, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 1157–1166 RSC .
R. Hou, G. S. Gund, K. Qi, P. Nakhanivej, H. Liu, F. Li, B. Y. Xia and H. S. Park, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 212–241 CrossRef .
B. C. Kim, J.-Y. Hong, G. G. Wallace and H. S. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500959 CrossRef .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lethien, J. Le Bideau and T. Brousse, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 96–115 RSC .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, C. Xu, L. Lin, R. L. Snyder and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2572–2577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nakhanivej, H. H. Rana, H. Kim, B. Y. Xia and H. S. Park, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7696–7703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, K. Wang, C. Li, X. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Han, X.-L. Wu, F. Li and Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24979–24987 RSC .
S. Zhou, X. Kong, B. Zheng, F. Huo, M. Stromme and C. Xu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9578–9586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, S. Chen, D. Chen, L. Dong, J. Wang, T. Zhang, T. Jiao, B. Liu, H. Wang, J.-J. Kai, D. Zhang, G. Zheng, L. Zhi, F. Kang and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20254–20266 RSC .
X. Xu, W. Shi, P. Li, S. Ye, C. Ye, H. Ye, T. Lu, A. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Xu, M. Zhong and X. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6058–6065 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Liu, L. Wang, F. Bu, J. Wei, D. Pan and M. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, e1801498 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dai, Y. Yuan, J. Yu, J. Tang, J. Zhou and W. Tang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15454–15461 RSC .
J. Xu, Y. He, S. Bi, M. Wang, P. Yang, D. Wu, J. Wang and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12065–12069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, W. Shi, W. Liu, S. Ye, R. Yin, L. Zhang, L. Xu, M. Chen, M. Zhong and X. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24086–24091 RSC .
Y.-Z. Zhang, T. Cheng, Y. Wang, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5242–5248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, C. Qu, Z. Liang, B. Zhao, S. Dai, B. Qiu, Y. Jiao, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, W. Guo, D. Dang, R. Zou, D. Xia, Q. Xu and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2788–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Liu, Z. Wu, R. Wang, Q. Wang, T. Li, J. Zhang, J. Cheng, Z. Yang, S. Chen, M. Miao and D. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124071 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Ajdari, E. Kowsari and A. Ehsani, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 265, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, W. Zhang, S. Kandambeth, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900482 CrossRef .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Wang, S.-X. Zhao, L. Yu, X.-X. Zheng, Q.-L. Wu and G.-Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7406–7414 RSC .
J. X. Zhao, H. Y. Li, C. W. Li, Q. C. Zhang, J. Sun, X. N. Wang, J. B. Guo, L. Y. Xie, J. X. Xie, B. He, Z. Y. Zhou, C. H. Lu, W. B. Lu, G. Zhu and Y. G. Yao, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 420–431 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Chengang Pei and Min Sung Choi contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Historical advance in MOFs, COFs and their derivatives for application of SCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The synthesis, structures, and chemical modifications of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 3  Storage sites of MOFs and COFs and the corresponding energy storage mechanisms of MOFs, COFs and their derivatives which are classified in Fig. 2.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of synthesis of NPC materials derived from ZIF-8; (b) SEM image and (c) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm of large-sized NPC (inset: pore size distribution of the NPC). Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of NiO/NiCo2O4 (1:1); (b) FESEM and (c) TEM images of an individual NiO/NiCo2O4 (1:1) hollow nanowire. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) (a) Schematic description of NiO/CNF composite synthesis; (b) high-magnification TEM image for a single nanofiber and a single particle; (c) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of activated nanoporous carbon polyhedron from Zn-MOF; (b) SEM images of A-NCP; (c) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm curves. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of PPF-3 nanosheets and 2D CoSNC nanocomposites; (b) AFM image of 2D CoSNC nanocomposites. Inset: statistical analysis of the thickness of 2D CoSNC nanocomposites measured in AFM images; (c) TEM image of a typical 2D CoSNC nanocomposite. Top inset: TEM image taken from the white square in the main panel. Bottom inset: SAED pattern of 2D CoSNC nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (C) (a) Schematic of experiment procedure; (b) SEM image of as-prepared 2rGO/Ni2P; (c) TEM image of 2rGO/Ni2P. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (D) (a) Graphic illustration of the fabrication and application of the rGO@C/Fe3C material; (b) SEM image of Fe3C/rGO; (c) TEM image of Fe3C/rGO. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) (a) A plausible schematic diagram of the formation of Na/Zn-MOF/rGO; (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Na/Zn-MOF/rGO. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Preparation illustration of Cu-CAT-NWAs/PPy; (b) lateral SEM and (c) TEM images of Cu-CAT nanowires. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) A schematic illustration of the formation of ultrathin Cu-MOF@δ-MnO2 nanosheets; (b) typical SEM image and (c) TEM images of ultrathin Cu-MOF@δ-MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the MnS/MoS2/C hybrid material; (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of MnS/MoS2/C hybrid. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 		 
C*H−NH2 + 2OH− ↔ C*NH + 2H2O + 2e−
C*−NH2 + 2OH− ↔ C*−NHOH + H2O + 2e−
Mn(II)s + OH− ↔ Mn(II)(OH)ad + e−
Mn(II)(OH)ad ↔ Mn(III)(OH)ad + e−
Co3O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ 3CoOOH + e−
CoOOH + OH− ↔ CoO2 + H2O + e−
2CoSe2 + 2H2O + O2 → 2Co(OH)2 + 4Se
Co(OH)2 + OH− ↔ CoOOH + H2O + e−
CoOOH + 2OH− ↔ CoO2 + 2H2O + 2e−
Co(OH)2 + OH− ↔ CoOOH + H2O + e−
Co3O4 + OH− + H2O ↔ 3CoOOH + e−
Ni(OH)2 + OH− ↔ NiOOH + H2O + e−
Co(OH)2 + OH− ↔ CoOOH + H2O + e−
CoOOH + 2OH− ↔ CoO2 + 2H2O + 2e−
MnS + OH− ↔ Mn(OH)S + e−
Mn(OH)S + OH− ↔ MnOS + H2O + e−
(MoS2) + K+ + e ↔ MoS−SK+
NiO + OH− ↔ NiOOH + e−
Ti3C2(OH) + K+ + e− ↔ KTi3C2(OH)

 	Fig. 7  (A) (a) Molecular structure of Ni3(HITP)2; (b) Ni K-edge XANES and (c) k3-weighted Fourier transform of the EXAFS of Ni3(HITP)2, positive and negative electrodes of cell after cycling at 2 A g−1 between 0.0 V and 1.0 V over 10000 cycles. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (B) (a) The reaction mechanism diagram of NiCo2S4; (b) different charge and discharge states and (c) the related in situ XRD patterns at different states. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (C) (a) Wireframe view of 3D Ni-DMOF-ADC along the (1, 0, 0) surface; (b) Raman spectra of DMOF-ADC electrode from 5000th, 10000th, 15000th cycle; (c) FTIR of DMOF-ADC converted material. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (D) (a) Schematic illustration of the structural advantages of NiCo2S4–Ni9S8–C DYMs electrode; (b) energy distribution curves of (b) NiCo2S4 and (c) Ni9S8. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

e-JUC-511	1 M NBu4PF4/ACN	5.46 mF cm−2/1000 mV s−1	∼100/10000/—	0.27 mW h cm−3	
235

NPC-2	1 M H2SO4	199.9 F g−1/0.05 A g−1	79/10000/2 A g−1	—	
236

B-N-C-1000	6 M KOH	230 F g−1/5 A g−1	83.48/1400/20 A g−1	—	
63

APC	6 M KOH	270 F g−1/1 A g−1	91.1/5000/0.5 A g−1	18.38 W h kg−1	
237

BTT-DADP COF-700	EMIMBF4	∼79 F g−1/10 A g−1	77.5/10000/10 A g−1	—	
25

Porous carbon	Na2SO4/PVA	38.6 F g−1/1 A g−1	94.8/10000/10 A g−1	17.37 W h kg−1	
238

Ni3(HITP)2	1 M TEABF4/ACN	111 F g−1/0.05 A g−1	90/10000/2 A g−1	—	
8

Cu-CAT NWAs	3 M KCl	202 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	80/5000/—	2.6 W h kg−1	
239

GNRib	1 M H2SO4	193 F g−1/10 mV s−1	—/—/—	—	
240

NPCs	0.5 M H2SO4	238 F g−1/20 mV s−1	—/—/—	19.6 W h kg−1	
241

Co8-MOF-5	0.1 M TBAPF6	3.27 F g−1/25 mV s−1	92/1000/10 mA g−1	—	
19

C800	1 M H2SO4	188 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1	—/—/—	—	
242

NPC	1 M H2SO4	204 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1	—/—/—	—	
17


 	Fig. 8  (A) (a) Crystal structure of Cu-CAT viewed along the c-axis; (b) N2 sorption isotherms of Cu-CAT at 77 K; (c) GCD curves at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (B) (a) The crystal structure of MOF-74; (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms and (c) GCD curves of CNRod, GNRib and MPC. Reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (C) (a) Crystal structure of COFs series; (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm and (c) CV curves of e-JUC-511. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (D) (a) Crystal structure and (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of BTT-based COFs; (c) specific capacitances of BTT-based COFs at different current densities with the typical GCD curves as inset. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

Ni-CoN@NC	Ni3N + CoN	1 M KOH	993 F g−1/1 A g−1	96.4/5000/10 A g−1	37.1 W h kg−1	
250

Ni-MOF nanosheet	Ni3(OH)2(C2H6O4S)2	2 M KOH	1518.8 F g−1/1 A g−1	95.5/10000/20 A g−1	50.8 W h cm−2	
251

PPNF@Co-Ni MOF	Ni3-xCox(OH)2(H2O)2(L)2	3 M KOH	1096.2 F g−1/1 A g−1	—/—/—	93.6 W h kg−1	
252

NiCo-LDH/10	Ni(OH)2 + Co(OH)2	3 M KOH	1272 C g−1/2 A g−1	—/—/—	36.1 W h kg−1	
137

Zr-NDI-scu-MOF	NDI	1 M H2SO4	30.75 F g−1/1 A g−1	∼100/5000/5 A g−1	472 mW h kg−1	
253

NiCo-LDH/NCF	Ni(OH)2 + Co(OH)2	2 M KOH	756 C g−1/0.5 A g−1	81.7/5000/5 A g−1	41.5 W h kg−1	
75

Co2(OH)2BDC	Co(II)-L + Co(OH)2	3 M KOH	1120 F g−1/1 A g−1	96.7/6000/2 A g−1	2.85 mW h cm−3	
91

Ni/P/N/C-500	Different metal (Ni) state	6 M KOH	2887.87 F g−1/1 A g−1	90/1000/10 A g−1	—	
254

Ni-MOF	Ni(II)s	3 M KOH	977.04 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	92.34/5000/0.5 A g−1	55.26 W h kg−1	
255

CTAs@NCBs-700(T)	N functional groups	1 M H2SO4	244 F g−1/0.67 A g−1	98.5/10000/20 mA cm−2	—	
256

CoSNC	CoS2	2 M KOH	383 F g−1/1 A g−1	91/10000/10 A g−1	—	
257

2D-CMO	CoO + NiO	4 M KOH	2098 mF cm−2/1 mA cm−2	92/4200/20 mA cm−2	36.4 W h kg−1	
258

ZnO@C@NiCo2O4	NiCo2O4	2 M KOH	2650 F g−1/5 A g−1	76/4000/10 mA cm−2	—	
202

Nanoporous Co3O4	Co3O4	6 M KOH	504 F g−1/5 A g−1	—/—/—1	36 W h kg−1	
222

MOF@Co1−xS@C	CosII + CoS	6 M KOH	13.14 F cm−2/2 mA cm−2	96.5/10000/0.5 A cm−2	270 mW h cm−2	
259

DAAQ-TFP	Anthraquinone subunits	1 M H2SO4	40 F g−1/0.1 A g−1	∼100/5000/0.1 A g−1	—	
22

v-CNS-RGO-3	B-doped carbon nanosheets	6 M KOH	∼162 F g−1/1 A g−1	∼100/3000/10 A g−1	—	
185

Ni-COF	Ni(II)	3 M KOH	1257 F g−1/1 A g−1	94/10000/1 A g−1	130 W h kg−1	
28


 	Fig. 9  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of DMOFs; (b) FESEM images of Ni-DMOF-ADC; (c) CV curves for Ni-DMOF-ADC, Ni-DMOF-TM and Ni-DMOF-NDC; (d) GCD curves of Ni-DMOF-ADC at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of the Ni/Co-LDH; (b) SEM image of the Ni/Co-LDH-7:3; (c) CV curves of blank Ni net and MOF derived various Ni/Co-LDH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1; (d) GCD curves of the Ni/Co-LDH-7:3 electrode at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (C) (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes of hierarchically porous CTAs@NCBs; (b) TEM image of CTAs@NCBs700(T); (c) CV and (d) GCD curves of CTAs@NCBs-700(T). Reproduced with permission.256 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) (a) Crystal structure, (b) TEM image, (c) CV curves and (d) GCD profiles of TPPDA-TPTPE COF. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) The stick model with regular microporous structure, and (b) SEM image of Ni-COF; (c) CV curves at scan rates from 5 to 30 mV s−1; (d) Energy density of Ni-COF. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) (a) Schematic of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing functional groups in ONCs; (b) HRTEM images of ONC-T1-850; (c) CV curves of ONC-T0-700, ONC-T0-850, ONC-T1-700 and ONC-T1-850; (d) GCD profiles of ONC-T1-850 at different current densities. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

NiCo2O4@Ni-MOF	AC	PVA/KOH	41.5 mA h g−1/2 mA cm−2	∼100/6000/8 mA cm−2	32.6 W h kg−1	
274

Co3O4@NiCo2O4	AC	1 M KOH	151.3 C g−1/1 A g−1	89.5/10000/10 A g−1	36 W h kg−1	
266

ZDPC-2	MoS2-ZIF	1 M LiPF6 (EC/DEC: 1/1)	—/—	81/10000/2 A g−1	155 W h kg−1	
275

GW-MSNGOHS	GW-YS-NFOHS	6 M KOH	140.2 mA h g−1/1 A g−1	92.1/10000/18 A g−1	118.97 W h kg−1	
267

65Ni-MDH	N–C	2 M KOH	215 F g−1/2 A g−1	91.3/1000/13.5 A g−1	81 W h kg−1	
225

ZIF-LDH/GO	ZIFC/G	6 M KOH	142.1 F g−1/1 A g−1	81.2/3000/5 A g−1	50.5 W h kg−1	
31

MOF-NPC/MnO2	MOF-NPC	1 M Na2SO4	—/—	87.3/3000/5 A g−1	76.02 W h kg−1	
126

Mn2O3@NF	MC	PVA/LiCl	317.5 F g−1/0.4 Ag−1	86.73/5000/12 A g−1	112.82 W h kg−1	
127

ADC-OH/rGO	ADC-C/rGO	2 M KOH	—/—	95/10000/20 A g−1	59 W h kg−1	
276

CNG/Co(OH2	MPRGO	PVA/KOH	58.9 mA h g−1/4 A g−1	91/5000/16 A g−1	37.6 W h kg−1	
218

Mn-MOFs	rGO	2 M KOH	211.4 F g−1/5 A g−1	81.18/10000/10 A g−1	66 W h kg−1	
217

NiMOF	CNTs-COOH	3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6	96.7 mA h g−1/1 A g−1	90.6/3000/10 A g−1	55.8 W h kg−1	
93

Na0.5MnO2	rGO@C/Fe3C	1 M Na2SO4	38.5 mA h g−1/1 A g−1	73.1/5000/10 A g−1	46.16 W h kg−1	
161

Ni–Co–S/ACC	AC	PVA/KOH	177 F g−1/1 A g−1	82/10000/5 A g−1	30.1 W h kg−1	
273

TM-nanorods	TM-NPCs	—	161 F g−1/1 A g−1	83.2/10000/10 A g−1	47.1 W h kg−1	
277


 	Fig. 11  (A) (a) View of the structure of Ni-MOF along the b axis; (b) SEM images of Ni-MOF; (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of the assembled Ni-MOF//CNT-COOH cell. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Structure and (b) TEM image of Co–Ni–S–B (inset: SEM image of Co–Ni–S–B); (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of the asymmetric Co–Ni–B–S/NF//AC/NF device. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) Schematic illustration of Zn/Ni-MOF; (b) SEM image of Zn/Ni-MOF@PPy; (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of the hybrid SC cells compared with previously reported ones. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) (a) Structure and (b) SEM image of PDC-MA-COF; (c) schematic illustration and (d) Ragone plots of PDC-MA-COF//AC ASC. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

HC-40-4	EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP	201 F g−1/0.5 A g−1	80.1/10000/50 A g−1	100/180°	
290

CNF@c-MOF	PVA/KCl	96 mF cm−2/0.2 mA cm−2	90/10000/1 A g−1	∼100/180°	
291

NiCo2O4@Ni-MOF//AC	PVA/KOH	41.5 mA h g−1/2 mA cm−2	∼100/6000/8 mA cm−2	∼100/180°	
274

CT-DqTp	PVA/H2SO4	12 mF cm−2/0.39 mA cm−2	80/2500/—	—/—	
103

C-M/G-40//N-M/G-40	PVA/H2SO4	426.5 mF cm−2/1.2 mA cm−2	93/3000/2.4 mA cm−2	97.5/180°	
292

rGO/Fe2O3	PVA/KOH	250 mF cm−3/6.4 mA cm−3	96.3/5000/50.4 mA cm−3	∼100/—	
293

Ni-MOF//AC	PVA/KOH	230 mF cm−2/1.0 mA cm−2	92.8/5000/5 mA cm−2	∼100/180°	
90

N-GQD@cZIF-8/CNT	PVA/H2SO4	400 F g−1/0.3 A g−1	82/5000/—	∼100/180°	
294

MSC//AC	PVA/KOH	246 F g−1/5 A g−1	111.9/5000/—	95/135°	
259

4 h-Cu-CAT-NWAs/PPy	PVA/LiCl	209 F g−1/5 A g−1	90/8000/—	∼100/180°	
33

CC@CoO@S–Co3O4//CC@carbon	PVA/KOH	1.99 F cm−3/2 mA cm−2	87.9/5000/5 mA cm−2	∼100/—	
295

CTAs@NCBs-700/T	PVA/H3PO4	580 mF cm−2/1 mA cm−2	95.5/8000/30 mA cm−2	∼100/180°	
256

MoO2@Cu@C	PVA/KOH	7.49 mA h g−1/0.25 A g−1	91/5000/1 A g−1	∼100/180°	
196

g-C34N6-COF	PVA/LiCl	15.2 mF cm−2/2 mV s−1	93.1/5000/2 mA cm−2	∼100/180°	
296

Ni(OH)2–MnO2/C	PVA/KOH	530.0 mF cm−3/2.24 mA cm−3	86.7/10000/11.2 mA cm−3	∼100/—	
297

MnOx–MHCF//AC	PVA/KOH	175 mF cm−2/0.5 mA cm−2	94.5/10000/5 mA cm−2	∼100/180°	
298

ZIF−PPy	PVA/Na2SO4	225.8 mF cm−2/0.4 mA cm−2	—/—/—	∼100/180°	
262


 	Fig. 12  (A) (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of ZIF-PPy; (b) TEM image of ZIF-PPy-2; (c) Ragone plots and comparisons of flexible ZIF-PPy-2 SCs; (d) CV curves of flexible ZIF-PPy-2 SCs at 5 mV s−1 subjected with different bending angles. Reproduced with permission.262 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (B) (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow NiCo2O4 from 2D Co-MOF; (b) SEM image of NiCo2O4; (c) Ragone plots and (d) cycling test (inset: the flat, bending and twisting states) of the CC@NiCo2O4//CC@NC full cell. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) Schematic of the formation process of CoOx/NG-A and C/NG-A; (b) TEM image of CoOx/NG-A; (c) Ragone plot and comparison of C/NG-A SSCs; (d) bending test of C/NG-A SSCs. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (D) (a) Schematic construction process for flexible CHCM SCs; (b) the cross-section SEM image of CHCM; (c) tensile strength of CNTF, COF, COF@CNTF and CHCM; (d) GCD curve of CHCM at different bending angles. Reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) (a) Schematic of the synthesis route of the flexible 2D-MOF/rGO paper; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of the rGO paper and 2D Co-MOF/rGO hybrid paper; (c) GCD curves of single micro-SCs, two SCs in parallel, and two SCs in series (inset: SCs connected in series and in parallel). Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Synthetic procedures of g-C34N6-COF; (b) magnified top-view SEM image of g-C34N6-COF/CNT hybrid (inset: the preparation of and the optical photograph of COF-MSC); (c) Ragone plots of g-C34N6-COF/CNT compared with some reported lectures. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) (a) Schematic and structural illustration, (b) SEM image of LSG/Ni-CAT MOF; (c) the areal Ragone plot of LSG/Ni-CAT MOF MSCs compared with other reported interdigitated MSCs. Reproduced with permission.302 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) (a) DFTB model structures of COF-CNF hybrid; (b) TEM image of DqDaTp-CNF; (c) diagrammatic representation of PSC; (d) discharging of the photocharged SC device. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (B) (a) SEM images of ZnCo2O4@Zn–Co–S HA; (b) SEM images of as-prepared CNTFs@H–Co3O4@CoNC HA. Inset: enlarged SEM image; (c) Ragone plot of the FASC device; (d) charging/discharging curves of the as-prepared FASCs charged by the FTENG. Reproduced with permission.305 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† Chengang Pei and Min Sung Choi contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
