Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSSs): an important building block for organic optoelectronic materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC01327B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC01327B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5283-5298Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSSs): an important building block for organic optoelectronic materials

        
          
            Zibiao 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Junhua 
            Kong†
a, 
      
        
          
            FuKe 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Chaobin 
            He
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, #08-03, 138634 Singapore. E-mail: wangf@imre.a-star.edu.sg
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117574, Singapore. E-mail: msehc@nus.edu.sg
Received 
      29th March 2017
    , Accepted 11th May 2017First published on 11th May 2017AbstractDue to the low-cost, facile processability and the capability of producing large areas of flexible thin films, organic optoelectronic materials have been considered among the most promising materials in the past two decades in both academic research and industry applications. Particularly, the incorporation of polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSSs) to develop high performance organic optoelectronic materials and the fabrication of these sophisticated materials into highly efficient devices are of significant interest because of the unique hybrid structures and physical properties of POSS. In this review, we present the recent advances in the development of POSS-based organic optoelectronic materials and devices, including organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), liquid crystal display, sensors and electrochromic devices. In addition, the insights into the uniqueness of POSS in microstructure, confined size effect, and their different organic substituents in the enhancement of the optoelectronic performance are illustrated. Finally, perspectives and challenges related to the further advancement of POSS-based organic optoelectronic materials are discussed, followed by the proposed design considerations to address the challenges that we will face in the future.
Zibiao Li
Dr Zibiao Li obtained his PhD in 2014 from National University of Singapore (NUS). Currently, he is working as a research scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR, Singapore. His research interests are focused on biodegradable and functional polymeric materials design, structural properties investigations and their hybrid fabrications for biomedical and consumer care applications.
Junhua Kong
Dr Junhua Kong received his MSc (2005) at School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University (XJTU), China, and another MSc (2008) at School of Energy and Power Engineering, XJTU. He then obtained his PhD degree (2012) at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, under the supervision of Prof. Xuehong Lu. His PhD work focused on one-dimensional carbon-based hybrids for energy storage. He worked as a research fellow in Prof. Lu's group (2012–2015) and Prof. Chaobin He's group (2015–2016) at the National University of Singapore, as a research fellow. He is now a scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. His current research interests include carbon-based nanostructures for electrochemical applications and functional polymer nanocomposites for properties enhancement.
FuKe Wang
FuKe Wang is currently a Research Scientist at the Institute of Materials Research & Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR. He obtained his PhD degree in 2003 from the National University of Singapore and worked as a Research Associate at IMRE till 2005. He then worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the University of California at Santa Barbara and Oklahoma University before he joined IMRE again in 2010. His research interests include functional polymers, polymer nanocomposites for 3D printing, and nano-materials assembly.
Chaobin He
Dr Chaobin He received his PhD degree from Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge in 1995. After graduation, Dr He worked in Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge as a postdoctoral associate for two years and later in the University of Southern Mississippi, USA for another two years before he joined the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) under A*STAR in 1999. Currently, Dr He is an associate professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, and holds a joint appointed position as a Principal Scientist at IMRE. His current research interests are in the areas of polymer nano-structured materials, organic–inorganic hybrid materials, and block copolymers and self-assembly.
1. Introduction
In the past two decades, organic optoelectronic materials have been receiving a surge in interest in academic research and industry applications.1–4 Due to their low-cost, facile processability, variability in structural and property tuning, and the capability of producing large areas of flexible thin film, organic optoelectronic materials have been successfully applied in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), liquid crystal displays, thin-film-transistors, sensors, electrochromic devices and many others.5–9 With the extensive academic and industrial efforts, the mechanism and the relationship between the molecular structure and optoelectronic properties have been illustrated, and various device structures have been developed. Currently, more and more organic optoelectronic materials research efforts are focused on developing highly efficient and practically applicable devices.10,11 Among these efforts, the incorporation of polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSSs) into organic optoelectronic materials to achieve improved performances has been attracting particular attention because of the unique and interesting hybrid structures of POSS.
POSS can be considered as the smallest hybrid particles of silica, with the hard inorganic ceramic core surrounded by organic silicone polymers or functional groups. The general formula of POSS is Rn(SiO1.5)n, where n is commonly 6, 8, 10, or 12, and the ratio of Si to O is 1.5, and the value of n = 8 is studied most extensively.12,13Fig. 1 shows the hybrid nanostructure of POSS that includes the siloxane cage with Si–O–Si bonds, which provides the thermally and chemically robust framework.14,15 Eight pendant organic arms, either organic groups or polymers, provide excellent solubility or miscibility to the organic matrix. Some research work on asymmetric POSS structures also demonstrated that the disruption of the symmetry can further improve POSS solubility in organic solvents and polymeric matrices.16,17 In addition, POSS structures can be precisely functionalized with reactive groups for grafting, polymerization, and other transformations, as a very popular strategy to build nanometer-scale blocks in various applications. These interesting structures and properties of POSSs cause them to be widely used in nanocomposite materials,18,19 catalytic supports,20 biomedical applications,21 drug delivery, etc.,22,23 which have been reviewed extensively. The focus of the present review will be on how to build new organic optoelectronic materials by using unique structures and properties of POSS to improve their performance and efficiency.
 Fig. 1  The hybrid nanostructure of POSS. 
Firstly, because the stiff and inert SiO core structure, which not only reinforces the mechanical properties of the polymer materials, but also functions as a thermal barrier to isolate heat because of its low thermal conductivity, POSSs have been widely used as building blocks to enhance the mechanical and thermal properties of organic optoelectronic materials. Recently, a significant enhancement of both mechanical properties (6-fold higher) and optical transmittance was reported for a POSS-containing copolymer, as compared to the control polymer without POSS.24,25 The enhancement mainly came from the small size of the silica-like cage that acts as a nanoparticle filler, and the organic substituents, which allow POSS processing with excellent compatibility. Significant enhancement of the thermal stability of azobenzene dyes by coupling to POSS was reported by our group. We showed about 177 °C increase in decomposition temperature of the POSS coupled dye over the un-modified one.26
The second merit of POSS is to function as an important 3D scaffold to build star-shaped structures for organic optoelectronic materials. We used the monosubstituted and higher phenyl-substituted octahydrosilsesquioxanes as models to simulate the electronic structures of POSS. The results showed that both the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) were localized on the phenyl functional groups (Fig. 2).27
 Fig. 2  Typical orbitals of the Ph8Si8O12 molecule: (left) orbital 168 (HOMO), depicting the π-electron orbital on phenyl groups; and (right) orbital 169 (LUMO), showing the π-electron orbital on phenyl groups. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission. 
This suggests that using POSS can help to suppress the self-quenching of organic luminescent dyes, luminescent oligomers or polymers in their aggregates and improve their quantum efficiencies in photoluminescence and electroluminescence. This interesting property has been successfully used in the design of organic light-emitting diodes and sensing organic optoelectronic materials to improve their performance. We know that the strong π–π stacking in most organic luminescent materials normally causes a significant drop in quantum yield in the solid state. By using the 3D scaffold POSS structures, the self-assembly behaviors of these conjugated luminescent materials can be suppressed, with improved processability.28 The same strategy was also employed in the electrochromic materials to disrupt conjugated polymer packing and provide a loose and porous film, allowing free ion movement and more accessible sites for the redox reaction.
Furthermore, the formation of star-shaped structures can help to change the crystallinity of materials and thus help to improve the performance of organic optoelectronic materials. An interesting example is the preparation of POSS-based ionic liquids for applications in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).29–31 Imidazolium iodides have become an important type of additive as liquid electrolytes for applications in DSSCs; but, generally a crystal growth inhibitor is needed for these solid electrolytes to improve the pore filling and interfacial contact. The work from Wang et al. showed that the coupling of imidazolium ring with POSS gave an amorphous nature of the solid electrolytes (Fig. 3), with improved solar cell conversion efficiency, without adding a crystal growth inhibitor. Similar conducting ionic liquids based on POSS, such as POSS octacarboxy anions (POSS–COO−)8 and (POSS–PEG)8 were also reported.32,33 In addition, the author showed that the glass transition temperatures (or applications temperatures of the devices) can be easily tuned by changing the length of alkyl chains linked to the imidazolium iodides.
 Fig. 3  Structures of POSS-based imidazolium iodides with various alkyl groups of different lengths. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission. 
On the other hand, the sizes of POSS cores (1 to 3 nm) are close to that of a large molecule; together with their uniform size, POSS 3D structures have been widely used to control supramolecular assemblies in crystalline lattices for applications in the aggregation-induced emission (AIE) based sensors and biodevices.34,35 In addition, to operate as 3D scaffolds, the molecular nanostructures of POSS also allow them to be used as “giant molecules” for the self-assembly of macromolecules and polymers for liquid crystal applications. For instance, various nanophase separated structures with sub-10 nm feature sizes have been demonstrated by introducing different functional groups onto POSS heads.12,36,37 In this review, we will therefore provide a comprehensive overview of recent literature on the POSS-based organic optoelectronic materials for various applications, particularly in the area of electroluminescent materials, electrochromic devices, and other important applications such as liquid crystal displays and sensors, with the aim to illustrate how to take advantage of the unique structures and physical properties of POSS to build these interesting materials.
2. POSS-based electroluminescent materials
In recent years, POSS has been extremely popular for use in the making of electroluminescent materials with enhanced properties. The use of POSS caused a decrease in intermolecular interactions, achieving the quantum confinement effect.38,39 This resulted in the POSS-based material having improved properties, which include having greater efficiencies, brightness, thermal stability and stable colour emission, to name a few.40,41 The material has been used to fabricate various appliances, including light emitting devices and dyes. The light emitting devices would often show stable light emission with high performance.18
In the design of electroluminescent materials, the concept of using POSS as a spacer to reduce the intermolecular interaction has been widely explored by our and other research groups.42–46 The special considerations for using POSS here include its low dielectric constant and its high band gap (intensive absorption at 6 eV and emission at 4.2 eV), which is much higher, compared to conventional organic compounds or oligomers. These properties make POSS an ideal candidate for isolating organic arms, while limiting the influence of its electronic properties on organic moieties. For example, in one recent study, we reported a series of nano-hybrid light emitting dots, with a diameter ranging from 2 to 4 nm, by directly implanting organic conjugated chains into POSS.42 Due to the unique architecture, it was noted that POSS could prevent the overlapping of organic chains, whereas the intermolecular interaction was significantly reduced by the outer layer of alkyl/alkoxy chains attached to the top of the organic chains and thus achieved a drastic reduction in aggregation. The nano-hybrids' distinctive structure gave them outstanding photoluminescence properties that differ from conjugated polymers and most organic molecules. Moreover, there was a tremendous increase in the PL quantum efficiency (PLQE), regardless of being in solution or in condensed states. In comparison to the PL spectrum of the nano-hybrid in most organic solvents, a blue shift was observed when it was in solid film.42
By using a similar strategy, we also recently synthesized organic quantum dots (QD) cluster materials, where POSS was used to spatially isolate the short organic chains.43,44 As shown in Fig. 4, the clusters were made up of a cubic core with short organic arms extending from all eight corners. Quantum confinement effects were achieved due to the core acting as a stable spacer, thus separating the organic arms. In addition to acting as luminescent centers, the organic arms hindered intermolecular aggregation as the ends were capped with alkyl chains. The nano-sized and rigid cage-like POSS enhanced the mechanical and thermal stabilities, and further reduced the electronic effects faced by the organic moieties. The torsion energy barrier was increased by the incorporation of methyl groups into the R position of the neighbouring phenyl ring, resulting in a reduction of phenyl ring rotation, preventing PL line broadening (Fig. 4).43
 Fig. 4  Organic clusters made up of a cubic core with eight short organic arms stretching from the corners were synthesized. The PLE and PL results proved that these organic clusters possessed properties similar to quantum dots (QD). Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission. 
Chang et al. recently developed a blue-light electroluminescent nanoparticle containing eight carbazole chromophore arms and octakis[N-(9-ethyl-9H-carbazol-3-yl)undecanamide-11-dimethylsiloxy]silsesquioxane (POSS-C11-Cz), which can form well-ordered dispersive structures in the bulk state (Fig. 5).45 In this study, the carbazole units were linked to the POSS cage through alkyl chain spacers, creating a bulky POSS core, resulting in the prohibition of inter-chain interactions, which ultimately caused a reduction in aggregation and excimer formation. This was confirmed through the photoluminescence and optical spectra of POSS-C11-Cz in both solution and solid state. Particularly, the photoluminescence measurement of a blend of polyfluorene (97 wt%) and POSS-C11-Cz (3 wt%) showed stable colour luminescence, even after the sample was heated for 5 h at 200 °C. When compared to a device based on pure polyfluorene, a triple-layer device based on this blend displayed greater luminance efficiencies and maximum brightness, indicating its great potential as a photoluminescence material.45
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the well-ordered dispersive structure formed from POSS-C11-Cz in the bulk state, showing strong electroluminescence properties. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission. 
Another example of reduced aggregation was through the use of FeCl3-oxidative polymerization, where soluble hyperbranched organic–inorganic hybrid conjugated polymers were synthesized from 4,7-bis(3-ethylhexyl-2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole and POSS at varying concentrations. Unlike its linear counterpart, the newly designed polymers showed 80–400% increase in PL quantum efficiencies. In addition, the electroluminescent (EL) spectra showed an emission λmax at 660 nm, which was within the range of pure red light, and the EL spectrum was also narrower when compared to the hyperbranched polymer with its linear counterpart. Under similar voltage and film thickness, the hyperbranched polymer displayed ∼500% greater EL brightness, showing its high potential as an effective red electroluminescent material for LED applications.46 Naka et al. reported a bi-functional terminal polyhedral octasilicate (OS)-core dendrimer containing carbazole and 1,8-naphthalimide on its peripheries (OS-NC). The photoluminescence spectrum of OS-NC coating film showed exciplex emission and displayed greater red-shift emission in comparison to binary blends.47
In addition to the reduction of aggregation, POSS-based luminescent materials also displayed higher efficiencies, brightness and thermal stability.10,28,48–55 For instance, using the Gilch polymerization method, POSS05–poly(p-phenylenevinylene)s (PPV) was synthesized to carry 5 mol% POSS-attached PPV units, whereas POSS25–PPV and POSS100–PPV carried 25 mol% and 100 mol% respectively. EL devices containing the POSS–PPV possessed better thermal stability with the glass transition temperature in the range of 64–77 °C, compared to 58 °C of MEH–PPV. MEH–PPV had a maximum brightness of 3880 cd m−2 at 14.8 V and luminance efficiency of 0.075 cd A−1 at 3880 cd m−2, whereas POSS25–PPV showed higher maximum brightness and luminance efficiency of 6340 cm m−2 at 13.2 V and 0.26 cd A−1 at 6190 cd m−2 respectively, indicating that the presence of the POSS moieties caused an improvement in the EL properties (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  (a) The electroluminescence spectra of devices with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer blend (POSS25–PPV in MEH–PPV)/Ca/Al configuration. (b) Relationship of voltage and luminance of POSS25–PPV in MEH–PPV. (c) Relationship of voltage and luminance efficiencies of POSS25–PPV in MEH–PPV. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission. 
However, a binary blend made up of 95 wt% of MEH–PPV and 5 wt% of POSS25–PPV showed a luminance efficiency of 0.48 cd A−1 at 10540 cd m−2, which was 6.4 times better than that of POSS25–PPV. It also displayed maximum brightness of 11010 cd m−2 at 14.3 V. This surprising enhancement was due to insulation domains of the POSS moieties being formed within the polymer matrices. Therefore, in addition to the PL efficiencies of the emitting polymers, the EL efficiencies of the devices are dependent on the charge mobility and there should be a balance of charge carriers of electrons and holes.48,49 In another report, the addition of POSS to polyfluorene derivatives showed a decrease in inter-chain interaction along with the keto formation, which led to a remarkable increase in fluorescence quantum yields. The POSS units also resulted in a reduction in fluorescence quenching, thus giving the POSS-tethered polymer better thermal stability.50
On the other hand, Yang et al. synthesized POSS macromolecules with platinum complex and carbazole moieties.51 It showed that the monomer/excimer emission balance was directly affected by the ratio of carbazole to platinum complex moiety combined with the POSS. In comparison to analogous devices that made use of a mix of platinum complexes and polymer matrix, light emitting devices that used the POSS macromolecule showed remarkably greater efficiencies with a peak external quantum efficiency of ca. 8%. Moreover, there was an increase in the device efficiency along with the ratio of monomer and excimer/aggregate emission intensity in the electroluminescent spectra when there was a decrease in the amount of platinum complex in the POSS macromolecule. This is due to the decline in concentration quenching and reduction of interaction between the platinum complexes.51 In a similar fashion, POSS nanoparticles were introduced into the choromophore matrix to synthesize a novel organic–inorganic amorphous 3,6-dipyrenylcarbazole–POSS hybrid material (POSS–DPCz) (Fig. 7). The introduction of the POSS nanoparticles was to facilitate the formation of a three-dimensional nanostructure. OLED device fabrication was able to take place due to the presence of a suitable HOMO–LUMO energy level. When the POSS derivative was used in a three-layer OLED device, a maximum brightness of 8900 cd m−2 was observed, where a stable blue-light at 450 nm was observed. Results showed that when compared to the control DPCz-based devices, its performances were nearly two times higher.52 With these enhanced properties, most electroluminescent materials showed stable and pure colour emission, in particular blue light.56–60
 Fig. 7  Synthetic procedure for POSS–DPCz and its high electroluminescence properties in solution. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission. 
It was previously reported by Lee et al. that through the nickel-catalyzed Yamamoto coupling reaction, the highly efficient blue polymer, POSS-substituted polyfluorene (PFPOSS), could be synthesized.56 With restricted inter-chain interactions, it showed a decrease in undesired green emission (>500 nm) of poly(dialkylfluorene). The POSSs group contributed to the high thermal stability of the polymer, which further led to a better colour stability of PFPOSSs blue emission, despite undergoing thermal annealing at 150 °C. An exceptionally steady blue light emission with great performance was produced by ITO/Ca/Al/OEDOT–PSS/polymer LED devices that made use of PFPOSS.56 Through the interaction of 4-uracilbutyl-1-methylpyrene ether (U-PY) and octakis[dimethyl(N-(6-acetamidopyridin-2-yl))siloxy]silsesquioxane (ODAP–POSS), a star-like POSS core supramolecule was developed as an efficient blue-light electroluminescent material.57
The hydrosilation reaction was commonly used to produce materials that exhibited high efficiencies and luminance. Recently, Cho et al. synthesised POSS–FL3, a POSS-based blue light electroluminescent nanoparticle containing a terfluorene chromophore on each arm.58 Poly(dihexylfluorene) had a maximum absorption wavelength (391 nm in THF solution), which overlapped well with the maximum emission wavelength (394 nm in THF solution) of POSS–FL3. This indicated that the quantum efficiencies of blue light-emissive conjugated polymers such as polyfluorenes can be increased by energy transfer and isolation of the chromophores through the use of POSS–FL3 as a dopant.58 Using a similar approach, our group recently designed a series of pearl-necklace-like polymers through the hydrosilylation condensation between hybrid polymers of inorganic bifunctional POSS and organic light-emitting oligofluorene segments (Fig. 8). Optoelectronic analyses showed that the presence of the interconnecting POSS can effectively reduce the red-shift in photoluminescence and electroluminescence during film formation. The obtained hybrid poly(oligofluorenes) displayed stable blue emission with high color purity. Thermal analyses recorded a high glass transition temperature of 125 °C, suggesting the thermal plastic behavior of the materials.59 In addition to the pearl-necklace-like structure, a hybrid POSS material comprised of carbazole (POSS–8Cz) was developed using the hydrosilylation reaction.60 It was found that POSS–8Cz possessed high thermal stability and showed blue emission in both solid film and solution in the photoluminescence spectroscopic analysis.
 Fig. 8  Synthetic procedure (B) and schematic illustration of blue-light emissive poly(oligofluorenes) with bifunctional POSS in the main chain. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission. 
Many attempts have been made to integrated POSS-based luminescent materials with excellent properties into various systems including dyes61 and light emitting devices.62–64 For example, Singh et al. recently developed iridium-based stellate POSS macromolecular dyes along with an inkjet printing process, which can deposit the dyes to study the POSS-based light emitting diodes.61 It showed that the peak luminance was at ∼10000 cd m−2, and with printed layers, it was possible to obtain peak quantum efficiencies of ∼2.5%. Efficiencies of the printed devices were plausibly reduced due to the thickness of the printed layer along with the effect of the emissive region where the surface roughness strengthens the metal cathode quenching.61 As for the POSS-based light emitting devices, Lo et al. recently synthesized novel amorphous POSS core materials using Heck coupling. In this study, octavinylsilsesquioxane (OVS) was reacted with different amounts of 1-bromopyrene, resulting in SSQ-based materials that contained a spherical “silica” core and pyrene-functionalized emissive periphery (Fig. 9).62 The advantage of using SSQ-based materials within organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) include high solubility, high Tg, high yield reactions, low polydispersities and high purity. The materials showed an external quantum efficiency of 2.63% and current efficiency of 8.28 cd A−1, making them efficient emitters. In addition, iridium complexes attached to POSS showed high performance in monochromatic light-emitting devices, where the peak external quantum efficiencies were in the 5–9% range.64 This can be driven at a voltage that is less than 10 V to achieve a luminance of 1000 cm m−2. Moreover, white-emitting devices with R, G, B POSS emitters exhibited an external quantum efficiency of 8%, with a power efficiency of 8.1 lm W−1 at 1000 cd m−2. Encouraging efficiencies were achieved in the devices based on hole-transporting and Ir-complex moieties dual-functionalized POSS materials without using host materials, demonstrating that triplet-dye and carrier-transporting moieties functionalized POSS materials are a viable approach to the development of solution-processable electrophosphorescent devices.64
 Fig. 9  Synthetic route of pyrene substituted octavinylsilsesquioxane (P8-OVS and P14-OVS) using Heck coupling. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. 
3. POSS on electrochromic devices
The term, electrochromism, is defined as the phenomenon of the reversible change of electromagnetic absorbance or transmittance spectra upon applying external potential to the host. The spectral change is mainly due to the switching of redox states of the chemical species, and leads to visually distinguishable color change. Electrochromic materials are in such a special category of materials that are capable of changing their own optical properties, rendering themselves greatly useful in a rich variety of practical fields, such as reflective-type displays,65 smart windows and smart mirrors66,67 and e-papers.68,69 Various materials, including inorganics (WO3, ZnO, etc.),70–75 organic small molecules,76 macromolecules and polymers (DNA, polyaniline, polypyrrole, etc.),77–79 as well as their hybrids (ZnO–PEDOT, MoO3–WO3, WO3–PPy, WO3–rGO, etc.),80–84 are electrochromically active and have been extensively researched to date. Compared with the others, polymer-based electrochromic materials exhibit unique advantages, including multiple coloration and high efficiency, rapid response, high thermal stability, good mechanical durability, ease of processing and relatively low cost.
Electrochromic polymers normally feature in high conjugation with band gaps ranging from 0.5 V to 3.0 V. The band gap of conjugated polymers is tunable through altering the chemical structure of the polymers or corresponding monomers. This leads to potential improvement of the optical contrast, which is one of the most critical and demanded parameters in the area of electrochromism. Some typical examples include introducing additional electrochromic groups onto the polymer chains as side pendants or copolymerized segments,85,86 incorporating rigid or bulky substituents,87 and increasing the size of the functional groups on the polymer chains.88 On the other hand, porous polymers or nanosized ones do speed up the switching response, compared to bulky solid polymers.89,90 This is due to the facilitated ion movement and shortened ion pathway; however, the porosity and small size has limited influence on the optical contrast.
Summarizing the above, the manipulation of the chemical structures of the conjugated polymers turns out to be the most useful strategy to modulate the optical contrast, while the morphological optimization reduces the switching time significantly. This enhances the overall electrochromic performance of the corresponding devices. Benefitting from the cage-like geometry of the POSS, as well as the convenience and diversity in attaching/grafting functional groups or long organic chains onto the corners of the cages, the incorporation of POSS into electrochromic polymers in a chemical way brings possible alteration to the morphology and structure of the polymers. Typically, such “chemical way” involves tethering electrochromic chains onto the nanocages of POSS through covalent bonding, disrupting the molecular packing of the chains. The incorporation of POSS will help to enlarge the interspaces between the electrochromic chains due to the separation effect from the POSS cages. This allows relatively free ion movement during the redox switching. Also, POSS-induced morphology change leads to a loose, non-parallel packing of the polymer chains, offering more accessible sites for the redox reaction, inducing more distinct color change, i.e., higher optical contrast.
Lu's group has done substantial and valuable work on POSS-modified electrochromic polymers. In 2007, for the first time, they grafted polyaniline (PANI) onto the corners of POSS cages (POSS–PANI) through oxidative emulsion copolymerization of aniline with octa(aminophenyl) silsesquioxane (OAPS), as shown in Fig. 10.91 After the copolymerization, the dense packing of the rigid aniline chains was prohibited, which was verified by the poor crystallinity as well as the reduction of the crystal size.92 Furthermore, the nanoporous structure was created due to the loose packing structure of the star-like geometry (Fig. 10), offering free pathways for ion injection and extraction. This was evidenced by the increased ionic conductivity and decreased electrical conductivity of the POSS–PANI over that of pure PANI. Due to the above adjustments, the optical contrast of POSS–PANI with OAPS concentration of 0.5 mol% increased by about 40%, compared to that of pure PANI, and the switching time that was required to achieve 90% of the total absorbance change decreased from 3.2 s for pure PANI to 2.8 s for POSS–PANI (0.5 mol% OAPS), as shown in Fig. 10. It is worth noting that increasing the OAPS concentration reduces the chromophore concentration induced by the excess amount of nanometer-sized POSS cages. This further reduced the switching time to 1.5 s; however, there was no further enhancement of the contrast. Therefore the optimization of POSS content for the grafting must be taken into careful consideration to achieve the best electrochromic performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic demonstration of POSS–PANI from emulsion polymerization. (b) A possible loose packing structure of POSS–PANI. (c) Optical absorbance at λmax for the devices with pure PANI (dotted line), POSS–PANI with 0.5 mol% OAPS (POSS–PANI-a, thick solid line) and the one with 1.0 mol% OAPS (POSS–PANI-b, thin solid line) as the electrochromic layers, under square-wave potentials oscillating between −3.0 and +3.0 V. Reproduced from ref. 91 and 92 with permission. 
Besides the improvement of optical contrast and switching time, the electrochemical stability of POSS–PANI is also significantly higher than that of pristine PANI.92 This may be due to the stronger interactions between dopant anions and PANI chains brought by the larger conformation freedom of the anions in POSS–PANI. It is worth noting that following the same strategy, Toppare's group attached polypyrrole (PPy) chains onto thiophene processed OAPS nanocages through click chemistry.93 The lower band gap of π–π* transitions as well as the nano-scale porous structure from the loose packing of the star-like geometry give rise to higher optical contrast, fast switching response and color properties, compared to pristine PPy.
By combining POSS–PANI with other electrochromically active materials through proper assembling techniques, the optical contrast and switching response can be further enhanced from the synergistic effect of both phases. The typical techniques include electrostatic layer-by-layer (LBL) assembling and complementary dual-layer device fabrication. LBL is a unique strategy to produce low-roughness electroactive polymer films with excellent homogeneity and high optical contrast.96 Utilizing this strategy, Lu's group fabricated alternative multilayer thin films of POSS–PANI with poly(2-acrylamido-methane-2-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS)95 and sulfonated polyaniline (SPANI),94 respectively, as shown in Fig. 11. It was verified that the redox process of POSS–PANI/PAMPS is close to a nondiffusion-controlled process. Being attributed to the unique morphology brought about by the synergistic combination of star-like geometry and the LBL assembling technique, the POSS–PANI/PAMPS possesses a 30% higher optical contrast, as well as much faster switching kinetics than its counterpart, PANI/PAMPS, under dynamic switching conditions. Besides the nondiffusion-controlled redox mechanism in the case of POSS–PANI/SPANI, strong interaction between POSS–PANI and SPANI was formed. The interaction increases the amount of electroactive units and conjugation length in POSS–PANI/SPANI, leading to lower band gap energies and higher electrical conductivity. Furthermore, a more favorable redox reaction was achieved as verified by the lower oxidation and reduction potential values. The above alteration results in 35% electrochromic contrast improvement for the POSS–PANI/SPANI over POSS–PANI/PAMPS, and the switching kinetics of POSS–PANI/SPANI is much faster than that of spin-coated SPANI (Fig. 11). This demonstrates the great usefulness of the LBL technique in effectively enhancing the electrochromic performance of polymer thin films through the intimate assembling with synergistic polyions.
 Fig. 11  LBL assembly of (a) POSS–PANI with PAMPS and (b) POSS–PANI with SPANI, and (c) the potential step absorptiometry of the LBL electrochromic devices compared with that of reference. Reproduced from ref. 94 and 95 with permission. 
A complementary electrochromic device refers to the one with two electrochromic layers with coincident coloration and bleaching potentials, including the anodically colored layer and cathodically colored layer. The integrated function of the dual-layer configuration could bring more than the sum of two single-layers. POSS–PANI has been used to combine with WO397 and poly(4-styrenesulfonicacid) (PSS)-doped PEDOT(PEDOT:PSS)98 to fabricate dual-layer complementary electrochromic devices. Under such configurations, more favorable accessible doping sites were formed due to the loosely packed structure of POSS–PANI, releasing more protons or Li+ during the oxidation process. The ionic concentration gradient creates an additional internal driving force to diffuse more ions towards the other electrochromic layer, i.e., WO3 or PEDOT:PSS. Therefore, the layer of WO3 or PEDOT:PSS adds a significant contribution to the overall electrochromic performance of the corresponding dual-layer device, leading to a much higher optical contrast than the counterparts and even the sum of the two corresponding single layers (Fig. 12). Moreover, the switching speed and the coloration efficiency are also greatly improved, thanks to the loosely packed structure and the formed internal driving force.
 Fig. 12  Optical absorbance for the devices with (a) PANI (I) (dashed-dotted line), POSS–PANI (II) (dotted line), WO3 (III) (short dotted line), PANI/WO3 (IV) (dashed line) and POSS–PANI/WO3 (V) (solid line) as the electrochromic layers, and (b) POSS–PANI/PEDOT:PSS (1), PANI/PEDOT:PSS (2), POSS–PANI (3), PANI (4) and PEDOT:PSS (5) as the electrochromic layers. Reproduced from ref. 97 and 98 with permission. 
In addition to the above-stated function of POSS, i.e., attaching organic electrochromic chains onto the corners, POSS has also been used to prepare new structures or modify existing morphologies regarding electrochromic properties. Bekaroglu's group designed a novel sandwich-like bis(phthalocyaninato)lanthanide(III) complex, LuPc2, which contains a mercaptopropylisobutyl–POSS functional group on each Pc moiety.99 The further reaction with lithium followed by Lu(OAc)3·3H2O in refluxing 1-pentanol leads to the formation of a special compound, which exhibits electrochromic green-blue transition. Orel's group used POSS as pigment surface modifier.100 In a typical work, Thin TiO2 (anatase) pigment coating was prepared through milling metatitanic acid (mTiA) agglomerates in the presence of trisilanol heptaisobutyl silsesquioxane (trisilanol POSS)/butanol/hexane. The coating was constructed with mTiA and rutile (mTiR) nanoparticles in sizes of less than 100 nm, on the surface of which a thin layer of POSS dispersant was formed by establishing hydrogen bonding. Being used as an electrochromic layer, the trisilanol POSS/mTiA pigment coating exhibited a dark blue color at the coloration stage; it possessed higher transmittance contrast than the coating without trisilanol POSS, due to the small and uniform nanoparticle size facilitated by the trisilanol POSS, as well as the interaction between the mTiA pigment coating and the trisilanol POSS dispersant layer on the surface.
In an electrochromic device, the electrolyte is another critical component that determines the conduct of the ions during redox switching. Due to the large specific surface area as well as the functionality number, POSS can also be used to modify electrolytes to improve the electrochromic performance of the corresponding devices. Orel's group used POSS as the nano-sized building blocks to construct functionalized 1,3-alkylimidazolium iodide solid and room temperature ionic liquids, as shown in Fig. 13.101 Using MePrIm+Ix− IB7 T8 POSS as the electrolyte of the WO3/Pt-based electrochromic device, an adequate coloring-bleaching change was established for up to 1000 repetitive cycles. Following this, Lu's group incorporated octa(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyldimethylsiloxy) polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS-OH) into electrospun poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-co-HFP) nanofibers with good dispersion, as shown in Fig. 14, and used as host of the ionic liquid (IL), LiClO4/1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIM+BF4−).102 The ionic conductivity is enhanced in the presence of POSS-OH, due to the greater extents of dissociation of the IL and LiCLO4, induced by the Lewis acid–base interactions of POSS-OH with BF4− and ClO4−. As the electrolyte of an electrochromic configuration of an ITO glass/electrochromic layer (PANI–TiO2)/electrolyte/ITO glass, the PVDF-co-HFP (5 wt% POSS-OH)/LiClO4/BMIM+BF4− helps to achieve higher optical contrast (71.9%) and shorter coloration/bleaching time (2.0 s/2.3 s, Fig. 14), compared with PVDF-co-HFP/BMIM+BF4− (53.9%, 5.9 s/7.9 s, respectively). The improvement can be ascribed to the small size of Li+ as well as the increased number of free Li+. The above presented work suggests that POSS with adjustable functional groups on the corners can be a potential modifier for the electrolyte for electrochromic performance enhancement.
 Fig. 13  Schematic demonstration of the synthesis of 1-methyl-3-propyl hepta(i-butyl) octasilsesquioxane imidazolium iodide (MePrIm+Ix− IB7 T8 POSS, 3a), 1-(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl) 3-propyl hepta(i-butyl) octasilsesquioxane imidazolium iodide (3b). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission. 
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of an electrospun PVDF-co-HFP/POSS-OH nanofibrous mat with 5 wt% POSS-OH. (c) Switching curves of the electrochromic devices, with PVDF-co-HFP/BMIM+BF4−, PVDF-co-HFP/LiClO4/BMIM+BF4− and PVDF-co-HFP (5 wt% POSS-OH)/LiClO4/BMIM+BF4− as electrolytes under squarewave potentials oscillating between +2.0 V and −2.0 V. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission. 
4. Other applications of POSS in organic optoelectronic materials
Except for the successful applications of POSS in electroluminescent and electrochromic materials, it was also widely used in other interesting areas due to its unique structure and physical properties. Because of the uniform sized nanostructure and good dispersion in most organic matrices, POSSs have been widely used in liquid crystal (LC) alignment with improved contrast ratio and time response.103,104 It has been reported that the addition of POSSs to liquid crystals can induce a spontaneous vertical alignment, which eliminates the alignment layers required in a conventional LC device, and avoids the drawbacks of the traditional high temperature process.105,106
In the LCD industry, changing the pre-tilt angle θp by using the synthetic polyimide to produce the homogeneous (θp ∼ 0°) and homeotropic (θp ∼ 90°) surface alignments has become an established technology; however, only a small tuning range of pre-tilt angle can be achieved by using the commercial polyimides. By using the POSS (nanoparticles)-induced vertical alignment technique, control of the liquid-crystal pre-tilt angles over the range of 0° < θp < 90° has been achieved simply by tuning the POSS concentration.107,108 The research results show that the changing of the pre-tilt angles was due to the competition between the homogeneously aligned polyimide layer and the POSS-induced spontaneous vertical alignment domain. Therefore, to further improve the LC performance, more and more work is focused on the modified POSS. For instance, poly(methyl methacrylate) modified POSS showed vertical LC alignment having a pre-tilt angle of about 90° with good electro-optical characteristics such as voltage holding ratio (VHR) and residual DC voltage (R-DC).109
By covalently attaching eight groups of azo-benzene mesogenes that differ in the length of the dielectric POSS core, light-driven functionality was added to the new POSS particles.110 These nanoparticles were doped into the medium (E-7) and highly (1294-1b) birefringent nematic mixtures, and exhibited reversible dynamic holographic properties. These new systems also showed quite large optical nonlinearities as nonlinear n2 coefficients equal to 5.4 × 10−2 cm2 W−1, making these new POSS materials promising for applications in nonlinear optical filtering and real-time holography. The doping of azo-functionalized POSS nanoparticles into the LC cell polyimide alignment layer was also developed to tune the pre-tilt angle.106,111 Due to the photochromic properties of the azo-benzene mesogens, a new functionality for pre-tilt angle change, when exposing the anchoring layer to photoisomerizing light, was achieved.106,111
The use of rigid core of POSS to build the star-shaped liquid crystals has also been explored and a quite stable liquid crystal phase was obtained, compared to corresponding linear LC polymers. The first octameric silsesquioxane-containing liquid crystal (LC) was reported in 1991 by Kreuzer et al.112 Subsequently, a lot of POSS-based LCs have been prepared by introducing different mesogens into the periphery of the POSS core. Most of the POSS-based LCs were built with octa-substituted moieties because of easy synthesis and high symmetry, and most of them exhibited nematic or smectic properties.113–117 For instance, by using the octakis(2-bromo-2-methylpropionoxypropyldimethylsiloxy)-octasilsesquioxane (OBPS) as initiator, Fan et al. synthesized the well-defined eight-arm star mesogen-jacketed liquid crystalline polymers with controlled molecular weight and low polydispersity by the atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) method (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Synthesis of the eight-arm star poly(2,5-bis[(4-methoxyphenyl)oxycarbonyl]styrene) by ATRP, using OBPS as the initiator. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission. 
It was observed that when the molecular weight was higher than 1.60 × 104 g mol−1, hexagonal lateral packing of the cylinders (lacked long-range order) exists and is named the ΦHN phase.15 The comparison of linear liquid crystal polymer, poly(6-(4′-octyloxyphenyl-4′′-benzoyl)hexyl acrylate) (LLCP) and the star-shaped POSS-graft-LCP showed that this topology helped POSS-grafted-LCP to form and stabilize the liquid crystal phase easily.118 It was revealed that the length between the POSS core and mesogens would seriously affect the POSS-based LC supramolecular assembly.20,116 The “column-within-column” hexagonal columnar phases are generally formed when the spacer is short, while it tends to form rectangular or hexagonal columnar phases when the spacer is longer than six CH2 units.20 Also, the asymmetric substitution (or partial substitution) of POSS was explored to control the mesophase of the POSS-based LCs.119,120
As shown in Fig. 16, an asymmetric dyad was synthesized by covalently attaching a 2-hydroxy-3,6,7,-10,11-pentakis(pentyloxy)triphenylene (P5T-OH) discotic molecule to the POSS molecule through a C11 spacer.120 X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses showed that nanophase separation occurred between the liquid crystalline P5T and crystalline POSS lamellae in the neat P5T–POSS, and there was a miscible 1:1 mol/mol blend of P5T–POSS and POSS. Also, POSS molecules self-assembled into an ABCA four-layer lamellar crystal sandwiched between triphenylene layers. In the 1:1 P5T–POSS:POSS, POSS molecules formed the inner B and C layers and P5T–POSS formed outer (or A) layers, suggesting that the 1:1 P5T–POSS:POSS was a miscible blend and P5T molecules were interdigitated in the rhombohedral crystal structure (Fig. 16).120 All these POSS based LC materials research results indicated that liquid crystalline POSS represents a promising candidate for the exploration of novel supramolecular self-assembly pathways in liquid crystals.121
 Fig. 16  Chemical structure of the P5T–POSS dyad molecule (a) and schematic representations of P5T–POSS (b) and 1:1 P5T–POSS:POSS (c) self-assembly at room temperature, viewed along the [100] POSS direction. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission. 
Taking advantage of the star-shaped 3D structure, POSS found many interesting applications in sensor design and applications. Perylene diimide (PDIs) derivatives have a strong tendency to form π–π interactions between adjacent PDIs units, and thus a significant drop of fluorescence quantum yield in the solid state. This greatly limited the applications of PDI in sensors and OLEDs. To overcome the strong π–π stacking in the PDI compounds, POSS was introduced into both ends of the PDI molecule to form the S-heterocyclic PDI (SPDI) with high yield (Fig. 17). In solution, POSS groups do not show large effects on the spectroscopic properties of PDIs, but the solid state spectroscopic properties of these compounds are significantly affected by the bulky POSS groups. In the solid state, if the presence of bulky POSS groups leads to the formation of “J” aggregates, the solid state fluorescence quantum yields will be improved significantly. Otherwise, low fluorescence quantum yields are obtained if the bulky POSS groups cause “H” type aggregation.122 The controlled compound SPDI coupled with C8 chains (C8–SPDI–C8) with low steric effect showed a low quantum yield of 0.7%, while the S-annulated PDI coupled with POSS nanoparticles (POSS–SPDI–POSS) showed a remarkably improved quantum yield, up to 17.5%.28 These results demonstrated that coupling bulky POSS units to the PDIs molecules is one of the most efficient approaches to significantly enhancing the fluorescence quantum yield in the solid state.28,123–125 Also, the SEM and XRD analysis showed that these POSS-coupled SPDIs had a strong propensity to form a dimer in solution and possess unique molecular packing of discrete dimeric motifs in the solid state.28
 Fig. 17  (a) Synthesis and chemical structures of POSS–SPDI–POSS and C8–SPDI–C8. (b) Fluorescence emission change of POSS–SPDI–POSS (30 mM in THF) observed upon the addition of various anions (300 mM). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Most interestingly, the POSS moieties here not only function as steric nanostructures, but they can also function as excellent nanoreactors for fluoride anions. Due to the presence of Si–O–Si bonds in the POSS core,126 the addition of fluoride anions induced fast decomposition of POSS and thus the fluorescence intensity was dramatically quenched by the progressive addition of fluoride anions, due to the collapse of the POSS steric support. Based on this property, the author further developed the effective sensor with a rapid response for fluoride anions by using the POSS–SPDI–POSS compounds.
The direct coupling of octa-substituted ammonium POSS with bithiophene dicarboxylic acid can form a series of POSS network polymers by modulating the feed ratio of the linker. Since POSS maintains its distinct hydrophobic properties, these water-dispersible network polymers can efficiently encapsulate hydrophobic guest molecules.127–130 By using these interesting properties, Tanaka et al. developed the POSS based network polymer for optical sensors for discriminating the particle size.27 It was found that the emission properties of the POSS network polymers showed varied fluorescence spectra with the sizes of the silica nanoparticles that were dispersed in the sample. The red-shifted emission of the POSS network was observed in the presence of nanoparticles, but blue-shifted emission was observed from the samples containing microparticles. These peak shifts depending on the size of coexisting particles were ascribed to the polarity changes around the bithiophene cross-linkers, induced by the adsorption of the POSS networks onto the particle surfaces.27
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we have demonstrated that POSS is one of the most interesting and important building blocks for constructing high-performance organic optoelectronic materials. The key features of POSS in building the organic optoelectronic materials come from its unique hybrid-cage structures with uniform size in the macromolecular level (1–3 nm core), together with its interesting physical properties such as the hard and heat insulating SiO core, with functional periphery organic groups. However, challenges still remain in the areas of the deeper understanding of the structure–property relationship, precise control of the substituents on the POSS core and the 3D structures, and the development of the multifunctional POSS-based organic optoelectronic materials.
(1) POSS has been widely used to eliminate the π–π stacking in organic semiconducting materials to improve their optical purity and efficiency. However, recent research results have also shown that the self-assembly behaviour is influenced by symmetrical structure POSS compounds. Therefore, a better understanding of how to control the assembly behavior of the POSS-based organic optoelectronic materials, particularly in the solid state, requires a systematic investigation.
(2) Although various synthetic techniques have been developed to precisely control the number of substitutes on the POSS core, and various functional POSS precursors are now commercially available, the precise control of the substitution, especially the control the of the space distribution of the functional substitution requires more synthetic techniques and new catalyst development.
(3) At the current stage, the POSS-based organic optoelectronic materials development occurs mainly through the direct coupling of POSS with active organic molecules, taking advantage of the uniform size of POSS or its unique star-shaped structure. However, as mentioned in the present review, in the reported POSS-based optoelectronic active compounds, many available sites on POSS were not used for function. Thus, there is a strong interest in developing multifunctional POSS compounds, and the newly developed multifunctional POSS will be expected to significantly increase their performance and broaden their applications.
References
J. E. Kwon and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3615–3642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, C. Zhang, X. Lin, Z. Zhou, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 91–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Yan, S. Yang, Y. Zhu, I. Murtaza, G. He, H. Meng and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 722–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 341–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ostroverkhova, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13279–13412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bulovic, G. Gu, P. E. Burrows, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Nature, 1996, 380, 29 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shen, P. E. Burrows, V. Bulović, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Science, 1997, 276, 2009 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, R. F. Chen, Q. Sun, W. Y. Lai, Q. Q. Su, W. Huang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3259–3302 RSC .
Z. Yang, Z. Mao, Z. Xie, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, J. Xu, Z. Chi and M. P. Aldred, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 915–1016 RSC .
D. M. Sun, Z. J. Ren, M. R. Bryce and S. K. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9496–9508 RSC .
H. Nakanotani, T. Higuchi, T. Furukawa, K. Masui, K. Morimoto, M. Numata, H. Tanaka, Y. Sagara, T. Yasuda and C. Adachi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4016 CAS .
D. B. Cordes, P. D. Lickiss and F. Rataboul, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2081–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, B. H. Tan, G. Jin, K. Li and C. He, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 6740–6753 RSC .
R. M. Laine and M. F. Roll, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 1073–1109 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Phillips, T. S. Haddad and S. J. Tomczak, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2004, 8, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
I. Blanco, F. A. Bottino and P. Bottino, Polym. Compos., 2012, 33, 1903–1910 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Moore, S. M. Ramirez, G. R. Yandek, T. S. Haddad and J. M. Mabry, J. Organomet. Chem., 2011, 696, 2676–2680 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Kuo and F.-C. Chang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1649–1696 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. A. Rashid, K. Ariffin, C. C. Kooi and H. M. Akil, Mater. Des., 2009, 30, 1–8 CrossRef .
E. A. Quadrelli and J.-M. Basset, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 707–728 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Kannan, H. J. Salacinski, P. E. Butler and A. M. Seifalian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 879–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Kidane, G. Burriesci, M. Edirisinghe, H. Ghanbari, P. Bonhoeffer and A. M. Seifalian, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 2409–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. D. Lickiss and F. Rataboul, in Advances in Organometallic Chemistry, ed. A. F. Hill and M. J. Fink,  2008, vol. 57, pp. 1–116 Search PubMed .
I. Pramudya, C. G. Rico, C. Lee and H. Chung, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 3853–3861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alexandris, A. Franczyk, G. Papamokos, B. Marciniec, K. Matyjaszewski, K. Koynov, M. Mezger and G. Floudas, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3376–3385 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chi, K. Y. Mya, T. Lin, C. He, F. Wang and W. S. Chin, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 735–742 RSC .
T. T. Lin, C. He and Y. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13788–13792 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Ben, X.-K. Ren, B. Song, X. Li, Y. Feng, W. Jiang, E.-Q. Chen, Z. Wang and S. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2566–2576 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Li, F. Gong, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12627–12633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lv, W. Zhang, L. Zhang and Z. S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5343–5350 CAS .
H. Wang, X. Zhang, F. Gong, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 121–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, F. Ishiguro and Y. Chujo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17649–17651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Chinnam and S. L. Wunder, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5111–5121 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiang, Y. Li, C. Xu and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5578–5583 RSC .
H. Zhou, J. Li, M. H. Chua, H. Yan, Q. Ye, J. Song, T. T. Lin, B. Z. Tang and J. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12478–12481 RSC .
K. Yue, C. Liu, M. Huang, J. Huang, Z. Zhou, K. Wu, H. Liu, Z. Lin, A.-C. Shi, W.-B. Zhang and S. Z. D. Cheng, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 303–314 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Roll, M. Z. Asuncion, J. Kampf and R. M. Laine, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 320–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Lu and C. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2775–2782 RSC .
R. Y. Kannan, H. J. Salacinski, P. E. Butler and A. M. Seifalian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 879–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, L. Wang, H. Ni and C. U. Pittman, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2001, 11, 123–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Schwab and J. D. Lichtenhan, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 12, 707–713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, L. Liu, C. He, W. S. Chin, T. Lin, K. Y. Mya, J. Huang and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 829–836 RSC .
C. He, Y. Xiao, J. Huang, T. Lin, K. Y. Mya and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7792–7793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chou, S.-L. Hsu, K. Dinakaran, M.-Y. Chiu and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 745–751 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Cheng, C.-H. Chien, Y.-C. Yen, Y.-S. Ye, F.-H. Ko, C.-H. Lin and F.-C. Chang, Acta Mater., 2009, 57, 1938–1946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, X. Lu, L. W. Tan, K. Ong and C. He, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 5661–5670 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Irie, T. Yamanaka and K. Naka, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 8346–8353 RSC .
J.-M. Kang, H.-J. Cho, J. Lee, J.-I. Lee, S.-K. Lee, N.-S. Cho, D.-H. Hwang and H.-K. Shim, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4999–5008 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chou, S.-L. Hsu, S.-W. Yeh, H.-S. Wang and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9117–9123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. J. Cho, N. S. Cho, D. H. Hwang, J. M. Kang, E. Lim, J. I. Lee and H. K. Shim, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 2943–2954 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. D. Froehlich, H. S. Chae, B. T. Harding, S. Li, A. Mochizuki and G. E. Jabbour, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4776–4782 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Cheng, Y.-L. Chu, C.-W. Chu and D.-J. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6461–6465 RSC .
X. Gong, C. Soci, C. Yang, A. J. Heeger and S. Xiao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 2048 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yu, X. Wang, W. Su, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang and Z. Xu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 80572–80582 RSC .
H. Zhou, Q. Ye and J. Xu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 212–230 RSC .
J. Lee, H.-J. Cho, B.-J. Jung, N. S. Cho and H.-K. Shim, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8523–8529 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Chu, C.-C. Cheng, Y.-P. Chen, Y.-C. Yen and F.-C. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9285–9292 RSC .
H.-J. Cho, D.-H. Hwang, J.-I. Lee, Y.-K. Jung, J.-H. Park, J. Lee, S.-K. Lee and H.-K. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3780–3787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chi, S. L. Lim, F. Wang, X. Wang, C. He and W. S. Chin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 801–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, T. Yu, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, G. Zhao, J. Li and L. Chai, J. Fluoresc., 2016, 26, 149–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Singh, H. S. Chae, J. D. Froehlich, T. Kondou, S. Li, A. Mochizuki and G. E. Jabbour, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 3002–3005 RSC .
M. Y. Lo, C. Zhen, M. Lauters, G. E. Jabbour and A. Sellinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5808–5809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Chan, P. Sonar and A. Sellinger, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9103–9120 RSC .
X. Yang, J. D. Froehlich, H. S. Chae, S. Li, A. Mochizuki and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Corr, D. Lupo, F. Pichot and M. Ryan, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 845–848 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, A. Azens, A. Hjelm, L. Kullman, G. A. Niklasson, D. Rönnow, M. Strømme Mattsson, M. Veszelei and G. Vaivars, Sol. Energy, 1998, 63, 199–216 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Llordes, S. D. Lounis and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10555–10572 RSC .
P. Tehrani, L.-O. Hennerdal, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds and M. Berggren, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1799–1802 RSC .
Y. Kondo, H. Tanabe, H. Kudo, K. Nakano and T. Otake, Materials, 2011, 4, 2171 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 201–262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Li, D. H. Chen and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10500–10508 RSC .
C. Fang, H. Wang and S. Q. Shi, Acta Phys. Sin., 2016, 65, 168201 Search PubMed .
G. F. Cai, M. Q. Cui, V. Kumar, P. Darmawan, J. X. Wang, X. Wang, A. L. S. Eh, K. Qian and P. S. Lee, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1373–1382 RSC .
A. Z. Hu, F. Wu, J. P. Liu, J. A. Jiang, R. M. Ding, X. Li, C. X. Cheng, Z. H. Zhu and X. T. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 507, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, Z. W. Fu and Q. Z. Qin, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 418–419 CrossRef CAS .
I. Imae, K. Nawa, Y. Ohsedo, N. Noma and Y. Shirota, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, J. Varghese, J. Y. Gerasimov, A. O. Polyakov, M. Shuai, J. Su, D. Chen, W. Zajaczkowski, A. Marcozzi, W. Pisula, B. Noheda, T. T. M. Palstra, N. A. Clark and A. Herrmann, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sonmez and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 20–22 RSC .
P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2772–2776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Sun and J. X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1884–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kateb, S. Safarian, M. Kolahdouz, M. Fathipour and V. Ahamdi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 200–205 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Dong, Y. Lv, L. L. Xiao, Y. Fan, N. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33842–33847 CAS .
H. Ling, G. Q. Ding, D. Mandler, P. S. Lee, J. W. Xu and X. H. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9379–9382 RSC .
M. Y. Zhi, W. X. Huang, Q. W. Shi, M. Z. Wang and Q. B. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 67488–67494 RSC .
O. Turkarslan, M. Ak, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 4496–4503 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Ko, M. Kang, B. Moon and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1712–1716 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Gaupp, D. M. Welsh and J. R. Reynolds, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 885–889 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neves, R. F. Santos, W. A. Gazotti and C. Polo Fonseca, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 460, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Cho, W. J. Kwon, S. J. Choi, P. Kim, S. A. Park, J. Kim, S. J. Son, R. Xiao, S. H. Kim and S. B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Ryu, J.-H. Lee, S.-J. Han and K.-D. Suh, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1156–1161 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Xiong, Y. Xiao, J. Ma, L. Y. Zhang and X. H. Lu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Xiong, P. T. Jia, K. Y. Mya, J. Ma, F. Boey and X. H. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3523–3530 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ak, B. Gacal, B. Kiskan, Y. Yagci and L. Toppare, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2202–2210 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jia, A. A. Argun, J. Xu, S. Xiong, J. Ma, P. T. Hammond and X. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6085–6091 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Jia, A. A. Argun, J. W. Xu, S. X. Xiong, J. Ma, P. T. Hammond and X. H. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4434–4441 CrossRef CAS .
D. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1455–1459 CrossRef .
L. Y. Zhang, S. X. Xiong, J. Ma and X. H. Lu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 625–629 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Xiong, J. Ma and X. H. Lu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 2113–2117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ceyhan, M. A. Ozdag, B. Salih, M. K. Erbil, A. Elmah, A. R. Ozkaya and O. Bekaroglu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 4943–4950,  DOI:10.1002/ejic.200800562 .
M. Mihelcic, V. Francetic, P. Pori, H. Gradisar, J. Kovac and B. Orel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 313, 484–497 CrossRef CAS .
M. Colovic, I. Jerman, M. Gaberscek and B. Orel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3472–3481 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, K. P. Pramoda, W. S. Liu, D. Zhou, G. Q. Ding, C. B. He, Y. W. Leong and X. H. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 224–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jamil, F. Ahmad, J. T. Rhee and Y. J. Jeon, Curr. Sci., 2011, 101, 1544–1552 CAS .
D. A. Higgins, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 251–264 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hwang, Y. M. Shieh and K. R. Lin, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015, 840182 Search PubMed .
S. J. Hwang, S. C. Jeng and I. M. Hsieh, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 16507–16512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Jeng, S. J. Hwang and C. Y. Yang, Opt. Lett., 2009, 34, 455–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Liu and S.-C. Jeng, Opt. Mater., 2013, 35, 1418–1421 CrossRef .
H. Kang, H. Hong, D. G. Kim, E. H. Sohn, J. Shim, D. Kang and J. C. Lee, Liq. Cryst., 2015, 42, 32–40 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miniewicz, J. Girones, P. Karpinski, B. Mossety-Leszczak, H. Galina and M. Dutkiewicz, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 432–440 RSC .
S. J. Hwang, S. C. Jeng and I. M. Hsieh, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 16507–16512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-H. Kreuzer, R. Maurer and P. Spes, Makromol. Chem., Macromol. Symp., 1991, 50, 215–228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Keith, G. Dantlgraber, R. A. Reddy, U. Baumeister, M. Prehm, H. Hahn, H. Lang and C. Tschierske, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3796–3805 RSC .
Q. Pan, X. Chen, X. Fan, Z. Shen and Q. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3481–3488 RSC .
A. Van-Quynh, P. J. Sebastião, D. A. Wilson and G. H. Mehl, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2010, 31, 275–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. M. Cho, W. Y. Say, A. Y. X. Tan, C. He, H. S. O. Chan and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5248–5257 RSC .
Q. Pan, L. Gao, X. Chen, X. Fan and Q. Zhou, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4887–4894 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. A. Rashid, K. Ariffin, C. C. Kooi and H. M. Akil, Mater. Des., 2009, 30, 1–8 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, T. J. Bunning and R. M. Laine, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3653–3662 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, J. P. Collet, G. Xu and L. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3503–3512 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Goodby, G. H. Mehl, I. M. Saez, R. P. Tuffin, G. Mackenzie, R. Auzely-Velty, T. Benvegnu and D. Plusquellec, Chem. Commun., 1998, 2057–2070,  10.1039/A802762E .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, D. Sun and X. Li, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 1453–1463 RSC .
F. Du, Y. Bao, B. Liu, J. Tian, Q. Li and R. Bai, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4631–4633 RSC .
F. F. Du, J. Tian, H. Wang, B. Liu, B. K. Jin and R. K. Bai, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 3086–3093 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lucenti, C. Botta, E. Cariati, S. Righetto, M. Scarpellini, E. Tordin and R. Ugo, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 96, 748–755 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Ren, B. Sun, C. C. Tsai, Y. F. Tu, S. W. Leng, K. X. Li, Z. Kang, R. M. Van Horn, X. P. Li, M. F. Zhu, C. Wesdemiotis, W. B. Zhang and S. Z. D. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 4802–4810 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kakuta, K. Tanaka and Y. Chujo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 12539–12545 RSC .
K. Tanaka, K. Inafuku, K. Naka and Y. Chujo, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 3899–3901 CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Inafuku, S. Adachi and Y. Chujo, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3489–3492 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jeon, K. Tanaka and Y. Chujo, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 6500–6506 CAS .

Footnote† Both these authors made an equal contribution to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Zibiao Li
	Dr Zibiao Li obtained his PhD in 2014 from National University of Singapore (NUS). Currently, he is working as a research scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR, Singapore. His research interests are focused on biodegradable and functional polymeric materials design, structural properties investigations and their hybrid fabrications for biomedical and consumer care applications.

Junhua Kong
	Dr Junhua Kong received his MSc (2005) at School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University (XJTU), China, and another MSc (2008) at School of Energy and Power Engineering, XJTU. He then obtained his PhD degree (2012) at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, under the supervision of Prof. Xuehong Lu. His PhD work focused on one-dimensional carbon-based hybrids for energy storage. He worked as a research fellow in Prof. Lu's group (2012–2015) and Prof. Chaobin He's group (2015–2016) at the National University of Singapore, as a research fellow. He is now a scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. His current research interests include carbon-based nanostructures for electrochemical applications and functional polymer nanocomposites for properties enhancement.

FuKe Wang
	FuKe Wang is currently a Research Scientist at the Institute of Materials Research & Engineering (IMRE), A*STAR. He obtained his PhD degree in 2003 from the National University of Singapore and worked as a Research Associate at IMRE till 2005. He then worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the University of California at Santa Barbara and Oklahoma University before he joined IMRE again in 2010. His research interests include functional polymers, polymer nanocomposites for 3D printing, and nano-materials assembly.

Chaobin He
	Dr Chaobin He received his PhD degree from Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge in 1995. After graduation, Dr He worked in Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge as a postdoctoral associate for two years and later in the University of Southern Mississippi, USA for another two years before he joined the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) under A*STAR in 1999. Currently, Dr He is an associate professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, and holds a joint appointed position as a Principal Scientist at IMRE. His current research interests are in the areas of polymer nano-structured materials, organic–inorganic hybrid materials, and block copolymers and self-assembly.

 	Fig. 1  The hybrid nanostructure of POSS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical orbitals of the Ph8Si8O12 molecule: (left) orbital 168 (HOMO), depicting the π-electron orbital on phenyl groups; and (right) orbital 169 (LUMO), showing the π-electron orbital on phenyl groups. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of POSS-based imidazolium iodides with various alkyl groups of different lengths. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  Organic clusters made up of a cubic core with eight short organic arms stretching from the corners were synthesized. The PLE and PL results proved that these organic clusters possessed properties similar to quantum dots (QD). Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the well-ordered dispersive structure formed from POSS-C11-Cz in the bulk state, showing strong electroluminescence properties. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The electroluminescence spectra of devices with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer blend (POSS25–PPV in MEH–PPV)/Ca/Al configuration. (b) Relationship of voltage and luminance of POSS25–PPV in MEH–PPV. (c) Relationship of voltage and luminance efficiencies of POSS25–PPV in MEH–PPV. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthetic procedure for POSS–DPCz and its high electroluminescence properties in solution. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthetic procedure (B) and schematic illustration of blue-light emissive poly(oligofluorenes) with bifunctional POSS in the main chain. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthetic route of pyrene substituted octavinylsilsesquioxane (P8-OVS and P14-OVS) using Heck coupling. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic demonstration of POSS–PANI from emulsion polymerization. (b) A possible loose packing structure of POSS–PANI. (c) Optical absorbance at λmax for the devices with pure PANI (dotted line), POSS–PANI with 0.5 mol% OAPS (POSS–PANI-a, thick solid line) and the one with 1.0 mol% OAPS (POSS–PANI-b, thin solid line) as the electrochromic layers, under square-wave potentials oscillating between −3.0 and +3.0 V. Reproduced from ref. 91 and 92 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 11  LBL assembly of (a) POSS–PANI with PAMPS and (b) POSS–PANI with SPANI, and (c) the potential step absorptiometry of the LBL electrochromic devices compared with that of reference. Reproduced from ref. 94 and 95 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  Optical absorbance for the devices with (a) PANI (I) (dashed-dotted line), POSS–PANI (II) (dotted line), WO3 (III) (short dotted line), PANI/WO3 (IV) (dashed line) and POSS–PANI/WO3 (V) (solid line) as the electrochromic layers, and (b) POSS–PANI/PEDOT:PSS (1), PANI/PEDOT:PSS (2), POSS–PANI (3), PANI (4) and PEDOT:PSS (5) as the electrochromic layers. Reproduced from ref. 97 and 98 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic demonstration of the synthesis of 1-methyl-3-propyl hepta(i-butyl) octasilsesquioxane imidazolium iodide (MePrIm+Ix− IB7 T8 POSS, 3a), 1-(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl) 3-propyl hepta(i-butyl) octasilsesquioxane imidazolium iodide (3b). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of an electrospun PVDF-co-HFP/POSS-OH nanofibrous mat with 5 wt% POSS-OH. (c) Switching curves of the electrochromic devices, with PVDF-co-HFP/BMIM+BF4−, PVDF-co-HFP/LiClO4/BMIM+BF4− and PVDF-co-HFP (5 wt% POSS-OH)/LiClO4/BMIM+BF4− as electrolytes under squarewave potentials oscillating between +2.0 V and −2.0 V. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 15  Synthesis of the eight-arm star poly(2,5-bis[(4-methoxyphenyl)oxycarbonyl]styrene) by ATRP, using OBPS as the initiator. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical structure of the P5T–POSS dyad molecule (a) and schematic representations of P5T–POSS (b) and 1:1 P5T–POSS:POSS (c) self-assembly at room temperature, viewed along the [100] POSS direction. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Synthesis and chemical structures of POSS–SPDI–POSS and C8–SPDI–C8. (b) Fluorescence emission change of POSS–SPDI–POSS (30 mM in THF) observed upon the addition of various anions (300 mM). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Both these authors made an equal contribution to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
