Direct growth of high-rate capability and high capacity copper sulfide  nanowire array cathodes for lithium -ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM00434K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM00434K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6638-6645Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsDirect growth of high-rate capability and high capacity copper sulfide nanowire array cathodes for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Chen-Ho 
            Lai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kuo-Wei 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ju-Hsiang 
            Cheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chung-Yang 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bing-Joe 
            Hwang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Lih-Juann 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Material Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC. E-mail: ljchen@mx.nthu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-3-5718328;   Tel: +886-3-5731166
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC
Received 
      17th February 2010
    , Accepted 4th May 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      22nd June 2010
    AbstractA general solution method for the growth of highly ordered large-scale Cu2S nanowire arrays onto the copper metal current collector substrates has been developed. The electrochemical behaviors of Cu2S nanowire array cathodes for lithium-ion battery applications reveal that they exhibit stable lithium-ion insertion/extraction reversibility, high reversible lithium storage capacity, long cycle life and outstanding rate capability. The superb electrochemical performance can be attributed to the nanowire arrays having increased reaction sites, improved cycle life in the face of mechanical strain and efficient charge transport. With the simplicity of fabrication and good electrochemical properties, the Cu2S nanowire arrays are promising cathode materials for the practical use in the next generation lithium-ion batteries.
Introduction
One-dimensional nanostructures have attracted much attention due to their interesting electronic, optical, magnetic, electrochemical and mechanical properties as well as promising novel applications in light-emitting diodes, field emitters, nanothermometers, solar cells, nanogenerators and electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.1–5 Well-aligned nanowire arrays on substrates are highly attractive for device applications in particular. A variety of chemical or physical synthesis routes for well-aligned nanowire arrays have been developed such as hydrothermal growth, template-assisted growth, high-pressure autoclave processes, chemical vapor deposition, laser-assisted catalytic growth and thermal evaporation.6–10 However, these growth methods usually require the use of additional instruments, surfactants, catalysts or templates which will increase the cost, contamination and energy-consumption. Nanostructured metal chalcogenides have been extensively studied due to their importance in interpreting quantum size effect and applications. However, they are usually harvested in powder form which may limit their applicability.11–15 Anisotropic nanostructures such as nanowires, nanotubes, nanorods and nanobelts are usually preferable to nanoparticles in technological application and they have been widely studied as potential building blocks for fabrication of novel nanodevices.16–19
Among metal chalcogenides, Cu2S is a p-type semiconducting material with a bulk bandgap of 1.2 eV and has widely been used in solar cells, nanoscale switches, sensors, cold cathodes and nonvolatile memory devices.20–25 A variety of different Cu2S nanostructures such as nanowires, nanoplates and nanocrystals have been synthesized by diverse chemical routes.26,27 However, there are only a limited number of researches about the synthesis of Cu2S nanowire arrays by methods such as template-assisted hydrothermal and thermal evaporation processes.28–30 In this report, a controlled oxidation scheme in alkali solution has been developed. Large-scale and uniform Cu2S nanowire arrays have been synthesized on copper substrates via a general solution route using copper foils and sulfur as the starting materials. The reduction scheme, combining ethylenediamine (EDA) and hydrazine in alkali solution, has been shown to be effective in synthesizing copper nanowires.25 Dissolution of chalcogens, for example, sulfur in EDA can provide active polyanions such as S62− and S4−, which are suggested to be responsible for prompting redox reactions.31,32 This method has proven to be of great advantage in the preparation of nanostructured metal chalcogenides.17 It is reliable, of low cost, and useful for the large scale growth of pure-phase metal chalcogenide nanowire arrays on diverse metal substrates directly in one step without using catalysts, toxic H2S gas and templates. The metal substrate itself is a part of the reactants to support the vertically-aligned metal chalcogenide nanowire arrays growth. The oriented growth of nanostructures on diverse substrates has emerged as an active area of research. The oriented growth of metal chalcogenide nanowire arrays on metal substrates has allowed exploration of their promising applications in engineering nanodevices such as field emitters, solar cells, nanogenerators, fuel cells and lithium-ion batteries.5,17
Many novel researches and important progress have been made in the development of advanced energy conversion and storage technologies due to the increasing demand for oil and environmental issues.33 Undoubtedly, lithium-ion batteries have long been considered an attractive rechargeable power source for consumer electronic products and in particular they are also being intensively developed to plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) and electric vehicles (EV), which require a relatively high energy capacity and long cycle life. The commonly used commercial cathode materials cannot completely satisfy the effective needs due to their relatively low energy capacities. Further improvements are needed to satisfy the great challenges in developing cathode materials with competitive electrochemical properties for the next generation lithium-ion batteries.34 One-dimensional nanowire arrays are promising electrode materials for the next generation lithium-ion batteries because they can satisfy the essential needs to reach the goal of high performances: (i) their high contact area between the nanostructured electrode and electrolyte resulting in higher charge/discharge rates; (ii) short path distances for both electrons and lithium ions transport; and (iii) improving cycle life with better flexibility for accommodating strain of lithium-ion insertion/extraction.35,36
Copper sulfides are suitable cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries because of their high lithium activity, high theoretical capacity and low cost.37–39 Cu2S is abundant and cheap due to existence of chalcocite (Cu2S) minerals in nature.37 The reactions of transition-metal chalcogenide electrodes involve more electrons per 3d metal (two or more) as compared with the commonly used commercial electrodes (only one). In addition, the potential of the transition metal sulfides versus lithium conversion process reactions depends on the ionocovalence of the bonding between the transition metal and the chalcogenide, and therefore can be tuned continuously from 0 to 3.5 V by changing the nature of the anion chalcogenide.40 There have been many reports on high-performance nanostructured electrodes as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. However, relatively scarce researches on one-dimensional metal chalcogenide nanomaterials for lithium-ion battery cathode applications have been reported due to their difficulties in synthesizing one-dimensional nanostructure arrays by a general route.41–43 In this work, copper sulfide nanowire array cathodes for lithium-ion batteries were produced in a one-step template-free solution route. The nanostructured cathodes exhibited outstanding rate capability even at a rate of 20C and the capacity delivered was as high as 1.6 times that of the commonly used LiCoO2 (<145 mAhg−1) cathode material in commercial batteries. Compared with the fabrication of the traditional battery electrode, direct growth of nanowire arrays onto the metal current collector can simplify the cell assembly resulting in improvements of the yield rate, time and cost saving. Additionally, there are lots of advantages such as good electrical contact of every nanowire with the metal current collector, easier transportation for electrons and lithium ions, good strain accommodation, no additives needed and facile fabrication.44–46 The large-scale, high-quality and well-aligned Cu2S nanowire arrays on the metal current collector substrate were demonstrated as a promising cathode material for next generation lithium-ion batteries due to the good cyclic stability, high reversible lithium storage capacity, long cycle life and outstanding rate capability properties.
Experimental
The growth of Cu2S nanowire arrays on the copper substrate was carried out via the general solution route. All chemical reagents utilized in the present study were of analytical grade and used without further purification. A typical synthesis for Cu2S nanowire arrays on copper substrates was performed as follows. The alkali solution [15 g NaOH (SHOWA, assay-96%) in 40 ml deionized (DI) H2O] was prepared and heated in an open reactor. At constant 80 °C, ethylenediamine (TEDIA, assay-99%, 7 ml), sulfur (S: SHOWA, assay-99%, 7 mmol) and hydrazine (hydrazine monohydrate: Alfa Aesar, assay-98%, 40 μl) were added into the reactor. A piece of clean copper current collector substrate was then placed into the mixture. The reaction was carried out under ambient air conditions for 20 h. When a black film covered the copper current collector substrate surface, it was taken out from the mixture. The products on the copper current collector substrate were washed several times with ethanol and DI water, and then dried in an air atmosphere. The amounts of the copper sulfide nanowire arrays on the metal collector substrate were accurately examined using a microbalance (Sartorious ME5). The resolution of the weight is 1μg.
The examinations of morphology were carried out with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6500F) operating at 10 kV accelerating voltage. The substrate-bound copper sulfide nanowire arrays were scraped from the copper substrate mechanically, dispersed in an alcohol solution ultrasonically and then deposited on carbon-coated copper grids for transmission electron microscope (TEM) characterization. A JEOL-2010 high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) operating at 200 kV was used to examine the microstructures. An energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attached to the TEM was utilized to determine the composition of the nanostructures. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the products were obtained with a Rigaku (Japan) X-ray diffractometer equipped with the graphite monochromatized Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). The coin-type cells were assembled in a glove box filled with pure argon gas directly using the copper sulfide nanowire arrays grown on copper substrate as the cathode without any ancillary materials and lithium metal as the anode. Both the cathode and anode were electronically separated by a polypropylene film saturated with 1M LiPF6 electrolyte solution made up of 1: 2 v/v diethyl carbonate (DEC) and ethylene carbonate (EC). Charge-discharge cycles were performed in the potential range of 0.01 and 2.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) at room temperature using the Maccor battery test system (model 2300). The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were achieved by using the as-prepared Cu2S nanowire arrays on copper substrate as the working electrode and two lithium foils as the reference and counter electrodes with a Solartron electrochemical working station (model 1480 multistat) at a scanning rate of 1 mV s−1.
Results and discussion
The structures of the as-grown nanowire arrays on copper substrate were determined by X-ray diffraction. As shown in Fig. 1, all the diffraction peaks of the as-grown sample can be ascribed to the single phase of orthorhombic structured Cu2S crystal phase (JCPDS No. 23-0961) with lattice constants of a = 1.350 nm, b = 2.732 nm and c = 1.185 nm. It should be noted that there are three additional peaks (2θ = 43.32°, 50.45° and 74.13°) corresponding to the substrate copper foil.
 Fig. 1  X-ray diffraction spectrum of the as-grown Cu2S nanowire arrays on the copper substrate. 

Fig. 2(a) shows the low-magnification SEM image of the as-synthesized product grown on the copper substrate. The highly ordered copper sulfide nanowire arrays covered the entire area of the copper substrate compactly and uniformly. The high-magnification SEM image in Fig. 2(b) reveals that the Cu2S nanowires are parallel to one another and perpendicular to the copper substrate. Every Cu2S nanowire has a uniform diameter and a smooth surface.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the as-grown Cu2S nanostructures. (a) Low-magnification view of a large-area Cu2S nanowire arrays grown on the copper substrate. (b) High-magnification view of well-aligned Cu2S nanowire arrays grown on the copper substrate. 
The crystal structure and orientation of the as-prepared Cu2S nanowires were further characterized by TEM and HRTEM. Fig. 3(a) shows a typical TEM image of a single Cu2S nanowire. The diameters and lengths of individual Cu2S nanowire were found to be in the range of 40–120 nm and 700–1400 nm, respectively. The Cu2S nanowires have smooth surfaces and no catalysts were found at the nanowire tips. Fig. 3(b) shows a high-resolution TEM image taken from a single Cu2S nanowire. The corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b), confirms that the Cu2S nanowire is single crystalline and the phase is of orthorhombic crystal structure. No defects such as stacking faults or twinning sites were observed. The growth direction of the Cu2S nanowire was found to be along [100].
 Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of a single Cu2S nanowire extracted from the nanowire arrays. (b) HRTEM image revealing the single crystallinity of the Cu2S nanowire. The inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern of the nanowire. 
In order to understand the effects of the reaction conditions on the growth of the Cu2S nanowire arrays, a series of experiments have been carried out by examining the reaction temperature, aging time, the amount of chalcogens, the volume of EDA and reaction basicity. Fig. 4(a-b) shows the morphologies of Cu2S nanowire arrays grown at reaction temperatures of room temperature and 120 °C, respectively. The reaction time is 20 h. At room temperature, irregular nanowalls and columnar nanorods were obtained on the copper substrate surface (Fig. 4(a)). When the temperature was increased to 120 °C (Fig. 4(b)), longer columnar nanorods with different diameters were obtained. Higher reaction temperature gives faster sulfidation rate which was evidenced by observing wider nanorods at 120 °C. The higher the reaction temperature, the greater is the systemic free energy. Therefore, the critical nuclei size as well as the energy barrier decreases at higher reaction temperature and the nucleation density increases. As compared to room temperature, the formation of higher-density Cu2S nanowire arrays has been observed at a higher reaction temperature. Fig. 4(c-d) shows the SEM images of as-prepared Cu2S nanowire arrays grown at 80 °C for 10 h and 40 h, respectively. As the reaction carried out with prolonged aging time to 40 h at 80 °C (Fig. 4(d)), dimensions and lengths of nanowires were enlarged. Prolonging the reaction time leads to an increase in the dimension and length of the Cu2S nanowire arrays, but does not grow a higher density of Cu2S nanowire arrays. The growth of the existing nucleus which has been formed at a certain location is easier than the formation of new nuclei. Fig. 4(e-f) shows the morphologies of Cu2S nanowire arrays grown at 80 °C for 20 h with 3.5 mmol S and 14 mmol S, respectively. Increasing the amount of chalcogens to 14 mmol led to an increase in the dimensions of the nanowires (Fig. 4(f)). The chalcogen amount was also found to have a proportional influence on density and dimension of nanowires. Fig. 4(g-h) shows the SEM images of as-prepared Cu2S nanowire arrays grown at 80 °C for 20 h with 1.75 ml EDA and 3.5 ml EDA, respectively. A certain amount of EDA was indispensable to control the morphology and density of nanowires. Fig. 4(i-j) shows the morphologies of Cu2S nanowire arrays grown in different concentrations of alkali solution by changing the amounts of NaOH from 0 g to 7.5 g. The reaction temperature and reaction time for all samples are 80 °C and 20 h, respectively. The sulfidation rate was drastically suppressed by increasing the basicity of aqueous solution. Our experiments indicate that a high concentration of NaOH is also essential to let the sulfur anions diffuse to copper substrate slowly and prevent the rapid sulfidation rate of copper substrate from being carried out. The sulfidation rate has to be slowed in order to obtain high regularity for the one-dimensional Cu2S nanowire arrays. The high regularity of the one-dimensional nanowire morphology depended on the delicate balance between the amounts of these components used experimentally.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of as-prepared Cu2S nanowire arrays grown under different reaction conditions: (a) room temperature; (b) 120 °C; (c) 10 h; (d) 40 h; (e) 3.5 mmol S; (f) 14 mmol S; (g) 1.75 ml EDA; (h) 3.5 ml EDA; (i) 0 g NaOH; and (j) 7.5 g NaOH. 
The preparation strategy for the growth of highly ordered Cu2S nanowire arrays combines metal chelation chemistry and dioxygen catalytic reactions. The ethylenediamine molecules have the strong coordinating ability and function as metal activation (chelation) or mediating the electron transfer in the reaction system. These molecules enable the forming of chemically stable coordinating metal complexes with metal ions and such metal complexes will perform as the intermediate species in the chemical reaction.22,47–49 As a strong reducing agent, hydrazine is also used for further prevention of fast oxidation of copper substrates and is also known to have abilities for dissolving sulfur, coordinating metal ions and is critical for one-dimensional nanomaterial growth.50 The high concentration sodium hydroxide solution is necessary to prohibit copper ions from becoming copper hydroxide precipitates and results in pure Cu2S phase without other copper compound impurities.25 Furthermore, the high pH value in alkali condition also shows the ability to promote the chalcogens reduced to anionic forms.51 The nature of the oxidizing agent in the similar reaction system has yet to be investigated. It is suggested that metal-complex induced activation of dioxygen catalytic reactions are involved.52,53 Catalysts of oxygenated complexes have been known to be effective oxidizing agents since coordinated dioxygen is capable of effecting oxidation that otherwise would not proceed. Based on the literature and experimental results described in our previous research, we have confirmed the presence of peroxo species and the suggested oxidation process.17 A possible growth mechanism for the highly ordered Cu2S nanowire arrays directly onto copper substrate can be proposed. When the ethanol/acetone ultrasonically cleaned high-purity copper substrate was placed into the mixed solution, the strong coordinating ability of ethylenediamine molecules could play as a role in activating the surface of the copper substrate and in electron transfer in the reacting system.22,47–49 The ethylenediamine molecules are known to enable formation of a coordinating complex with copper ions. The formed Cu-EDA metal complex activates dioxygen incorporation with it and then the induced activation of dioxygen catalytic reactions is involved to form a Cu-EDA-dioxygen complex.31,52–54 Chalcogens like sulfur are reported to form active species when dissolved in ethylenediamine, which are suggested to facilitate the redox chemistry.31,32,51 Moreover, the alkali conditions also show the ability to reduce chalcogens to anionic forms.51 The active species S2− ions then react with the Cu-EDA-dioxygen complex to form an unstable inorganic–organic complex of Cu2S-EDA molecular precursors by replacing the dioxygen of the Cu-EDA-dioxygen complex.22,45,51–53 The ethylenediamine molecules of the unstable inorganic–organic complex of Cu2S-EDA molecular precursors are eventually eliminated and result in the formation of Cu2S crystals on the nuclei which were located on the copper substrate.22,31,47–49,51,55 It is well-known that solvent plays an important role in determining the morphology of crystals. Various solvents with different chemical and physical properties can affect the reactivity, solubility and diffusion behavior of the reactants. The coordinating ability and polarity of the solvents can have a great influence on the crystal morphology of the final product in particular.27,32 Ethylenediamine is a strong donor ligand due to its N-chelating behavior and it plays an important role in the formation of one-dimensional nanowires.25,47 On the other hand, the Cu2S-EDA molecular precursors may serve as molecular templates in the control of the crystal growth.47–49 Furthermore, the Cu2S nanowires grow with a preferred orientation along the [100] direction of the orthorhombic phase which leads to the same surface repulsion and surface polarization effects resulting in the formation of highly ordered Cu2S nanowire arrays vertical to the substrate surface. Our method, combining metal chelation chemistry and an oxygenated catalyst, has led to drastic reduction of the high interface energy between substrate, liquid and particle for oriented growth of nanostructures from the substrate without using a high-pressure autoclave process.47,50,55 A series of oriented metal chalcogenide nanostructures have been grown by our method on corresponding metal substrates and chalcogen elements indicating the generality of this route.17
The electrochemical properties of Cu2S nanowires as a cathode in lithium-ion storage were tested via discharge-charge measurements. Fig. 5 shows the specific capacity of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell cycled as a function of the cycle number at a high rate of 2C at ambient temperature. The square symbols represent the discharge cycle and the circular symbols represent the charge cycle. On cycling, the discharge and charge capacities of the first cycle had high values about 470 mAhg−1 and 400 mAhg−1, respectively. Compared to the first discharge and charge cycles, the second discharge cycle showed a capacity loss of 52 mAhg−1 and the second charge cycle showed a capacity loss of 55 mAhg−1. After the second cycle, the cycle performance of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell was observed to be highly reversible up to the 100th cycle. A capacity decay phenomenon of the Cu2S nanowire arrays/Li cell was found during the initial 40 cycles. Afterward the cycle performance of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell becomes more and more reversible. The Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell was determined to be about 230 mAhg−1 and found to maintain more than 50% of the reversible capacity after 100 cycles at a high rate of 2C. The corresponding Coulombic efficiency of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell is shown in the inset of Fig. 5. The first and second Coulombic efficiencies were about 82% and 83%, respectively. After the second cycle, the Coulombic efficiencies of the Cu2S nanowire arrays/Li cell were observed around 99%, indicating their good cycle performance and reversibility. The LiCoO2 is the commonly used cathode material in commercial lithium-ion batteries. The theoretical capacity of LiCoO2 is 145 mAhg−1 and can be regarded as the criterion for the cathode material. Therefore, the capacity of the Cu2S nanowire arrays derived here can be close to 1.6 times of the LiCoO2.56
 Fig. 5  Cycle performance of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell circulated at a high rate of 2C. The square symbols represent the discharge cycle and the circular symbols represent the charge cycle. The inset shows the corresponding Coulombic efficiency (CE) of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell. 

Fig. 6 shows the specific capacity of the Cu2S thin film/Li cell cycled as a function of the cycle number at a high rate of 2C at ambient temperature. The Cu2S thin film was also directly grown onto the metal current collector substrate by the same reaction system with a smaller volume of ethylenediamine and a faster sulfidation rate. The square symbols represent the discharge cycle and the circular symbols represent the charge cycle. On cycling, the first discharge cycle had a discharge capacity of 395 mAhg−1 and the first charge cycle had a charge capacity of 355 mAhg−1. Compared to the first discharge and charge cycles, the second discharge and charge cycles showed a capacity loss of 70 mAhg−1 and 55 mAhg−1, respectively. A serious capacity decay phenomenon of the Cu2S thin film/Li cell was found and the discharge and charge capacities of the Cu2S thin film/Li cell were found to linger at 68 mAhg−1 and 32 mAhg−1, respectively. This result might be due to the large volume change during Li+ insertion/extraction and active materials losing electronic contact with the metal current collector caused by fracture occurring in micron-sized or bulk materials. As compared to the cycle performance of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell shown in Fig. 5, the Cu2S nanowire arrays have higher discharge/charge capacity and reversible lithium capacity than the Cu2S thin film. The specific capacity of the Cu2S nanowire array electrode exhibits better cyclic stability than that of the Cu2S thin film. Apparently, nanostructures can improve the reversible reaction of Cu2S with Li+ due to their better flexibility for accommodating strain of Li+ insertion/extraction and shorter path lengths for both electronic and Li+ transport. As compared to the Cu2S thin film/Li cell or reports of Cu2S powder electrodes,37–39 the higher reversible lithium storage capacity, longer cycle life have demonstrated that the one-dimensional Cu2S nanowire arrays are potential cathode materials for the practical use in the next generation lithium-ion batteries. The conversion processes and electrochemical reactions between the electrolyte and electrode drive the electrolyte to degrade and form a gel-like polymeric layer.34,35 This phenomenon should be mainly responsible for the Coulombic efficiency loss of the initial discharge–charge cycles and is also observed in other systems of metal chalcogenide cathode materials operating through Li+ insertion/extraction reactions. As compared with Cu2S thin film cathodes, larger contact areas between the Cu2S nanowire array cathode and electrolyte result in more serious electrolyte degradation. As a result, the Cu2S thin film cathode exhibits a better initial Coulombic efficiency than the Cu2S nanowire array cathode. For prolonged cycles, the degree of electrolyte degradation has been kept stable and the Cu2S nanowire array cathode shows better Coulombic efficiency than Cu2S thin film cathode because of better accommodation of the strain during Li+ insertion/extraction and shorter path lengths for both electronic and Li+ transport.33–36
 Fig. 6  Cycle performance of the Cu2S thin film/Li cell circulated at a high rate of 2C at room temperature. The square symbols represent the discharge cycle and the circular symbols represent the charge cycle. 

Fig. 7 shows the first voltage-capacity profile of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell cycled in the potential range of 0.05 and 3.0 V at room temperature. The first discharge curve had a voltage plateau at about 1.60 V and a high discharge capacity of 470 mAhg−1. The first charge curve had two voltage plateaus at about 1.85 V and 2.25 V. And the first charge cycle had a charge capacity of 400 mAhg−1. This result is similar to that reported in the literature for Cu2S thin film/Li cells.37–39 The typical cyclic voltammograms (CV) of the as-prepared Cu2S nanowire arrays on the working electrode is shown in Fig. 8. The potential scanning rate is 1.0 mVs−1 in the potential range of 1.5–3.3 V vs. Li/Li+ at room temperature. It is seen that there exists a high current peak occurring at about 1.6 V in the oxidation process due to the insertion of lithium to the copper sulfide nanowire arrays. In contrast, there are two high current peaks occurring at about 1.9 and 2.3 V in the reduction process due to the extraction of lithium from the copper sulfide nanowire arrays.38,39 The results are consistent with the typical voltage-capacity profiles of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell in Fig. 7 and similar to that reported in the literature for Cu2S thin film/Li cells.37–39 As compared to the Cu2S/Na cells reported in the literature, the Cu2S/Li cells have a higher discharge plateau potential than Cu2S/Na cells. The discharge potential difference should come from the fact that the standard reduction potential of lithium (−3.01 V) is lower than sodium (−2.71 V).37
 Fig. 7  The first voltage-capacity profiles of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell cycled between 0.05 and 3.0 V at room temperature. 
 Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammograms for the as-prepared Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell. The potential scanning rate is 1.0 mVs−1 in the potential range of 1.5–3.3 V vs. Li/Li+. 
The Cu2S nanowire array electrode shows a long cycle life while still exhibiting a relatively high normalized capacity even at high C-rates. Fig. 9 shows the variation of the normalized capacity of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li and Cu2S thin film/Li cells at C-rates ranged from C/20 to 20C. It was found that more than 56% of the reversible capacity could be delivered even at a 20C rate by Cu2S nanowire arrays at the 50th cycle, but only 28% of the reversible capacity could be delivered at the same rate by Cu2S thin film at the same cycle. The Cu2S thin film electrode shows a large decrease in the normalized capacity when the C-rate is increased from C/20 to 20C. The reasons leading to serious deterioration of the capacity retention of the Cu2S thin film electrode might be due to the large volume change during Li+ insertion/extraction, active materials losing electronic contact with metal current collector and limited transport of electrons and ions under fast C-rates. Excellent rate performance is demonstrated for the Cu2S nanowire array electrode compared to Cu2S thin film electrode and other copper sulfide cathode systems as it exhibits a high reversible capacity, even at a 20C rate.37–39 It is believed that the superior rate capability is attributed to better accommodation of the strain of lithium insertion/extraction and the higher electrode/electrolyte contact area.44,45 These experimental results demonstrate that better rate capability property is feasible by using nanostructured electrodes and indicating that the one-dimensional nanowire arrays are effective at higher C-rates.
 Fig. 9  Profiles of the normalized capacity changes with respect to the C-rate ranged from C/20 to 20C of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li and Cu2S thin film/Li cells. 
We further investigated the cycling stability for a better understanding of the advantage of the Cu2S nanowire arrays in lithium-ion battery cathode applications. As shown in Fig. 10, the cycling stability at continuously variable C-rates was evaluated. From cycling performance with respect to the increasing discharge and charge rates at the same time from C/20 to 20C, the variation of the specific capacity as a function of cycle number can be clearly observed. The high rate capabilities and Coulombic efficiencies indicate excellent reversibility. The Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell revealed good cycling stability at 10C. The specific capacity and Coulombic efficiency the Cu2S nanowire arrays/Li cell were determined to be about 185 mAhg−1 and 96%, respectively. Even at a rate as high as 20C, the Cu2S nanowire array electrode was capable of delivering a specific capacity of 145 mAhg−1. After 85 cycles, with the C-rate decreasing from 20C to C/20, about 79% of the initial specific capacity at C/20 can be recovered and this value lasts up to the 100th cycle without obvious loss. As compared with other metal chalcogenides electrode systems, the improved rate performance was proposed to be related to the advantages of the one-dimensional nanostructured electrode and direct growth of nanowire arrays onto the metal current collector as the working electrode.44,45 In addition to making better contact between the nanostructured material and the working electrode leading to easier transportation for electrons, it can also have better flexibility for accommodating the strain of lithium ion insertion/extraction and higher charge/discharge rates.33–36
 Fig. 10  Cycling stability at various C-rates for Cu2S nanowire arrays. 
Conclusions
In summary, Cu2S nanowire array electrodes can be produced directly onto the copper metal current collector substrates via a one-step template-free solution route. Our preparation strategy for oriented growth of large-scale Cu2S nanowire arrays combines metal chelation chemistry and dioxygen catalytic reactions. The coordination of chalcogen-EDA solutions and hydrazine in alkali solution has proven to have great advantages for the fabrication of metal chalcogenides with fewer instrumental limitations. Controlled oxidation/sulfidation for Cu2S nanowire arrays growth has been achieved by using a metal-complex induced oxygenated catalytic reaction. The Cu2S nanowires have a typical orthorhombic single-crystal structure with no defects. This method is reliable and operates in mild template-free conditions for single-crystalline metal chalcogenide nanowire array production without using high-pressure autoclave processes. It provides an attractive and convenient route to large-scale growth of pure phase metal sulfide nanowire arrays on substrates for device applications. The Cu2S nanowire array electrode has shown good electrochemical performance for lithium-ion battery cathode application. The high reversible lithium storage capacity, long cycle life, good cycling stability and outstanding rate capability properties even at a rate as high as 20C have confirmed that the one-dimensional Cu2S nanowire array is a promising cathode material for the next generation of lithium-ion batteries.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Republic of China National Science Council through Grant No. NSC 97-2120-M-007-003.
Notes and references
X. D. Wang, J. H. Song, J. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4639 RSC .
K. C. Chen, W. W. Wu, C. N. Liao, L. J. Chen and K. N. Tu, Science, 2008, 321, 1066 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Taberna, S. Mitra, P. Poizot, P. Simon and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 567 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xi, J. H. Song, S. Xu, R. S. Yang, Z. Y. Gao, C. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9260 RSC .
L. W. Yin and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 957 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, X. S. Fang, L. D. Zhang, Y. Bando, U. K. Gautam, B. Dierre, T. Sekiguchi and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2794 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Mu, W. S. Shi, J. C. Chang and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 104 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, J. H. Song and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 711 RSC .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Pasquariello, R. Kershaw, J. D. Passaretti, K. Dwight and A. Wold, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23, 872 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Lee, S. W. Yoon, E. J. Kim and J. H. Park, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 778 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Zhuang, Q. Peng, B. Zhang and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10482 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 784 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Wen, W. X. Zhang, S. H. Yang, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1397 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lai, K. W. Huang, J. H. Cheng, C. Y. Lee, W. F. Lee, C. T. Huang, B. J. Hwang and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7277 RSC .
H. M. Liu, Y. G. Wang, L. Li, K. X. Wang, E. Hosono and H. S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7885 RSC .
C. Y. Wang, N. W. Gong and L. J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4789 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. L. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 123107 CrossRef .
S. C. Liufu, L. D. Chen, Q. Yao and F. Q. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12085 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. D. Xia, X. F. Liang, K. B. Yin, J. Yin, Z. G. Liu and Y. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 073511 CrossRef .
T. Sakamoto, H. Sunamura, H. Kawaura, T. Hasegawa, T. Nakayama and M. Aono, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chang, M. L. Lye and H. C. Zeng, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3746 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Lou, M. Chen, X. B. Wang and W. M. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9658 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Lim, H. Y. Low and W. S. Chin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2429 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Wen and S. H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 451 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wang, S. H. Yang, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 3750 RSC .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Li, Z. Y. Wang and Y. Ding, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 4737 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lifshitz, M. Bashouti, V. Kloper, A. Kigel, M. S. Eisen and S. Berger, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 857 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, G. Z. Cao, Z. G. Yang, D. H. Wang, D. Dubois, X. D. Zhou, G. L. Graff, L. R. Pederson and J. G. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Jiang, E. Hosono and H. S. Zhou, Nano Today, 2006, 1, 28 CrossRef .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, D. Y. Kim, G. B. Cho, T. H. Nam, K. W. Kim, H. S. Ryu, J. H. Ahn and H. J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 864 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonino, M. Lazzari, B. Rivolta and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1498 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, L. Dupont, R. Patrice and J.-M. Tarascon, Solid State Sci., 2006, 8, 640 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, P. Balaya and J. Maier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1878 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, J. Gao, L. J. Fu, L. C. Yang, Y. P. Wu and H. Q. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1321 RSC .
K. F. Hsu, S. Y. Tsay and B. J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2690 RSC .
J. Thomas, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 705 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 307 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Liu, Y. Y. Li, X. T. Huang, R. M. Ding, Y. Y. Hu, J. Jiang and L. Liao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1859 RSC .
B. L. Cao, Y. Jiang, C. Wang, W. H. Wang, L. Z. Wang, M. Niu, W. J. Zlang, Y.
Q. Li and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1501 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Davey, S. N. Black, L. A. Bromley, D. Cottier, B. Dobbs and J. E. Rout, Nature, 1991, 353, 549 CrossRef CAS .
H. Grijalva, M. Inoue, S. Boggavarapu and P. Calvert, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 1157 RSC .
L. Z. Zhang, J. C. Yu, M. S. Mo, L. Wu, Q. Li and K. W. Kwong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Li, Y. Ding, H. W. Liao and Y. T. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1999, 60, 965 CrossRef CAS .

          L. I. Simándi, in Catalytic Activation of Dioxygen by Metal Complexes, Vol. 13, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Holland 1992 Search PubMed .
K. W. Huang, J. H. Wang, H. C. Chen, H. C. Hsu, Y. C. Chang, M. Y. Lu, C. Y. Lee and L. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2307 RSC .
K. D. Karlin, S. Kaderli and A. D. Zuberbuhler, Acc. Chem. Res., 1997, 30, 139 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu and M. Yoshimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 277 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  X-ray diffraction spectrum of the as-grown Cu2S nanowire arrays on the copper substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the as-grown Cu2S nanostructures. (a) Low-magnification view of a large-area Cu2S nanowire arrays grown on the copper substrate. (b) High-magnification view of well-aligned Cu2S nanowire arrays grown on the copper substrate.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of a single Cu2S nanowire extracted from the nanowire arrays. (b) HRTEM image revealing the single crystallinity of the Cu2S nanowire. The inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern of the nanowire.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of as-prepared Cu2S nanowire arrays grown under different reaction conditions: (a) room temperature; (b) 120 °C; (c) 10 h; (d) 40 h; (e) 3.5 mmol S; (f) 14 mmol S; (g) 1.75 ml EDA; (h) 3.5 ml EDA; (i) 0 g NaOH; and (j) 7.5 g NaOH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cycle performance of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell circulated at a high rate of 2C. The square symbols represent the discharge cycle and the circular symbols represent the charge cycle. The inset shows the corresponding Coulombic efficiency (CE) of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cycle performance of the Cu2S thin film/Li cell circulated at a high rate of 2C at room temperature. The square symbols represent the discharge cycle and the circular symbols represent the charge cycle.	 

 	Fig. 7  The first voltage-capacity profiles of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell cycled between 0.05 and 3.0 V at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammograms for the as-prepared Cu2S nanowire array/Li cell. The potential scanning rate is 1.0 mVs−1 in the potential range of 1.5–3.3 V vs. Li/Li+.	 

 	Fig. 9  Profiles of the normalized capacity changes with respect to the C-rate ranged from C/20 to 20C of the Cu2S nanowire array/Li and Cu2S thin film/Li cells.	 

 	Fig. 10  Cycling stability at various C-rates for Cu2S nanowire arrays.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
