One dimensional CdS based materials for artificial photoredox reactions   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA06373J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA06373J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2387-2410One dimensional CdS based materials for artificial photoredox reactions†

        
          
            Zi-Rong 
            Tang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuang 
            Han
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
        
      ab
aCollege of Chemistry, New Campus, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350116, P. R. China. E-mail: zrtang@fzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 591 22866126;   Tel: +86 591 22866126
bState Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350002, P. R. China.  Fax: +86 591 83779326;   Tel: +86 591 83779326
Received 
      27th July 2016
    , Accepted 14th December 2016First published on 15th December 2016AbstractSemiconductor-based heterogeneous photocatalysis has received considerable attention as an alternative promising approach to alleviate the globally increasing energy demand and environmental concerns. As promising candidates, one dimensional (1D) CdS nanostructures have gained growing interest due to their unique advantages, including a narrow band gap, suitable band edge positions, high aspect ratio structure with low reflectance, and excellent electronic charge transfer. This review summarizes a panorama of the latest progress related to the design and construction of 1D CdS based photocatalysts with boosted performance, involving constructing 1D solid solution, loading cocatalysts, coupling with semiconductors, hybridizing with carbon-based materials and functionalization with biocatalysts. Finally, some challenges and opportunities for future exploration of 1D CdS based photocatalysts are critically discussed. It is anticipated that this review will afford enriched information on the rational utilization of 1D CdS materials with ameliorated performances by harnessing their inherent merits, and particularly stimulate further developments of low dimensional heterostructures towards various artificial photoredox reactions.
1 Introduction
Spurred by the persistently growing energy demand, excessive consumption of traditional fossil fuels and ever-increasing environmental concerns, searching for clean, carbon-neutral alternative, abundant and inexhaustible energy resources has become one of the most important scientific challenges for the development of a sustainable future without environmental detriment.1–4 Among various renewable energy projects, solar energy conversion and storage in the form of chemical fuels have been widely studied in recent decades.5–7 Semiconductor-based heterogeneous photocatalysis, an efficient and cost-effective candidate to directly convert solar energy to chemical energy and solar fuels, is granted a place in the sun for providing a viable long-term solution with potential to address the environmental and energy issues.8–12 Since the landmark report of water splitting obtained under UV radiation with a TiO2 electrode,13 considerable research attention has been paid to the development of advanced photocatalysts and recent efforts have begun to bear more fruits.14–16
With a band gap of ca. 2.4 eV,17–19 which corresponds well with the visible spectral range of sunlight, CdS, a vital and classical II–VI semiconductor, has been extensively investigated in the arena of solar energy conversion as one of the most fascinating photocatalysts due to its versatile and fundamental properties, including the desired direct band gap, suitable band edge positions, excellent transport properties and high electronic mobility.20–22 Importantly, CdS can be readily surface-functionalized with a rich variety of ligands, which not only enable them to possess either hydrophilic or hydrophobic properties, but also provide selectivity for interaction with other functional materials.23,24 In the past few years, intensive efforts have been made to construct CdS nanostructures with a controllable size, shape and morphology.25–27 In particular, one dimensional (1D) CdS nanostructures have drawn broad attention owing to their intrinsic optical, structural, and electronic advantages.28–30 Firstly, 1D nanostructures provide a direct pathway for electron transport along the long axis of the 1D structure and decouple the direction of charge carrier collection, which is favorable for the separation of electron–hole pairs.31–33 Secondly, the light absorption and scattering properties of 1D nanomaterials can be remarkably enhanced due to their high length-to-diameter ratios.34,35 Thirdly, in comparison with bulk materials, 1D nanostructures feature relatively larger specific surface areas.36,37
The past decades have witnessed considerable interest in the development of 1D CdS based photocatalysts.38–40 In addition, recent advancements in materials science and nanotechnology have also greatly accelerated the progress of this research arena. Until now, some reviews on 1D CdS materials, which predominantly focus on the synthesis, properties, and applications, have been reported.41–43 The dedicated review on the recent development of the 1D CdS based photocatalysts is still in its infancy, particularly from a viewpoint of materials design. Consequently, it is timely useful to provide an up-to-date review on constructing 1D CdS based systems for photoredox catalysis processes.
This paper predominantly summarizes the recent advances in designing various 1D CdS based artificial photoredox systems with ameliorative photoactivity and/or photostability, primarily based on the progress by some quintessential examples in the literature. It starts with a synopsis of the fundamentals of 1D CdS based photocatalysts. Then, the specific approaches on the design and construction of 1D CdS based photocatalysts are elaborated, focusing on illustrating rational approaches to optimize the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS from a holistic perspective. Last but not least, a discussion of the key issues and prospects for the future development in this area is presented. It is kindly anticipated that our review can provide new insights to harness the inherent merits of 1D CdS structures and stimulate greater interest in the rational design of low dimensional photocatalysts for versatile solar energy conversion.
2 Fundamentals of 1D CdS based photocatalysts
2.1 The mechanistic fundamentals of the 1D nanomaterial
Generally, a 1D nanostructure is constructed with a high aspect ratio, with at least one of the dimensions in 1–100 nm, no matter whether it is rod, wire, belt or tube shaped.44 The high aspect ratio of the 1D nanostructure is capable of enhancing light absorption and scattering properties, resulting in an enhanced light-harvesting capability.45,46 The diameter along the radial dimension of the 1D nanostructure is comparable to many important physical parameters, such as the exciton Bohr radius, the wavelength of light, the phonon mean free path, the excitation diffusion length, etc.31,47 On one hand, the confined dimension of 1D nanostructures produces quantized particles, such as electrons, phonons and photons.48 On the other hand, the unconfined dimension of 1D nanostructures provides a direct charge transport path along the axial direction for direct conduction of these quantized particles.49,50 In the 1D nanostructure, the solar light absorption occurs along the longer dimensions of 1D nanostructures (microns or more), while the carrier separation occurs by diffusion across the short radial distance (tens of nanometers),51 as revealed in Scheme 1A. The enhanced light absorption and scattering properties combined with the merits of fast and long-distance charge transport endow the 1D nanostructure with promising potential for efficient artificial solar energy conversion.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustrations of the generation and separation process of charge carriers in a 1D nanostructure (A), and illustration showing the excitation process and possible reactions occurring on a semiconductor under light irradiation (B), partial DOS for the electronic orbital of Cd and S atoms (C), and migration of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the outer surface (OS) and in the inner surface (IS) under solar light irradiation (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
2.2 Basic principles of photocatalysis using CdS based materials
With a direct band gap of ca. 2.4 eV, which matches well with the visible spectral range of solar irradiation, CdS is a promising photocatalyst. Moreover, the effective diffusion length of electrons in CdS is about 0.65 μm.52 Therefore, the electrons in 1D CdS have enough time to reach the surface and participate in the photocatalytic reactions. Apart from that, from a thermodynamics perspective, the positions of the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of a semiconductor, which determine the oxidation and reduction power of photogenerated carriers, are also important for the process of artificial photoredox reactions. As for CdS, the band positions perfectly satisfy the thermodynamic requirements for many mainstream photocatalytic reactions, such as water splitting and CO2 reduction.53,54 Furthermore, the band structure and positions of CdS can be finely tuned by modifying its crystal structure and composition,55,56 which can significantly enhance the light-harvesting capacity and/or the reduction/oxidation power, thus resulting in an improved photoactivity.
As revealed in Scheme 1B, under suitable light irradiation, electrons are excited from the VB to the CB on CdS, while the holes in the VB are created. The electrons and holes can transfer to the CdS surface by spontaneous migration, and then reduce (pathway a) or oxidize (pathway b) the pre-adsorbed species. The electron transport pathway is typically sufficiently fast, while the hole transfer is more problematic; the rates are generally slower and the oxidation reactions by the holes require high overpotential.57,58 Simultaneously, competing with migration of charge carriers to the acceptor molecules, photogenerated electrons and holes can recombine in the bulk or on the surface of CdS within a few nanoseconds, which dissipates energy and is disadvantageous to the overall photocatalytic efficiency.59 In this regard, considerable efforts have been made to boost the performance of CdS based photocatalysts by suppressing the recombination of charge carriers. Besides, enhancing light absorption efficiency over a broad light absorption band and enriching the number of adsorption and reaction sites are also of great significance to ameliorate the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS.
Photocorrosion is another concern associated with the practical applications of semiconductors CdS. Generally, photocorrosion, for which surface sulfide ions are oxidized by photogenerated holes, makes CdS unstable as a photocatalyst.60 According to the density of states (DOS) calculation, the bottom of the CB of CdS is mainly derived from Cd 3d orbitals, whereas the top of the VB of CdS is primarily derived from S 2p orbitals, as illustrated in Scheme 1C. When irradiated by solar light, the photogenerated electrons in the outer surface (OS) move to the inner surface (IS) and the photogenerated holes move in the reverse direction, which results in a p-type layer at the surface (Scheme 1D).61 Namely, the interior photogenerated holes continuously escalate the photocorrosion of the outer surface, which leads to fast deactivation of CdS via concentrating in bonding orbital regions of surface sulphur.
There are two main pathways for the photocorrosion of CdS. The first one is valid in the presence of oxygen:62–64 (1) CdS + 4h+ + 2H2O + O2 → Cd2+ + SO42− + 4H+(2) O2 + 4e− + 2H+ → 2OH−(3) (4)
The overall reaction is described as eqn (4). While the photocorrosion of CdS is changed in the absence of oxygen, which is caused by the two holes, the formed possible photooxidation product is sulphur by the well-known photocorrosion reaction below:64–66 CdS + 2h+ → Cd2+ + S(5)
In view of the fact that the reaction of photogenerated holes and CdS is the principal reason for the collapse of the CdS, it is of great significance to restrict the reaction between the holes and CdS as well as to facilitate the separation of electron–hole pairs. In the following sections, whenever possible, the issue of catalyst stability after a photochemical reaction will be discussed.
2.3 Synthetic approaches of 1D CdS semiconductors
Various approaches have been developed to fabricate 1D CdS semiconductors, including hydrothermal/solvothermal,67–69 physical evaporation,70–72 template-assisted,73 colloidal micellar,74 and chemical vapour deposition.75 Among these approaches, the solvothermal method is one of the widely used wet-chemistry methods for its low cost and manoeuvrability.
Constructing 1D CdS with Cd2(S2CNEt2)4 as single precursor is a typical solvothermal approach.76–79 The growth mechanism can be summarized as follows. Firstly, Cd2(S2CNEt2)4, which can be regarded as an inorganic core [Cd2S2] with four capping groups, is synthesized by precipitating from a stoichiometric mixture of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate trihydrate (C5H10NS2Na·3H2O) and cadmium chloride (CdCl2·2.5H2O). Then, the four thione groups of Cd2(S2CNEt2)4 are removed by the nucleophilic attack of ethylenediamine (en) at the thione carbon, as revealed in Scheme 2A.80 Under an appropriate reaction environment, the inorganic [Cd2S2] cores combine with each other and grow along a unique direction, thereby resulting in 1D CdS NWs.
 Scheme 2  Growth mechanism of the 1D CdS nanowires with Cd2(S2CNEt2)4 as a single precursor (A). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 1999 Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic representation of the mechanism with non-single precursor (B). In the first step, the nuclei undergo the transformation to a microsphere with nanosheets covering the surface; in the second step, the nanorods are formed on the surface; in the last stage nanorods grow to nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from forming Cd2(S2CNEt2)4 in the first step, various substances or compounds have been employed as the precursors of cadmium or sulphur in the solvothermal approaches.81–83 For instance, Lee et al. have investigated the growth mechanism of the 1D CdS nanostructure with ethylenediamine (en) as a solvent and complexing agent.84 As shown in Scheme 2B, Cd2+ can combine with an en molecule (which acts as a bidentate ligand) to form a Cd–en complex, which is stabilized in the solution. As the solvothermal temperature increases, the Cd–en complex decomposes to form CdS nuclei. Thiourea will also decompose under the solvothermal condition and provide sulphur needed for the formation of CdS. These nuclei grow to form a microsphere composed of nanosheets (NSs). With increasing temperature to 100 °C, the NSs become unstable and start rolling into nanorods (NRs). When the reaction remains at 160 °C for 48 and 72 h, the NRs grow into nanowires (NWs) with uniform diameters and hexagonal phase. It is noteworthy that en is used as solvent in most solvothermal approaches.85–87 Thus, the above mechanism is a representative one for fabricating a 1D CdS structure with a variety of S and Cd precursors.
Constructing nanoarrays (NAs) is vital and interesting to enrich the category of 1D CdS materials. By employing thiosemicarbazide and Cd foil as the starting materials, Jiang et al. have prepared highly ordered large-area arrays of 1D wurtzite CdS NWs on Cd-foil substrates.88 The mechanism study of such 1D NAs has suggested that once a nucleus has been formed at a certain location, from a free energy perspective, the growth of the existing nucleus is easier than the formation of new nuclei. Furthermore, all the CdS NWs grow with a preferred orientation along the [001] direction of the hexagonal phase, which leads to the same surface polarization and surface repulsion effects of the NWs, thus resulting in the formation of high-density NW arrays vertical to the Cd-foil surface.
Regarding colloidal CdS nanorods (NRs), the synthetic approaches differ from those of the above 1D CdS peers. In most cases,89–91 the seeded-growth procedure is the mainstream approach. Various organic ligands, such as tri-n-octylphosphine, tri-n-octylphosphine oxide, dodecylamine and n-tetradecylphosphonic acid, are employed in the fabrication of colloidal CdS NRs. In general, the NR formation depends on two factors: the capping ligand chemistry and the nanocrystal growth kinetics.92 Certain surfactants, such as n-tetradecylphosphonic acid, will preferentially adsorb onto certain crystal facets, thus inhibiting the growth rate on those facets. For cadmium chalcogenides with a wurtzite structure, phosphoric acids preferentially adsorb onto the nonpolar facets, leaving the polar [002] facets more exposed for semiconductor deposition. But the nanocrystal growth kinetics must be adequately controlled in order to induce preferential deposition on specific crystallographic surfaces. The seeded-growth approach is also employed to construct 1D CdS heterostructures, such as CdS–CdSe93 and CdS–Ag2S94 composite. In addition, hot-injection is another typical method to fabricate colloidal CdS NRs.95
3 Strategies for enhancing the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS materials
3.1 Constructing 1D CdS based solid solutions
Recently, introducing transitional metal ions, such as Zn2+,96 Mn2+97 and Ni2+,98 into CdS to form CdS based solid solutions has been proven to be an effective method for improving photocatalytic performance. In comparison with the pristine CdS, solid solutions (a.k.a., MxCdS1−xS) possess some unique advantages, such as tunable band gap width and band edge positions, better electrical conductivity and more active sites, and thereby exhibit an enhanced visible-light response and improved photoactivity.99,100 Additionally, constructing solid solution can suppress the photocorrosion of CdS under light irradiation in long-term photocatalytic reactions.101
Among various solid solutions, Zn-doped CdS alloys (ZnxCd1−xS) have been witnessing an increased amount of attention in the past few years motivated by a well-matched coordination mode between CdS and ZnS.102,103 However, most of the reported ZnxCd1−xS solid solutions are irregular particles or micro/nano-spheres. In a recent example, Chen et al. have reported a facile solvothermal method to fabricate 1D cubic Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid-solution nanowires (NWs) by harnessing the “levelling effect” of thioglycolic acid (TGA), which serves as both the sulphur source and template agent,104 as shown in Fig. 1A. The TGA exhibits a “levelling effect” to eliminate the difference in physicochemical properties of metal ions because of its hydrosulphonyl (–SH) and carboxyl group (–COOH), thereby resulting in 1D cubic Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid solution (Fig. 1B). It is noteworthy that the single 1D nanowire appears to be prismatic instead of cylindrical, according to the TEM image in Fig. 1C. Due to the introduction of Zn into CdS, the absorption edges of cubic Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid solutions are lower than those of 1D CdS, which is in accordance with the result of a previous study,105 that is, as the Zn contents increase in the Cd1−xZnxS solid solution, its conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) will shift to more negative and positive positions, respectively. It is well known that a higher CB position of the semiconductor means an enhanced reduction power, which is crucial for efficient hydrogen production. Therefore, with Na2S–Na2SO3 as sacrificial agents, the Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid solutions exhibit enhanced H2 production activity compared to bare 1D CdS (52.3 mmol h−1). Additionally, the activity of 1D Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid solutions is also 50% higher to that of Cd0.8Zn0.2S nanoparticles (NPs), indicating the superiority of 1D morphology in photocatalysis. However, the 1D Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid solution sample displays a gradually decreased activity after cycling for 12 h, which is attributed to its photocorrosion. Such a decreased H2 evolution rate is inconsistent with the previous observation that Zn2+ doping can improve the photocatalytic activity and stability of CdS.106 It is generally accepted that CdS with a cubic crystal structure shows poorer photostability than the hexagonal one.107 Therefore, 1D Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid solution with a cubic structure shows relatively poor stability.
 Fig. 1  Growth mechanism of the 1D Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid-solution nanowires (A) and SEM (B) and TEM (C) images of the as-prepared sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from Zn2+, Ni2+, whose ionic radius and Pauling electronegativity are well matched with those of Cd2+, holds great potential to substitute Cd2+ ions in the crystalline structure of CdS. Chen and co-workers have reported a facile route to fabricate homogeneous 1D NixCd1−xS nanorod (NR) photocatalysts with ethanediamine-assisted decomposition of NixCd1−x(DDTC)2 complex precursors,108 as revealed in Fig. 2A. However, as shown in Fig. 2B and C, the aspect ratio of 1D NixCd1−xS NRs significantly decreases with the increase of Ni2+ doping concentration. Such a decreased aspect ratio may originate from the discrepant physicochemical property of Cd2+ and Ni2+ ions. The optimal solid solution, i.e., the Ni0.01Cd0.99S sample shows improved visible light photocatalytic activity for RhB degradation in comparison with pure CdS NRs and P25. The enhancement of photocatalytic performance may be attributed to suitable Ni2+ lattice doping, which is not only beneficial to narrow the band gap, but also useful to create more active sites. These active sites can act as temporary trapping sites to accelerate the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, thus prolonging the lifetime of charge carriers. However, at higher Ni content doped in CdS, e.g., up to x = 0.05, the activity of photocatalytic degradation of RhB became lower. The decreased activity can be attributed to the lattice defects originating from excess Ni2+ doping, which serve as the recombination centers of photo-generated electron–hole pairs. In addition, there is no obvious catalyst deactivation after five-time consecutive photo-irradiation (Fig. 2D), and the crystal structure has not changed during the photocatalytic reaction (Fig. 2E). Consequently, these results indicate high stability of the Ni0.01Cd0.99S NR sample. However, we should be aware that enhancement of activity is relatively slight. Additionally, the photostability of pure CdS has not been investigated, thereby failing to illustrate the origin of good stability of Ni0.01Cd0.99S NRs.
 Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the fabrication of homogeneous NixCd1−xS NR photocatalysts (A), and SEM image of the Ni0.01Cd0.99S sample (B) and Ni0.05Cd0.95S sample (C), cycling runs for photocatalytic degradation of RhB solution in the presence of the Ni0.01Cd0.99S sample under test conditions (D), and XRD patterns before and after cycling runs (E). Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2015 Springer. 
Constructing CdS based solid solution leads to a tunable band gap, which is able to trigger some new kinds of photoredox reactions and contributes to chemisorption towards specific reactants. Importantly, the toxicity of composite photocatalysts can also be greatly reduced due to the decreased content of cadmium. Therefore, it holds promising potential to synergistically enhance the overall photocatalytic efficiency and anti-photocorrosion ability of CdS. Nevertheless, it is still challenging to achieve tunable band gaps by altering the composition while simultaneously maintaining control over the 1D growth and band gap alignment of the target heterostructure.109 When the proportion of heteroatoms exceeds a certain threshold, it is difficult to keep the regular morphology. Apart from constructing bimetal based solid solutions, the photocatalytic performance of MxCd1−xS solid solutions can be further improved by intentionally introducing other transition metal ions. For instance, Xu et al. have reported a series of Ni2+ doped ZnxCd1−xS photocatalysts towards photocatalytic H2 production.110 Compared to the non-doped sample, Ni2+ doping can give rise to 86% increase in the hydrogen evolution rate. However, the further intruded elements may destroy the 1D structure of solid solution.111 It is, therefore, of considerable significance to develop facile and feasible strategies to fabricate 1D CdS based solid solution with tunable components. Very recently, the typical work by Hu et al. presents a superionic conductor-mediated growth method to fabricate ZnxCd1−xS NRs with a relatively uniform diameter and length,112 which provides a simple paradigm for engineering the composition and band gap of ternary MxCd1−xS alloyed NRs.
3.2 Loading cocatalysts onto 1D CdS

3.2.1 Metal cocatalysts. 
Noble metals, such as Pt,113,114 Au,115 Ru,116 Pd,117 and Rh,118 have been widely used as efficient cocatalysts towards artificial photoredox reactions, e.g., H2 evolution, CO2 reduction and selective organic transformation. Among them, Pt, with large work function and low overpotential for the H2 evolution reaction, is considered to be one of the most effective H2 evolution cocatalysts.30,119–121 For instance, very recently, Fu et al. have successfully developed a simple one-pot solvothermal (OPS) method to prepare Pt modified CdS nanorods (CdS NRs) by simultaneously fabricating CdS NRs and loading metallic Pt(0).122 This work provides comprehensive comparisons of the photocatalytic activity of CdS based materials. As shown in frame a in Fig. 3A, the H2 evolution rate of CdS NR samples is 2.10 mmol g−1 h−1, which is about 10 times higher than that of CdS particles (0.28 mmol g−1 h−1). The higher activity is attributed to the unique 1D structure and higher crystallized structure hexagonal phase. The frame b in Fig. 3A reveals that the OPS method is more effective than conventional post-deposition routes, such as in situ photo-reduction (i.s. PR), photo-reduction (PR) and impregnation-reduction (IR) deposition methods, to improve the H2 evolution rate of CdS NRs. The primary advantage of the OPS method is that Pt is deposited by a gentle process in a “mild” solvent (EDA or TEA), rather than in an aqueous medium, in which the reduction of [PtCl6]2− can be quickly achieved by the breakdown products of NaBH4. Such an OPS route is also applicable for other noble metals, as displayed in frame c of Fig. 3A. All of the selected noble metal-1D CdS systems exhibit enhanced performance compared with bare 1D CdS. The sample loaded with 0.5% Pt shows the highest HER activity and the rate of H2 evolution is as high as 16.27 mmol g−1 h−1, which is almost 8 times higher than that of pristine CdS NRs (2.10 mmol g−1 h−1, frame d of Fig. 3A). Besides their high activity, the stability of the Pt/CdS NRs has been further confirmed by cyclic experiments, which shows a slight decrease during the 5 recycles, as displayed in Fig. 3B. In addition, the XRD, UV-vis DRS, and SEM results of the used sample after the 5 run tests show little variation compared with the fresh sample before the reaction, as revealed in Fig. 3C–F. In another study, Yu et al. have also reported Pt–1D CdS prepared by the NaBH4 reduction method, which shows smaller Pt nanoparticles (NPs, ca. 1–2 nm) and higher Pt dispersion than the sample prepared by the photoreduction deposition method.119 Such a high Pt dispersion system with small Pt NPs exhibits a remarkable H2 production rate of 1.49 mmol h−1 with a quantum efficiency (QE) of 61.7% with 0.3 wt% of Pt, which exceeds that of pure CdS NWs by more than 74 times, also higher than that of the P–Pt/CdS sample. After destroying the morphology of nanowires by grinding, the photocatalytic H2-production activity is significantly reduced by more than 30%. Therefore, both of the above examples highlight the significance of the dispersion and size of the Pt cocatalyst and the 1D morphology of CdS for optimizing the photocatalytic activity of CdS.
 Fig. 3  (A) is the comparison of H2 evolution rates of: (a) CdS–P and platinized CdS–P samples, (b) CdS–N and platinized CdS–N (0.06% Pt) samples prepared by different deposition routes, (c) different noble metal-modified CdS–N (0.06% M, M = Pt, Pd, or Ru) and (d) different amounts of Pt modified CdS–N samples prepared by the OPS method. Successive test runs for the HER on Pt/CdS–N under visible light irradiation (B), (C) XRD, (D) UV-vis DRS spectra, and (E and F) SEM images of the Pt/CdS–N samples before and after the HER test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Using CdS NRs–Pt as the typical photocatalytic system, Feldmann et al. have investigated the effects of hole scavenger redox potentials on the quantum efficiency (QE) and stability of CdS NRs.123 They have found that the highest efficiency is observed in the presence of SO32−, with a QE of 1.7% and 1.0% for cysteine and MPA stabilized CdS (Fig. 4A), respectively. Fig. 4B–I display the TEM images of Pt–CdS NRs for different hole scavengers before and after 4 h of photocatalytic H2 generation. Before illumination, all samples display well defined CdS NRs decorated with Pt nanoparticles (NPs). However, clear differences are visible after photocatalytic hydrogen generation. When MeOH and EDTA4+ are used as hole scavengers, the shortening and aggregation of the NRs are observed, which indicates destabilization of the NRs in these cases through oxidation by the photogenerated hole. When SO32− or TEA is used, no visible difference of the Pt-decorated NRs before and after illumination is observed. The results indicate that SO32− or TEA is more beneficial to enhance both the photocatalytic activity and photostability of the CdS–Pt system. Then, the redox potentials of the hole scavengers have been systematically compared, as displayed in Fig. 4J. Among them, SO32− has the highest oxidation potential (−3.4 eV, vs. vacuum), followed by TEA at −3.4 eV and EDTA4+ at −4.0 eV, and MeOH shows the lowest one at −4.2 eV. Therefore, it is reasonably concluded that the H2 generation rate and photostability of CdS are correlated with the oxidation potential of the hole scavenger. Recently, Lian et al. have also observed a positive correlation of hole transfer rates with the steady-state H2 generation QE of the CdS–Pt composite.124 These studies reveal the relationship between hole scavengers and the photocatalytic performance of CdS, which provides important foundations for the choice of hole scavengers.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of quantum efficiencies for Pt-decorated CdS nanorods using SO32−, TEA, EDTA4+, and MeOH as hole scavengers. Data for different ligands (i.e., MPA and cysteine) are shown (A), typical TEM images of Pt-decorated CdS nanorods before and after four hours of hydrogen generation: (B and C) SO32−, (D and E) TEA, (F and G) EDTA4+, (H and I) MeOH are used as hole scavengers and MPA as a stabilizing ligand; schematic plot of the energy levels of the electrons of SO32−, TEA, EDTA4+, and MeOH that are involved in the reduction of the photo-hole vs. vacuum and on normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale (J). Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2012 AIP Publishing. 
In addition to stochastic arrangements of the 1D CdS materials with metal components, a spatially controlled nanoheterostructure is anticipated to further exert the advantages of the 1D morphology.125–129 In a typical example, Amirav and co-workers have constructed a multicomponent nanoheterostructure composed of Pt-tipped CdS NRs with embedded CdSe seeds, which exhibits ca. 100% photon-to-hydrogen production efficiency under visible light illumination.130 In such a nanoheterostructure, photogenerated holes are three-dimensionally confined to the CdSe, whereas the delocalized electrons are transferred to the Pt tips, and thereby the electrons are separated from the holes over three different components, as shown in Fig. 5A. Two kinds of nanostructures, i.e., one tip and two tips, have been fabricated, as shown in Fig. 5B and C. With a hydroxyl anion–radical redox couple operating as a shuttle to relay the holes, the one tip Pt-tipped CdSe@CdS rod sample exhibits a quantum efficiency (QE) for the hydrogen reduction of ca. 100%, while the QE decreases to 58.5% when two tips of Pt are loaded (Fig. 5D). Therefore, for a multi-electron reaction such as hydrogen reduction, the photocatalyst design should only include a single co-catalytic site per each segment of the semiconductor. Amirav and co-workers have investigated the effect of CdSe seeds on the photostability of CdS.131 The CdS–Pt–CdSe sample exhibits a stable H2 evolution rate, while the H2 production rate from the Pt–CdS rods decreases about 50% of its original value over the course of 12 h. The improved stability is attributed to the ability of the CdSe seeds to isolate the oxidizing holes from the sensitive Pt/CdS interface. These studies demonstrate great opportunities of intelligent design of each functional component for promoting long lasting charge carrier separation and minimizing the back-reaction of intermediates.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of the nanoparticle photocatalyst depicting the photocatalytic cycle. (A) TEM micrographs of CdSe@CdS nanorod photocatalysts with single (B) and double (C) Pt co-catalysts, photocatalytic quantum efficiencies for the hydrogen reduction half-reaction obtained with the two samples (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Other noble metals have also received great research interest. For instance, Pal et al. have signified the importance of different shapes of Au and CdS by fabricating various kinds of Au–CdS heterocomposites.132 By means of time resolved luminescence decay spectra, they have investigated the charge separation and recombination. As revealed in Fig. 6A, the estimated average lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs is found to be 2.7 μs, 12.5 μs and 34 μs for CdS nanorod (R), Au nanosphere (S)–CdS (R) and Au (R)–CdS (R), respectively. The results manifest that Au loading notably prolongs the lifetime of charge carriers, and thereby increases the relaxation time of charge carriers of CdS (R). Additionally, a larger interfacial contact area of Au (R)–CdS (R) than the Au (S)–CdS (R) interface effectively sinks out a large number of electrons from the CdS surface and significantly retards the electron–hole recombination, hence reducing the PL intensity as per the scheme of Fig. 6B. Therefore, the Au (S)–CdS (R) sample shows the best photocatalytic activity towards salicylic acid (SA) degradation, and the rate constants have been found (Fig. 6C) to be 0.7 × 10−4, 0.8 × 10−4, 4 × 10−3, 6 × 10−3 and 9 × 10−3 min−1 for bare CdS (S), Au (S)–CdS (S), bare CdS (R), Au (S)–CdS (R) and Au (R)–CdS (R), respectively. This work has also studied the effect of Au on the stability of CdS. Due to the photo-corrodibility in nature, CdS deteriorates the SA photoactivity up to 21.7% after 3 cycles. In contrast, Au (S)–CdS (R) and Au (R)–CdS (R) catalysts decompose SA effectively without significant deactivation even after 3 times of recycling, as revealed in Fig. 6D. However, the reason for improved stability has still been unrevealed in this work. Moreover, the CdS–Au composites show poor interfacial contact due to the impregnation method. It is generally accepted that intimate contact favours the transfer of photogenerated charge pairs. Therefore, in addition to optimizing individual components, interface optimization is also of great significance to harmonize 1D CdS-cocatalyst systems towards further photoactivity improvement.
 Fig. 6  Time resolved emission decay curves of different Au–CdS interfaces (A), a schematic of carrier relaxation processes in Au–CdS composites as a function of their interface contact area (B, where 〈ex〉, 〈gr〉, kb, and kt represent the excited state, ground state, rate due to radiative recombination, and rate due to the trapping state), change in concentration of salicylic acid (−lnC/Co) as a function of time (t) for various bare and Au–CdS nano-junctions under UV light (C), degradation of salicylic acid after recycling with bare CdS and Au–CdS composites under UV light irradiation of 2 h (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2013 Elsevier. 
Owing to the prohibitive costs of upscaling for noble metals, earth-abundant alternatives, such as nickel, are actively sought.133–138 Recently, Feldmann and co-workers have reported a redox shuttle mechanism to enhance photocatalytic H2 generation on Ni-decorated CdS NRs (Fig. 7A).57 By employing a hydroxyl anion/radical redox couple which possesses good mobility and can react with CdS and the sacrificial agent (ethanol) to efficiently relay the hole from the semiconductor to the scavenger, a slow hole transfer process is replaced with two faster ones. Meanwhile, the photoexcited electron, free from the Coulomb attraction of the hole, transfers to the Ni particle, where it then reduces protons to hydrogen. The basic principle of the process is depicted in Fig. 7B. As a result, a significant enhancement in the H2 generation rate can be achieved, with an apparent QE of 53% at 447 nm and a remarkable H2 formation rate of 63 mmol g−1 h−1 under optimal conditions. Moreover, the photocatalyst exhibited an excellent long-term stability (over 220 h) for photocatalytic H2 production. Besides, the recent work of Amirav et al. has confirmed that Ni tipping of CdSe@CdS NR photocatalysts exhibits comparable activity to that of Pt toward H2 evolution.129 Therefore, it is reasonable to believe that some earth abundant metals, e.g. Ni, hold the potential as viable and effective cocatalysts alternative to noble metal Pt.
 Fig. 7  HAADF-STEM image of the Ni-decorated CdS nanorods (A) and schematic of the photocatalytic generation of H2 under the proposed hole shuttle mechanism (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Apart from single metal based cocatalysts, bimetallic systems also exhibit great potential in artificial solar energy conversion owing to their extraordinary structural properties.139–141 Due to the fact that different components of the catalysts have a particular function in the overall reaction mechanism, the chemical transformations, which can barely be achieved by the monometallic catalytic systems, can actually be accomplished by bimetallic systems.142–145 The activity, selectivity and resistance to poisoning of the metal catalysts can be drastically influenced by the presence of a second metal component.146 For instance, Ge et al. have investigated the effect of the Pt/Co alloy on the photocatalytic performance of 2D g-C3N4.147 In the Pt/Cox alloys, the “synergistic effect” of Pt and Co makes the surface defects increase, and changes the Fermi energy level position in comparison to Pt. Therefore, the photoactivity of the Pt/Co–g-C3N4 system increases by a factor of 2.9 compared to that of Pt–g-C3N4. It is, therefore, of great significance to exploit 1D CdS-bimetal (even multimetals) systems with boosted photocatalytic performance towards target reactions.


3.2.2 Transition metal oxides and hydroxide cocatalysts. 
Several transition metal oxides, such as NiOx,148 CuxO,149,150 CoOx,151,152 and MoO3,153,154 have been found to function as cocatalysts for improving the photocatalytic activity of H2 evolution or CO2 reduction. Very recently, Li et al. have reported amorphous Co3O4 modified CdS nanorod (NRs) photocatalyst towards H2 evolution, which were synthesized by a two-step solvothermal/hydrothermal method.155 The morphology of the Co3O4–CdS NR hybrids is shown in Fig. 8A and B. It is clearly observed that the diameter of amorphous Co3O4 nanoparticles (NPs) on the surface of CdS NRs is about 0.5–2 nm. As revealed in Fig. 8C, the CdS NRs–3 mol% Co3O4 sample exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity (236 μmol g−1 h−1) for H2 evolution under visible light irradiation, which is 33-fold higher than that of the pristine CdS NRs and slightly higher than that of CdS NRs–1% Pt composite (190.3 μmol g−1 h−1). Fig. 8D demonstrates that the Co3O4–CdS NR hybrid photocatalyst shows no significant decrease in the H2 production rate after 3 cycles. This is mainly ascribed to the loading of amorphous Co3O4 onto the surface of CdS NRs, which can enhance the consumption rate of the photogenerated holes, thereby promoting the separation of electron–hole pairs and enhancing the stability of CdS NRs. This work not only demonstrates that the earth-abundant Co3O4 can be used as an effective cocatalyst to promote photocatalytic H2 evolution rates, but also provides potential opportunities to design spatially separated dual cocatalyst systems, i.e., electron and hole transfer cocatalysts, to further improve the activity of semiconductors.
 Fig. 8  (A) TEM image (inside picture, SAED pattern) and (B) HRTEM image of the as-prepared CdS–3% Co3O4 sample, (C) the average rate of H2 evolution over the photocatalysts: (a) CdS; (b) CdS–1% Co3O4; (c) CdS–3% Co3O4; (d) CdS–5% Co3O4, and (D) repeated time courses of photocatalytic H2 evolution on the CdS–3% Co3O4 sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In other studies, some metal hydroxides have been developed as efficient and noble metal-free cocatalysts.156–160 For instance, Ran and co-workers have developed a facile precipitation method to fabricate Ni(OH)2 modified CdS NR photocatalysts towards H2 production.161 As the potential of Ni2+/Ni is lower than the conduction band (CB) of CdS and more negative than the H+/H2 potential, the electron is able to transfer from the CB of CdS to Ni(OH)2, which favors the reduction of Ni2+ to Ni0. The role of Ni0 is to help the charge separation and to act as a cocatalyst for water reduction, thus enhancing the photocatalytic H2 production activity. The optimal Ni(OH)2 loading was found to be 23 mol%, which results in a visible-light H2 production rate of 5085 μmol g−1 h−1 corresponding to 28% quantum efficiency (QE) at 420 nm, exceeding that of pure CdS and 1 wt% Pt loaded CdS nanorods by a factor of 145 and 1.3 times, respectively.
Apart from Ni(OH)2, the Co(OH)2/CdS NR composite has been prepared via a coprecipitation strategy by Xie and co-workers.162 The highest photocatalytic activity is achieved with 6.8 mol% Co(OH)2 loading, providing a H2 generation rate of 61 μmol g−1 h−1, which exceeds that of pure CdS by a factor of 41 times. Electron capture by Co(OH)2 is the leading cause for the increase of the H2 generation rate over CdS, which not only improves charges separation in CdS but also makes more electrons take part in the reduction reaction. However, the electron capture processes and the stability of this composite have not been fully investigated. In a recent report, Yu et al. have fabricated a new Co(OH)2/CdS NW system for photocatalytic H2 production via a facile impregnation method.163 The Co(OH)2/CdS NW system with an optimal loading amount shows a H2 evolution rate of 14.43 mmol g−1 h−1, which has 206 times higher photocatalytic activity than that of the pristine CdS NWs and 3 times higher than that of the benchmark 1 wt% Pt–CdS NWs, as displayed in Fig. 9A. In particular, the core–shell structure of the Co(OH)2/CdS NW system formed during the photocatalytic reaction can significantly improve the stability of photocatalysts, leading to a stable H2 production rate in the 12 h duration, as shown in Fig. 9B. The slight decrease of the H2 evolution rate is attributed to the fact that less available photons participate in the photocatalytic reactions due to the dense cobalt-compounds covered on the surface of CdS NWs. Since Co(OH)2 clusters will be partially reduced to Co+ and Co atoms by photogenerated electrons, the origin of the promotion effect of Co(OH)2 is ascribed to the circular photocatalytic reactions of the cobalt atom and ions (Co, Co+ and Co2+), which can accelerate the separation and transfer of photogenerated electrons at the interface of CdS Co-compounds. This work suggests the feasibility of preventing photocorrosion of CdS via a suitable core shell structural design.
 Fig. 9  Photocatalytic H2 generation rate of C0, C0.5, C4.8, C6.5, C9.1 and C100 in 30% triethanolamine (TEOA) aqueous solution under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) (A), time course of photocatalytic H2 production over the sample C6.5 and the bare CdS NWs; every three hours, the reaction system is bubbled with N2 for 1 h to remove the H2 inside (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.3 Transition metal phosphide, sulphide, carbide, nitride and boride cocatalysts. 
Apart from transition metal oxides and hydroxides, transition metal phosphides,164–170 sulphides,171–179 carbides,180 nitride181 and borides182 have attracted mounting attention as efficient cocatalysts towards photocatalytic reactions. In particular, recent studies have demonstrated that MoS2, a transition metal sulfide consisting of three atom layers (S–Mo–S) stacking together via weak van der Waals interaction, can perform as an efficient cocatalyst for H2 production due to the existence of abundant active sites which stemmed from the sulfur edge.183–190 In a typical example, Yin et al. have reported CdS NWs decorated with ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets as an efficient photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution.191 By ultrasonic exfoliation with dimethylformamide as the dispersing agent, CdS NWs decorated with an ultrathin MoS2 nanosheet composite have been fabricated. As depicted in Fig. 10A, the activity of all the MoS2/CdS composites is higher than that of the MoS2 and CdS components. The optimal mass ratio of MoS2/CdS is 10:100 (dubbed MC-10), which shows the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 1914 μmol h−1. As revealed in Fig. 10B, there is a decline in the hydrogen evolution activity after eight cycles due to photocorrosion of the metal sulfide, which is confirmed by the observation of no Mo atoms and an increased proportion of S atoms over the MC-10 sample after 24 h of reaction. The enhanced photocatalytic performance for hydrogen evolution is attributed to the large number of active sites of ultrathin-layer MoS2 nanosheets (Fig. 10C) as well as the inherent p/n heterojunction. Moreover, compared to bulk MoS2, the flexible and ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets are more readily adsorbed on the CdS NW surface in a uniform manner.
 Fig. 10  Time-dependent photocatalytic H2 for a series of photocatalysts (A), cycling test of photocatalytic H2 for MC-10 (B) and illustration of the difference between the adhesion of bulk MoS2 and ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets on CdS NWs (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
In order to optimize the photocatalyst structure, Park and co-workers have designed a heterostructure consisting of MoS2 tips and CdS nanorods (M-t–CdS NRs) synthesized by amine-assisted oriented attachment,192 as shown in Fig. 11A. The M-t–CdS NR heterostructure provides a large contact area between CdS NRs and hole scavenger, thus promoting unidirectional electron transfer from CdS NRs to MoS2 tips. Fig. 11B demonstrates that the 3.5 wt% M-t–CdS NR sample shows the optimal activity (8.44 mmol g−1 h−1), with an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 22.2% at 420 nm, which is 92 times higher than that of pure CdS NRs. Moreover, the 3.5 wt% M-t-CdS NR sample shows superior activity to Pt/CdS NRs and a conventional MoS2–CdS photocatalyst with 3.5 wt% MoS2 content (Fig. 11B). Significantly, the H2 production rate of 3.5 wt% M-t–CdS NRs is maintained through repeated cycles of hydrogen generation for 23 h (Fig. 11C), with small fluctuations of approximately ±0.6 mmol g−1 h−1, indicating superior long-term photostability. As shown in Fig. 11D, the M-t–CdS NR heterostructure is conducive to ultrafast charge transfer and slow charge recombination via the alleviation of charge recombination at the spatially localized trap states, which favors directional electron transfer from the CdS NRs to the tipped MoS2. This work offers a promising strategy for optimizing the spatial structure and electron transfer pathway of 1D semiconductor based photocatalysts.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the formation of the M-t–CdS NRs (A), comparison of photocatalytic H2 production activities between CdS NRs, 1 wt% Pt/CdS NRs, 3.5 wt% MoS2/CdS NRs, 3.5 wt% M-t–CdS NRs, and 3.5 wt% Pt/CdS NRs (B); time course of H2 evolution on 3.5 wt% M-t–CdS NRs (C); and schematic representation of photocatalytic H2 generation on M-t–CdS NRs and electron transfer at tipped MoS2 (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
In view of increased interest in the MoS2–1D CdS system,193–195 a brief summary of the typical examples of the 1D CdS/MoS2 system toward photocatalytic H2 evolution is provided in Table S1 (ESI†).191–195 The results in Table S1† definitely indicate that MoS2 is an effective cocatalyst toward promoting a photocatalytic high H2 production rate with enhanced apparent quantum yield (AQY). Among them, the partially crystalline MoS2 NSs–CdS NR system displays the highest enhancement factor of ca. 130 compared with bare 1D CdS, with an AQY of 41.37% under reaction conditions (10 vol% lactic acid, λ ≥ 420 nm).193 In another reaction system, the ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets–CdS NW system exhibits the highest H2 evolution rate of 1914 μmol h−1 (95.7 mmol g−1 h−1) with 20 vol% lactic acid as a sacrificial agent under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 400 nm).191 However, the decreased H2 evolution activity over this system during eight cycles highlights the instability of the photocatalyst.191 These examples jointly indicate that fully exposing the active sites of MoS2 and optimizing the efficiency of electron transfer from 1D CdS to MoS2 are the two key points for optimizing the photocatalytic performance.
Apart from MoS2, metal phosphides have also been developed as novel non-noble-metal cocatalysts. For instance, Du et al. have constructed a Ni2P–1D CdS NR system towards for photocatalytic H2 evolution.196 As revealed in Fig. 12A, when the loading amount of Ni2P is 0.5 wt%, the H2 production rate reaches ca. 553.7 μmol mg−1 h−1, corresponding to an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of ca. 41% at 450 nm. As shown in Fig. 12B, there is no significant decrease in H2 evolution through each cycle, indicating good stability of this hybrid photocatalyst. Fig. 12C and D display the morphology of the 0.5 wt% Ni2P/CdS NRs, which show a typical Ni2P nanoparticle decorated 1D structure. Additionally, the CdS NR sample shows an enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution rate compared to CdS nanoparticles (NPs) with a hexagonal phase under identical conditions and the 0.5 wt% Ni2P/CdS NR photocatalyst also shows much higher photoactivity than 0.5 wt% Ni2P/CdS NPs, further demonstrating that the 1D structure shows better photoactivity than the bulk structure.196 Since Ni2P is an earth-abundant material, this hybrid Ni2P/CdS NR system may open a new scenario in exploring new promising alternative cocatalysts to improve the photocatalytic efficiency of 1D based CdS composite systems. Furthermore, the structure and active sites of novel cocatalysts should be distinctly identified, which provides theoretical foundation for optimizing their photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 12  The rate of H2 evolution on Ni2P/CdS NR photocatalysts loaded with different amounts of Ni2P (A), the time courses of H2 evolution and apparent quantum yield photocatalyst (B), TEM image (C) and high-magnification HRTEM image (D) of 0.5 wt% Ni2P/CdS NRs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.4 Dual cocatalyst system. 
Recent reports have demonstrated that simultaneously introducing appropriate electron cocatalysts and hole cocatalysts, i.e., dual cocatalysts onto the light-harvesting semiconductor, is a more efficient strategy than a single cocatalyst to improve the photocatalytic performance.197–203 For CdS based photocatalysts, further loading of appropriate hole cocatalysts has been recognized as an efficient strategy to inhibit the photocorrosion of CdS via the rapid consumption of photogenerated holes. Park et al. have reported a sandwich-like architecture using CdS NRs embedded to a p/n junction of MoS2/nitrogen doped-RGO (N-RGO) towards photocatalytic overall water splitting in natural water.204 The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images show that CdS NRs are well embedded in the MoS2/N-RGO sheets (Fig. 13A–C), presenting a sandwich-like architecture. As displayed in Fig. 13D, only the MoS2/CdS/N-RGO hybrid can promote overall water splitting into H2 and O2 with the molar ratio of ca. 2:1, while pure CdS NRs and CdS NRs loaded with a single cocatalyst, such as N-RGO, MoS2 or Pt (1 wt%), do not exhibit photoactivity toward gas evolution. As shown in Fig. 13E, photogenerated electrons from CdS favor MoS2 at the CdS/MoS2 interface, and photogenerated holes favor N-RGO at the CdS/N-RGO interface because the conduction band (CB) of MoS2 is nearer to that of CdS and the valence band (VB) of N-RGO is more close to that of CdS. Subsequently, the half-reaction sites of water reduction and oxidation are separated from each other. The energy diagram in the p/n depletion region for the MoS2/CdS/N-RGO hybrid is shown in Fig. 13F. Notably, the geometry of sandwich-like architecture can minimize direct contact between the electrolyte and CdS NRs, reducing the possibility of the unwanted back reaction. Compared with well-defined thermodynamically favored charge transport, the new charge transfer route in MoS2/CdS/N-RGO splits natural water and results in an essential change of the carrier separation mechanism and high anti-corrosion.204 Consequently, there is no deactivation during the five cycles of hydrogen generation for the MoS2/CdS/N-RGO hybrid in the presence of 7 vol% lactic acid as a sacrificial agent. However, the photostability of the dual cocatalyst system in pure water has not been deeply discussed.204
 Fig. 13  TEM image of the CdS NRs/N-RGO hybrid (A–C), photocatalytic water splitting of CdS NRs, CdS NRs/N-RGO, MoS2/CdS NRs, Pt/CdS and MoS2/CdS NRs/N-RGO hybrids in natural water under solar light irradiation (D), schematic illustration (E) and band position diagrams (F) of the MoS2/CdS NRs/N-RGO hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Based on the above discussions, it is reasonable to anticipate that precise maneuver of dual cocatalysts and 1D CdS semiconducting materials, especially loading electron cocatalysts at the end of 1D CdS and hole cocatalysts at the side, i.e., spatially separated cocatalyst system, is able to synergistically take full advantage of 1D nanostructures and cocatalysts to enhance the performance of targeted artificial photoredox reactions. As shown in Fig. 14, the spatial separation of the dual-cocatalysts not only contributes to the separation and collection of the electrons and holes at the respective cocatalysts, but also suppresses the reverse reactions. As for CdS, the swift transfer of photogenerated holes promoted by the loading of hole cocatalysts is beneficial for improving the photostability.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration showing the possible transfer way of photogenerated charge pairs and the artificial photoredox reactions in 1D CdS nanostructures loaded with spatially separated cocatalysts. 
Some typical results on 1D CdS-cocatalyst composites towards photocatalytic H2 production from photocatalytic water splitting are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). For comparison, other typical examples of CdS nanoparticles (NPs)-cocatalyst systems are also provided in Table S2 (ESI†). In order to make a relatively reasonable judgment on the effectiveness of each approach, we provide three complementary evaluation indexes, i.e., H2 evolution rate, apparent quantum yield (AQY) and enhancement factors of the photocatalytic H2 production rate of 1D CdS-cocatalyst composites compared with that of pure 1D CdS. As shown in Table S2 (ESI†), a 206-fold enhancement is achieved when Co(OH)2 is employed as a cocatalyst, which is the highest one among the 1D CdS-cocatalyst composites.163 As for AQY, the Pt–CdSe@CdS NR system displays a very high AQY of ca. 100%. In the noble metal free systems,130 CdS–Ni57 and CdS–MoS2 (ref. 191) systems show a considerable AQY of 53% and 46.9%, respectively. From the viewpoint of the H2 evolution rate, the Ni2P–CdS NR system exhibits a high rate of 553 μmol mg−1 h−1 with 1 mg of catalyst used in the photocatalytic reaction system.196 However, such a rate cannot be directly converted to 553 mmol g−1 h−1, because there is no sheer proportional relationship between the H2 evolution rate and amount of catalyst.
Because the type and content of cocatalyst, the interfacial bonding form of the composite, and reaction conditions together are significant factors affecting the overall performance of 1D CdS based photocatalysts, it is not reasonable to simply judge which cocatalyst is the best one. In the above section, we mainly focus on illustrating how to optimize the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS based composites by using different single cocatalysts or dual cocatalysts through choosing typical examples in the literature. In addition, the disadvantages of the poisoning and high cost of noble metals should be noted. Consequently, developing novel cocatalysts with interfacial structure design and optimizing the existing systems towards targeted reactions from a holistic perspective are equally important for practical application in future extension.

3.3 Coupling with other semiconductors
When constructing 1D CdS-semiconductor composite photocatalysts, the heterojunction is often formed, which generally can be classified into three different types based on the band positions of the semiconductors, as depicted in Fig. 15. In the type I heterojunction (Fig. 15A), both the VB and CB potentials of smaller band gap semiconductors (semiconductor 2) are confined within the larger band gap semiconductor (semiconductor 1), creating a straddling band alignment. Thus, both electrons and holes are accumulated on semiconductor 2, which yields no improvement in charge carrier separation and thus commonly impairs the photocatalytic activity. Fig. 15B shows the illustration of the type II heterojunction, in which the photogenerated electrons and holes are spatially separated from each other due to the staggered band edge potentials, thereby reducing the recombination probability.205 Most of the examples of hybrids described in the literature are type II alignment.206–208 Finally, type III heterojunctions are also called broken-gap situations, in which both VB and CB edges of semiconductor 1 are located above the CB potential of semiconductor 2 without crossing each other (Fig. 15C). By choosing appropriate semiconductors, constructing 1D CdS based hetero-nanostructured photocatalysts comprising multicomponent or multiphase heterojunctions is regarded as an effective strategy to design highly active photocatalyst systems by improving the separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes.
 Fig. 15  Different types of semiconductor heterojunctions. 

3.3.1 Wide band gap semiconductors. 
Combining 1D CdS NWs with wide band gap semiconductors has been proven to be a promising strategy for enhancing their photocatalytic performance. Our group has fabricated a 1D CdS@TiO2 core–shell hybrid photocatalyst towards selective oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes under mild conditions.209 Compared with bare CdS NWs, an obvious enhancement of conversion is achieved over the 1D CdS@TiO2 composite, which is ascribed to the prolonged lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers over that of the 1D CdS@TiO2 composite under visible light irradiation. In addition, other groups have also reported a 1D CdS/TiO2 composite with improved activity towards various artificial photoredox reactions, such as photocatalytic H2 evolution from water,67 selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol210 and photodegradation of phenol.211
Besides TiO2, other wide band gap semiconductors, such as ZnS,212 CeO2,213 and SnO2,214 can also be employed to construct 1D CdS based hybrid photocatalysts. For instance, Du et al. have reported a cocatalyst-free CdS NRs/ZnS NP composite for high-performance visible light driven H2 evolution from water.212 The CdS/ZnS-0.5 sample displays the maximum rate of 239 μmol mg−1 h−1, with an AQY of 16.8% at 420 nm (Fig. 16A), which is much higher than that of bare ZnS and CdS NRs under identical conditions. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 16B, the ZnS/CdS-0.5 sample exhibits a stable photoactivity for 12 h, suggesting the excellent photostability for H2 production. Since the band gap of ZnS is much wider than that of CdS, the transfer of photogenerated electrons and holes will be limited in a well-confined type I heterojunction (Fig. 15A). However, based on the observed efficient transfer of charge carriers in the core–shell CdS/ZnS system, two possible mechanisms for charge transfer and H2 evolution are presented. The first one is a hole transfer mechanism. As manifested in Fig. 16C, there are many intrinsic defects, such as zinc vacancies (VZn) and interstitial sulfur vacancies (ISV), in the ZnS shells. VZn and IS can act as acceptors for holes generated from the CdS NRs, which further promotes efficient charge transfer, thereby stimulating efficient H2 production. The other one is an electron tunneling mechanism. As revealed in Fig. 16D, the surface-deep trap states of the CdS core, on which the photogenerated electrons and holes with low energy are not efficient for hydrogen evolution, are passivated, making more charge carriers with suitable energies active for the reduction reaction. Thus, the charge carriers in the CdS core would tunnel through the thin ZnS shell for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. However, the origin of good photostability over the hybrid catalysts has not been unequivocally clarified. Although the mechanism of charge separation is yet to be confirmed, this work provides new insight to design an efficient cocatalyst-free system, and enrich the mechanisms for charge transfer.
 Fig. 16  Hydrogen evolution rate in a 20 mL aqueous solution containing 0.75 M Na2S and 1.05 M Na2SO3 in the presence of 1.0 mg of CdS/ZnS NR photocatalysts (A). (A) CdS/ZnS-0, (B) CdS/ZnS-0.1, (C) CdS/ZnS-0.5, (D) CdS/ZnS-1.0, (E) CdS/ZnS-1.5, and (F) CdS/ZnS-5.0; cyclic H2 evolution curves for the 1.0 mg CdS/ZnS-0.5 NR photocatalyst (B); schematic illustration of the mechanisms for the photocatalytic H2 production over core–shell CdS/ZnS NRs under visible light irradiation (C and D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Constructing 1D hierarchical heterostructures has also been demonstrated to contribute to improve the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS based composites. For example, our group has reported a branched hierarchical CdS–ZnO composite via a seeded growth method, as displayed in Fig. 17A.215 Growing ZnO NRs on the surface of CdS NWs to form the branched hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (Fig. 17B) not only increases the light harvesting efficiency because of the increased optical path as well as additional light trapping through reduced reflection and multi-scattering, but also boosts charge separation and fast charge transport and collection due to the direct charge carrier transport pathway in both trunks and branches. Therefore, the hierarchical CdS–ZnO composite exhibits boosted activity towards photocatalytic fine-chemical synthesis, i.e., selective oxidation of thioanisole and reduction of 4-nitroaniline (4-NA). As revealed in Fig. 17C, the conversion for thioanisole and yield for methylsulfonylbenzene are about 60% and 52%, respectively, over the hierarchical CdS–ZnO composite, which are much higher than the values obtained over CdS NWs (conversion 36% and yield 33%) and ZnO (conversion 3.5% and yield 3%). Fig. 17D shows that the hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite exhibits remarkably enhanced photoactivity (conversion 60%) for selective reduction of 4-NA as compared to CdS NWs (conversion 30%) and ZnO (conversion 2%) under artificial solar light irradiation. On the basis of boosted performance for photoredox reactions, a direct “Z-scheme” mechanism, i.e., the holes from CdS and electrons from ZnO recombine at the interface contact, is proposed over the hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite under irradiation of artificial solar light, as revealed in Fig. 17E. This work suggests that the design of well-defined and highly ordered 2D or 3D spatial architectures will contribute to optimizing the overall performance of 1D based CdS hybrid photocatalysts.
 Fig. 17  A schematic illustration of synthesis of the branched hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (A), SEM images of the CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (B), photocatalytic performance of CdS NWs, blank ZnO and branched hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite for selective oxidation of thioanisole (C) under artificial solar light irradiation for 2 h and 4-nitroaniline reduction under artificial solar light irradiation for 1 min (D) and a schematic diagram illustrating the photocatalytic redox reactions over the CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (E). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.2 Narrow band gap semiconductors. 
The development of 1D CdS coupled with narrow band gap semiconductors is another useful approach to improve the photocatalytic performance.216–219 For example, Lu et al. have reported a 1D ZnFe2O4–CdS NR system by loading paramagnetic ZnFe2O4 nanocrystals onto the surface of 1D CdS NRs.218 As revealed in Fig. 18A, the ZnFe2O4 nanocrystals of around 10 nm adhere to the surfaces of CdS NRs with a thickness of 15–20 nm. The ZnFe2O4–CdS NR composite not only achieves an enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution rates but also offers extra protection for CdS from hole attack, as shown in Fig. 18B. Fig. 18C shows the PL spectra of the plain and decorated CdS NRs, in which a significant quenching after the ZnFe2O4 decoration is observed. As revealed in Fig. 18D, the photoinduced holes of CdS tend to migrate to the photochemically stable ZnFe2O4 domain, while the photoinduced electrons of ZnFe2O4 tend to migrate to the photochemically more active CdS domain, thereby achieving CdS protection and electron–hole separation. It is noteworthy that the ZnFe2O4–CdS system shows slightly enhanced activity than bare CdS, especially during the first 5 h. After that, the ever-increasing H2 evolution rate over CdS/ZnFe2O4 has been observed. However, the origin accounting for this activation process remains unaddressed in this work. Overall, one main function of ZnFe2O4 is to improve the photostability of CdS. Moreover, the paramagnetism of ZnFe2O4 endows the 1D CdS–ZnFe2O4 composite photocatalyst with easy recyclability.
 Fig. 18  TEM image of ZnFe2O4 decorated CdS nanorods (A), hydrogen evolution (B) and PL spectra (C) of plain and ZnFe2O4 decorated CdS nanorods, and band structures of plain and ZnFe2O4 decorated CdS nanorods (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another study, our group has fabricated 1D CdS NWs-two dimensional (2D) BiVO4 nanosheet (NS) heterostructures (CdS–BiVO4 1D/2D HSs) through a simple electrostatic self-assembly synthetic method.220Fig. 19A shows the typical TEM image of the resultant sample, which shows 1D/2D heterostructures. As compared with bare 1D CdS NWs and 2D BiVO4 NSs, the CdS–BiVO4 1D/2D HSs display significantly improved photoactivity toward selective reduction of nitro-aromatic compounds under visible light irradiation, while blank BiVO4 is inert in this reaction system (Fig. 19B). Such a markedly enhanced photoactivity of CdS–BiVO4 1D/2D HSs is attributed to the improved separation of photo-generated charge carriers, which is confirmed by the enhanced transient photocurrent of CdS–BiVO4 1D/2D HSs as compared with blank CdS NWs and BiVO4 NSs (Fig. 19C). However, due to the low conduction band (CB) position, BiVO4 NSs cannot drive the reduction of nitro compounds. Based on the experimental results and theoretical analysis, a direct Z-scheme mechanism is proposed. As mirrored in Fig. 19D, the photogenerated electrons in the CB of BiVO4 move to the VB of the CdS, and then recombine with photogenerated holes at the CdS, completing the relay of the “Z-scheme”. This work provides a promising strategy for designing 1D CdS based hybrid photocatalysts with dissimilar dimensionalities with improved performance.
 Fig. 19  TEM image of CdS–BiVO4 1D/2D HSs (A), photocatalytic performances of blank CdS NWs, BiVO4 NSs and CdS-1% BiVO4 1D/2D HSs (B), transient photocurrent–time (I–t) curves (C) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) and Z-scheme mechanism (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By varying the Cd/S molar ratio and reaction time, Feng et al. have constructed core–shell type concentric CdS NR phase junctions (NRPJs) composed of hexagonal core and cubic shell towards photocatalytic H2 production with long-time stability.221 With the optimized Cd/S precursor molar ratio and reaction temperature, an ultrathin cubic shell forms over the hexagonal core, while pure hexagonal CdS NRs are generated in a sulfur-rich environment (Fig. 20A). The optimal CdS NRPJ sample (CS18) shows a high H2 production rate of 742.5 μmol h−1 (Fig. 20B), which is 494 times higher than that of pure hexagonal CdS NRs (CS1, 1.5 μmol h−1). Moreover, the CS18 sample shows an excellent photocatalytic stability over 400 h (Fig. 20C), which is much longer than that of blank hexagonal CdS (only about 10 h). Even under aerobic conditions, the CS18 sample can also continuously operate for over 100 h with H2 production activity superior to that of pure hexagonal CdS NRs in a vacuum by 108 times. Due to the passivation of surface trap states on hexagonal CdS and ultrathin thickness of the cubic CdS shell, the confined electrons and holes with high energy in the core will tunnel through the cubic CdS shell to the external surface for reactions. Thus, the photogenerated holes could be rapidly consumed by the sacrificial agent, resulting in improved photostability and reduced recombination probability of electron/hole pairs. This work illustrates that elaborate phase junction engineering is capable of improving photocatalytic efficiency and stability of CdS.
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustrating the formation process of concentric CdS NRPJs composed of a hexagonal core and cubic shell (A), photocatalytic H2 production rate (per 20 mg) of CS1, CS12, CS18, and CS25 (B), the photocatalytic stability of CS18 in a vacuum under visible light irradiation, λ ≥ 420 nm (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 


3.3.3 Multi-component systems. 
An ideal artificial photocatalyst for a practical application system is generally expected to have high stability, high activity, low cost, wide spectrum response, suitable band positions, effective carrier separation and transportation. In fact, so far, no single material can meet all of these requirements. Thus, it is of paramount significance to develop multi-component or multi-phase systems with functional design, for example, forming various heterojunctions (including p–n junctions,166 and Schottky junctions222 as well as Z-scheme approaches223). Recently, Li et al. have designed a smart multi-component photocatalytic system of a TiO2/CdS/Co–Pi nanostructured ternary composite.224 In this ternary composite, the TiO2 matrix provides a direct pathway for electron transport, while Co–Pi and CdS contribute to a hole transfer relay to accelerate the surface water oxidation reaction and a light absorber for wider solar spectra harvesting, respectively. Therefore, the ternary composite is capable of simultaneously enhancing light absorption, charge separation, and transport and surface water oxidation reaction for efficient and stable solar fuel production.
Apart from integrating multi-component systems, the optimization of individual material components and the heterointerface is also quite important for state-of-the-art photocatalytic materials (Fig. 21A).225 In this regard, growing attention has been paid to constructing complex low dimensional nanostructures by employing low dimensional nanobuilding blocks. For instance, Wang et al. have fabricated a novel helical CdS/ZnIn2S4 nano-heterostructure (Fig. 21B).28 The resultant well-defined 1D/2D helical CdS/ZnIn2S4 multidimensional nano-heterostructures induce the delocalized interface states, thus facilitating the charge transfer and improving the performance of photoelectrochemical cells. This work suggests that the design of complex multidimensional nano-heterostructures with optimization of individual material components and heterointerfaces can sufficiently unleash the fascinating properties of each component, thereby improving the performance of 1D CdS based hybrids.
 Fig. 21  State-of-the-art system materials engineering triangle (A). Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. TEM image of the helical CdS/ZnIn2S4 nano-heterostructure (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2014 Wiley. 

3.4 Design and construction of carbon-1D CdS heterojunctions

3.4.1 Graphene and its derivatives. 
Graphene, a one-atom-thick two-dimensional (2D) layer of the sp2 carbon lattice, has attracted considerable attention since its discovery in 2004,226 due to its outstanding mechanical, thermal, optical, and electrical properties.227–229 In particular, the excellent mobility of charge carriers at room temperature endows graphene with capability to accept/transport electrons photogenerated from band gap photoexcitation of semiconductors upon light irradiation.230,231
Our group has reported the 1D CdS nanowire-reduced graphene oxide (RGO) nanocomposite (CdS NWs–RGO NCs) via a simple electrostatic self-assembly method, followed by a hydrothermal reduction process,232,233 as displayed in Fig. 22A. Fig. 22B shows the typical TEM image of the resultant CdS NWs–RGO NCs, which demonstrates a good interfacial contact. Due to the enhanced lifetime and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 22C) and improved adsorption capacity toward aromatic nitro organics originating from the addition of RGO, the CdS NWs–RGO NCs exhibit much higher photoactivity than bare CdS NWs, as shown in Fig. 22D. Interestingly, the use of a radical scavenger for holes during the photocatalytic reduction reaction effectively inhibits the photocorrosion of 1D CdS in the composite of CdS NWs–RGO NCs. This work suggests that electron conductive graphene can be utilized to improve the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS and the photocorrosion of CdS can be effectively inhibited by controlling reaction conditions.
 Fig. 22  Schematic flowchart for synthesis of CdS NWs–RGO NCs (A), typical TEM image of CdS NWs–RGO NCs (B), transient photocurrent responses (C) and photocatalytic performance (D) of the as-prepared CdS NWs and CdS NWs–RGO NCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
In another study, Yu et al. have prepared 1D CdS–RGO hybrid photocatalysts by a one-step microwave-hydrothermal method.234Fig. 23A shows that CdS nanorods (NRs) are well dispersed on the surface of RGO sheets with intimate contact, which facilitates photo-electron transfer from the CdS NRs to the RGO sheets. Loading RGO can improve the CH4 production rate and achieve a maximum of 2.51 mmol g−1 h−1 at a RGO content of 0.5 wt%, which is ca. 12 times higher than that of bare CdS, as shown in Fig. 23B. The CdS–0.5 wt% RGO sample also shows higher activity than CdS–0.5 wt% Pt sample, indicating that RGO is a good cocatalyst for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4. The strong π–π conjugation interaction between CO2 and RGO sheet leads to higher CO2 adsorption capacities of CdS–RGO composites, which contributes to the enhanced photoactivity. However, the photostability of 1D CdS during the photocatalytic reaction conditions remains unclear.
 Fig. 23  TEM image of the G0.5 sample (A), comparison of the photocatalytic CH4-production rate of the G0, G0.1, G0.25, G0.5, G1.0, G2.0, N0.5, P0.5 and RGO samples (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, our group has constructed a CdS NWs–TiO2 NPs–RGO ternary hybrid via a simple surface charge promoted self-assembly method, as demonstrated in Fig. 24A.235 The resultant CdS NWs–TiO2 NPs–RGO (CTG) composite shows improved performance towards selective photocatalytic oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes (Fig. 24B), and reduction of 4-nitroaniline (Fig. 24C) and Cr(VI) (Fig. 24D). In the ternary composite, RGO serves as an electron “sink” to improve the transfer of photogenerated electron–hole pairs from CdS NWs. Moreover, the presence of TiO2 NPs on CdS NWs is also able to further boost the transfer of charge carriers in the ternary CTG system due to the suitable energy band match between TiO2 and CdS. Other multiple systems, such as CdS NWs–Ag NWs–RGO composite,236 and CdS NRs-cocatalysts–RGO system,114,229,237 have also been successfully constructed.
 Fig. 24  Schematic flowchart for synthesis of CdS–RGO and CdS–TiO2–RGO composite (A), photocatalytic performance of CdS NWs, CdS–RGO and CdS–TiO2–RGO composite for selective oxidation of a series of alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes (B), and reduction of 4-nitroaniline (C) and Cr(VI) (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.4.2 g-C3N4. 
Recently, carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a polymeric photocatalyst, has attracted considerable attention because of its abundance, high thermal and chemical stability, and visible-light response.238–240 Due to the lower VB maximum of CdS than that of C3N4, corrosive photogenerated holes in CdS can readily transfer to C3N4.241 Therefore, combining CdS with g-C3N4 may provide a feasible solution to deal with the low efficiency and poor photostability of 1D CdS simultaneously. For instance, Huang et al. have fabricated a core/shell CdS/g-C3N4 nanowire composite via a combined solvothermal and chemisorption method.242 The exfoliated g-C3N4 sheets are preferentially coated on the lateral surface of the 1D CdS nanowires to achieve a minimum surface energy, and thereby a thin and unclosed shell is formed with tips and some areas of the CdS nanowire uncovered. As shown in Fig. 25A, the CdS–C3N4 composite exhibits an optimal rate of photocatalytic H2 evolution up to 4152 μmol g−1 h−1 at the g-C3N4 2 wt% content, corresponding to an AQY of 4.3% at 420 nm. Although the activity is moderate, a good photostability is achieved, as confirmed by the steady H2 production rate during the 4 recycles. Moreover, most of the CdS for the CNO sample (pristine CdS) is decomposited (Fig. 25B) after 8 h irradiation, and the concentration of released Cd2+ in CN0 solution reaches 329.23 mg L−1. While the CN2 (CdS–2 wt% g-C3N4) sample displays an essentially unchanged morphology (Fig. 25C) with a low concentration of Cd2+ (29.04 mg L−1), indicating a significantly enhanced photostability. Fig. 25D shows the energy-level configuration between g-C3N4 and CdS, which favors the transfer of photogenerated electrons from g-C3N4 to CdS and the photogenerated holes from CdS to g-C3N4. This consequently results in an enhancement of the photocatalytic activity and an inhibition of the photocorrosion. The effect of the g-C3N4 amount is illustrated in Fig. 25E and F. Excess g-C3N4 may create a closed shell to prevent CdS from contacting the reaction solution, resulting in a decreased photoactivity.
 Fig. 25  Comparison of photocatalytic H2 production activities of pristine CdS nanowires (CN0) and g-C3N4-coated CdS nanowires (A), comparison of the TEM images for pristine CdS nanowires (B) and 2 wt% g-C3N4-coated CdS nanowires (C) after 8 h of light irradiation in anaerobic distilled water, schematic illustration of the energy-level configuration and the photogenerated charge-transfer process between g-C3N4 and CdS (D), the photocatalytic process on a CdS nanowire with a thin and unclosed g-C3N4 shell (E), and a CdS nanowire with a dense and closed g-C3N4 shell (F). Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
To further enhance the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, many studies have investigated the effect of cocatalysts. For instance, Du et al. have reported a CdS/g-C3N4 heterostructure nanowire loading with a Ni(OH)2 cocatalyst for efficient photocatalytic H2 production.243 As revealed in Fig. 26A, the optimal hydrogen evolution rate over Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 is 115.18 μmol mg−1 h−1, which is ca. 26 times higher than that of the CdS/g-C3N4 NR composite. Fig. 26B shows the transient photocurrent responses of the samples, which indicates that Ni(OH)2 can act as a favorable cocatalyst to promote the separation of photogenerated charges carriers. The mechanism for H2 generation over the Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 samples is demonstrated in Fig. 26C. Photogenerated electrons in the g-C3N4 are rapidly injected into the CB of the contacted core part of CdS due to the difference of CB edge potentials. The photogenerated holes in the VB of CdS migrate to the VB of g-C3N4, inhibiting the corrosion of CdS and efficiently separating the photogenerated charge carriers. The electrons on the CB of CdS can inject into the Ni(OH)2 cocatalyst and participate in the photocatalytic H2 production.
 Fig. 26  Photocatalytic H2 evolution over the Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 nanorod samples with different loading ratios of Ni(OH)2 (A), transient photocurrent–time profiles for pure g-C3N4, CdS, CdS/g-C3N4, and Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 (B), and proposed mechanism for H2 generation by these Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.5 Combined with biocatalysts
Recently, interest has been paid to constructing biohybrids by integrating biological materials with semiconductors to engineer new assemblies for solar conversion.244–247 Biocatalysts, such as bacteria and enzymes, hold great potential to significantly improve the photocatalytic performance of targeted reactions due to their outstanding features, including abundance, multiformity, high specificity and low cost. For example, in nature, three typical iron-based hydrogenases ([FeFe] hydrogenase, [FeNi] hydrogenase and [Fe] only hydrogenase)248–253 serve as efficient catalysts to highly promote proton reduction for H2 production.
In a recent study, King et al. have developed complexes of 1D CdS nanorods capped with 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) and clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase I (CaI).254Fig. 27A shows a structural model of the complex formed between CaI and MPA-capped CdS nanorods (NRs), in which CdS NRs combine with CaI via electrostatic interactions and are predicted to orient the positively charged enzyme surface near the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster toward the MPA carboxylate group. Although the CdS–CaI system exhibits an apparent quantum yield (AQY) for H2 production of 20% at 405 nm light, the peak rate of H2 production occurs within the first 30 min of illumination, followed by a slow and continuous decline in the observed rate throughout the next several hours, as displayed in Fig. 27B. When CdS–CaI complexes are illuminated, the CaI is clearly inactivated (Fig. 27C). However, a small but significant (∼20%) fraction of active CaI remained even after the photocatalytic rates had approached zero. Thus, it is proposed that the prolonged illumination of CdS–CaI results in the slow light-driven loss of MPA from the nanorod surface, which in turn leads to the progressive loss of CaI activity. Therefore, the loss of the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate is ascribed to photo-oxidation of the CdS capping ligand.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 production by the CdS/CaI complex (A), effects of long-term illumination of CdS/CaI solution (B) and effect of long-term illumination on CaI activity (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Wilker et al. have demonstrated that 1D CdS nanorods can be used to photosensitize the nitrogenase MoFe protein.245 In nitrogen-fixing bacteria, the enzymatic reduction of N2 to NH3 is catalyzed by nitrogenase enzymes and proceeds via the hydrogenation of N2 through metal–hydride intermediates, which requires a large input of chemical energy provided by the hydrolysis of adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP), as revealed in Fig. 28A. When constructing CdS NRs-nitrogenase MoFe protein biohybrids, the reduction potential of the first photoexcited state transition of CdS (−0.8 V versus NHE) is sufficiently negative to reduce the MoFe protein (−0.31 V) to drive electron transfer for catalytic reduction of N2 to NH3 (Fig. 28A). Therefore, the light harvesting replaces ATP hydrolysis to drive this enzymatic reduction. The biohybrids show a peak NH3 production rate of 315 ± 55 (mg MoFe protein)−1 min−1 at a TOF of 75 min−1, which is 63% of ATP-coupled reaction rate under optimal conditions. The ability to create complexes between nanomaterials and biocatalysts provides new photochemical models for realizing difficult light-driven catalytic transformations.
 Fig. 28  Reaction scheme for N2 reduction to NH3 by ATP-coupled reaction (A) and CdS–MoFe protein biohybrids (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2016 AAAS. 
However, combining compatible inorganic and biological components is still in its infancy. More attention in future should be paid to profound new insights into the mechanism of stepwise processes, such as semiconductor-biocatalyst electron transfer that underpins these catalytic reactions. Moreover, the poor stability, and the high cost of screen, separation and purification of the enzymes and microbes have limited their large scale application.255 It is, therefore, of great significance to develop low-cost and stable biological materials-1D CdS biohybrids photocatalysts to synergistically couple light-harvesting and catalytic functions for solar-to-chemical conversion.
4 Summary and outlook
1D CdS namomaterials represent an important category of functional materials in heterogeneous photocatalysis and the last few decades have witnessed a surge of interest in developing 1D CdS based photocatalysts. In this review, we have summarized the fundamentals and progress of 1D CdS based photocatalysts with some prominent examples in this filed, and particularly the various strategies for enhancing the photocatalytic performance of 1D CdS materials. In spite of some encouraging progress outlined in this review, more efforts should be devoted to further advancing this research topic.
Firstly, a simple yet efficient method to synthesize 1D CdS materials with high-quality and high aspect ratio at large scale and low cost is highly desirable. The development of advanced manufacturing processes for 1D CdS based nanostructure growth and assembly would be critical for the commercial adoption of 1D CdS structure based technologies.
Secondly, more attention in the future should be paid to the fabrication of spatially ordered 1D CdS architectures, such as 1D–1D branched nanostructures, 1D–2D carpet-like arrays, 1D–3D urchin-like architectures, and 2D or 3D units grown on 1D CdS substrates. Growth and alignment of 1D CdS based spatially ordered architectures can bridge the gap between the nano- and the micro- or macro-scales, which is able to help achieve collective, or optical, electrical, and mechanical properties for enhancing solar energy conversion efficiency.
Thirdly, some fundamental understandings, such as the charge kinetics across the heterojunctions of 1D CdS based artificial photoredox systems, still remain unclear. Given such a situation, further computational simulation and modeling combined with advanced characterization techniques, such as optical and X-ray absorption transient spectroscopy, are of great significance to understand the dynamics of these processes.
Last but not least, the current state-of-the-art 1D CdS based photocatalyst systems are still far from practical applications. Similar to biological systems, a full mastery of their behaviors requires us to not only understand the individual parts, but also comprehend the interfaces between them and how their interactions determine the whole performance of the entire system. Therefore, system-level engineering of devices, rather than simply focusing on the individual components, is needed to design 1D CdS based composites with optimal photocatalytic performance.
Abbreviations and acronyms

1DOne-dimensional
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
ATPAdenosine 5′-triphosphate
AQYApparent quantum yield
CBConduction band
CaIClostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase I
DDTCDiethyldithiocarbamate
DOSDensity of states
ESIElectronic supplementary information
enEthylenediamine
ISInner surface

i.s. PR
In situ photo-reduction
ISVInterstitial sulfur vacancies
IRImpregnation-reduction
MPA3-Mercaptopropionic acid
NAsNanoarrays
NHENormal hydrogen electrode
NPsNanoparticles
NRsNanorods
NRPJCsNanorod phase junctions
NSsNanosheets
N-RGONitrogen doped-RGO
NWsNanowires
OPSOne-pot solvothermal
OSOuter surface
PRPhoto-reduction
QEQuantum efficiency
RGOReduced graphene oxide
TOFTurnover of frequency
VBValence band
VZnZinc vacancies

Acknowledgements
The support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (20903022, 20903023, 21173045, and U1463204) and the Science and Technology Development of Foundation of Fuzhou University (2013-XQ-16) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, S. Liu, J. Yang, X. Fan, H. Huang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6913 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, C. Han, Y.-J. Xu, J. J. Foley Iv, D. Zhang, J. Codrington, S. K. Gray and Y. Sun, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 473 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fagnoni, D. Dondi, D. Ravelli and A. Albini, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Yu, S. M. Wong, G. Zhang, X. Sun, P. G.-Q. Lo and D.-L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033102 CrossRef .
I. McConnell, G. Li and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Biol., 2010, 17, 434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240 RSC .
R. D. Richardson, E. J. Holland and B. K. Carpenter, Nat. Commun., 2011, 3, 301 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 37 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, R. Ciriminna, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5276 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, M. Pagliaro, Y.-J. Xu and B. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3088 RSC .
W. Li, S. Xie, M. Li, X. Ouyang, G. Cui, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4190 CAS .
Q. Li, X. Li, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500010 CrossRef .
G. Lin, J. Zheng and R. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7363 CAS .
Y.-F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S.-Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3127 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Chen, T. Ling and X.-W. Du, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5602 RSC .
Y. Xu, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 591 RSC .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Catal., 2013, 303, 60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, Y. Yu, P. Zhou, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13353 CAS .
Y. Hu, X. Gao, L. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Ning, S. Xu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 5746 CrossRef .
B. Xu, P. He, H. Liu, P. Wang, G. Zhou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9352 CAS .
M. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. S. Susha, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, M. Döblinger, F. Jäckel, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 093108 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang, Y. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053 RSC .
K. R. Yoon, J. W. Ko, D.-Y. Youn, C. B. Park and I.-D. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 944 RSC .
J. Chun and J. Lee, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 4251 CrossRef CAS .
B. Weng, S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12685 RSC .
Z.-R. Tang, X. Yin, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 11758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-R. Tang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1512 CAS .
F. X. Xiao, J. Miao, H. B. Tao, S. F. Hung, H. Y. Wang, H. B. Yang, J. Chen, R. Chen and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Guo, Y. L. Min, J. C. Fan and Q. J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 2928 Search PubMed .
S. ChemieGu, Y. Chen, X. Yuan, H. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, Z. Wu and G. Zeng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79556 RSC .
T. Di, B. Zhu, J. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 775 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Wang, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, Y. Bando, D. Golberg, Y. Ma and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhai, X. Fang, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 168 RSC .
K. Wu and T. Lian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3781 RSC .
D. Appell, Nature, 2002, 419, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, Z. Li, J. Chen, S. Zhang, L. Wang and S. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15716 CAS .
J. Zhang, F.-X. Xiao, G. Xiao and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11293 RSC .
J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920 RSC .
S. Feng, J. Wu, P. Hu, Y. Chen, B. Ma, J. Peng, J. Yang and H. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12154 RSC .
G. Ma, J. Liu, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, Y. Moriya, M. Iwase, H. Nishiyama, M. Katayama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4302 RSC .
M. J. Bierman and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1050 CAS .
C. Weber, U. Becker, R. Renner and C. Klingshirn, Zeitschrift für Physik B Condensed Matter, 1988, 72, 379 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, D.-H. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466 CAS .
J. Jin, J. Yu, D. Guo, C. Cui and W. Ho, Small, 2015, 11, 5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sasikala, A. R. Shirole, V. Sudarsan, K. G. Girija, R. Rao, C. Sudakar and S. R. Bharadwaj, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16566 RSC .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348 CAS .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, A. Adrović, D. Volbers, R. Wyrwich, M. Döblinger, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Matthews, J. Catal., 1988, 111, 264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Robert and S. Malato, Sci. Total Environ., 2002, 291, 85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meissner, C. Benndorf and R. Memming, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1987, 27, 423 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Wang, J. Jin, J. Liu, Y. Li, M. Wu, L. Chen, B. Wang, X. Yang and B.-L. Su, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 188, 351 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. H. Abdel-Aal and A. Henglein, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 301 CrossRef .
D. Meissner, R. Memming, L. Shuben, S. Yesodharan and M. Grätzel, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie, 1985, 89, 121 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meissner, R. Memming and B. Kastening, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 3476 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meissner, R. Memming, B. Kastening and D. Bahnemann, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 127, 419 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Fermín, E. A. Ponomarev and L. M. Peter, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 473, 192 CrossRef .
J. S. Jang, H. G. Kim, U. A. Joshi, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5975 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Z. Liu, J. Liang and Y. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Jiang, Q. Li, X. Liu and Y. Qian, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 235, 421 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, J. Jiao, M. Coulter and L. Love, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 653 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pan, R. Liu, Q. Yang, Y. Zhu, G. Yang, B. Zou and K. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kar and S. Chaudhuri, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-Y. Xu, H. Wang, C.-W. Cheng, H.-Q. Zhang, J.-M. Cao and G.-B. Ji, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2006, 16, 105 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Wang, G. L. Zhao and G. R. Han, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 2625 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Lin, Y.-J. Hsu, S.-Y. Lu and S.-C. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2391 RSC .
C. J. Barrelet, Y. Wu, D. C. Bell and C. M. Lieber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bera, C.-H. Kim and S. I. Seok, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 532 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang, G. Y. Wang and X. Y. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 437, 47 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Liu, M. Yang, Y. Fan and J. Zhan, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 897 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yan, Y. Xie, Y. Qian and X. Liu, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1293 RSC .
S. Xiong, B. Xi, C. Wang, G. Zou, L. Fei, W. Wang and Y. Qian, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Yao, S.-H. Yu, S.-J. Liu, J.-P. Chen, X.-M. Liu and F.-Q. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Wang, G. L. Zhao and G. R. Han, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 2680 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jang, U. A. Joshi and J. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13280 CAS .
H. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Shi, M. Jing and K. Zou, Appl. Phys. A, 2008, 91, 69 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pan, S. Wang, R. Liu, C. Li and B. Zou, Small, 2005, 1, 1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Hsu, S.-Y. Lu and Y.-F. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2854 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cao, Y. Jiang, C. Wang, W. H. Wang, L. Z. Wang, M. Niu, W. J. Zhang, Y. Q. Li and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1501 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone, S. Kudera, C. Giannini, G. Ciccarella, R. Cingolani, P. D. Cozzoli and L. Manna, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3952 RSC .
A. E. Saunders, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Zhu, Z. Liu, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Saunders, A. Ghezelbash, P. Sood and B. A. Korgel, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Lian, M. Lin and Y. Chan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 672 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Feng, K. Chen, W. Fan and Q. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 3990 RSC .
Z. Zhuang, X. Lu, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. A. Zapien, Y. Y. Shan, C. Y. Geng, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Du, L. Ma, D. Jing and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Y. Liu, J. Hu, H. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1813 CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, S. Z. Qiao and J. Yu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Moradlou, N. Tedadi, A. Banazadeh and N. Naseri, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 46282 RSC .
S. Xie, X. Lu, T. Zhai, J. Gan, W. Li, M. Xu, M. Yu, Y.-M. Zhang and Y. Tong, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Lingampalli, U. K. Gautam and C. N. R. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3589 CAS .
P. Wang, Z. Geng, J. Gao, R. Xuan, P. Liu, Y. Wang, K. Huang, Y. Wan and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1709 CAS .
Z. Han, G. Chen, C. Li, Y. Yu and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1696 CAS .
X. Zhang, D. Jing, M. Liu and L. Guo, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 1720 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, N.-N. Yan, S. Huang, Q. Sun, L.-Z. Zhang and Y. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9078 CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata, K. Domen, A. Gupta, K. Yanagisawa and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17527 CAS .
W. Chen, G.-R. Duan, T.-Y. Liu, Z.-M. Jia, X.-H. Liu, S.-M. Chen and X.-J. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 3920 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chan, C.-C. Chang, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-C. Weng, K.-Y. Chen, H.-H. Lin, W.-C. Huang and S.-F. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 1630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, J. Zheng, R. Jiang and R. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 581 CAS .
L. Wang, X.-A. Wang, R. Chen, C.-Y. Wu, Y.-Q. Yu, J. Xu, J.-G. Hu and L.-B. Luo, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 063108 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Cai, T. Ji, Q. Wu, Y. Xu, X. Wang, T. Sun, L. Yang and Z. Hu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 584 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 8915 RSC .
M. Cao, P. Wang, Y. Ao, C. Wang, J. Hou and J. Qian, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 16372 RSC .
J. Fang, L. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, S. Cao, Z. Wang, L. Yin, Y. Liao and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8088 CAS .
R. M. Navarro, F. del Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4265 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sreethawong and S. Yoshikawa, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7554 CAS .
J. Jin, J. Yu, G. Liu and P. K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10927 CAS .
F. F. Schweinberger, M. J. Berr, M. Döblinger, C. Wolff, K. E. Sanwald, A. S. Crampton, C. J. Ridge, F. Jäckel, J. Feldmann, M. Tschurl and U. Heiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Berr, A. Vaneski, C. Mauser, S. Fischbach, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel and J. Feldmann, Small, 2012, 8, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Fu, S. Meng, X. Jiang, J. Wang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23732 CAS .
M. J. Berr, P. Wagner, S. Fischbach, A. Vaneski, J. Schneider, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223903 CrossRef .
K. Wu, Z. Chen, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kim, S. J. Lee, S. H. Kim, S. Kwon, K. J. Yee, H. Song, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, W.-J. Chen, Y.-H. Shen, F.-Z. Huang, C.-H. Li and S.-K. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15052 CAS .
T. Tanabe, W. Miyazawa, T. Gunji, M. Hashimoto, S. Kaneko, T. Nozawa, M. Miyauchi and F. Matsumoto, J. Catal., 2016, 340, 276 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakibli and L. Amirav, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4524 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kalisman, Y. Nakibli and L. Amirav, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1051 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh and B. Pal, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 378, 246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, K. Kailasam, D. Hollmann, M. Schroder, A. Thomas, A. Bruckner and M. Driess, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 104 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zeng and S. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhukovskyi, P. Tongying, H. Yashan, Y. Wang and M. Kuno, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6615 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, C.-J. Wang, X.-J. Lv, Y. Chen and W.-F. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 381 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, W. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Huang and L. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, L. Wu, L. Ge, Y. Li and Z. Zhao, Carbon, 2015, 92, 31 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 448 CrossRef CAS .
P.-C. Chen, X. Liu, J. L. Hedrick, Z. Xie, S. Wang, Q.-Y. Lin, M. C. Hersam, V. P. Dravid and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2016, 352, 1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mu, Q. Fu, H. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Jiang, S. Zhang, D. Tan and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, T. Wang, P. Li, L. Liu, K. Chang, M. Li and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ş. Neaţu, J. A. Maciá-Agulló, P. Concepción and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15969 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, M. Li, T. D. Dao, Y. Liu, W. Zhou, L. Liu, X. Meng, T. Nagao and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 398 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Sneed, A. P. Young, D. Jalalpoor, M. C. Golden, S. Mao, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang and C.-K. Tsung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Y. Lu, J. Zhang, L. Ge, Y. Li, C. Chen, Y. Xin, L. Wu and S. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23274 CAS .
A. K. Agegnehu, C.-J. Pan, J. Rick, J.-F. Lee, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13849 RSC .
W.-T. Chen, V. Jovic, D. Sun-Waterhouse, H. Idriss and G. I. N. Waterhouse, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 15036 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 5888 CrossRef .
S. Chen, S. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Qi, F. Zhang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 3047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, A. Ramakrishnan, A. Bétard, O. V. Khavryuchenko and R. Beranek, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, H. Xu, R. Zhang, X. Cheng, J. Xia, Y. Xu and H. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 25 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Ma, J. S. Kim, C. H. Choi and S. I. Woo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3582 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, J. Wen, Q. Gao, S. Chen, J. Li, X. Li and Y. Fang, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1680 RSC .
H. Niu, D. Zhou, X. Yang, X. Li, Q. Wang and F. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18413 CAS .
Z. Yan, X. Yu, A. Han, P. Xu and P. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22896 CAS .
J. Yu, Y. Hai and B. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4953 CAS .
J. Yu and J. Ran, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1364 CAS .
W. Chen, M. Chu, L. Gao, L. Mao, J. Yuan and W. Shangguan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2708 RSC .
L. J. Zhang, R. Zheng, S. Li, B. K. Liu, D. J. Wang, L. L. Wang and T. F. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13406 CAS .
X. Zhou, J. Jin, X. Zhu, J. Huang, J. Yu, W.-Y. Wong and W.-K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5282 CAS .
S. Cao, Y. Chen, C.-J. Wang, X.-J. Lv and W.-F. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8708 RSC .
H. Cheng, X.-J. Lv, S. Cao, Z.-Y. Zhao, Y. Chen and W.-F. Fu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Q. Yue, J. Li, J. Xu, H. Zheng and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10243 CAS .
P. Zhao, N. Cao, J. Su, W. Luo and G. Cheng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, Y. Chen, C.-C. Hou, X.-J. Lv and W.-F. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6096 CAS .
Z. Sun, H. Chen, Q. Huang and P. Du, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4964 CAS .
Q. Yue, Y. Wan, Z. Sun, X. Wu, Y.-p. Yuan and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16941 CAS .
K. Chang, X. Hai and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502555 CrossRef .
W. Ho, J. C. Yu, J. Lin, J. Yu and P. Li, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhong and R. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7631 RSC .
Z. Sun, X. Liu, Q. Yue, H. Jia and P. Du, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, J. Wen, Y. Zhong, X. Li, Y. Fang, S. Zhang and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18244 CAS .
Y. Lu, D. Chu, M. Zhu, Y. Du and P. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17355 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Z. Qiao, L. Qi and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12088 RSC .
J. He, L. Chen, Z.-Q. Yi, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 8327 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhang, T. F. Xie, D. J. Wang, S. Li, L. L. Wang, L. P. Chen and Y. C. Lu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11811 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, H. Xu, K. Lin, J. Li, H. Zhan, W. Liu and C. Li, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Lu and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13289 CAS .
X. Wang, H. Yu, L. Yang, L. Shao and L. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2015, 67, 45 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Yuan, Z.-J. Ye, H.-W. Lu, B. Hu, Y.-H. Li, D.-Q. Chen, J.-S. Zhong, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 532 CrossRef .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, L. Wang, X. Chen, J. Du and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nguyen, P. D. Tran, S. S. Pramana, R. L. Lee, S. K. Batabyal, N. Mathews, L. H. Wong and M. Graetzel, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1479 RSC .
J. He, L. Chen, F. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Chen, C. T. Au and S. F. Yin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, J. K. Kim, M. Ma, S. Y. Yim, C.-L. Lee, H. Shin and J. H. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4527 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Yin, L.-L. Li, W.-J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15258 CAS .
B. Han, S. Liu, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and Z.-R. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 298 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, D. Xu, W. Peng, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 74394 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Zheng, J. Li and P. Du, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2668 CAS .
D. Wang, T. Hisatomi, T. Takata, C. Pan, M. Katayama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., 2013, 52, 11252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, X. Wang, J. Yang, G. Liu, J. Han and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11584 CAS .
H. Yu, J. Tian, F. Chen, P. Wang and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, R. Chong, F. Zhang, Q. Xu, S. Shen, H. Han and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17734 RSC .
K. Maeda, A. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 4190 CrossRef .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, W. Kim, M. Ma, X. Shi and J. H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4803 CAS .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Zhang, L. Luo, X. Chen, Z. Wang, E. Wu, D. Su and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 15260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meng, X. Ning, T. Zhang, S.-F. Chen and X. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 11577 RSC .
X. Pan and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7184 CAS .
S. Liu, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6378 CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Zhang, B. Tian and J. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2015, 70, 30 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, F. Pan, L. Xu, M. Zheng, C. H. Sow, K. Wu, G. Q. Xu and W. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 279 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, Z. Sun, H. Jia, D. Lu and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 675 CAS .
X. Zhang, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and Z.-R. Tang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 6756 RSC .
Y. Liu, P. Zhang, B. Tian and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13849 CAS .
S. Liu, M.-Q. Yang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7193 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Dong, H. Jia, B. Xu, C. Yu and Z. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 644, 159 CrossRef CAS .
C. Singh, Devika, R. Malik, V. Kumar and S. Singhal, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 89327 RSC .
T.-H. Yu, W.-Y. Cheng, K.-J. Chao and S.-Y. Lu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7356 RSC .
J. Wu, Z. Li and F. Li, Superlattices Microstruct., 2013, 54, 146 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, S. Liu, Y.-J. Xu and Z.-R. Tang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 16476 RSC .
K. Li, M. Han, R. Chen, S.-L. Li, S.-L. Xie, C. Mao, X. Bu, X.-L. Cao, L.-Z. Dong, P. Feng and Y.-Q. Lan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, X. Li, Q. Kong, R. Long, C. Wang, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ai, H. Li, S. Liu, R. Mo and J. Zhong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5706 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19156 CAS .
M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale Horizons, 2016, 1, 185 RSC .
Q. Xiang, F. Cheng and D. Lang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weng, J. Wu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14401 CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8251 CAS .
B. Han, S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 145 CrossRef .
J. Yu, J. Jin, B. Cheng and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3407 CAS .
S. Liu, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 430 CAS .
S. Liu, B. Weng, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 861 RSC .
A. Arabzadeh, A. Salimi, M. Ashrafi, S. Soltanian and P. Servati, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 3485 CAS .
J.-C. Wang, H.-C. Yao, Z.-Y. Fan, L. Zhang, J.-S. Wang, S.-Q. Zang and Z.-J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3765 CAS .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, J. Oh, S. Park, Y. Shim and S. Park, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, B. Chang, Y. Tian, F. Xi and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3083 CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317 CAS .
Z. Yan, Z. Sun, X. Liu, H. Jia and P. Du, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4748 RSC .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chaudhary, T. W. Woolerton, C. S. Allen, J. H. Warner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 58 RSC .
W. Wang, T. Yu, Y. Zeng, J. Chen, G. Yang and Y. Li, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2014, 13, 1590 CAS .
W.-J. Liang, F. Wang, M. Wen, J.-X. Jian, X.-Z. Wang, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Caputo, M. A. Gross, V. W. Lau, C. Cavazza, B. V. Lotsch and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11722 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Wilker, K. E. Shinopoulos, K. A. Brown, D. W. Mulder, P. W. King and G. Dukovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Zadvornyy, J. E. Lucon, R. Gerlach, N. A. Zorin, T. Douglas, T. E. Elgren and J. W. Peters, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2012, 106, 151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shima, O. Pilak, S. Vogt, M. Schick, M. S. Stagni, W. Meyer-Klaucke, E. Warkentin, R. K. Thauer and U. Ermler, Science, 2008, 321, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Two tables on 1D CdS–MoS2 systems and 1D CdS-cocatalyst systems, respectively. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06373jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustrations of the generation and separation process of charge carriers in a 1D nanostructure (A), and illustration showing the excitation process and possible reactions occurring on a semiconductor under light irradiation (B), partial DOS for the electronic orbital of Cd and S atoms (C), and migration of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the outer surface (OS) and in the inner surface (IS) under solar light irradiation (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 
	(1)
CdS + 4h+ + 2H2O + O2 → Cd2+ + SO42− + 4H+	(2)
O2 + 4e− + 2H+ → 2OH−	(3)
	(4)
CdS + 2h+ → Cd2+ + S	(5)

 	Scheme 2  Growth mechanism of the 1D CdS nanowires with Cd2(S2CNEt2)4 as a single precursor (A). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 1999 Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic representation of the mechanism with non-single precursor (B). In the first step, the nuclei undergo the transformation to a microsphere with nanosheets covering the surface; in the second step, the nanorods are formed on the surface; in the last stage nanorods grow to nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 1  Growth mechanism of the 1D Cd0.8Zn0.2S solid-solution nanowires (A) and SEM (B) and TEM (C) images of the as-prepared sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the fabrication of homogeneous NixCd1−xS NR photocatalysts (A), and SEM image of the Ni0.01Cd0.99S sample (B) and Ni0.05Cd0.95S sample (C), cycling runs for photocatalytic degradation of RhB solution in the presence of the Ni0.01Cd0.99S sample under test conditions (D), and XRD patterns before and after cycling runs (E). Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2015 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) is the comparison of H2 evolution rates of: (a) CdS–P and platinized CdS–P samples, (b) CdS–N and platinized CdS–N (0.06% Pt) samples prepared by different deposition routes, (c) different noble metal-modified CdS–N (0.06% M, M = Pt, Pd, or Ru) and (d) different amounts of Pt modified CdS–N samples prepared by the OPS method. Successive test runs for the HER on Pt/CdS–N under visible light irradiation (B), (C) XRD, (D) UV-vis DRS spectra, and (E and F) SEM images of the Pt/CdS–N samples before and after the HER test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of quantum efficiencies for Pt-decorated CdS nanorods using SO32−, TEA, EDTA4+, and MeOH as hole scavengers. Data for different ligands (i.e., MPA and cysteine) are shown (A), typical TEM images of Pt-decorated CdS nanorods before and after four hours of hydrogen generation: (B and C) SO32−, (D and E) TEA, (F and G) EDTA4+, (H and I) MeOH are used as hole scavengers and MPA as a stabilizing ligand; schematic plot of the energy levels of the electrons of SO32−, TEA, EDTA4+, and MeOH that are involved in the reduction of the photo-hole vs. vacuum and on normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale (J). Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2012 AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of the nanoparticle photocatalyst depicting the photocatalytic cycle. (A) TEM micrographs of CdSe@CdS nanorod photocatalysts with single (B) and double (C) Pt co-catalysts, photocatalytic quantum efficiencies for the hydrogen reduction half-reaction obtained with the two samples (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time resolved emission decay curves of different Au–CdS interfaces (A), a schematic of carrier relaxation processes in Au–CdS composites as a function of their interface contact area (B, where 〈ex〉, 〈gr〉, kb, and kt represent the excited state, ground state, rate due to radiative recombination, and rate due to the trapping state), change in concentration of salicylic acid (−lnC/Co) as a function of time (t) for various bare and Au–CdS nano-junctions under UV light (C), degradation of salicylic acid after recycling with bare CdS and Au–CdS composites under UV light irradiation of 2 h (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2013 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  HAADF-STEM image of the Ni-decorated CdS nanorods (A) and schematic of the photocatalytic generation of H2 under the proposed hole shuttle mechanism (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) TEM image (inside picture, SAED pattern) and (B) HRTEM image of the as-prepared CdS–3% Co3O4 sample, (C) the average rate of H2 evolution over the photocatalysts: (a) CdS; (b) CdS–1% Co3O4; (c) CdS–3% Co3O4; (d) CdS–5% Co3O4, and (D) repeated time courses of photocatalytic H2 evolution on the CdS–3% Co3O4 sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photocatalytic H2 generation rate of C0, C0.5, C4.8, C6.5, C9.1 and C100 in 30% triethanolamine (TEOA) aqueous solution under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm) (A), time course of photocatalytic H2 production over the sample C6.5 and the bare CdS NWs; every three hours, the reaction system is bubbled with N2 for 1 h to remove the H2 inside (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Time-dependent photocatalytic H2 for a series of photocatalysts (A), cycling test of photocatalytic H2 for MC-10 (B) and illustration of the difference between the adhesion of bulk MoS2 and ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets on CdS NWs (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the formation of the M-t–CdS NRs (A), comparison of photocatalytic H2 production activities between CdS NRs, 1 wt% Pt/CdS NRs, 3.5 wt% MoS2/CdS NRs, 3.5 wt% M-t–CdS NRs, and 3.5 wt% Pt/CdS NRs (B); time course of H2 evolution on 3.5 wt% M-t–CdS NRs (C); and schematic representation of photocatalytic H2 generation on M-t–CdS NRs and electron transfer at tipped MoS2 (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  The rate of H2 evolution on Ni2P/CdS NR photocatalysts loaded with different amounts of Ni2P (A), the time courses of H2 evolution and apparent quantum yield photocatalyst (B), TEM image (C) and high-magnification HRTEM image (D) of 0.5 wt% Ni2P/CdS NRs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM image of the CdS NRs/N-RGO hybrid (A–C), photocatalytic water splitting of CdS NRs, CdS NRs/N-RGO, MoS2/CdS NRs, Pt/CdS and MoS2/CdS NRs/N-RGO hybrids in natural water under solar light irradiation (D), schematic illustration (E) and band position diagrams (F) of the MoS2/CdS NRs/N-RGO hybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration showing the possible transfer way of photogenerated charge pairs and the artificial photoredox reactions in 1D CdS nanostructures loaded with spatially separated cocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 15  Different types of semiconductor heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 16  Hydrogen evolution rate in a 20 mL aqueous solution containing 0.75 M Na2S and 1.05 M Na2SO3 in the presence of 1.0 mg of CdS/ZnS NR photocatalysts (A). (A) CdS/ZnS-0, (B) CdS/ZnS-0.1, (C) CdS/ZnS-0.5, (D) CdS/ZnS-1.0, (E) CdS/ZnS-1.5, and (F) CdS/ZnS-5.0; cyclic H2 evolution curves for the 1.0 mg CdS/ZnS-0.5 NR photocatalyst (B); schematic illustration of the mechanisms for the photocatalytic H2 production over core–shell CdS/ZnS NRs under visible light irradiation (C and D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  A schematic illustration of synthesis of the branched hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (A), SEM images of the CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (B), photocatalytic performance of CdS NWs, blank ZnO and branched hierarchical CdS–ZnO nanocomposite for selective oxidation of thioanisole (C) under artificial solar light irradiation for 2 h and 4-nitroaniline reduction under artificial solar light irradiation for 1 min (D) and a schematic diagram illustrating the photocatalytic redox reactions over the CdS–ZnO nanocomposite (E). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  TEM image of ZnFe2O4 decorated CdS nanorods (A), hydrogen evolution (B) and PL spectra (C) of plain and ZnFe2O4 decorated CdS nanorods, and band structures of plain and ZnFe2O4 decorated CdS nanorods (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  TEM image of CdS–BiVO4 1D/2D HSs (A), photocatalytic performances of blank CdS NWs, BiVO4 NSs and CdS-1% BiVO4 1D/2D HSs (B), transient photocurrent–time (I–t) curves (C) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) and Z-scheme mechanism (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustrating the formation process of concentric CdS NRPJs composed of a hexagonal core and cubic shell (A), photocatalytic H2 production rate (per 20 mg) of CS1, CS12, CS18, and CS25 (B), the photocatalytic stability of CS18 in a vacuum under visible light irradiation, λ ≥ 420 nm (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  State-of-the-art system materials engineering triangle (A). Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. TEM image of the helical CdS/ZnIn2S4 nano-heterostructure (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic flowchart for synthesis of CdS NWs–RGO NCs (A), typical TEM image of CdS NWs–RGO NCs (B), transient photocurrent responses (C) and photocatalytic performance (D) of the as-prepared CdS NWs and CdS NWs–RGO NCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  TEM image of the G0.5 sample (A), comparison of the photocatalytic CH4-production rate of the G0, G0.1, G0.25, G0.5, G1.0, G2.0, N0.5, P0.5 and RGO samples (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic flowchart for synthesis of CdS–RGO and CdS–TiO2–RGO composite (A), photocatalytic performance of CdS NWs, CdS–RGO and CdS–TiO2–RGO composite for selective oxidation of a series of alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes (B), and reduction of 4-nitroaniline (C) and Cr(VI) (D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Comparison of photocatalytic H2 production activities of pristine CdS nanowires (CN0) and g-C3N4-coated CdS nanowires (A), comparison of the TEM images for pristine CdS nanowires (B) and 2 wt% g-C3N4-coated CdS nanowires (C) after 8 h of light irradiation in anaerobic distilled water, schematic illustration of the energy-level configuration and the photogenerated charge-transfer process between g-C3N4 and CdS (D), the photocatalytic process on a CdS nanowire with a thin and unclosed g-C3N4 shell (E), and a CdS nanowire with a dense and closed g-C3N4 shell (F). Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Photocatalytic H2 evolution over the Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 nanorod samples with different loading ratios of Ni(OH)2 (A), transient photocurrent–time profiles for pure g-C3N4, CdS, CdS/g-C3N4, and Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 (B), and proposed mechanism for H2 generation by these Ni(OH)2–CdS/g-C3N4 (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 production by the CdS/CaI complex (A), effects of long-term illumination of CdS/CaI solution (B) and effect of long-term illumination on CaI activity (C). Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Reaction scheme for N2 reduction to NH3 by ATP-coupled reaction (A) and CdS–MoFe protein biohybrids (B). Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2016 AAAS.	 
1D	One-dimensional
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
ATP	Adenosine 5′-triphosphate
AQY	Apparent quantum yield
CB	Conduction band
CaI	Clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase I
DDTC	Diethyldithiocarbamate
DOS	Density of states
ESI	Electronic supplementary information
en	Ethylenediamine
IS	Inner surface

i.s. PR	
In situ photo-reduction
ISV	Interstitial sulfur vacancies
IR	Impregnation-reduction
MPA	3-Mercaptopropionic acid
NAs	Nanoarrays
NHE	Normal hydrogen electrode
NPs	Nanoparticles
NRs	Nanorods
NRPJCs	Nanorod phase junctions
NSs	Nanosheets
N-RGO	Nitrogen doped-RGO
NWs	Nanowires
OPS	One-pot solvothermal
OS	Outer surface
PR	Photo-reduction
QE	Quantum efficiency
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
TOF	Turnover of frequency
VB	Valence band
VZn	Zinc vacancies
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Two tables on 1D CdS–MoS2 systems and 1D CdS-cocatalyst systems, respectively. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06373j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
