Stimuli-responsive polydopamine-based smart materials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00374G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00374G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8319-8343Stimuli-responsive polydopamine-based smart materials

        
          
            Peng 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengbiao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yiyun 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yiwen 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China. E-mail: ywli@scu.edu.cn
bState and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Novel Functional Polymeric Materials, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Polymer Design and Application, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, P. R. China. E-mail: wangzhao@suda.edu.cn
cShanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, P. R. China
Received 
      15th April 2021
    First published on 8th June 2021AbstractStimuli responsiveness has long been a fascinating feature of smart material design. Polydopamine (PDA), a nature inspired polymeric pigment, exhibits excellent photo-responsive properties and has active surface functionality for loading various responsive motifs, making it a promising candidate for the construction of stimuli-responsive smart functional materials. PDA has long been considered as a robust coating material, but its responsive feature has rarely been emphasized in the past reviews. Herein, we present the first effort to summarize recent advances in the design strategies, responsive mechanisms, and diverse applications of stimuli-responsive PDA-based smart materials; the stimuli include light, pH, chemicals, temperature, humidity, electric fields, mechanical force, magnetic fields, and ultrasound. Moreover, the current trends, challenges, and future directions of stimuli-responsive PDA-based materials are also elaborated.
Peng Yang
Peng Yang obtained his MS degree from the College of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University in 2020. Then he continued to pursue his PhD degree in the College of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University, under the supervision of Prof. Yiwen Li. His current research interests include the synthesis and application of polydopamine and polyphenol based nanomaterials.
Fang Zhu
Fang Zhu received his MS degree from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Henan University, in 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, under the supervision of Prof. Yiwen Li. Currently, his research interests mainly focus on deferoxamine supramolecular drugs.
Zhengbiao Zhang
Zhengbiao Zhang received his BS degree in 2000 and his PhD degree in 2007 from Soochow University. Since 2000, he has worked as an assistant professor (2000), associate professor (2009) and full professor (2013–present) in Soochow University. His Postdoctoral Fellowship was in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering of the National University of Singapore in 2007–2008 (one year). In 2012–2013, he was appointed as a Visiting Scholar in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering of The University of Akron. In 2015, he worked as a Visiting Professor in the Graduate School of Engineering, Department of Applied Chemistry, Nagoya University. His current research interests include the precision synthesis of polymers with well-defined molecular weight, architecture, tacticity and sequence; structure/property (function) relationships of precision polymers; recyclable and biomimetic polymers; and design and synthesis of functional polymers.
Yiyun Cheng
Yiyun Cheng received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2008 and was a postdoctoral fellow at Washington University in St. Louis. He joined East China Normal University (ECNU) and started independent research at 2010. He received the Distinguished Young Scholars Award from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC), and the Young Chemist Award from the Chinese Chemical Society. He was the editorial board member of Biomaterials Science, Chinese Chemical Letters, Giant, etc. He has published more than 150 peer-reviewed articles. His research interests are focused on the development of smart polymers and nanoparticles for drug delivery.
Zhao Wang
Zhao Wang received his BS degree from East China University of Science and Technology and his MS degree from the University of Akron. In 2013, he moved to the University of California, San Diego, for his PhD study, working with Prof. Nathan Gianneschi mainly on polydopamine-based polymeric materials. In 2018, he joined Aaron Esser-Kahn's group as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Chicago, where he explored mechanically controlled polymerization and material strengthening. He joined Soochow University in 2021 as professor of polymer chemistry. His current research focuses on the development of chemistry tools for new forms of stimuli-responsive polymerization processes.
Yiwen Li
Yiwen Li received his BS in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (2008) and PhD in Polymer Science from the University of Akron (2013). After two years’ postdoctoral training at the University of California, San Diego, he began his independent career at Sichuan University in 2016, where he is currently a professor at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, and the State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering. His current research interests focus on bioinspired polymers including synthetic melanin and polyphenolic materials. He has published 120+ peer-reviewed articles, and served as the associate editor for Materials Express (ASP) and editorial board members for Giant (Elsevier) and Molecules (MDPI).
1. Introduction
In nature, living systems can sense environmental stimuli and change their properties accordingly (e.g., the folding of mimosa plants and the skin tone change of cephalopods). Inspired by this, many efforts have been put into developing stimuli-responsive materials that are capable of changing their structures and/or chemical/physical properties in response to one or more external stimuli (such as light, pH, chemicals, temperature, humidity, mechanical force, electrical fields, and magnetic fields).1–3 Despite the proliferation of stimuli responsive systems,4–6 many established methods are carried out by sophisticated synthesis procedures and molecular architecture design to achieve required performances. Thus, a simple but powerful method to access materials with excellent responsive properties is highly desirable for extensive research studies and practical applications.
1.1 Polydopamine (PDA)
As an artificial analogue of natural melanin, PDA can be easily prepared on a large scale via the self-polymerization of dopamine monomer (Fig. 1).7 In one well-known reaction pathway, dopamine was first oxidized into a quinone structure, which might either undergo oxidation to form 5,6-dihydroxyindole (DHI), or react intermolecularly via catechol-to-catechol coupling.8,9 The existing pathways of DHI oxidation are largely speculative, but the catechol-to-catechol coupling mechanism has been applied to PDA-based surface modification. Finally, the cross-linking reaction between those intermediates occurred and the final PDA structure was formed. It was usually considered that the degree of DHI polymerization was limited to eight units, including a group of stable tetramers.10,11 However, the polymeric nature of PDA has been proved and oligomers have reached up to 30 units (and even higher) by means of single-molecule force spectroscopy very recently.12 Besides the covalent polymerization, the formation of PDA also involved a non-covalent self-assembly pathway (Fig. 1). Lee and co-workers found a vast amount of unreacted dopamine coupled with DHI by high-performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry.13 The resulting physical complex was entrapped in the covalent backbone stably due to the existence of various intermolecular interactions, including ionic, cation–π, π–π stacking, quadrupole–quadrupole, T-shape, and hydrogen bonding interactions.13,14 Thus, a key to revealing the PDA structure is probing the mystery of chemical disorder from four main levels: various intermediates, degree of polymerization, stacking structures, and intrinsic properties (Fig. 1). Though the mystery still remains unsolved, it became gradually clearer that the properties of PDA are greatly influenced by slight changes in disordered structures.15,16 For example, the relationship between the hierarchically assembled structure and the unusual nonlinear dynamics was important to the light absorption properties of PDA.17 More recently, our studies on co-polymerization of different monomers with dopamine revealed that the chemical complexity was another key factor in regulating the light absorption and antioxidant properties of PDA-based materials.18,19 The chemical complexity rather than simple chemical disorder is another key point to the uniqueness of PDA,20 which benefits the design and construction of innovative multifunctional materials based on PDA by rational interventions at different levels of complexity.
 Fig. 1  Proposed covalent and non-covalent pathways during the formation of PDA. 
1.2 Non-responsive feature of PDA-based materials
PDA has been extensively used as a robust coating material in biology, medicine, and catalysis.9,21–34 Consisting of crosslinked units with great thermal stability, this material has a high molecular weight.35 PDA was also found to be non-fluorescent in nature as the high molecular weight polymer chains form an intramolecularly or intermolecularly stacked structure that is unfavorable for fluorescence emission. Instead, PDA showed an excellent fluorescence quenching ability when it encountered fluorophores. This limits the use of PDA as a fluorescence-responsive material. But further engineering of the inherent stacked microstructure of PDA can turn its non-fluorescent nature into a fluorescent active material,36 which will be discussed in detail later. The highly crosslinked structure helps resist the dissolution of the material in organic solvents and degradation by enzymes. This chemically and thermally stable feature enables its use for biomedical applications and structural coloration. Though unreacted dopamine monomers/oligomers were incorporated into PDA structures during synthesis, the strong non-covalent interactions prevent their release from PDA under physiological conditions.
1.3 Responsive mechanisms of PDA-based materials
Though PDA has many non-responsive features, recent studies highlight the active side of PDA – it also exhibits various intriguing responsive properties for the construction of stimuli-responsive materials.37–40 The responsive feature comes from three aspects: (1) PDA is a photo-responsive material that has an excellent light absorption ability due to its high molar extinction coefficient. The relaxation of photoexcited materials after light stimulation produces heat. Strategies to either increase the light absorption or suppress the nonthermal radiative transition process have been demonstrated to enhance the photoconversion performance and thus was applied for photothermal therapy and seawater desalination.41,42 (2) The fluorescent nature of PDA is sensitive to its chemical composition and aggregation state. It was found that the approaches to stop the polymerization at early stages, forming oligomers instead of high molecular weight polymers, and attenuation of the π–π stacking interaction via chemical/physical treatment can lead to the enhancement in fluorescence emission. Then, these PDA-based fluorescent materials were used in chemical detection.36 (3) External stimuli-responsive motifs can be introduced through either chemical conjugation or physical blending to achieve features responsive to stimuli, such as temperature, humidity, electric fields, mechanical force, magnetic fields, and ultrasound. In one typical example, the metal chelation of PDA could improve its light absorption, resulting in a higher photothermal conversion efficiency compared with pristine PDA.43 In addition, PDA-based materials can be further optimized by simple chemical modification or physical blending of active ingredients to maximize the stimuli-response.
In this review paper, we summarize the synthesis of PDA-based stimuli-responsive materials in the form of individual nanoparticles, PDA-based complex nanostructures, and PDA-based composites. We focus on the recent efforts that exploit stimuli such as ultrasound, chemicals, mechanical force, humidity, and electric fields that have not yet been as heavily considered, despite their unique potential. Most of the current reviews mainly focus on PDA as a robust coating material for biomedical applications, and this is indeed completely different from exploring the responsive mechanisms, which thus guides the design of stimuli-responsive PDA materials proposed in this review. In particular, the fundamentals, including responsive mechanisms and structural engineering towards better responsive performance, are ignored. Our intention is not only to review the material fabrication strategies and their applications, but also to emphasize the fundamentals and importance of the structural engineering of PDA, allowing the transformation from non/low to high responsive performances. Lastly, we discuss the applications of stimuli-responsive PDA-based materials for theranostics, sensors, actuation, self-healing materials, optical devices, seawater desalination, and others (Fig. 2). We believe this review article will provide the first summary specifically for this new type of material and will complement polydopamine research.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of different stimuli-responsive PDA-based materials for different applications. 
2. Structural engineering to improve the responsive features
The typical oxidative polymerization of dopamine in alkaline environments results in stable PDA with weak responsive performance. Recent reports have revealed that the structural engineering of PDA-based materials is an effective approach to expand and enhance responsive features.19,44 This includes (1) structural engineering of PDA nanoparticles by co-polymerization of other monomers or metal ions to tune their chemical composition and molecular packing; (2) structural engineering of PDA-based complex nanostructures with an emphasis on surface chemistry and coating methodologies; and (3) structural engineering of PDA-based composites and the underlying effect from both fillers and the matrix phase (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of three strategies to prepare stimuli-responsive PDA materials. 
2.1 Strategy for engineering PDA nanoparticles
Mimicking the formation of natural melanin in organisms, enzymatic oxidation reaction, a benign and environmentally friendly procedure, has been proposed for the synthesis of PDA, which preserved the activity of the enzyme entrapped in PDA.45 Subsequently, the chemical oxidative polymerization method has been developed as the alternative for mass production of PDA materials, especially for nanoparticles (NPs) with tunable size, shape, and morphology. Although large sized nanoparticles (>50 nm) were easily achieved, ultrasmall PDA synthesis remained a challenge in that study. The later research proposed a PEGylation method to obtain ultrasmall PDA NPs.46 In particular, the PDA NPs showed size-dependent absorption spectra and they were not significantly altered by scattering, where small particles exhibited lower attenuation at longer wavelengths compared to larger particles. Thus, the photothermal effect of PDA NPs would increase with the increase of particle size.47 The PDA NPs with larger size contained higher molecular weight stacking subunits of the same oligomer sheets, resulting in π-electron delocalization and lowering the energy gap. The geometric preference would be enhanced with the increase in the quantity of stacked oligomers forcing their lateral faces with each other efficiently and forming numerous quinhydrone complexes, which consequently caused red-shift and broadened chromophore bands.17 Recently, our group developed co-polymerization strategies to prepare enhanced light-responsive PDA by co-polymerization of dopamine and other monomers (e.g., 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) and arginine) (Fig. 3a).18,48 These monomers reacted with each other to form donor–acceptor pair structures by covalent bonding so that the energy bandgap was narrowed and the light absorption was enhanced. Furthermore, the co-polymerization strategy was applied during the dopamine polymerization to introduce external stimuli-responsive functions into PDA NPs (Fig. 3).48–52 The co-polymerization method is compatible with the existing synthetic protocols so that extra burden on synthesis is avoided. In the study by Du and co-workers, pH-responsive PDA–doxorubicin (DOX) conjugate NPs were developed by co-polymerization of dopamine and a dopamine–DOX prodrug.53 The prodrug was synthesized using an acid-labile hydrazone bond, and the resulting hybrid NPs showed remarkable pH-dependent size change and drug release. The prodrug strategy is commonly compatible with many polymerization methods and offers facile access to inserting different types of responsive bonds. It also adds the formulation options and enhances the biopharmaceutical performance. But the effects of different dopamine-derived monomers on polymerization kinetics and non-covalent stacking gained less attention and should be explored in the future. Additionally, the luminescence properties of PDA NPs can be regulated by adjusting the aggregation state or introducing additives.54–57 The fluorescence of PDA NPs could also be quenched by changing the electron configuration of PDA, thus being responsive to chemicals for detection.36 These examples show the importance of structural engineering of PDA NPs in achieving desirable responsive performance, but its limitations on their light, pH and fluorescence responsiveness. The co-polymerization strategy offers a simple way to introduce additional responsive modules in the future, especially those towards mechanical force, electric fields and enzymes that have been less explored in the past.
2.2 Strategy for engineering PDA-based complex nanostructures
In 2007, Messersmith's group reported the universal one-step formation of adhesive PDA films by the self-polymerization of dopamine on various substrates.34 Since then, PDA has emerged as a universal material for the construction of complex nanostructures for numerous applications owing to its excellent biocompatibility and colloidal stability (Fig. 3b).58–62 After coating, these materials inherited the corresponding responsive behavior from PDA, including light- (photothermal effect) and pH-responsive behaviors.63–67 For instance, Zheng and co-workers developed magnetic composite particles with PDA as the shell and Fe3O4 particles as the core.68 The composite particles surprisingly had an enhanced photothermal effect compared to pure PDA particles. This was on account of the higher near infrared (NIR) absorption after the PDA coating. It was further proved that the temperature change of the composite particles increased with the increase of the PDA shell thickness, suggesting the tunable light-responsive capacity of the composite particles by controlling the thickness of the PDA shell. In addition, PDA can also be deposited on polymer substrates by immersion69–72 and electrochemical synthesis, thus imparting the photo-responsive feature to the substrates.73 It was found that the higher dopamine concentration would lead to a thicker coating. However, the continuous increase of dopamine concentration (beyond 2 mg mL−1) showed a negligible influence on the coating thickness. The thickness could be tuned by adjusting the immersion time. The thicker PDA coating was found to absorb more light and led to higher temperature response.74 Taking advantage of this, the PDA coating with a thickness gradient would achieve the desirable spatial control of the light response that is crucial in many applications.
PDA has also been used as a universal core material for delivery since the abundant functional groups on the surfaces of PDA materials offer latent reactivity for further modification of functional cargoes.75–78 The loaded cargoes could be released effectively when exposed to NIR light irradiation or an acid stimulus. In addition, stimuli-responsive molecules, such as stearyl methacrylate, undecylenic acid, and perfluorocarbon, with terminal thiol or amino groups could be conjugated onto PDA materials’ surfaces via Schiff base and/or Michael addition reactions.79,80 The controlled synthesis of temperature-responsive polymers, including poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA),81,82 poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM),83 and random copolymers of 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate and oligo-(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (P(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA)),84 from PDA surfaces was achieved via atom-transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) with a thickness range from 11 to 90 nm. It was found that the thickness of the polymer corona was important for the triggered release kinetics. The thick polymer corona might lead to a slow-release rate. It slowed down the diffusion of the stimulus, causing lower response sensitivity and a longer response time. However, the above-mentioned systems have been limited to the development of temperature-responsive polymers so far. The incorporation of responsive bonds may be an alternative way to enable PDA materials to exhibit other active responses. It has been shown that phenylboronic acid can react with phenolic groups on a PDA surface to form the acid liable boronic ester bond that is sensitive to high temperature and low pH.85–88 Besides, many other responsive interactions, including pH-responsive hydrazone bond, pH-responsive benzoic–imine bond, glutathione-responsive disulfide bond, and enzyme-responsive peptide bond interactions, could also be employed for the construction of PDA responsive materials for their accessibility in more complicated environments.53,89–91 The current challenge lies in developing chemistry tools for building more types of responsive bonds and integrating multiple response mechanisms without any influence on each other.
2.3 Strategy for engineering PDA-based composites
PDA NPs, as nanofillers, can participate in the construction of composite materials via crosslinking and blending. The surface functional groups provide reaction sites to interact and stabilize the matrix networks via physical or chemical crosslinking.92–100 Temperature-responsive matrixes were widely used in PDA-based composites for achieving temperature responsive or light responsive features. The composites were also endowed with the light responsive features from PDA with tunable performance by varying the content of PDA. However, the transparency of the matrix might influence the response behavior of the composites owing to the penetration problem. In comparison, colloidal hydrogels constructed from all NP contents show high sensitivity to various stimuli. Recently, He et al. reported a pH-responsive colloidal hydrogel by the physical crosslinking of PDA NPs and gelatin NPs.91 The formation of the binary colloidal gel was triggered by the change in pH value. Under basic conditions, two components were dispersed well in the solution with negative charges at the surface. However, the pH sensitive gelatin NPs reversed the charge to positive at pH lower than the isoelectric point. Thus, the interparticle network was formed due to the electrostatic interactions between PDA and gelatin NPs. The pH-responsive release was further achieved by pre-loading therapeutic drugs or other functional cargoes (Fig. 3c). Compared with monolith-based scaffolds, colloidal hydrogels could alleviate the transport barriers without any influence on mechanical properties. They offered quick response to local stimuli. The pseudoplastic behavior of the colloidal hydrogel further made it a promising candidate for the fabrication of moldable and shape-specific materials. But the low optical transparency of the gel may impede its application in biomedical devices. For bulk polymer materials, the hydrophilic nature of PDA guarantees its great compatibility with polar polymers, as well as hydrogels.101 However, nonpolar polymer substrates, such as poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), would cause significant phase separation and lead to weakened response performance. To solve this, grafting these polymers from PDA surfaces was proposed.102 After grafting, the good interfacial adhesion from PDA might enhance the mechanical properties and endow the composites with stimuli-responsive capacity.
3. Types of stimuli/triggers
PDA is an independent responsive module for light and redox stimuli. Also, the versatile catechol chemistry of PDA affords additional responsiveness to the changes in chemical and physical properties. The surface functions can be further tuned by simple and abundant surface chemistry. To date, various PDA-based stimuli-responsive platforms have been developed, including but not limited to the response to a single stimulus – pH, chemicals, humidity, temperature, light, mechanical force, electric field, and ultrasound – or certain combinations of them. In the sections below, we will discuss the trigger design principles and typical examples of PDA-based stimuli-responsive materials with single-, dual- and multi-stimuli-responsive features.
3.1 Reflections on trigger design
In general, most of the PDA-based stimuli-responsive platforms are designed to meet the requirements of applications. But several design principles shall be considered in advance. The design of pH-, chemical-, and humidity-responsive systems relies on the diffusion kinetics of the stimulus. Thus, the concentration, viscosity and temperature can affect the response performance. Similarly, the issue of heat transfer might be significant for bulk materials to respond to temperature change. Therefore, the choice of an appropriate matrix is important for PDA-based composites. In comparison, light has the fastest speed even in solids, but photo-responsive systems, especially those using short wavelength ultraviolet (UV) light, often suffer from the penetration problem. Sunlight and even infrared light are good candidates to provide better penetration depth compared to UV light. As an alternative, field-stimuli (e.g., mechanical force and electrical fields) that have been less explored could be applied or removed near immediately, which might be convenient for signal control. In Table 1, we summarize stimuli-responsive PDA materials with various applications and categorized them based on their trigger design.
Table 1 Stimuli-responsive PDA-based materials and their applications




Stimuli
Responsive moieties
Applications
Ref.




Light
PDA
Theranostics

41, 48, 89, 98 and 103





Bioimaging

104





Antibacterial materials

94, 95 and 105





Drug delivery

106





Wound healing

97





Near infrared imaging

107





Anticounterfeiting

108





Actuation

69, 70, 109 and 110





Seawater desalination

18 and 111–117





Shape memory and self-healing

74, 93, 102, 118 and 119





Photoelectric devices

120



PDA and MXene
Seawater desalination

121



pH
PDA
Controlled release

122 and 123





pH monitoring

124





Cancer therapy

125



Stearyl methacrylate and undecylenic acid
Oil/water separation

79



Chemical
PDA
Cation-π progressive assembly

126



Probe DNA
DNA detection

127 and 128



Ferrocene and hydroxyl group
H2O2 sensors

49



Fluorescent PDA
Metal ion detection

54, 57 and 129





Glutathione sensors

56





Hydrogen peroxide and glucose sensors

55



Fluorescent oligomers
Metal ion detection and bioimaging

130



Single-stranded DNA sequences
ATP semiquantification

131



Disulfide bond
Degradation

90 and 132



Temperature
Hybrid hydrogel
Cell delivery

66



PDMAEMA
Controlled release

81



PNIPAM
Separation

83





Structural coloration

133



Humidity
PDA
Structural coloration

134





Self-standing materials

135





Self-healing materials

136



Electric field
PDA
E-ink

137





Cell proliferation

138





Atenolol sensors

73



Mechanic force
PDA
Self-healing materials

139





Structural coloration

140 and 141



Hybrid hydrogel
Strain sensors

61 and 142



Ultrasound
Perfluorocarbon
Bioimaging

80



pH and light
PDA
Theranostics

62, 63, 76, 77 and 143–147





Controlled release

60 and 65





Wound healing

92



PDA and hydrazine bond
Theranostics

53



PDA and glycol chitosan
Antibacterial materials

59



PDA and boronate ester bond
Theranostics

85 and 86



pH and temperature
Polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) and PNIPAM
Membrane functionalization

71



P(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA)
Controlled release

84



PDMAEMA
Controlled release

82



pH and chemical
PDA
Controlled release

148



pH and magnetic field
PDA and Fe3O4
DNA capture

149



pH and ultrasound
PDA
Controlled release

64



Light and chemical
PDA and Fe2+
Theranostics

150



Light and magnetic field
PDA, chlorin e6, and Mn2+
Theranostics

151



PDA and Fe3+
Theranostics

75



PDA and Mn2+
Theranostics

152



Light and temperature
PDA and PNIPAM
Controlled release

153 and 154



PDA and polyurethane
Self-healing materials

155



Light and ultrasound
PDA and perfluorocarbon
Theranostics

156



PDA and perfluorocarbon
Bioimaging

157



pH, light, and chemical
PDA
Theranostics

158 and 159



PDA, disulfide bond, and chlorambucil
Theranostics

44



PDA, perfluorocarbon, and disulfide bond
Theranostics

67



PDA and manganese carbonyl
Theranostics

160



pH, light, and temperature
PDA, PAA, and PDEAA
Adsorption

96



pH, light, and enzyme
PDA and gelatin
Theranostics

91





3.2 Single stimulus-responsive PDA materials
A single stimulus-responsive material represents the simplest type of stimuli-responsive system in which only one kind of external signal can induce the desired response and achieve a specific purpose. Compared with multi-stimuli-responsive systems, single stimulus-responsive PDA materials are more easily prepared and have more straightforward response mechanisms.

3.2.1 Light-responsive PDA materials. 
Light is widely used as a non-invasive and easily controllable stimulus. The construction of PDA-based light-responsive materials usually involves mechanisms due to the photothermal effects of PDA and conformational change of the chromophore. PDA contains various compact π-stacked microstructures formed by covalent polymerization and non-covalent self-assembly of dihydroxyindole-derived units, and shows broadband absorption properties.13 Among various photothermal conversion mechanisms, we hypothesize that thermal vibration is the major contribution, accompanied by non-radiative relaxation.161 First of all, the photoexcited electron promoted from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) was then relaxed and the absorbed light energy was converted into the vibration of atomic lattices, resulting in an increase of macroscopic temperature (Fig. 4a). Second, the photoexcited electrons returned to the low-level states and released energy by non-radiative relaxation in the form of phonons and caused local heating (Fig. 4a). Therefore, PDA has been regarded as an ideal candidate for photothermal therapy. To minimize the absorption by tissues, NIR light near 800 nm was used most widely for photothermal therapy. In 2013, Lu's group first reported the use of PDA for NIR photothermal therapy (Fig. 4b).41 The PDA NPs not only showed up to 40% photothermal conversion efficiency but also provided excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability. After irradiation within 5 min, the tumor site temperature could easily exceed 50 °C, causing cancer cell death. However, the understanding of their in vivo photothermal performance as well as the blood circulation need much more attention in future studies. Subsequently, many efforts have been devoted to achieving in situ photothermally-triggered release of drugs from PDA-based delivery systems on demand.162 The study conducted by Liu et al. demonstrated a novel NIR-induced blasting carrier-free nanodrug delivery system for tumor therapy.103 The nanodrug formed by self-assembly of DOX was co-assembled with PDA and NH4HCO3. After coating with PDA, the circulation time would be prolonged and the PDA film hindered the pre-leakage of the drug. In this study, a HeLa cell xenograft tumor model was selected and boosting drug release behavior was realized through the thermolysis of NH4HCO3. It is anticipated that other kinds of chemotherapeutic drugs as well as other disease models can also be loaded and studied in the future using a similar design.
 Fig. 4  (a) The possible photothermal mechanism of PDA. (b) Schematic illustration of a PDA NP-based photothermal therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The design of a PDA material with enhanced photothermal effects via a co-polymerization strategy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) The preparation of light-triggered multi-shape memory polymers via PDA coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) A self-cleaning photo-responsive membrane comprising a thin film of AZO and PDA. Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission from Elsevier. 
The development of PDA-based materials with advanced performances is concomitant with the knowledge of structure–function relationships. The detailed mechanism of PDA-based photothermal response is still unclear due to the structural heterogeneity and complexity of PDA. Our group proposed an energy bandgap theory to tailor the photothermal capacity of PDA (Fig. 4c).18,48 The introduction of TEMPO could form a donor–acceptor structure, which decreased the energy bandgap of PDA and benefited the electron transfer process. Therefore, the resulting PDA could absorb more light energy and the total photothermal efficiency of PDA was improved by ∼74% for 635 nm irradiation and ∼95% for 635 nm irradiation.18 In another example, the incorporation of metal ions could enhance the photothermal conversion capacity of PDA by increasing the light absorbance in the NIR region.107 We presumed that the enhancement of the photothermal effect might be contributed by two aspects. Firstly, the metal ions introduced could form a coordination complex with catechol groups, facilitating internal electron transitions and increasing the absorption cross-sectional areas.163,164 Secondly, it was believed that the introduction of metal ions during the polymerization process might tune the stacking structure of the intermediates for efficient intermolecular electron and/or energy transfer,165 which was further supported by the faster polymerization kinetics, and the larger sized NPs had a stronger absorption ability.17,22 In one example, Jokerst's group found that Gd3+ loaded PDA showed a 40-fold photoacoustic signal improvement compared with pristine PDA.104 They attributed the increase of photoacoustic signal to the improved absorption cross-section by catechol–Gd coordination. But the exact mechanism that can link the metal coordination with the increased absorption and photoacoustic signal remains unknown. Nevertheless, these methods not only offered an intuitive understanding of the photothermal mechanism of PDA but also presented a new design strategy for advanced PDA-based photo-responsive materials.
The outstanding photothermal properties of PDA could also be integrated with temperature-responsive polymers to achieve profound response. Lu's group prepared a PDA-containing hydrogel with PNIPAM as the temperature-responsive polymer.97 Under NIR irradiation, PDA rapidly converted light energy into thermal energy and the PNIPAM hydrogel was heated beyond its lower critical solution temperature (LCST), causing the collapse of PNIPAM chains. Following this, a series of temperature-responsive polymer coated PDA materials were synthesized, showing light-induced shape deformation properties.69,70 In a typical example, Fu's group introduced a gradient PDA coating approach on the surface of PCL for light-triggered multi-shape memory polymers (Fig. 4d).74 The thickness gradient of the PDA coating could generate a temperature gradient on the horizontal direction of the material surface during light irradiation. This enabled a programmable recovery feature; that is, partial recovery was achieved when the light intensity was low, while full recovery was accomplished at higher light intensity. Though as an excellent photothermal agent, PDA also has its own limitation on photothermal conversion. The higher maximum temperature requires the use of high intensity light which may induce photodamage to the material and even not applicable when using sunlight as the source.166 Thus, further studies on designing PDA materials with improved photothermal performance and the resulting composites with higher thermal conductivity and better thermostability are highly desirable.
Most of the cases mentioned above use NIR light as the trigger for achieving desirable responses. However, the photo-responsive feature of PDA can be enhanced in a wavelength specific fashion. This was commonly realized via the addition of a light-sensitive compound that responds to specific wavelengths of light. As such, a PDA-based stimuli-responsive membrane was modified with 4,4′-azodianiline (AZO), a photo-responsive material that switches between the trans- and cis-configuration when exposed to UV and visible light, respectively, to give a material with reversible shrinkage and expansion properties (Fig. 4e).72 Moreover, PDA coated on electrodes could promote electron transfer and benefit the absorption of photon energy due to its semiconducting properties and charge transfer ability. Thus, the photocurrent of the PDA-based device would increase remarkably with the increase of light intensity.120 However, the photoconductivity of PDA is still limited by the complex and disordered chemical structures of PDA. The relative proportions of hydroxyquinone, semiquinone, and quinone species in PDA were directly governed by the comproportionation reaction.167 After coupling with water, the reaction could generate free carriers and promote the production of extrinsic free radicals (electrons) and hydronium ions (protons). Thus, the electronic–ionic hybrid characteristic complicated the whole photoconductivity process. Also, the advantages of employing PDA as a photoconductive response agent are yet unknown since its biological function as a melanin analogue remains a mystery.
Recently, assembled PDA NPs were employed in the construction of structurally colored films.168 In nature, brunette hairs containing black eumelanin granules show different colors under strong and weak light. Cho and co-workers captured this feature via resonant Mie scattering using PDA nanospheres as the mimic of black eumelanin granules.108 The high absorption efficiency of PDA inhibited multiple scattering, resulting in the predomination of resonant colors under high intensities of light. More importantly, these PDA nanospheres exhibited wavelength-dependent backscattering efficiency, thereby enabling the development of variegated colors.


3.2.2 pH-responsive PDA materials. 
The complexation of catechol groups on PDA with metal ions showed distinct and reversible pH-dependent behavior.169–171 Holten-Andersen reported the formation of mono-catechol/Fe3+ complexes at pH ≤ 5. The pH jump caused the spontaneous formation of bis- and/or tris-catechol/Fe3+ complexes (Fig. 5a).172 This method could prevent ferric hydroxide precipitation upon increasing the pH. But the redox activity of Fe3+ and dopamine might also induce covalent cross-linking between those complexes that can prevent the reversible switch. This was neglected in the previous study and deserved further investigations. Moreover, the hydrophobic interaction between PDA and drugs also highly depended on the pH value that would influence the uptake and release behaviors. The abundant amino and phenolic surface groups had positively charged surfaces under acidic conditions, while PDA became negatively charged in an alkaline environment. Therefore, PDA could absorb and release the molecules when triggered by the pH change.123,124 In addition, the PDA coating layer was also pH-responsive, as it can be detached from the silica NP's core in an acidic environment.173 Thus, the PDA coating was utilized as the gatekeeper for drug-loaded porous carriers to avoid premature release during transportation.
 Fig. 5  (a) The catechol–Fe3+ coordination complexes at different pHs. (b) Disulfide linked dopamine for surface coating and GSH-responsive degradation. (c) Schematic illustration of a potassium ion-responsive PDA film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.2.3 Chemical-responsive PDA materials. 
Recently, many efforts have been put into the development of chemical-responsive polymers. As PDA is a kind of redox-active and light-sensitive polymer, the further structural engineering of PDA offers the opportunity to incorporate chemical-responsive motifs on PDA.174 In general, the chemical-responsive properties of PDA lies in two aspects: (1) the responsive abilities of PDA to chemicals and (2) the fluorescence-responsive feature of PDA. In the first aspect, the response of PDA to specific chemical molecules can be achieved by introducing chemical-responsive groups. A typical study by Choi's group showed the first glutathione- (GSH) responsive degradable PDA films through polymerization of disulfide linked dopamine monomers (Fig. 5b).90 After substrates were coated with the PDA film, the water contact angles of the samples turned out to be about 60° regardless of substrates, indicating successful coating. When the cleavage of the disulfide linkage occurred, the film could absorb water molecules quickly, which hydrated the film and led to its rapid degradation. The thickness of the film decreased after incubation with a higher concentration of GSH, showing a concentration-dependent chemical-responsive behavior. Hong's group selected cystamine as the disulfide crosslinker to co-polymerize with dopamine. The as-formed PDA film showed similar stimulus-responsive degradability but without requiring disulfide linked dopamine monomer synthesis.132 Though reversible disulfide bond formation can be realized in the most optimistic scenario, it was not mentioned in the above studies. The construction of PDA-based adaptive double networks using reversible thiol–disulfide chemistry may open a new avenue for stimuli-responsive material design. In addition, a ferrocene-functionalized PDA film exhibited a responsive feature to electron transfer,49 and was used in the electrocatalytic oxidation of H2O2. PDA also showed a metal ion responsive feature as the metal coordination could generate intermolecular cation–π interaction within PDA.126 After the disassembly of the PDA coating with NaOH, the K+ reversed the coating thickness due to the larger cation–π binding force for K+–π than that for Na+–π (Fig. 5c). Thus, the loss of amine cationic species could be compensated for by the presence of K+ for cation–π interaction recovery.
The other kinds of chemical-responsive abilities of PDA rely on the fluorescence switching feature of PDA, which originated from either the fluorescence quenching ability of PDA to fluorescent dyes or the intrinsic fluorescence from structure engineered PDA. Firstly, surface abundant catechol and quinone groups could induce fluorescence quenching of fluorophore-labeled nucleic acids and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) absorbed on the PDA surface via a Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) or photoinduced electron transfer mechanism.175 The fluorescence recovery was achieved by adding high affinity competition agents that led to the dissociation of fluorophore-labeled molecules from the PDA and the recovery of fluorescence.127,128 In this context, the use of an aptamer/PDA nanocomplex platform for molecular sensing in living cells was accomplished by Xu's group.131 The fluorescence quenching of the fluorophore labeled aptamer occurred due to the proximity and efficient energy transfer from the fluorophores to PDA. However, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) led to the release of the aptamer due to conformational change and the recovery of fluorescence. In addition, the inherent fluorescence properties of PDA could be tuned by manipulating the π–π stacking interaction of structural units.36 Further experiments of metal ion coordination characterization suggested the influence of the electron configuration on the fluorescence of PDA.54,57,129,130 Similarly, fluorescent PDA can also be used for the detection of chemicals that either influence the structure or change the surface states of PDA. Compared with other nanomaterials, fluorescent PDA exhibited safe, rapid, and cost-effective response as a luminescent signal indicator. But the fluorescence intensity and quantum yield are relatively lower compared with classic dye molecules. Thus, the development of fluorescent PDA materials with higher intensity and quantum yields and broad emission wavelengths is one of the future directions.


3.2.4 Other stimuli-responsive PDA materials. 
In the above section, we reviewed the PDA-based responsive materials triggered with light, pH, and chemicals. Other sources of stimuli, including temperature, humidity, electric fields, mechanical force, and ultrasound, are commonly applied in the context of PDA-based stimuli-responsive systems. PDA-based temperature-responsive materials are usually constructed by the incorporation of thermo-responsive polymers (Fig. 6a). The as prepared polymer–PDA composites have been applied in various applications, including cell sheet translocation and controlled release of small molecules.66,81 Among those composites, PNIPAM–PDA was targeted for this purpose since PNIPAM has the LCST near body temperature. Apart from blending, the polymers were “grafted-from” the PDA surface, achieving the controlled release of fertilizers. They were also used as shrinkable fillers to control the thickness of PDA-based structural color films as the displayed color was associated with the coating thickness.133 Further control over the responsive temperature was not demonstrated in the above cases but is possible and dependent on the design of thermo-sensitive polymers.
 Fig. 6  Approaches for constructing PDA-based materials with different stimuli-responsive properties: (a) temperature responsiveness, (b) and (c) humidity responsiveness, (d) electric field responsiveness, (e) mechanical force responsiveness, and (f) ultrasound responsiveness. 
Past examples in the literature showed the high stability and poor swelling properties of PDA in solution.136 Therefore, PDA-based membrane composites with asymmetric water swelling performance were designed for the construction of humidity-responsive materials.135 In a pioneering study, Lee's group reported a freestanding film consisting of dopamine modified poly(ethylenimine) (PEI) obtained via the spontaneous co-polymerization at the air–water interface.136 The PEI domain readily swelled in the presence of water molecules, while the PDA domain was not sensitive to wetting, resulting in the repeated flipping of the film (Fig. 6b). In the subsequent study, Xiao and co-workers demonstrated a self-assembled PDA film with a fast, significant, and reversible responsive ability to humidity changes (Fig. 6c).134 The thin film interference model and the calculated reflectance spectra indicated that the increase of the humidity not only swelled the film but also reduced the effective refractive index of PDA and thus resulted in color change. The sizes of PDA films obtained using current fabrication methods were limited to a few square centimeters, and the scalable production of defect-free PDA films with a few square meters is challenging and will require extra efforts in the future.
PDA, as a highly redox active polymer,138 also shows remarkable response to electrical fields. This redox reaction involves a two-electron process of catechol-o-quinone transitions.176 These catechols and quinones were expected to change their redox orientation in response to the applied periodic potentials. Additionally, the external applied electric field can direct the movement of PDA. When positioned in an electric field, PDA NPs were accumulated at the anode due to their inherent negative charge (Fig. 6d). This feature was then employed for the construction of synthetic E-ink.137 We spread PDA NPs randomly between two conductive glass plates with transparent and dielectric patterns. The NPs were driven to the anode and filled in the exposed regions guided by the electron field. Note that PDA-based E-ink also had many advantages such as a fast response time (<1 s) and a low working voltage (1 V). Moreover, PDA materials, especially PDA capsules, can respond to the mechanical loading and release the stored chemical information (Fig. 6e). Liu et al. reported a self-repairable hydrophobic textile surface by deposition of hydrophobic agent loaded PDA nanocapsules.139 When encountering damage, the hydrophobic agent migrated to the PDA surface in response to mechanical stimuli (e.g., stretching, compression, and friction) so that the hydrophobicity of the fabric was restored. In addition to the mechanical vibrations, PDA materials were responsive to high frequency ultrasonication after fluorination.80 Fluoroalkyl chains are both hydrophobic and lipophobic, and have a high tendency to aggregate with other fluorous compounds via a fluorophilic effect.177–179 The fluorinated PDA could be effectively loaded with perfluorocarbons which were subsequently released to form gaseous microbubbles under ultrasound stimulation (Fig. 6f), which offered distinct contrast under various intensities of ultrasound. The development of electric field and mechanical stimuli-responsive systems is still in its infancy. It requires the development of new chemistry to tailor the physicochemical structure of PDA and new responsive modules to be integrated into the system. On that note, the co-polymerization method may be a good option as it provides easy access to tuning the chemical compositions as well as the physical properties of PDA.

3.3 Dual stimuli-responsive PDA materials
With the development of stimuli-responsive PDA materials, single stimulus-responsive systems extend the responsive behaviors to dual stimuli-responsiveness for applications with the requirements of higher response precision and larger response windows. Among various stimulations mentioned above, various combinations of two stimuli, including pH/light, pH/temperature, pH/ultrasound, pH/magnetic field, light/magnetic field, light/temperature, light/chemical, and light/ultrasound, were proposed to improve the versatility of the system and extend the performance windows.

3.3.1 pH- and light-responsive PDA materials. 
pH and light are two of the most common stimuli signals in bioscience. There is a huge pH variation (4.5–8.0) across different organelles for targeted response events to happen. The light triggered system can further enhance response with high spatial precision and temporal control. Thus, pH/light-responsive PDA materials are widely used for biomedical applications. To date, the combination of light and pH stimuli in PDA has been the most widely studied dual stimuli-responsive system. It has been shown that pristine PDA, without sophisticated structural engineering and surface modification, has light and pH responsive features. PDA has been frequently used as the vehicle for delivering drug molecules that were incorporated into or loaded onto PDA-based materials via hydrophobic interaction and/or hydrogen bonding. Preloaded drugs, including DOX,62,76,77,144–146,180–183 daptomycin (DAP),59 hymexazol,60 camptothecin (CPT),63 cisplatin,65 bortezomib (BTZ),184 and tetracycline hydrochloride (TH),92 could be released by pH change and photoirradiation as both can affect the interaction between PDA and the cargo drug. A study by Wang and co-workers showed a NIR- and pH-responsive PDA nanoplatform to address the paradox between the efficiency of tumor regression and the minimum of side effects.185 The anticancer drug 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN38) could be released efficiently under 808 nm irradiation and/or acidic stimuli to suppress tumor growth and reduce osteolytic damage at a mild temperature (Fig. 7a). The dual light/pH stimuli induced an enhanced drug release from the PDA nanoplatform, thus suppressing tumor growth more efficiently compared with other experimental groups. However, this light/pH stimuli-induced drug release depends on the relatively weak hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding that can be significantly altered under physiological conditions and thus affect its in vivo release behavior. The heat-labile boronic ester bond at the PDA surface can sense and cleave under NIR irradiation for controlled release of drugs, offering a more effective photothermal therapy with minimal side effects.86,186 The further development of responsive drug release systems using covalent bonds with specific chemical/enzyme stimuli will provide new opportunities to tailor therapeutic systems with precise control over drug release and high accumulation tumor concentration for a specific patient or disease.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a light- and pH-responsive PDA system for drug release. (b) A temperature- and pH-responsive PDA NPs via surface grafting of PDMAEMA. (c) The pH- and ultrasound-responsive PDA-coated mesoporous silica NPs for controlled drug release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Magnetic field- and pH-responsive PDA NPs for separation of DNA. (e) Schematic illustration of the light- and chemical-responsive behavior of Fe2+-PDA-GOD NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (f) A fluorinated PDA system with light- and ultrasound-responsive behavior for photoacoustic and ultrasound imaging. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.2 pH- and temperature-responsive PDA materials. 
As pH and temperature are important environmental triggers, both are vital in operating and controlling the biological and chemical events. The combination of pH and temperature stimuli could further enhance the response precision and controllability of PDA. To achieve the desired response, the PDA surface was modified with pH- and/or temperature-responsive polymers. Feng et al. systematically studied the temperature- and pH-responsive behavior of pH-sensitive PDMAEMA coated PDA (Fig. 7b).82 It was found that the composite exhibited a LCST of 34 °C. Above the LCST, the PDMAEMA chains showed hydrophobicity due to the breakage of the hydrogen bonds with the surrounding water. The tertiary amine groups on the PDMAEMA side chains were protonated completely at lower pH and electrostatic repulsions were formed between polymer chains. In contrast, PDMAEMA chains could be shrunk and showed more hydrophobicity at higher pH as those tertiary amine groups were unprotonated.
Other temperature- and pH-stimuli responsive polymers, such as PNIPAM, have also been investigated for controlled permeation and release.71 In this example, P(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA) has been considered as an attractive alternative to PNIPAM since the LCST could be easily tuned by adjusting the proportion of oligo-(ethylene glycol) methacrylate units in the polymer. Thus, nanocomposites with an inner PDA capsule and a P(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA) corona allow the temperature-sensitive release of charged small molecules.84 In addition, the PDA capsule is negatively charged at high pH but positively charged at low pH. This charge response to pH endowed PDA capsules with selective permeability for anions and cations. Taken together, the dual stimuli-responsive system showed a promising uptake and release profile for modern agriculture applications.


3.3.3 Other dual stimuli-responsive PDA materials. 
In addition to pH/light and pH/temperature dual stimuli-responsive systems, pH is also employed to combine with other stimuli, including ultrasound and magnetic fields. PDA-coated mesoporous silica NPs showed a pH/ultrasound dual-stimuli responsive drug release behavior (Fig. 7c).64 Also, the PDA functionalized magnetic NPs could capture free DNA by electrostatic interaction. The recovery of the NPs was achieved by using an external magnet and other impurities were removed easily without the use of centrifugation and poisonous solvents (Fig. 7d). The exfoliation of the bound DNA from the magnetic particle surface could be carried out by a pH-induced charge switch.149 However, the repeated use of PDA at high pH might induce its disassembly and contaminate the purified DNA sample. Therefore, the stability of PDA under this method needs further investigations. In addition, PDA loaded with paramagnetic ions showed light/magnetic field dual-responsiveness that has been extensively used for MRI-guided photothermal therapy.75,152
In fact, the excellent photothermal conversion capacity of PDA endows hybrid materials with both light and temperature responsive abilities.153 Further experiments showed a light and chemical dual-responsive PDA prepared for the combination of glucose degradation, the Fenton reaction, and photothermal therapy.150 The Fe2+ and glucose oxidase modified PDA (Fe2+-PDA-GOD) could consume the glucose and generate gluconic acid and H2O2 to improve the efficiency of the subsequent Fenton reaction (Fig. 7e). Recently, fluorinated PDA NPs have been proved to stabilize perfluorocarbon agents. They showed dual light- and ultrasound-responsive abilities due to the ultrasound and light triggered vaporization of perfluorocarbon (Fig. 7f).157 Liquid perfluorocarbon NPs can also be coated on PDA,156 thus generating microbubbles under photoirradiation to increase the ultrasound imaging signals and therapeutic efficacy.

3.4 Multi-stimuli-responsive PDA materials
Multi-stimuli-responsive PDA material systems are less explored since the design involves the sophisticated preparation and high compatibility of each component. Compared with single and dual stimuli-responsive systems, multi-stimuli responsive systems have many advantages including higher response efficiency, larger switch windows, better specificity and flexibility, and adaptable to more complicated application conditions. In a typical example, a dopamine-derived prodrug with the dynamic disulfide bond and ester bond for GSH and pH stimuli, respectively, was designed by Du et al.44 The NPs formed by the co-polymerization of the prodrug and dopamine showed pH-, GSH-, and light-stimuli responsive drug release behaviors (Fig. 8a). This system showed a high drug-loading ability and NIR responsive performance, giving a synergistic effect of drug release (up to 94%) under intracellular GSH and pH stimuli. Furthermore, a PDA-based pH-, H2O2- and light-stimuli responsive nanoplatform was developed for synergetic tumor ablation (Fig. 8b).158 The NIR light triggered burst release of the loaded drug due to the suppression of π–π stacking interaction between PDA and the drug at high temperature. The π–π stacking interaction could also be regulated via the protonation/deprotonation equilibrium of the amine groups on the PDA surface at different pHs. Further observations suggested that the presence of H2O2 would trigger the release of the drug as the oxidized phenol groups broke the hydrogen bonds between PDA and the drug. So far, these multi-stimuli-responsive smart systems have been limited to pH, light and chemical stimuli. They showed some success in the triggered release of drugs. However, comparisons between PDA and other nanoparticle scaffold-based drug delivery systems are missing and need further clarifications.
 Fig. 8  (a) The synthesis of light/pH/chemical triple-responsive PDA–prodrug conjugate NPs for controlled drug release. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The chemical structure and light/pH/chemical triple-responsive drug release of PDA. Reprinted from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier. (c) A pH/light/enzyme triple-responsive PDA hydrogel system. (d) PDA-based hydrogel with pH-, light-, and thermo-responsive features for the removal of dyes from wastewater. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, NP-based colloidal hydrogel networks have attracted great attention due to their programmed delivery behaviors, and their physicochemical properties could be easily controlled by manipulating particulate building blocks to achieve high responsiveness towards pH and enzymes. He and co-workers fabricated a pH, light, and enzyme stimuli responsive colloidal hydrogel consisting of amphoteric gelatin and PDA NPs (Fig. 8c).91 The drug release rate was significantly promoted at lower pH probably due to the increased repulsive interaction between the gelatin NPs and drug and the higher solubility of the drug in acidic environments. Moreover, matrix metalloproteinase 2 and 9 enzymes could degrade the hydrogel and the high temperature induced by light irradiation could trigger gel-to-sol transition behavior. Both could destroy the hydrogel network and result in enhanced drug release. This strategy was expected to be explored and developed by utilizing various amphoteric and functional NPs to build interdisciplinary colloidal hydrogels for different requirements.
Polymer hydrogels doped with PDA also showed multi-stimuli responsive properties. Liu's group prepared a pH-, temperature- and light-stimuli responsive hydrogel with poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) as the pH-responsive moiety, poly(N,N-diethylacrylamide) (PDEAA) as the thermo-responsive component, and PDA NPs as the light-responsive part for the removal of dyes from wastewater (Fig. 8d).96 The association and disassociation of dye with/from the hydrogel was triggered by pH induced charge changes. The temperature sensitive PDEAA led to a quick shrinkage of the hydrogel structure at elevated temperature that was also governed by the photothermal effect of PDA. Besides the prominent character of stimuli responsiveness from PDA, the mechanics that determine the hydrogel's properties can also be affected by the addition of PDA. The study on the influence of PDA on the hydrogel structure and its mechanical properties is quite intriguing and important for designing next-generation PDA-based hydrogel materials.
4. Applications of stimuli-responsive PDA smart materials
Having both facile fabrication processes and diverse responsive properties, stimuli-responsive PDA materials have been successfully used for various applications. Among them, theranostics is studied most widely due to the impressive biocompatibility and outstanding controlled release behaviors of the PDA materials. Besides, more emerging applications have been reported including sensors, actuation, self-healing materials, optical devices, seawater desalination, and others.
4.1 Theranostics
Cancer has been considered as one of the major threats to human life. Current cancer therapies focus on surgery, chemotherapy, and physiotherapy, where the latter two approaches had severe side effects on normal tissues and organs. NP-based delivery systems have shown great potential for cancer therapy as they avoid the premature degradation of drugs, achieve targeted drug delivery, and control the drug distribution profile.185,187 The loaded drugs could be released quickly upon exposure to external stimuli, while leakage during the circulation process was inhibited.188,189 As a stimuli-responsive component, the pH-sensitive PDA coating can effectively suppress the release of loaded cargoes at neutral pH but triggers their release in a weakly acidic tumor environment.64,65,173 PDA materials have also been well developed as photothermal agents for photothermal therapy in vivo.48,86 However, it should be noted that hyperthermia induced photothermal therapy could cause autophagy to prevent cancer cells from death.190,191 Thus, the destruction of the homeostatic functions of autophagy and activation of autophagic cell death could benefit the therapeutic efficiency of photothermal therapy. Cheng's group reported a PDA based multifunctional nanoplatform for promoting autophagy associated photothermal cancer therapy (Fig. 9a).192 The PDA was modified with a beclin 1-derived peptide for up-regulating autophagy, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) for improving biocompatibility and prolonging its blood circulation time, and cyclic Arg–Gly–Asp (RGD) peptides for increasing the particle accumulation in the tumor. The nanoplatform successfully promoted the autophagic activity in cancer cells and improved the photothermal therapy effect. Compared with individual photothermal therapy, the combined treatment suppressed the tumor growth and ablated the tumor issue more efficiently.
 Fig. 9  (a) Approach for constructing a PDA based multifunctional nanoplatform for cancer therapy. Reprinted from ref. 192 with permission from Elsevier. (b) The light-responsive PDA hydrogel for controlled drug release in cancer therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Borate-coordination-polymer-coated PDA nanoplatform for a synergetic targeting property for sialic acid-overexpressed tumor cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) A radionuclide-64Cu-labeled DOX-loaded PDA–gadolinium–metallofullerene (Gd3N@C80) core–satellite nanoplatform for MR imaging, PA imaging, PET imaging and photothermal cancer therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
However, past examples reported the incomplete ablation of tumors especially at the tissue edges, since photothermal therapy was subject to the heterogeneous distribution of hyperthermia and intermittent irradiation. Thus, combined treatment (e.g., photothermal-chemotherapy) was used as the complementary therapy to enhance therapeutic efficiency.193 A recent publication by Cheng's group used PDA NPs and thiol-terminated four-arm PEG to prepare a nanocomposite hydrogel with cancer drugs loaded onto the surface (Fig. 9b).98 After irradiation for 5 min, the tumor-site temperature of the experimental group was much higher compared to the control group and the tumor growth was inhibited completely. Additionally, the body weights of the mice showed no obvious difference during the period, and no detectable morphological damage or inflammation could be found in the main organs. Besides chemotherapy, a PDA-based long-lasting reactive oxygen species generation system was developed by Ding et al. for tumor therapy.147 In this platform, reactive oxygen species (˙OH) could be generated cumulatively in a weakly acidic and low H2O2 homeostasis environment by the heterogenous Fenton-like reaction for cancer therapy. However, PDA may also react with hydroxyl radicals due to its radical scavenging ability. Thus, the effect of PDA as the substrate for reactive oxygen species generation needs more systematic investigations.
Though new antitumor drugs and novel nanomaterials for controlled delivery and release have undergone rapid developments, the metastasis and drug resistance of tumors remain huge challenges. To address these issues, efficient tumor-targeted nanomaterials are highly anticipated for cancer treatment. PDA nanomaterials have plentiful chemical-active functional groups on the surfaces (e.g., phenolic, quinone, and amine groups) to guarantee the feasibility of further modification with targeted functions.106,145,185 Liu et al. reported a PDA-based chemo-photothermal cancer treatment nanoplatform (Fig. 9c).85 After the functionalization of borate-coordination-polymer on PDA, catechol-capped PEG could be anchored onto the phenylboronic acid of the polymer layer for “passive targeting”. In a weakly acidic tumor microenvironment, the hydrolysis of the boronic ester bond led to “active targeting” triggered by the phenylboronic acid. The dynamic PEGylation method benefited the drug delivery system in two aspects. Firstly, PEG could reduce the elimination by the reticuloendothelial system and promote the accumulation of the nanoplatform in the tumor region. Secondly, PEG chains would be removed at lower pH in the tumor microenvironment to avoid the side effects of the hydrophilic nonionic feature and promote the uptake of the nanoplatform.194 The synergetic targeting strategy greatly increased the drug accumulation and improved the antitumor efficiency. Nevertheless, some challenges remain even though some promising studies have been demonstrated. For example, how to increase the loading efficiency, and measure and characterize the dosages of the therapy agents and pharmacokinetic behavior? The combination of various in vivo imaging techniques to monitor the accumulation and distribution of nanodrugs can shed some light on it.
Concurrent with investigating the kinetic behavior and optimizing the therapeutic window of NPs is the need to monitor them in vivo. As such, imaging-guided therapies, also named theranostics, were developed to perform treatment more precisely at the expected time scale and location. PDA-based nanoplatforms can respond to light and convert to acoustic signals for imaging purposes, a phenomenon called the photoacoustic effect. In addition, the heat stimulated by irradiation of PDA was also employed to kill cancer cells. The accumulation behavior of PDA-based nanoplatforms, loaded with chemotherapeutic drugs,44,53,76,146 could be monitored via photoacoustic imaging (PAI), to guide the treatment. Moreover, the phenolic groups present on the PDA surface can chelate paramagnetic ions that respond to magnetic fields and can be used for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Integrated MRI-guided chemo-/photothermal combination therapy systems exhibiting excellent therapeutic effects in vivo with little side effects have been reported.63,75,77,144,180 The stability of metal–PDA chelation was known to be lower than those of FDA approved contrast agents, such as Magnevist and Dotarem. Thus, the release of metal ions and long-term side effects is a concern and shall be evaluated in future studies.
Further experiments suggested that the PDA-based platform could load various functional components for multimodal imaging-guided combination cancer treatment.151,160 In a typical example by Wang et al., they reported a radionuclide-64Cu-labeled DOX-loaded PDA–gadolinium–metallofullerene (Gd3N@C80) core–satellite nanoplatform for cancer theranostics (Fig. 9d).143 In this system, Gd3N@C80 was used for MRI and PAI. Coupled with 64Cu, the nanoplatform had the capability for positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. The three imaging signal intensities in the tumor area all reached the maximum 24 h post-injection, suggesting a high consistency of these imaging techniques. Therefore, the tumor regions were irradiated for 24 h post-injection and the tumor temperature increased quickly during the irradiation, while the tumor temperature of the mice injected with phosphate buffered solution did not change obviously. Subsequently, the growth of the tumor was suppressed without recurrence during the subsequent 3 weeks. The combination of multiple imaging techniques can remedy the limitations of a single technique. However, many of the current studies have only demonstrated the consistency of data from multiple imaging techniques but lack the analysis of improvement on precision or resolution.
4.2 Sensors
A sensor is a device that senses and transforms external stimuli into a detectable signal. Among the sensing technologies, use of fluorescent sensors is a facile and convenient detection method for applications under low concentration conditions (ppb level). PDA-based fluorescent sensors were employed for the detection of biomolecules and metal ions as their interaction with PDA led to changes in fluorescence intensity. PDA also exhibited an excellent fluorescence quenching ability towards attached fluorescently-labeled molecules through FRET and/or photoinduced electron transfer mechanisms. When the complex encountered targeted agents, the fluorescently-labeled biomolecules were detached from PDA and the inherent fluorescence recovered.58 For example, Xu's group reported a 6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM)-labeled probe DNA that could be absorbed onto PDA NPs’ surfaces via non-covalent binding, causing the quenching of FAM fluorescence (Fig. 10a).127 The quenching efficiency reached as high as 97%, which compared favorably with that of graphene oxide. The fluorescence of FAM recovered after the introduction of targets, the complementary DNA or protein, to release the dye from the PDA surface. Thus, the restoration of fluorescence was used to detect the concentration of DNA and proteins. Similar strategies have also been used for intracellular molecule analysis.131
 Fig. 10  (a) The sensing ability of probe DNA-functionalized PDA for DNA and proteins. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The synthesis of fluorescent PDA NPs via microplasma electrochemistry and their application in U6+ detection. Reprinted from ref. 195 with permission from Elsevier. 
Fluorescent PDA was also employed for sensing biomolecules and metal ions.36 Its fluorescent nature is highly dependent on its structure. Thus, any molecule that influences the dopamine polymerization could be detected via fluorescence intensity change. Also, the fluorescence intensity changed after its coordination with certain metal ions due to the change in electron configuration. This phenomenon has been applied for detection of various heavy metals, such as Cu2+, Fe3+, and Cr6+.51,129 Wang and co-workers employed a microplasma electrochemistry strategy to prepare fluorescent PDA NPs for detection of U6+ with a detection limit of 2.1 mg L−1 (Fig. 10b).195 The quenching mechanism was considered as a static quenching process since the introduction of U6+ did not change the fluorescence lifetime. Additionally, the multiple catechol groups of PDA were considered as the main bidentate ligands to coordinate U6+ in the equatorial plane, which caused the aggregation of fluorescent PDA after adding U6+. However, the coordination environments of U6+ and other heavy metal ions to PDA need further characterization. The stability constants of these metal–PDA complexes remain unknown. Nevertheless, this work provided a new insight into the synthesis of fluorescent PDA and its potential applications in heavy metal detection.
Recently, PDA was engineered to have n-type behavior by covalent conjugation of aromatic amines in PDA. Moreover, photosensitizing components could be easily incorporated into PDA scaffolds to improve the light response of PDA for photocapacitive sensor applications. Prompted by these, Ambrico et al. co-polymerized 5-S-cysteinyldopamine with dopamine for the construction of a pheomelanin-like material with enhanced light responsive properties.50 The doped 5-S-cysteinyldopamine units disordered the original molecular packing of PDA and substantially changed the π-electron properties. After light stimulation, the photocarriers were generated more efficiently due to the increase of optical absorption and the existence of surface dipoles. The surface potential generated from the dipole could promote the injection of photocarriers and enhanced the photo-responsiveness of PDA. The enhancement effect is closely related to the unusual characteristics of oxygen-sustained oxidation of pheomelanin. Pheomelanin, as another typical kind of melanin material, offered more options in designing stimuli-responsive systems for various applications. However, the structure of pheomelanin and its artificial synthesis are even more complicated compared with PDA and thus deserve more attention. Another concern regarding pheomelanin is related to its pro-oxidative behavior and potential side effects on organisms. Therefore, understanding its biological significance would be in favor of the application of pheomelanin-based materials.
In addition, PDA was employed as a coating material of electrodes for electrochemical sensing. The presence of many redox species in PDA resulted in a higher current per geometric area.73,124 PDA materials have also shown potential for building wearable sensors that transform strain signals into electronic signals.61 For example, Liu's group developed a wearable epidermal strain sensor made of a polyvinyl alcohol hydrogel blended with PDA.142 The low modulus hydrogel reproduces the dynamic feature of natural human skin, while the adhesive nature of PDA prevents the strain sensor from failing. More importantly, the hydrogel had stable resistances under original and stretched conditions without obvious fluctuation. However, the shape change of the hydrogel could influence the original resistance so as the sensing performance. The sensor showed reliable sensing performances with a nearly linear relationship between strain and signal output. Thus, it has been successfully applied for monitoring both large strain and microstrain as low as 0.1%, such as body movements, expression changes, pulse beating, throat vibrations, and breathing depths and rates. Yet, the water evaporation problem might affect the sensing performances over a long period of time. Encapsulation of the devices might be an effective method to prevent water loss. Moreover, the further development of wearable devices requires the integration of multiple electronic units with different functions for health monitoring and the primary diagnosis of some critical diseases.
4.3 Actuation
Stimuli-responsive materials that can dynamically adapt their shape to environmental stimulations have been designed to build actuators. Among them, a PDA-based actuator was reported to perform worm-like motion as a result of the shrinkage and expansion of the bilayer actuator.196 PDA-based light triggered actuations have non-contact and remote-control features with simple one-step PDA coating treatment. Furthermore, a PDA-based actuator with a multi-shape memory effect was achieved via a gradient PDA coating on the surface of cross-linked PCL.74 Li and co-workers reported a shape memory polymer (SMP) with PDA coating to allow flexible and fast light-responsive shape deformation (Fig. 11a).69 Under irradiation, the PDA coated sample recovered to its original shape within 10 s, while the blank sample did not respond to the light. The programmable structure deformations were further accomplished by patterned deposition of PDA. The temperature gradient from the top and bottom of the coated sample induced a bending event in the direction toward the PDA coated side. During the continuous variation process, the polymer substrate shrank, while PDA was stable under irradiation, which might induce cracks and affect its mechanical strength. Also, the interface interaction and heat conduction between PDA and the substrate deserve more attention as they are critical for the stability and durability of the composite.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis, shape deformation and photothermal mechanism of a PDA coated SMP. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Restoration and reversible actuation of deformed dynamic 3D structures of different patterned PDA stripes. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The designed PDA-coated liquid crystal elastomer as a soft robotic swimmer and its light-controlled swimming behavior. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Liquid crystal elastomers showed reversible and rapid deformation due to the crystalline–isotropic phase transition upon temperature change. A novel PDA/liquid crystal elastomer material for light-controlled 3D deformation was reported by Li et al.110 After pre-stretching, the liquid crystal elastomer sheet blended with PDA would recover to the original length when exposed to light, while the length of the blank sheet remained the same. Similarly, a diagonal line patterned PDA strip could guide a helix deformation and the two-directional stretch resulted in a claw-like structure (Fig. 11b). More importantly, a liquid crystal elastomer film coated with PDA exhibited a very fast light-response.70 When exposed to irradiation, the free end of the film could be lifted 22.5 mm in 0.17 s and recover to the original state in 0.48 s. Due to its rapid response, the PDA-coated liquid crystal elastomer film was used as the power source for the construction of a robotic swimmer as shown in Fig. 11c. The PDA was only coated on the bottom of the film to direct the downward swimming movement. The overall net local motion distance was about 6 mm in a cycle at an average speed of 1 mm s−1. These examples represented a proof-of-concept for actuated behaviors. The development of advanced materials and fabrication techniques will facilitate actuator research for practical use and extreme conditions.
4.4 Self-healing materials
Materials are subject to various damaged conditions in everyday use. Self-healing materials are aimed at meeting the demand for extending the lifetime and improving the reliability of materials.139 Currently, the preparation of self-healing materials mainly refers to two strategies: impregnation of catalysts that can initiate the repolymerization at the fracture point, and incorporation of reversible interactions in the matrix networks that could be induced by external stimuli. As the ideal energy source, PDA produces heat when stimulated with NIR light for triggering chemical bond formation/cleavage and phase transitions. Within this context, Xiong et al. prepared a self-healing composite material with PCL as a matrix and PDA as a filler.102 Under light irradiation, the temperature of the composite could easily exceed its melting temperature. Thus, the crystallites on the fracture surfaces would melt and the polymer chains diffused across two fracture surfaces. After cooling below the crystallization temperature, the fused polymers would recrystallize and repair the fracture surface. The repaired strip could be stretched up to 3 times of its original length and, more importantly, the mechanical properties of the repaired strip were almost identical to those of the initial materials (Fig. 12a). Furthermore, non-covalent or reversible covalent bonds can be introduced to construct self-healing materials.93 Xia's group developed self-healing polymer composites containing a Diels–Alder dynamic crosslinked polyurethane blended with PDA NPs.118 When the crack of the composite was irradiated with light, PDA NPs absorbed the light and generated heat energy, causing the temperature of the composite to increase, where the retro-Diels–Alder reaction of the crosslinked polyurethane proceeded to fill the crack. After cooling to room temperature, the Diels–Alder bonds reformed and the fracture crack of the composite was healed (Fig. 12b). However, it should be noted that long term irradiation would destroy the materials and led to a low healing efficiency due to overheating under a high light intensity and/or long irradiation time. For the 1 wt% PDA loaded composite, the healing efficiency reached ∼93% after 10 s irradiation, while 60 s irradiation could decrease the efficiency to ∼63%. Further experiments on the multicycle healing showed healing efficiencies of ∼96%, ∼87%, and ∼78% after the first, second, and third damage–repair cycles, respectively. In fact, the observed photothermal effects and temperature increase of the composites are not the results of simple bulk-scale heating, but the effect of transient and intense heating near the PDA surface. The local and transient temperature might induce pyrolysis and phase separation that should be evaluated or avoided in future designs.
 Fig. 12  (a) Photograph of original, cut, healed PCL/PDA composite strips, and their mechanical properties. Reprinted from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Self-healing polyurethane/PDA nanocomposites made via Diels–Alder dynamic crosslinking. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.5 Optical devices
PDA has unique absorption patterns to provide radiation protection and a higher refractive index (1.741 ± 0.001 at 589 nm) than most organic polymers for structural coloration. The broad absorption spectrum of PDA further reduces incoherent scattering and improves the purity of the structure color. Thus, PDA has been used for the design and manufacture of highly sensitive colorimetric optical devices.168 Also, a PDA-based material is promising for replacing traditional ink for display technology. In E-ink technology, large sized pigments (typically in hundreds of micrometers in diameter) challenge the development of high-resolution displays. PDA NPs, with uniformly sub-500 nm sizes, can be used as E-ink candidates for high-resolution displays (Fig. 13a).137 Compared with commercial electronic ink, every PDA NP was used as one pixel and responded independently to the electric signal to reduce the pixel size and provide ultrahigh resolution (>10000 ppi). Moreover, the simple oxidation treatment could endow PDA-based ink with a fluorescence feature, affording the opportunity for the development of fluorescent inks with nanoscale resolution.
 Fig. 13  (a) The working principle of a PDA-based E-ink high resolution display and the “show-and-erase” performance for a microscale feature (scale bar, 50 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustrations and photographs of PDA dispersions under ambient light and spotlight, and photographs showing selective disclosure of a yin–yang symbol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Lastly, the pigmentation from natural melanin in avian feathers inspired the work of structural colored PDA thin films that showed reversible color changes by altering the film thickness.133,134,168 It was found the natural melanin in brunette hairs showed colors under strong sunlight. PDA NPs with different sizes showed indistinguishable black colors in ambient light, but they appeared to manifest colors when exposed to strong white light with different angles of incidence and NP concentration (Fig. 13b).108 The reflectance spectra suggested a particle size-dependent structural color relation. This was because PDA had high absorption efficiency that restrained the multiple scattering and enhanced the effect of resonant Mie scattering, causing the resonant color to dominate under strong light. Therefore, the PDA NPs showed promise for novel inks.108 A patch containing 230 and 250 nm nanospheres failed to exhibit any color without illumination, whereas the designed pattern appeared when exposed to a flashlight in a smartphone. Although PDA NPs have successfully demonstrated their potential in anticounterfeiting applications, their low stability and weak mechanical strength hindered their large-scale manufacturing for other applications. Spin coating of PDA NPs with certain crosslinkers to stabilize the PDA may yield mechanically robust films.
4.6 Seawater desalination
Desalination is considered as one of the effective protocols to solve water shortage. Thermal desalination using solar energy has attracted increasing attention owing to its green and sustainability features.197 The design of thermal desalination devices shall consider the following criteria: materials with (1) excellent light absorption in the full wavelength region and outstanding photothermal conversion capacity, (2) low thermal conductivity at the evaporation interface, and (3) high wettability to guarantee efficient water transportation.121 The excellent photothermal properties of PDA ensured its promising application for highly efficient seawater desalination through solar evaporation.112–117 Recently, our group employed arginine to enhance the photothermal performance of PDA for water steam generation.115 The introduction of arginine could not only decrease the energy bandgap of PDA due to the local existence of donor–acceptor pairs, but could also destroy the inherent inter-unit π-conjugation structure of PDA, so the radical concentration was increased, and non-thermal radiative transition processes were restrained (Fig. 14a).48 To maximize the energy utilization and decrease the thermal loss, we used natural wood as the insulation layer. The long cylindrical channels of wood offered the ideal paths for water transportation. Compared with the pure cellulose membrane, the absorbance of PDA-loaded membranes increased about 96% in the UV-vis region and about 87% in the NIR region, which ensure the most energy absorption across the solar spectrum. The solar steam efficiency was determined to be 53.0%, which was much higher than that of natural wood alone as the control. More importantly, the device showed outstanding recycling stability after 100 cycle experiments, indicating the high efficiency and durability of the seawater desalination device. However, the efficiency of solar desalination is highly dependent on solar intensity,198 but this process is also plagued with the water contamination issue. To address this, Zhang et al. fabricated a PDA-functionalized sponge (PDA-sponge) for water purification under all-weather conditions (Fig. 14b).111 Under solar illumination, the PDA-sponge generated water by the evaporation–condensation process, while at night or when cloudy, the strong adsorption of the PDA sponge would work due to the existence of catechol, amine, and imine groups. Then, acid washing and ethanol washing were used to remove the metal ions and organic pollutants for regeneration. The removal rate was maintained above 90% even after 10 cycles. Beyond the high photothermal effect, another attractive point is the biodegradability of PDA that avoids secondary pollution in the environment. However, the performance data of the device in real seawater rather than simulated seawater in laboratories are still missing. In addition, the absorption of PDA mainly focuses on the UV and visible regions and still did not cover the full solar spectrum even though some efforts have been put in.18,48
 Fig. 14  (a) A schematic diagram of arginine-doped PDA NPs with enhanced photothermal conversion capacity and solar evaporation performances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society and reprinted from ref. 115 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Photograph of a seawater treatment set-up under all-weather conditions and the reusability of PDA-sponge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
4.7 Other applications
PDA-based stimuli-responsive materials have been used in other applications across many fields, such as separation,83 antimicrobial materials,199 agricultural pest management,81 and cell transplantation.66 The abundant polar groups on PDA surfaces can easily capture targeted molecules for separation. In one example, PDA functionalized magnetic NPs were used as adsorbents to capture genomic DNA, which was further applied for L. monocytogenes and E. coli O157:H7 detection in milk samples.149 The positively charged magnetic PDA can bind negatively charged phosphodiester by electrostatic interactions. However, the amino and phenolic groups on the PDA surface were deprotonated in an alkaline environment (pH = 8–10) to release the captured DNA. Therefore, the separation and purification of genomic DNA were realized by simple magnetic separation with an external magnet and acid–base wash. On the other hand, the selectivity, stability, and repeatability of this method need to be further assessed by using various clinical samples.
The photothermal effect of PDA was also used for the treatment of bacterial infections.59,200 A series of PDA-based materials have been developed for antibacterial treatment through a hyperthermic effect and release of antibiotics.94,201 For example, Wu's group prepared an injectable hydrogel using ciprofloxacin loaded PDA and glycol chitosan.95 The hydrogel demonstrated great controllability of the antibiotic release under NIR irradiation. It showed high antibacterial activity assisted by irradiation in vivo. Generally, the long-term use of antibiotics might cause increasing antimicrobial resistance. To solve this problem, Andoy et al. fabricated a multifunctional antimicrobial nanoplatform to target and kill bacteria.105 The peptide modified on the PDA surface as well as the photothermal effect of PDA could drastically decrease the mechanical stability of Escherichia coli's outer membrane. In turn, the decrease of critical solution temperature for bacterial death helped mitigate collateral damage to the surrounding healthy cells and tissues. This cooperative strategy offered a new opportunity to reduce the probability of resistance evolution. Besides the chemical treatment for cancer and bacterial infection, PDA composites were also used in agricultural pest management. For example, Tong and co-workers reported a PDA/graphene oxide nanocomposite for the controlled release of pesticides.60 Xu et al. prepared core–shell nanocomposites with PDA as a core and PNIPAM as a shell,153 where the PDA core offered the excellent photothermal effect and PNIPAM was used as a thermo-responsive gatekeeper. When the nanocomposites were exposed to sunlight, the increasing temperature triggered the release of pesticides and improve the activity of the pesticide simultaneously. Both effects contributed to the enhanced efficacy of insect killing. However, their practical application in modern agriculture may be still limited due to their higher cost than urea fertilizer.
Cell transplantation is used to promote the regeneration and recovery of injured tissues. Artificial scaffolds are widely adopted in cell transplantation to improve the survival of cells in vivo. It was found that PDA modified hydrogel scaffolds had enhanced surface hydrophilicity and cell attachment.202 The photothermal properties of coated PDA led to the shrinkage of the hydrogel network so that cells were released on demand.97 Lastly, the electrically triggered redox switch between the phenolic and quinone groups of PDA was important for regulating the cell behavior. The oxidized quinone groups enhanced the cell spreading and proliferation and the phenolic groups in the reduced state induced cell differentiation,138 while the related mechanism and universality are subject to confirmation.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we attempted to summarize recent advances of PDA-based stimuli-responsive materials from fabrication strategies and stimuli-responsive mechanisms to their promising applications. As mentioned above, it is convenient and flexible to design and prepare stimuli-responsive materials by using PDA due to its inherent light-responsive capacity, tunable structure and properties, and prominent secondary modification ability. Thus, various external stimuli, including light, pH, chemicals, temperature, humidity, electric fields, mechanical force, magnetic fields, and ultrasound, have been used to achieve the desired responses to meet the increasingly pressing requirements.
Although tremendous progress in PDA-based stimuli-responsive systems has been made, some challenges are still facing their practical applications in the future. First, the inherent stimuli-responsive properties of PDA (e.g., photothermal performance and reversible transition of surface states) greatly promote the construction of PDA-based stimuli-responsive multifunctional materials. Concomitant with screening new potential applications is the need to understand the fundamentals of the PDA structure which is beneficial for the construction of advanced PDA materials with accurate stimuli-responsive properties.19,48 However, PDA, as a mimic of natural melanin, has a heterogeneous and complex structure, which hinders the rational design and preparation of PDA with controlled and fine-tuned properties for maximizing the response to stimuli. Mass spectrometry, electrochemical analysis, single-molecule force spectroscopy, and theoretical calculations might offer new insights into the discovery of this complicated structure. Secondly, the PDA surface contains numerous functional groups for further modification with various responsive motifs so that multi-stimuli responsive features can be achieved. However, the site-specific modification of each responsive component is difficult to control and may hinder performance optimization. Another potential problem is the multi-step and complex synthesis process that limits the practical applications of PDA-based materials. Orthogonal reactions (e.g., “click” chemistry) might be an alternative candidate to simplify the fabrication procedure.203 Thirdly, the long-term toxicity and metabolic pathway of stimuli-responsive PDA-based materials should be systematically evaluated before they are used for clinical diagnosis. A few studies have been documented to show the nontoxicity of PDA to tissue and organisms.204 Moreover, the residual reagents left during the synthesis and functionalization procedures may also have side effects. Last but not least, more consideration should be given to the necessity of using PDA when designing and preparing smart materials, rather than the introduction of functions. In other words, the irreplaceability of PDA is the most essential for the further development of PDA-based stimuli-responsive systems.
We hope this review will provide a comprehensive overview of fabrication methods, stimuli, responsive mechanisms, and applications of stimuli-responsive PDA materials, which guides the preparation of next-generation PDA-based materials and their related applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21774079, 21975167, 21725402, and 21925107), the Research Fund Program of Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Functional and Intelligent Hybrid Materials and Devices (2019B121203003), and the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities.
Notes and references
S. K. Mellerup and S. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3537–3549 Search PubMed .
L. Montero de Espinosa, W. Meesorn, D. Moatsou and C. Weder, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12851–12892 Search PubMed .
C. Lu and M. W. Urban, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 78, 24–46 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Chen, K. H. Lim, S. Gonuguntla, K. W. Lim, D. Pranantyo, W. P. Yong, W. J. T. Yam, Z. Low, W. J. Teo, H. P. Nien, Q. W. Loh and S. Soh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804540 Search PubMed .
X. Yao, J. Mu, L. Zeng, J. Lin, Z. Nie, X. Jiang and P. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 846–870 Search PubMed .
R. T. Shafranek, S. C. Millik, P. T. Smith, C.-U. Lee, A. J. Boydston and A. Nelson, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 93, 36–67 Search PubMed .
W. Cao, X. Zhou, N. C. McCallum, Z. Hu, Q. Z. Ni, U. Kapoor, C. M. Heil, K. S. Cay, T. Zand, A. J. Mantanona, A. Jayaraman, A. Dhinojwala, D. D. Deheyn, M. D. Shawkey, M. D. Burkart, J. D. Rinehart and N. C. Gianneschi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2622–2637 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, M. D. Shawkey and A. Dhinojwala, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2000932 Search PubMed .
H. A. Lee, E. Park and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907505 Search PubMed .
H. Okuda, K. Yoshino, K. Wakamatsu, S. Ito and T. Sota, Pigm. Cell Melanoma Res., 2014, 27, 664–667 Search PubMed .
C. T. Chen, F. J. Martin-Martinez, G. S. Jung and M. J. Buehler, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 1631–1641 Search PubMed .
P. Delparastan, K. G. Malollari, H. Lee and P. B. Messersmith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1077–1082 Search PubMed .
S. Hong, Y. S. Na, S. Choi, I. T. Song, W. Y. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4711–4717 Search PubMed .
N. F. Della Vecchia, R. Avolio, M. Alfè, M. E. Errico, A. Napolitano and M. d'Ischia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1331–1340 Search PubMed .
C. T. Chen, C. Chuang, J. Cao, V. Ball, D. Ruch and M. J. Buehler, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3859 Search PubMed .
D. Tuna, A. Udvarhelyi, A. L. Sobolewski, W. Domcke and T. Domratcheva, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 3493–3502 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Ju, M. C. Fischer and W. S. Warren, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12050–12061 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou, X. Chen, P. Yang, G. Liang, Y. Yang, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb4696 Search PubMed .
P. Yang, Z. Gu, F. Zhu and Y. Li, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 128–138 Search PubMed .
M. d'Ischia, A. Napolitano, A. Pezzella, P. Meredith and M. Buehler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11196–11205 Search PubMed .
J. Hu, L. Yang, P. Yang, S. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Li, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 4940–4950 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Xie, Z. Wang, N. Zang, F. Carniato, Y. Huang, C. M. Andolina, L. R. Parent, T. B. Ditri, E. D. Walter, M. Botta, J. D. Rinehart and N. C. Gianneschi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10186–10194 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Zou, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Small, 2020, 16, 1907042 Search PubMed .
W. Cheng, X. Zeng, H. Chen, Z. Li, W. Zeng, L. Mei and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8537–8565 Search PubMed .
C. Qi, L.-H. Fu, H. Xu, T.-F. Wang, J. Lin and P. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 162–188 Search PubMed .
M. Farokhi, F. Mottaghitalab, M. R. Saeb and S. Thomas, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 309, 203–219 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, B. Gu, Z. Chen, Y. Yue, W. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Ren, W. Yang and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30360–30367 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Pan, J. Wang, F. Man, W. Zhang and G. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903129 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 Search PubMed .
H. A. Lee, Y. Ma, F. Zhou, S. Hong and H. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 704–713 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Guo, Z. Jin, W. Guo, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Today, 2021, 37, 101075 Search PubMed .
Z. Jia, M. Wen, Y. Cheng and Y. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008821 Search PubMed .
S. L. Mei, X. H. Xu, R. D. Priestley and Y. Lu, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 12269–12281 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 Search PubMed .
K. G. Malollari, P. Delparastan, C. Sobek, S. J. Vachhani, T. D. Fink, R. H. Zha and P. B. Messersmith, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 43599–43607 Search PubMed .
P. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Liu, Z. Wang and Y. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 746–761 Search PubMed .
M. d'Ischia, A. Napolitano, V. Ball, C. T. Chen and M. J. Buehler, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3541–3550 Search PubMed .
M. d'Ischia, K. Wakamatsu, F. Cicoira, E. Di Mauro, J. C. Garcia-Borron, S. Commo, I. Galvan, G. Ghanem, K. Kenzo, P. Meredith, A. Pezzella, C. Santato, T. Sarna, J. D. Simon, L. Zecca, F. A. Zucca, A. Napolitano and S. Ito, Pigm. Cell Melanoma Res., 2015, 28, 520–544 Search PubMed .

          M. Shin, Y. Wang and H. Lee, in Stimuli-Responsive Dewetting/Wetting Smart Surfaces and Interfaces, ed. A. Hozumi, L. Jiang, H. Lee and M. Shimomura, Springer, Cham,  2018, pp. 437–454 Search PubMed .
A. H. Hofman, I. A. van Hees, J. Yang and M. Kamperman, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704640 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai, J. Liu, M. Deng, Y. He and L. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1353–1359 Search PubMed .
L. Zong, M. Li and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 308–315 Search PubMed .
X. H. Wang, L. Yang, P. Yang, W. C. Guo, Q. P. Zhang, X. H. Liu and Y. W. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1295–1305 Search PubMed .
C. Du, Y. Ding, J. Qian, R. Zhang and C.-M. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 415–432 Search PubMed .
Y. Tan, W. Deng, Y. Li, Z. Huang, Y. Meng, Q. Xie, M. Ma and S. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5016–5024 Search PubMed .
S. Harvey, D. Y. W. Ng, J. Szelwicka, L. Hueske, L. Veith, M. Raabe, I. Lieberwirth, G. Fytas, K. Wunderlich and T. Weil, Biointerphases, 2018, 13, 06D407 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, P. Yang, J. Hu, Z. Wang and Y. Li, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 4194–4200 Search PubMed .
P. Yang, S. Zhang, N. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zhong, X. Sun, Y. Qi, X. Chen, Z. Li and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42671–42679 Search PubMed .
T. N. Kumar, S. Sivabalan, N. Chandrasekaran and K. L. N. Phani, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 6081–6088 Search PubMed .
M. Ambrico, N. F. D. Vecchia, P. F. Ambrico, A. Cardone, S. R. Cicco, T. Ligonzo, R. Avolio, A. Napolitano and M. d’Ischia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7161–7172 Search PubMed .
M. Chen, Q. Wen, F. Gu, J. Gao, C. C. Zhang and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 342, 331–338 Search PubMed .
L. Zhou, C. Du, R. Zhang and C. Dong, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 561–564 Search PubMed .
C. Du, J. Qian, L. Zhou, Y. Su, R. Zhang and C. M. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31576–31588 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, T. Wang, F. Zhu, Z. Wang and Y. Li, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 783–786 Search PubMed .
L. Tang, S. Mo, S. G. Liu, N. Li, Y. Ling, N. B. Li and H. Q. Luo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 259, 467–474 Search PubMed .
X. J. Kong, S. Wu, T. T. Chen, R. Q. Yu and X. Chu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15604–15610 Search PubMed .
B. Liu, X. Han and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13620–13626 Search PubMed .
A. Ravikumar, P. Panneerselvam and N. Morad, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20550–20558 Search PubMed .
D. He, T. Yang, W. Qian, C. Qi, L. Mao, X. Yu, H. Zhu, G. Luo and J. Deng, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 415–429 Search PubMed .
Y. Tong, L. Shao, X. Li, J. Lu, H. Sun, S. Xiang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu and X. Wu, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 2616–2622 Search PubMed .
X. Jing, H. Y. Mi, Y. J. Lin, E. Enriquez, X. F. Peng and L. S. Turng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20897–20909 Search PubMed .
Q. Wu, M. Niu, X. Chen, L. Tan, C. Fu, X. Ren, J. Ren, L. Li, K. Xu, H. Zhong and X. Meng, Biomaterials, 2018, 162, 132–143 Search PubMed .
J. C. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. H. Li and X. B. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22278–22288 Search PubMed .
X. Li, C. Xie, H. Xia and Z. Wang, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 9974–9981 Search PubMed .
A. V. Tran, K. Shim, T. T. Vo Thi, J. K. Kook, S. S. A. An and S. W. Lee, Acta Biomater., 2018, 74, 397–413 Search PubMed .
Y. B. Lee, Y. M. Shin, E. M. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, J. Lim, S. K. Kwon and H. Shin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 6012–6022 Search PubMed .
C. Xu, F. Gao, J. Wu, S. Niu, F. Li, L. Jin, Q. Shi and L. Du, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 7141–7153 Search PubMed .
R. Zheng, S. Wang, Y. Tian, X. Jiang, D. Fu, S. Shen and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15876–15884 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Yang, B. Qin, K. Wang, T. Xie, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4741–4747 Search PubMed .
H. Tian, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Shao, T. Gao and S. Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8307–8316 Search PubMed .
J. I. Clodt, V. Filiz, S. Rangou, K. Buhr, C. Abetz, D. Höche, J. Hahn, A. Jung and V. Abetz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 731–738 Search PubMed .
S. N. Ramanan, N. Shahkaramipour, T. Tran, L. Zhu, S. R. Venna, C.-K. Lim, A. Singh, P. N. Prasad and H. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 554, 164–174 Search PubMed .
M. Amiri, E. Amali and A. Nematollahzadeh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 216, 551–557 Search PubMed .
Y. Wei, X. Qi, S. He, S. Deng, D. Liu and Q. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32922–32934 Search PubMed .
L. Ao, C. Wu, K. Liu, W. Wang, L. Fang, L. Huang and W. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12544–12552 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Jiang, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ren, K. Ai, X. Chen and L. Lu, Acta Biomater., 2017, 47, 124–134 Search PubMed .
Z. Dong, H. Gong, M. Gao, W. Zhu, X. Sun, L. Feng, T. Fu, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 1031–1042 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Wang, S. Y. Lu, J. Hu, W. Zhang, L. Xu, D. Gu, W. Yang, W. Tang, F. Liu, Y. Cao and H. Liu, Biomaterials, 2019, 223, 119465 Search PubMed .
X. Zeng, K. Yang, C. Huang, K. Yang, S. Xu, L. Wang, P. Pi and X. Wen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 368–376 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, J. Wang, Z. Wang, K. A. Krug and J. D. Rinehart, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12813–12819 Search PubMed .
W. Sheng, W. Li, B. Li, C. Li, Y. Xu, X. Guo, F. Zhou and X. Jia, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1640–1645 Search PubMed .
C. Feng, S. Lü, C. Gao, X. Wang, X. Xu, X. Bai, N. Gao, M. Liu and L. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3157–3166 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, M. Yan, J. Lu, C. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Cui, C. Li and Y. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 309, 98–107 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, X. Jia, J. Hu, G. Zhang, F. Zhou, Z. Liu and H. Wang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5631–5637 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Pan, J. Liu, Y. Ma, F. Qiu, L. Mei, X. Zeng and G. Pan, Small, 2018, 14, 1703968 Search PubMed .
R. Zhu, F. Gao, J. G. Piao and L. Yang, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 1596–1602 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, M. Li, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 869–874 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Shen, B. Li, T. Li, H. Chang and Y. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1956–1965 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Luo, Y. Wu, P. Tang, J. Liu, Z. Liu, S. Shen, H. Ren and D. Wu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 17046–17062 Search PubMed .
D. Hong, H. Lee, B. J. Kim, T. Park, J. Y. Choi, M. Park, J. Lee, H. Cho, S. P. Hong, S. H. Yang, S. H. Jung, S. B. Ko and I. S. Choi, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20149–20154 Search PubMed .
G. He, S. Chen, Y. Xu, Z. Miao, Y. Ma, H. Qian, Y. Lu and Z. Zha, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 711–716 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Sui, C. Liu, C. Liu, M. Wu, B. Li and Y. Li, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 188, 27–36 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, Z. Wang, G. Fei and H. Xia, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700421 Search PubMed .
L. Han, P. Li, P. Tang, X. Wang, T. Zhou, K. Wang, F. Ren, T. Guo and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15846–15861 Search PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. W. Jiang, H. R. Jia and F. G. Wu, Biomaterials, 2019, 188, 83–95 Search PubMed .
S. Li, J. Xu, G. Yao and H. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 17075–17087 Search PubMed .
L. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Lu, K. Wang, Z. Wang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29088–29100 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1370–1376 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, B. Wu, Y. Zhou, F. Zhou, W. Liu and Z. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3605–3637 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Wang, T. Dai, P. Xu, P. Wu, Y. Zou, P. Yang, J. Hu, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802127 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Sun, X. Zhu, Q. Zhao, T. Zhang, A. Cholewinski, F. K. Yang, B. Zhao, R. Pinnaratip, P. K. Forooshani and B. P. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 433–464 Search PubMed .
S. Xiong, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Yu and Z. Hu, Polymer, 2016, 84, 328–335 Search PubMed .
M. Li, X. Sun, N. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Jia and W. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800155 Search PubMed .
J. E. Lemaster, Z. Wang, A. Hariri, F. Chen, Z. Hu, Y. Huang, C. V. Barback, R. Cochran, N. C. Gianneschi and J. V. Jokerst, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 251–259 Search PubMed .
N. M. O. Andoy, K. Jeon, C. T. Kreis and R. M. A. Sullan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004503 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Wu, L. Zhou, Y. Su and C. M. Dong, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 916–922 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou, T. Wu, N. Li, X. T. Guo and Y. W. Li, Polymer, 2020, 186, 122042 Search PubMed .
S. Cho, T. S. Shim, J. H. Kim, D. H. Kim and S. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700256 Search PubMed .
T. Chen, H. Li, Z. Li, Q. Jin and J. Ji, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 581–587 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Chen, X. Qian, N. Liu, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6740–6746 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Yin, B. Yu, X. Wang, Q. Guo and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32559–32568 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Xu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700046 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, Q. Jiang, D. Ghim, S. Singamaneni and Y.-S. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18799–18807 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, L. Wu, J. Tan, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12267–12274 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou, P. Yang, L. Yang, N. Li, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, Polymer, 2021, 217, 123464 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Jia, Y. Li, S. Wang and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47029–47037 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou, J. Zhao, J. Zhu, X. Guo, P. Chen, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7617–7624 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Lu, Z. Wang and H. Xia, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 2166–2172 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Du, S. Deng, J. Qiu, Z. Du, X. Cheng and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125654 Search PubMed .
H. J. Nam, J. Cha, S. H. Lee, W. J. Yoo and D. Y. Jung, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1458–1461 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, X. Zha, L. Tang, J. Pu, K. Ke, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, Nano Res., 2019, 13, 255–264 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, J. Xie, B. Ma, D. E. Bartlett, A. Xu and C. H. Wang, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 1324–1332 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Yu, W. Ye and F. Zhou, Macromol. Biosci., 2011, 11, 1227–1234 Search PubMed .
M. Amiri, E. Amali, A. Nematollahzadeh and H. Salehniya, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 228, 53–58 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Jia, G. Chen, J. Peng and J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 13347–13350 Search PubMed .
S. Hong, Y. Wang, S. Y. Park and H. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat7457 Search PubMed .
W. Qiang, W. Li, X. Li, X. Chen and D. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3018–3024 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, X. Lin, Y. Huang, R. Pan, Z. Zhu, L. Zhou and C. J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2156–2158 Search PubMed .
S. Z. Zhao, X. Song, X. M. Bu, C. Zhu, G. Wang, F. Liao, S. W. Yang and M. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 44784 Search PubMed .
B. Xiong, Y. Chen, Y. Shu, B. Shen, H. N. Chan, Y. Chen, J. Zhou and H. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13578–13580 Search PubMed .
W. Qiang, H. Hu, L. Sun, H. Li and D. Xu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 12190–12196 Search PubMed .
W. Jeong, E. Kim, J. Jeong, H. Bisht, H. Kang and D. Hong, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 2622–2626 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, B.-H. Wu, Y. Du, M.-Q. Ma and Z.-K. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3898–3902 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, Y. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Wang, M. Gao, N. C. Gianneschi, A. Dhinojwala and M. D. Shawkey, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5516–5521 Search PubMed .
F. Ponzio, V. Le Houerou, S. Zafeiratos, C. Gauthier, T. Garnier, L. Jierry and V. Ball, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 2420–2426 Search PubMed .
S. Hong, C. F. Schaber, K. Dening, E. Appel, S. N. Gorb and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7581–7587 Search PubMed .
L. Chang, F. Chen, X. Zhang, T. Kuang, M. Li, J. Hu, J. Shi, L. J. Lee, H. Cheng and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16553–16560 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, K. Ouyang, L. Zhou, P. Yu, J. Liao and C. Ning, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 343–350 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Hu, Z. Liu, X. Pei, B. Yu, P. Yan and F. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7109–7114 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Yu, J. Guo, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000151 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. R. Shang, G. P. Chen, L. Y. Sun, X. X. Zhang and Y. J. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaax8258 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, R. Zheng, S. Chen, Y. Wu, H. Liu, P. Wang, Z. Deng and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4183–4190 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Zhou, R. Bai, N. Lu, Y. Liu, X. Fu, O. Jacobson, W. Fan, J. Qu, S. Chen, T. Wang, P. Huang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701013 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, K. Ai, J. Liu, X. Ren, C. Jiang and L. Lu, Biomaterials, 2016, 77, 198–206 Search PubMed .
J. Feng, Z. Xu, P. Dong, W. Yu, F. Liu, Q. Jiang, F. Wang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 994–1004 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Su and C. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 8067–8077 Search PubMed .
T. Ding, Z. Wang, D. Xia, J. Zhu, J. Huang, Y. Xing, S. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Zhang and K. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008573 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Song, P. Zhu, Z. H. Xu and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 5730–5740 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Ma, C. Ding and L. Jia, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 862, 33–40 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, N. Xin, Z. Qiao, S. Chen, L. Zeng, Y. Zhang, D. Wei, J. Sun and H. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 43018–43030 Search PubMed .
Z. Dong, L. Feng, Y. Hao, M. Chen, M. Gao, Y. Chao, H. Zhao, W. Zhu, J. Liu, C. Liang, Q. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2165–2178 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Miao, H. Wang, H. Yang, Z. L. Li, L. Zhen and C. Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16946–16952 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, B. Bai, H. Wang and Y. Suo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6424–6432 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Q. Zeng, Q. Zhang, K. Li, X. Shi, F. Liang and D. Han, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8679–8686 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Du, Z. Du, M. Zhou, X. Cheng, H. Wang and B. Yan, Polymer, 2020, 190, 122219 Search PubMed .
C. Mou, Y. Yang, Y. Bai, P. Yuan, Y. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 1246–1257 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, J. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Hu, A. Hariri, N. Tu, K. A. Krug, M. D. Burkart, N. C. Gianneschi, J. V. Jokerst and J. D. Rinehart, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 4833–4842 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Wang, J. Xiao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2016, 81, 114–124 Search PubMed .
X. Lin, X. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Cao, Y. Xue, F. Wu, F. Yu, M. Wu and X. Zhu, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 1875–1884 Search PubMed .
D. Wu, X. Duan, Q. Guan, J. Liu, X. Yang, F. Zhang, P. Huang, J. Shen, X. Shuai and Z. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900095 Search PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 Search PubMed .
B. Poinard, S. Z. Y. Neo, E. L. L. Yeo, H. P. S. Heng, K. G. Neoh and J. C. Y. Kah, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21125–21136 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, M. Han, F. He, S. Peng, S. B. Darling and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104886 Search PubMed .
Y. Sugiura, H. Tanaka, Y. Mino, T. Ishida, N. Ota, M. Inoue, K. Nomoto, H. Yoshioka and T. Takemoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 6979–6982 Search PubMed .
Q. Zou, M. Abbas, L. Zhao, S. Li, G. Shen and X. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1921–1927 Search PubMed .
W. Li, A. Patil, X. Zhou, Z. Wang, M. Xiao, M. D. Shawkey, N. C. Gianneschi and A. Dhinojwala, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 203701 Search PubMed .
A. B. Mostert, B. J. Powell, F. L. Pratt, G. R. Hanson, T. Sarna, I. R. Gentle and P. Meredith, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 8943–8947 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, Y. Li, M. C. Allen, D. D. Deheyn, X. Yue, J. Zhao, N. C. Gianneschi, M. D. Shawkey and A. Dhinojwala, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5454–5460 Search PubMed .
D. Wu, J. Zhou, M. N. Creyer, W. Yim, Z. Chen, P. B. Messersmith and J. V. Jokerst, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4432–4483 Search PubMed .
M. Li, H. Wang, J. Hu, J. Hu, S. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7678–7685 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Sang, Y. Wang, F. Zhu, X. Hu, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7045–7051 Search PubMed .
N. Holten-Andersen, M. J. Harrington, H. Birkedal, B. P. Lee, P. B. Messersmith, K. Y. Lee and J. H. Waite, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 2651–2655 Search PubMed .
W. Cheng, J. Nie, L. Xu, C. Liang, Y. Peng, G. Liu, T. Wang, L. Mei, L. Huang and X. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18462–18473 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Qu, H. Tan, J. Song, M. Lei, E. Kim, G. F. Payne and C. Liu, Acta Biomater., 2019, 88, 181–196 Search PubMed .
P. Yang, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, J. Zhong, F. Zhu, X. Liu, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1834–1839 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Fu, P. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Li and Z. Gu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000632 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, W. Shen, J. Ling, Y. Yan, J. Hu and Y. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1377 Search PubMed .
G. Rong, C. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Yan and Y. Cheng, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz1774 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Lv, Q. Zhuang, Z. Yang, Z. Cao, L. Xu, P. Pei, C. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Dong, Y. Chao, C. Wang, K. Yang, R. Peng, Y. Cheng and Z. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 1043–1052 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Zhou, S. Yang, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. You, C. Peng and C. He, Acta Biomater., 2019, 86, 406–415 Search PubMed .
T. Yin, X. Zhang, L. Luo, L. Li, K. Bian, H. Liu, K. Niu, Y. He and D. Gao, Nanomedicine, 2018, 13, 1967–1983 Search PubMed .
X. Ding, J. Liu, J. Li, F. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Song and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6695–6700 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Bai, Y. Liu, X. Jia and X. Jiang, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 2011–2017 Search PubMed .
R. Zhang, S. Su, K. Hu, L. Shao, X. Deng, W. Sheng and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19722–19731 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Huang, X. He, H. Chen, Y. Zou, Y. Li, K. Lin, X. Cai, J. Xiao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2018, 183, 10–19 Search PubMed .
J. G. Piao, F. Gao and L. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 936–944 Search PubMed .
J. Shi, P. W. Kantoff, R. Wooster and O. C. Farokhzad, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2017, 17, 20–37 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zou, J. Hu, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, Giant, 2020, 3, 100022 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Yan, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 1658–1668 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Yan, K. Hu, Y. Zou, Y. Li, R. Ma, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2017, 141, 116–124 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Chen, K. Lin, T. Ying, Q. Huang, X. Cai, J. Xiao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Sci. China: Mater., 2020, 64, 474–487 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Yan, L. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2019, 203, 63–72 Search PubMed .
S. H. Kim, I. In and S. Y. Park, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1825–1835 Search PubMed .
K. Knop, R. Hoogenboom, D. Fischer and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6288–6308 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Xu, Y. Lu, G. Wei, G. Ye, T. Sun and J. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 344, 480–486 Search PubMed .
M. Ji, N. Jiang, J. Chang and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5412–5419 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, H.-C. Yang, F. He, S. Peng, Y. Li, L. Shao and S. B. Darling, Matter, 2019, 1, 115–155 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Ozden, N. Bizmark, C. B. Arnold, S. S. Datta and R. D. Priestley, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007833 Search PubMed .
Y. Fu, L. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Hu, G. Duan, X. Liu, Y. Li and Z. Gu, Mater. Horiz., 2021 10.1039/d0mh01985b .
X. Yu, D. He, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Song, D. Shi, Y. Fan, G. Luo and J. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1766–1781 Search PubMed .
Y. Xiang, C. Mao, X. Liu, Z. Cui, D. Jing, X. Yang, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, D. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900322 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiang, X. Lu, L. Fang, D. Gan, C. Lv, H. Zhang and S. Qu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 89–100 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou, L. Zhang, L. Yang, F. Zhu, M. Ding, F. Lin, Z. Wang and Y. Li, J. Controlled Release, 2018, 273, 160–179 Search PubMed .
X. Bao, J. Zhao, J. Sun, M. Hu and X. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8882–8892 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Peng Yang
	Peng Yang obtained his MS degree from the College of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University in 2020. Then he continued to pursue his PhD degree in the College of Polymer Science and Engineering at Sichuan University, under the supervision of Prof. Yiwen Li. His current research interests include the synthesis and application of polydopamine and polyphenol based nanomaterials.

Fang Zhu
	Fang Zhu received his MS degree from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Henan University, in 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, under the supervision of Prof. Yiwen Li. Currently, his research interests mainly focus on deferoxamine supramolecular drugs.

Zhengbiao Zhang
	Zhengbiao Zhang received his BS degree in 2000 and his PhD degree in 2007 from Soochow University. Since 2000, he has worked as an assistant professor (2000), associate professor (2009) and full professor (2013–present) in Soochow University. His Postdoctoral Fellowship was in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering of the National University of Singapore in 2007–2008 (one year). In 2012–2013, he was appointed as a Visiting Scholar in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering of The University of Akron. In 2015, he worked as a Visiting Professor in the Graduate School of Engineering, Department of Applied Chemistry, Nagoya University. His current research interests include the precision synthesis of polymers with well-defined molecular weight, architecture, tacticity and sequence; structure/property (function) relationships of precision polymers; recyclable and biomimetic polymers; and design and synthesis of functional polymers.

Yiyun Cheng
	Yiyun Cheng received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2008 and was a postdoctoral fellow at Washington University in St. Louis. He joined East China Normal University (ECNU) and started independent research at 2010. He received the Distinguished Young Scholars Award from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC), and the Young Chemist Award from the Chinese Chemical Society. He was the editorial board member of Biomaterials Science, Chinese Chemical Letters, Giant, etc. He has published more than 150 peer-reviewed articles. His research interests are focused on the development of smart polymers and nanoparticles for drug delivery.

Zhao Wang
	Zhao Wang received his BS degree from East China University of Science and Technology and his MS degree from the University of Akron. In 2013, he moved to the University of California, San Diego, for his PhD study, working with Prof. Nathan Gianneschi mainly on polydopamine-based polymeric materials. In 2018, he joined Aaron Esser-Kahn's group as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Chicago, where he explored mechanically controlled polymerization and material strengthening. He joined Soochow University in 2021 as professor of polymer chemistry. His current research focuses on the development of chemistry tools for new forms of stimuli-responsive polymerization processes.

Yiwen Li
	Yiwen Li received his BS in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (2008) and PhD in Polymer Science from the University of Akron (2013). After two years’ postdoctoral training at the University of California, San Diego, he began his independent career at Sichuan University in 2016, where he is currently a professor at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, and the State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering. His current research interests focus on bioinspired polymers including synthetic melanin and polyphenolic materials. He has published 120+ peer-reviewed articles, and served as the associate editor for Materials Express (ASP) and editorial board members for Giant (Elsevier) and Molecules (MDPI).

 	Fig. 1  Proposed covalent and non-covalent pathways during the formation of PDA.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of different stimuli-responsive PDA-based materials for different applications.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of three strategies to prepare stimuli-responsive PDA materials.	 

Light	PDA	Theranostics	
41, 48, 89, 98 and 103


	Bioimaging	
104


	Antibacterial materials	
94, 95 and 105


	Drug delivery	
106


	Wound healing	
97


	Near infrared imaging	
107


	Anticounterfeiting	
108


	Actuation	
69, 70, 109 and 110


	Seawater desalination	
18 and 111–117


	Shape memory and self-healing	
74, 93, 102, 118 and 119


	Photoelectric devices	
120

PDA and MXene	Seawater desalination	
121

pH	PDA	Controlled release	
122 and 123


	pH monitoring	
124


	Cancer therapy	
125

Stearyl methacrylate and undecylenic acid	Oil/water separation	
79

Chemical	PDA	Cation-π progressive assembly	
126

Probe DNA	DNA detection	
127 and 128

Ferrocene and hydroxyl group	H2O2 sensors	
49

Fluorescent PDA	Metal ion detection	
54, 57 and 129


	Glutathione sensors	
56


	Hydrogen peroxide and glucose sensors	
55

Fluorescent oligomers	Metal ion detection and bioimaging	
130

Single-stranded DNA sequences	ATP semiquantification	
131

Disulfide bond	Degradation	
90 and 132

Temperature	Hybrid hydrogel	Cell delivery	
66

PDMAEMA	Controlled release	
81

PNIPAM	Separation	
83


	Structural coloration	
133

Humidity	PDA	Structural coloration	
134


	Self-standing materials	
135


	Self-healing materials	
136

Electric field	PDA	E-ink	
137


	Cell proliferation	
138


	Atenolol sensors	
73

Mechanic force	PDA	Self-healing materials	
139


	Structural coloration	
140 and 141

Hybrid hydrogel	Strain sensors	
61 and 142

Ultrasound	Perfluorocarbon	Bioimaging	
80

pH and light	PDA	Theranostics	
62, 63, 76, 77 and 143–147


	Controlled release	
60 and 65


	Wound healing	
92

PDA and hydrazine bond	Theranostics	
53

PDA and glycol chitosan	Antibacterial materials	
59

PDA and boronate ester bond	Theranostics	
85 and 86

pH and temperature	Polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) and PNIPAM	Membrane functionalization	
71

P(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA)	Controlled release	
84

PDMAEMA	Controlled release	
82

pH and chemical	PDA	Controlled release	
148

pH and magnetic field	PDA and Fe3O4	DNA capture	
149

pH and ultrasound	PDA	Controlled release	
64

Light and chemical	PDA and Fe2+	Theranostics	
150

Light and magnetic field	PDA, chlorin e6, and Mn2+	Theranostics	
151

PDA and Fe3+	Theranostics	
75

PDA and Mn2+	Theranostics	
152

Light and temperature	PDA and PNIPAM	Controlled release	
153 and 154

PDA and polyurethane	Self-healing materials	
155

Light and ultrasound	PDA and perfluorocarbon	Theranostics	
156

PDA and perfluorocarbon	Bioimaging	
157

pH, light, and chemical	PDA	Theranostics	
158 and 159

PDA, disulfide bond, and chlorambucil	Theranostics	
44

PDA, perfluorocarbon, and disulfide bond	Theranostics	
67

PDA and manganese carbonyl	Theranostics	
160

pH, light, and temperature	PDA, PAA, and PDEAA	Adsorption	
96

pH, light, and enzyme	PDA and gelatin	Theranostics	
91


 	Fig. 4  (a) The possible photothermal mechanism of PDA. (b) Schematic illustration of a PDA NP-based photothermal therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The design of a PDA material with enhanced photothermal effects via a co-polymerization strategy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) The preparation of light-triggered multi-shape memory polymers via PDA coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) A self-cleaning photo-responsive membrane comprising a thin film of AZO and PDA. Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The catechol–Fe3+ coordination complexes at different pHs. (b) Disulfide linked dopamine for surface coating and GSH-responsive degradation. (c) Schematic illustration of a potassium ion-responsive PDA film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 6  Approaches for constructing PDA-based materials with different stimuli-responsive properties: (a) temperature responsiveness, (b) and (c) humidity responsiveness, (d) electric field responsiveness, (e) mechanical force responsiveness, and (f) ultrasound responsiveness.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a light- and pH-responsive PDA system for drug release. (b) A temperature- and pH-responsive PDA NPs via surface grafting of PDMAEMA. (c) The pH- and ultrasound-responsive PDA-coated mesoporous silica NPs for controlled drug release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Magnetic field- and pH-responsive PDA NPs for separation of DNA. (e) Schematic illustration of the light- and chemical-responsive behavior of Fe2+-PDA-GOD NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (f) A fluorinated PDA system with light- and ultrasound-responsive behavior for photoacoustic and ultrasound imaging. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The synthesis of light/pH/chemical triple-responsive PDA–prodrug conjugate NPs for controlled drug release. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The chemical structure and light/pH/chemical triple-responsive drug release of PDA. Reprinted from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier. (c) A pH/light/enzyme triple-responsive PDA hydrogel system. (d) PDA-based hydrogel with pH-, light-, and thermo-responsive features for the removal of dyes from wastewater. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Approach for constructing a PDA based multifunctional nanoplatform for cancer therapy. Reprinted from ref. 192 with permission from Elsevier. (b) The light-responsive PDA hydrogel for controlled drug release in cancer therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Borate-coordination-polymer-coated PDA nanoplatform for a synergetic targeting property for sialic acid-overexpressed tumor cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) A radionuclide-64Cu-labeled DOX-loaded PDA–gadolinium–metallofullerene (Gd3N@C80) core–satellite nanoplatform for MR imaging, PA imaging, PET imaging and photothermal cancer therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The sensing ability of probe DNA-functionalized PDA for DNA and proteins. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The synthesis of fluorescent PDA NPs via microplasma electrochemistry and their application in U6+ detection. Reprinted from ref. 195 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis, shape deformation and photothermal mechanism of a PDA coated SMP. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Restoration and reversible actuation of deformed dynamic 3D structures of different patterned PDA stripes. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The designed PDA-coated liquid crystal elastomer as a soft robotic swimmer and its light-controlled swimming behavior. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photograph of original, cut, healed PCL/PDA composite strips, and their mechanical properties. Reprinted from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Self-healing polyurethane/PDA nanocomposites made via Diels–Alder dynamic crosslinking. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The working principle of a PDA-based E-ink high resolution display and the “show-and-erase” performance for a microscale feature (scale bar, 50 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustrations and photographs of PDA dispersions under ambient light and spotlight, and photographs showing selective disclosure of a yin–yang symbol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A schematic diagram of arginine-doped PDA NPs with enhanced photothermal conversion capacity and solar evaporation performances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society and reprinted from ref. 115 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Photograph of a seawater treatment set-up under all-weather conditions and the reusability of PDA-sponge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
