Enhanced ion transport by graphene oxide/cellulose nanofibers assembled membranes for high-performance osmotic energy harvesting   - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0MH00979B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0MH00979B
(Communication)
Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2702-2709Enhanced ion transport by graphene oxide/cellulose nanofibers assembled membranes for high-performance osmotic energy harvesting†

        
          
            Yadong 
            Wu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weiwen 
            Xin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiang-Yu 
            Kong
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jianjun 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yongchao 
            Qian
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Sun
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolu 
            Zhao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Weipeng 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Jiang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Liping 
            Wen
          
        
      *ab
aCAS Key Laboratory of Bio-inspired Materials and Interfacial Science, Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: wen@mail.ipc.ac.cn
bSchool of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      15th June 2020
    , Accepted 30th July 2020First published on 31st July 2020AbstractAs an emerging potential energy source to address the energy crisis, osmotic energy has attracted increasing attention. Fast ion transport is essential for this blue energy and for other membrane-based energy systems to achieve low membrane resistance and high ion selectivity for power density. However, the current nanochannel membranes suffer from a high energy barrier for ion transmembrane movement because of the narrow channel size and the low charge density, which results in low current and undesirable power density. Here, an elaborate graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets/cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) assembled membrane is reported to improve confined ion transport for high-performance osmotic energy conversion. CNFs, the most abundant natural nanomaterial with highly anisotropic properties and a high density of functional groups, not only enlarge the original narrow channel, which reduces the energy barrier for ion transport, but also introduce space charge between pristine GO nanosheets to maintain ion selectivity. Benefiting from the effective assembly of GO and CNFs, a high power density of 4.19 W m−2 with an improved current is obtained by mixing artificial seawater and river water. Moreover, a power density of 7.20 W m−2, which is higher than the standard for commercialization, is achieved at 323 K. The osmotic energy conversion shows a nonlinear thermal dependence relationship at high temperatures due to bubble nucleation. This material design strategy can provide an alternative concept to effectively enhance ion transport in membrane-based fields such as separations, desalination, flow batteries and fuel cells.

New concepts
Osmotic energy is a renewable and sustainable energy source to address the energy crisis, thus, of increasing broad appeal. However, the current energy conversion suffers from high ion transport energy barrier and low current output. Here, a novel composite membrane with improved confined ion transport is demonstrated by the assembly of graphene oxide nanosheets and cellulose nanofibers. This strategy of the combination of enlarged nanochannel and space charge leads to low ion transport energy barrier (less than a half) and high ion selectivity. Thus, high-power density (the highest value to the best of our knowledge) with enhanced ion transportation and current is obtained. The thermal and solvent activation treatments can further improve the power density which is beyond the critical commercialization benchmark. This material design concept will have broad applications, which can usher in an alternative paradigm to effectively enhance ion transport for other membrane-based energy fields, such as batteries (e.g., fuel cells, flow batteries, storage batteries and supercapacitors), desalination and so on.

Introduction
The energy shortage and the scarcity of clean water are two global challenges that need to be addressed.1 There is enormous potential energy in the ocean called “blue energy”, which includes wave energy2 and osmotic energy.3 Osmotic energy originates from the concentration difference between sea and river water. According to the van’t Hoff law, P = kBTΔc, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature and Δc is the solute imbalance between reservoirs, this osmotic pressure (P) is nearly 30 atmospheres, which is almost equal to the hydrostatic pressure energy under a 300 m water column and comparable to the dams and barrages used for hydropower.4 In living organisms evolving over millions of years, nanofluidic channels with highly selective and flux filters can effectively convert this salinity-gradient into electric power. For instance, electric eels can generate a potential difference of approximately 600 V from the salt content in fluids using highly selective nanochannels.5,6 In nature, there are considerable and easily obtained osmotic gradient energy resources in estuaries, which can provide a promising way to address the energy crisis.3
To date, many nanofluidic channel membranes have been developed to imitate the functions of ion channels in living organisms to utilize this enormous potential energy source. For example, 25 pW per nanopore was obtained in track-etched membrane7 by the surface charge controlled ion transport. A power density of 0.37 Wm−2 was achieved by the membrane stacking strategy.8 And an output power density of 0.35 W m−2 was further achieved based on the combination of track-etched membranes and self-assembled block copolymer membranes,9 and the power density was improved to 2.04 W m−2 by an ultrathin film strategy.10 Recently, two-dimensional11 nanofluidics, such as graphene, molybdenum disulfide,12 and MXene,13–15 have attracted attention due to the perfect ion selectivity in narrow spaces between nanosheets. Interestingly, the confined space in the 2D nanofluidic channel is generally less than one nanometer, which results in perfect ion selectivity. However, this narrow channel space by simple stacking of nanosheets causes a high ion permeation energy barrier, slow ion transport, and reduced ion flux, which give rise to a low power density (far less than the critical value of 5 W m−2 for the economic viability standard16). The relationship between the ion transport rate and selectivity is called a trade-off relationship,17 which limits the development of two-dimensional nanofluidic and other membrane-based systems (e.g., flow batteries and fuel cells). To further improve the performance of the nanochannel membrane, one-dimensional nanomaterials have attracted increasing attention owing to the high density of functional groups and their highly anisotropic and stable properties. For example, Kevlar nanofiber-based hybrid membranes including MXene/Kevlar,18 BN/Kevlar,19 polyelectrolyte/Kevlar20 and GO/Kevlar21 have been constructed to improve the chemical and mechanical stabilities of the membranes for high osmotic energy conversion. However, synthetic nanofibers are usually expensive and require a complex synthesis process. Thus, there is a trend to develop natural nanofibers with low cost and easy accessibility for broad applications. Very recently, natural ultrathin silk fibroin22 and silk-based hybrid23 membranes have been successfully developed for osmotic energy conversion with a desirable power density of 4.06 W m−2 and 2.86 W m−2 respectively, showing the possibility of employing natural nanofibers. Among the natural nanomaterials, cellulose nanofibrils, the most abundant natural material, have attracted substantial research interest in energy conversion,24 water purification25 and ion/electron transport26 because of their unique nanoscale dimensions, abundant and modifiable functional groups,27 excellent mechanical property and sustainability.
Herein, we demonstrate an elaborate graphene oxide (GO)/cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) assembled membrane with a combination of high space charge and enlarged nanochannels. This composite strategy can effectively decrease the resistance of ion transport and maintain high ion selectivity. These advances result in a high-performance nanofluidic osmotic power generator with a high power density output of 4.19 W m−2 by mimicking sea/river water conditions. A power density up to 7.20 W m−2 can be further achieved at 323 K, which is far beyond the critical standard for commercialization and state-of-the-art nanochannel membranes to the best of our knowledge. Additionally, osmotic energy conversion shows an interesting nonlinear thermal dependence relationship at higher temperatures due to bubble nucleation. The introduction of CNFs largely reduces the transmembrane energy barrier from 15.18 kJ mol−1 to 6.58 kJ mol−1. This reduced energy barrier results in enhanced ion transport. These results strongly suggest that this elaborately assembled membrane with 1D and 2D nanomaterials exhibits promising ion transport behaviors for membrane-based energy conversion systems (e.g., flow batteries and fuel cells) to boost their performances.
Results and discussion
The ion transport process in GO/CNFs assembled membranes during osmotic energy generation is illustrated (Fig. 1a). The osmotic power device is integrated by separating two reservoirs containing different concentrations of sodium chloride (NaCl) solutions (Fig. 1b) with a freestanding and flexible GO/CNFs membrane in which cations are mainly allowed to pass through the enlarged and space charge filled (Fig. 1c) interlayer space (Fig. 1d) along the salinity gradient. Thus, an osmotic ion flux is formed towards the equilibrium state. The introduction of CNFs into the original GO lamellar film has two functions (Fig. 1c). One function is to enlarge the interlayer space (Fig. 1e), which reduces the ion transport energy barrier, as shown in Fig. 1c. The other function is to provide space charge, which maintains high ion selectivity. With the combination of a larger nanochannel and space charge, higher short-circuit (Isc) and larger open-circuit voltage (Voc) were achieved at the same time (Fig. 1f) compared with those of pure CNFs or GO membranes, which will enhance both ion transport and ion-selective properties.
 Fig. 1  Harvesting osmotic energy by the GO/CNFs assembled membranes with enhanced ion transport. (a) Osmotic energy harvesting system. (b) Illustration of ion transport in the GO/CNFs membranes during osmotic energy harvesting. High concentration (CH) and low concentration (CL) salt solutions are separated by the composite membrane. The ion flux is driven under the chemical potential passing through a cation selective membrane, causing a power output. (c) The function of CNFs during ion transport. The enlarged channel and negative space charge reduce the ion transport energy barrier, resulting in boosting the current and power output. (d) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the lamellar structured GO/CNFs membrane. The magnified image in the inset clearly shows the layered structure. (e) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the GO/CNFs membrane indicate the existence of CNFs in the bulk membrane and a larger interlayer distance (1.32 nm) than that of the pure GO membrane (0.88 nm). (f) The I–V curves for GO/CNFs versus pure CNFs and pure GO membrane, showing enhanced ion transport with high ion selectivity. 
The GO/CNFs assembled membranes were prepared by vacuum-assisted filtration (Fig. S1a, ESI†) to form a flexible (Fig. S1b and c, ESI†) and freestanding membrane. GO and CNFs were prepared according to the experimental section. TEMPO-oxidized27 CNFs with lengths on the micrometer scale and diameters in the range of 0–10 nm were observed by transmission electron microscope (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S1d and e, ESI†). The prepared GO/CNFs membranes were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. S1f, ESI†). The GO/CNFs film interlayer distance is 1.32 nm (Fig. 1c), which means a wider interlayer distance than that of 0.88 nm for the GO membrane (Fig. S2c, ESI†). These results reveal that GO and CNFs successfully assembled into a membrane through van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonds.28 This unique membrane structure explains the larger interlayer distance as well as the space charge function for fast ion transport in osmotic and other membrane-based energy conversion systems.
The ion transport behavior of the GO/CNFs membranes with a thickness of 9 μm was studied by the ionic current−voltage (I–V) property in a homemade electrochemical cell (Fig. 2a). The linear ohmic ion transport behavior over a range of KCl electrolyte concentrations indicates the symmetric membrane structure (Fig. 2b). The ionic conductance over a series of KCl concentrations is plotted as a function of electrolyte concentration (Fig. 2c). This reveals the obvious charge-governed ion transport and confined ion transport behaviors through the GO/CNFs film. There is a critical concentration point at approximately 0.1 M electrolyte. Above this point, the ionic conductance follows the bulk rule of linearly increasing with concentration due to the thin electrical double layers (EDL).9,10 However, as the concentration decreases to the critical point, a strong nonlinear relationship is observed, and the ionic conductivity dramatically deviates from the bulk value, reaching a plateau. This interesting phenomenon induced by the overlapping EDL in the nanochannels leads to ion enrichment in the confined space where the ion transport behaviors are determined by the surface charge of and the space charge of CNFs instead of the bulk concentration. Because of the negative charge of GO and CNFs, GO/CNFs membranes showed a cation selective property meaning cations (i.e., Li+, Na+, K+) were enriched and anions (i.e., Cl−) were excluded in the channel. The ion-selective property is critical for osmotic energy conversion because the directional ion flow of cations or anions induces the net diffusion current (Idiff) and potential (Vdiff). The performance of GO/CNFs membranes under a salinity-gradient was further studied by choosing different concentrations of electrolytes placed between the membrane. Fig. 2d shows the I–V curves of the GO/CNFs membrane (CNFs content of ∼66.7 wt%) under a 50-fold concentration gradient (0.5 M/0.01 M KCl). Two similar curves represent the reverse and forward ion diffusion directions. The absolute values of the intercepts on the X/Y-axes for each line equally demonstrate the symmetric membrane structure and show that no preferential ion diffusion direction was observed. The ion selectivity and energy conversion were also explored under different concentration gradients (Fig. 2e). According to the equations shown29 below, (1) (2)Vdiff and the energy conversion efficiency are associated with the ion transfer number (t+) and concentration gradient (ahigh/alow). By subtracting Vredox (Table S1, ESI†) from Voc and fitting the experimental Vdiff data, the results showed that the transference number can exceed 0.8 with more than 30% conversion efficiency. Considering the expanded interlayer space, the ion selectivity performance and energy conversion efficiency are outstanding; thus, Voc and Isc are also promising for high osmotic energy generation (Fig. 2f).
 Fig. 2  Ion transport behaviors of the GO/CNFs assembled nanochannel membrane. (a) Schematic of the ion transport behaviors. The electrolyte is driven by an external electric field to pass through the test membrane where anions are blocked. (b) I–V curves of the GO/CNFs membrane (CNFs weight content of 66.7%) tested in neutral electrolytes with different KCl concentrations. (c) Ionic conductance in a range of concentrations of neutral KCl electrolyte. An obvious charge-governed ion transport behavior can be observed according to the deviations from the bulk value (red dashed line) under the low concentration (0.1 M) region. (d) Forward and reverse diffusion I–V curves for the GO/CNFs membrane (CNFs weight content of 66.7%) tested in a 50-fold KCl concentration. (e) The tested ion selectivity property, defined as the transmembrane ion transference number and energy conversion efficiency under a series of KCl concentration gradients, where the low concentration side is fixed at 0.01 mM. (f) The short-circuit (Isc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) were tested under the same range of electrolyte concentrations. 
The influence of the CNFs weight content on energy conversion performance was investigated by varying the CNFs weight content from 0% to 80% (Fig. 3a) by connecting the power system to an external circuit (Fig. S3, ESI†) with an external load (RL). Then the actual output power density (P) can be calculated by the current output (I) according to the formula P = I2 × RL. As shown in Fig. 3a, the power density first increases when the CNFs content increases and it reaches a maximum value of 4.19 W m−2 at 66.7% weight content. However, the power density dropped when the CNFs content further increased. However, note that CNFs dramatically improved the osmotic energy conversion performance compared to that of the pure GO membrane over all the investigated content ranges, which verified the important role of CNFs and the composite strategy in improving ion transport. To further explore the mechanism of the improved energy density in the GO/CNFs system, Voc and Isc are also plotted over CNFs content range (Fig. 3b). For pure GO membranes, a higher Voc can be easily achieved, which indicated the high ion selectivity due to the narrow interlayer distance. However, it also induced low Isc, which means less net ion flux and a high ion transport energy barrier. Thus, the power density was limited according to the theoretical maximum output power equation.29 (3)
 Fig. 3  Osmotic energy conversion performance under a 50-fold NaCl osmotic gradient. (a) Influence of the CNFs weight content on osmotic energy generation. (b) Influence of the CNFs weight content on Voc and Isc. (c) The improved power density of GO/CNFs (66.7 wt%) compared with that of pure GO and CNFs membranes, indicating an improved power density and reduced resistance. (d) The improved current density of GO/CNFs (66.7 wt%) compared with that of pure GO and CNFs membranes. 
After introducing CNFs into the GO system, an obvious improvement in Isc can be observed as a result of the enlarged interlayer space. Although Voc showed a decreasing trend because of the reduced ion selectivity at a low CNFs content (approximately 54 wt%), the output energy density was still much higher than that of the pure GO membrane. As the CNFs weight content increased, Voc gradually resumed to the level of pure GO membranes. Isc showed a slightly decreasing trend. As a consequence, there is an optimal and critical CNFs weight content with a maximum value of 4.19 W m−2. Around this critical point, the interlayer distance was expanded, which was appropriate for fast ion transport and high transmembrane flux. There was enough space charge filling in the expanded layer which maintained high ion selectivity for enlarged nanochannels. However, above this critical content point, more CNFs are unfavorable for the output power density because of the increase in the physical steric hindrance for the ion transmembrane movement. Therefore, more CNFs will reduce ion flux and Isc. With the combination of the enlarged nanochannel and the space charge, the performance of GO/CNFs assembled membranes to achieve an energy output density of 4.19 W m−2 was observed, and the resistance was largely decreased compared with that of pure CNFs (2.88 W m−2) or GO (1.95 W m−2) membranes (Fig. S4a, ESI†). Additionally, the Voc and Isc value of the GO/CNFs membranes were higher than those of the GO and CNFs membranes (Fig. S4b, ESI†). Compared with pure GO or CNFs membranes, GO/CNFs membranes showed a low resistance of 27 kΩ (Fig. 3c) and a higher current density (Fig. 3d) thus giving rise to a high output power density. Meanwhile, the thickness of the membrane also affects the resistance and power density (Fig. S5, ESI†). But, the performance of GO/CNFs membranes is still higher than that of the pure GO membranes. Therefore, CNFs effectively improve the osmotic energy density by boosting the current output with enlarged nanochannels and high space charge density.
For practical applications, the performance of the GO/CNFs membranes was studied under various working conditions. Since the energy conversion is mainly affected by the surface charge of GO and the space charge of CNFs, the output power density of GO/CNFs membranes highly depends on the pH value of the electrolyte. With an increase in the electrolyte pH value from 3 to 10, the power density increased at the same time and finally reached 5.52 W m−2 (Fig. 4a). When the pH was equal to 10, the lowest resistance and highest Isc were obtained due to the more negative charge of CNFs and GO nanosheets. Additionally, different electrolyte types were tested under the same concentration gradient (Fig. S4c, ESI†). A power density of only 1.89 W m−2 was obtained in the LiCl electrolyte while the KCl electrolyte showed the highest value with a power density of 5.85 W m−2, which exceeded that of the standard for commercialization.16 This phenomenon was caused by the difference in the ion diffusion coefficient. The GO/CNFs membrane was cation selective which means that a higher cation diffusion coefficient gives rise to fast ion transport, less resistance and effective ion separation. Thus, a high output power density was obtained. The ion diffusion coefficient order for the three chosen electrolytes is K+ >Na+ >Li+, which agrees with the output energy density and current density order (Fig. S4d, ESI†). The resistance order was opposite to the ion diffusion coefficient order, which demonstrated that KCl is the most remarkable electrolyte for osmotic energy conversion. And for common divalent ions in water such as Ca2+, Mg2+ and Cu2+ ions (i.e., 2.62, 2.16 and 0.52 W m−2, respectively), the ion diffusion coefficient order is Ca2+ > Mg2+ > Cu2+. Thus, the faster the cation diffuses (for cation-selective membranes) with equal valent, the more efficient the charge separation will occur, which leads to high osmotic energy conversion (Fig. S6, ESI†). The concentration gradient is another factor that affects the osmotic energy conversion. Three electrolyte concentration gradients were established to represent the possible range of osmotic sources that can be found in natural resources (freshwater, seawater and high saline lakes). The results are easily-understood according to equation (1). A higher osmotic gradient leads to a higher power and current density (Fig. 4b and c). At a 500-fold concentration gradient (mimicking the salt-lake/river water condition), a remarkable power density of 13.25 W m−2 was obtained, which also means that a higher concentration gives rise to a lower resistance (Fig. 4c). To test this hypothesis, a fixed concentration gradient with different CL concentrations (from 0.001 M to 0.1 M) was measured, which has not been fully experimentally discussed in detail in previous studies.9,10,12,14,18,23,30 The experimental results illustrated that there was a large difference in the output power density even if the concentration gradients were the same. The results were analyzed by the differences in the cell resistance according to the following equation:31 (4)where Rcell represents the cell resistance and K is the cell constant. CL, Λ0 and b indicated the low NaCl concentration, the equivalent conductance under an infinite dilution and the Onsager slope constant, respectively. The corresponding trend is that a higher concentration leads to high flux and low resistance.31 Thus, a higher power density was obtained (Fig. 4d). A meaningful suggestion for harvesting high power density can be obtained from this experiment result considering the cell resistance. That is, the resistance is largely reduced by mixing some seawater in advance with the freshwater before introducing it into the working cell. Generally, an increase in the concentration will induce a thin EDL. Thus, the nanochannel has low ion selectivity. However, in this GO/CNFs system, with the combination of surface and space charges, a high ion selectivity is maintained even at a high concentration. Therefore, a high concentration31,32 leads to the high ion flux through the expanded interlayer space, resulting in a higher output energy density.
 Fig. 4  External factors that influence the osmotic energy generation of the GO/CNFs (66.7 wt%) membrane. (a) Electrolyte pH value influence on power density, resistance, Voc and Isc. The osmotic gradient is the 50-fold NaCl concentration (CH = 0.5 M, CL = 0.01 M). (b and c) Dependence of the output power density, resistance and current density on the electrolyte concentration gradient. CL was fixed at 0.01 M NaCl. (d) The differences in output power density, resistance, Voc and Isc under a 50-fold NaCl concentration gradient. 
We also tested the solvent activation relationship with the GO/CNFs energy conversion performance by immersing the membrane in artificial seawater (0.5 M NaCl), which is close to and simulates real-world operating conditions. The result (Fig. S7, ESI†) demonstrates that the output energy density was effectively improved from the original value of 4.19 W m−2 to a value of 5.65 W m−2. The XRD results showed a further expanded interlayer distance33 (Fig. S8, ESI†) leading to an improved output current density which is stable without becoming weak over time. Thus, the membrane is activated. Therefore, the GO/CNFs membrane exhibits excellent osmotic energy conversion performance under a range of different working conditions.
To quantitatively understand the mechanism of confined ion transport in the GO/CNFs membrane, the thermal dependence relationship was investigated. As the temperature increases, the power density gradually increases and the resistance decreases (Fig. 5a and b). The Voc (Fig. S9, ESI†) and Isc followed a trend similar to that of the power density. However, it is worth noting that there was still a maximum power density point, which showed the nonlinear thermal dependent relationship of energy conversion. The thermal dependence of the GO/CNFs membrane (Fig. 5a and b) can be divided into three regions, namely, high viscosity at low temperatures, low viscosity with high ion mobility when increasing the temperatures and the bubble region at a high temperature, as shown in Fig. 5d. This interesting ion transport behavior can be comprehended by considering material surface and fluid property change over rising temperature.34 From the material surface property aspect, increasing the system temperature affects the functional group activity on GO and CNFs, resulting in a more negative charge in the confined space. From the view of confined ion transport, increasing the temperature reduces the viscosity of the liquid and increases the ionic mobility34 (Fig. 5d) according to the following equation,35 where μ(T) is the ionic mobility, r is the ionic radius, and η(T) is the water viscosity. (5) (6)
 Fig. 5  Thermal dependence of osmotic energy conversion. (a and b) Thermal dependence on the energy power density, resistance, Voc and Isc under a 50-fold NaCl gradient. (c) The Arrhenius-type plot of the conductivity as a function of temperature. The inset shows the ion conductance versus temperature. The Na+ ion transmembrane barrier is 6.58 kJ mol−1 under a 50-fold NaCl osmotic gradient. (d) Different temperature-dependent relationships between ion transport behaviors. At low temperatures (e.g., 298 K), high viscosity and mobility result in low Isc, Voc and power density. Increasing the temperature (e.g., 318 K) induced low viscosity and high ionic mobility; thus, a high power output was obtained. High temperatures (e.g., 328 K) were unfavorable for ion transport by the bubble nucleation effect, causing a decreasing trend in the power density. 
These two factors worked together and significantly enhanced the output energy density from 298 K to 323 K. Further increasing the fluid medium temperature caused bubble nucleation34,36,37 (Fig. 5d) in the confined space. Hydrophobic patches exist on cellulose nanofibers (200) plane due to –CH groups (Fig. 1c) and on the amphiphilic GO nanosheets,28 which serve as nucleation sites for bubbles. These nucleation sites can eventually grow cross-sections of the nanochannel, blocking the flow of the electrolyte and ions and leading to the energy conversion having a nonlinear thermal relationship. As a consequence, the space charge could be gradually filled with nanopancake-like gas layers, thus shielding the charge zone and hindering electrolyte flow.38 Thus, the power density decreases. However, it is also important to note the increasing rate of power density slowed with increasing temperature. This indicates that a slight increase in temperature can significantly improve the power density. For the GO/CNFs membrane, a power density of 6.86 W m−2 was easily achieved at 313 K. Heat treatment occurs in nature with the assistance of solar energy32 and low-grade thermal energy.39 Through thermal analysis, the ion transport energy barrier in the confined space can be calculated according to the Arrhenius equation,40 (7)where G is the conductance, G0 is a constant, Ea is the activation energy, R is the gas constant, and T is the temperature. The quantitative result shows that (Fig. 5c) the energy barrier for Na+ ion transport in the pure GO membrane (Fig. S10, ESI†) is 15.18 kJ mol−1, which is comparable to the reported value with a similar interlayer distance.33,41 However, for GO/CNFs membrane, the energy barrier (6.58 kJ mol−1) was less than half that of the GO membrane, which agreed with the reduced resistance and fast ion transportation for energy conversion. This significant improvement in power density depends on the expanded interlayer distance and is associated with the space charge. For polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), which has a less negative charge than CNFs,18 the power density of the GO/PVA membranes did not increase, as shown by the GO/CNFs membranes (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI†). This result clearly demonstrated the significant role of space charge in ion transport and energy conversion. Moreover, the introduction of CNFs not only provided space charge but also increased the stability of membrane.42 Fig. S13 (ESI†) clearly shows that after immersing the membrane into 0.5 M NaCl or heating the test solution by thermal treatment, the GO/CNFs remained almost unchanged, but the GO membrane was broken into several pieces when it was removed from the test equipment.
Conclusions
In summary, an elaborate GO/CNFs assembled membrane has been successfully explored for high-performance osmotic energy conversion with enhanced ion transport due to a reduced energy barrier. By the combination of an expanded interlayer distance and space charge, a maximum power density of 4.19 W m−2 under a 50-fold electrolyte gradient can be achieved. It can be further boosted to 5.60 W m−2 and 7.20 W m−2, which are higher than the standard for commercialization by simple, available and easily achieved treatment methods, including increasing the temperature and solvent activation. Furthermore, a series of potentially different dimensional materials and preparation methods can be used to boost the performance by optimizing the thickness and chemical properties of membranes. Thus, this material design strategy offers a promising approach to improve ion transport for the development of membrane-based osmotic energy conversion and other membrane-based processes such as hydraulic and solar energy conversion, flow batteries, fuel cells, water purification and desalination39,43–47 because ion transport is the rate-determining step in those systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFA0206904, 2017YFA0206900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21625303, 21905287, 51673206, 21988102), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDA21010213), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2194088), and the Key Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (QYZDY-SSW-SLH014).
References
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, T. Jiang and L. Xu, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. La Mantia, M. Pasta, H. D. Deshazer, B. E. Logan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1810–1813 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marbach and L. Bocquet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3102–3144 RSC .
A. L. Gotter, M. A. Kaetzel and J. R. Dedman, Comp. Biochem. Physiol., Part A: Mol. Integr. Physiol., 1998, 119, 225–241 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. H. Schroeder, A. Guha, A. Lamoureux, G. VanRenterghem, D. Sept, M. Shtein, J. Yang and M. Mayer, Nature, 2017, 552, 214–218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balme, T. Ma, E. Balanzat and J.-M. Janot, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 544, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, E. Balanzat, J.-M. Janot and S. Balme, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12578–12585 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X.-Y. Kong, K. Xiao, Q. Liu, G. Xie, P. Li, J. Ma, Y. Tian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14765–14772 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Sui, P. Li, G. Xie, X.-Y. Kong, K. Xiao, L. Gao, L. Wen and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8905–8914 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, M. Xu, J. Zhao, S. Jiang, S. Wang, Z. Li, X. He, T. Huang, M. Cao, H. Wu, M. D. Guiver and Z. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605898 CrossRef .
J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature, 2016, 536, 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Sun, C. Zhu, B. Niu, X. Huang, X.-Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. Wen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3593–3601 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, F. Ming, Y. Shi, R. Li, I. S. Kim, C. Y. Tang, H. N. Alshareef and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8917–8925 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, W. Lei, C. Chen, S. Qin, L. Zhang, Y. Su, J. Wang, Z. Chen, L. Sun, X. Wang and D. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104954 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jia, B. Wang, S. Song and Y. Fan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 91–100 CrossRef .
H. B. Park, J. Kamcev, L. M. Robeson, M. Elimelech and B. D. Freeman, Science, 2017, 356, eaab0530 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, S. Yang, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Chen and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2920 CrossRef .
C. Chen, D. Liu, L. He, S. Qin, J. Wang, J. M. Razal, N. A. Kotov and W. Lei, Joule, 2020, 4, 247–261 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. He, C. Zhu, Y. Qian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 875 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, D. Liu, G. Yang, J. Wang, L. Wang and W. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904098 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, W. Xin, X.-Y. Kong, Y. Qian, X. Zhao, W. Chen, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, L. Jiang and L. Wen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 742–748 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xin, Z. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Hu, T. Zhou, C. Zhu, X.-Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. Wen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3876 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, C. Wang, R. Wang, C. Chen, J. Gao, J. Dai, D. Liu, Z. Lin and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902590 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, X. Xu, C. Chen, H. Huang, C. Jia, X. Zhao, E. Hitz, Y. Zhou, R. Yang, L. Cui and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Chen, X. Zhang, D. Liu, L. Xu, J. Dai, S.-C. Liou, Y. Wang, C. Li, H. Xie, Q. Wu, B. Foster, T. Li, R. M. Briber and L. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17830–17837 CrossRef CAS .
A. Isogai, T. Saito and H. Fukuzumi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 71–85 RSC .
R. Xiong, H. S. Kim, L. Zhang, V. F. Korolovych, S. Zhang, Y. G. Yingling and V. V. Tsukruk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8508–8513 CrossRef CAS .
D.-K. Kim, C. Duan, Y.-F. Chen and A. Majumdar, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2010, 9, 1215–1224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, Q. Kang, Y. Zhou, Y. Feng, X. Chen, J. Yuan, W. Guo, Y. Wei and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603623 CrossRef .
F. E. Kiviat, Science, 1976, 194, 719 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
J. Abraham, K. S. Vasu, C. D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C. T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S. J. Haigh, I. V. Grigorieva, P. Carbone, A. K. Geim and R. R. Nair, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 546–550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, T. Sekimoto, W.-L. Hsu, S. Kataoka, A. Endo and H. Daiguji, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12068–12076 RSC .
P. M. Kampmeyer, J. Appl. Phys., 1952, 23, 99–102 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Jones, G. M. Evans and K. P. Galvin, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 80, 27–50 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Tao, J. Sha and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3482–3490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, Y. Zhou, X.-Y. Kong, G. Xie, P. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9703–9709 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xie, P. Li, Z. Zhang, K. Xiao, X.-Y. Kong, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800459 CrossRef .
D. D. Ordinario, L. Phan, W. G. Walkup, J.-M. Jocson, E. Karshalev, N. Hüsken and A. A. Gorodetsky, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 596–602 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Shao, K. Raidongia, A. R. Koltonow and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7602 CrossRef .
C. Wang, C. Miao, X. Zhu, X. Feng, C. Hu, D. Wei, Y. Zhu, C. Kan, D. Shi and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4193–4202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, L. Yang, H. Wang, Z. Xu, Y. Zhao, Y. Luo, N. Nasir, Y. Song, H. Wu, F. Pan and Z. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2101 CrossRef .
L. Wen, J. Ma, Y. Tian, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Small, 2012, 8, 838–842 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, L. Jiang and M. Antonietti, Joule, 2019, 3, 2364–2380 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
F.-M. Allioux, S. Balme and L. F. Dumée, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1185–1193 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0mh00979bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

New concepts
Osmotic energy is a renewable and sustainable energy source to address the energy crisis, thus, of increasing broad appeal. However, the current energy conversion suffers from high ion transport energy barrier and low current output. Here, a novel composite membrane with improved confined ion transport is demonstrated by the assembly of graphene oxide nanosheets and cellulose nanofibers. This strategy of the combination of enlarged nanochannel and space charge leads to low ion transport energy barrier (less than a half) and high ion selectivity. Thus, high-power density (the highest value to the best of our knowledge) with enhanced ion transportation and current is obtained. The thermal and solvent activation treatments can further improve the power density which is beyond the critical commercialization benchmark. This material design concept will have broad applications, which can usher in an alternative paradigm to effectively enhance ion transport for other membrane-based energy fields, such as batteries (e.g., fuel cells, flow batteries, storage batteries and supercapacitors), desalination and so on.


 	Fig. 1  Harvesting osmotic energy by the GO/CNFs assembled membranes with enhanced ion transport. (a) Osmotic energy harvesting system. (b) Illustration of ion transport in the GO/CNFs membranes during osmotic energy harvesting. High concentration (CH) and low concentration (CL) salt solutions are separated by the composite membrane. The ion flux is driven under the chemical potential passing through a cation selective membrane, causing a power output. (c) The function of CNFs during ion transport. The enlarged channel and negative space charge reduce the ion transport energy barrier, resulting in boosting the current and power output. (d) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the lamellar structured GO/CNFs membrane. The magnified image in the inset clearly shows the layered structure. (e) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the GO/CNFs membrane indicate the existence of CNFs in the bulk membrane and a larger interlayer distance (1.32 nm) than that of the pure GO membrane (0.88 nm). (f) The I–V curves for GO/CNFs versus pure CNFs and pure GO membrane, showing enhanced ion transport with high ion selectivity.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Ion transport behaviors of the GO/CNFs assembled nanochannel membrane. (a) Schematic of the ion transport behaviors. The electrolyte is driven by an external electric field to pass through the test membrane where anions are blocked. (b) I–V curves of the GO/CNFs membrane (CNFs weight content of 66.7%) tested in neutral electrolytes with different KCl concentrations. (c) Ionic conductance in a range of concentrations of neutral KCl electrolyte. An obvious charge-governed ion transport behavior can be observed according to the deviations from the bulk value (red dashed line) under the low concentration (0.1 M) region. (d) Forward and reverse diffusion I–V curves for the GO/CNFs membrane (CNFs weight content of 66.7%) tested in a 50-fold KCl concentration. (e) The tested ion selectivity property, defined as the transmembrane ion transference number and energy conversion efficiency under a series of KCl concentration gradients, where the low concentration side is fixed at 0.01 mM. (f) The short-circuit (Isc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) were tested under the same range of electrolyte concentrations.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Osmotic energy conversion performance under a 50-fold NaCl osmotic gradient. (a) Influence of the CNFs weight content on osmotic energy generation. (b) Influence of the CNFs weight content on Voc and Isc. (c) The improved power density of GO/CNFs (66.7 wt%) compared with that of pure GO and CNFs membranes, indicating an improved power density and reduced resistance. (d) The improved current density of GO/CNFs (66.7 wt%) compared with that of pure GO and CNFs membranes.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  External factors that influence the osmotic energy generation of the GO/CNFs (66.7 wt%) membrane. (a) Electrolyte pH value influence on power density, resistance, Voc and Isc. The osmotic gradient is the 50-fold NaCl concentration (CH = 0.5 M, CL = 0.01 M). (b and c) Dependence of the output power density, resistance and current density on the electrolyte concentration gradient. CL was fixed at 0.01 M NaCl. (d) The differences in output power density, resistance, Voc and Isc under a 50-fold NaCl concentration gradient.	 
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Thermal dependence of osmotic energy conversion. (a and b) Thermal dependence on the energy power density, resistance, Voc and Isc under a 50-fold NaCl gradient. (c) The Arrhenius-type plot of the conductivity as a function of temperature. The inset shows the ion conductance versus temperature. The Na+ ion transmembrane barrier is 6.58 kJ mol−1 under a 50-fold NaCl osmotic gradient. (d) Different temperature-dependent relationships between ion transport behaviors. At low temperatures (e.g., 298 K), high viscosity and mobility result in low Isc, Voc and power density. Increasing the temperature (e.g., 318 K) induced low viscosity and high ionic mobility; thus, a high power output was obtained. High temperatures (e.g., 328 K) were unfavorable for ion transport by the bubble nucleation effect, causing a decreasing trend in the power density.	 
	(7)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0mh00979b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
