Anisotropic Janus materials: from micro-/nanostructures to applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR05499F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR05499F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 18839-18864Anisotropic Janus materials: from micro-/nanostructures to applications

        
          
            Zhouliang 
            Peng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jinxia 
            Huang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhiguang 
            Guo
          
        
      *ab
aMinistry of Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, People's Republic of China
bState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zguo@licp.cas.cn;  Fax: +86-931-8277088;   Tel: +86-931-4968105
Received 
      20th August 2021
    , Accepted 8th October 2021First published on 8th October 2021AbstractJanus materials have led to great achievements in recent years owing to their unique asymmetric structures and properties. In this review, recent advances of Janus materials including Janus particles and Janus membranes are summarized, and then the microstructures and applications of Janus materials are emphasized. The asymmetric wettability of Janus materials is related to their microstructures; hence, the microstructures of Janus materials were analyzed, compared and summarized. Also presented are current and potential applications in sensing, drug delivery, oil–water separation and so on. Finally, a perspective on the research prospects and development of Janus materials in more fields is given.
1. Introduction
Since Casagrande1et al. successfully prepared Janus glass spherical particles with one hydrophilic hemisphere and the other one hydrophobic in 1989, special two-faced Janus materials have triggered a wave of scientific research. The speech in 1991 of Pierre-Gilles2 on the Nobel prize stage further reinforced the wave. The Janus nomenclature is a reference to the ancient Roman god Janus, who had a pair of faces, at the front and back of his head, one looking into the past and one gazing out at the future. Therefore, the word Janus is often associated with “two-faced”, “contradictory”, “opposite”, etc. Coincidentally, Janus materials completely reflect the peculiarity of the god. Janus materials are asymmetric materials with completely different structures or compositions on two faces.
Materials inspired by natural examples are the focus of research. The construction of an asymmetric wettability structure in Janus materials also gets inspiration from nature. For example, the most typical Janus material in nature, the lotus leaf, has unique wettability on its two surfaces: its upper surface is superhydrophobic, which means that the water contact angle is θ > 150° and the sliding angle is θ < 10°. However, its lower surface is hydrophilic, with a water contact angle of θ < 90° and it is even superoleophobic in an oil/water system. These natural examples greatly promoted the development of Janus materials. The micro–nanoscale papillae on the surfaces of lotus leaves,3 the interchange distribution of hydrophilic and hydrophobic sites of desert beetles,4 the stimulated closure of mimosa plants,5 and the stimulated bending of the hairs on the antennae of ants6 all provide inspiration for the preparation of Janus materials. Scientists have adopted a variety of strategies to construct Janus structures by mimicking these plants and animals that have unique properties and structures in nature. Based on current research on Janus materials, we have enumerated some representative structures and applications of Janus materials, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Representative microstructures and applications of Janus membranes and Janus particles. The microstructures of Janus membranes: needle-like micro–nano structures, rod-like micro–nano structures, fiber structure of electrospinning and fabrics. (Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2017.) The microstructures of Janus particles: magnetic porous Janus particles, self-assembling Janus particles, masking Janus particles and phase separated Janus particles. (Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.) The applications of Janus membranes: sensor, unidirectional penetration of underwater bubbles, oil/water separation, fog collection and transportation of crude oil. (Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2019.) The applications of Janus particles: drug delivery, sensor, magnetic response, bubble stabilizer in water, water–oil interface stabilizer. (Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.) 
Nowadays, there are diverse types of Janus materials, such as particles,7 membranes,8 tubes,9etc. Meanwhile, different types of Janus materials shine brightly in different fields. The two ends of Janus materials have different or even completely opposite chemical properties and physical structures, which contribute to their asymmetric wettability. Janus particles were the first to be studied and laid the foundations for the development of other Janus materials. To date, there have been many different shapes of Janus particles, including spherical,10 rod-like,11 sheet-like,12 dumbbell-like13 or a variety of other shapes. According to the composition of Janus particles, Janus particles can generally be divided into three categories: polymeric Janus particles, inorganic Janus particles, and polymeric–inorganic Janus particles.14 Simultaneously, there are three main methods for the fabrication of Janus particles, namely, self-assembly,15 masking16 and phase separation.17 Janus particles obtained by different preparation methods have different microstructures. The microstructures of Janus particles obtained by these three preparation methods will be described in detail in this paper. As shown in Fig. 1, due to their asymmetric wettability and special structures, Janus particles show great advantages for applications in sensors,18 drug-delivery,19 surfactants20,21 and so on. Research on Janus membranes has been well developed in recent years. Based on the prepared materials of Janus membranes, Janus membranes can be divided into three categories: polymeric Janus membranes, inorganic Janus membranes and other Janus membranes. Common preparation methods for Janus membranes include electrospinning,22,23 immersion,38 plasma treatments,39 and chemical deposition.40,41 Due to the wide variety of substrate materials, the microstructures of Janus membranes are also different. For example, the surface microstructures of metal based Janus materials are usually composed of metal micro–nanoneedles or micro–nanorods. The surface of Janus materials prepared by electrospinning is usually composed of micro–nanofibers. A paper based Janus membrane has different degrees of roughness of paper fibers: some are tightly bonded, some are loosely distributed. Other coated Janus materials have micro–nanocoated particles evenly distributed on the surface. These various microstructures are classified and detailed in this paper below. The applications of Janus membranes with an asymmetric wetting profile are numerous in research fields, such as directional fluid transportation,42–45 sensors,46–48 fog collection,49–51 oil/water separation25,52,53 and so on.
In this review, we briefly introduce the research origins of Janus materials, the Janus structure in nature (e.g. lotus leaf, proboscis of a butterfly) and theoretical research on Janus materials. After that, the microstructures and applications of Janus materials are highlighted. We describe in detail the structures of Janus membranes and Janus particles and their corresponding applications. Since the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials is relevant to their structures, Janus membranes can be divided into three types according to their wettability: ordinary wetting, wetting–superwetting combination and superwetting. Thus, the microstructures of Janus membranes with different wettability are analyzed, compared and summarized. The composition of Janus particles is related to the preparation method, so Janus particles are classified into three categories, namely, masking, phase separation and self-assembly. The unique properties and applications of Janus materials are also presented. Finally, we summarize the common microstructures of Janus materials, point out the defects of current preparation technology, and express our expectations for the application of Janus materials in more fields.
2. Source of bionic inspiration
Nature has always been a source of inspiration for materials research. Imitating examples from nature enables us to prepare new materials with superior and unique properties faster and better, which makes a great contribution to the research and development of materials. In 1997, German botanist Barthlott54 discovered the self-cleaning effect and superhydrophobic phenomenon on a lotus leaf surface, which opened the door for the research and development of biomimetic wettability materials. We also gain a lot of inspiration from nature when we research the preparation of Janus materials with asymmetric wettability. The asymmetric wettability of the upper and lower surfaces of lotus leaves was first imitated, and a Janus material with asymmetric wettability prepared from the lotus leaf shows great application prospects in oil–water separation, directional transportation, and other aspects that are expected to solve sewage treatment, crude oil transportation, and other problems. The directional deformation of the Mimosa pudica leaf also provides new inspiration for the asymmetric structure of Janus materials, leading to Janus materials with potential applications in sensors, wettability response materials, energy conversion, and so on. The special wettability structure of a desert beetle's back with alternating hydrophilic and hydrophobic patterns also contributes to the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials, which makes the prepared Janus materials show great potential for water collection. Simultaneously, the sensing ability of the sensilla of insects has also intrigued scientists. It is well known that the antennae of insects are particularly sensitive to external mechanical and chemical stimuli, which, due to the large number of fibers on the antennae of insects, can produce ultrafast response times and microscale actuation. This ultrafast responsive deformation also inspires the asymmetry of Janus materials, making Janus materials potentially useful for highly sensitive sensors. More Janus structures are impressively used by natural species to adapt to highly variable environmental conditions by controlling wetting phenomena: for example, as mentioned above, the alternating wettability of the carapace that the desert beetle has evolved for desert conditions, and the proboscis of butterflies and moths has hydrophilic internal liquid channels and hydrophobic external surfaces that allow them to feed efficiently.55 In addition, there are more microscopic Janus structures in nature that are worth studying and utilizing, such as antifreeze proteins56 (AFPs) and EAS57 (a class I hydrophobin). Take the Pyramimonas gelidicola,56 which lives in the Arctic region, as an example, it can produce and secrete AFPs; these have the special structure of hydrophilic/ice-binding and hydrophobic sides, which can form a protective layer between the hydrophobic extractives of microalgae and ice crystals, and reduce the melting temperature of ice crystals through binding, so that it can live in harsh conditions without freezing.58 The class I hydrophobin EAS is a unique fungal protein, which is called a living Janus interface on the surface of spores and fruiting bodies. It has a distinct rodlet structure with hydrophilic and hydrophobic sections in the structure, so it can be self-assembled into an amphiphilic monolayer at hydrophilic–hydrophobic interfaces.59
2.1 Lotus leaf
The self-cleaning property of the lotus leaf surface was discovered early, although the mechanism behind this fact remained unknown until SEM technology was developed in the mid-1960s. Studies on lotus leaves during the past decade have revealed that the macroscopically smooth upper surface of the lotus leaf exhibits micro- and nanostructures together with hydrophobic epicuticular wax crystalloids, which result in its superhydrophobicity. The lower surface of the lotus leaf can be completely wetted with water in air but it is superoleophobic in water. Studies on the lower side of the lotus leaf reveal that there are no three-dimensional wax crystals on the lower surface and the microstructure revealed upon scanning by SEM is different from that of the upper surface. The Janus feature of the lotus leaf supplies us with inspiration to design and create bionic Janus materials.
There is a digital photograph of the lotus leaf drifting on the surface of water in Fig. 2(a) that indicates the wettability of the lotus leaf on both the upper surface and the lower surface.60 The water droplets on the upper surface remain spherical in shape in air and the oil droplets on the lower surface also retain a spherical shape in water with an oil contact angle (OCA) reaching up to 155° ± 1.5°. These Janus features work together and effectively ensure the purity of the lotus leaf. It can be seen clearly from the low-marinization scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Fig. 2(a) that the lotus leaf surface is composed of two-dimensional, neat, quasi-periodic arrays, and the hemispheric micro-papillae are randomly distributed; the diameters of the micro-papillae are between 5 and 9 μm.61 The environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) image in Fig. 2(a) shows a large number of tabular micro-convex papillae with lengths of 30–50 μm and widths of 10–30 μm on the lower side of the lotus leaf.60
 Fig. 2  (a) A digital photograph of a floating lotus leaf and three water droplets remaining as perfect spheres on its upper side and three oil droplets form spheres underwater on its lower surface. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2011. SEM image of the upper surface of the lotus leaf (reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2019) and ESEM image of the lower surface of the lotus leaf (reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2011). (b) A digital photograph of the proboscis of a monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus), coiled proboscis of a monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus), longitudinal section of the proboscis revealed by micro-CT, and a cross section of the proboscis of a hawk moth (Manduca sexta). Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from The Royal Society. Copyright 2018. (c) A photograph of open pinnules of Mimosa pudica and a photograph of pinnules in the process of closing. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. Copyright 2016. (d) A photograph of elytra structures of the desert beetle Stenocara gracilipes. Scale bar = 5 mm. SEM image of the apex of the elytra. Scale bar = 1 mm. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from BioMed Central. Copyright 2010. (e) A digital photograph of a Camponotus japonicus ant with SEM images of its antennae composed of a high AR (≈10) tilt receptor. Scale bars from left to right: 1 mm, 100 μm, and 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017. (f) Image of Pyramimonas gelidicola cultured in-house at KOPRI and the 3D structure of P. gelidicola AFP obtained by in silico protein modeling. Scale bar = 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2014. 
2.2 
          Mimosa pudica


Mimosa pudica is a sensitive plant, the leaves of which close and the petioles of which hang down in response to external stimuli, such as wind, vibration and touch, acting as a defense mechanism to protect it from animals. In recent years, scientists have put forward a number of explanations for the mechanism of this phenomenon, and found that the movement mechanism of Mimosa pudica is similar to the insect-catching mechanism of the Venus flytrap. Volkov64et al. proposed the HEC model to illustrate the mechanism of insect capture by the Venus flytrap in 2008. In the same year, a novel mechanism based on a HEC model was proposed by Markin65et al., which illustrated the movement mechanism of the closing or opening of the pinnules in Mimosa pudica or lobes of the Venus flytrap. The new HEC model of Mimosa pudica is based on the assumption of the elasticity of curvature and that the pinnules are composed of an outer and an inner water layer, where different hydrostatic pressures can be generated. It is also well known that stimulation of Mimosa pudica leads to rapid water redistribution, which is apparently driven by pressure differences between different parts of the plant and occurs through open water pores between the two hydraulic layers.
It has been reported that the water in mimosa leaves will migrate when disturbed, thus enriching the water in some areas, resulting in volume expansion, water loss and shrinkage in other areas, and the asymmetric volume changes eventually lead to directional deformation of mimosa leaves.66Fig. 2(c) shows different shapes of pinnules in open or closed states. It has been reported that the movement process of Mimosa pudica is similar to that of the Venus flytrap through three phases: (1) the processing of the triggering signal; (2) the opening of the water channels between two hydraulic reservoirs; and (3) the transfer of water between these reservoirs.67 However, the movement of Mimosa pudica is an order of magnitude slower than the Venus flytrap. Understanding and analyzing these processes effectively contribute to the construction of Janus structures.
2.3 Desert beetles
There are several natural species that are often mentioned in the preparation of Janus interface materials, although they are not actually Janus materials, but instead utilize other wetting structure types for superwettability integration. The most popular example of a natural species is the Namib desert beetle with a back made up of arrays of hydrophilic bumps and hydrophobic valleys. The Janus materials in our definition refer to materials with asymmetric wettability on opposing sides. Although the desert beetle has asymmetric wettability parts on its back, the hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts are alternatingly distributed on the same surface, so it is not the Janus material we define. The special structure of the back of the Namib desert beetle can be considered as a micropatterned alternating wettability surface and it has brought a lot of new inspiration for the preparation of Janus materials. As shown in Fig. 2(d), the back of the small Stenocara gracilipes beetle is covered with jagged and variable-sized bumps that form irregular lines and the scale bar is 5 mm.63 The SEM image of the desert beetle's back is further enlarged, with a scale bar of 1 mm, from which we can see there are also bumps in between the lines.63 The bumps are hydrophilic and the areas surrounding the bumps are hydrophobic. When the desert begins to fog, the special structure enables the desert beetle to collect water carried by fog, so that the beetle can survive in the arid desert environment. Water droplets ranging from 1 to 10 μm settle on the hydrophilic bumps and coalesce.58 Once the fast-growing droplets are large enough to move against the wind, the desert beetle tilts its body forward, and the collected water rolls down through the hydrophobic areas into its mouth. Besides, there are other species in nature that can collect water from fog and make great contributions to the preparation of Janus materials, such as cacti in the desert and spiderwebs made by spiders, although their principle of water collecting is to use gradient Laplace pressure, which is different from that of the Namib desert beetles, and thus, will not be described here in detail.
2.4 Ant antennae
Insect antennae are known to be very sensitive to various mechanical and chemical stimuli (such as touch, heat/flow diffusion, vibration, and smell) and respond very quickly due to their unique layered fibrous structures that connect mechanical/chemical receptive sensory organs.6 For instance, cilia on ant antennas, as tactile and vibration sensing receptors, can transmit various mechanical forces and provide an exquisite sensing performance, mainly because cilia have a high aspect ratio and high surface area to volume ratio, which ensures strong interactions with the environment.68 In particular, insect receptors greatly inspired the development of efficient artificial sensors; however, some characteristics of insect receptors have not been integrated into artificial biological sensors. These features can produce rapid response times and microscale actuation and are based on the tentacle fiber bending element of reversible mechanical/chemical reactions. An image of an ant (Camponotus japonicus) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of its antennae are shown in Fig. 2(e). It shows the special hierarchical structure in detail, and the SEM images clearly depict the densely pitched appearance of the sensilla, which are ≈2 μm in diameter and 20 μm in height (aspect ratio, AR = height/diameter = 10).6 The fibers in the image respond rapidly to tiny mechanical and chemical stimuli in the outside environment and transmit tiny forces to the sensory organs through rapid displacement, thus collecting all kinds of information.
We list plants and animals with special wettability in nature, and meticulously discuss the above four biological morphology and structural characteristics that provide inspiration for the preparation of biomimetic Janus materials. The asymmetrical structure of the superhydrophobic upper surface and underwater superhydrophobic lower surface endows the lotus leaf with a good self-cleaning performance. When mimosa is stimulated, water migration in the leaves leads to expansion in some areas and contraction in some areas. This volume asymmetry endows mimosa with a unique self-protection mechanism. The alternating distribution of hydrophilic peaks and hydrophobic valleys on the back of the desert beetle gives the beetle a special ability to collect water from fog in the air. The cilia on the antennae of ants have a special structure and will bend when stimulated by external stimuli. The rapid deformation of cilia gives the antennae of ants sensitive sensing characteristics.
Of course, the similarities and differences of these plants and animals are listed here to provide a reference for the preparation of Janus materials. First, the unique properties of lotus leaves and desert beetles are derived from the special wettability of their surfaces, while the unique properties of mimosa and ant antennae have nothing to do with wettability, but are due to their special structures. Secondly, both lotus leaves and ant antennae have hierarchical surface morphologies. The surface of the lotus leaf is a hierarchical micro- and nanostructure, while the ant has unique hierarchical fibrous architectures on its antennae.
3. Mechanism
3.1 Theories of wettability
The study of wettability has improved over the years. Young first described the contact angle and created Young's equation in 1804 and 1805.69 Wenzel70 wrote the Wenzel equation to explain the contribution of roughness to surface wettability in 1936. In 1944, the research of Cassie and Baxter indicated that the composite interface between a solid and air had an impact on surface wettability.71 Meanwhile, the Wenzel–Cassie equation was proposed based on the Wenzel equation. Later, Fowkes and his colleagues discussed CA's hysteresis.72 Over the next 50 years, wetting studies focused on theoretical research and analytical techniques. It was not until 1997 that Barthlott and Neinhuis73 proposed a single microstructural model, suggesting that the self-cleaning properties of lotus leaves were caused by the cooperation between the tiny surface structure of the nipple and the epidermal wax layer, which further advanced the study of surface wettability. Since the multilevel structure of the lotus leaf surface is very similar to the triadic Koch curve described in fractal geometry,74 Feng75et al. used the fractal formula to calculate the roughness factor in 2002. By changing the roughness factor, a new mathematical model was derived to describe the relationship between the surface roughness of the lotus leaf and the contact angle. The curve in Fig. 3(b) reveals that the contact angle of the hydrophobic surface of the lotus leaf changes with the change of roughness, and the corresponding point of the surface of the lotus leaf can be found on the curve. It proves that the structure of the superwetting surface is related to the rough structure, and the precision micro–nano rough structure can greatly improve the superwettability. Fig. 3(c) shows that the balance between liquid surface tension and solid surface free energy can yield repellence/absorbance of a liquid to a solid.75 Therefore, the superwetting property is also related to surface tension, and the surface hydrophobicity or oleophobicity can be effectively improved by the modification of low surface energy materials. It is concluded that the preparation of wetting or superwetting surfaces depends on the surface roughness and surface chemical composition.
 Fig. 3  (a) Superwettability system in air, water and oil. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Copyright 2016. Blue half circle on the left: underwater superoleophobicity, superoleophilicity, superaerophobicity, and superaerophilicity on rough substrates; the middle round part: the bule circle contacts hydrophilicity, oleophilicity, hydrophobicity, and there is oleophobicity on flat substrates in air, the superhydrophilicity, superoleophilicity, superhydrophobicity, and superoleophobicity states in air after introducing two layers of sufficient micro/nanoscale roughness in the circle outside the blue circle. Orange half circle on the right: under-oil superhydrophobicity, superhydrophilicity, superoleophobicity, and superoleophilicity on rough substrates. (b) The wettability–roughness curve of the lotus leaf is fitted according to calculated data (contact angle, expressed in degrees, relative to the average outer diameter of the protruding structure, expressed in microns). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2002. (c) The balance between liquid surface tension and solid surface free energy can yield repellence/absorbance of liquid to solid. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2014. 
Interface materials designed and prepared with different superwetting states have been gradually explored. Based on different media, the superwettability system has been divided into three types, the first category is the superwettability of the liquid–solid interface in air, the second category is the superwettability of the liquid–solid interface in liquid, and the last category is the superwettability of the gas–solid interface in liquid.76 As shown in Fig. 3(a), the middle part of Fig. 3(a) is the superwettability existing in air, including superhydrophobicity (WCA > 150°), superhydrophilicity (WCA ≈ 0°), superoleophobicity (OCA > 150°) and superoleophilicity (OCA ≈ 0°). On the left part of Fig. 3(a) is the underwater superwettability, which is composed of superoleophobic (underwater solid surface with a static oil contact angle θ > 150°), superoleophilic (underwater solid surface with a static oil contact angle θ ≈ 0°), superaerophobicity (underwater solid surface with a static bubble contact angle θ > 150°) and superaerophilicity (underwater solid surface with a static bubble contact angle θ ≈ 0°). The right part of Fig. 3(a) shows the superwettability under oil, including superhydrophobicity (WCA > 150° in oil), superhydrophilicity (WCA ≈ 0° in oil), superoleophobicity (OCA > 150° in oil) and superoleophilicity (OCA ≈ 0° in oil). Different types of superwettability apply to different scenarios. Superwetting systems in air are suitable for antiwetting or antifouling. For example, Zhu78et al. prepared a superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic antifouling Janus fiber membrane. Benefitting from a high water contact angle of 157° on the superhydrophobic surface and a high underwater oil contact angle of 156° on the superhydrophilic surface, the Janus fiber membrane has good application prospects in antifouling and wastewater desalination. However, the durability of materials has always been a problem that needs to be improved for superwetting materials in air. The liquid–solid interface superwetting system is suitable for oil–water separation. For instance, based on in situ mussel-inspired chemistry, Song79et al. prepared a Janus membrane for directional oil–water separation, which showed asymmetric wettability with an underwater oil contact angle of 152.2° and an underoil water contact angle of 153.3°. Membrane fouling is always a difficult problem in oil–water separation. The superwettability of the gas–solid interface in a liquid is suitable for underwater bubble transportation. For example, Chen80et al. used femtosecond lasers to prepare Janus microporous arrays for unidirectional underwater bubble transport. In aqueous solution, bubbles selectively penetrate from the aerophilic side to the superaerophilic side, but are blocked in the reverse direction. Likewise, durability is a problem for this type of superwetting material.
In order to distinguish different states of wetting, Wang81et al. defined five different superhydrophobic wetting models on the basis of contact angle hysteresis: (1) a superhydrophobic surface that has been fully immersed in a Wenzel state, (2) a superhydrophobic surface with air pockets in the Cassie state, (3) a micro/nanostructured hierarchical “lotus” state (a special case of the Cassie state), (4) a transitional state between Wenzel and Cassie states (the state of the “rose petals”), and (5) the “gecko” state with a high adhesive property. Xiao76et al. proposed that these five wetting states could also be applied to other superwetting systems, including superoleophobicity in air, underwater superoleophobicity, underwater superaerophobicity, under-oil superoleophobicity, and under-oil superaerophobicity, since the underlying mechanism for building the superwetting state is similar.
Over the years, Young's equation has been the fundamental equation of wettability in terms of wettability theory. Its research is based on an ideal smooth solid surface and it reveals the relationship between the contact angle of a droplet on surface and the specific energy at the liquid–solid interface (SV), the liquid–liquid interface (LV), and the solid–liquid interface (SL):69 γlvcosθ = γsv − γsl(1)where θ is the contact angle (CA) between the droplets and surface and can measure the degree of wetting. The CA limit between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity derived from Young's equation is 90°. Hence, it has been defined theoretically that surfaces with contact angles (CAs) of θ < 90° are hydrophilic surfaces and those with CAs > 90° are hydrophobic surfaces. However, taking the actual chemical and structural state of the droplets into account, Berg82et al. suggested that the new hydrophilic and hydrophobic limits should be 65°. Whereafter, by measuring the intrinsic and apparent contact angle on a range of polymer surfaces, Da Silva83et al. predicted that the new limit of hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces might be 62.7° rather than 90°.
This is due to the fact that Young's equation is based on an ideal surface, and negative factors, such as roughness, chemical heterogeneity, swelling and dissolution, are ignored. The Wenzel and Cassie models further illustrate the effect of surface roughness on apparent contact angle and can be used to modify Young's equation.
In the Wenzel model, the surface is generally assumed to be rough and the droplets are completely immersed in the valleys of the rough surface where they are in contact. Wenzel proposed the relationship between roughness and apparent contact angle as follows:84 cosθw = rcosθ(2)where θw is the apparent contact angle of the rough surface, θ is the contact angle of the ideal surface in Young's equation and r is the roughness factor of the surface that is defined as the ratio of the true surface area to the projected area of the same surface. The value of r is equal to one in Young's equation and the value of r is always greater than one in the Wenzel equation, which causes the apparent contact angle, θw (in the Wenzel state), to always be greater than Young's contact angle, θ. Specifically, with increasing degree of roughness, the hydrophilic surface (θw < 90°) will become more hydrophilic, while the hydrophobic surface (θw > 90°) will become more hydrophobic with the same type of roughness increase.76
In the Cassie model, the liquid does not completely immerse the rough structure, but only the top of the rough structure, and there are air pockets trapped between the top of the rough structure and the surface, which means that the droplet is in a compound contact state with the surface. In this compound state, the air part of the surface can be considered as completely non-wetting. The apparent contact angle in the Cassie model can be described as: cosθw = fsl(cosθ + 1) −1(3) where fsl is the area fractions of the tips of the surface asperities immersed underneath the droplet on the surface. According to the above understanding of wettability, when the wettability changes from the Cassie–Baxter model to the Wenzel model, it is a process of overcoming an energy barrier, and it can be seen that wettability gradually decreases during this process.85 Also, the Cassie–Baxter equation and the Wenzel equation are sometimes combined into a more general formula to describe the apparent contact angle of a partially permeated rough surface. The apparent contact angle in the Wenzel–Cassie model can be described as:71 cosθw = fsl(rcosθ + 1) − 1(4)
The three classical models have illustrated the mechanisms of droplet contact with different surfaces, and they are of great significance for our research and the construction of Janus surfaces. Besides the static contact angle of the surface, another important parameter that affects the wetting behavior is the contact angle hysteresis (CAH). The hysteresis angles include the advancing angle (θadv) and the receding angle (θrec). Place a droplet on an inclined surface, and when the droplet begins to roll, the contact angle of the droplet towards the moving direction is the advancing angle and the contact angle of the droplet towards the opposing direction is the receding angle. The difference between the advancing and receding angles is the sliding angle, which indicates the degree of contact angle hysteresis (CAH). Contact angle hysteresis (CAH) is produced when droplets are pinned at the triple line of the solid–liquid–gas interface due to chemical heterogeneities or roughness.86 In order to expound the relationship between contact angle hysteresis and sliding angle, Furmidge87 proposed the Furmidge equation in 1962 as follows: mgsina = γAL(cosθrec − cosθadv)ω(5)where α is the sliding angle, θrec is the receding angle, θadv is the advancing angle, γAL is the surface tension of the liquid droplet, w is the width of the droplet, m is the mass of the droplet and g is gravitational acceleration.
3.2 Asymmetric wettability of Janus materials
As mentioned above, the theoretical limit of the contact angle between the hydrophilic surface and the hydrophobic surface is 90°, which originates from Young's equation. Simultaneously, it has been defined that solid surfaces with a static contact angle greater than 150° are superhydrophobic surfaces and solid surfaces with a static contact angle less than 5° or 10° are superhydrophilic surfaces. Whereafter, superoleophobicity, superoleophilicity, superaerophobicity and superaerophilicity also are defined on the basis of the above. These superwetting properties give surfaces many special properties, such as directional fluid transport,88,89 water collection,90,91 oil–water separation,53 self-cleaning,92 anti-icing,93,94 energy conversion,95 sensing96 and responsive wettability.97 In recent years, Janus materials with different wettability on their two sides have been developed. Janus materials consist of two interrelated regions where wettability is completely different and each part is uniform in wettability, such as superhydrophobic/hydrophilic materials, superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic materials, superamphiphobic/ superhydrophobic materials and so on. Janus materials have broad prospects in many fields due to their special asymmetrical wettability. There are two strategies for preparing Janus materials. The first preparation method is to prepare each part with different wettability separately and then combine them together. Another popular method is to modify the surface of the material directly, and of course Janus particles can also be self-assembled to construct Janus structures. Regardless of the preparation strategy, the wettability gradient of a Janus material tends to change gradually along the direction of the membrane cross section due to its asymmetric wettability. It is worth noting that Janus materials have asymmetric wettability, which means that a large number of prepared Janus membranes have the propensity for directional fluid transport, and its mechanism is worth exploring.
Janus materials have an asymmetric wetting property on the two sides. In general, we can measure the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials by comparing the contact angles of the two sides. As shown in Fig. 4(a), Hou43et al. combined electrospinning with copper mesh to prepare an anisotropic Janus membrane with opposite wettability and a special interpenetrating interface microstructure, showing the diode-like performance of unidirectional liquid penetration. This Janus membrane permits the liquid to permeate from the lyophobic to the lyophilic direction, while being blocked in the opposite direction. The image shows that the wettability of the PVDF-HFP nanofiber (M0)/Cu(OH)2 nanoneedle Janus membrane is significantly different between the two sides. The water droplet is spherical on the PVDF-HFP nanofiber surface, while the water droplet is rapidly absorbed on the Cu(OH)2 nanoneedle surface. Yao98et al. designed a double-woven structure of asymmetrically wetting Janus fabric using two systems of warp yarns and two types of weft yarns with significantly different wettability. Fig. 4(b) shows that the double-weave fabric has asymmetrical wettability: one side is superhydrophobic (the water contact angle is 156.8°), and the other side is both superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic (the oil contact angle is 150.6°). This asymmetrical wettability enables unidirectional penetration and oil–water separation. We can also detect the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials from a macroscopic perspective through the dynamic change of contact angles in Fig. 5(a) and (b). Zhou24et al. successfully prepared nanoscale alternating hydrophilic–hydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foam. The Janus cooperative copper foam has unidirectional transport properties, where droplets can penetrate from the alternating hydrophilic–hydrophobic side to the superhydrophilic side, while the reverse direction has no penetration.
 Fig. 4  (a) Anisotropic wettability of a Janus membrane. On the PVDF-HFP side, the droplet is spherical, while, on the Cu(OH)2 nanoneedle side, the droplet is absorbed rapidly. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2019. (b) Structure simulation diagram of double-woven fabric; the water contact angle on the superhydrophobic surface is 156.8°, and the underwater oil contact angle on the superhydrophilic surface is 150.6°. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2018. (c) A cross section of the fabric placed vertically in water (first line) and the corresponding cross section diagram (second line). The fabric sample is electrosprayed on one side with SU-8 with different contents. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Digital photographs and diagrams showing the mechanism of unidirectional water transport on hybrid nanoscale hydrophilic–hydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foam, and transfer from the hydrophobic side to the superhydrophilic side. (b) Digital photographs and diagrams showing the mechanism of unidirectional water transport on hybrid nanoscale hydrophilic–hydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foam, and transfer from superhydrophilic side to hydrophobic side. (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. 
Besides, there is a novel test that indicates the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials. As shown in Fig. 4(c), Zeng99et al. prepared a hydrophobic/hydrophilic fabric with unidirectional water transmission after electrospraying a thin layer of Su-8 on one side of the hydrophilic fabric. Their study gives us an intuitive view of the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials by observing the water contact profile on both sides when the directional transport fabrics are vertically immersed in water, and it is found that the vertical contact angle (VCA) on the hydrophilic side is significantly lower than that on the hydrophobic surface.
3.3 Pressure analysis
Due to the driving force provided by the asymmetry of wettability, the Janus material exhibits unique directional transport properties with the liquid in the cross-sectional direction. Using the wetting gradient on the cross section to provide the driving force, the asymmetric structure of Janus membranes permits opposing properties at the interface to work collaboratively, leading to the unidirectional transport of most Janus membranes.100 The unidirectional transport behavior on the sample is mainly dependent on the asymmetric wetting force and can only occur when the hydrophobic layer thickness is appropriate. In the preparation of Janus materials, electrospun nanofiber membranes, conventional fabrics, and metal mesh have directional fluid transfer properties based on Janus wettability. Extensive research has been devoted to using textiles as a substrate due to their potential to facilitate perspiration and ventilation in the preparation of medical Janus materials. Electrospun nanofiber membranes are another fiber structure commonly used in Janus materials because they tend to form double layers and each layer is tailored for wettability. The Janus system of a metal mesh for unidirectional transport behavior has also been mentioned in some reports in the literature. To achieve the asymmetric wettability of Janus materials, the thickness of these fabrics and metal mesh is usually in the range of a few hundred microns, while the thickness of the electrospun film is more easily controlled, ranging from a few to a few hundred microns.
Monolayer Janus materials produce moisture gradients that permit directional penetration of fluids, while composite Janus materials with directional transport properties typically consist of two layers of tightly coupled, opposite-wettability materials. In this Janus system, the thickness of the hydrophobic layer is much more important than the thickness of the hydrophilic layer, which plays a decisive role in directional transport characteristics. When the hydrophobic layer is too thin, fluid can permeate from both sides of the Janus system. When the hydrophobic layer is too thick, the Janus system cannot permeate from either side of the liquid. The appropriate thickness range is determined by the porosity of the material and the surface wettability. When a liquid comes into contact with these porous materials, the liquid stays on the surface or flows into the porous matrix, depending on the capillary effect. For an ideal pore with a circular cross section, the Young–Laplace capillary pressure is expressed as follows: (6)where θ is the contact angle between droplets and the capillary wall, r is the pore radius, and γ is the surface tension of the liquid. When the pore surface is wettable (θ < 90°), the liquid will naturally be sucked into the pore due to positive capillary pressure. However, when the pore surface is non-wettable (θ > 90°), the liquid cannot penetrate the pore. But an additional pressure, which is the opposite of the Laplacian pressure, can be applied to force the liquid to penetrate into the pores. The minimum external pressure that causes the liquid to flow into the pore is called the breakthrough pressure (Pbreakthrough), so the breakthrough pressure can be expressed as follows:101 (7)
This formula illustrates the relationship between droplet breakthrough pressure, surface wettability and surface porosity. The pressure required for droplet breakthrough at different pore radii is different, which is helpful for the selection and preparation of Janus materials.
We can get a more profound understanding of the relationship between droplet breakthrough pressure and surface wettability on a Janus material's surface through the permeation of droplets. As shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), Zhou24et al. tested the directional transport capability of the hybrid nanoscale hydrophilic–hydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foam they produced and illustrated the pressure analysis of the droplets as they penetrated the Janus cooperative copper foam. When the hydrophilic–hydrophobic surface of Janus copper foam is upward, water droplets are dropped on the surface and contact with the hydrophobic part. The droplet is subjected to two forces acting in opposite directions: one is the downward static pressure (Fg) caused by gravity, and the other is the upward supporting force (FH) provided by the hydrophobic part. When the droplet is small, the downward static pressure (Fg) provided by gravity is less than the upward supporting force (FH) provided by the hydrophobic site, and the static pressure (Fg) of the droplet increases with increasing size of the droplet. When static pressure (Fg) is greater than the supporting force (FH), the droplet breaks through the hydrophobic site and begins to penetrate through the channel formed by the hydrophilic site on the hydrophobic surface and the superhydrophilic layer. Thus, the droplets gradually penetrate from the hydrophobic–hydrophilic side to the superhydrophilic side with increasing size of the droplets. When the droplet enters the superhydrophilic layer, FH disappears and the horizontal and downward capillary forces, Fc, are generated on the superhydrophilic side, which accelerates unidirectional transport. When the superhydrophilic surface is upward, the water droplets on the superhydrophilic surface are immediately absorbed by the superhydrophilic layer, and the droplets spread along the surface in any direction until a water film is formed on the surface of the hydrophobic layer. At this point, Fc plays a leading role, while Fg provided by gravity is very small due to droplet diffusion, and its resultant force (Fc + Fg) cannot overcome FH provided by the hydrophobic layer, so the droplets cannot permeate through the hydrophobic–hydrophilic layer in a directional way from the superhydrophilic layer.
4. Microstructure studies
In recent years, Janus materials have been developed for a variety of applications, including oil/water separation, directional transport, fog collection, sensing, and catalysis. The structural characteristics of Janus materials for different applications are different, which is worthy of our study. It is well known that the structural characteristics of Janus materials affect their surface wettability. The special wettability of the superhydrophobic surface originates from the construction of a microscopic rough structure and the reduction of surface tension.102 As for Janus materials with opposite wettability, the microstructure and surface tension are worthy of further study. The preparation of Janus materials usually has two different paths. The first idea is to combine two materials with different wettability. The second way is to prepare parts with different wettability from the substrate material by chemical modification of a single wettability material, such as copper mesh. At the same time, due to different substrate materials used for the preparation of Janus systems, many different preparation methods were used to prepare Janus materials for different purposes, including electrospinning,103–105 single-side spraying,106,107 single-side chemical modification,35 Pickering emulsion method,108 and layer-by-layer self-assembly.29
In general, Janus materials can be divided into polymer Janus materials, inorganic Janus materials, polymer–inorganic Janus materials and other Janus materials in terms of the choice of substrate materials.85 Or Janus material can be divided into Janus membranes and Janus particles according to the shape of the Janus material. Typical studies of common Janus materials are summarized in Table 1, which includes substrates, preparation methods, wettability, and applications for each study.
Table 1 Summary table of representative Janus materials, including substrates, preparation methods, wettability, and applications




 
Substrates
Preparation
Wettability
Application
Ref.




Janus membranes
Copper mesh
Immersion
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Oil/water separation

25



Polypropylene membrane
Immersion
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Oil/water separation

116



Polypropylene membrane
Single-side deposition
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Oil–water separation

112



PU and C-PVA
Electrospinning
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Unidirectional water penetration

113



Cotton fabric
Plasma graft polymerization
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Sensor

27



Graphene
O2 plasma
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Enhance solar interfacial evaporation

115



—
Single-side deposition
Superamphiphobic/amphiphilic
Transportation of crude oil

35



Nickel foam
Immersion
Superhydrophilic/hydrophobic
Directional water delivery

45



Paper
Single-side deposition
Superhydrophilic/hydrophobic
Sensor

66



Cotton fabric
Single-side modification
Superhydrophobic/hydrophilic
Oil–water separation

119



Copper foams
Chemical etching and spaying
Hydrophobic–hydrophilic/superhydrophilic
Fog droplets collection

24



Cotton fabric
One-step spraying
Superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic
Unidirectional water penetration

98



PVDP-HFP
Layered
Superhydrophobic/superamphiphobic
Oil–water separation

26



FD-POSS
Electrospinning








Janus particles
SiO2 particles
Masking
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
Bubble stabilizer

30



Gold wire










CPSAA particles
Phase separation
—
Colloidal surfactants

31



PS










SiO2 particles
Pickering emulsion method
—
Drug delivery

137



Au NPs










SiO2 nanoparticles
Modification chemical etching
Hydrophobic/hydrophilic
EOR performance

132





4.1 Janus membranes
Membrane materials, as the core elements in many applications, such as separation processes and directional transport, have received extensive attention and are closely related to human life. With the rapid development of modern society, there is a growing demand for functional membranes. Nature can provide us with much inspiration when designing functional membrane materials, such as cell membranes,109 which have lipid bilayer structures composed of a hydrophilic phosphate outer layer and a hydrophobic hydrocarbon core layer. Asymmetric wettability enables hydrophobic molecules to migrate spontaneously from hydrophilic to hydrophobic layers, while the permeability of hydrophilic polar molecules is reduced. These membranes with asymmetrical wettability are called Janus membranes.
The special surface wettability, different layer thickness and asymmetrical engineering of the pore structure make Janus membranes superior to conventional membranes in terms of transmission. Janus membranes are designed to make industrial production processes more energy efficient and intelligent. For example, some scientists have developed a membrane that can separate oil-in-water and oil-in-water emulsions, thus obtaining higher time and energy efficiency in industrial production. There is also a Janus cotton fabric that can both stop blood clotting and prevent blood permeation and is expected to be used in the medical field. Janus membranes with asymmetrical wettability surfaces have gained wide applications in a variety of research fields due to their unique mass transfer behavior (e.g. liquid or gas) in two-phase or multiphase systems. This unique fluid delivery relies on the synergistic effect of wettability asymmetry in the direction of film thickness. Therefore, how to create and control asymmetric wettability is the key to Janus membrane preparation.
In 2016, Yang110et al. redefined Janus membranes and divided them into three categories in order to better demonstrate the structure of Janus membranes. According to membrane structure, Janus membranes can be divided into three types: A-on-B, A-and-B and A-to-B. In the first type of A-on-B membrane, the A layer is much thinner than the B layer, but it also has a significant effect on the surface properties of the membranes. The second type is where the A and B layers are of similar thickness, and we call them A-and-B membranes. The third type of A-to-B membrane exhibits a gradient on the cross section of the membrane, which is usually achieved by a light transmission gradient or a liquid diffusion gradient.
In this work, we can roughly divide Janus membranes into three categories according to the classification of wettability, the first is ordinary wetting: hydrophobic/hydrophilic. The second category is wetting/superwetting: superhydrophobic/hydrophilic, hydrophobic/superhydrophilic, hydrophobic–hydrophilic/superhydrophilic and superamphiphobic/amphiphilic. The third type is superwetting: superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic, superhydrophobic/superamphiphobic.

4.1.1 Ordinary wetting Janus membranes. 
The hydrophobic and hydrophilic wetting properties are opposite to each other and relatively easy to obtain, resulting in a wide variety of preparation methods for hydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus membranes with different surface structures. For example, based on a 3D hydrophobic/hydrophilic collaborative system, Cao111et al. designed and manufactured a continuous fog collector inspired by natural water-collecting and water-retaining strategies. As shown in Fig. 6(a), the hydrophobic/hydrophilic cooperative Janus system was prepared by a tight combination of hydrophobic copper mesh and hydrophilic cotton adsorbent, with a contact angle of 140° on the hydrophobic surface and 0° on the hydrophilic surface. It was found that during the atomization process, the atomized droplets were rapidly, spontaneously and unidirectionally transported from the hydrophobic copper network to the hydrophilic cotton side. At the same time, it was found that the reevaporation rate of collected water was reduced by 30% in the Janus system. In addition, by comparing the delivery rates of droplets to hydrophilic cotton with different integrated copper grids, it is found that hydrophobic copper grids are more efficient than ordinary copper grids and there are no residual water droplets on the surface to hinder the next round of transportation.
 Fig. 6  Structural analysis of hydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus membranes. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of a hydrophobic/hydrophilic cooperative Janus system. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015. (b) SEM images of copper mesh modified with ODT at concentrations of 0.1 mM, 0.5 mM and 2.0 mM. The upper images show the obverse of the copper mesh, while the lower images show the opposite. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Janus membranes coated with CNTs for deemulsification and separation of oil/water emulsions. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. (d) Amplified SEM image and XRD pattern of the nanostructure. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017. (e) SEM image of the cross section of PU/c-PVA composite fibrous film composed of two layers of fiber membrane. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012. (f) SEM image of the HPSA/c-PVA composite Janus membrane. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Taylor & Francis. Copyright 2014. (g) Time-dependence of water contact angles and N 1s XPS profiles of Janus cotton fabric treated with an acid or base. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2017. (h) WCA images of LIG and LIG-O and a SEM image of LIG. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. 
Another common way to prepare Janus membranes is by immersion in solution. By controlling the depth of the membrane immersed to obtain the Janus structure, A-on-B Janus membranes can be prepared, as well as A-and-B Janus membranes. For instance, Cheng25et al. prepared a new Janus nanostructured copper omentum by a simple solution immersion process and used it for the separation of oil–water mixtures. The membrane has a special one-way water transfer capability (water permeable when the hydrophobic surface is upward), and can effectively separate light and heavy oil/water mixtures simply by changing the direction of the membrane. This excellent performance is due to a combination of asymmetric surface chemical composition and nanostructure. Fig. 6(d) is the magnified SEM image of the nanostructure and the XRD spectrum of the nanostructure membrane. It was found that Cu(OH)2 nanowires were successfully prepared on copper mesh substrate by a solution impregnation process. Cu(OH)2 is hydrophilic and nano-rough structures enhance the hydrophilicity. Meanwhile, these nano-rough structures make the other side, which is treated with fluorosilane (FAS), have superior hydrophobicity, thus constructing the asymmetric Janus structure.
Therefore, Cu(OH)2 nanowires, which are inherently hydrophilic and have good hydrophobicity after simple modification with low surface energy, have attracted much attention. Zhong4et al. placed flat copper mesh grown from Cu(OH)2 nanoribbons horizontally at the bottom of a beaker containing octadecyl mercaptan (ODT)/ethanol solution. By controlling the soaking time, sample placement and concentration of octadecyl mercaptan, a Janus copper mesh with asymmetric wettability at the nanoscale (hydrophilic–hydrophobic/hydrophilic) was obtained. Fig. 6(b) shows the SEM images of ODT-modified copper mesh at concentrations of 0.1 mM, 0.5 mM and 2.0 mM, respectively. The upper images show the obverse, and the lower images show the reverse sides. As shown in the figure, the red area of the 0.5 mM ODT treatment on the obverse side of the copper mesh reflects fractional modification, but the 0.5 mM ODT treatment on the reverse side shows no difference from the untreated surface. Moreover, both the obverse and reverse sides of the copper mesh were completely modified under the treatment of 2.0 mM ODT. It is shown that as long as the ODT concentration is low enough, most ODT molecules are distributed at the upper surface and interact with Cu(OH)2 only at the upper surface. Therefore, the low concentration of modifier and the special location of matrix are the keys to achieve the coexisting alternating wettability and asymmetric wettability of copper mesh through simple liquid phase surface modification. Co-operative surface wettability enhances the ability of copper mesh (CM) to trap fog, supply water, and especially remove water.
This method of constructing Janus structures by solution immersion is not limited to copper mesh. Other materials can also be used to construct Janus structures by solution immersion. For instance, Wu116et al. prepared Janus membranes by floating a hydrophobic polypropylene membrane on a dopamine/polyethylenimine (DA/PEI) solution under ambient temperature. In this case, through Michael addition or Schiff-base reactions, PDA and PEI formed a hydrophilic cross-linked coating on the surface of the contact membrane, while the other side maintained the original hydrophobicity, thus forming an asymmetric structure. In comparison, it was found that the hydrophobic surface of Janus films showed similar a WCA and OCA to those of a hydrophobic membrane, while the hydrophilic surface showed a higher OCA and a lower WCA than that of a hydrophilic membrane. This asymmetrical surface wettability gives Janus membranes superior permeability and separation performance over purely hydrophobic or hydrophilic membranes.
Constructing a Janus structure by chemical deposition is also one of the commonly used methods to prepare Janus membranes. Solution immersion and chemical modification could not control the thickness of the hydrophobic layer in Janus membranes, but the thickness contrast between the hydrophilic layer and the hydrophobic layer was closely related to the unidirectional transport of Janus membranes. Therefore, the simple and thickness-controlled chemical deposition method performs excellently in the preparation of Janus membranes. By controlling the amount of sediment, the wettability of Janus membranes can be adjusted and the thickness of Janus membranes can be controlled, which has great advantages for the preparation of novel Janus membranes. An112et al. prepared a series of Janus membranes by vacuum filtration using positively or negatively charged CNT coatings and a hydrophobic polypropylene microfiltration membrane as raw materials. As shown in Fig. 6(c), Janus membranes with excellent oil–water separation performance were prepared by the deposition of carbon nanotubes with opposite charges on both sides of a hydrophobic polypropylene microfiltration membrane. The prepared Janus membrane has a sandwich-like structure: the upper and lower surfaces are hydrophilic, and the middle layer is hydrophobic. By controlling the amount of carbon nanotubes deposited on the substrate film, the thickness of the hydrophilic coating of carbon nanotubes can be well adjusted. There are two reasons why the prepared Janus membrane can effectively demulsify and separate surfactant stabilized oil–water emulsions. On the one hand, the charged carbon nanotube coating can attract oil droplets with opposite charge, thus greatly facilitating demulsification. On the other hand, by carefully designing the mass thickness of the carbon nanotube layer, the surface wettability can be easily adjusted to make the Janus film hydrophobic in air and oil-phobic underwater. This special wettability Janus membrane has unique crude oil permeability characteristics and oil–water separation performance.
Electrospun nanofibers have broad application prospects in many fields, including Janus functional materials, due to their unique morphology and physical and chemical properties. The preparation of Janus films by conventional electrospinning was reported in the early years of research into Janus materials. For example, as early as in 2012, Wu113et al. successfully produced a “water diode” thin membrane with intelligent unidirectional water penetration. The membrane is composed of hydrophobic polyurethane (PU) and hydrophilic cross-linked polyvinyl alcohol (C-PVA) fiber layers. As can be seen from Fig. 6(e), the Janus membrane is composed of two fibrous membranes that are tightly bonded. The magnified section shows that the two fibrous membranes are interwoven with fibers of different diameters. Water can spontaneously permeate from the hydrophobic PU side to the hydrophilic C-PVA side, but if the composite membrane is turned over, this permeation will not occur again. The ability to permeate water in one direction can be easily adjusted by controlling the thickness of the membrane.
In electrospinning technology, there is a multifunctional in situ multilayered electrospinning method that can directly prepare multilayered nanofiber films.117,118 This sequential electrospinning process can easily produce multilayered nanofiber films with hierarchical and ordered structures. The thickness, morphology and chemical composition of the multilayered structure of the prepared nanofiber films can be directly controlled by changing the number of deposition cycles and the composition of the sediment, which provides a new idea for the preparation of Janus films by electrospinning. For instance, Shi114et al. designed a novel TDDS patch based on Janus electrospun nanofiber films. Fig. 6(f) shows a SEM image of the cross-section of the HPSA/C-PVA composite membrane. The image shows that the composite film obtained consists of two layers of fiber membranes: the upper layer is a HPSA fiber membrane and the bottom layer is a C-PVA fiber membrane. The wettability gradient from the hydrophobic HPSA layer to the hydrophilic C-PVA layer endows the composite membrane with unidirectional permeability. Water can permeate from the hydrophobic side to the hydrophilic side, but not in the opposite direction unless an external force is applied.
Plasma technology is extensively applied to chemical fields, including environmental engineering, biology, material processing, and chemical synthesis. Especially since the 1960s, many unprecedented chemical reactions have been realized by using plasma technology, and remarkable achievements have been made in semiconductor materials, surface etching and thin film preparation. For instance, Yan27et al. successfully prepared a pH-responsive hydrophilic/hydrophobic fluorine-free Janus cotton fabric by plasma graft polymerization. This pH-responsive hydrophilic/hydrophobic fluorine-free Janus cotton fabric has a special sandwich structure with a pH-responsive hydrophilic layer at the top, a primitive hydrophilic layer in the middle, and a hydrophobic layer at the bottom. Fig. 6(g) shows the variation of water contact angle and N 1s XPS profiles of Janus cotton fabric treated with an acid or base with time. As can be seen from the figure, after acid treatment, one side of the Janus cotton fabric is hydrophilic, but it still has strong hydrophobicity on the other side, and the water contact angle is 142°. However, after alkaline treatment, both sides of the fabric showed good hydrophobicity, and the water droplets did not change much after 3 min. The N 1s XPS spectra showed that the PDMAEMA coating was protonated after acid treatment, which made the coating hydrophilic. After alkaline treatment, the quaternary amine peak of the hydrophilic cotton fabric decreased, and the PDMAEMA coating was deprotonated and turned hydrophobic. Therefore, the water contact angles of fabrics treated at different pH levels show good pH response to hydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus characteristics.
In recent years, the research and development of graphene materials has attracted much attention, and they have also been used in the preparation of Janus materials. For example, Han115et al. reported a method of air flow enhancement of solar interface evaporation using a graphene-based Janus membrane. Solar interface evaporation has been recognized as a universal energy conversion protocol for cutting-edge applications, such as water treatment and power generation (such as hydroelectric effects). LIG/oxidized LIG (LIG-O) Janus membranes with significantly opposite wettability on both sides were formed by single treatment of laser-induced graphene (LIG) films using O2 plasma. Fig. 6(h) shows the water contact angle of LIG and LIG-O, as well as a SEM image of LIG. The water contact angle on the LIG surface is about 121° and that on the LIG-O surface is about 0°. At the same time, the SEM image shows that the surface of LIG is rough at the nanoscale and shows a porous structure. Due to the asymmetric wettability of Janus membranes, LIG/LIG-O films show improved interfacial floatability. The combination of stable interfacial floatability under the action of airflow, micro-scale capillary water transport and nanoscale light capture effectively enhances the evaporation performance of the solar interface.


4.1.2 Wetting/superwetting Janus membranes. 
Janus membranes with one wetting side and one superwetting side are also very common and usually include superamphiphobic/amphiphilic, superhydrophobic/hydrophilic, hydrophobic–hydrophilic/superhydrophilic, hydrophobic/superhydrophilic, etc. combinations. For instance, Huang35et al. prepared micro/nanoflower-shaped spherical particles of FOTS-TiO2. Superamphiphobic/amphiphilic Janus materials were prepared by assembling superamphiphobic flower-like TiO2 particles (SFTP) on the surface by a single-side coating deposition method. SEM images of superamphiphobic flower-like TiO2 particles are shown in Fig. 7(a). It can be found that TiO2 particles have a rod-like spiked structure (with an average diameter of ∼50 nm), which is due to calcination, such that glycerol titanium is totally converted into pure anatase titanium. Subsequently, FOTs reduced the surface energy of TiO2 and gave it superamphiphobic properties. Therefore, FOTS–TiO2 particles were deposited on one side of the copper mesh or other substrates, leaving the other side immobile, to produce Janus structures with superamphiphobic/amphiphilic properties. Based on the above research, Huang35et al. prepared a simple, efficient and mass producible TiO2/SiO2-F single-sided superamphiphobic coating by combining the Stöber method and spraying method in the second year. This coating can repel most water-based compounds, most oils, organic solutions and hot water.
 Fig. 7  Structural analysis of Janus membranes. (a–e) Wetting/superwetting combined Janus membranes, (f–h) superwetting Janus membranes. (a) SEM image and magnification of modified flower-like titanium dioxide nanoparticles (MFT). Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2019. (b) Optical microscope cross-sectional image of Janus nickel foam, optical and SEM images of the hydrophobic layer on the upper surface and the superhydrophilic layer on the lower surface. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2018. (c) SEM image of the cross section of Janus paper, with the fiber image of the upper side and lower side of the Janus paper. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Journal of Jilin University. Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic diagram of surface changes in seven short segments of the fabric thread during the preparation of Janus fabric. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2016. (e) SEM images and magnification images of the raw copper foam, Cu(OH)2 nanowires on copper foam, and ZnO nanorods grown on Cu(OH)2 nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. (f) Optical and SEM images of both sides of Janus superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic fabric. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2018. (g) A FE-SEM cross-sectional image of superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic cotton fabric (sprayed from 30 cm), a SEM image of the sprayed side and a SEM image of the untreated side. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016. (h) SEM images of PVDF-HFP (left) and PVDFHFP/POSS (right) nanofiber membrane and photographs of water and diesel droplets on the nanofiber membrane. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015. 
Simple solution immersion can also be used to prepare superhydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus materials. For example, Si45et al. dispersed sticky starch paste in ethanol, dipped most of the nickel foam into the liquid and coated it with starch paste to form an ultra-hydrophilic coating. The remaining nickel foam in air retains its original hydrophobicity, resulting in the preparation of stable Janus superhydrophilic/hydrophobic nickel foam, which can be used for directional water delivery. Fig. 7(b) shows the optical cross-sectional image of Janus nickel foam, an optical photograph and a SEM image of the superhydrophilic surface and hydrophobic surface. The white superhydrophilic layer is speculated to be about 1300 μm from the cross-sectional image. It is evident from optical images that the hydrophobic layer (the original nickel foam layer) has a silver–gray metallic appearance and the superhydrophilic layer is grey–white due to the presence of the starch paste layer. The SEM image shows that the original nickel foam frame is smooth and flat and the superhydrophilic layer of the nickel foam skeleton is covered by starch paste and is rugged and uneven. This stable 3D “water diode” Janus superhydrophilic/hydrophobic nickel foam has been shown to deliver water in a directional manner.
The special structure of superhydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus paper makes it a potential material for shape memory devices, energy conversion devices, environmental sensors and intelligent response devices. For instance, Tian66et al. prepared multifunctional superhydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus paper by depositing PVDF on one side of qualitative filter paper. A cross-sectional SEM image of Janus paper is shown in Fig. 7(c). It can be seen that fibers near the upper surface are much denser than fibers near the bottom. In addition, by comparing the magnified SEM images of the upper and lower parts of the fibers, it can be seen that fibers near the upper part are completely wrapped in the solidified polymer, resulting in a smooth surface of the fibers, while fibers near the lower part are exposed. Directional deformation occurs when the paper contacts with water, and the degree and direction of deformation can be controlled by adjusting the asymmetrical expansion behavior of the paper. Therefore, Janus paper can be used as an energy conversion device to convert expansion potential energy into mechanical potential energy.
Oil–water separation has always been a focus of research, and superhydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus films have good application prospects in the field of oil–water separation. Back in 2015, Wang119et al. developed a new method for preparing superhydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus cotton fabrics. The prepared Janus fabrics containing PDMS and PDMAEMA can be used as filters to separate oil from a variety of simple oil/water mixtures, as well as from a variety of water-in-oil emulsions, but the experimental scheme is complicated and cannot be produced on a large scale. They improved the experiment the next year. Wang120et al. produced a superhydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus fabric by single-side spraying. Fig. 7(d) is a schematic diagram of the preparation process, which shows the surface changes of seven short segments of the fabric thread during the preparation process of the Janus fabric. When used as a filter, the Janus fabric quickly and efficiently separates oil from simple oil/water mixtures and water-in-oil emulsions.
In recent years, it has been found that the asymmetric wettability of the Janus structure and the alternating hydrophobic–hydrophilic structure inspired by the desert beetle can both promote fog droplet collection. Therefore, hybrid hydrophobic–hydrophilic/superhydrophilic Janus systems have been constructed and applied to fog droplet collection. For instance, Zhou24et al. found a simple and effective method to produce alternating nanoscale (hydrophilic–hydrophobic)/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foams with high fog droplet collection performance. Structural changes during the preparation process are shown in Fig. 7(e). The surface of the original copper foam is smooth, but after the preparation of superhydrophilic Cu(OH)2 nanowires by chemical etching, the surface becomes rough, and the Cu(OH)2 nanowires on the surface are evenly distributed in different directions. ZnO nanorods were grown on Cu(OH)2 nanowires by a hydrothermal method to form layered micro–nanostructures like pine leaves. Finally, PDMS was partially grafted onto ZnO nanorods. The surface microstructure did not change significantly, but the chemical properties of the grafted parts changed from hydrophilic to hydrophobic. By controlling the spraying distance and spraying times, different alternating nanoscale (hydrophilic–hydrophobic)/superhydrophilic copper foams with asymmetric wettability were obtained. The sprayed layer is a hybrid hydrophilic surface, while the unsprayed layer keeps its original superhydrophilicity. Compared with previously reported preparation methods, the method is simple, effective and controllable. After prolonged exposure to UV or several heating/cooling cycles, the prepared Janus copper foam still maintains stable wettability and effective fog collection.


4.1.3 Superwetting Janus membranes. 
Janus membranes with two-sided superwetting and opposite wettability are one of the most difficult Janus structures to construct. However, superwetting Janus membranes have also been developed because membranes with superwetting properties are superior to ordinary wetting membranes in many fields. For example, Yao98et al. designed asymmetrically wetting Janus fabric with two warp systems and two weft yarns with obvious wettability as raw materials. A SEM image of Janus fabric is shown in Fig. 7(f). The Janus fabric is made from yellow yarns and white yarns, but, in the image, the Janus fabric has a single color on each side (yellow or white). Compared with the smooth surface of the original yarn, the yellow superhydrophobic surface and white superhydrophilic surface are obviously rough, and the roughness is different due to different braiding structures and chemical treatment agents. This asymmetrical wettability enables one-way penetration and oil–water separation.
The superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus fabric has potential applications not only in oil and water separation, but also in the medical field. Sasaki122et al. produced asymmetric superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic cotton fabrics by one-step spraying of polymers and nanoparticles. Fig. 7(g) is a FE-SEM image of the cross section of Janus fabric, showing the boundary between the superhydrophobic layer and the superhydrophilic layer in Janus fabric. The upper layer is superhydrophobic, and a hierarchical structure composed of SiO2 nanoparticles can be observed, while the lower layer is still the original fiber structure. The treated cotton fabric still has a high blood absorption rate and air permeability after blood coagulation on the superhydrophilic side, and it also has the ability to prevent blood penetration and self-clean on the sprayed side. This highly breathable fabric, which prevents water and blood from penetrating the back side, is expected to have a wide range of applications in various medical fields.
In addition to superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus membranes, superhydrophobic/superamphiphobic Janus membranes have also been prepared. The nanofilms were prepared by Wang26et al. using layered electrospinning, with one side of superhydrophobic PVDP-HFP and one side of superamphiphobic PVDF-HFP/FD-POSS/FAS. SEM images of the electrospun nanofibers and the WCA and OCA of the Janus membrane are shown in Fig. 7(h). The diameter of the superhydrophobic PVDP-HFP fiber was 200 ± 58 nm, and the diameter of the superhydrophobic PVDF-HFP/FD-POSS/FAS nanofiber was 222 ± 85 nm. Since the concentration of PVDF-HFP in the two electrospinning solutions was the same and the electrospinning parameters were the same, the difference in fiber diameter indicated that it was affected by FD-POSS and FAS. By comparing the WCA and OCA on PVDP-HFP and PVDF-HFP/FD-POSS/FAS fiber membranes, it can be found that the PVDP-HFP fiber membrane is superhydrophobic but not oleophobic. However, the PVDF-HFP/FD-POSS/FAS fiber membrane is superamphiphobic, and both water droplets and oil droplets remain spherical on the surface.
As is well-known, surface wettability is related to a rough surface structure and surface energy. A rough structure will promote extreme wettability. For example, with increasing surface roughness, a hydrophobic surface will be superhydrophobic, and a hydrophilic surface will be superhydrophilic. The surface energy level directly affects the surface wettability, so a low surface energy surface will lead to hydrophobicity and a high surface energy surface will lead to hydrophilicity.
In this section, we introduce various Janus membranes with different wettability in detail, focusing on the analysis of the microstructure of Janus membranes. It has been found that Janus membranes are usually constructed in three ways. The first way is to combine the hydrophobic and hydrophilic layers directly with an adhesive. The Janus system structure is dependent only on the raw materials.
The second strategy is to construct opposite wettability on hydrophobic or hydrophilic substrates. These Janus membranes are also divided into two types: one is prepared by growing a rough structure on the substrate and then treating it with chemical reagents, and the other is prepared by attaching a coating or micro–nanoparticles with special wettability to the substrate. Janus membranes are available in a wide variety of configurations, depending on the substrate. Metal substrates, including hard metal substrates, such as copper mesh, and soft metal substrates, such as copper foam, can grow metal oxides on the surface to form rough structures and then be treated with chemical reagents to obtain superhydrophobicity. By observing SEM images, it can be found that the surface of these metals is covered with a layer of micro–nano rough structures. The paper (such as Qualitative Filter Paper) itself has good hydrophilicity and the fiber bond is close, paper-based Janus membranes are different, SEM image shows that the hydrophilic layer and hydrophobic layer fiber density is obviously different. Fabric-based Janus membranes are usually prepared by deposition. The hydrophobic layer of fabric fibers is attached to particles with special wettability, while the hydrophilic layer usually retains the original fibrous shape of the fabric.
The third type is to treat both sides of the substrate with hydrophobic and hydrophilic agents respectively. This Janus membrane has a special three-layered structure, with the original substrate in the middle, which makes it better in some specific areas. Of course, there are other Janus films that do not fall into these three categories, such as Janus membranes prepared by electrospinning, which are microscopic fibers of varying thicknesses and densities, the special wettability of which is derived from the raw materials.

4.2 Janus particles
Janus particles are a class of particles with two or more surface regions, each exhibiting different wetting properties, and the surface regions are configured in an asymmetric manner. As shown in Fig. 8(a), Janus particles have different shapes, including spherical, sheet-like and rod-like. The Janus particles have very different chemical properties, ranging in size from a few nanometers to tens of microns, but they all share one common feature. All Janus particles combine an asymmetric structure based on two kinds: the surface of the particle produces the asymmetric structure, and the core produces the asymmetric structure. This unique binding property makes Janus particles very interesting for a wide range of applications in different fields, such as surfactants, sensors, drug delivery or coatings.121Fig. 8(b) shows that there are three main pathways to prepare Janus particles, namely, self-assembly,123–125 masking126 and phase separation.127–129
 Fig. 8  Representative shape and preparation of Janus particles. (a) There are three types of Janus particles: spherical, sheet-like and rod-like. (b) Three methods for the preparation of spherical Janus particles: masking, phase separation and self-assembly. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2017. 
To prepare Janus particles by masking, the most direct method is to selectively protect or bury one side of the particle and functionalize one of its faces in order to give asymmetric particles. A practical approach is to fix the particles at the interface between the two phases and then functionalize only one of them. For example, one of the easiest and first methods to achieve this goal is to adsorb a layer of symmetrical particles on a flat solid surface and then modify the exposed upper part.
The preparation of Janus particles by phase separation is an effective method to produce particle asymmetry by taking advantage of the incompatibility between two or more components. The idea is to form a single particle from two insoluble substances and then induce their phases to separate, resulting in the Janus structure. This method is useful because a variety of organic and inorganic materials can be used. For example, soft polymer Janus particles, hard inorganic Janus particles and hybrid organic–inorganic Janus particles can be prepared by the phase separation method.
Bottom-up self-assembly is a special tool for the production of a variety of symmetrical nanostructured materials. However, it is not easy to prepare asymmetric structures by using self-assembly technology, but it is very promising technology to prepare real nanoscale soft Janus particles by using self-assembly technology. Scientists have developed a number of strategies over the years to break the symmetry of the particles to produce asymmetric Janus particles. These strategies typically involve mixing two diblock copolymers in solution, or first obtaining a specific nanostructure using a triblock ternary polymer and then binding it to a specific microlocale.
The preparation of asymmetric Janus particles has always been a challenging task. However, scientists have made great progress in the past few decades, and many new pathways for synthesizing Janus particles have been reported, leading to the formation of various Janus materials. Fujii30et al. successfully prepared monodisperse, micron-sized Au-SiO2 Janus particles by grafting based on the thiol–gold interaction, and they prepared PS-g-Au-SiO2 Janus particles and PPFBEMS-g-Au-SiO2 Janus particles by grafting different hydrophobic polymers onto the surface of gold. Fig. 9(a) and (b) shows SEM and OM images of three Janus particles, showing that these Janus particles with hydrophilic/hydrophobic surface characteristics can stabilize bubbles in water. By comparing the ability of the three Janus particles to act as particle stabilizers, it was found that Au-SiO2 and PS-g-Au-SiO2 Janus particles exhibited monolayer adsorption on the Au side and SiO2 side of the air–water interface facing the gas phase and the water phase, respectively, and could effectively stabilize bubbles. PPFBEMS-g-Au-SiO2 Janus particles are adsorbed as aggregates at the air–water interface, but they can also stabilize bubbles. PS-g-Au-SiO2 Janus particles stabilized bubbles for more than 1 month due to their high adsorption energy at the air–water interface, while the stabilized bubbles of Au-SiO2 and PPFMEMS-g-Au-SiO2 Janus particles collapsed within 2 weeks due to the low adsorption efficiency of the Janus particles and aggregates at the interface.
 Fig. 9  Structure of a Janus particle. (a) SEM images and (b) OM images of air bubbles in water stabilized by three types of Janus particles: Au-SiO2, PS-g-Au-SiO2 and PPFBEM-g-Au-SiO2. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. (c) Representative TEM images of colloidal onion self-assembled from heterocluster Janus molecules, ideal colloidal onion images and the 3D structure of colloidal onion. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2019. (d) Morphologies of the representative CPSAA-PS JNPs prepared via the swelling process at different mass ratios (0.5, 1, 3, 5, 7, 10). Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. 
The ordered arrangement of Janus clusters and shape manipulation make the formation of special structures or forms, such as honeycomb crystals and two-dimensional honeycomb superlattices, possible. Thus, Janus particles (JNPs) with controlled anisotropy are considered to be a promising material for complex components and assemblies. Wang131et al. were the first to design and create a series of HCJMs composed of different nanoclusters, namely, polyoxometalates (POMs) and polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS), which were linked by various organic linkers. These molecules resemble traditional amphiphilic molecules, with one end hydrophilic and the other hydrophobic. These heterocluster Janus molecules self-assemble into colloidal onions in an acetone/water mixture. Fig. 9(c) shows the 3D structure of colloidal onion and the ideal structure of colloidal onion, and the TEM image shows that these aggregates are colloidal onion with a solid core and uniform layer thickness.
Xie31et al. proposed a simple and direct method for the synthesis of uniformly distributed and anisotropic controlled Janus particles. The synthesis strategy is based on the formation of polystyrene (PS) and CPSAA compartments corresponding to the number of monomers on seed polystyrene-co-acrylic acid (CPSAA) nanoparticles by controlled expansion of the phase separation-induced styrene liquid phase. Fig. 9(d) shows the geometric evolution of the anisotropic JNPs obtained by changing the mass ratio (MR). Only when the MR is between 3 and 10 do CPSAA-PS JNPs grow best, and when the MR is less than 3, they form homogeneous particles after polymerization, and when the MR is greater than 10, polydisperse JNPs and spherical PS NPs are obtained. The obtained JNPs with tunable amphiphilicity can be used as colloidal surfactants and can also be used to prepare and stabilize monodisperse droplets in microfluidic devices.
All in all, different preparation methods for Janus particles have respective advantages and disadvantages, and the Janus particles obtained by different preparation methods have diverse microstructures. Although initially limited to the formation of micron-sized particles, nanoscale Janus particles can now be acquired through masking as technology advances. The strategy of masking can be used to prepare a variety of Janus particles, but the output of Janus particles is usually affected by the limited available surface on the particle interface. The main advantages of the phase separation strategy are that the whole process is very easy and the strategy is quite versatile since various kinds of materials, organic and inorganic, can be used. However, these methods have limitations that must be overcome, including the difficulty of controlling the size and structure of the Janus particles and the inability to produce large numbers of particles. In most cases, the nanostructures obtained by the bottom-up self-assembly strategy are symmetric, so it is not an easy task to prepare asymmetric Janus structures from self-assembled copolymers. However, authentic nanoscale Janus particles can be prepared by self-assembly, and this strategy can also be advantageously exploited to produce various kinds of asymmetric nanoparticles, including lamellae–sphere morphology, Janus cylinders or disks. Janus particles prepared by masking retained the shape of the substrate particles, and only the modified part showed a new coating or grafting. Janus particles prepared by self-assembly have a variety of morphologies, including spherical and strip. The structure of Janus particles prepared by phase separation is related to the phase. Two-phase separated Janus particles are usually dumbbell shaped. Three-phase and higher components of Janus particles have more multiphase protuberances on the basis of the basal sphere.
5. Applications
Studies have shown that Janus particles prepared by traditional methods, such as interface modification, phase separation and self-assembly, have good application prospects in oil–water separation, colloid crystallization, water production and targeted transport. Janus membranes have a wider range of applications due to their more diverse preparation methods, focusing on water collection, directional fluid transport, oil–water separation, sensing and drug release, etc. Fig. 10 shows representative applications of Janus materials. The various special structures of Janus materials are described in detail above; these give them unique properties, such as asymmetric wettability and water/oil selectivity, and the applications of Janus materials in many fields are inextricably related to these properties.
 Fig. 10  Common applications of Janus materials. Janus particles: (a) The EOR performance of Janus particles. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (b) The magnetic response of Janus particles. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. The mutual applications of Janus particles and membranes: (c) the sensor. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (d) Drug delivery. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Taylor & Francis. Copyright 2014. Janus membranes: (e) Fog collection. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (f) Oil/water separation. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2018. 
5.1 Sensors
The application of Janus materials in sensing has been deepening in recent years due to the unique asymmetry of these materials. The first and most common application is that Janus materials can be used as a humidity sensor due to their asymmetrical wettability, because the two sides of the Janus material respond differently to humidity, especially paper-based Janus materials, which provide more accurate feedback. Secondly, through different chemical modifications, the two sides of Janus material respond differently to some gases or chemicals, which leads to the application of Janus materials in electrochemical sensing. For instance, Ma48et al. prepared oxide Janus porous microtubes by combining atomic layer deposition with ultrasonic technology. Oxide Janus nanomembranes, such as TiO2 nanomembranes, were prepared by atomic layer deposition on a polyurethane sacrificial template. After heat treatment and polyurethane template removal, a large number of metal oxide nanomembranes were obtained. The rolling of Janus nanomembranes deposited on a sponge template with a one-sided porous structure is triggered by ultrasound. The single-sided porous nanomembranes can be transformed from a planar state into a microtubule structure in a highly polar solvent under the action of ultrasound. Functionalized microtubules can be used for electrochemically sensing dopamine and ascorbic acid. As shown in Fig. 11(a), the peak intensity of DPV increased with increasing dopamine concentration. The increase of the peak ΔI in the range of 0.4–80 μm was linear with the concentration of dopamine. The results show that the Janus microtubular sensor has a higher sensitivity, a wider linear detection range (LDR) and a lower detection limit than DA sensors reported previously in the literature. Selective electrochemical sensing of dopamine and ascorbic acid has important implications for solving problems related to neurological diseases, such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.133 The tubular structure, porous inner surface and exposure of the active sites are considered to be the main reasons for its excellent performance. Meanwhile, the microtubule sensor maintained a stable sensing performance after 12 days. This method provides an effective method for preparing novel 3D sensing structures with broad application prospects.
 Fig. 11  Property analysis of sensing and drug delivery. (a) I–V curves of different concentrations of dopamine solutions from 0.4 to 80 μm by a Janus microtubule sensor. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (b) Performing real-time sweat monitoring on the body; the signal acquisition of each sensor takes place during the collection of sufficient sweat samples. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (c) Fluorescence image and SERS spectrum of Janus particles treated with gastric juice (scale bar, 100 μm). Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017. (d) The in vitro drug release profiles of the raw helicid particles, monolithic nanofibers, and Janus nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. (e) Images of tumor-bearing mice after various treatments during the 15-day evaluation period and photographs of each group of mice after treatment for 15 days. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. 
He32et al. have developed a wearable smart Janus textile belt that combines an integrated self-pumping Janus textile as an attractive sweat sampling platform with a tape-based electrode array for electrochemical measurement systems for a variety of physiological biomarkers. The main structure of the sweat sampling platform is an array of hydrophobic polyurethane (PU) nanofibers prepared by electrospinning on superhydrophilic gauze. Based on the contact-pumping model, Janus textiles can deliver sweat from the skin (hydrophobic side) to the embedded electrode surface (hydrophilic side) in a one-way and thorough manner, resulting in the fast and full transfer of sweat from the skin to the analysis area with the desired skin comfort. As shown in Fig. 11(b), the chemically modified electrode system embedded in Janus textiles provides sensitive and real-time detection of physically relevant sweat components, including glucose (40 to 18 μM), lactic acid (approximately 10 mM), K+ (6.3 to 0.3 mM), and Na+ (approximately 60 mM) in human trials. This type of wearable sensor improves the usability of sweat from the epidermis mainly by optimizing the interfacial wettability, and has great application potential in sports, military, clinical care, intelligent medicine and other fields of bio-fluid analysis.
pH sensors have been widely used because accurate pH sensing is of great significance in various fields of scientific research and technology, such as disease diagnosis, environmental analysis, and chemical process control.134 However, it is worth noting that a traditional SERS pH sensor usually fails in acidic medium with a pH value below 5.5; this is caused by the aggregation of probes. In order to solve the limitation of the unreliability of the traditional SERS pH sensor below pH 5.5, Yue37et al. developed a surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)–fluorescence dual-mode pH sensing method based on a Janus microgel to combine the advantages of SERS of high specificity with rapid fluorescence imaging. First, the Janus microgel was prepared by using a centrifugal microfluidic device, then labeled AuNPs and carbon dots (CDS) were encapsulated in two separate hemispheres of Janus microgel particles. Based on the obvious volume variation of hydrogels at different pH values, Janus microparticles were successfully applied to sensitive and reliable pH measurements ranging from 1.0 to 8.0 without significant interference between the two hemispheres. Fig. 11(c) shows the fluorescence image and SERS spectrum of Janus particles in gastric juice, which verify the effectiveness of the Janus microgel in detecting the pH value. The microparticles have good stability, reversibility, biocompatibility and ideal semi-permeability, which can avoid protein contamination, and may become an implantable continuous pH monitoring sensor in vivo.
5.2 Drug delivery
The new generation of Janus nanoparticles have a tunable and controllable asymmetrical structure, which permits drugs with different physical and chemical properties to be placed on opposite surfaces without interacting with each other, facilitating the independent release of individual drugs compared to symmetric nanoparticles. Functionally different surfaces of Janus particles can be used to selectively bind to specific triggers to stimulate the reactive release of dual drugs. In the field of cancer treatment, an appropriate drug combination can increase the killing of tumor cells, maximize the therapeutic effect, reduce multidrug resistance, and reduce overlapping toxicity.136 In this case, functionally different surfaces of Janus particles can selectively bind specific chemical fragments, and the anisotropy of Janus nanoparticles can be used to simultaneously deliver two drugs, resulting in a synergistic drug effect that can enhance the antitumor activity of the drug. For instance, Xing36et al. successfully synthesized gold–mesoporous silica Janus nanoparticles by the Pickering emulsion method. The obtained Janus nanoparticles were selectively assembled with thiol-β-cyclodextrin as the drug delivery carrier for paclitaxel on the gold domain, while the silica side with a mesoporous structure was used as the drug delivery carrier for doxorubicin. These synthesized Janus nanoparticles have both pH and near-infrared (NIR) responsive release properties. Representative images of the tumors after 15 days of treatment are shown in Fig. 11(e). It can be found that Janus nanoparticles loaded with two drugs show significantly more tumor inhibition in tumor-bearing mice than in single-drug tumor-bearing mice. Histological analysis showed no pathological changes to the main organs of rats. The results show that the double-drug loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles have high therapeutic efficiency and good biocompatibility in vitro and in vivo, and can be used as an effective candidate drug for cancer treatment. Nanoparticles have been the subject of much interest for therapeutic and diagnostic applications in the field of nanomedical science, and one of them, Janus nanoparticles, have a dual surface structure that is anisotropic in composition, shape and surface chemistry, generating great interest in cell targeting, non-invasive imaging and drug delivery. Shao137et al. reported a simple and mild method for the preparation of novel Janus silver–mesoporous silica nanoparticles (Ag-MSNs). This new type of Janus silver–mesoporous silica nanoparticle with silver nanospheres as the head and ordered mesoporous silica as the main body has excellent surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and mesoporous properties, which can be used for the simultaneous imaging of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and pH-responsive drug release. The silver nanospheres were combined with mesoporous silica by the sol–gel method, and the assembly mechanism was based on anisotropic island nucleation and growth of mesoporous silica in an alcohol-free reaction system. Due to the unique Janus structure, the SPR and mesoporous properties of the Ag-MSN nanocomposites were not disturbed or weakened. It was found that the Ag-MSN nanocarrier was an effective drug delivery system, which was beneficial for endocytosis, pH-responsive drug release and SERS imaging simultaneously. Additionally, Ag-MSNs loaded with DOX selectively inhibit the growth of cancer cells, but not normal human cells. This work highlights the potential of the Janus Ag-MSN nanocarrier as an achievable tool for effective cancer therapy.
In addition to the great advantages of Janus particles in drug delivery, Janus films also have potential applications in drug delivery. For example, Wang135et al. designed a novel hydrophilic Janus structure nanocomposite for rapid dissolution and transmembrane penetration of helicid, which is an herb with poor water solubility. Control by the Janus composite can provide more than 10-fold increased transmembrane crossing rates for the crude helicid particles. Fig. 11(d) shows the in vitro drug release profiles, both conventional nanofibers and Janus nanofibers released the load within 1 min, but only 11.7% of the helicin particles were released after 30 min. Although there was no significant difference in in vitro dissolution results between conventional nanofibers and Janus nanofibers, due to the asymmetric wettability of the Janus structure, the Janus nanofibers could further improve their performance in enhancing rapid dissolution. Compared with monolithic nanocomposites prepared by a traditional hybrid electrospinning process, Janus nanocomposites have better hydrophilicity and can further promote the dissolution and transmembrane penetration of helical proteins, which may lead to faster therapeutic effects. At the same time, the hydrophilic Janus nanocomposite containing drugs can be used as a new nano drug delivery system, which can quickly improve the therapeutic effect of oral water insoluble drugs.
5.3 Fog collection
The potential of Janus membranes for fog collection has been highlighted in recent years due to the advantages of asymmetric wettability. The world's water resources are decreasing year by year, and for some areas where water is scarce, the morning and evening fog and dew are worth collecting. Fog collectors are now used in humid areas, which partly solve the problem of water shortages. Therefore, the development of fog water collectors has attracted more and more attention. Janus membranes widely applied to fog collection include Janus metal mesh, Janus fabric and Janus polymer films. For instance, Su50et al. reported a smart stretchable Janus membrane of flexible polydimethylsiloxane sheets prepared by ultrafast laser drilling. The membrane can adjust the fog collection rate by uniaxially stretching the flexible PDMS sheet, and one can obtain any ideal collection rate through different tensile levels. Fig. 12(a) shows a schematic diagram of fog collection and the measured results of fog collection. It can be found that when the maximum strain of the smart Janus membrane is 200%, the fog collection efficiency is improved by 67% compared to the original form. Additional theoretical calculations show that when the strain is 200%, the wetting force and the Laplacian pressure act synergically, and the fog concentration increases by 79% with the uniaxial tension, which is in good agreement with the experimental results. At the same time, several continuous fog collection processes show good collection reproducibility. It is believed that this smart Janus membrane can be used not only in the fog collection field, but also in other fields such as dynamic fog–flux regulators in food engineering.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram and measured data from a fog collecting system. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2019. (b) Water collection and water collection rate of PS–CA mesh compared with PS and CA meshes. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (c) Water collection rate and collected water weight of different samples within 5 h. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. 
The preparation of Janus membranes with the ability to collect fog by imitating a natural biological structure is also an area of concern. For example, Zhu51et al. were inspired by the backs of beetles in the Namib Desert to produce an asymmetric wettability Janus fabric with a hydrophobic–hydrophilic pattern that enabled efficient fog collection. PDVB@fabric has good self-cleaning and antifouling performance, wear resistance and environmental durability. Furthermore, Janus fabric with asymmetric wettability can be prepared by simply exposing PDVB@fabric to ultraviolet light due to the photocatalytic degradation of PDVB nanopolymer. Based on the ability to capture fog in the hydrophilic region and water transport performance in the hydrophobic region, an efficient fog capture system is realized. As shown in Fig. 12(c), all Janus fabrics with hydrophobic–hydrophilic patterns have a higher water collection rate than homogeneous superhydrophilic or superhydrophobic Janus fabrics, indicating that such hydrophobic/hydrophilic patterned fabrics driven by surface energy gradients can achieve more efficient fog collection. Jacquard fabric has the advantages of a simple and rapid manufacturing strategy, high water-collecting rate and stable reusable performance, which can meet the practical needs of large-scale fog-collecting applications. Therefore, this simple strategy to achieve controlled gradient wettability by adjusting the surface structure and chemical composition of the fabric shows great potential for efficient fog collection.
In addition, in recent years, it has been possible to prepare Janus membranes with fog collecting properties by electrospinning. Using hydrophobic polystyrene (PS) and hydrophilic cellulose acetate (CA) as materials, Knapczyk-Korczak49et al. successfully combined two polymers with different wettability and mechanical properties by electrospinning to prepare a novel single-fiber Janus system. The new system, which uses Janus fibers, shows great potential for fog water collection applications. By comparing the water collection rate and water collection of the three fiber networks in Fig. 12(b), it is found that the Janus PS–CA catchment systems are more efficient at collecting water than single PS and CA fiber networks and other commercial networks. Polystyrene prepared by electrospinning is a common hydrophobic material with good water absorption, but its surface is rough and unsuitable for commercial applications. The addition of CA alleviates this problem because CA can be either hydrophilic or hydrophobic, depending on the geometry and molecular weight of the polymer. The Janus PS–CA net reinforced with CA can be more durable and mechanically stable than PS or CA fiber nets alone. At the same time, the Janus PS–CA mesh has a low surface roughness and specially designed grooved fibers, which create an effective drainage system for the collected water droplets and greatly improves the water collection rate.
5.4 Other applications
Nowadays, more and more attention is being paid to environmental protection issues, such as the treatment of environmental pollution such as industrial waste oil. A variety of oil–water separation devices have been prepared in which the Janus material performs better than other homogeneous materials due to its asymmetric wettability. For instance, Nau38et al. introduced a novel Janus functional paper-based hybrid membrane with an adjustable wettability gradient, designed with wettability and wettability gradients ranging from hydrophilic to superhydrophobic. The novel Janus functional paper-based hybrid membrane with an asymmetrical silicon distribution along a cross-section was prepared by using a very small amount of ethyl orthosilicate as the only active chemical during a simple impregnation–curing process. These asymmetric wetting properties are based on the interaction of silane reactivity and environmental control of transport along the cross-section of the paper during curing. The Janus paper membrane is capable of separating oil and water in a double-diode manner, allowing water to permeate from one side and oil from the other side and in the opposite direction. This simple and efficient oil–water separation membrane design offers great potential for industrial applications.
Emerging applications of Janus particles fall into three main categories. The first category is the most common Janus particles with amphiphilic properties, which can be used as interface stabilizers. The second category of Janus particles is the one that highlights the asymmetry, such as Janus particles with anisotropic optical properties or Janus particles with asymmetric electromagnetic properties, which can be used in biosensors or as nano- and micropumps. The third category, asymmetric Janus particles that can carry two drugs at once, could be used for drug delivery. The drug delivery applications of Janus granules have been detailed above, and we will briefly introduce the other two applications.
One of the earliest and most common applications of Janus particles is as a stabilizer for multiphase fluid mixtures. Because of the strong surface activity and amphiphilicity of Janus particles as emulsifiers, these Janus particles adsorb on the interface more effectively than homogeneous particles, and release three times more interfacial energy than ordinary particles in the process of self-assembly at the oil–water interface, which can significantly improve the interfacial stability. For instance, Liu132et al. developed a novel method for preparing functionalized Janus–SiO2 nanoparticles by combining an in situ surface modification route with a chemical etching route. The hydrophilic surface of amphoteric Janus–SiO2 nanoparticles contains Si–OH species and the hydrophobic surface contains –CH3 fragments. The prepared Janus–SiO2 nanoparticles are 4–9 nm in size, and the specific surface area is up to 612.9 m2 g−1. They are easily dispersed in water and can be transferred from the water phase to the oil phase by adjusting the surface polarity, which can achieve depressurization and HPAM thickening. In addition, they can be adjusted to achieve bidirectional regulation of surface wettability and reduce oil/water interfacial tension, significantly reducing the water injection pressure and enhancing HPAM recovery.
Magnetic Janus particles have attracted a lot of attention due to their ability to remotely manipulate translational and rotational motion and directions. Magnetic Janus particles, which can be twisted by an external magnetic field, can be used for targeted therapy and imaging and can increase the sensitivity of dynamics and analysis. Al Nuumani28 reported a novel microfluidic strategy for the preparation of polymeric Janus particles with composition, topological and magnetic asymmetries, based on a single-step emulsification and solvent evaporation process with two distinct phase separations within a template droplet. The magnetic Janus particles were obtained by two successive phase separations in a five-element dispersion phase consisting of two polymers (PVAc and PS), a volatile solvent (DCM), n-heptane and oleic acid coated magnetic nanoparticles. Due to the high polarity difference between the two polymers and the strong preference for n-heptane to migrate to the polystyrene phase, the porosity between the two polymer parts is very different. As a result, the polystyrene portion has an extremely high surface porosity, which is a useful topological feature that can be used to improve the bubble formation rate of the bubbly driven Janus micromotor, as well as to enhance the waterproof performance of the polystyrene portion.
Underwater bubbles are important fluid systems that have attracted considerable research interest due to their potential applications in catalytic reactions, wastewater treatment, and medicine. At the same time, controlling the transport of bubbles in the liquid phase is also a challenge that needs to be solved in many industrial processes. For example, some bubbles in the pipeline transport of fluids may corrode the pipeline, and bubbles may even affect the life of marine ships. There are few materials available for the anti-buoyancy unidirectional transport of bubbles, and Pei33et al. demonstrated the anti-buoyancy unidirectional penetration of underwater bubbles via a “bubble diode”. By integrating superaerophobic and aerophilic surfaces, they can easily produce single-layer Janus copper meshes with one side superaerophobic and one side aerophilic. Adjusting the aperture size of the mesh can result in different mesh sizes of the Janus system. Bubbles can penetrate the Janus mesh from the superaerophobic side to the aerophilic side, but not from the opposite direction, due to the competition between bubbles penetrating and diffusing across the mesh. The combined driving force of the Laplace pressure gradient and the ambient pressure gradient overcomes the buoyancy of the bubble, resulting in the unidirectional transportation of the bubble. The results of this research will facilitate the development of novel bubble controllable transportation materials, and the Janus mesh system has potential applications in microfluidic and microdetector applications.
6. Summary and outlook
In this review, we first introduce background research on biomimetic Janus materials, introduce some unique properties of biomimetic organisms, and analyze the mechanism of the unique properties of Janus materials, including asymmetric wettability and pressure analysis. Then, the microstructures of Janus materials, including Janus membranes and Janus particles, are described in detail. Among them, the Janus membrane is divided into three categories according to wettability: ordinary wetting Janus membrane, wetting/superwetting Janus membrane, and superwetting Janus membrane. There are three types of Janus particles: spherical, sheet and rod. We mainly analyze the microstructures of spherical Janus particles obtained by different preparation methods. The asymmetric wettability of Janus materials is inextricably linked to their surface microstructures, which vary with the use of different substrates. Through the analysis and comparison of the microstructure of Janus materials with different substrates, we found that the surface of the metal-based Janus membrane was usually composed of a micro–nano metal oxide structure, including spherical, needle-like, and rod-like structures. The microstructures of a paper-based Janus membrane, a fabric-based Janus membrane and a Janus fiber membrane prepared by electrospinning are all fibrous. At the same time, the preparation method also has an effect on the microstructure of the Janus material. For example, when a fabric-based Janus film is prepared by the deposition method, the hydrophobic layer will deposit particles with special wettability, while the hydrophilic layer will retain the original fiber state; the difference is obvious. However, when a surfactant was used to obtain the fabric-based Janus film directly, the hydrophobic surface was rougher than the hydrophilic surface, and there were more fine fibers, but the boundary between hydrophilic layer and hydrophobic layer was not obvious. Finally, we introduced the applications of Janus materials, including sensing, drug delivery, and fog collection. Janus materials have good application prospects in many high-precision fields, such as medical treatment. Janus particles have great potential in the field of drug delivery. The asymmetric structure enables Janus particles to release two drugs at the same time, and different drugs are released when different external stimuli are received, which is an advantage in the field of cancer treatment. Sensing is also an area of great potential for Janus materials. A Janus film is suitable for use as a humidity sensor. When combined with other electronic products, it can also be used as an electrical signal sensor to monitor changes in sweat, reflecting the internal situation of the human body. Janus particles with anisotropic optical properties have potential applications in implantable biosensors.
Nowadays, there are still some unsolved problems in the development of Janus materials. The first is the durability of the Janus material. The rough microstructure helps to improve the wettability of the Janus material, but it also creates the problem of durability. Wear and tear can make the Janus material lose its special wettability, so it cannot be put to commercial use. Flexible pressure-resistant materials and self-healing materials are expected to improve this defect. After that, the development cost and environmental friendliness of Janus materials also need to be improved. Commonly used surfactants contain fluorine and are not friendly to the environment. Therefore, minimizing the use of fluorinated surfactants or not using surfactants and constructing a special rough structure are also strategies to prepare new Janus materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (no. 51735013 and 51905520).
Notes and references
C. Casagrande, P. Fabre, E. Raphaël and M. Veyssié, Europhys. Lett., 1989, 9, 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Gennes, Science, 1992, 256, 495–497 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, W. Liu and B. L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 335–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhong, J. Feng and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8405–8413 RSC .

          J. H. Kim, Biologically-inspired Stimuli-responsive DDS, Stimuli-responsive Drug Delivery Systems,  2018 Search PubMed .
H. Han, S. Baik, B. Xu, J. Seo, S. Lee, S. Shin, J. Lee, J. H. Koo, Y. Mei, C. Pang and T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701618 CrossRef .
Y. P. Sheng, L. Xia, G. Z. Yang, Y. Q. Xia, Y. Huang, C. J. Pan and Y. T. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 38666–38676 RSC .
W. F. Zhang, R. X. Qu, X. Y. Li, Y. N. Liu, Y. Wei and L. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27156–27163 RSC .
H. Qi, Q. Ma, Y. Xie, Y. Song, J. Tian, W. Yu, X. Dong, D. Li, G. Liu and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6565–6576 RSC .
A. Kirillova, C. Marschelke, J. Friedrichs, C. Werner and A. Synytska, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32591–32603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Volf, T. Huang, F. V. Luna, Y. Alsaadawi and A. Erbe, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 12504–12512 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Deng, H. Shangguan, C. Zheng, J. Shi, F. Huang and B. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12227–12237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Skelhon, Y. Chen and S. A. Bon, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 13525–13532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, S. X. Zhou, Y. Y. Sun, X. S. Fang and L. M. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4356–4378 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. He and X. Dong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 105070–105075 RSC .
M. H. Chi, Z. X. Fang, H. W. Ko, C. W. Chang and J. T. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28867–28874 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, L. Jiang, C. Zeng, C. Wang, J. Wang, X. Ke and L. Zhang, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 5981–5989 RSC .
B. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Ma, H. Cheng, H. Sun, H. Wang, J. Huang, X. He and K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 15104–15111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. B. Garbuzenko, J. Winkler, M. S. Tomassone and T. Minko, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 12941–12949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tu and D. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9999–10006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, L. Ge, S. Lu, J. Li and R. Guo, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 5819–5828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, R. Li, W. Jia, G. Liu, Y. Luo and Z. Cheng, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 6430–6438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Oh, G. Y. Jung, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. H. Kim, S. K. Kwak and S. Y. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7074–7083 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, X. Jing and Z. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 730–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, B. Wang, H. Lai, P. Liu, D. Zhang, D. Tian, H. Liu, X. Yu, B. Sun and K. Sun, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 2085–2092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Zhou, H. Niu, J. Zhang, Y. Du and T. Lin, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400506 CrossRef .
X. J. Yan, J. W. Li and L. M. Yi, Mater. Lett., 2017, 208, 46–49 CrossRef CAS .
R. Al Nuumani, S. K. Smoukov, G. Bolognesi and G. T. Vladisavljevic, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 12702–12711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hessberger, L. B. Braun and R. Zentel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800629 CrossRef .
S. Fujii, Y. Yokoyama, S. Nakayama, M. Ito, S. I. Yusa and Y. Nakamura, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 933–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, S. Chen, Q. Zhu, X. Li, D. Wang, S. Shen, M. Jin, G. Zhou, Y. Zhu and L. Shui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26374–26383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, S. Yang, Q. Pei, Y. Song, C. Liu, T. Xu and X. Zhang, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 1548–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pei, Y. Peng, Y. Zhang, D. Tian, K. Liu and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5489–5494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. He, D. F. Wang, F. Xu, F. X. Zhang and G. X. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 14398–14411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, G. Wen, J. X. Huang and Z. G. Guo, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 15213–15221 RSC .
Y. Xing, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Deng, C. Dong and S. Shuang, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 1573–1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yue, X. Sun, N. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, M. Chen and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39699–39707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nau, N. Herzog, J. Schmidt, T. Meckel, A. Andrieu-Brunsen and M. Biesalski, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900892 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Tian, H. Jin, J. Sainio, R. H. A. Ras and O. Ikkala, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6023–6028 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Waldman, H.-C. Yang, D. J. Mandia, P. F. Nealey, J. W. Elam and S. B. Darling, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800658 CrossRef .
C. Cheng and M. Gupta, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2001103 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gupta and B. Kandasubramanian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19102–19113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hou, N. Wang, X. Man, Z. Cui, J. Wu, J. Liu, S. Li, Y. Gao, D. Li, L. Jiang and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4124–4132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, C. Yu, Y. Si, M. Song, Z. Dong and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7504–7511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si, L. Chen, F. Yang, F. Guo and Z. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 509, 346–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Han, P. Xiao, J. C. Gu, J. Chen, Z. Q. Cai, J. W. Zhang, W. Q. Wang and T. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 22759–22762 RSC .
D. Li, Y. Fan, G. Han and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10039–10049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ma, B. Yang, Z. Zhao, Y. T. Zhao, R. B. Pan, D. R. Wang, Y. Kong, Y. M. Chen, G. S. Huang, J. L. Kong and Y. F. Mei, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 10032–10039 CrossRef CAS .
J. Knapczyk-Korczak, J. Zhu, D. P. Ura, P. K. Szewczyk, A. Gruszczyński, L. Benker, S. Agarwal and U. Stachewicz, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 9, 180–188 CrossRef .
Y. H. Su, S. W. Cai, T. Wu, C. Z. Li, Z. C. Huang, Y. Y. Zhang, H. Wu, K. Hu, C. Chen, J. W. Li, Y. L. Hu, S. W. Zhu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901465 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu, M. Liu, Y. Hou, L. Zhang, M. Li, D. Wang, D. Wang and S. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50113–50125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Zhu, Z. Q. Liu, L. L. Zhong, C. J. Song, W. X. Shi, F. Y. Cui and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 563, 602–609 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu and B. Li, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3779–3786 CrossRef CAS .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, C. E. Beard, P. H. Adler and K. G. Kornev, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 171241 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Jung, Y. Gwak, P. L. Davies, H. J. Kim and E. Jin, Mar. Biotechnol., 2014, 16, 502–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Kwan, R. D. Winefield, M. Sunde, J. M. Matthews, R. G. Haverkamp, M. D. Templeton and J. P. Mackay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 3621–3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ç. K. Söz, S. Trosien and M. Biesalski, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 336–357 CrossRef .
J. Bayry, V. Aimanianda, J. I. Guijarro, M. Sunde and J. P. Latge, PLoS Pathog., 2012, 8, e1002700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Cheng, M. Z. Li, Y. M. Zheng, B. Su, S. T. Wang and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5948–5951 RSC .
X. Y. Li, F. Q. Gong, D. Liu, S. He, H. Yuan, L. H. Dai, X. L. Cai, J. B. Liu, J. W. Guo, Y. Q. Jin and F. T. Sang, Org. Electron., 2019, 69, 216–219 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Y. Wong, M. Li, D. R. Nisbet, V. S. J. Craig, Z. Wang and A. Tricoli, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600417 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Norgaard and M. Dacke, Front. Zool., 2010, 7, 23 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Volkov, T. Adesina, V. S. Markin and E. Jovanov, Plant Physiol., 2008, 146, 694–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Markin, A. G. Volkov and E. Jovanov, Plant Signaling Behav., 2008, 3, 778–783 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tian and Z. G. Guo, J. Bionic Eng., 2019, 16, 1–12 CrossRef .
A. G. Volkov, J. C. Foster, T. A. Ashby, R. K. Walker, J. A. Johnson and V. S. Markin, Plant, Cell Environ., 2010, 33, 163–173 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alfadhel and J. Kosel, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7888–7892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Young, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1997, 95, 65–87 Search PubMed .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 2002, 28, 988–994 CrossRef .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
F. M. Fowkes, Adv. Chem., 1964, 43, 202–210 Search PubMed .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79, 667–677 CrossRef .
B. B. Mandelbrot, Am. J. Phys., 1998, 51, 468 Search PubMed .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Xiao, L. Wen and L. Jiang, in Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology,  2016, pp. 1–34,  DOI:10.1002/0471238961.koe00013 .
Y. Tian, B. Su and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6872–6897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Zhu, L. L. Zhong, X. M. Chen, W. Zheng, J. L. Zuo, G. F. Zeng and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 615, 118499 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Song, C. Chen, X.-X. Shui, H. Yang, L.-J. Zhu, Z.-X. Zeng and Q.-J. Xue, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 573, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, L. A. Shi, Z. Huang, Y. Hu, S. Wu, J. Li, D. Wu and J. Chu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900297 CrossRef .
S. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3423–3424 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Berg, L. G. T. Eriksson, P. M. Claesson and K. G. N. Borve, Langmuir, 2002, 10, 1225–1234 CrossRef .
L. F. M. Da Silva, G. W. Critchlow and M. A. V. Figueiredo, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2008, 22, 1477–1494 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Wenzel, J. Phys. Colloid Chem., 1949, 53, 1466–1467 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12921–12950 RSC .
E. Bormashenko, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 222, 92–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. L. Furmidge, J. Colloid Sci., 1962, 17, 309–324 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fu, H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, W. Yang, H. Shao, J. Wang and T. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27402–27409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Zhou, W. Yang, Y. Zhao, J. Fang and T. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22874–22880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, K. K. Tu, I. Burgert and T. Keplinger, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22001–22008 RSC .
D. Li, Z. Wang, D. Wu, G. Han and Z. Guo, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 11774–11781 RSC .
S. Zhang, P. Zuo, Y. Wang, P. Onck and J. Toonder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27726–27736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qi, H. Chen, L. Shen, X. Li, Q. Fu, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 2047–2057 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Emelyanenko, L. B. Boinovich, A. A. Bezdomnikov, E. V. Chulkova and K. A. Emelyanenko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24210–24219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, X. Kong, Z. Ji, X. Wang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49694–49704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, H. Liu, S. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. He, L. Mi, J. Zhang, C. Liu, C. Shen and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21904–21914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, S. X. Zhou, B. You and L. M. Wu, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 7018–7026 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, M. Luo, H. Wang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 54, 5942–5951 CrossRef .
C. Zeng, H. Wang, H. Zhou and T. Lin, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600036 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang, P. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1071–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu and T. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2964 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Su, T. Ye and J. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Ma, W. Yu, D. Li, X. Dong, G. Liu and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 10679–10692 RSC .
X. Li, Q. Ma, J. Tian, X. Xi, D. Li, X. Dong, W. Yu, X. Wang, J. Wang and G. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18918–18930 RSC .
Y. Geng, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu and K. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5390–5396 RSC .
J. Feng, L. Zhong and Z. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124283 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Wang, B. H. Wu, Z. K. Xu and L. S. Wan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2102–2109 RSC .
K. Wang, G. Wang, C. Lu and Y. Wang, Micro Nano Lett., 2018, 13, 397–402 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Seddon, D. Casey, R. V. Law, A. Gee, R. H. Templer and O. Ces, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2509–2519 RSC .
H. C. Yang, J. Hou, V. Chen and Z. K. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13398–13407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cao, K. Li, Z. Dong, C. Yu, S. Yang, C. Song, K. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. An, J. Yang, H. C. Yang, M. B. Wu and Z. K. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9832–9840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, N. Wang, L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 5996–5999 RSC .
Y. Shi, Y. Li, J. Wu, W. Wang, A. Dong and J. Zhang, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2014, 25, 713–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Han, Z. D. Chen, J. C. Li, J. W. Mao, Z. Z. Jiao, W. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. L. Zhang and H. B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25435–25443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Wu, H. C. Yang, J. J. Wang, G. P. Wu and Z. K. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5062–5066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fujihara, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 4139–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kidoaki, I. K. Kwon and T. Matsuda, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Wang and G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1291–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Liu and S. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14610–14613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, F. Liu, S. Chen, A. Tsyrenova, K. Miller, E. Olson, R. Mort, D. Palm, C. Xiang, X. Yong and S. Jiang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2047–2055 RSC .
K. Sasaki, M. Tenjimbayashi, K. Manabe and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 651–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Song, J. Yuan, L. Zhu, M. Pan and G. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 8907–8917 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Ruhland, A. H. Gröschel, N. Ballard, T. S. Skelhon, A. Walther, A. Müller and S. Bon, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Eslami, K. Bahri and F. Müller-Plathe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 9235–9244 CrossRef CAS .
B. Greydanus, D. K. Schwartz and J. W. Medlin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Wang, J. Lin and Z. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 4619–4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Liang, X. Qu, Q. Wang and Z. Yang, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2715–2722 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, Y. Sun, F. Liang, B. Jiang and Z. Yang, Macromolecules, 2018, 52, 96–102 CrossRef .
E. Poggi and J.-F. Gohy, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2017, 295, 2083–2108 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Wang, L. J. Ren, X. G. Wang, J. B. Ming and W. Wang, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 6727–6734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. Li, H. Yu, L. Niu, L. Yu, D. Ni and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24201–24208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qing, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Ding, W. Zhong, D. Wang, W. Wang, Q. Liu, K. Liu, M. Li and Z. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13105–13113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mani, K. Miyakoda, A. Saito, Y. Yasoda, K. Kajiwara, M. Kimura and K. Tsuchiya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21651–21659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, X. K. Liu, X. H. Chen, D. G. Yu, Y. Y. Yang and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2859–2867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, L. Song, H. Yun, Z. Jie and C. Zhang, Mol. Pharm., 2017, 14, 2697–2710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shao, X. Zhang, W. Liu, F. Zhang, X. Zheng, P. Qiao, J. Li, W. F. Dong and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4303–4308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Representative microstructures and applications of Janus membranes and Janus particles. The microstructures of Janus membranes: needle-like micro–nano structures, rod-like micro–nano structures, fiber structure of electrospinning and fabrics. (Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2017.) The microstructures of Janus particles: magnetic porous Janus particles, self-assembling Janus particles, masking Janus particles and phase separated Janus particles. (Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.) The applications of Janus membranes: sensor, unidirectional penetration of underwater bubbles, oil/water separation, fog collection and transportation of crude oil. (Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2019.) The applications of Janus particles: drug delivery, sensor, magnetic response, bubble stabilizer in water, water–oil interface stabilizer. (Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A digital photograph of a floating lotus leaf and three water droplets remaining as perfect spheres on its upper side and three oil droplets form spheres underwater on its lower surface. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2011. SEM image of the upper surface of the lotus leaf (reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2019) and ESEM image of the lower surface of the lotus leaf (reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2011). (b) A digital photograph of the proboscis of a monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus), coiled proboscis of a monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus), longitudinal section of the proboscis revealed by micro-CT, and a cross section of the proboscis of a hawk moth (Manduca sexta). Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from The Royal Society. Copyright 2018. (c) A photograph of open pinnules of Mimosa pudica and a photograph of pinnules in the process of closing. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. Copyright 2016. (d) A photograph of elytra structures of the desert beetle Stenocara gracilipes. Scale bar = 5 mm. SEM image of the apex of the elytra. Scale bar = 1 mm. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from BioMed Central. Copyright 2010. (e) A digital photograph of a Camponotus japonicus ant with SEM images of its antennae composed of a high AR (≈10) tilt receptor. Scale bars from left to right: 1 mm, 100 μm, and 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017. (f) Image of Pyramimonas gelidicola cultured in-house at KOPRI and the 3D structure of P. gelidicola AFP obtained by in silico protein modeling. Scale bar = 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Superwettability system in air, water and oil. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Copyright 2016. Blue half circle on the left: underwater superoleophobicity, superoleophilicity, superaerophobicity, and superaerophilicity on rough substrates; the middle round part: the bule circle contacts hydrophilicity, oleophilicity, hydrophobicity, and there is oleophobicity on flat substrates in air, the superhydrophilicity, superoleophilicity, superhydrophobicity, and superoleophobicity states in air after introducing two layers of sufficient micro/nanoscale roughness in the circle outside the blue circle. Orange half circle on the right: under-oil superhydrophobicity, superhydrophilicity, superoleophobicity, and superoleophilicity on rough substrates. (b) The wettability–roughness curve of the lotus leaf is fitted according to calculated data (contact angle, expressed in degrees, relative to the average outer diameter of the protruding structure, expressed in microns). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2002. (c) The balance between liquid surface tension and solid surface free energy can yield repellence/absorbance of liquid to solid. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2014.	 
γlvcosθ = γsv − γsl	(1)
cosθw = rcosθ	(2)
cosθw = fsl(cosθ + 1) −1	(3)
cosθw = fsl(rcosθ + 1) − 1	(4)
mgsina = γAL(cosθrec − cosθadv)ω	(5)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Anisotropic wettability of a Janus membrane. On the PVDF-HFP side, the droplet is spherical, while, on the Cu(OH)2 nanoneedle side, the droplet is absorbed rapidly. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2019. (b) Structure simulation diagram of double-woven fabric; the water contact angle on the superhydrophobic surface is 156.8°, and the underwater oil contact angle on the superhydrophilic surface is 150.6°. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2018. (c) A cross section of the fabric placed vertically in water (first line) and the corresponding cross section diagram (second line). The fabric sample is electrosprayed on one side with SU-8 with different contents. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Digital photographs and diagrams showing the mechanism of unidirectional water transport on hybrid nanoscale hydrophilic–hydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foam, and transfer from the hydrophobic side to the superhydrophilic side. (b) Digital photographs and diagrams showing the mechanism of unidirectional water transport on hybrid nanoscale hydrophilic–hydrophobic/superhydrophilic Janus cooperative copper foam, and transfer from superhydrophilic side to hydrophobic side. (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020.	 
	(6)
	(7)

Janus membranes	Copper mesh	Immersion	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Oil/water separation	
25

Polypropylene membrane	Immersion	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Oil/water separation	
116

Polypropylene membrane	Single-side deposition	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Oil–water separation	
112

PU and C-PVA	Electrospinning	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Unidirectional water penetration	
113

Cotton fabric	Plasma graft polymerization	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Sensor	
27

Graphene	O2 plasma	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Enhance solar interfacial evaporation	
115

—	Single-side deposition	Superamphiphobic/amphiphilic	Transportation of crude oil	
35

Nickel foam	Immersion	Superhydrophilic/hydrophobic	Directional water delivery	
45

Paper	Single-side deposition	Superhydrophilic/hydrophobic	Sensor	
66

Cotton fabric	Single-side modification	Superhydrophobic/hydrophilic	Oil–water separation	
119

Copper foams	Chemical etching and spaying	Hydrophobic–hydrophilic/superhydrophilic	Fog droplets collection	
24

Cotton fabric	One-step spraying	Superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic	Unidirectional water penetration	
98

PVDP-HFP	Layered	Superhydrophobic/superamphiphobic	Oil–water separation	
26

FD-POSS	Electrospinning	
	
	

Janus particles	SiO2 particles	Masking	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	Bubble stabilizer	
30

Gold wire	
	
	
	

CPSAA particles	Phase separation	—	Colloidal surfactants	
31

PS	
	
	
	

SiO2 particles	Pickering emulsion method	—	Drug delivery	
137

Au NPs	
	
	
	

SiO2 nanoparticles	Modification chemical etching	Hydrophobic/hydrophilic	EOR performance	
132


 	Fig. 6  Structural analysis of hydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus membranes. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of a hydrophobic/hydrophilic cooperative Janus system. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015. (b) SEM images of copper mesh modified with ODT at concentrations of 0.1 mM, 0.5 mM and 2.0 mM. The upper images show the obverse of the copper mesh, while the lower images show the opposite. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Janus membranes coated with CNTs for deemulsification and separation of oil/water emulsions. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. (d) Amplified SEM image and XRD pattern of the nanostructure. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017. (e) SEM image of the cross section of PU/c-PVA composite fibrous film composed of two layers of fiber membrane. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012. (f) SEM image of the HPSA/c-PVA composite Janus membrane. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Taylor & Francis. Copyright 2014. (g) Time-dependence of water contact angles and N 1s XPS profiles of Janus cotton fabric treated with an acid or base. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2017. (h) WCA images of LIG and LIG-O and a SEM image of LIG. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structural analysis of Janus membranes. (a–e) Wetting/superwetting combined Janus membranes, (f–h) superwetting Janus membranes. (a) SEM image and magnification of modified flower-like titanium dioxide nanoparticles (MFT). Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2019. (b) Optical microscope cross-sectional image of Janus nickel foam, optical and SEM images of the hydrophobic layer on the upper surface and the superhydrophilic layer on the lower surface. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2018. (c) SEM image of the cross section of Janus paper, with the fiber image of the upper side and lower side of the Janus paper. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Journal of Jilin University. Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic diagram of surface changes in seven short segments of the fabric thread during the preparation of Janus fabric. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2016. (e) SEM images and magnification images of the raw copper foam, Cu(OH)2 nanowires on copper foam, and ZnO nanorods grown on Cu(OH)2 nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Elsevier Inc. Copyright 2020. (f) Optical and SEM images of both sides of Janus superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic fabric. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2018. (g) A FE-SEM cross-sectional image of superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic cotton fabric (sprayed from 30 cm), a SEM image of the sprayed side and a SEM image of the untreated side. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016. (h) SEM images of PVDF-HFP (left) and PVDFHFP/POSS (right) nanofiber membrane and photographs of water and diesel droplets on the nanofiber membrane. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 8  Representative shape and preparation of Janus particles. (a) There are three types of Janus particles: spherical, sheet-like and rod-like. (b) Three methods for the preparation of spherical Janus particles: masking, phase separation and self-assembly. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Springer. Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of a Janus particle. (a) SEM images and (b) OM images of air bubbles in water stabilized by three types of Janus particles: Au-SiO2, PS-g-Au-SiO2 and PPFBEM-g-Au-SiO2. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. (c) Representative TEM images of colloidal onion self-assembled from heterocluster Janus molecules, ideal colloidal onion images and the 3D structure of colloidal onion. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2019. (d) Morphologies of the representative CPSAA-PS JNPs prepared via the swelling process at different mass ratios (0.5, 1, 3, 5, 7, 10). Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  Common applications of Janus materials. Janus particles: (a) The EOR performance of Janus particles. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (b) The magnetic response of Janus particles. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. The mutual applications of Janus particles and membranes: (c) the sensor. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (d) Drug delivery. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Taylor & Francis. Copyright 2014. Janus membranes: (e) Fog collection. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (f) Oil/water separation. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Elsevier B.V. Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  Property analysis of sensing and drug delivery. (a) I–V curves of different concentrations of dopamine solutions from 0.4 to 80 μm by a Janus microtubule sensor. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (b) Performing real-time sweat monitoring on the body; the signal acquisition of each sensor takes place during the collection of sufficient sweat samples. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (c) Fluorescence image and SERS spectrum of Janus particles treated with gastric juice (scale bar, 100 μm). Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017. (d) The in vitro drug release profiles of the raw helicid particles, monolithic nanofibers, and Janus nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018. (e) Images of tumor-bearing mice after various treatments during the 15-day evaluation period and photographs of each group of mice after treatment for 15 days. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram and measured data from a fog collecting system. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2019. (b) Water collection and water collection rate of PS–CA mesh compared with PS and CA meshes. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020. (c) Water collection rate and collected water weight of different samples within 5 h. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
