Electrocatalyst design for the conversion of energy molecules: electronic state modulation and mass transport regulation  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC03630D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC03630D
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 10907-10924Electrocatalyst design for the conversion of energy molecules: electronic state modulation and mass transport regulation

        
          
            Jia 
            Wang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiankun 
            Wei†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Cuihua 
            An
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Haolin 
            Tang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qibo 
            Deng
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Junsheng 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China
bFoshan Xianhu Laboratory of the Advanced Energy Science and Technology Guangdong Laboratory, Foshan 528200, P. R. China
cKey Laboratory of Hebei Province on Scale-span Intelligent Equipment Technology, and School of Mechanical Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin 300401, P. R. China
Received 
      30th June 2022
    , Accepted 23rd August 2022First published on 29th August 2022AbstractElectrocatalytic conversions of energy molecules are involved in many energy conversion processes. Improving the activity of electrocatalysts is critical for increasing the efficiency of these energy conversion processes. However, the tailored design of highly active electrocatalysts for practical applications remains challenging. In this regard, we present an overview of the general design principles for efficient electrocatalysts and application of these principles in different electrocatalytic processes. Specifically, enhancing the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts by electronic state modulation through heteroatom doping, vacancy introduction, interfacial electronic transfer and strain engineering is introduced. In addition, improving the apparent performance of electrocatalysts by mass transport regulation, which is realized by morphological and wettability control, is also discussed. Finally, enlightenment from these studies is summarized and perspectives for the future development of electrocatalysts are provided. The important progress highlighted in this work will provide solid foundations for the tailored design of electrocatalysts toward practical applications.
Jia Wang
Jia Wang is a doctoral student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Wuhan University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Junsheng Li. He obtained his master's degree from School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science & Technology, in 2020. His current research interests mainly focus on developing electrocatalysts for water splitting and oxygen reduction reaction.
Jiankun Wei
Jiankun Wei is a master's student in the School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences at Wuhan University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Junsheng Li. His research interest includes the calculation of Density functional theory (DFT) and hydrogen evolution reaction.
Qibo Deng
Prof. Qibo Deng received his bachelor's (2007) and master's degrees (2009) in Solid Mechanics at the Beijing Institute of Technology, China and then received his PhD degree in Material Physics and Technology at the Hamburg University of Technology, Germany in 2014. He is currently working as a full professor at the Hebei University of Technology, China. His research focuses on the electrocapillary coupling of surface mechanics and electrochemistry at the solid–liquid interface, as well as the surface-mechanics-induced improvement of electrochemical properties of the electrode materials. He received the International Association of Advanced Materials (IAAM) Scientist Medal in the year 2019. He has been honored with the Fellow of the IAAM and Vebleo Fellow.
Junsheng Li
Junsheng Li obtained his BEng in Materials Science and technology from Wuhan University of Technology (WUT) in 2007 and his MEng in New Energy Materials from the same university in 2010. He received his doctorate in natural science from the University of Heidelberg in 2014. Currently, he is working as a professor in WUT. His research focuses on the key materials for electrochemical conversion and storage devices.
1. Introduction
Currently, fossil fuels account for more than 80% of the global energy supply; the heavy consumption significantly disrupts the ecological balance.1 In addition, the expected rapid increase of energy demand from ∼18 TW in 2014 to ∼24 TW in 20402 will accelerate the depletion of fossil fuels. In this situation, the development of sustainable and eco-friendly energy conversion devices is of great significance.3–6 Electrochemical conversion of energy molecules, such as H2, O2, N2 and H2O, plays an important role in eco-friendly energy conversion devices. Till now, considerable efforts have been invested in these electrochemical processes. However, there are still technical challenges to be overcome for the efficient utilization of these electrochemical processes. One of the primary challenges is to develop a high-performance electrocatalyst that efficiently catalyzes the conversion reaction of the energy molecules, such as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) and CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). For example, the electrochemical water splitting can be divided into the anodic OER and the cathodic HER with a theoretical decomposition voltage of 1.23 V.7 However, a high overpotential is required in practice.
In particular, the sluggish kinetics of the anodic OER, involving the simultaneous transfer of four electrons and four protons, significantly limits the overall efficiency of water splitting.7–9 Moreover, there is a strong pH effect on the OER reaction mechanism, which can be categorized into water oxidation under acidic or neutral conditions and hydroxide oxidation under highly alkaline conditions.10,11 Therefore, it is important to customize the OER catalyst to response various application conditions. Specifically, RuO2 and IrO2 exhibit excellent OER activity in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes, but they are unstable at high overpotential and will be oxidized to form RuO4 and IrO3 and dissolved in electrolytes, especially in acidic electrolytes because the participation of lattice oxygen may lead to structural collapse to accelerate the dissolution of Ru/Ir.12–14 For neutral electrolytes, the presence of the polymeric water structure with strong hydrogen bonding limits the kinetics, while in the HER, there is a potential surface reconstruction in alkaline electrolytes caused by the adsorption of OH− on the catalyst surface, resulting in misjudgment of the really active sites.
Even though different electrochemical catalytic reactions follow different mechanisms, the general design principles of electrocatalysts for different reactions have many common points. Improving the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalyst is an important yet challenging point for the design of an electrocatalyst. For example, commercial Pt/catalysts for the ORR have a much lower mass activity (0.23 A mgPGM−1 at 0.9 V) than that required for practical applications (0.44 A mgPGM−1 at 0.9 V).15 From a mechanistic point of view, the intrinsic activity of a catalyst mainly depends on the adsorption/desorption behaviour of the reaction intermediates on the active sites of electrocatalysts.16 The adsorption/desorption behaviour of the reaction intermediates on the electrocatalyst is dictated by the electronic states of the electrocatalyst. Therefore, modulation the electronic state of the electrocatalyst is the key for improving its intrinsic activity. Besides intrinsic activity, the mass transport capacity is another limiting factor for the performance of electrocatalysts.17 Nowadays, most of the catalysts are designed and evaluated at a low current density region (tens of mA cm−2), where mass transport limitation is not prominent. However, in practical applications such as fuel cells and water electrolysis, the electrode should be able to be operated above 1 A cm−2 under most of the working conditions, where mass transport loss is significant. Consequently, improving the mass transport capability of electrocatalysts is also critical for their performance. Since typical electrocatalytic reactions proceed at three-phase boundaries, appropriate design of electrocatalyst morphology and control over its interfacial wettability are also crucial for the performance of the electrocatalysts.
Considering the important roles of electronic state modulation and mass transport regulation in the design of high-performance electrocatalysts, we present an overview of recent efforts on the tailored design of advanced electrocatalysts. This review mainly focuses on metal based electrocatalysts because of their high potential for practical applications. Strategies allowing for the tuning of the electronic states of electrocatalysts, with an emphasis on strain engineering, are introduced. Approaches for enhancing the mass transport capabilities of the electrocatalysts are also introduced and discussed.
2. Intrinsic activity improvement by electronic status modulation
2.1. Intrinsic activity improvement by electronic status modulation
The intrinsic activity of the catalyst depends on the adsorption and desorption barriers of the reaction intermediates on the surface of the catalyst, which is controlled by the electronic structure of the active sites. It was proposed that the change of adsorption energy can be approximated by the change of Kohn–Sham orbital energy, based on which the change in the adsorption energy of reaction intermediates on different catalysts can be calculated. According to the conclusion above, the Newns–Anderson model18 describing the interaction between the adsorbent and the surface of catalysts from the perspective of electronic interactions, is established.
Norskov et al. proposed a simplified model emphasizing the important role of the d-band center of the electrocatalyst in determining the adsorption behaviour of reaction intermediates (d-band center theory). It is stated that the bandwidth of the half-filled s and p-orbitals in the valence electron of transition metal is increased due to the uncertainty principle, which leads to a weak interaction between the s and p orbitals and the electrons of the adsorbents. As a result, the primary factor determining the adsorption of adsorbents is the d band orbital of the electrocatalysts. As adsorbents bind on the metal surface, bonding and antibonding orbitals are formed. The molecular orbitals of the adsorbent interact with the d bands of the metal and result in the splitting of the d band. The thus-formed antibonding orbitals will be lifted close to the Ef so that the electrons in the antibonding orbitals tend to transfer to the bonding orbitals, resulting in enhanced adsorption of the reaction intermediates on the metal surface. The number of electrons transferred to the bonding orbitals depends on the position of the d band center of the metal relative to Ef. The direct correlation between the d band center and adsorption energy of typical reaction intermediates is proved by combined theoretical and experimental analysis (Fig. 1a).19 Therefore, it is suggested that the position of the d band center of a metallic electrocatalyst is an important descriptor of its catalytic activity.
 Fig. 1  (a) Data represented by open circles were determined by using the Newns–Anderson model. The calculated adsorption energies correlate well with the d band center. (b) The relationship between the energy average of the d-band on the surface of the metal and the adsorption energy of O. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2000). (c) UPS valence-band spectra of Ni2P and (NixFe1−x)2P. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (d) Valence band spectra (VBS) of Ag75M25 as measured by high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2017). 
Modulation in the d-band center of the metal-based catalyst can be directly proved using different characterization studies. The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) is a kind of photoelectron spectroscopy that uses low-energy ultraviolet light (16–41 eV) as the excitation source. By measuring the photoelectron energy generated by the ultraviolet excitation, the surface electronic structure, chemical state, composition and other information of the solid materials can be obtained. Sun et al. demonstrated the shift of the d band center of Ni in Ni2P to Ef after Fe-doping by UPS valence band characterization studies (Fig. 1c).20 Such a shift effectively regulated the adsorption and desorption capacities of the oxygen-containing intermediates (*O, *OH, and *OOH) on Ni2P. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) providing valence band spectra (VBS), reflecting the valence band information of solid materials, is another commonly-used technique for d-band center characterization. Wu et al. demonstrated the shift in d-band spectra of an Ag-based catalyst by alloying using XPS VBS (Fig. 1d).21
2.2. Strategy for d-band center modulation
The applicability of d band theory in the design of active electrocatalysts is demonstrated in many studies. Several approaches have been developed for the enhancement of the electrocatalytic performance of catalysts by modifying the d-band center of the electrocatalysts.

2.2.1. Heteroatom doping. 
Heteroatom doping is a facile and effective means to adjust the d-band center of the catalyst. In 2009, Dai et al. found that doping-induced charge redistribution of nitrogen-doped vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VA-CNTs) facilitated the chemisorption of O2 and the electron transfer for ORR.22 Subsequently, they discovered that co-doping with an additional heteroatom could further improve the performance of ORR by studying the B and N co-doped VA-CNTs.23 Thereafter, the approach of heteroatom doping has been widely employed in the design of electrocatalysts.24 Improving the utilization and durability of precious metal atoms is important for the development of precious metal-based catalysts. Qi et al. used phosphorous doping to modify the electronic structure and stability of the Rh single-atom catalyst (P–RuSAC–Co3O4/NF).25 Their results demonstrated that the introduction of P atoms could efficiently boost the charge transfer process at the grain boundary and thus promote the reaction kinetics. DFT calculations showed that the P-doping strategy facilitates electrons transfer among Rh atoms, which decreased the adsorption and desorption energy of various intermediates. With these advantages, the catalyst demonstrated outstanding alkaline overall water splitting activity and stability. Additionally, the P-doping method was employed to enhance the durability of Mo–Ni alloy catalysts through triggering the electronic redistribution around the metal centers.26 DFT calculations confirmed that the reconstructed electronic structure optimized the bond strength of H* and Ni–MoP, which reduced the energy barrier of water splitting, as well as favored the structural stability of the P–MoNi catalyst. To facilitate the NRR process and improve the faradaic efficiency, Hou et al. reported a viable strategy to manipulate the local spin state of isolated iron sites via S-coordinated doping (FeSA-NSC).27 The in situ analysis revealed that the incorporation of S induces the transition of spin-polarization configuration with the formation of a medium-spin-state of Fe. Theoretical calculations showed that the induction of S-doping lowered the energy barrier for *NNH intermediate formation and accelerated hydrogenation reaction kinetics. Tao et al. tuned the d-band center of Pd-based catalysts by boron doping.28 Their state density calculation showed that the d-band of Pd shifted to Ef after optimal boron doping due to the hybridization between the 3d orbital of Pd and the p-orbital of boron (Fig. 2a). Considering that the adsorption/desorption of proton in Pd-based catalysts is the rate-determining step in the HER, the shift of the d-band center towards Ef will cause a higher occupancy in the antibonding orbital between Pd and H+, thereby weakening the binding strength of hydrogen and facilitating the HER (Fig. 2b). Doping of B into Mo2C was also reported to modify the d-band center of Mo.29 In addition, B-doping enhances the hybridization of the Mo 4d orbital and N 2p orbital, which promotes the adsorption and activation of N2 on the catalysts and reduces the reaction barrier for the NRR (Fig. 2c and d). Other non-metallic heteroatoms such as N and P were also used as dopants for a metal-based catalyst to adjust the d-band center of the catalyst.30 The doped P species at the Pt–N3 regulates the 5d orbitals of Pt, inducing a left shift of the PDOS of the 5d orbitals and a deeper d-band center (Fig. 2f). In addition, the rate-determining step of the PtN was changed from the first protonation step (H2O + O2 + e− + * → OOH* + OH−) to the fourth protonation step (OH* + e− → * + OH−) after P-doping (Fig. 2g and h).
 Fig. 2  The d-band center (a) and calculated free-energy diagram (b) of Pd-1B, Pd-3B, Pd-6B, Pd-12B and Pd. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). The PDOS of Mo 4d for (c) B-Mo2C and (d) β-Mo2C catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2022). (e) d-Band centers of Ni2P, (Ni0.83Fe0.17)2P, (Ni0.67Fe0.33)2P and Fe2P. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (f) The projected density of states (PDOS) of d orbitals of Pt atoms on PtN3. The PDOS of PtN3 and PtN3–OP. (g) Calculated free energy diagrams of ORR on PtNx and PtNx–PO catalysts at the equilibrium potential (1.23 V) under alkaline conditions. The PtN4–PO_1 and 2 indicate the PO group located at two different α-C sites, respectively. (h) Calculated ORR theoretical onset potential versus the free energies of OH*  on PtNx and PtNx–PO catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright (2021). 
Doping of metallic heteroatoms (such as Fe, Ni, V and Zn) also modifies the d-band structure and tunes the surface properties of the catalyst.7,8,31 Wang et al. successfully adjusted the d-band center of Co4N via V-doped and prepared a highly HER active V-Co4N catalyst.32 The DFT analysis confirmed that the anti-bonding state was filled with more electrons after V-doping, which reduced the adsorption energy of H and promoted H2 desorption. Detailed characterization and DFT calculations identified that the Fe dopant synergistically optimized the electronic states of Co2, and the Co2 site nearest the Fe site has the highest activity.33 Sun et al. found that the doping of Fe into Ni2P enhanced the OER activity of Ni2P because the introduction of Fe lifted the d band-center of Ni (Fig. 2e).20 The use of noble metal atom doping to adjust the electronic state of the surrounding atoms was also proposed to improve the activity of the catalyst.34–36 Lu et al. designed a surface-engineering strategy to dope Ru into the subsurface of the Co matrix as a HER catalyst.34 DFT results showed that Ru doping in the subsurface dramatically enhances the catalytic activity for the HER and the Ru doped into the subsurface was thermodynamically more stable than that the Ru alloyed on the surface.


2.2.2. Vacancy engineering. 
The introduction of vacancies into metal-baed catalysts is another viable approach to regulate the d-band center of the active component in the catalysts.7–9 Catalysts are typically designed with two vacancies: (1) anionic vacancies (non-metallic vacancies). Compared with cationic vacancies, anionic vacancies are easily obtained because of the lower formation energy.7 Qiao et al. successfully increased the onset potential of the HER in an alkaline electrolyte via introducing phosphorus vacancies (Pv).37 The DOS analysis disclosed that Pv can facilitate the electron enrichment of Ni and P atoms next to them. Luo et al. developed amorphous a-VSe2−x nanosheets with Se vacancies for electrochemical NRR.38 The projected density of state (PDOS) analysis suggested that the unsaturated V atoms in the a-VSe2−x had a shift in the d-band center (unsaturated V atoms) to Ef (Fig. 3a), and as a result the antibonding orbital between unsaturated V atoms of a-VSe2−x and adsorbed intermediates was less occupied (Fig. 3a). In the scenario, the V-3d orbital of a-VSe2−x could favourably interact with the N2-2p orbital to generate hybrid states that facilitate sufficient adsorption and activation of N2 (Fig. 3c). Therefore, a-VSe2−x showed excellent NRR activity due to the modulation of the d-band center of the catalyst (Fig. 3b). Zhong et al. generated O-vacancy in Co3O4 through the introduction of low valence Ni2+.39 The electron redistribution resulting from vacancy introduction affords the Co atoms (around the vacancy site) higher valence charge numbers, indicating a shift in its d-band center toward Ef. Superior HER performance was demonstrated for the Co3O4 catalyst with a controlled vacancy structure (Fig. 3d). The strategy of d-band engineering via vacancy engineering is also demonstrated for perovskite-type catalysts. Han et al. investigated the effect of the oxygen vacancy concentration on catalytic activity without altering the surface area, physical properties and composition (Fig. 3e).40 The experimental result and DFT calculations indicated that the d-band center of Co in the catalyst was closer to the Ef and the p-orbital level of O with the increases in O-vacancy concentration. The shift in the d-band center of Co facilitated orbital hybridization with O and promoted the adsorption activation of reactants and intermediates, which ultimately improved the OER/ORR activity of the catalyst (Fig. 3f and g).
 Fig. 3  (a) PDOS of V 3d in c-VSe2 and a-VSe2−x. (b) Free energy diagrams of energetically favorable NRR pathways on c-VSe2 and a-VSe2−x. (c) Optimized structures of *N2 on c-VSe2 and a-VSe2−x. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright (2022). (d) Free Energy of water splitting and hydrogen adsorption for Co3O4 and Ni-Co3O4. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). (e) The schematic diagram of the relationship between the O-vacancy content in the catalyst and the position of the d-band center and the calculated free energy profiles of the ORR and OER on the (100) surface of SSC in alkaline media. Calculated free energy profiles of the OER (f) and ORR (g) on the (100) surface of SSC in alkaline media. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). 
The cationic vacancy has a multifarious electron configuration, which is also conducive to alter the electronic structure of the catalyst.7 By comparing the introduction of O-vacancies and Co-vacancies, Dou et al. found that the Co-vacancies effectively reduced the overpotential of the OER.41 The theoretical calculations revealed that the Co vacancies seek to optimize the electronic states of Co2, and therefore the binding energy of OH* is dramatically decreased. Zhang et al. devised a facile chemical synthetic method via a one-pot solvothermal method in the presence of rhodium(III) acetylacetonate, oleylamine, oleic acid and formaldehyde.42 The DFT calculations verified that the ordered Rh vacancies in VBP-1 Rh(010) break the hollow site and make the adjacent Rh atoms more active, resulting in relatively more positive adsorption energy for H and leading to the enhanced adsorption of H2O molecules. In addition, vacancy engineering also plays a role in improving stability via adjusting the electronic states. Instability under high oxidation potentials is the key issue that limits the application of highly active layered double hydroxides (LDH). Waterhouse et al. revealed that the stability degradation of the catalyst resulted from the decrease in the number of active sites and undesirable phase segregation, with metal dissolution underpinning both these deactivation mechanisms. Fortunately, they effectively enhanced the LDH stability by introducing cationic vacancies.43 DFT calculations showed the strengthened binding energy between the metal and oxygen in the LDH sheets and the decreased lattice distortions after the introduction of cation-vacancies, achieving both high catalyst activity and stability during the OER. Zhang et al. demonstrated a simple wet-chemistry method to grow ultrathin feroxyhyte nanosheets with rich Fe vacancies on the Ni foam substrate as the water splitting catalyst.44 Significantly, the structural analysis and DFT simulation indicated that the iron cation vacancies not only led to increased electrical conductivity of the catalyst, but also strengthened the mechanical steadiness. In short, the design of the iron vacancies enabled it to endure the drastic gas evolution at an increased current density without active attenuation.


2.2.3. Interface electronic state modulation. 
In addition to heteroatomic doping and vacancy engineering, the construction of heterointerfaces enabling electronic interactions between the catalyst components could be also utilized to tune the position of the d-band center of the active component to improve the catalytic performance. This approach for d-band engineering is particularly effective for precious metal catalysts with low-cost supports. In our previous work, Au/ZrO2 composite was designed for NRR.45 As shown in Fig. 4a, electron transfer occurred at the interface between Au and ZrO2. The electron transfer propelled the shift of the d-band center of Au closer to Ef, which facilitates the adsorption and activation of N2 on the surface of the catalyst (Fig. 4b and c). In another example, Pt/MoS2 was developed. It was proposed that the strong synergy between S and Pt contributed to the formation of electronic coupling at the interface of Pt and MoS2 (Fig. 4d).46 The coupling effect has changed the relative position of the d-band center of Pt, thereby enhancing the HER performance of Pt (Fig. 4e). Chem et al. synthesized h-BN/Pd electrocatalyst with outstanding activity and long-term durability by confining Pd nanoparticles to an ultra-thin h-BN nanosheet support.47 The experimental and DFT calculations show that h-BN not only plays a role in inhibiting the agglomeration of Pd NPs and maximizing the exposure of the active sites, but also in shifting the d-band center of Pd away from Ef (Fig. 4g). This electronic modulation is the key to the enhancement in the ORR kinetics of h-BN/Pd (Fig. 4f). Organic ligands are a new type of material for the interfacial electronic modulation of electrocatalysts. Li et al. reported the tuning of the electronic states of bi/trimetallic layered hydroxides (LDH)/MOFs OER electrocatalyst by the assembly of carboxylate ligands on the electrocatalyst.48 The carboxyl groups around the metal (oxygen) hydroxide take a function to induce the redistribution of interface electrons (Fig. 4h), modulate the relative position of the d-band center (Fig. 4i) and optimize the adsorption of intermediates on the surface of the catalyst to dissociate the energy barrier. Significantly enhanced OER performance was demonstrated by the interfacial electronic modulation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Charge density differential diagram of Au/ZrO2 (left), The increase and decrease of electron density are indicated by the yellow delocalized section and blue delocalized section, respectively and planar-average charge–density of Au/ZrO2. (b) Partial density of states (DOS) diagram of Au and Au/ZrO2 (right). (c) Free energy diagram and optimized atomic configuration of Au(111) and Au(111) + e− for ENRR. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2021). (d) The side views of the atomic model of a Pt truncated octahedron loaded on MoS2. (e) Charge–density difference for Pt-MoS2 and the PDOS of Pt atoms on the above positions. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). (f) Free energy diagrams during the ORR at U = 0 V (vs. NHE) and partial density of states for Pd and h-BN/Pd, where the values denote the position of the Pd d-band center. (g) Partial density of states for Pd and h-BN/Pd, where the values denote the position of the Pd d-band center. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). Differential charge densities of NiFe–LDHs/CLs (h) and the illustration (i) of the d-band center decreasing. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2021). 
Furthermore, the formation of a hetero-structure is a viable approach to modulate the electronic state of the active sites due to the high electronic conductivity, low interfacial resistance and rapid electron transfer.7,49 In this respect, several catalysts with a hetero-structure were designed to enhance the catalytic activity. Recently, Co-based LDHs were regarded as one of the most efficient OER catalysts owing to their special morphologies, high catalytic activity and facile synthesis. However, the stability of the Co-based LDH remains to be enhanced. An effective strategy to improve the durability and catalytic activity of the Co-based LDH is to tune the local electronic structure by constructing heterojunctions.8,9 For example, Yang et al. designed a Co-LDH@ZIF-67 heterojunction to improve the activity and stability of Co-LDH.50 The DFT calculations indicated that the heterojunction interface was constructed by the O of Co–LDH and N of the 2-methylimidazole ligand in ZIF-67. The heterojunction modulated the electronic structure of the active sites, which facilitated the breakage of the H–Oout bond and resulted in lower free energy in the OER. To reduce the amount of precious metal and accelerate alkaline water dissociation, Yan et al. developed a single-atom platinum immobilized NiO/Ni heterostructure (PtSA–NiO/Ni) as a HER catalyst.51 Among the catalyst, the single-atom-level dispersion fully improved the utilization of Pt, while the Pt single-atom coupled with the NiO/Ni heterostructure efficiently tailors the water dissociation energy and promotes H* conversion. For the OER, the current understanding is that the active oxygen species formed by the surface reconstruction during the OER process are the real active sites of the catalyst.52 Fisher et al. built an adaptive heterojunction via the OER-induced surface reconstruction, where NiOOH grows on delithiated LiNiO2.52 The in situ characterization and DFT calculations demonstrated that the formation of delithiated-LiNiO2/NiOOH heterojunction improves the rate of electron transfer and evolves the delithiated LiNiO2 with lithium vacancies that strengthen the stability of NiOO* species. Poor durability and sluggish charge transfer kinetics limited the development of large-scale hydrogen production under high current density-driven water splitting. Huang et al. constructed a sulfide-based metallic heterostructure (Mo2S3@NiMo3S4) to meet the industrial demand.53 The metallic Mo2S3 modulated by the heterostructure facilitated the charge transfer for fast Volmer H and Heyrovsky H2 generation. The constructed heterostructure realized an extraordinarily low cell voltage of 1.672 V at the current density of 1 A cm−2, and remained stable after chronoamperometric test for over 100 h. In addition, the pH effect cannot be ignored during the HER process, for this catalyst. The development of electrocatalysts applicable in a wide pH range is of great significance for industrial applications. Yin et al. reported a PtCo@PtSn heterojunction catalyst with excellent HER performance in pH-universal.54 DFT simulations illustrate that the construction of the heterojunction tunes the surface electronic structure of Pt and decreases the Pt–H bond strength. The PtCo@PtSn heterojunction catalyst absorbed the advantages of Pt-based materials and heterojunctions to achieve exceptional HER activity, with overpotentials of 25 mV, 18 mV and 21 mV in 1.0 M KOH, 1.0 M phosphate-buffered saline and 0.5 M H2SO4, respectively.
Finally, the self-supported electrocatalysts are presently considered to be the most suitable catalyst form to increase the active loading, mass transfer and large current density activity because of enhanced kinetics and stability.55 At present, the most commonly used substrates applied in the self-supported catalysts are the conventional conductive substrates, such as those that are carbon based (carbon cloth, carbon fiber paper) and metal based (metal foam, metal foil).8,55,56 However, these carbon-based support materials are more surface-stable, resulting in a simple deposited rather than forming a solid interface, which increases the resistance of interface electron transfer. Wang et al. fabricated the active ingredient on the activated carbon cloth (ACC) via a hydrothermal method.57 Additionally, the active component of the self-supported catalyst was closely combined with the conductive substrate. Compared with carbon cloth, the ACC was equipped with a higher electrical conductivity of 4.2 S cm−1, which facilitated the electron transfer during the electrode/electrolyte interface. This structure not only reduced the mutual coverage but also prevented the catalyst abscission during the HER process. Julio et.al reported a solution combustion methodology to produce self-supported electrocatalysts.58 A strong interfacial effect was formed between the active component (M–NiO) and the substrate with the introduction of NF, which guided the M–NiO to form a unique laminar structure and modified its electronic structure to enhance the electron activity. Therefore, the self-supported electrode exhibited outstanding alkaline oxygen evolution performance and excellent stability.59 Furthermore, the structure and surface morphology of the electrocatalysts are directly related to the resulting water splitting efficiency. Hence, the regulation of the structure and surface morphology of active species can effectively enhance the activity and stability of the self-supported catalysts. Du et al. found that the multidimensional integrated architecture can improve the performance of individual 1D or 2D nanocatalysts by fabricating a self-supported electrocatalyst of 1D MoO3 nanorods coupled with 2D nanosheets on NF.60 The unique nanostructure had the features of large surface area, more accessible active sites, rapid electron transfer and favorable gas bubbles escape.


2.2.4. Strain engineering. 
The alloying of Pt, Pb and other transition metal elements not only reduces the amounts of noble metals, but also generates the alloying effect, ligand effect, etc.61–70 The aforementioned effects can effectively change the position of the center of the low d-band of the metal active site relative to the Ef, which can enhance the adsorption–desorption behavior of the active sites for intermediates. More importantly, in the process of forming the alloy, the lattice parameters of transition metals or Pt, Pd, etc. noble metals change, resulting in the generation of strain.71 Density functional theory calculations show that strain changes the electronic structure of metal active sites, and appropriate tensile/compressive strain can further optimize the activity of metal-based catalysts.72–79
Luo et al. prepared ultrathin PdMo bimetalenes via a one-pot method. Using molybdenum carbonyl as the metal precursor, the low-temperature pyrolysis of this precursor effectively promotes the formation of ultrathin structures with only 0.88 nm thickness. The shift of the characteristic XRD peaks indicates that Mo enters the lattice of Pd to form an alloy, which induces strain in the PdMo bimetal. Simulation results at room temperature display an average tensile strain of 0.95% in the PdMo bimetalene, and the bending geometry also contributes to the strain. The ORR performances of the PdMo bimetalene in an alkaline solution are shown below. The mass activity of the PdMo bimetalene/C at 0.9 V (vs. RHE) is 16.37 A g−1, which is equivalent to 327.4 times that of commercial Pd/C. DFT theoretical calculations showed that a tensile strain of 1% enables the PdMo bimetalene to have the best O adsorption free energy. The relationship between oxygen adsorption energy and strain on the surface of metalenes was studied by comparing different PDMS (M: Cu, Ni, Mo, W), the result shown that the alloying effect plays the most important role in enhancing the ORR activity of PdMo bimetalenes. Moreover, the synergy of strain effect, quantum size effect and alloy effect makes the ORR activity of the PdMo bimetalene reach the best.80 In addition, the instability of platinum-group metals under a high overpotential was another vital problem. The adaptively generated alloy strain reduced the lattice stress and tuned the electronic structure of the system, which was beneficial to enhance the stability of the PdMo bimetalene. As a result, the catalyst showed little decay after 30000 potential cycles.
According to previous reports, specific crystal planes of Pt3Ni alloys such as (111) can provide higher ORR activities.81 Pt3Fe nanowires as shown in Fig. 5f were prepared by the wet chemical method. Powder X-ray diffraction and energy dispersive spectroscopy characterization results showed that Pt and Fe formed a solid solution alloy. Pt3Fe nanowires supported on carbon supports were annealed at an appropriate temperature to obtain skin-like Pt3Fe nanowires with high density (311) and (211) planes, named Pt-skin Pt3Fe z-NWs (Fig. 5g–j). At 0.9 V, the Pt-skin Pt3Fe z-NWs exhibited high ORR activity with a mass activity of 2.11 A g−1, which was 13.2 and 1.9 times higher than those of Pt/C and skinless Pt3Fe nanowires, respectively. The DFT calculation results show that the Pt3Fe alloy has a compressive strain of about 1.5% compared with a single Pt. The strain effect shown in Fig. 5k optimizes the oxygen adsorption free energy of Pt-skinPt3Fez-NWs for higher ORR activity.82
 Fig. 5  Structural and compositional characterization studies of Pt3Fe zigzag-like nanowires. (a) Low- and (b) high-magnification HAADF-STEM images, (c) TEM-EDS, (d) PXRD pattern and (e) STEM-EDS elemental mapping of Pt3Fe z-NWs. (f) HAADF-STEM image of Pt-skin Pt3Fe z-NWs. (g and i) The enlarged images of the red square in (f). (h) Structural demonstration of the z-NWs. (j) STEM-EDS elemental mapping of Pt-skin Pt3Fe z-NWs, clearly showing the presence of a “Pt skin” in around two-atomic-layer thickness on the surface. The crystal orientation of the structure is along the zone axis of [110]. (k) DFT calculations of oxygen adsorption energy. ΔEO as a function of compressive strain on (a) (211) and (b) (311) surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2018). (l) The STEM image of L1O–CoPt/Pt NPs with 2–3 atomic layers of the Pt shell over the L1O–CoPt core (darker atom is Pt and lighter atom is Co), zone axis is the 〈10〉 direction. Scale bar, 5 nm. (m) Schematic of L1O–CoPt/Pt NPs with 2–3 atomic layers of the Pt shell, where the silver-colored atom is Pt and the blue-colored atom is Co. (n and o) Enlarged sections indicated by dashed squares (top square region, n; bottom square region, o) in (l), showing the 2–3 atomic layers of Pt shell (indicated by yellow arrows) and the L1O–CoPt core, Pt is colored in red and Co is colored in blue. Scale bars, 1 nm. (p) a and b directions on Pt(111) models. (q) Specific activity and mass activity of commercial Pt/C, etched A1–CoPt, and L1O–CoPt/Pt measured at 0.9 V (versus RHE). (r) Specific activity and mass activity of L1O–CoPt/Pt measured at 0.9 V (versus RHE) at BOL and EOL (10000 cycles, 20000 cycles, and 30000 cycles). Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Cell press, copyright (2019). 
The face-centered cubic solid solution alloy PtM (M: transition metal) has the problem of transition metal leaching in acidic ORR systems, which leads to the decay of the catalytic activity as well as the excessive consumption of Pt atom. Recently, the core–shell structure was extensively studied because its unique structure exhibits a potential effect on the exposure of the active sites and the inhibition of toxic substances. In this content, there is a broad prospect of preventing atomic leaching by building a protective enclosure. The research found that the L1O structure intermetallic compound FePt is a promising alternative due to its better stability. Similarly, the use of L1O-structured CoPt as the core and Pt as the shell (2–3 layers) to construct a core–shell structure yielded high-efficiency ORR catalysts L1O–FePt/Pt and L1O–CoPt/Pt (Fig. 5m–o). As depicted in Fig. 5q, the mass activities of L1O–CoPt/Pt are 19 and 2.8 times higher than those of commercial Pt/C and L1O–FePt/Pt, respectively, which exhibit only a small decrease after 30000 cycles. The modeling calculation shown in Fig. 5p shows that the strains of the Pt shell of L1O–CoPt/Pt along the a 〈01〉 and b 〈10〉 directions are −4.50% and −4.25%, respectively. The strains of the Pt shell in L1O–CoFe/Pt are −3.47% and −2.23% along the a 〈01〉 and b 〈10〉 directions, respectively. DFT calculation results show that the synergistic effect of compressive strain and ligand effect increases the free energy of the L1O–CoPt/Pt surface for intermediates, and the decrease in adsorption strength is the origin of the high activity of L1O–CoPt/Pt.83
Defects are also a type of microstrain, often with active sites near the edges showing high activity.72,73,84,85 Similar results have also been reported for the presence of twins, steps, etc.86–88 Moreover, unlike the more uniform stress distribution in the alloy, the defects exhibit a relatively short-range stress distribution, which facilitates coordination-like fine-tuning of the electronic structure around the active site.89
Twinning can also generate local strain, which in turn affects the electrocatalytic performances of metal-based materials.90,91 Multiple twinned Pt3Cu icosahedral nanocrystals were prepared in a solution system with structure orientation using a wet chemical method (Fig. 6a–c). Single-crystal Pt3Cu octahedrons can also be obtained by the above method, only by replacing the Cu metal precursor with copper acetylacetonate. From Fig. 6d, it can be seen that the multi-twinned Pt3Cu icosahedron exhibits excellent ORR activity in an acidic solution, and the mass activity is about 1.5 times and 12 times that of single-crystal Pt3Cu octahedra and commercial Pt/C, respectively. The multiple-twinned Pt3Cu icosahedron also has excellent methanol oxidation reaction activity, and the mass activity is about 1.4 times and 8 times that of the single crystal Pt3Cu octahedron and commercial Pt/C, respectively. These results indicate that twinning defects and strain enhance the activity of the Pt3Cu icosahedron for the ORR and MOR.92
 Fig. 6  (a–c) HRTEM images, corresponding FFT images, and geometrical models of Pt3Cu icosahedra oriented along three typical projections. Electrochemical performances of different Pd metalene samples. (d and e) Specific activity and mass activity at 0.9 V versus RHE for these three catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2015). (f) Schematic illustration of coordination effect in ORR electrocatalysis based on Pd metalene samples with different active site structures. M represents metalene. (g) Mass activity at 0.9 V versus RHE, (h) specific activity at 0.9 V versus RHE and half-wave potential. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2022). 
Active sites with higher generalized coordination numbers (>7.5) can be formed by introducing atomically concave structures (atomic cavities) on Pd metal as illustrated in Fig. 6f. The mass activity of defective Pd metalene at 0.9 V (vs. RHE) is 2.7 times that of the Pd metalene without atom-sized cavity defects. And the defective Pd metalene has a higher half-wave potential. Ultrathin Pd metalenes have inherent tensile strains of 1.1–1.4%. The high coordination formed by atomic-level cavities is also a type of microstrain. These strains work together to optimize the adsorption strength of active sites for oxygen-containing intermediates, making ultrathin Pd metalenes with atomic-scale cavities exhibiting excellent ORR activity (Fig. 6g and h).
At present, there are many methods to introduce strain into the surface of materials in core–shell structures.93,94 The most common method is to introduce impurity atoms to cause lattice mismatch on the surface of the shell. This method can be adjusted to obtain appropriate compressive strain or tensile strain, which can greatly improve the catalytic activity of the materials. In general, the catalytic performances of core–shell catalysts are determined by the synergistic effect of strain effect and ligand effect. However, these two effects sometimes restrict each other, which greatly reduces the catalytic performance of the core–shell structure. The synthesis of PdCu/Ir core/shell nanocrystals realizes the exclusive strain effect. Through the epitaxial growth of 4 monolayers of Ir shell on PdCu nanocrystals, a thicker Ir shell was formed. This not only eliminates the ligand effect, but also yields a 3.6% compressive strain. DFT shows that the compressive strain in the Ir shell moves down the center of the d-band and weakens the binding of the intermediate, confirming that the compressive strain plays a dominant role in the catalytic process. In an acidic medium, the overpotentials of PdCu/Ir core/shell nanocrystals for the OER and HER at 10 mA cm−2 are 283 mV and 20 mV, respectively. A high active electrocatalytic overall water splitting electrolyzer with a cell voltage of 1.583 V at 10 mA cm−2 was realized.
Generally speaking, compressing the lattice on the surface of the shell is an effective means to improve the ORR activities of the catalysts.95 However, the stretching of the Pt surface usually leads to excessive binding between the intermediate and the surface of the catalyst, which leads to the desorption difficulty of oxygen species and reduces the catalytic efficiency. Recently, a highly uniform PtPb/Pt core–shell nanoplate with a large biaxial tensile strain has attracted wide attention.96 As shown in Fig. 7, two kinds of interfaces are formed in PtPb nanoplates: the interface between the PtPb core and the rectangular surface of the Pt shell, and the interface between the PtPb core and the hexagonal surface of the Pt shell. Through the measurement, it is found that the [01] of the Pt shell has 11% compressive strain and 7.5% tensile strain along the [100] direction. In the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) and ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR), the electrocatalytic activity and stability of the PtPb/Pt core–shell nanoplates are also high. Its specific activity is 2.5 mA cm−2 and its mass activity is 1.4 A mg−1, which is 1.9 times and 2.5 times that of PtPb/C, 10.4 times and 8.8 times that of commercial Pt/C, respectively.
 Fig. 7  Structure analysis of PtPb nanoplates. (a) A model of one single hexagonal nanoplate, (b) HAADF-STEM image of in-plate view, (c) HAADF-STEM image of out-of-plate view. (d–f) (d) A high-resolution HAADF image from the selected area in (c). (e) and (f) High-resolution HAADF images from the selected areas in (b). Simulated HAADF images as well as the atomic models are superimposed on the experimental images. (g) The schematic atom models of the nanoplate showing the top interface (110)Pt//(100)PtPb and the side interface (110)Pt//(001)PtPb. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright (2016). 
It is noted that the electronic structure in the active layer at such a surface of catalysts could be affected by the ligand effect and the strain effect. Since these two effects are not readily separated, the impact of strain on the catalytic reactivity of materials surfaces is not usually observed in isolation in experiments. In fact, quantifiable measures for the reactivity–strain coupling strength have not been reported so far, nor are definitions for the coupling parameters established.
The coupling of adsorption heat energy of reactants and intermediates with surface mechanics is a research hotspot in the field of surface science and catalysis. The strong chemical–mechanical coupling proposed by theory and well supported by experiments provides a practical method for regulating the surface adsorption energy of catalysts in electrocatalysis.97–99 Generally, the mechanical method is to deform the substrate, and the strain transfer method is used to transfer the strain of the substrate to the catalytic material. Through the different treatments of the substrate, the strain method is divided into the “bendable substrate” method which can be stretched or bent, the “pre-stretched substrate” method which can produce regular folds or ripples, and the “pattern array” method which can be highly irregularly transformed. The “pressure difference induced strain” method and the simple and easy-to-control “direct tension” method can produce tension and compression strain at the same time.97–99
Taking the HER on gold and platinum electrodes in H2SO4 as a model, the effect of lattice parameters on the catalytic activity has been widely explored.100 A locking technique has been proposed, which allows the application of a small cyclic elastic strain on the electrode material while following the modulation of the reaction current in situ. The results show that the tensile strain increases the exchange current density and reactivity at low overpotential. On the contrary, when the overpotential is high, the reactivity decreases. The kinetic rate equations of Heyrowsky and Tafel have been introduced. The relationship between hydrogen adsorption and activation heat and strain has been taken into account. These results relate the reactivity regulation to the electrocapillary coupling coefficient, which can be studied by experiment or ab initio calculation. The coupled symbol reversal appears as a function of overpotential, which is consistent with the experiment.

3. Apparent activity enhancement by mass transport regulation
As an inseparable process in electrocatalysis, mass transport is a common limiting factor for electrocatalytic reactions, especially at high current density.101–103 Effective mass transport represents rapid absorption and desorption step at active sites, which not only require suitable adsorption energy between reactants and various reaction intermediates, but also splendid mass transfer channels.103–105 Although numerous methods have been employed to exploit efficient catalysts, it is still a rigorous challenge to develop a catalyst with efficient mass transfer capability.106–108 Considering the restrictions of mass transport in heterogeneous electrocatalysis, we review the kinetic mechanism and optimization strategy of mass transport in the design of electrocatalysts.
3.1. Mass transport kinetics
Due to the presence of mass transport limitation, the electrode reaction frequently shows the kinetic characteristics of the mass transport step, instead of the reaction kinetic characteristics.104,109 For example, the Tafel slope of HER catalyzed on some catalyst is ∼120 dec−1 in an acidic medium, reflecting mass transfer limitation rather than the reaction kinetic limitation as the Volmer step must occur under acidic conditions.109 Therefore, the study of mass transport kinetics is beneficial to the development of high-performance electrocatalysts.104,110,111
For electrocatalytic reactions, there are three main forms of mass transport between the electrolyte and catalyst layer: convection, diffusion and electromigration.104,112 In the absence of external agitation, concentration gradient and temperature gradient are the main forces of convection and diffusion, while applied electric field causes electromigration of the dot particles.112 The mass transport rate can be expressed by the flow of the species studied through the unit cross-section in a unit time.104,113 As the electrocatalytic reaction progresses, the concentration difference of species i is formed between the electrode surface and electrolyte, which in turn produces a diffusion flow (JD,i). In addition to convection and diffusion triggered by concentration gradients, there is mass transport flow brought by electromigration (JE,i). The total mass flow contribution by convection (JC,i), diffusion and electromigration can be described using the following formula when only the mass transport in the normal direction of the electrode plane is considered: (1)where ci is the density of species i, vx is the velocity vector in x, Di is the diffusion coefficient, Ex is the electric field strength in x, and u0i is velocity of the particles at the unit electric field intensity.
In electrolytes, convection occurs far from the electrode, and the velocity can be considerably increased utilizing agitation and bubbling. On the other hand, it is assumed that the electrolyte is sufficient for the reaction to progress and contains a large number of unreactive ions; the effect of electromigration can be ignored. Different from the above two mass transfer forms, diffusion is closely related to the structure and surface characteristics of the catalyst because the diffusion occurs on the surface of the catalyst, especially for nanocatalysts because the diffusion length is comparable to the size of the catalyst, which directly determines the mass transport in the body of the catalyst and in turn affects the effective utilization rate of the active sites.112,114 Considering the key effect of the structure and surface characteristics for diffusion coefficient and diffusion layer length, it is an effective strategy to improve the activity of the catalyst by optimizing the structure and surface properties comprehensively.
3.2. Mass transfer kinetic analysis
As discussed above, loss associated with electron transport and mass transport is non-negligible for nanosized electrocatalysts owing to their comparable size with diffusion layer length.115 Correct quantification of mass transport loss on nanosized electrocatalyst is the premise for the development of electrocatalyst with optimized mass transport.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is an effective tool to research mass transport, from which mass transport resistance (Rmt) can be identified.116,117 Typically, Rmt can be calculated by fitting the low-frequency regions of the EIS data.102,106 She et al. performed EIS tests to identify the HER/OER mass transport in multiple electrolytes (pH = 12.5–14).106 The Rmt (RE2 in Fig. 8b) of all samples were identified and the results agree well with the theoretical predictions. The quantification of Rmt for HER/OER was also conducted with a rotating disk electrode.117 There are various impedance spectra with different rotation rates under a potential of 875 mV. The impedance spectrum consists of only one semi-circle on the Nyquist plot, and the significant reduction of diameter at higher rpm triggers can be attributed to the decrease of mass transport resistance rather than electron transport resistance. The EIS proved that electron transport and mass transport are the RDS at high rpm and low rpm, respectively. The impedance spectrum carried out at 750 mV demonstrates that Rct is insignificant relative to Rmt regardless of rpm, which illustrates mass transport is always the RDS consistently at high overpotential. Another parameter describing the mass transport resistance, namely mass diffusion coefficient (D), can be obtained by plotting real parts of the impedance (Z′) versus the reciprocal square root of the angular frequency (ω) in the low-frequency region, with the slope being related to the D value.101 (2) (3)where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, A is the surface area of the electrode, n is the number of electrons per molecule, F is the faradaic constant, C is the concentration of ion, and σ is the Warburg factor. Sun et al. determined that the excellent performance of the synthesized HPCM-5 ORR catalyst originated from a unique structure that greatly improved the diffusion coefficient to promote mass transfer by calculating the value of D.101 Besides, the activity of the catalyst is limited by the thickness of the catalyst layer due to the function of the mass transport resistance, especially for the powder catalysts because the excessive catalysts will enhance the interfacial resistance and worsen mass transport furtherly. In theory, Sun et al. studied the effects of 3D structure for mass transport by linear voltammetry scanning (LSV). The 2D FeNi3–LDH catalyst exhibits a severe limitation on activity by the catalyst loading (Fig. 8d), while the 3D FeNi3–LDH/CNFs catalyst shows excellent activity under high loading, which demonstrates the superior mass transport of the catalyst.118
 Fig. 8  Nyquist plots of the impedance spectra of SCF, BM-SCF, and S-BM-SCF electrodes at (a) pH 14, (c) pH 13, and (b) comparison of the RE2 values for SCF, BM-SCF, and S-BM-SCF from pH 12.5 to 14. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright (2021). (d) FeNi3–LDH and FeNi3–LDH/CNFs with different loadings (0.05 mg cm−2, 0.2 mg cm−2 and 0.4 mg cm−2) in a 1M KOH solution. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2019). 
As the mass transport is closely related to the morphology of the catalyst, characterization of the sample's morphology also gives important information about the mass transport features of the catalysts.115,119 Many reports confirmed that the construction of hierarchical porous nanostructures fully integrates the resistance of mass transport and electron transport, which facilitates the reaction process.17,120–123 Li et.al determined the synthesized catalyst hs-CoFe with an excellent transport channel ranging from 10 to 1000 nm by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area.124 The electrochemical measurement confirmed the effect of pore size on mass transport as the overpotential to deliver 10 mA cm−2 was reduced by 10 mV with the range expanded from 10–1000 nm to 10–1000 nm. Besides, mass transport capacity can be judged through the analysis of adsorption/desorption energy of reactions and intermediates with the catalyst.107,125–129
3.3. Strategies for boosting mass transport

3.3.1. Construction of mass transport channels. 
For nanostructured catalysts, interconnected and hierarchically structured pores are normally required for mass transport because a parochial channel is easily blocked by electrolyte, resulting in low accessibility of the active sites.130–132 In contrast to the mature procedures of catalyst synthesis and functionalization, tailoring the mass transport channel in electrocatalysts remains challenging.133
Many electrocatalysts were synthesized by direct calcination of catalyst precursors and therefore there was a lack in control over the pore structures of the electrocatalysts.134–138 Application of appropriate template materials in the synthesis is a straightforward method for the control of electrocatalyst morphology. An active non-metal ORR catalyst with three-dimensional ordered mass transfer channels (3DOM NS-C) was prepared in our previous study.111 Briefly, a new ionic liquid bearing an alkyne group has been synthesized and used as a precursor to prepare the 3DOM NS-C catalyst using a silica spheres template (average diameter of 300 nm). 3DOM NS-C exhibited rich micropores and macropores, which facilitate the diffusion of oxygen molecules in the catalyst layer. Due to the hierarchical pore structure, the 3DOM NS-C catalyst shows a more positive ORR onset potential and half-wave potential compared with the Pt/C catalyst. Li et al. prepared a honeycomb-like Co–Nx–C electrocatalyst by using a polystyrene (PS) template with a size of 180 nm.130 With the introduction of PS, interconnected macropores were constructed in the catalyst. The honeycomb-like Co–Nx–C catalyst (Honeycomb-600) exhibits a typical polyhedral morphology (Fig. 9a and b) with a particle size of about 0.8–4 μm and abundant interconnected macropores of 180 nm throughout the crystal. It was shown that the splendid ORR activity mainly stemmed from the improved mass transport in the unique pore structure. Salt template is another commonly used template for the optimization of mass transfer in the electrocatalysts. Zhang et al. reported an ant-nest-like hierarchical porous ultrathin carbon nanosheet network as an efficient electrocatalyst by employing NaCl as a template.139 The electrocatalyst with an optimized porous feature exhibited excellent activity toward electrocatalytic conversion of polysulfide species. Although numerous research studies have shown that hierarchical macro-, meso-, and microporous structures can provide abundant mass transport channels and the accessibility of the active site, self-reliant strategies are momentous for multifarious catalysts and reactions due to the difference in conductivity and particle size, respectively.110,121,122,140,141
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic Illustration of the construction of the MOF-derived honeycomb-like Co–Nx–C superstructures and (b) the TEM images. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2020). (c) The scheme of catalytic performance enhancement mechanism of CoFe–LDH nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2016). (d) The scheme of borate ion intercalated 0.05-SB-Ni0.8Fe0.2(OH)2. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2020). 
The pores of the electrocatalysts could be also engineered indirectly by hybridization of the electrocatalysts.142 In our previous work, a Zn-doping strategy has been proposed to enhance the HER performance of MoS2 through enhancing mass transport.143 Our results showed a significant increase in BET surface area and electrochemical active surface area after Zn-doping. As a result of the structural advantages brought by Zn-doping, the overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and the Tafel slope of the synthesized Zn-1T/2H-MoS2 were significantly lowered. In addition to adjusting the structure, doping can facilitate mass transport by regulating the crystal parameters.144–146 The synergistic effects between Co and Fe species were used to expand the interlayer space of CoOOH (Fig. 9c). Su et al. reported an efficient catalyst 0.05-SB-Ni0.8Fe0.2(OH)2 for OER by introducing borate ions into NiFe LDH.146 They showed that, after intercalation with borate ions, the interlayer spacing and specific surface area of the NiFe LDH are increased. In addition, the pore size distribution was broadened, thus enhancing mass transport and catalytic activity as shown in Fig. 9d.


3.3.2. Electrocatalyst support engineering. 
Tuning the porous features of the electrocatalyst may alter the electronic status of the electrocatalysts, thereby deteriorating its catalytic performance. Engineering the mass transport features of the catalyst support allows for effective tuning in the mass transport features of the catalyst without affecting its intrinsic properties. Such supports can be mainly divided into two types. The first type of support is porous material composite strategies (e.g., carbon nanotubes, metal–organic frameworks and their derivatives).7,58,147,148 As highly ordered coordination polymers, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have emerged as ideal support/precursors for electrocatalysts because of the high surface area and rich pore structure, facilitating the exposure of active sites and expediting mass transfer.147 In addition, the MOF-derived catalysts will enhance the electronic conductivity of the MOF materials under the base of inheriting the porous structure. More advantageously, the combination of single-atom active sites with MOF-derived materials can further enhance the distribution density and the stability of active sites, which is shown by the research of Jiang et al. They fabricated a CO2RR catalyst of Fe and Ni single-atom decorated on MOF-derived N-doped carbon support via pyrolysis of MOFs (FeNi-NC).149 The MOF-derived N-doped carbon carrier endowed the catalyst with abundant pore structure and high specific surface area (595 m2 g−1), which is favorable for mass transfer and adequate dispersion of Fe and Ni atoms. To further suppress the agglomeration of single-atom, they inserted SiO2 into the MOF materials and successfully synthesized the Fe implanted N-doped porous carbon (FeSA-NC) with high Fe loading (3.46%).150 In-depth study found that the Fe atom is bound by the N atoms in the MOF-derived substrate and anchored by the FeN4/SiO2 interfaces. These features afforded the catalyst with a high Fe loading of 3.46% and excellent stability. Compared with MOF-based materials, employing commercial nano-carbon materials (such as CNTs, nanorods) as the support is more conducive to clarify the role of each component during the reaction process because of the regular pore structure and single component.24 Moreover, the accessibility and stability of the active sites can be regulated by selecting a porous composite with different wetting properties. Shul et al. reported a nanofibrous oxide–carbon composite by an in situ method of carbon nanofiber (CNF) growth by highly dispersed Ni nanoparticles.151 The in situ evolution strategy endowed the catalyst with excellent stability, while the hydrophobic properties of the carbon nanofibers improve the full diffusion of oxygen on the catalyst surface. In our previous study, we synthesized a high-performance HER catalyst (Pt@NOMC-A) using nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon (NOMC-A) as a novel support to regulate the mass transport in the HER process (Fig. 10k).152 The key advantage of NOMC-A is its ordered meso-structure and high surface area, which ensures easy electrolyte infiltration and reactant adsorption/desorption. The Pt@NOMC-A catalyst exhibited excellent HER activity and a high Pt utilization efficiency. The HER performance of Pt@NOMC-A with a low Pt loading of 7.2% is comparable to that of commercial 20% Pt/C catalyst. Recently, Zhu et al. also optimized the mass transport of the catalyst via appropriate selection of the catalyst support (Fig. 10a–f). EIS and CdI/BET area measurements showed that the carbon black (CB) supported Co catalyst (0.05Co-N-CB) possessed a lower mass transport resistance of 101 Ω and a higher surface area than those with other supports (Fig. 10g–j).128 Thus, excellent ORR performance was demonstrated for 0.05Co-N-CB. In addition, the preparation of self-supporting working electrodes with the porous carriers is the other support strategy.
 Fig. 10  TEM images of 0.05Co-N-AC (a)–(c) and 0.05Co-N-CB (d–f). (g) Nitrogen adsorption−desorption isotherm curves and (h) pore-size distribution and pore volume curves of 0.05Co-N-CB and 0.05Co-N-AC. (i) The comparison of the double layer capacitance (Cdl) and the BET area. (j) The EIS curves of 0.05Co-N-CB and 0.05Co-N-AC at 0.75 V vs. RHE via the RDE test. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (k) The schematic illustration of the synthesis and structure of the Pt@NOMC-A electrocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2018). (l) The scheme of the (Fe,Co)OOH/MI OER catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2022). 
Compared with the powered porous materials, the carrier of the self-supporting electrode not only improves the conductivity and rich pore structure, but maintains long-term operation because of the mechanical stability and low surface energy.153–156 Among various supports, metal foam,157–161 carbon fiber paper162–165 and carbon cloth166–169 are often used because of elevated conductivity and specific surface area. Huang et al. designed (Fe, Co)OOH/MI as an OER catalyst by using Ni Foam (NF) as substrates for the in situ growth of MOF (Fig. 10l).157 In addition to the typical metal characteristics, the unique interconnected macropores structure of NF not only facilitates mass transport, but also protects from the issues of stacking and shedding of catalyst on the adhesion electrode. Depending on fast mass transport and electron transport caused by NF, (Fe, Co)OOH/MI demonstrates excellent OER activity with a low overpotentials of 230/290 mV at 10/100 mA cm−2.


3.3.3. Mass transport driven by interfacial wettability control. 
Most of the electrochemical catalysis processes are a multi-phase reaction, which normally involves the release or consumption of gases in electrolytes. It is recognized that the intimate contact of the reactants and the catalyst is beneficial for the utilization of active sites.170 Therefore, endowing the catalyst with the hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity on-demand can promote mass transport of the reaction.171
For electrochemical reactions using gas reactants (ORR, NRR, CO2RR, etc.), gas transport channels should be also introduced to avoid water flooding. Hence, hydrophobic catalysts need to be designed to facilitate gas transport, especially for NRR and CO2RR due to the facile competitive HER. The construction of a hydrophobic catalyst can be realized by modifying the active phase with organic phases.172–175 Alternatively, high hydrophobicity of the catalyst can be achieved by integrating superficial structure with low surface energy into the catalyst phase.176–180 To the aim of developing a catalyst for NRR with high NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency, He et al. prepared the hydrophobic-treated Au@MOF (HT Au@MOF) by modifying the catalyst with organosilicon. The XRD results indicated the organosilicon coating treatment did not affect the MOF framework in HT Au@MOF.178 The water droplet could be quickly absorbed on Au@MOF, while freely standing on the surface of HT Au@MOF with a large water contact angle of 154°, proving that a hydrophobic coating is generated over the external surface of HT Au@MOF to repel the water (Fig. 11a). Relying on the hydrophobic characteristics, the competitive HER was effectively weakened, and N2 transfer efficiency was improved. In another example, Lai et al. reported burying selenium vacancy-rich ReSe2@carbonized bacterial cellulose (CBC) between two hydrophobic CBC layers and successfully prepared an NRR catalyst Vr-ReSe2@CBC (Fig. 11c).173 The CBC layers kept Vr-ReSe2@CBC in the hydrophobic state, thus impeding the HER process and facilitating the transport of humid N2 into the catalyst layer. This control in the catalyst wettability greatly enhanced its performance for NRR. To weaken the ion poisoning and facilitate O2 transfer on the ORR catalyst, Kumeda et al. evaluated the effect of hydrophobic cations of different alkyl chain lengths on the performance of single-crystal Pt catalyst. The results showed the TAA+ with longer alkyl chains promotes the ORR activity through facilitating O2 transfer by inhibiting water flow on the Pt(111) surface.180 Modification of oxygen–permeable oil (dimethyl–silicon–oil) onto the conventional Pt/C catalyst was demonstrated to enhance O2 transfer.181 Zhang et al. designed a supported electrocatalyst through in situ fabrication of Au nanoparticles located on hydrophobic carbon fiber paper (Au/o-CFP).182 The hydrophobic CFP surface facilitates efficient three-phase contact points for N2, electrolyte and Au NPs (Fig. 11d). Moreover, the surface of Au/o-CFP with a lower gas-bubble contact angle of 112° than the Au/i-CFP (hydrophilic surface of CFP) of 141.5°, resulted in an aerophilic property with a relatively strong interaction toward N2 bubble. The hydrophobic interface provides sufficient contact between catalyst and N2 (Fig. 11d), resulting in enhanced NRR performance and suppressed HER performance.182
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the electrocatalytic NRR by the HT Au@MOF composite. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). (b) Scheme Illustration of the competitive adsorption mechanism of the CO2 and H2O Molecules on the Surface of MASC and F-MASC. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2016). (c) Schematic illustration for the preparation and EDX elemental mapping images and of “sandwich”-structured CBC/Vr-ReSe2@CBC/CBC membrane. The proposed overall mechanism for the selective and enhanced electrochemical NRR process by encapsulating Vr-ReSe2@CBC NFs within the hydrophobic CBC layers. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2020). The schematic illumination three-phase contact for N2 (gas), electrolyte (liquid), and catalyst (solid) at (d) the hydrophilic interface and the hydrophobic interface. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2020). (e) Contact angles of a drop of 1.0 M KOH on PPy–HMS and PPy@SiO2-HMS. (f) LSV profiles of NF/PPy–HMS and NF/PPy@SiO2-HMS. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (g) Static water contact angle measurements of F-CoOOH and CoOOH products. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2018). 
In contrast to the electrocatalytic reactions using a gaseous substance as the reactant, the hydrophilic surface characteristics are conducive to the rapid shedding of gas products and the full adsorption of electrolyte on the surface of the catalyst when the reactants are in the liquid phase, which promotes the efficiency of mass transport. Roughening of an intrinsic hydrophilic electrocatalyst may render the electrocatalyst superhydrophilic.183–186 Representatively, Qiu et al. proposed a coordination strategy to enhance both surface roughness and oxygen species by controlling the atom-escape of metal Ni for self-assembling super-hydrophilic hydroxide FeNi–OH. The catalyst exhibits a super-hydrophilic surface, which makes the water entry rapid thus the H2 and O2 are crowded out in time. These advantages enable the FeNi–OH with considerable activity, yielding 50 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 236 and 196 mV for OER and HER, respectively.183 Cao et al. constructed a novel nanostructure of one-dimensional (1D) MoS2/Ni3S2 nanoarrays on NF (3D MoS2/Ni3S2/Ni) to enhance the roughness of the electrode.185 The wettability of the 3D MoS2/Ni3S2/Ni catalyst is tested, and the small droplet entered the 3D MoS2/Ni3S2/Ni as soon as it contacted the surface, suggesting the first-class surface wettability. Modifying the catalyst with a high surface energy substance is another route to superhydrophobicity.187–190 The electronic conducting polymers (ECPs) have excellent charge transfer properties, but as the catalyst for HER is rarely reported because of their poor adsorption energy per water molecule, which hinders the Volmer step. To enhance the hydrophilic properties of PPy (one ECPs), Zheng et al. designed a hybridization strategy by adopting a good water affinity SiO2. After the formation of SiO2 shell on the core-layer Ppy, the contact angle significantly decreased from 82.4° to 27.4° (Fig. 11e), convincingly confirming that the Ppy–SiO2–HMS exhibits excellent water affinity than Ppy–HMS.187 Thus, the hydrophilic surface of Ppy–SiO2–HMS will display improved water dissociation kinetics. With the excellent surface character, the Ppy–SiO2–HMS exhibits a lower overpotential of −123 mV at 10 mA cm−2 than −192 mV at 10 mA cm−2 of Ppy–HMS (Fig. 11f). Chen et al. highlighted an F-anion surface engineering to enhance oxygen evolution and synthesised the OER catalyst F–CoOOH/NF. Benefiting from stronger ionicity of weak metal–F bonds, the dynamic migration of F-anions from inside to the outside can be observed and finally enriched on the surface.191 Combining with the improved electron transfer capacity and hydrophilic surface (Fig. 11g), F–CoOOH/NF exhibits improved OER performance. Numerous reports have shown that the metal hydroxides are ideal OER catalysts as the unique electronic structure and the excellent hydrophilicity of hydroxide promote mass transport. Different from the above strategy, Zhang et al. studied the effects of different precursors on the surface hydrophilicity of the Co/Fe–C catalyst. The tannic acid (TA) and fulvic acid (FA) derived Co/Fe–C catalysts demonstrate greatly similar morphologies, as well as the performance optimization process of electrocatalytic OER. Notably, OER performances of the TA-derived Co/Fe–C catalyst surpass that of the FA-derived Co/Fe–C catalyst as the super-hydrophilic surface of TA-derived Co/Fe–C facilitates mass transport.192 Furthermore, Zhu et al. prepared a bifunctional catalyst Co3S4–L with excellent activity for HER and OER by screening hydrophilic medium and precursors. The dispersion of Co3S4–L (with the different concentrations of 10, 20, 30, 50 ppm) in water is homogenous and there is no precipitation after standing for 2 h, while the hydrophobic Co3S4–B (prepared using hydrophobic precursors) cannot be dispersed well in water and precipitation at the bottom of glass bottles is observed, proving that the surface characteristics of the catalyst can be regulated by selecting appropriate precursors.193

4. Summary and outlook
Approaches enabling intrinsic activity improvement and mass transport facilitation of electrocatalysts are summarized. First, recent progress in improving the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts by electronic structure regulation is shown. Guided by d-band centre theory, the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts is effectively improved through heteroatom doping, vacancy engineering, interface design and strain engineering. In addition, related studies on enhancing the apparent performance of electrocatalysts by mass transport optimization are also presented. We show that the construction of well-defined transport channels and regulation of interfacial wettability are the key factors to facilitate mass transport because these strategies promote the diffusion of the reaction species on the surface of the catalysts. Despite the fact that important progress has been achieved in the development of advanced electrocatalysts, most of the electrocatalysts reported so far could not meet the performance requirements for industrial application. For the future development of high-performance electrocatalysts, the following suggestions are provided.
First of all, the development of advanced characterization methods for the evaluation of the electronic states and mass transfer capability is essential. As discussed above, the d-band center of metal-based catalysts, which is an important descriptor for the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalysts, could be characterized by UPS/XPS valence-band spectra. However, traditional characterization could only be implemented in the ex situ mode. It is known that the catalyst surface usually undergoes a dynamic reconstruction process during the electrocatalytic process, which leads to the change in the d-band centre. Therefore, the development of advanced characterization methods which could be used to monitor the dynamic changes in the d-band center of the electrocatalysts will be beneficial for the understanding of the catalytic mechanism and rational design of the electronic states of the electrocatalysts. The mass transport performance could be only determined indirectly by morphological characterization studies and impedance measurements. Direct and quantitative analytic approaches for the evaluation of mass transport capability are still lacking, which impedes the reasonable design of the mass transport characteristics of the catalysts.
Second, understanding of the coupling of electronic state modulation and mass transport regulation in the design of electrocatalysts should be deepened. An ideal electrocatalyst should possess balanced intrinsic activity and mass transport capability. However, most of the studies reported so far focus either on the electronic state modulation or mass transport regulation. In further studies, theoretical models that involve both the catalytic reaction process and mass transport process should be established to provide comprehensive guidelines for the design of electrocatalysts. In addition, research on how electronic state modulation and mass transport regulation affect each other should also be studied for the optimized design of the synthetic routes of electrocatalysts.
Finally, the research paradigm for the design of electrocatalysts should be updated with the state-of-art artificial intelligence technique. Traditional semi-empirical exploration in the design of electrocatalysts is laborious. Furthermore, the research output gained from different research studies is scattered, which makes establishment of general design principles for electrocatalysts difficult. The update of the research paradigm with artificial intelligence technique is expected to greatly improve the efficiency of electrocatalyst development.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51972254 and 12172118), the Research Program of Local Science and Technology Development under the Guidance of Central (216Z4402G), Foshan Xianhu Laboratory of the Advanced Energy Science and Technology Guangdong Laboratory (XHD2020-002-04, XHD2022-002) and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020B1515120042) for financial support. Q.D. acknowledges support from the ‘‘Yuanguang” Scholar Program of Hebei University of Technology.
References
L. Li, X. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1234–1252 RSC .
L. Peng and Z. Wei, Particuology, 2020, 48, 19–33 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, L. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Deng, G. Jiang, J. Wang, B. Cao and Y. Wang, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2021, 31, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, J. Xu, C. Chen, Z. Xie, D. Liu, D. Qu, H. Tang, Q. Wei, Q. Deng, J. Li and N. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 582, 591–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, Z. Zhang, W. Qiu, J. Wei, Z. Fang, Q. Deng, W. Guo, D. Liu, Z. Xie, D. Qu, H. Tang, J. Li and N. Hu, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 11147–11153 CrossRef CAS .
C. An, W. Li, M. Wang, Q. Deng and Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 603–610 CrossRef CAS .
B. Singh, A. Singh, A. Yadav and A. Indra, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 447, 214144 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Lin, X. Wang, J. Li, Y. Li, L. Gao, L. Zhang, D. Chao, X. Xiao and J. M. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2008422 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Singh and A. Indra, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 16, 100239 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Hao, J. Wu, R. Wang, L. Gu, X. Yang, Q. Yang, C. Lian, H. Liu and M. Gong, Chem, 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.chempr.2022.06.012 .
J. Wang, S. Chen, Z. Li, G. Li and X. Liu, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1067–1079 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Z. Huan, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef .
S. Anantharaj, S. Noda, V. R. Jothi, S. Yi, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18981–19006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, B. Mi, J. Zhou, Z. Qin, Z. Chen and H. Wang, Molecules, 2022, 27, 2524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, M. Iqbal, B. Jiang, Z. Wang, J. Kim, A. K. Nanjundan, A. E. Whitten, K. Wood and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4054–4061 RSC .
E. M. Milner and E. H. Yu, Fuel Cells, 2018, 18, 4–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Norskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937–943 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov., Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71–129 CAS .
S. Sun, X. Zhou, B. Cong, W. Hong and G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9086–9097 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, F. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. Lei, Y. Jin, A. Qaseem and R. L. Johnston, Small, 2017, 13, 1603387 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. Xue, D. Yu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756–11760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and L. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, X. Wang, A. Bao, L. Dong, X. Zhang, H. Pan, W. Cui and X. Qi, Nano Res., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s12274-022-4738-z .
B. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Liu, N. Wu, S. Che and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120494 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Ji, Y. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Zheng, X. Sang, B. Yang, Z. Li, L. Lei, Z. Wen, X. Feng and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2202240 CrossRef .
T. Jiang, L. Yu, Z. Zhao, W. Wu, Z. Wang and N. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 133525 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, H. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Song, X. Zheng, C. Li, Y. Tan, X. Han, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110783 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, X. Tan, K. H. Wu, S. C. Haw, C. W. Pao, B. J. Su, J. Jiang, S. C. Smith, J. M. Chen, R. Amal and X. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21911–21917 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Qi, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 11910–11930 RSC .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dou, C. T. He, L. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Al-Mamun, J. Ma and H. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiao, N. N. Zhang, C. Zhang, N. Sun, Y. Pan, C. Chen, J. Li, M. Tan, R. Cui, Z. Shi, J. Zhang, H. Xiao and T. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2200010 CrossRef .
H. Song, M. Wu, Z. Tang, J. S. Tse, B. Yang and S. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7234–7244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Miao and X. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 9881–9890 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen, C. A. Ortiz-Ledon, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8181–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, Q. Li, Y. Tian, Y. Liu and K. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1742–1749 RSC .
W. Zhong, C. Yang, J. Wu, W. Xu, R. Zhao, H. Xiang, K. Shen, Q. Zhang and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 436, 134813 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, O. Gwon, K. Choi, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Park, J.-W. Yoo, J.-Q. Wang, J. H. Lee and G. Kim, Adv. Catal., 2020, 10, 4664–4670 CAS .
Y. Dou, D. Yuan, L. Yu, W. Zhang, L. Zhang, K. Fan, M. Al-Mamun, P. Liu, C. T. He and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2104667 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, G. Liu, X. Cui, Y. Gong, D. Yi, Q. Zhang, C. Zhu, F. Saleem, B. Chen, Z. Lai, Q. Yun, H. Cheng, Z. Huang, Y. Peng, Z. Fan, B. Li, W. Dai, W. Chen, Y. Du, L. Ma, C. Sun, I. Hwang, S. Chen, L. Song, F. Ding, L. Gu, Y. Zhu and H. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd6674 Search PubMed .
L. Peng, N. Yang, Y. Yang, Q. Wang, X. Xie, D. Sun-Waterhouse, L. Shang, T. Zhang and G. I. N. Waterhouse, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 24612–24619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Q. Peng, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, X. Zhou, C. S. Lee, H. Zhao and W. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, e1803144 CrossRef .
J. Wei, Y. Jing, Z. Zhao, Z. Fan, Z. Liang, J. Huang, H. Wu, Z. Xie, D. Liu, D. Qu, H. Tang and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 381, 138222 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shan, X. Teng, Y. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Xu, C. Liu, H. Li, H. Ye and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2022, 94, 106913 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Cai, P. Li, G. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Jiang, J. Chen, S. X. Dou, H. Pan and W. Sun, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6807–6814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Li, J. W. Zhao, L. J. Xie, J. Q. Wu, Q. Ren, Y. Wang and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18129–18137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, F. Li and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2663–2695 RSC .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Kang, C. C. Yu, Y. Wen, M. Hu, D. Meng, W. Song and Y. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002631 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Zhou, Z. Wang, C. B. Han, X. Ke, C. Wang, Y. Jin, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, C. Wei, Y. Sun, X. Liu, F. Meng, X. Meng, S. Sun, S. Xi, Y. Du, Z. Bi, G. Shang, A. C. Fisher, L. Gu and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2001292 CrossRef .
T. Wu, S. Xu, Z. Zhang, M. Luo, R. Wang, Y. Tang, J. Wang and F. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2022, e2202750 CrossRef .
J. Chen, G. Qian, H. Zhang, S. Feng, Y. Mo, L. Luo and S. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2107587 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1806326 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102074 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Bao, S. Mao, R. Fan and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11634–11642 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bucci, M. García-Tecedor, S. Corby, R. R. Rao, V. Martin-Diaconescu, F. E. Oropeza, V. A. de la Peña O'Shea, J. R. Durrant, S. Giménez and J. Lloret-Fillol, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12700–12710 RSC .
G. W. Sievers, A. W. Jensen, J. Quinson, A. Zana, F. Bizzotto, M. Oezaslan, A. Dworzak, J. J. K. Kirkensgaard, T. E. L. Smitshuysen, S. Kadkhodazadeh, M. Juelsholt, K. M. O. Jensen, K. Anklam, H. Wan, J. Schafer, K. Cepe, M. Escudero-Escribano, J. Rossmeisl, A. Quade, V. Bruser and M. Arenz, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 208–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, H. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Shang and Y. Du, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 21850–21856 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Zhang and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Qin, W. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Luo, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Zhang, M. Luo, X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Li, M. Li, Y. Qin, C. Li, N. Xu, G. Lu, P. Gao and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802136 CrossRef .
J. Lai, F. Lin, Y. Tang, P. Zhou, Y. Chao, Y. Zhang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1800684 CrossRef .
K. Wang, B. Huang, F. Lin, F. Lv, M. Luo, P. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, C. Yang, Y. Tang, Y. Yang, W. Wang, H. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801891 CrossRef .
F. Lv, W. Y. Zhang, W. X. Yang, J. R. Feng, K. Wang, J. H. Zhou, P. Zhou and S. J. Guo, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 7 CrossRef .
J. Feng, F. Lv, W. Zhang, P. Li, K. Wang, C. Yang, B. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Zhou, F. Lin, G. C. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703798 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Y. Yang, B. Huang, F. Lv, K. Wang, N. Li, M. Luo, Y. Chao, Y. Li, Y. Sun, Z. Xu, Y. Qin, W. Yang, J. Zhou, Y. Du, D. Su and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805833 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Kim, F. Dionigi, V. Beermann, X. L. Wang, T. Moller and P. Strasser, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 19 Search PubMed .
Z. Han, Z. Qi, Q. Wei, Q. Deng and K. Wang, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 2056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, Q. Deng, L. Deng, X. Guan and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902630 CrossRef .
M. Luo and S. Guo, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17059 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xia and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3265–3278 RSC .
K. Jiang, M. Luo, Z. X. Liu, M. Peng, D. C. Chen, Y. R. Lu, T. S. Chan, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. W. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Zhou, S. Y. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Y. Xiong, H. B. Yang, S. Liu, J. L. Tang, J. M. Zhang, D. Liu, L. R. Zheng, Y. Kuang, X. M. Sun and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 736–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Huang, H. H. Jia, Z. Liu, P. F. Gao, J. T. Zhao, Z. L. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3594–3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Li, Y. X. Zhao, Y. Liu, M. Z. Sun, G. I. N. Waterhouse, B. L. Huang, K. Zhang, T. R. Zhang and S. Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3290–3298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Huang, J. Wang, Y. C. Peng, C. Y. Jung, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 21 Search PubMed .
Q. Deng and A. Yuan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, H480–H484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J. Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. F. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2007, 315, 493–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. Li, Y. Li, C. Li, Y. Yang, L. Wang, P. Gao, G. Lu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705515 CrossRef .
J. Li, S. Sharma, X. Liu, Y.-T. Pan, J. S. Spendelow, M. Chi, Y. Jia, P. Zhang, D. A. Cullen, Z. Xi, H. Lin, Z. Yin, B. Shen, M. Muzzio, C. Yu, Y. S. Kim, A. A. Peterson, K. L. More, H. Zhu and S. Sun, Joule, 2019, 3, 124–135 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Yan, Y. X. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. M. Dai and S. Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 20 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Liang, M. Luo, F. Lv, Y. Qin, L. Wang, C. Xu, E. Fu and S. Guo, Small, 2018, 14, 1702259 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Luo, Y. Qin, M. Li, Y. Sun, C. Li, Y. Li, Y. Yang, F. Lv, D. Wu, P. Zhou and S. Guo, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. An, C. Dong, L.-H. Shao and Q. Deng, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 103, 94–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Han and Q. Deng, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 684 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yuan, H. Zhang and Q. Deng, Molecules, 2019, 24, 3662 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, D. H. Gosslar, M. Smetanin and J. Weissmuller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 11725–11731 RSC .
Q. Deng, M. Smetanin and J. Weissmüller, J. Catal., 2014, 309, 351–361 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Sun, K. Z. Jiang, N. Zhang, S. J. Guo and X. Q. Huang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7634–7640 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lin, F. Lv, Q. Zhang, H. Luo, K. Wang, J. Zhou, W. Zhang, W. Zhang, D. Wang, L. Gu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2202084 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, C. An, A. Yuan, Q. Deng and J. Ning, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 89, 43–47 CrossRef CAS .
C. An and Q. Deng, Molecules, 2018, 23, 3113 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Z. Bu, N. Zhang, S. J. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. L. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J. Y. Ma, D. Su and X. Q. Huang, Science, 2016, 354, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. An, C. H. Dong, L. H. Shao and Q. B. Deng, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 103, 94–99 CrossRef CAS .
Q. B. Deng, V. Gopal and J. Weissmuller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12981–12985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. B. Deng and J. Weissmuller, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10522–10530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. B. Deng, M. Smetanin and J. Weissmuller, J. Catal., 2014, 309, 351–361 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Wu, Y. Jin, Y. Li, Y. Shi, T. Zhu, H. Mao, J. Liu, C. Xiao and S. Ding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910482 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kubannek and U. Krewer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 144510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, S. Liu, Z. Chen, B. Li, L. Chen, C. V. Singh, B. Liu and Q. Mao, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 1384–1387 RSC .
X. Lu, W. Tang, M. Li, Y. Dang, N. Campbell, Z. Li, S. L. Suib and P.-X. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126906 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, S. Li, Y. Zhao, C.-Y. Lao, Z. Zhang, L. Liu, F. Fang, H. Wu, B. Jia, Z. Liu, W. A. Wang, Y. Liu and X. Qu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9 Search PubMed .
S. She, Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, S.-C. Weng, X. Wu, Y. Chen, D. Guan, Y. Song, J. Dai, S. C. Smith, H. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 011407 CAS .
M. Wang, K. Cao, Z. Tian and P. Sheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 493, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuan, W. Bi, T. Zhou, N. Zhang, C. A. Zhong, W. Chu, W. Yan, Q. Xu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 2, 35–41 CrossRef .
S. Anantharaj, S. Noda, V. R. Jothi, S. Yi, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18981–19006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Xiao, J. Ying, G. Tian, X. Yang, Y. X. Zhang, J. B. Chen, Y. Wang, M. D. Symes, K. I. Ozoemena, J. Wu and X. Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 7870–7878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, L. Shi, J. Lei, D. Liu, D. Qu, Z. Xie, X. Du, P. Yang, X. Hu, J. Li and H. Tang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 323, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Li, N. Hu, L. Liu, C. Huang, Q. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. Suo, T. Wang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22506–22511 RSC .
D. You, H. Zhang and J. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 625, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Li and A. Ray, AIChE J., 2000, 46, 1034–1045 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Chen, Y. H. Liu, Z. He, J. L. Wang, J. W. Liu, H. J. Jiang, W. R. Huang, G. Y. Gao, Z. H. Hou and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 12600–12608 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, T. Okada, K. Miyabayashi and M. Miyake, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 6116–6123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Singh, R. Devivaraprasad, T. Kar, A. Chakraborty and M. Neergat, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F489–F498 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, L. Du, C. Du, Y. Gao and G. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 485, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Xu, Z. Hu and J. C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106120 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adam, M. H. Suliman, M. N. Siddiqui, Z. H. Yamani, B. Merzougui and M. Qamar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29407–29416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Meng, N. Chen, S. Cai, J. Wu, R. Wang, T. Tian and H. Tang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 4768–4775 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhai, X. Gu, Y. Wei, J. Zuo, Q. Chen, W. Liu, H. Jiang, X. Wang and Y. Gong, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 62, 43–50 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Yin, J. Xu, Y. Xiang, W. Zhu, W. Qiu and J. Li, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 095505 CrossRef .
J. Li, J. Wu, Z. Xie, X. Zhang, S. Lv, H. Shao, K. Qu and W. Cai, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131140 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, C. Liang, J. Xu, J. Wei, X. Li, Y. Zheng, J. Li, H. Tang and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, C. Jian, Q. Cai, W. Hong and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10990–10997 RSC .
M. Guo, M. Xu, Y. Qu, C. Hu, P. Yan, T. T. Isimjan and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120415 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Y. Pei, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Qin, Y. Yin and M. D. Guiver, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32842–32850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, L. Shi, C. Liang, H. Wu, J. Lei, D. Liu, D. Qu, Z. Xie, J. Li and H. Tang, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1148–1153 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, G. Jiang, Y. P. Deng, G. Liu, D. Ren, Z. Zhang, J. Zhu, R. Gao, Y. Jiang, D. Luo, Y. Zhu, D. H. Liu, A. M. Jauhar, H. Jin, Y. Hu, S. Wang and Z. Chen, iScience, 2020, 23, 101404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Li, J. Fu, G. Jiang, G. Lui, D. Luo, Y. P. Deng, J. Zhang, Z. P. Cano, A. Yu, D. Su, Z. Bai, L. Yang and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806761 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y. T. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef .
H. Xu, J. Cao, C. Shan, B. Wang, P. Xi, W. Liu and Y. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8654–8658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, M. Qiao, J. Liu, T. Tao and C. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8143–8170 RSC .
M. V. Varsha, G. Nageswaran, L. Jothi and A. Ravi Sankar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 036503 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, X. Cui, J. Wei, C. Chen, H. Tang and J. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 621, 195–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
Z. Miao, X. Wang, M. C. Tsai, Q. Jin, J. Liang, F. Ma, T. Wang, S. Zheng, B. J. Hwang, Y. Huang, S. Guo and Q. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801226 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Shao and P. Zhang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 3942–3951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and H. Park, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 38, 102529 CrossRef .
X. Wan, X. Liu, Y. Li, R. Yu, L. Zheng, W. Yan, H. Wang, M. Xu and J. Shui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, C. Yu, J. Yang, C. Zhao, H. Huang, Z. Liu, P. M. Ajayan and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500782 CrossRef .
J. Xu, Z. Zhao, W. Wei, G. Chang, Z. Xie, W. Guo, D. Liu, D. Qu, H. Tang and J. Li, Chemistry, 2021, 27, 15992–15999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 146 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, Y.-F. Guo, Y.-M. Yan, F. Wang, C. Deng, D. Rooney and K.-N. Sun, Carbon, 2016, 106, 84–92 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414–1448 RSC .
X. F. Lu, Y. Fang, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1555–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, S. Zhou, A. Li, C. Xie, X. Zheng, W. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19417–19424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, R. Zhang, G. Wan, W. Yang, X. Wan, H. Zhou, J. Shui, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jeon, Y. Ji, Y. I. Cho, C. Lee, D. H. Park and Y. G. Shul, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6819–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, H. Du, C. Tang, K. Nan, J. Wu and C. Ming Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 528, 36–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, T. Liu, D. Liu, Z. Wang, Q. Deng, D. Qu, Z. Xie, H. Tang and J. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 595–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marquez-Montes, K. Kawashima, Y. J. Son, J. A. Weeks, H. H. Sun, H. Celio, V. H. Ramos-Sánchez and C. B. Mullins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7736–7749 RSC .
L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Sun, G. Yin, J. Liu and Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 314–322 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Shih, R. H. Jhang, Y. T. Tsai, C. W. Huang, Y. J. Hung, M. Y. Liao, J. Huang and C. H. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, e1903363 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Wang, M. Ma, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, W. Zhou and H. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127686 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, J. Li, X. Liao, R. Lu, C. Ling, X. Liu, J. Meng, L. Qu, M. Lin, X. Hong, X. Zhou, S. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2200270 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Son, K. Kawashima, B. R. Wygant, C. H. Lam, J. N. Burrow, H. Celio, A. Dolocan, J. G. Ekerdt and C. B. Mullins, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, X. Huang, Z. Wang, G. Li, Z. Han, H. Yang, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2140–2146 RSC .
S. Riyajuddin, K. Azmi, M. Pahuja, S. Kumar, T. Maruyama, C. Bera and K. Ghosh, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5586–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Xu, W. Guo, Z. Wang, X. Du, C. Chen, Z. Zheng, D. Liu, D. Qu, Z. Xie, H. Tang and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 307, 451–458 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dai, X. Zhang, M. Sun, B. Huang, N. Zhang, P. Da, R. Yang, Z. He, W. Wang, P. Xi and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2102593 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, R. Ma, Y. Lu, Y. Pei, M. Yang, J. Wang and D. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5919–5926 RSC .
T. A. Shifa, K. Yusupov, G. Solomon, A. Gradone, R. Mazzaro, E. Cattaruzza and A. Vomiero, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 4520–4529 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, J. Wang, J. Hu, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Fu, Y. Lei, X. Ren, C. He, Q. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 6104–6112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, Y. Zhao, Z. Wu and X. Liu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5036–5041 RSC .
Y. Huang, L. W. Jiang, B. Y. Shi, K. M. Ryan and J. J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, e2101775 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Lu, X. Z. Fu and J. L. Luo, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903777 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Yin, H. Xiong, X. Du, Y. Jiang, W. Guo, Z. Wang, Z. Xie, D. Qu, H. Tang, Q. Deng and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 490, 516–521 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, S. Wang, N. Zhang, Y. Tong, H. Ju, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15471–15475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Du, L. Yang, M. Markiewicz, J.-Y. Choi, R. Chenitz and S. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118523 CrossRef .
A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernández, A. M. Fontani Herreros, T. Agapie and J. C. Peters, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 4530–4537 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lai, W. Zong, G. He, Y. Xu, H. Huang, B. Weng, D. Rao, J. A. Martens, J. Hofkens, I. P. Parkin and T. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13320–13327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Meng, Y. Hou, F. Yang, C. Cao, Z. Zou, J. Luo, W. Zhou, Z. Tong, S. Chen, S. Zhou, J. Wang and S. Deng, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 303, 120874 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. F. Sim, J. R. T. Chen, C. S. L. Koh, H. K. Lee, X. Han, G. C. Phan-Quang, J. Y. Pang, C. L. Lay, S. Pedireddy, I. Y. Phang, E. K. L. Yeow and X. Y. Ling, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16997–17003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lv, C. Teng, M. Shi, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, Z. Kong, X. Lu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802339 CrossRef .
L. Niu, Z. Liu, G. Liu, M. Li, X. Zong, D. Wang, L. An, D. Qu, X. Sun, X. Wang and Z. Sun, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 3886–3893 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, Q.-Q. Zhu, Y. Yan, H.-W. Zhang, Z.-Y. Han, H. Sun, J. Chen, C.-P. Li, Z. Zhang and M. Du, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 302, 120840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2962–2966 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kumeda, N. Hoshi and M. Nakamura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15866–15871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Ji, Z. D. Wei, S. G. Chen, M. R. Xia, Q. Zhang, X. Q. Qi, X. H. Hu, W. Ding and L. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4797–4802 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, B. Zhao, W. Liang, G. Zhou, Z. Liang, Y. Wang, J. Qu, Y. Sun and L. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2002630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, X. Zhang, H. Han, Z. Liu, J. Liu and X. Ji, J. Power Sources, 2021, 499, 229941 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bose, S. K. Balasingam, S. Shin, Z. Jin, D. H. Kwon, Y. Jun and Y. S. Min, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 5220–5227 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1752–1760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Yu, T. Ren, S. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34728–34735 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, F. Yang, T. Xiong, D. Adekoya, Y. Huang and M. J. T. Balogun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 57093–57101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, D. Ge, J. Chen, R. Li, X. Zhang, T. Yu, Y. Wang and S. Song, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 10529–10532 RSC .
R. Xu, R. Wu, Y. Shi, J. Zhang and B. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Z. Yang, L. H. Li, Q. Cai, H. Nie, M. Ge, X. Chen, Y. Chen and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6886–6894 RSC .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, S. Wang, N. Zhang, Y. Tong, H. Ju, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15471–15475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Xu, M. Wu, B. Luo, J. Hao and W. Shi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 11652–11663 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Zhang and S. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 509, 522–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jia Wang
	Jia Wang is a doctoral student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Wuhan University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Junsheng Li. He obtained his master's degree from School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science & Technology, in 2020. His current research interests mainly focus on developing electrocatalysts for water splitting and oxygen reduction reaction.

Jiankun Wei
	Jiankun Wei is a master's student in the School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences at Wuhan University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Junsheng Li. His research interest includes the calculation of Density functional theory (DFT) and hydrogen evolution reaction.

Qibo Deng
	Prof. Qibo Deng received his bachelor's (2007) and master's degrees (2009) in Solid Mechanics at the Beijing Institute of Technology, China and then received his PhD degree in Material Physics and Technology at the Hamburg University of Technology, Germany in 2014. He is currently working as a full professor at the Hebei University of Technology, China. His research focuses on the electrocapillary coupling of surface mechanics and electrochemistry at the solid–liquid interface, as well as the surface-mechanics-induced improvement of electrochemical properties of the electrode materials. He received the International Association of Advanced Materials (IAAM) Scientist Medal in the year 2019. He has been honored with the Fellow of the IAAM and Vebleo Fellow.

Junsheng Li
	Junsheng Li obtained his BEng in Materials Science and technology from Wuhan University of Technology (WUT) in 2007 and his MEng in New Energy Materials from the same university in 2010. He received his doctorate in natural science from the University of Heidelberg in 2014. Currently, he is working as a professor in WUT. His research focuses on the key materials for electrochemical conversion and storage devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Data represented by open circles were determined by using the Newns–Anderson model. The calculated adsorption energies correlate well with the d band center. (b) The relationship between the energy average of the d-band on the surface of the metal and the adsorption energy of O. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2000). (c) UPS valence-band spectra of Ni2P and (NixFe1−x)2P. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (d) Valence band spectra (VBS) of Ag75M25 as measured by high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2017).	 

 	Fig. 2  The d-band center (a) and calculated free-energy diagram (b) of Pd-1B, Pd-3B, Pd-6B, Pd-12B and Pd. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). The PDOS of Mo 4d for (c) B-Mo2C and (d) β-Mo2C catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2022). (e) d-Band centers of Ni2P, (Ni0.83Fe0.17)2P, (Ni0.67Fe0.33)2P and Fe2P. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (f) The projected density of states (PDOS) of d orbitals of Pt atoms on PtN3. The PDOS of PtN3 and PtN3–OP. (g) Calculated free energy diagrams of ORR on PtNx and PtNx–PO catalysts at the equilibrium potential (1.23 V) under alkaline conditions. The PtN4–PO_1 and 2 indicate the PO group located at two different α-C sites, respectively. (h) Calculated ORR theoretical onset potential versus the free energies of OH*  on PtNx and PtNx–PO catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright (2021).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) PDOS of V 3d in c-VSe2 and a-VSe2−x. (b) Free energy diagrams of energetically favorable NRR pathways on c-VSe2 and a-VSe2−x. (c) Optimized structures of *N2 on c-VSe2 and a-VSe2−x. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright (2022). (d) Free Energy of water splitting and hydrogen adsorption for Co3O4 and Ni-Co3O4. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). (e) The schematic diagram of the relationship between the O-vacancy content in the catalyst and the position of the d-band center and the calculated free energy profiles of the ORR and OER on the (100) surface of SSC in alkaline media. Calculated free energy profiles of the OER (f) and ORR (g) on the (100) surface of SSC in alkaline media. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Charge density differential diagram of Au/ZrO2 (left), The increase and decrease of electron density are indicated by the yellow delocalized section and blue delocalized section, respectively and planar-average charge–density of Au/ZrO2. (b) Partial density of states (DOS) diagram of Au and Au/ZrO2 (right). (c) Free energy diagram and optimized atomic configuration of Au(111) and Au(111) + e− for ENRR. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2021). (d) The side views of the atomic model of a Pt truncated octahedron loaded on MoS2. (e) Charge–density difference for Pt-MoS2 and the PDOS of Pt atoms on the above positions. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). (f) Free energy diagrams during the ORR at U = 0 V (vs. NHE) and partial density of states for Pd and h-BN/Pd, where the values denote the position of the Pd d-band center. (g) Partial density of states for Pd and h-BN/Pd, where the values denote the position of the Pd d-band center. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). Differential charge densities of NiFe–LDHs/CLs (h) and the illustration (i) of the d-band center decreasing. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2021).	 

 	Fig. 5  Structural and compositional characterization studies of Pt3Fe zigzag-like nanowires. (a) Low- and (b) high-magnification HAADF-STEM images, (c) TEM-EDS, (d) PXRD pattern and (e) STEM-EDS elemental mapping of Pt3Fe z-NWs. (f) HAADF-STEM image of Pt-skin Pt3Fe z-NWs. (g and i) The enlarged images of the red square in (f). (h) Structural demonstration of the z-NWs. (j) STEM-EDS elemental mapping of Pt-skin Pt3Fe z-NWs, clearly showing the presence of a “Pt skin” in around two-atomic-layer thickness on the surface. The crystal orientation of the structure is along the zone axis of [110]. (k) DFT calculations of oxygen adsorption energy. ΔEO as a function of compressive strain on (a) (211) and (b) (311) surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2018). (l) The STEM image of L1O–CoPt/Pt NPs with 2–3 atomic layers of the Pt shell over the L1O–CoPt core (darker atom is Pt and lighter atom is Co), zone axis is the 〈10〉 direction. Scale bar, 5 nm. (m) Schematic of L1O–CoPt/Pt NPs with 2–3 atomic layers of the Pt shell, where the silver-colored atom is Pt and the blue-colored atom is Co. (n and o) Enlarged sections indicated by dashed squares (top square region, n; bottom square region, o) in (l), showing the 2–3 atomic layers of Pt shell (indicated by yellow arrows) and the L1O–CoPt core, Pt is colored in red and Co is colored in blue. Scale bars, 1 nm. (p) a and b directions on Pt(111) models. (q) Specific activity and mass activity of commercial Pt/C, etched A1–CoPt, and L1O–CoPt/Pt measured at 0.9 V (versus RHE). (r) Specific activity and mass activity of L1O–CoPt/Pt measured at 0.9 V (versus RHE) at BOL and EOL (10000 cycles, 20000 cycles, and 30000 cycles). Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Cell press, copyright (2019).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) HRTEM images, corresponding FFT images, and geometrical models of Pt3Cu icosahedra oriented along three typical projections. Electrochemical performances of different Pd metalene samples. (d and e) Specific activity and mass activity at 0.9 V versus RHE for these three catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2015). (f) Schematic illustration of coordination effect in ORR electrocatalysis based on Pd metalene samples with different active site structures. M represents metalene. (g) Mass activity at 0.9 V versus RHE, (h) specific activity at 0.9 V versus RHE and half-wave potential. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2022).	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure analysis of PtPb nanoplates. (a) A model of one single hexagonal nanoplate, (b) HAADF-STEM image of in-plate view, (c) HAADF-STEM image of out-of-plate view. (d–f) (d) A high-resolution HAADF image from the selected area in (c). (e) and (f) High-resolution HAADF images from the selected areas in (b). Simulated HAADF images as well as the atomic models are superimposed on the experimental images. (g) The schematic atom models of the nanoplate showing the top interface (110)Pt//(100)PtPb and the side interface (110)Pt//(001)PtPb. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright (2016).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Nyquist plots of the impedance spectra of SCF, BM-SCF, and S-BM-SCF electrodes at (a) pH 14, (c) pH 13, and (b) comparison of the RE2 values for SCF, BM-SCF, and S-BM-SCF from pH 12.5 to 14. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright (2021). (d) FeNi3–LDH and FeNi3–LDH/CNFs with different loadings (0.05 mg cm−2, 0.2 mg cm−2 and 0.4 mg cm−2) in a 1M KOH solution. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2019).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic Illustration of the construction of the MOF-derived honeycomb-like Co–Nx–C superstructures and (b) the TEM images. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2020). (c) The scheme of catalytic performance enhancement mechanism of CoFe–LDH nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2016). (d) The scheme of borate ion intercalated 0.05-SB-Ni0.8Fe0.2(OH)2. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2020).	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM images of 0.05Co-N-AC (a)–(c) and 0.05Co-N-CB (d–f). (g) Nitrogen adsorption−desorption isotherm curves and (h) pore-size distribution and pore volume curves of 0.05Co-N-CB and 0.05Co-N-AC. (i) The comparison of the double layer capacitance (Cdl) and the BET area. (j) The EIS curves of 0.05Co-N-CB and 0.05Co-N-AC at 0.75 V vs. RHE via the RDE test. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (k) The schematic illustration of the synthesis and structure of the Pt@NOMC-A electrocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2018). (l) The scheme of the (Fe,Co)OOH/MI OER catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2022).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the electrocatalytic NRR by the HT Au@MOF composite. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier, copyright (2022). (b) Scheme Illustration of the competitive adsorption mechanism of the CO2 and H2O Molecules on the Surface of MASC and F-MASC. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2016). (c) Schematic illustration for the preparation and EDX elemental mapping images and of “sandwich”-structured CBC/Vr-ReSe2@CBC/CBC membrane. The proposed overall mechanism for the selective and enhanced electrochemical NRR process by encapsulating Vr-ReSe2@CBC NFs within the hydrophobic CBC layers. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2020). The schematic illumination three-phase contact for N2 (gas), electrolyte (liquid), and catalyst (solid) at (d) the hydrophilic interface and the hydrophobic interface. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2020). (e) Contact angles of a drop of 1.0 M KOH on PPy–HMS and PPy@SiO2-HMS. (f) LSV profiles of NF/PPy–HMS and NF/PPy@SiO2-HMS. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright (2020). (g) Static water contact angle measurements of F-CoOOH and CoOOH products. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag, copyright (2018).	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
