Electrochemical neutralization energy: from concept to devices    - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01239D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01239D
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1495-1511Electrochemical neutralization energy: from concept to devices†‡

        
          
            Yichun 
            Ding
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pingwei 
            Cai
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhenhai 
            Wen
          
          
        
      *
      CAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou 350002, China. E-mail: wen@fjirsm.ac.cn
Received 
      24th September 2020
    First published on 21st December 2020AbstractAqueous electrochemical devices such as batteries and electrolytic cells have emerged as promising energy storage and conversion systems owing to their environmental friendliness, low cost, and high safety characteristics. However, grand challenges are faced to address some critical issues, including how to enhance the potential window and energy density of electrochemical power devices (e.g. fuel cells, batteries, and supercapacitors), and how to minimize the energy consumption in electrolysis. The use of decoupled acid–base asymmetric electrolytes shows great potential in improving the performance of aqueous devices by electrochemically converting the conventional thermal energy of acid–base neutralization into electricity, i.e., electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE). This review aims to introduce the little-known concept of the ENE, including its development history, thermodynamic fundamentals, operating principles, device configurations, and applications. The recent progress made in ENE-assisted electrochemical energy devices emphasizing fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, and electrolytic cells is summarized specifically. Finally, the challenges and future perspectives of ENE associated technology are discussed. It is believed that this tutorial review will give a better understanding of the mechanism and operating principles of the ENE to newcomers, which would shed light on the innovative design and fabrication of ENE-assisted devices and thus pave the way for the development of high-performance aqueous electrochemical energy devices.
Yichun Ding
Yichun Ding received his PhD degree in Biomedical Engineering from South Dakota School of Mines & Technology (USA) in 2018. He then joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an associate professor. His research mainly focuses on high-performance polymers, electrospinning and electrospun nanofibers, flexible and wearable electronics, and electrochemical devices (batteries, electrolysis, etc.)
Pingwei Cai
Pingwei Cai received his BSc and MSc degree from Nanchang Hangkong University, and PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Fujian Institute of Research of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences (FJIRSM, CAS), and he is now a postdoctoral researcher at FJIRSM, CAS. His research interests focus on electrocatalysis, Zn–air batteries, and aqueous batteries with high voltage and energy density.
Zhenhai Wen
Zhenhai Wen received his MSc from the Beijing University of Technology in 2004 and PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, in 2008. He then worked as a lecturer at Nanchang Hangkong University. In 2009, he worked at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Germany as a Humboldt postdoctoral research scholar and then moved to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee as a postdoctoral researcher in 2010. He joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2015. The research topics in his group mainly include the design and synthesis of functional nanostructures and exploration of their applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems. He has published around 200 peer-reviewed articles with over 15000 citations, and has been selected in Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researchers in 2018 and 2019 from Clarivate Analytics.

Key learning points
(1) Concept of the electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE).
(2) Working principles and key components of ENE devices.
(3) Basic knowledge of the laws of thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and electrochemical devices (electrolysis, fuel cells, batteries, and supercapacitors).
(4) Principles and strategies to develop advanced aqueous energy devices with the capability of harvesting the ENE.

1. Introduction
Exploring sustainable energy sources is of significant importance to reduce the reliance on fossil fuels and to alleviate the global climate change crisis. With the modern industrial revolution, great breakthroughs have been achieved in the development of renewable energies such as wind, solar, geothermal, and tidal energy. However, these energy resources are intermittent, regional, and heavily dependent on climate, and thus cannot meet the uninterrupted and long-lasting electricity demand for human activities and industry. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop reliable energy storage and conversion technologies to take full advantage of these renewable energies. Electrochemical power devices, such as lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and capacitors, have been widely used in consumer electronics, electric vehicles, and grid-scale energy storage. They can store and release energy by cyclic charge and discharge processes. Besides, electrolysis is an effective electrochemical method to store intermittent energy in the form of stable chemical bonds by producing commodity chemicals; for example, water electrolysis can produce hydrogen gas (H2), which is expected to be next-generation clean energy provided that H2/O2 fuel cells can be commercially available in a scalable manner.
Aqueous electrochemical devices that use water-based electrolytes have recently emerged as promising energy storage and conversion systems, owing to their inherent environmental benignity, simple maintenance, and high safety characteristics. Specifically, the advantages of aqueous electrolyte energy devices include: (1) aqueous electrolytes are non-flammable, so they can avoid fire and explosions that might occur in organic electrolytes, (2) the ionic conductivity of aqueous electrolytes is about two orders of magnitude higher than that of organic ones, (3) the devices can be assembled under ambient conditions without strict requirements, (4) water is non-toxic, green, and low cost, and (5) water-soluble electrolytes are typically inorganic salts which cost relatively little.1 However, compared with the organic counterparts such as the dominant LIBs, aqueous electrochemical energy devices have much lower operating potential and energy density,1 greatly hampering their practical applications.
The theoretical voltage of water decomposition is 1.229 V, which is independent of the pH value, as manifested by the two parallel lines corresponding to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) with a constant potential gap (ΔE) of 1.229 V in the Pourbaix diagram of water (Fig. 1). Therefore, the operating voltage window of aqueous galvanic cells or batteries is theoretically restricted to 1.229 V. During charging, when the applied voltage exceeds 1.229 V, water will be decomposed to hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) gases at the cathode and anode, respectively. In practice, the operating voltage window can be a little wider due to the inevitable overpotentials of the HER and OER, while it is still far lower than that of the conventional organic electrolyte devices. On the other hand, for electrolytic cells, for example, water electrolysis to produce H2 and O2, the required voltage is always higher than 1.229 V, resulting in much higher energy consumption than the energy generated from H2 fuel cells or combustion. Therefore, numerous researchers have been striving to explore new strategies to break through such a limit for the development of energy-efficient aqueous electrochemical devices.
 Fig. 1  The Pourbaix diagram of water with curves generated by the Nernst equation showing the theoretical potentials for the corresponding reactions. 
As we know, acid–base neutralization by directly mixing an acid and base (H+ + OH− = H2O) is a spontaneous exothermic process (i.e., enthalpically favourable), during which the standard molar enthalpy change (ΔHθ) is −55.84 kJ mol−1, corresponding to a heat release of 55.84 kJ mol−1. In addition, the neutralization reaction is also entropically favourable with a standard entropy change (ΔSθ) of 80.66 J mol−1 K−1, and therefore acid–base neutralization has a standard molar Gibbs free energy change (ΔGθ) of −79.9 kJ mol−1 (ΔGθ = ΔHθ − TΔSθ, see the calculation in Section 2.2 and the ESI‡). Hereinto, is it possible to convert such an amount of chemical energy to electrical energy? Looking in-depth into the Nernst equation and Pourbaix diagram of water (Fig. 1), even though the overall cell voltage (1.229 V) of water decomposition is independent of the pH value, the individual half reactions (i.e., HER and OER) are dependent on the pH value. Therefore, it is feasible to adjust the operating voltage of aqueous electrochemical cells by decoupling the electrolyte with a cathodic acid and anodic base. One can see that the potential gap between the HER and OER can be extended to 2.057 V by coupling an alkaline anolyte (pH = 14) with an acidic catholyte (pH = 0) (red dash line in Fig. 1). On the contrary, the potential gap can be decreased to 0.401 V by coupling an acidic anolyte (pH = 0) with an alkaline catholyte (pH = 14) (green dash line in Fig. 1), implying that an electrolytic cell with such a design can theoretically achieve overall water splitting at an applied voltage as low as 0.401 V. Therefore, based on this principle, the strategy of using a decoupled acid–base asymmetric electrolyte is employed to adjust the potential window of aqueous devices. In these acid–base asymmetric devices, the chemical neutralization energy is converted to electrical energy, which is termed the Electrochemical Neutralization Energy (ENE).
The ENE can be viably harvested by designing specific pH-sensitive anodic and cathodic reactions. In detail, by designing an acid–base asymmetric aqueous electrochemical device with both half reactions involving the consumption of protons (H+) and hydroxide ions (OH−), the ENE can be harvested. During the process, the consumption of H+ and OH− is decoupled at the two electrodes (e.g., H+ is consumed on the cathode and OH− is consumed on the anode) to form H2O (either on the anode, the cathode, or both), and electrons are transmitted through an external circuit, thus inputting extra energy into the electrochemical system. The ENE system can be applied either to galvanic cells (e.g., fuel cells, batteries, and supercapacitors) to enlarge the output voltage and energy density or to electrolytic cells to reduce the energy consumption. It is worth mentioning that the acid and base are continuously consumed in acid–base asymmetric devices, and therefore intermittent replenishment of the acid and base is essential to guarantee sustainable operation and stable performance, which can be implemented in a flow electrolyte cell; on the other hand, this behaviour endows the system with great potential for acid and base wastewater treatment.
In this tutorial review, we intend to give a comprehensive introduction to the concept, principles, and applications of the ENE. The concept and fundamentals of the ENE will be first expounded on the basis of thermodynamics. The key to harvesting the ENE is the rational design of pH-sensitive redox reactions and the bipolar membrane used to separate the acid–base asymmetric electrolytes, which will be discussed subsequently. Then, a variety of ENE-assisted devices developed recently will be highlighted in the category of fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, and electrolysis. Finally, the problems, challenges, and future perspectives of this unexcavated technology will be analysed.
2. Concept and fundamentals of the electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE)
2.1 A brief history
Attempts to collect the acid–base neutralization energy can be traced back to the invention of bipolar membranes (BPMs), which made the physical separation of acid and base electrolytes possible. However, BPMs are commonly used for the reverse process of splitting H2O to H+ and OH− for production of acids and bases. Such a process is known as bipolar membrane electrodialysis (BMED, see the ESI‡). In 1979, F. L. Ramp first proposed the concept of generating electricity from acid–base neutralization;2 such a device could be regarded as a special type of reverse electrodialysis (RED). In a typical RED process (see the ESI‡), membrane stacks with alternate cation-exchange membranes (CEMs) and anion-exchange membranes (AEMs) are fed with high-salinity (seawater) and low-salinity (freshwater) solutions, respectively. The directional migration of cations and anions creates an ionic flux to generate electrical power, which is called salinity gradient power (SGP). In Ramp's device, acid and base solutions were used to replace the high-salinity and low-salinity solutions, respectively. A pH gradient is created between the acidic and alkaline chamber separated by the BPM. The H+ and OH− on both sides of the BPM can migrate into the membrane to form H2O at the interface. Since the counter-ions cannot pass through the BPM, a charge imbalance is established on the two sides of the BPM and induces a junction potential. The ionic charges can convert to electronic charges to power an electrical circuit by using two redox electrodes. Applying a similar configuration, Y. Ayato et al.3 developed a bipolar membrane H2/O2 fuel cell by adopting the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) at the acidic anode and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the alkaline cathode in 2003.
Thereafter, a few studies were conducted developing acid–base asymmetric electrolyte systems, for example, some efforts have been made on a microfluidic membraneless acid–base asymmetric fuel cell,4 an acid–base dual-electrolyte PbO2–MHx battery,5 a three-electrolyte (H2SO4|K2SO4|KOH) PbO2–MHx battery,6 an acid–base asymmetric vanadium–MHx semi-flow battery,7 BPM-based photoelectrochemical water electrolysis,8 and acid–base water electrolysis using a ceramic Li-ion exchange membrane.9Fig. 2 shows a timeline highlighting the major breakthroughs during the development of the ENE. In 2014, Chan's group summarized the progress on applying acid–base asymmetric electrolytes in galvanic cells (e.g., batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors), and proposed the concept of “pH differential power sources” from “electrochemical neutralization”.10 Recently, our group conducted a series of work in designing ENE-assisted electrolysis and battery devices with further achieving in-depth understanding of the mechanism, operating principles, device configurations, and applications of the ENE.11–23 Although these studies have demonstrated significantly enhanced performance in aqueous devices due to the contribution of the ENE, the concept of the ENE still has not attracted wide attention. Herein, as one of the most active research groups worldwide in this area, we intend to update the recent progress and comprehensively introduce this little-known concept of the ENE, aiming to attract more attention to applying ENE systems to develop energy-efficient aqueous electrochemical devices.
 Fig. 2  A brief history and the major breakthroughs towards the development of electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE) devices. 
2.2 Concept of the ENE
During the acid–base neutralization process (eqn (1)), the standard molar enthalpy change (ΔrHθ) is −55.84 kJ mol−1 (eqn (2)), which will release in the form of heat (i.e., thermal energy). In addition, the standard molar entropy change (ΔSθ) is about 80.66 kJ mol−1 K−1 (eqn (3)), and the positive value of the entropy change can contribute to a more favourable process of the neutralization reaction (ΔG < 0). Under standard conditions, the Gibbs free energy change (ΔGθ) of acid–base neutralization is about −79.9 kJ mol−1 (eqn (4)). Namely, the neutralization process is spontaneous thermodynamically, and a theoretical energy of 79.9 kJ (denoted as the Neutralization Energy (NE)) can be evolved when one mole of H+ reacts with one mole of OH− with formation of H2O (Fig. 3a). Vice versa, the theoretical energy required for dissociating one mole H2O to H+ and OH− is also 79.9 kJ, which is termed as the Dissociation Energy (DE). Neutralization reaction: H+ + OH−  H2O(1) (2) (3) (4)Obviously, it remains a great challenge to harvest the thermal energy liberated from direct neutralization, not only because acid–base neutralization is quite fast and uncontrollable, but also the thermal energy is released in the electrolyte and thus is difficult to utilize. In addition, even if the thermal energy was completely harvested, the energy conversion efficiency is less than 70% since only the enthalpy change (−55.84 kJ mol−1) will be released in the form of heat. As aforementioned, the neutralization energy can be viably harvested in the electrochemical form by developing an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte cell with properly designing the pH-sensitive redox reaction in both electrodes, through which the total energy of 79.9 kJ mol−1 could be harvested completely, converting to electrical energy, according to the Nernst equation. The significant positive entropy change represents a positive temperature coefficient for the output voltage of electrochemical neutralization devices, revealing that not only the enthalpic energy (ΔH) but also the entropic energy (TΔS) can be harvested as an electrical driving force. Note that the entropic energy is usually negligible in conventional electrochemical systems such as Daniel cells and Ni–Cd cells.24
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of acid–base neutralization through a chemical route (a) and an electrochemical route (b). 
To effectively harvest the ENE, in principle, an asymmetric electrochemical cell (galvanic cell or electrolytic cell) should be assembled with the catholyte being acidic and the anolyte being alkaline, and the cathodic reduction and anodic oxidation reactions consume H+ and OH−, respectively (Fig. 3b). To better illustrate such a process, we assume that only one electron transfer occurs in both the cathodic reduction reaction in acid with a pH value of 0 (eqn (5)) and anodic oxidation reaction in alkali with a pH value of 14 (eqn (7)), and the overall reaction can be obtained (eqn (9)). Both of the potentials for the cathodic and anodic reactions can be calculated based on the Nernst equation (eqn (6) and (8)). Accordingly, the cell voltage can be deduced by subtracting the anodic potential from the cathodic potential (eqn (10)), and one can find that such an acid–base cell can produce an extra voltage of 0.0591 × ΔpH V compared to the symmetrical electrolyte cell. In this simplified case, the net voltage is around 0.828 V with ΔpH = 14. Rationally, the net voltage can be used for calculating the net Gibbs free energy (eqn (11)), which is about 79.9 kJ mol−1 given a net voltage of 0.828 V or ΔpH = 14, being exactly consistent with the neutralization energy described above. On the basis of the above deduction, we can conclude that the chemical energy of acid–base neutralization can be indeed harvested electrochemically in the manner of electricity energy, which is rationally and explicitly termed the Electrochemical Neutralization Energy (ENE). Theoretically, a total energy of 79.9 kJ mol−1 (ΔpH = 14) can be converted to electrical energy (ENE), and the conversion efficiency of NE to ENE might be 100% under ideal conditions (i.e., the BPM has perfect ion permselectivity, the internal electrical resistance is negligible, the electrode reactions are ideal, etc.). However, the conversion efficiency can be influenced by a variety of factors such as the electrolyte conductivity, ion diffusion rate, pH value (i.e., concentration of acid and base), electrode/catalyst performance, etc. Nevertheless, the conversion efficiency (η) can be experimentally quantified based on the enhanced voltage in an acid–base asymmetric cell relative to the corresponding symmetrical cell, as expressed in eqn (12). Cathode: [Ox]1 + H+ + e− = [Red]1(5) (6) Anode: [Red]2 + OH− − e− = [Ox]2 + H2O(7) (8) Overall: [Ox]1 + [Red]2 + H+ + OH− = [Red]1 + [Ox]2 + H2O(9) (10) (11) (12)where R is the molar gas constant (8.314 J K−1 mol−1), F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1), T is the absolute temperature, n is the number of moles of electrons transferred, ΔG is the Gibbs free energy change, ΔGθ is the standard Gibbs free energy change, [H+] and [OH−] are the concentration of H+ and OH− in the electrolyte, respectively, and ΔpHanode–cathode is the pH difference between the anolyte and catholyte. ΔE is the practically measured cell voltage difference between the acid–base asymmetric cell and the corresponding symmetric cell, and Easy and Esym are the practical cell voltage of the acid–base asymmetric cell and symmetric cell, respectively.
The ENE can be applied to a variety of electrochemical power systems from fuel cells to batteries, whose output voltage will be increased thanks to the voltage contribution of the ENE.10 For a galvanic cell, when placing the anode (negative electrode) in an alkaline electrolyte and the cathode (positive electrode) in an acidic electrolyte, the discharge voltage will be enlarged due to the contribution of the ENE, and the voltage applied for charging would correspondingly be high since the water decomposition potential is increased by the shift of the HER and OER potentials in their unfavourable pH conditions. For example, in an acid–base asymmetric Zn–air battery (Fig. S3, ESI‡), H+ and OH− are consumed on the cathode and anode during discharging, respectively. The discharge voltage is accordingly increased since the potential of the ORR in acidic conditions is relatively high (Fig. S3a, ESI‡). During charging, the reactions are reversed with anodic oxidation in the acid and cathodic reduction in the alkali, and thus the potential gap between the HER and OER is enlarged due to their unfavourable pH conditions (Fig. S3b, ESI‡), resulting in a large stable potential window. The ENE can be also applied in electrolytic cells (e.g., water splitting); the externally applied voltage can be reduced since the harvested ENE from electrochemical neutralization of an acid and base can internally input an additional voltage to assist electrolysis. For example, the overall voltage required to split water is reduced in a water electrolyzer with an acidic cathode and alkaline anode, wherein H+ is consumed on the cathode and OH− is consumed on the anode (Fig. S4, ESI‡). We here summarize the general requirements for designing an electrochemical cell that is capable of harvesting the ENE for assisting either electrochemical power or electrolysis devices:
(1) An acid–base asymmetric electrolyte is required typically with an acidic catholyte and alkaline anolyte. In this manner, the catholyte can provide H+ while the anolyte can provide OH−. In some special cases, the asymmetric electrolytes can also be acid/neutral or neutral/base ones provided that the neutral electrolyte (H2O) can provide H+ or OH− to take part in the electrode reaction.
(2) The redox reactions on the two electrodes should be pH-sensitive, typically with the cathodic reduction reaction consuming H+ and the anodic oxidation reaction expending OH− accompanying the formation of H2O. Only in this case will the electrochemical neutralization reaction be accomplished so as to contribute additional energy (ENE) into the asymmetric electrolyte system.
(3) A separator (typically a bipolar membrane is used) is indispensable to separate the acidic catholyte and the alkaline anolyte, so that bulk neutralization can be prevented while specific ions can be transported through the membrane to maintain the ionic conductivity. Notably, some configurations such as three-compartment and microfluidic configurations have been designed without using a bipolar membrane, which will be discussed in detail in Section 2.5.
2.3 pH-sensitive electrochemical redox reactions
In order to harvest the ENE, designing appropriate pH-sensitive redox couples on both electrodes is one of the prerequisites.10 pH-sensitive redox reactions refer to the ones involving H+ or OH− in their reactions in aqueous electrolyte, and thus the electrode potential is correlated to the concentration of H+ or OH−. In theory, redox reactions with H+ (or OH−) in the reactant or product can be grouped into pH-sensitive reactions. Both half reactions involved in water electrolysis (i.e., the HER at the cathode and the OER at the anode) are representative pH-sensitive redox reactions, as manifested in the Pourbaix diagram of water (Fig. 1). Depending on the pH of the electrolyte, the two half reactions and corresponding electrode potentials are given as below:
(1) Under acidic conditions HER (cathode): 2H+ + 2e− = H2(g)(13) (14) OER (anode): 2H2O = 4H+ + O2(g) + 4e−(15) (16)
(2) Under alkaline conditions HER (cathode): 2H2O + 2e− = H2(g) + 2OH−(17) (18) OER (anode): 4OH− = 2H2O + O2(g) + 4e−(19) (20)Under standard conditions, the thermodynamic voltage for overall water splitting to H2 and O2 is always 1.229 V in a single electrolyte at various pH, since the electrode potentials of the HER and OER are shifted linearly with the same slope when changing the pH (Fig. 1). If the HER occurs in acid (pH = 0) while the OER occurs in alkali (pH = 14), the required voltage will be largely reduced to only 0.401 V (eqn (22)). In this circumstance, the overall reaction is as eqn (21) (combining eqn (13) with eqn (19)), and the counterbalanced voltage of 0.828 V can be attributed to the contribution from the ENE. If performed reversely, i.e., the HER in alkali (pH = 14) while the OER in acid (pH = 0), the theoretical voltage required for water splitting will be as large as 2.057 V (eqn (23) and (24)). Therefore, the asymmetric electrolyte strategy by decoupling the two electrode reactions should give their favourable conditions for electrochemical neutralization rather than electrochemical dissociation, so that the ENE could be harvested to contribute to the device.
Overall H2O electrolysis (acidic HER and alkaline OER): 4H+ + 4OH− = 2H2(g) + O2(g) + 2H2O(21) Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = 0 V − 0.401 V = −0.401 V(22)
Overall H2O electrolysis (alkaline HER and acidic OER): 6H2O = 2H2(g) + O2(g) + 4H+ + 4OH−(23) Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = −0.828 V − 1.229 V = −2.057 V(24)
Table S2 (ESI‡) lists some common pH-sensitive half reactions. Theoretically, an energy-efficient aqueous device can be built by rationally paring a pH-sensitive (proton-involving) cathodic reduction reaction with a pH-sensitive (OH−-involving) anodic oxidation reaction in an electrochemical cell with acid–base asymmetric electrolytes. Notably, a pH-sensitive reaction at both the cathode and anode is mandatory for harvesting the ENE in an aqueous acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device. If both electrode reactions are not pH-sensitive, there will be no harvesting of the ENE since there is no consumption of H+ and OH− in the system. However, the stable potential window of an asymmetric cell without pH-sensitive reactions (e.g., a supercapacitor) might also be extended, attributed to the fact that the voltage of water decomposition is enlarged. In addition, the ENE also cannot be harvested if there is only one pH-sensitive electrode reaction in an acid–base asymmetric device, but the associated performance of the device might be improved (i.e., the applied voltage is reduced in electrolytic cells, and the output voltage is enhanced in galvanic cells). The enhancement in this situation is simply attributed to the difference in the electrode potential at different pH values (i.e., concentration of H+ or OH−), which can be calculated according to the Nernst equation.
To apply the ENE in a battery system, a Zn based electrode is a good candidate since the Zn oxidation reaction is pH-sensitive under alkaline conditions, as shown in the Pourbaix diagram of Zn (Fig. 4). Here, we thus take the Zn–air battery as an example to illustrate the working principle of using an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte to harvest the ENE in galvanic type cells. In general, the Zn–air battery is operated in a symmetric alkaline electrolyte with anodic Zn oxidation reactions (eqn (25)) and cathodic oxygen reduction (ORR) (eqn (26)). The theoretic cell voltage is only about 1.6 V under standard conditions (eqn (28)). Whereas, when coupling alkaline Zn oxidation with the acidic ORR (eqn (27)), the cell voltage can be theoretically enlarged to about 2.428 V (eqn (29)).
 Fig. 4  The Pourbaix diagram of Zn and water with curves generated by the Nernst equation showing the theoretical potentials (assuming that the ion concentration is 1.0 M). The theoretical voltages of conventional and acid–base asymmetric Zn–air batteries are given, paired with the corresponding electrode reactions. 
Anode (alkaline Zn oxidation): (25)
Cathode (alkaline ORR): (26)
Cathode (acidic ORR): (27)
Traditional Zn–air battery: Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = 0.401 V − (−1.199) V = 1.6 V(28)
Acid–base asymmetric Zn–air battery: Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = 1.229 V − (−1.99) V = 2.428 V(29)
2.4 Bipolar membrane
It is a challenge for an acid and base to co-exist in one electrochemical cell since they are inclined to mix quickly and undergo bulk neutralization. Therefore, an appropriate ion-exchange membrane capable of preventing the penetration of H+ and OH− while maintaining ionic transmission is crucial in designing an asymmetric aqueous device to harvest the ENE. A bipolar membrane (BPM) therefore provides an ideal choice. A BPM is a special ion-exchange membrane composed of two oppositely charged layers in which one is a cation-exchange layer and the other is an anion-exchange layer, which is usually prepared by laminating/gluing a piece of cation-exchange membrane (CEM) and a piece of anion-exchange membrane (AEM). The CEM and AEM are polymer membranes containing fixed charged groups (e.g., –SO3− and –NR4+) on the polymer networks, which allow mobile ions with opposite charges to transport through the membrane while blocking ions with similar charges due to the Donnan exclusion effect, thus imparting permselectivity to the system.25 Due to the special architecture, a BPM shows current rectification behaviour under an electric field in aqueous solution, which is analogous to the p–n junction of inorganic semiconductors (see the detailed discussion in the ESI,‡ Fig. S5).26 The BPM exhibits high conductivity under a forward bias voltage due to the migration of ions into the membrane. Under reverse bias, when a voltage is applied below the thermodynamic potential of water dissociation (0.828 V), the BPM shows a small current density less than a certain value, which called the limiting current density.26 When the applied reverse bias voltage exceeds a certain value (0.828 V), water dissociation will occur at the interface of the BPM with dissociation of H2O molecules into H+ and OH− migrating to the two sides of the membrane;27 in this way can a BPM be conductive. It should be noted that a BPM is usually used under a reverse bias, because the accumulation of salt ions in the BPM under forward bias might cause issues such as contamination, bubbling, and delamination, resulting in damage and loss of function. As will be discussed in the following section, the BPM is usually operated under forward bias to effectively harvest the ENE in acid–base asymmetric devices. In addition, high permselectivity and low ion resistance are essential for the BPM to prevent bulk neutralization and to decrease the internal resistance and the energy loss of the devices.
2.5 Device configuration of an ENE system
As discussed above, a pH-sensitive redox couple and an ion-exchange membrane separating the acid–base electrolyte are prerequisites to assemble an electrochemical cell with the capability of harvesting the ENE. However, even if the use of a BPM can address the issue of pH incompatibility by separating the acidic and basic solutions in the cathode and anode compartments, the actual situation is more complicated since the placement of the BPM and the sequence of the acid/base electrolyte affect the operating process of the device and consequently impact the device performance. Here, still taking water electrolysis as a case for study, as shown in Fig. 5, there are four types of device configuration using a BPM and acid–base asymmetric electrolyte in combination.
 Fig. 5  (a–d) Schematic illustrations of four configurations using a BPM and acid–base asymmetric electrolyte for water electrolysis: (a) acidic cathode/AEM–CEM/alkaline anode, (b) alkaline cathode/AEM–CEM/acid anode, (c) acidic cathode/CEM–AEM/alkaline anode, and (d) alkaline cathode/CEM–AEM/acidic anode. (e–h) Theoretical I–V curves of the four configurations corresponding to (a–d). 

Fig. 5a shows the optimal device configuration which has been demonstrated to be able to harvest the ENE. In this configuration, the catholyte is acidic while the anolyte is alkaline, and the AEM surface of the BPM faces the acidic compartment while the CEM surface faces the alkaline side. In this case, the BPM operates under forward bias, during which the counter-ions of the acid and alkali (i.e., X− and M+) can penetrate into the BPM under the applied voltage, thereby providing ionic transport. In addition, the cathodic acidic HER and anodic alkaline OER reactions are in their favourable conditions, corresponding the standard potentials of 0 V and 0.401 V, respectively. Therefore, the theoretical potential required for overall water electrolysis to H2 and O2 is only 0.401 V (Fig. 5e).11,20 The device configuration in Fig. 5b exchanges the electrolyte (i.e., alkaline catholyte and acidic anolyte) while maintaining the order of the BPM. Then, the BPM is still working under forward bias, while now it is H+ and OH− instead of the counter-ions (X− and M+) that transport into the membrane. The standard potentials for the alkaline HER and acidic OER are −0.828 V and 1.229 V, respectively, which leads to a theoretical potential of 2.057 V for water electrolysis (Fig. 5f). However, the formation of H2O by bulk neutralization of H+ and OH− at the interface of BPM electrodes could contribute to a membrane potential of 0.828 V for fuel cell or battery systems.28Fig. 5c shows a configuration that exchanges the order of the BPM while maintaining the electrolyte (i.e., acidic cathode/CEM–AEM/alkaline anode). In this circumstance, the HER and OER reactions are favourable with the potentials being 0 V and 0.401 V, respectively. However, the BPM is operating under reverse bias, where water dissociation occurred to sustain the ionic transport, which requires a potential of 0.828 V. Therefore, the actual overall potential is also 1.229 V (Fig. 5g).8 The fourth device configuration shown in Fig. 5d is assembled in a double-reverse condition where both the BPM and electrolyte are exchanged (i.e., alkaline cathode/CEM–AEM/acidic anode). Consequently, a total voltage of 2.885 V is required to initiate the overall water electrolysis (Fig. 5h).11

Table 1 compares the electrode reaction, membrane reaction, and theoretical voltages of water electrolysis in the four device configurations discussed above. It can be seen that both configurations in Fig. 5a and c are capable of harvesting the ENE. However, the ENE in Fig. 5c is offset by the dissociation of water in the BPM. Even though the required voltage is not decreased, this configuration has an advantage that the pH values in each compartment can be maintained, since H+ and OH− are continuously supplied from water dissociation. On the contrary, intermittent refilling of the acid and base is required for the configuration in Fig. 5a for long-lasting application. The configurations in Fig. 5b and d cannot harvest the ENE since no H+ and OH− are consumed on the electrodes. Therefore, special attention should be paid to the device configuration when applying an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte and BPM to harvest the ENE for energy-efficient devices.
Table 1 Electrode reactions, standard potentials, and overall voltages of water electrolysis in the four device configurations




Configuration
Cathode
Anode
Membrane
Overall potential (V)
Is there ENE?




Note: the acid pH = 0 and alkali pH = 14, and here just the theoretical potentials are calculated, ignoring the overpotentials.





Fig. 5a

2H+ + 2e− = H2
4OH− = 2H2O + O2 + 4e−
Ion transport
−0.401
Yes



E = 0 V

E = 0.401 V



Fig. 5b

2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−
2H2O = 4H++ O2 + 4e−
H+ and OH− transport
−2.057
No



E = −0.828 V

E = 1.229 V



Fig. 5c

2H+ + 2e− = H2
4OH− = 2H2O + O2 + 4e−
H2O = H+ + OH−
−1.229
Yes (but it is offset by water dissociation)



E = 0 V

E = 0.401 V

E = −0.828 V



Fig. 5d

2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−
2H2O = 4H++ O2 + 4e−
H2O = H+ + OH−
−2.885
No



E = −0.828 V

E = 1.229 V

E = −0.828 V




Since BPMs usually have relatively high electrical resistance, which induces low power density, some attempts have tried to directly use a single ion-exchange membrane. For example, Weng et al.29 fabricated an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte electrolyzer using a proton-exchange membrane (PEM) and achieved water splitting at a voltage as low as 0.8 V. However, the PEM permits the crossover of H+, leading to the neutralization of the alkali and a gradual loss of the pH difference. Weng et al.30 have tried to alleviate the crossover of H+ by adding a high-solubility salt in both the acid and base compartments; because of the high concentration the salt ions have a much higher migration rate (∼40 times) than that of H+ and OH−. However, the addition of a large amount of salt in the electrolytes could not eventually solve the crossover issue, but also largely increases the cost. Besides, Wang et al.9,31 reported acid–base hybrid devices employing a ceramic lithium super-ionic conductor film (LISICON) as the separator to decouple the acid and base electrolytes, where only the transmission of lithium ions is permitted (as illustrated in Fig. 6a). However, ceramic ion-exchange membranes are brittle and high-cost and usually have low ionic conductivity in aqueous solutions, thus largely restricting their applications. Recently, a three-electrolyte configuration was developed by placing a neutral salt solution compartment between the acid and alkali compartments.6,32–34 As shown in Fig. 6b, the BPM is no longer necessary in this configuration, where an AEM and a CEM are used to separate the electrolytes. Herein, the ionic transport during the charging and discharging processes is accomplished by the movement of salt ions. As a result, the serious issues of bubbling and delamination of the BPM under forward bias and the water dissociation under reverse bias can be avoided.
 Fig. 6  (a) An acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device using a ceramic ion-exchange membrane. (b) A three-compartment configuration using a salt solution compartment to separate the acid–base asymmetric electrolyte, which avoids the use of a BPM. (c) A flow cell configuration design in an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device, which helps in maintaining the pH difference and enables large-scale application. (d) A membrane-less microfluidic cell configuration of an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device. 
In addition, some other strategies have been explored to optimize the device configuration. For example, a conventional redox flow cell design was introduced for an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device,7 where the anolyte and/or catholyte can be refilled/refreshed by external circulation (Fig. 6c). Therefore, on the one hand, the pH difference between the two electrolytes can be maintained; on the other hand, water-soluble pH-dependent redox molecules can be used as a flow electrolyte. Furthermore, the flow cell configuration enables the implementation of large-scale application. Besides, a membrane-free acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device was fabricated using a microfluidic cell structure,35 where the acid and alkali electrolytes are injected through two adjacent micro channels (Fig. 6d). Since the diameter of the micro channels is tiny and the flow rates of the electrolyte streams are high, the acid and base solutions will not mix together during a short contact period. In addition, it is reported that OH− ions have a higher density than H+, and therefore H+ ions can float in the upper layer while OH− ions are in the lower layer, limiting the diffusion of the two streams.
3. ENE-assisted electrochemical energy devices
As demonstrated, the ENE can be properly harvested by selecting suitable pH-sensitive electrochemical reactions, using decoupled acid–base asymmetric electrolytes, and designing appropriate device configurations. Some efforts have been devoted to applying the ENE in various aqueous electrochemical devices, which can be mainly categorized into fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, and electrolytic cells. In this section, specific examples of these devices will be discussed.
3.1 ENE-assisted fuel cells

H2/O2 fuel cell. 
The H2/O2 fuel cell is ideal green energy since it is carbon-free and almost zero-emission (generating a net product of water), which operates based on the half reactions of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR). Hydrogen fuel cells usually run either in an acidic or an alkaline condition, which are correspondingly called acidic fuel cells and alkaline fuel cells, respectively. In an acidic fuel cell, H2 is oxidized to protons on the anode with releasing electrons (Eθ = 0 V), which transport to the cathode via an external circuit to reduce O2 to H2O (Eθ = 1.229 V). In an alkaline fuel cell, H2 is oxidized to H2O on the anode (Eθ = −0.828 V) while O2 is reduced to OH− on the cathode (Eθ = 0.401 V). In both situations, the theoretical cell potential is 1.229 V.
Since both the ORR and HOR are pH-sensitive, a decoupled acid–base electrolyte can be used with the ORR taking palace in an acidic electrolyte (Eθ = 1.229 V) and the HOR occurring in an alkaline electrolyte (Eθ = −0.828 V). Consequently, a theoretical cell voltage of 2.057 V will be yielded due to the contribution of the ENE. Cohen et al.4 first demonstrated such a type of fuel cell with high voltage by fabricating a planar membrane-less microchannel architecture in 2005. In addition, Ünlü et al.28 also tried to fabricate an H2/O2 fuel cell using an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte, but the BPM in their device was arranged under reverse bias, and thus it did not achieve a high output voltage. Fig. 7 illustrates the proper configuration to design a fuel cell device that can take full advantage of the ENE. However, manufacturing an efficient and high-performance fuel cell in this configuration might be challenging, since it requires advanced electrocatalysts (e.g., noble metals) at the acidic cathode for the ORR to promote the sluggish kinetics.
 Fig. 7  An optimal configuration to design a H2/O2 fuel cell with a high output voltage by harvesting the ENE: the catholyte should be acidic while the anolyte should be alkaline, separated by a BPM with the AEM side facing the catholyte compartment and the CEM side facing the anolyte compartment. When the pH gradient is 14, the theoretical cell voltage is about 2.057 V. 


H2 or O2 ENE-battery. 
According to the Pourbaix diagram of water, it is theoretically possible to design a battery to harvest the ENE by using only one hydrogen (acidic HER cathode and alkaline HOR anode) or oxygen (acidic ORR cathode and alkaline OER anode) electrode, as illustrated in Fig. 8. For example, by decoupling the HOR in alkali with the HER in acid, the electrochemical cell can deliver a theoretical voltage of 0.828 V provided that the pH gradient is 14 (Fig. 8a). Bhat et al.36 demonstrated such a device (Fig. 9a) that can deliver a peak power density of 70 mW cm−2 at a peak current density of 160 mA cm−2 (Fig. 9b and c). During this process, hydrogen is consumed on the anode, while an equal amount of hydrogen will be reproduced on the cathode; therefore, the overall reaction is a net acid–base neutralization reaction (H+ + OH− = H2O), which only consumed acid and base in the catholyte and anolyte, respectively. Therefore, the device ideally verified the feasibility of harnessing the ENE. Similarly, Weng et al. demonstrated a pH-differential oxygen ENE-battery consisting of an acidic OER at the cathode and an alkaline ORR at the anode that is capable of harvesting the ENE directly with a net acid–base neutralization reaction.37 We thus would call these two electrochemical power devices an H2 ENE battery and O2 ENE battery, respectively.
 Fig. 8  The device configuration and electrode reactions to design pH-differential hydrogen (a) and oxygen (b) ENE-batteries. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Scheme of a fuel-exhaling fuel cell (pH-differential hydrogen ENE-battery) harnessing the energy of acid–base neutralization. (b) Polarization curve for the hydrogen ENE-battery, with an H2 flow rate of 100 mL min−1. (c) Galvanostatic polarization at the peak current density (160 mA cm−2) with H2 quantification at the cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 

3.2 ENE-assisted batteries
Even though aqueous batteries have the merits of high safety, low cost, and environmental friendliness, they still face big challenges in terms of low operating voltage and energy density for practical application. The most critical issue is the aforementioned narrow electrochemical window due to water decomposition in aqueous electrolytes. In addition, the inherent low specific capacity in conventional electrodes also limits the energy density of aqueous batteries. According to the Pourbaix diagram of water, the voltage operating window of aqueous electrochemical devices can be broadened by coupling an alkaline anode with an acidic cathode, since the ENE can contribute a considerable voltage (0.828 at ΔpH = 14) to the battery without sacrificing water decomposition. In this regard, various novel materials and/or new electrode reactions have been recently introduced into the aqueous battery system. Furthermore, if the electrode reactions are pH-sensitive, a high cell voltage and energy density can be attained through the design of an acid–base asymmetric electrochemical cell. Inspired by these points, several high-voltage acid–base asymmetric electrolyte aqueous batteries have been developed recently. For example, Chan's group has conducted a series of pioneering work applying acid–base asymmetric electrolytes in various rechargeable batteries such as PbO2/MHx batteries and vanadium–MH batteries.5–7,10
Recently, Zn-based batteries have attracted much attention in the manufacture of aqueous batteries due to the high negative redox potential (−1.199 V vs. SHE). Our group first demonstrated an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte Zn–H2O battery through a combination of an alkaline Zn anode and acidic HER cathode.15 Thanks to the contribution of the ENE and the pretty negative potential of Zn oxidation, this device achieved simultaneous hydrogen production and electricity generation, which showed an open circuit potential (OCP) of 1.249 V, an energy density up to 934 W h kg−1, and a hydrogen production rate of 0.166 mL s−1 (Table 2). To boost the output voltage, Thotiyl's group connected an acid–base asymmetric Zn–H2O battery with a typical Zn–ferricyanide battery in tandem.38 The tandem battery system can simultaneously generate hydrogen fuel and electric power with a high voltage and high energy density, in that it demonstrated an output voltage of ∼3 V, an energy density up to 16 W h L−1, and a hydrogen production rate of ∼932 μmol h−1. Compared with the Zn–H2O battery, the Zn–air battery has a higher output voltage since the ORR has a higher standard potential than the HER. However, the conventional Zn–air battery normally operates in an alkaline solution with a theoretical voltage limit of about 1.6 V. By using a bipolar membrane to decouple the ORR in acidic electrolyte, the Zn–air battery can appreciably increase the open circuit voltage (VOC) and operating voltage.16,17 As illustrated in Fig. 10, one can see that the acid–base asymmetric electrolyte Zn–air battery holds a much higher theoretical cell voltage (2.55 V) than that of the conventional one (1.65 V). The device practically delivered a VOC of 2.25 V and a specific energy density of 1522 W h kg−1. Notably, other electrochemical reduction reactions, such as the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), and redox organic molecule reduction (e.g., quinone), can also be used in combination with the Zn anode to assemble ENE-assisted high-voltage acid–base asymmetric Zn batteries (Table 2).18,19 Furthermore, electroorganic synthesis can also be realized by coupling the Zn anode with some reduction reactions. For example, Thotiyl's group achieved the reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline and oxalic acid to glycolic acid, respectively, by coupling Zn anode with corresponding cathode reactions in acid–base asymmetric Zn batteries.39 They also assembled an acid–base asymmetric Zn–quinone battery, which can produce hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) through the mediated reduction of molecular oxygen on the anthraquinone electrode.40 These types of Zn batteries not only achieved power generation but also spontaneous production of valuable products, opening up new avenues in electroorganic synthesis and the sustainable energy landscape.
Table 2 A summary of the theoretical and experimental performance of various acid–base asymmetric electrolyte aqueous Zn batteries




Battery type
Reaction
Standard potential (V, vs. SHE)
Theoretical cell potential (V)
Practical performance
Ref.


Open circuit potential (OCP) (V)
Energy density (W h kg−1)




Note: the theoretical cell potential is calculated under standard conditions (i.e., 1.0 M H+ and 1.0 M OH−), while some of the acid and base concentrations for the practical performance are higher than 1.0 M.




Anode: Zn + 4OH− = Zn(OH)42− + 2e−
−1.199
—
—
—




Zn–H2O
HER: 2H+ + 2e− = H2
0
1.199
1.249
934

15



Zn–air
ORR: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− = 2H2O
1.229
2.428
2.25
1522

16



2.11
1279

18



Zn–CO2
CO2RR: CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− = CO + H2O
−0.53
0.669
1.5
—

19



Zn–MnO2
MnO2 + 4H+ + 2e− = Mn2+ + 2H2O
1.224
2.423
2.44
1503

41



2.45
—

42



2.83
1621.7

34



Zn–KMnO4
MnO4− + 8H+ + 5e− = Mn2+ + 4H2O
1.507
2.706
2.8
308 mA h g−1

42



Zn–PbO2
PbO2 + SO42− + 4H+ + 2e− = PbSO4 + 2H2O
1.69
2.89
2.8
33.7

43



3.09
252.39

21



Zn–quinone
BQ + 2H+ + 2e− = QH2
0.735
1.934
1.95
567.5

18





 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the conventional Zn–air battery (ZAB), which holds a theoretical cell voltage of 1.65 V (a), and the asymmetric electrolyte Zn–air battery (AEZAB), which holds a theoretical cell voltage of 2.55 V (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, chemical conversion type electrodes have drawn much attention in developing high energy density aqueous batteries since they have much higher specific capacity than the conventional ion insertion/de-insertion materials. MnO2 is such a type of cathode material which undergoes dissolution/deposition chemical conversion (MnO2 + 4H+ + 2e− = Mn2+ + 2H2O) under acidic solution during charging and discharging. Very recently, a set of acid–base asymmetric electrolyte Zn–MnO2 batteries was developed.34,41,42 For example, Liu et al.41 reported an asymmetric Zn–MnO2 using a BPM to separate the acidic and alkaline electrolytes, which showed a VOC as high as 2.44 V and a high energy density of 1503 W h kg−1. However, the BPM is relatively expensive and usually has high electrical resistance, which hinders practical applications. Yadav et al.42 prepared a gelled alkaline electrolyte to replace the BPM to set up high-voltage asymmetric aqueous Zn–MnO2 and Zn–KMnO4− batteries, respectively. In addition, Zhong et al.34 fabricated an asymmetric Zn–MnO2 battery by adopting the three-compartment configuration. As shown in Fig. 11, the acidic catholyte and the alkaline anolyte were separated by a neutral solution (K2SO4) using an AEM and a CEM. During discharging, the SO42− ions in the acidic electrolyte diffuse through the AEM and the K+ ions in the alkaline electrolyte diffuse through the CEM into the neutral compartment. During charging, the SO42− and K+ ions in the neutral chamber diffuse back to the acidic and alkaline electrolyte, respectively. Such a Zn–MnO2 battery can even display a VOC of 2.83 V and a specific energy density of 1621.7 W h kg−1 with pretty good stability, indicating that the aqueous battery can be remarkably improved by virtue of ENE assistance. By adopting the three-compartment configuration, Su's group43 and our group21 have recently reported high-voltage Zn–PbO2 hybrid batteries by coupling an alkaline Zn anode with an acidic PbO2 cathode. We demonstrated that the Zn–PbO2 hybrid battery can deliver an impressively high open-circuit voltage of 3.09 V and an operating voltage of 2.95 V at 5 mA cm−2.21
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the cell structure and chemical reactions at the cathode and anode during the discharge and charge of the aqueous decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery (DZMB) based on decoupled reactions in acidic and alkaline electrolytes separated by a neutral electrolyte in the central chamber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 
3.3 ENE-assisted supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are another type of electrochemical energy storage device widely studied due to their high power density and long cycle life; however, the relatively low energy density appears as the main factor hampering the applications of aqueous supercapacitors. According to the formula: E = 1/2CV2, there are two directions, i.e., increasing the capacitance (C) and/or the cell voltage (V), to boost the energy density. Therefore, if operating aqueous supercapacitors in decoupled acid–base asymmetric electrolytes, the OER at the acidic cathode and the HER at the alkaline anode can be largely inhibited, resulting in enlarging the potential gap between the OER and HER (i.e., cell potential window). For instance, Wang et al.44 developed an acid–base asymmetric supercapacitor using active carbon-based electrode materials and dual electrolytes (pH = 1 and pH = 10) separated by bipolar ion-exchange membranes (AEM and CEM). The supercapacitor delivered a high cell discharge voltage up to 1.77 V and a specific energy of 12.7 W h kg−1. However, as we discussed above, even though the operating potential window can be significantly extended, the ENE will not be harvested in this situation since there is no formation of H2O. Besides, the H+ and OH− ions are “consumed” temporarily by the absorption of porous capacitive electrodes (Fig. 12a), which will then be reversibly released during discharging. In this situation, acid–base asymmetric electrolytes can be simply equivalent to an electrolyte with a stable potential widow higher than 1.229 V.
 Fig. 12  Schematics of the device configuration of acid–base asymmetric supercapacitors. (a) The left one using capacitive electrodes (e.g., porous carbon) cannot harvest the ENE, while the operating voltage window can still be extended; and (b) the right one using pH-sensitive redox electrodes (e.g., RuO2) can harvest the ENE. 
Compared to capacitor-type electrode materials (i.e., carbon), pseudocapacitive and redox-active electrodes can provide much higher capacitance. More importantly, if the redox-active electrodes are pH-sensitive, the ENE can also be harvested by constructing an acid–base asymmetric supercapacitor (Fig. 12b), contributing to much higher capacitance and in turn higher energy density. For example, Thotiyl's group fabricated an ENE-assisted acid–base asymmetric supercapacitor using RuO2 as electrodes, which delivered a cell voltage of 2.0 V and an energy density as high as ∼120 W h kg−1.45 In addition, Wu et al.46 reported an acid–base asymmetric Zn hybrid capacitor by applying Zn as the negative electrode and CNTs as the positive electrode, and dual electrolytes of 3.0 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4, which showed a stable potential window of 2.4 V. Table 3 summarises the different types of acid–base asymmetric supercapacitors.
Table 3 A summary of acid–base asymmetric supercapacitors




Supercapacitor type
Electrode material (anode/cathode)
Operating voltage window (V)
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Notes
Ref.




Electric double layer supercapacitor
Active carbon/active carbon
1.77
12.7
No harvesting of the ENE

44



Pseudo-supercapacitor
RuO2/RuO2
2.0
120
ENE-assisted

45



Hybrid supercapacitor
Zn/CNTs
2.4
—
No harvesting of the ENE

46





3.4 ENE-assisted electrolysis

Overall water splitting. 
Electrochemical water splitting by renewable energy provides a clean and promising approach to produce hydrogen gas. Overall water splitting involves two half reactions of the cathodic HER and anodic OER. Despite the fact that tremendous efforts have been made recently in developing advanced electrocatalysts for boosting the kinetics of the HER and OER, the voltage applied for overall water electrolysis is always larger than 1.229 V in a conventional electrolyzer with a symmetric electrolyte. Since the HER and OER reactions are pH-sensitive, the ENE can be harvested to assist water electrolysis. If the pH gradient between the anolyte and catholyte is 14, theoretically only a potential of 0.401 V is required, which has been elucidated elaborately in the above sections. However, the early application of acid–base asymmetric electrolytes for water splitting uses a reverse bias configuration (i.e., the configuration in Fig. 5c), where the ENE is compensated by the required voltage for water dissociation in the BPM, and thus the onset potential for overall water splitting was still higher than 1.229 V.8 Thereafter, Weng et al. reported an applied voltage for overall water splitting of less than 1.229 V by decoupling the acid–base electrolyte using a PEM.29 In addition, splitting water at a voltage lower than 1.229 V was also reported in an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte separated by a ceramic ion-exchange membrane,9 a microfluidic cell,35 and a three-electrolyte configuration,32 thanks to the fact that the ENE can be harvested to assist water electrolysis for H2 and O2 generation. However, these membranes/configurations suffer from limitations such as ion crossover, high cost, low energy density, poor long-term stability, weak mechanical strength, and complicated processes.
Recently, our group reported ENE-assisted energy-saving overall water splitting using an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte with a BPM operating under forward bias (i.e., the configuration in Fig. 5a).11,20 We first demonstrated an acid–base asymmetric electrolyzer using a bifunctional electrocatalyst of three-dimensional precious metal-free Ni2P nanorods (Fig. 13a). Under a pH difference of 14, an onset potential of 0.79 V and a potential of 1.12 V at 10 mA cm−2 were achieved for overall water splitting (Fig. 13b).11 We also investigated the effect of the acid and base concentrations, and compared the performance with conventional symmetric acid and base configurations and a double-reverse configuration (alkaline HER/CEM–AEM/acidic OER). As shown in Fig. 13c, the pH value increased for the catholyte while it decreased for the anolyte under a water splitting current density of 10 mA cm−2, implying that H+ and OH− were consumed during water splitting, being consistent with the working principle of ENE. The voltages required for a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in the conventional symmetric and reverse configurations were much higher than the acid–base asymmetric ones (Fig. 13d). Then, to further promote the performance, we rationally synthesized a bifunctional electrocatalyst of a Ru–RuO2/CNT hybrid, which showed pH-universal excellent electrochemical performance towards the HER and OER. By applying the Ru–RuO2/CNT electrocatalyst in an acid–base asymmetric water splitting electrolyzer, it achieved an onset potential of 0.65 V and a potential of 0.73 V at 10 mA cm−2 for overall water splitting (Fig. 13e). Notably, the asymmetric electrolyzer can be directly driven by a 1.0 V solar photovoltaic panel (Fig. 13f), and it demonstrated considerable long-term stability in that the applied potential for 10 mA cm−2 remained stable up to 30 h of electrolysis.20
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte water splitting device assisted by electrochemical neutralization. (b) Two-electrode overall water-splitting measurements with a Ni2P NR cathode in 0.5 M H2SO4, a Ni2P NR anode in 1 M KOH and a bipolar membrane in the middle. (c) pH variation of the anolyte and catholyte at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 during a stability test for 50 h. (d) The measured cell voltages at 10 mA cm−2 under different combinations of electrolytes, where (−) and (+) denote the negative and positive electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The polarization curves of Ru–RuO2/CNT as both anode and cathode catalysts in the 3A electrolyzer. (f) Digital graph of the 3A electrolyzer being driven by a 1.0 V solar panel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd. 


Coupling the HER with other oxidation reactions. 
The sluggish kinetics and high potential of the OER greatly lower the hydrogen production efficiency from water splitting. Therefore, efforts have been made to replace the OER by the oxidation reaction of some small molecules, such as urea oxidation (UOR) and hydrazine (N2H4) oxidation (HzOR). We demonstrated that coupling the HER with these oxidation reactions in an asymmetrical-electrolyte cell can significantly reduce the energy consumption and even generate additional electricity. For instance, a series of acid–base asymmetric electrolyzers coupling the HER in acidic electrolyte and the UOR in alkaline electrolyte were reported.12,14 The applied voltage for hydrogen production was appreciably decreased to 0.54–0.96 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Table 4). Furthermore, by coupling the HER with the HzOR, the electrochemical cell can not only produce hydrogen spontaneously but also generate electricity simultaneously, and thus can be regarded as a fuel cell.13 When using 1.0 M KOH containing 0.5 M N2H4 as the anolyte and 0.5 M H2SO4 as the catholyte, the fuel cell released an open circuit potential (OCP) of 0.7 V and delivered a maximum power density of 6.6 mW cm−2 at a current density of 32.4 mA cm−2, and the hydrogen production rate was calculated to be higher than 180 μmol h−1. Varhade et al.47 also reported a hydrazine fuel cell coupling the acidic HER and alkaline HzOR, which demonstrated a peak power density of ∼70 mW cm−2 at a current density of ∼195 mA cm−2 and a hydrogen production rate of ∼70 mL h−1. Their term ‘the electromotive force of the inherent heat’ (heat of neutralization) is, essentially, the electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE).
Table 4 A comparison of hydrogen production from overall water splitting and coupling the HER with other reactions using an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte




Reactions
Standard potential (V, vs. SHE)
Theoretical overall potential (V) at ΔpH = 14
Practical overall potential
Ref.


Onset potential (V)
Potential at 10 mA cm−2 (V)




Note: the coupling of the HER and HzOR (HER–HzOR fuel cell) can produce hydrogen spontaneously, and generate electricity simultaneously. Hence, the data of the open circuit potential (OCP) and power density is provided.




Acidic HER: 2H+ + 2e− = H2(g)
0










Alkaline OER: OH− = 2H2O + O2 + 4e−
0.401
0.401 (HER and OER)
0.79
1.12

11



0.65
0.73

20



Alkaline UOR: CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− = N2 + 5H2O + CO2 + 6e−
−0.456
−0.456 (HER and UOR)
—
0.96

12



—
0.54

14



Alkaline HzOR: N2H4 + 4OH− = N2 + 4H2O + 4e−
−1.158 V
−1.158 (HER and HzOR)
0.7 (OCP)
6.6 mW cm−2 at 32.4 mA cm−2

13



1.2 (OCP)
70 mW cm−2 at 195 mA cm−2

47





In addition, the anodic OER can be replaced by organic oxidation reactions to produce some valuable products. For example, Itagi et al.48 fabricated an asymmetric electrolyzer by coupling the acidic HER and alkaline glucose oxidation, where multiple products such as glycolic acid (GA), tartronic acid (TA), and oxalic acid (OA) were detected from the oxidation of glucose. We recently reported two asymmetric-electrolyte electrolyzers by coupling the acidic HER with alkaline glucose oxidation or phenylcarbinol oxidation, which show the capability to convert glucose and phenylcarbinol to more value-added gluconate and benzaldehyde products, respectively.22,23 Both electrolyzers can deliver an electrolysis current of 10 mA cm−2 for producing value-added products in both electrodes at an applied voltage of lower than 0.75 V. These results may open a new avenue to maximize chemical yields with expending as little as possible electric energy for future sustainable development.


CO2 electrolysis. 
The electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) for converting CO2 to valuable products (e.g., CO and HCOOH) provides a promising way to store renewable energy and mitigate the greenhouse effect. Regardless of the enormous challenge in developing electrocatalysts to improve its activity and selectivity, the optimal electrolyte conditions for the CO2RR are very different from water oxidation (OER). In aqueous electrolyte, the CO2RR usually favours a neutral environment (e.g., KHCO3 solution), because CO2 tends to react with alkali with the formation of carbonate salt, which may impose severe mass-transport limitations, while, in acidic conditions, the high proton concentration significantly decreases the CO2 concentration and therefore favours the competing HER reaction. However, overall CO2 electrolysis in a neutral aqueous electrolyte typically requires a high applied voltage due to the unfavourable conditions of the OER.
Since a BPM can separate the electrolytes, asymmetric neutral/alkaline electrolyte electrolyzers were developed for CO2 electrolysis,49,50 allowing the half reactions to run in each optimal condition. The reactions for overall CO2 electrolysis (CO2RR in neutral electrolyte and OER in alkaline electrolyte) are shown as follows (eqn (30)–(32), assuming the product is CO), and therefore a theoretical voltage of about 0.931 V is required. For example, Vermaas et al.50 studied the difference in CO2 electrolysis using a Nafion membrane in a symmetric electrolyte (Fig. 14a) and a BPM in an asymmetric electrolyte (Fig. 14b), which revealed that the applied voltage in the asymmetric architecture is about 2.7 V for CO2 electrolysis, which is ∼1.1 V lower than that of the conventional symmetric electrolyte (3.8 V) (Fig. 14c), attributed to the assistance of the ENE and the fact that both electrode reactions are in optimal conditions. Notably, the BPM in most of the current studies using a neutral/alkaline asymmetric electrolyte is placed in a reverse order, where the ENE is compensated by water dissociation in the BPM for ionic conduction. Therefore, if running under forward bias, more energy will be saved for CO2 electrolysis.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of ion transport through Nafion (a) and a BPM (b) in asymmetric electrolyte CO2 electrolysis. (c) The difference in the I–V curve between using Nafion and the BPM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Cathode: CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− = CO + H2O Eθ = −0.53 V vs. SHE(30)
Anode: 4OH− = O2 + 2H2O + 4e− Eθ = 0.401 V vs. SHE(31)
Overall: 2CO2 + 4H+ + 4OH− = 2CO + O2 + 4H2O Eθ = −0.931 V vs. SHE(32)

4. Challenges and future perspectives
It is proved that the potential energy stored in acid–base neutralization can be harvested in the form of electrical energy by designing an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte in aqueous electrochemical devices. The as-harvested energy, termed the electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE), provides a ready and effective way to improve the performance of aqueous devices. The output voltage and energy density of fuel cells, batteries, and supercapacitors can be greatly increased, while the applied voltage required for electrolytic cells can be largely minimized if the associated ENE can be efficiently harvested through elaborate cell design.
It may be envisioned that the ENE will have broad applications in various fields, including the development of energy-efficient electrochemical energy devices, industrial acid and alkali wastewater treatment, environment remediation, and electrochemical synthesis. Fig. 15 maps the promising potential applications of the ENE for future research. For example, acids and bases are widely used in various industrial processes such as chemical production, electroplating, dyeing, and papermaking, resulting in the generation of large amounts of waste acid and base solutions. The waste acid and base solutions are usually treated by direct neutralization and discharged into the environment, which not only causes serious environmental issues but is also a huge waste. It is estimated that the global annual waste acids are equivalent to 100 million tons of concentrated H2SO4; if all of them are neutralized, the generated heat will be approximately 1.11 × 1014 kJ (∼30 TW h) (see the calculations in the ESI‡). Hereinto, if the waste acid and base are utilized as acidic and alkaline electrolytes in an asymmetric electrochemical ENE cell, energy of about 44 TW h can be harvested if properly designed, not only achieving the treatment of industrial acid and alkali waste but also generating electrical power. Beyond waste acid and base treatment, the ENE system can also be used for seawater desalination, for example, Thotiyl's group recently reported spontaneous water desalination by designing a three-electrolyte configuration with harvesting the ENE as an electrical driving force.24 In addition, compared to high concentration electrolytes (e.g., water-in-salt electrolytes), the use of decoupled acid and base electrolytes provides a facile and effective way to significantly enlarge the stable potential window of aqueous devices. Therefore, the development of ENE devices may open a new avenue to design novel aqueous energy storage and conversion devices including fuel cells, supercapacitors and batteries to meet future increasing energy demand. Green and sustainable electro-organic synthesis is another promising application for the ENE system, since a variety of organic redox reactions can be readily coupled in the acid–base asymmetric system.
 Fig. 15  The potential applications of the electrochemical neutralization energy. 
However, at the current stage, ENE-assisted devices suffer from several bottlenecks including (1) complicated assembly processes due to the employment of acid–base asymmetric electrolytes; (2) relatively poor stability and durability due to the inevitable ion leakage/crossover and continuous consumption of acid and base; (3) poor charge and discharge reversibility in ENE-assisted batteries; (4) high internal electrical resistance of the device due to the use of a BPM or multiple ion-exchange membranes/compartments; (5) the relatively high cost of using a BPM; and (6) limited options of electrode reactions to pair a device due to the scarcity of pH-sensitive reactions.
As a little-known research topic, there are still numerous uncultivated topics that need to be further studied. First, although ENE-assisted devices have experimentally made considerable improvements in electrochemical performance, some detailed insights related to ENE devices are still not very clear. More research should be undertaken to investigate the effect of pH, electrolyte concentration, device size and dimensions, and other environmental conditions. Second, the BPM is one of the key components in ENE devices, which currently suffers from drawbacks such as high cost, high electrical resistance, non-perfect permselectivity, and inability to withstand strong acidic and alkaline conditions. The three-compartment configuration might be a good option to mitigate the above issues, but such a configuration will bring forth additional resistance and also complicate the device architecture. Hence, the development of high-performance bipolar membranes and a fundamental understanding of transport at the bipolar membrane are essential for future practical applications. Third, during the operation of an electrochemical cell, the acidity in the catholyte and the alkalinity in the anolyte tend to decrease due to the continuous consumption of protons and hydroxide ions, which leads to a decay in the performance. Therefore, a periodical refill or replacement of the acid and base solutions is required. A conventional flow cell structure might be introduced to solve this problem for practical applications. Fourth, although the ENE can be theoretically applied in any aqueous electrochemical devices in which pH-sensitive redox reactions are involved, how to best pair the pH-sensitive redox electrodes is beyond all doubt important to construct a device for harvesting the ENE. Last but not least, the development of efficient electrocatalysts for pH-sensitive electrocatalysis is a prerequisite to promote the performance of ENE-assisted systems. For practical and large-scale applications, electrocatalysts would be operated at a high current density and working voltage for electrolysis, and high-power density and energy density for batteries.
Despite the above promising applications and remaining challenges, the new research topic area of ENE is still in the early stage, and more studies are desired to put into this area. We believe there is still incredible room for further exploring this system; therefore, more and more efforts are highly desirable to contribute to this promising field. It is believed that ENE technology will open a new avenue to develop next-generation energy-efficient aqueous electrochemical energy devices to satisfy the ever-growing energy demand of modern society.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No.: 21875253 & 51903235). Y. Ding would like to thank Prof. Xia Chen at the University of Science and Technology of China for discussion of the properties of bipolar membranes, and Prof. Junxiang Chen at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, for discussion of the thermodynamics of acid–base neutralization.
Notes and references
Z. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Yang, X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 180–232 RSC .
F. L. Ramp, Nature, 1979, 278, 335–337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ayato, T. Okada and Y. Yamazaki, Electrochemistry, 2003, 71, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Cohen, D. J. Volpe, D. A. Westly, A. Pechenik and H. D. Abruña, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3544–3550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S.-A. Cheng and K.-Y. Chan, US Pat., US 7344801,  2008 Search PubMed .
H. Li, G. Weng, C. Y. V. Li and K.-Y. Chan, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9420–9425 CrossRef CAS .
G.-M. Weng, C.-Y. V. Li and K.-Y. Chan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1384–A1389 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, G. M. Geise, M. A. Hickner and T. E. Mallouk, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3017–3020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Dong, F. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3147–3150 RSC .

          H. Li, C.-Y. V. Li, G.-M. Weng and K.-Y. Chan, Electrochemically Enabled Sustainability: Devices, Materials and Mechanisms for Energy Conversion, CRC Press,  2014, ch. 11, pp. 429–467 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Chen, P. Cai and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4948–4954 RSC .
G. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Li, J. Jia, P. Cai and Z. Wen, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2603–2606 RSC .
G. Wang, J. Chen, P. Cai, J. Jia and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17763–17770 RSC .
G. Wang and Z. Wen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21087–21095 RSC .
P. Cai, Y. Li, G. Wang and Z. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3910–3915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cai, Y. Li, J. Chen, J. Jia, G. Wang and Z. Wen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 589–592 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cai, X. Peng, J. Huang, J. Jia, X. Hu and Z. Wen, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cai, G. Wang, K. Chen and Z. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 428, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peng, S. Ci, P. Shao, P. Cai and Z. Wen, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 3232–3236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Li, P. Cai, Y. Li and Z. Wen, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 576–583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, P. Cai, K. Chen, Y. Ding, L. Chen, W. Chen and Z. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23593–23597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Ci, X. Peng, J. Huang, P. Cai, Y. Ding and Z. Wen, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 54, 30–35 CrossRef .
D. Zheng, J. Li, S. Ci, P. Cai, Y. Ding, M. Zhang and Z. Wen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119178 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Bhat, D. Pandit, S. Ardo, R. Thimmappa, A. R. Kottaichamy, N. Christudas Dargily, M. C. Devendrachari and M. Ottakam Thotiyl, Joule, 2020, 4, 1730–1742 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chabi, K. M. Papadantonakis, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Freund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1320–1338 RSC .
H. Strathmann, J. J. Krol, H. J. Rapp and G. Eigenberger, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 125, 123–142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Oener, M. J. Foster and S. W. Boettcher, Science, 2020, 369, 1099–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ünlü, J. Zhou and P. A. Kohl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11416–11423 CrossRef .
S. X. Weng and X. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
G.-M. Weng, C.-Y. Vanessa Li and K.-Y. Chan, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 240–244 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Z. Guo, Y. Xia and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2204–2206 RSC .
M. Nazemi, J. Padgett and M. C. Hatzell, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1191–1194 CrossRef CAS .
G.-M. Weng, C.-Y. V. Li and K.-Y. Chan, Energy, 2019, 167, 1011–1018 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, B. Liu, J. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Zhong, Y. Li, C. Sun, X. Han, Y. Deng, N. Zhao and W. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 440–449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, J. Chen, Y. Fang, J. Ding, W. Peng and R. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 619–626 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Manzoor Bhat, R. Thimmappa, M. C. Devendrachari, A. R. Kottaichamy, S. P. Shafi, S. Varhade, M. Gautam and M. O. Thotiyl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-M. Weng, C.-Y. V. Li and K.-Y. Chan, J. Chem. Educ., 2019, 96, 1701–1706 CrossRef CAS .
T. Marichelvam, Z. Manzoor Bhat, R. Thimmappa, M. C. Devendrachari, A. R. Kottaichamy, V. N. Naranammalpuram Sundaram and M. O. Thotiyl, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16241–16246 CrossRef CAS .
M. Itagi, S. Battu, M. C. Devendrachari, Z. M. Bhat, A. R. Kottaichamy, D. Pandit, M. Gautam, R. Thimmappa, L. K. Sannegowda and M. O. Thotiyl, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15007–15014 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sudhakara, Z. M. Bhat, M. C. Devendrachari, A. R. Kottaichamy, M. Itagi, R. Thimmappa, F. Khan, H. M. N. Kotresh and M. O. Thotiyl, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 559, 324–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, X. Chi, Q. Han and Y. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903589 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Yadav, D. Turney, J. Huang, X. Wei and S. Banerjee, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2144–2146 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, Y. Sun, L. Gong, C. Ma, J. Wang and L. Su, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 020552 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. S. Chandrabose, Z. Jian, Z. Xing and X. Ji, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1853–A1858 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sur, A. R. Kottaichamy, Z. Manzoor Bhat, M. C. Devendrachari, R. Thimmappa and M. O. Thotiyl, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 712, 160–164 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu and K. Lian, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Varhade, Z. M. Bhat, R. Thimmappa, M. C. Devendrachari, A. R. Kottaichamy, S. Khaire, S. P. Shafi and M. O. Thotiyl, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 706, 553–557 CrossRef CAS .
M. Itagi, Z. M. Bhat, R. Thimmappa, D. Pandit, M. C. Devendrachari, L. K. Sannegowda and M. O. Thotiyl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 11284–11292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreier, F. Héroguel, L. Steier, S. Ahmad, J. S. Luterbacher, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17087 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vermaas and W. A. Smith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences (FJIRSM, CAS).‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs01239dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yichun Ding
	Yichun Ding received his PhD degree in Biomedical Engineering from South Dakota School of Mines & Technology (USA) in 2018. He then joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an associate professor. His research mainly focuses on high-performance polymers, electrospinning and electrospun nanofibers, flexible and wearable electronics, and electrochemical devices (batteries, electrolysis, etc.)

Pingwei Cai
	Pingwei Cai received his BSc and MSc degree from Nanchang Hangkong University, and PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Fujian Institute of Research of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences (FJIRSM, CAS), and he is now a postdoctoral researcher at FJIRSM, CAS. His research interests focus on electrocatalysis, Zn–air batteries, and aqueous batteries with high voltage and energy density.

Zhenhai Wen
	Zhenhai Wen received his MSc from the Beijing University of Technology in 2004 and PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, in 2008. He then worked as a lecturer at Nanchang Hangkong University. In 2009, he worked at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Germany as a Humboldt postdoctoral research scholar and then moved to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee as a postdoctoral researcher in 2010. He joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2015. The research topics in his group mainly include the design and synthesis of functional nanostructures and exploration of their applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems. He has published around 200 peer-reviewed articles with over 15000 citations, and has been selected in Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researchers in 2018 and 2019 from Clarivate Analytics.

Key learning points
(1) Concept of the electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE).
(2) Working principles and key components of ENE devices.
(3) Basic knowledge of the laws of thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and electrochemical devices (electrolysis, fuel cells, batteries, and supercapacitors).
(4) Principles and strategies to develop advanced aqueous energy devices with the capability of harvesting the ENE.


 	Fig. 1  The Pourbaix diagram of water with curves generated by the Nernst equation showing the theoretical potentials for the corresponding reactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  A brief history and the major breakthroughs towards the development of electrochemical neutralization energy (ENE) devices.	 
Neutralization reaction: H+ + OH−  H2O	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of acid–base neutralization through a chemical route (a) and an electrochemical route (b).	 
Cathode: [Ox]1 + H+ + e− = [Red]1	(5)
	(6)
Anode: [Red]2 + OH− − e− = [Ox]2 + H2O	(7)
	(8)
Overall: [Ox]1 + [Red]2 + H+ + OH− = [Red]1 + [Ox]2 + H2O	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
HER (cathode): 2H+ + 2e− = H2(g)	(13)
	(14)
OER (anode): 2H2O = 4H+ + O2(g) + 4e−	(15)
	(16)
HER (cathode): 2H2O + 2e− = H2(g) + 2OH−	(17)
	(18)
OER (anode): 4OH− = 2H2O + O2(g) + 4e−	(19)
	(20)
4H+ + 4OH− = 2H2(g) + O2(g) + 2H2O	(21)
Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = 0 V − 0.401 V = −0.401 V	(22)
6H2O = 2H2(g) + O2(g) + 4H+ + 4OH−	(23)
Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = −0.828 V − 1.229 V = −2.057 V	(24)

 	Fig. 4  The Pourbaix diagram of Zn and water with curves generated by the Nernst equation showing the theoretical potentials (assuming that the ion concentration is 1.0 M). The theoretical voltages of conventional and acid–base asymmetric Zn–air batteries are given, paired with the corresponding electrode reactions.	 
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = 0.401 V − (−1.199) V = 1.6 V	(28)
Ecell = ECathode − EAnode = 1.229 V − (−1.99) V = 2.428 V	(29)

 	Fig. 5  (a–d) Schematic illustrations of four configurations using a BPM and acid–base asymmetric electrolyte for water electrolysis: (a) acidic cathode/AEM–CEM/alkaline anode, (b) alkaline cathode/AEM–CEM/acid anode, (c) acidic cathode/CEM–AEM/alkaline anode, and (d) alkaline cathode/CEM–AEM/acidic anode. (e–h) Theoretical I–V curves of the four configurations corresponding to (a–d).	 



Fig. 5a
	2H+ + 2e− = H2	4OH− = 2H2O + O2 + 4e−	Ion transport	−0.401	Yes

E = 0 V	
E = 0.401 V

Fig. 5b
	2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−	2H2O = 4H++ O2 + 4e−	H+ and OH− transport	−2.057	No

E = −0.828 V	
E = 1.229 V

Fig. 5c
	2H+ + 2e− = H2	4OH− = 2H2O + O2 + 4e−	H2O = H+ + OH−	−1.229	Yes (but it is offset by water dissociation)

E = 0 V	
E = 0.401 V	
E = −0.828 V

Fig. 5d
	2H2O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−	2H2O = 4H++ O2 + 4e−	H2O = H+ + OH−	−2.885	No

E = −0.828 V	
E = 1.229 V	
E = −0.828 V

 	Fig. 6  (a) An acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device using a ceramic ion-exchange membrane. (b) A three-compartment configuration using a salt solution compartment to separate the acid–base asymmetric electrolyte, which avoids the use of a BPM. (c) A flow cell configuration design in an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device, which helps in maintaining the pH difference and enables large-scale application. (d) A membrane-less microfluidic cell configuration of an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte device.	 

 	Fig. 7  An optimal configuration to design a H2/O2 fuel cell with a high output voltage by harvesting the ENE: the catholyte should be acidic while the anolyte should be alkaline, separated by a BPM with the AEM side facing the catholyte compartment and the CEM side facing the anolyte compartment. When the pH gradient is 14, the theoretical cell voltage is about 2.057 V.	 

 	Fig. 8  The device configuration and electrode reactions to design pH-differential hydrogen (a) and oxygen (b) ENE-batteries.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Scheme of a fuel-exhaling fuel cell (pH-differential hydrogen ENE-battery) harnessing the energy of acid–base neutralization. (b) Polarization curve for the hydrogen ENE-battery, with an H2 flow rate of 100 mL min−1. (c) Galvanostatic polarization at the peak current density (160 mA cm−2) with H2 quantification at the cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 



Anode: Zn + 4OH− = Zn(OH)42− + 2e−	−1.199	—	—	—	

Zn–H2O	HER: 2H+ + 2e− = H2	0	1.199	1.249	934	
15

Zn–air	ORR: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− = 2H2O	1.229	2.428	2.25	1522	
16

2.11	1279	
18

Zn–CO2	CO2RR: CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− = CO + H2O	−0.53	0.669	1.5	—	
19

Zn–MnO2	MnO2 + 4H+ + 2e− = Mn2+ + 2H2O	1.224	2.423	2.44	1503	
41

2.45	—	
42

2.83	1621.7	
34

Zn–KMnO4	MnO4− + 8H+ + 5e− = Mn2+ + 4H2O	1.507	2.706	2.8	308 mA h g−1	
42

Zn–PbO2	PbO2 + SO42− + 4H+ + 2e− = PbSO4 + 2H2O	1.69	2.89	2.8	33.7	
43

3.09	252.39	
21

Zn–quinone	BQ + 2H+ + 2e− = QH2	0.735	1.934	1.95	567.5	
18


 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the conventional Zn–air battery (ZAB), which holds a theoretical cell voltage of 1.65 V (a), and the asymmetric electrolyte Zn–air battery (AEZAB), which holds a theoretical cell voltage of 2.55 V (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the cell structure and chemical reactions at the cathode and anode during the discharge and charge of the aqueous decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery (DZMB) based on decoupled reactions in acidic and alkaline electrolytes separated by a neutral electrolyte in the central chamber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematics of the device configuration of acid–base asymmetric supercapacitors. (a) The left one using capacitive electrodes (e.g., porous carbon) cannot harvest the ENE, while the operating voltage window can still be extended; and (b) the right one using pH-sensitive redox electrodes (e.g., RuO2) can harvest the ENE.	 

Electric double layer supercapacitor	Active carbon/active carbon	1.77	12.7	No harvesting of the ENE	
44

Pseudo-supercapacitor	RuO2/RuO2	2.0	120	ENE-assisted	
45

Hybrid supercapacitor	Zn/CNTs	2.4	—	No harvesting of the ENE	
46


 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of an acid–base asymmetric electrolyte water splitting device assisted by electrochemical neutralization. (b) Two-electrode overall water-splitting measurements with a Ni2P NR cathode in 0.5 M H2SO4, a Ni2P NR anode in 1 M KOH and a bipolar membrane in the middle. (c) pH variation of the anolyte and catholyte at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 during a stability test for 50 h. (d) The measured cell voltages at 10 mA cm−2 under different combinations of electrolytes, where (−) and (+) denote the negative and positive electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The polarization curves of Ru–RuO2/CNT as both anode and cathode catalysts in the 3A electrolyzer. (f) Digital graph of the 3A electrolyzer being driven by a 1.0 V solar panel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd.	 



Acidic HER: 2H+ + 2e− = H2(g)	0	
	
	
	

Alkaline OER: OH− = 2H2O + O2 + 4e−	0.401	0.401 (HER and OER)	0.79	1.12	
11

0.65	0.73	
20

Alkaline UOR: CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− = N2 + 5H2O + CO2 + 6e−	−0.456	−0.456 (HER and UOR)	—	0.96	
12

—	0.54	
14

Alkaline HzOR: N2H4 + 4OH− = N2 + 4H2O + 4e−	−1.158 V	−1.158 (HER and HzOR)	0.7 (OCP)	6.6 mW cm−2 at 32.4 mA cm−2	
13

1.2 (OCP)	70 mW cm−2 at 195 mA cm−2	
47


 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of ion transport through Nafion (a) and a BPM (b) in asymmetric electrolyte CO2 electrolysis. (c) The difference in the I–V curve between using Nafion and the BPM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− = CO + H2O Eθ = −0.53 V vs. SHE	(30)
4OH− = O2 + 2H2O + 4e− Eθ = 0.401 V vs. SHE	(31)
2CO2 + 4H+ + 4OH− = 2CO + O2 + 4H2O Eθ = −0.931 V vs. SHE	(32)

 	Fig. 15  The potential applications of the electrochemical neutralization energy.	 
Footnotes
† Dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences (FJIRSM, CAS).
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs01239d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
