Interface energetics in organo-metal halide perovskite-based photovoltaic cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE00168K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00168K
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1377-1381Interface energetics in organo-metal halide perovskite-based photovoltaic cells†

        
          
            Philip 
            Schulz
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Eran 
            Edri
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Saar 
            Kirmayer
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Gary 
            Hodes
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Cahen
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Antoine 
            Kahn
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. E-mail: phschulz@princeton.edu; kahn@princeton.edu
bDepartment of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
Received 
      16th January 2014
    , Accepted 13th February 2014First published on 13th February 2014AbstractDirect and inverse photoemission spectroscopies are used to determine materials electronic structure and energy level alignment in hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite layers grown on TiO2. The results provide a quantitative basis for the analysis of perovskite-based solar cell performance and choice of an optimal hole-extraction layer.

Broader context
In the past two years, methylammonium lead halides have generated considerable interest as candidates for the next generation of solid state hybrid photovoltaic devices. Named after their crystal structure, these hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite absorbers have recently been used in solar cells with power conversion efficiencies of more than 16%. The compounds are solution-processable and therefore interesting for low energy fabrication of large area photovoltaic platforms. They owe their suitability for high performance cells in part to a suitable optical band gap, a relatively large fraction of which is translated into a high open-circuit voltage, and respectable large charge carrier diffusion lengths, which result in high photocurrents. A key requirement for achieving maximum power conversion efficiencies is to match the electronic energy levels in the perovskite layer to those of the adjacent transport layers with minimal energy loss. We present the first direct measurements of the relevant electronic energy levels, conduction band and valence band, for a range of perovskite absorber materials. Moreover we determine the energy alignment of these levels with those of organic hole transport layers which allows us to provide guidelines for optimum interface engineering.

Methylammonium lead trihalide (MAPbX, X = Br3, I3, I3−xClx) perovskite absorbers have emerged as a promising class of materials for solid state photovoltaics.1–4 With efficiencies above 16% for MAPbX-based solar cells, these materials outperform all other hybrid organic–inorganic solar cell materials used at present.3–5 Recent studies describe improvements in film processing and device architecture,6–9 with results focusing on morphological and structural aspects.10 Yet, in spite of their crucial importance for device functionality, the energetics of these systems, i.e., energy positions of electronic bands and their alignment with energy levels of adjacent layers, have not been determined comprehensively. Here, we present the first direct spectroscopic measurements of valence and conduction bands and electronic band gap of a range of MAPbX absorber materials, as well as of their heterojunctions with organic hole transport layers (HTL). Our results illustrate the extent to which the interface energetics critically limit the open-circuit voltage.
In a conventional nanostructured cell design, the perovskite layer is sandwiched between the electron collecting cathode and a hole transport layer (HTL) with adjacent anode layer on top. Typical cells are comprised of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-covered glass substrates with a thin layer of dense titanium oxide (TiO2) as a hole blocking layer, a layer of perovskite absorber with or without a nanoporous electron collector, and an organic hole conductor, a common example of which is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD), as the HTL. Spiro-MeOTAD is usually employed in a doped and blended HTL for top-performing cells.7Fig. 1 shows an approximate energy diagram proposed for such a layer stack. While the position of the valence band maximum (VBM) has been determined for a selected perovskite1 the position of the perovskite conduction band minimum (CBM) relative to Evac is estimated by subtracting the optical band gap from the VBM. From this picture, efficient device operation is achieved if electrons are extracted from the perovskite into the conduction band of TiO2 while holes are transferred to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the spiro-MeOTAD, without significant energy loss. A direct and accurate determination of the perovskites’ electronic structures and of their interface energetics is therefore of paramount importance to establish a base of fundamental knowledge of the materials to help guide the design of high-performance structures. To date, relative positions of relevant energy levels have not been investigated for these materials, and potential interfacial effects have not been quantitatively considered. As an example, an interface dipole at the perovskite/HTL contact would change the position of the HOMO of the organic material relative to the VBM of the perovskite, which might impede hole extraction or lead to an energy loss in the hole transfer. Furthermore, recent performance improvement in perovskite-based solar cells, in which a fraction of the iodide is substituted by chloride (MAPbI3−xClx), has been attributed to an exceptionally high charge carrier diffusion length in the perovskite.11 Whether a difference in the position of the electronic bands in these films or in their alignment with the molecular levels of the adjacent HTL occurs and plays a role in the improvement has not been investigated. Finally, an absorber compound based on bromine (MAPbBr3) has been shown to yield VOC values above the ones reported for MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx when matched with a suitable HTL material.12 Yet the energetics of this Br-compound and of its interfaces with the HTL remain all but unknown. There is therefore a pressing need for quantitative information on these systems, and the present investigation, based on extensive direct and inverse photoemission measurements, begins to provide the electronic structure of materials and interfaces that is essential for the informed design of optimized perovskite-based devices.
 Fig. 1  Device structure and schematic energy diagram of a perovskite absorber (MAPbX)-based solar cell with an organic hole transport layer. The electronic structure of the device can be completed only through direct determination of the electron affinity (EA), ionization energy (IE) and electronic band gap (BG) of the MAPbX (X = I3, I3−xClx, Br3) film and of the HTL, and of the position of the relevant energy levels of these materials across all interfaces. Alignment between the conduction bands at the perovskite/oxide interface governs electron extraction, while alignment between the perovskite valence band and the HTL hole transport level (EHOMO) determines hole extraction. Energy level alignments are also subject to the formation of interfacial dipoles which lead to a shift in the vacuum level (ΔEvac). 
The direct experimental determination of the position of energy levels in perovskite layers and their interfaces in device-like structures is achieved with a combination of ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) for occupied states and inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES) for unoccupied states, performed on the same films in ultra-high vacuum. We present here measurements of valence and conduction bands, work function (WF) and band offsets with HTL for thin films of several of the perovskite compounds used in solar cells (MAPbI3, MAPbI3−xClx and MAPbBr3) on top of TiO2. Extensive precautions in film preparation and transfer (under nitrogen), following a well-established procedure were taken to minimize the impact of surface contaminants on the reported electronic structure. Layers of spiro-MeOTAD are incrementally evaporated in situ on the perovskite films, with thicknesses ranging from sub-monolayer to several nm, to precisely determine the interface molecular level alignment.
The direct and inverse photoemission spectra of the bare MAPbX surfaces are presented in Fig. 2 (black curves). For each compound: the left panel (UPS) displays the photoemission cut-off, from which the work function of the surface is extracted; the center panel (UPS) displays the top of the occupied states; and the right panel (IPES) displays the bottom of the unoccupied states. All energies are referenced to a common Fermi level (0 eV). The work function WF of the MAPbI3 and MaPbBr3 films is 4.0 eV while that of the MAPbI3−xClx film is slightly larger (4.1 eV). The position of the MAPbI3 VBM is at 1.4 eV below EF, in accord with a previous report,2 and that of MAPbI3−xClx is slightly closer to EF (1.3 eV). Both films exhibit the same ionization energy (IE) of 5.4 ± 0.1 eV. However, the MAPbBr3 VBM is at significantly larger binding energies (1.9 eV below EF), leading to an IE of 5.9 ± 0.1 eV. This is in stark contrast to earlier reports in which the MAPbBr3 VBM was assumed to be at the same binding energy as in MAPbI3, resulting in an erroneous CBM position as well.13 The IPES spectra yield CBM positions 0.3 eV above EF in MAPbI3 and 0.4 eV in MAPbI3−xClx and MAPbBr3, respectively. The electron affinity (EA), which is the difference between the WF and the CBM position, is therefore 3.7 ± 0.1 eV for the iodide and iodide-chloride and 3.6 ± 0.1 eV for the bromide-based perovskite film. These CBM positions also correspond to a close energy alignment with the CBM of the titania layer, measured here directly with inverse photoemission spectroscopy (see ESI Fig. S2†), and should therefore result in small band offsets for electrons at that interface. Hence, no barrier for electron extraction but a small loss in the open-circuit voltage (VOC) is expected in all three cases. Band bending in the perovskite film is expected to play only a minor role since our VBM positions are in good agreement with hard X-ray photoemission data probing the electronic structure of MAPbI3 at the TiO2 interface.14 Another major result extracted from the UPS/IPES measurements concerns the electronic transport gap. For MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx we find an electronic gap of 1.7 ± 0.1 eV, which is 0.1 eV larger than the reported optical gap of 1.6 eV.15 In the case of MAPbBr3, we find an electronic gap of 2.3 ± 0.1 eV, which is the same as the reported optical gap.16 Taking into account the reported exciton binding energies in the perovskites (up to 50 meV for the iodide/iodide-chloride and 76 meV for the bromine),17,18 the single particle gaps of the films measured here are only slightly larger than expected from optical measurements for the iodide-based perovskites and slightly smaller for the bromide perovskite. These values are summarized in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 2  UPS/IPES spectra of MAPbI3, MAPbI3−xClx and MAPbBr3 on TiO2, bare (black line) and with a spiro-MeOTAD overlayer (increasing thickness, 5–80 Å). Left panels: photoemission cut-off for the bare perovskite and as a function of HTL thickness, from which the vacuum level of the film is extracted. The work functions of the bare perovskite films are in the range of 4.0–4.1 eV. Middle panels: UPS spectra of the top of occupied states, i.e. VBM for the bare perovskites and HOMO for spiro-MeOTAD/perovskites as a function of HTL thickness. Right panels: IPES spectra of the bottom of unoccupied states of bare perovskites and 80 Å spiro-MeOTAD/perovskites. 
 Fig. 3  Experimentally determined energy level diagrams of interfaces between spiro-MeOTAD and MAPbX (X = I3, I3−xClx, Br3) films on TiO2. Each diagram provides the perovskite band gap, Fermi level position, electron affinity, ionization energy and work function. The HTL HOMO and LUMO positions with respect to the perovskite VBM and CBM underline key points of hole extraction and electron blocking, respectively. Minor band bending is observed throughout the spiro-MeOTAD film. 
The photoemission cut-off (left panels, Fig. 2) upon adsorption of the first 5 Å of the HTL spiro-MeOTAD on MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx remains basically at the same energy, indicating that the deposition of the organic layer does not induce a significant interface dipole (<50 meV). On the other hand, a shift is clearly detected in the case of MAPbBr3, indicating a ΔEvac = 0.15 eV downward vacuum level shift at that interface. The onset of the HTL HOMO is at 1.0 eV below EF for spiro-MeOTAD on MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx, and 1.1 eV on MAPbBr3. Note that in our study undoped spiro-MeOTAD has been used. With increasing HTL layer thickness, the HOMO shifts in all three cases to higher binding energies, by a maximum amount ranging from 100 meV for MAPbI3−xClx to 300 meV for the other compounds. In each case, the shift of the HOMO level is accompanied by a nearly identical shift of the vacuum level, yielding a constant IE of 5.0 ± 0.1 eV for spiro-MeOTAD. Note that the progressive HOMO (and LUMO) shift with increasing coverage is of little consequence here, as the deposition of a top contact metal in the completed device will likely alter this very slight “molecular level bending”. Yet, depositing an HTL film with thickness beyond the initial few monolayers is important to evaluate an eventual band bending in the perovskite layer under more realistic conditions. In that regard, no concomitant energy level shift, or band bending, is observed in the perovskite, as determined by tracking the Pb 4f core level as a function of HTL thickness via X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. S3,† ESI†). The onset of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the HTL is located at 2.2–2.3 eV above EF, corresponding to an EA of 1.5–1.6 eV for each spiro-MeOTAD layer and hence an electronic gap of 3.5 ± 0.1 eV is found, consistent with the reported optical gap of 3.1 eV corrected by the exciton binding energy.19
Summarizing these results, we establish the correct heterojunction band diagrams of the perovskite layers in contact with the undoped spiro-MeOTAD HTL film (Fig. 3). The HTL LUMO level is positioned 2 eV or more above the perovskite CBM, forming a large barrier for electrons and presumably preventing any unwanted electron collection in that layer.
Predictions for hole extraction at the interface can be drawn from the offset between the perovskite VBM and the HTL HOMO. In the three layer pairings studied here, the HTL HOMO level is found closer to EF than the perovskite VBM, with differences of the order of 0.4 eV for MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD, 0.3 eV for MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-MeOTAD and 0.8 eV for MAPbBr3/spiro-MeOTAD (Fig. 3). Therefore, none of these heterojunctions exhibits a hole extraction barrier. However, the fact that the HTL HOMO is at several 100 meV above the perovskite VBM constrains the built-in field and leads to thermionic losses for the collected holes.20 In terms of device functionality, these losses are reflected in a reduction in the attainable VOC. Hence, these VBM-HOMO offsets in principle limit the performance of the devices, in particular in the MAPbBr3 case where the energy loss for holes across the interface is 0.8 eV. The 0.1 eV difference between the pure iodide (0.4 eV offset) and Cl-substituted iodide perovskite (0.3 eV) could explain the slightly higher VOC obtained with the latter. Although the devices based on the spiro-MeOTAD HTL yield relatively high open-circuit voltages (1.0 V for MAPbI3, 1.1 V for MAPbI3−xClx and 0.9 V for MAPbBr3) (see ESI, Fig. S4† for spiro-MeOTAD on MAPbBr3),6,7 the energy offset (for a hole) between the perovskite VBM and the HTL HOMO shows that the device cannot reach VOC values closer to the actual perovskite band gap. In that regard, it was demonstrated that exchanging the HTL for one with a deeper HOMO level yields higher VOC values. Edri et al. used a soluble derivative of perylenedicarboximide (PDI), typically used as an acceptor molecule with deep lying HOMO in MAPbBr3-based solar cells, and achieved a significantly higher VOC = 1.3 V.12 In the present experiment, we use a derivative of this molecule, i.e. N,N′-dimethyl-3,4,9,10-perylenedicarboximide (PTCDI-C1), with similar IE and EA, deposited in ultra-high vacuum. The energetics of the MAPbBr3/PTCDI-C1 interface (see ESI, Fig. S5†) show that, in such a case, the HTL HOMO is actually slightly below the perovskite VBM, and thus does not limit the built-in field. Still, the net currents collected in the device are relatively low, presumably due to the small hole extraction barrier (0.3 eV) and the absence of an electron-blocking barrier that would prevent electrons in the perovskite CBM to leak into the HTL. This presumably leads to unwanted recombination in the PTCDI-C1, which dramatically affects the overall device performance. In a further study it was shown that with an alternative HTL material (4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl) as an acceptor molecule with a deep lying HOMO in MAPbBr3−xClx-based solar cells even higher VOC (>1.5 V) could be achieved.21
Our findings underline the need to optimize the match of materials in the emerging field of perovskite-based solar cells. Relatively low IE materials such as spiro-MeOTAD, which exhibit a non-optimum energy level alignment at interfaces with perovskite absorbers, limit the accessible VOC as the built-in field is constrained. Clear methods to alleviate these issues by tailoring the interface are yet to be refined and tested. Yet, the study at hand leads to the following conclusions. On the one hand, the CBM of a broad range of MAPbX perovskite films is in relatively fair energy alignment with the CBM of the underlying TiO2, although some additional interface engineering could be implemented in order to minimize losses in VOC at this junction. The top HTL material, on the other hand, should exhibit an ionization energy of 5.3 to 5.4 eV in the case of iodide and iodide-chloride-based perovskite compounds and 5.8–5.9 eV in the case of bromine materials in order to establish an optimized energy level alignment for hole extraction. At the same time the materials should exhibit a relatively low EA in order to insure electron blocking and minimize detrimental recombination events.
Acknowledgements
DC and AK thank the US–Israel Binational Science Foundation, Jerusalem, Israel, for partial support. At the Weizmann Institute this work was supported further by the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, the Israel National Nano-Initiative, the Nancy and Stephen Grand Center for Sensors and Security and a grant from Mr Martin Kushner Schnur. D.C. holds the Sylvia and Rowland Schaefer Chair in Energy Research. Work at Princeton University was further supported by the National Science Foundation (DMR-1005892).
Notes and references
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hodes, Science, 2013, 342, 317 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nature Photon., 2014, 8, 87–88 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4 DOI:10.1038/ncomms3761 .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014 10.1039/c3ee43822h .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 897 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cai, Y. Xing, Z. Yang, W.-H. Zhang and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1480 CAS .
R. Lindblad, D. Bi, B.-W. Park, J. Oscarsson, M. Gorgoi, H. Siegbahn, M. Odelius, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 648 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 032302 Search PubMed .
N. Kitazawa, Y. Watanbe and Y. Nakamura, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 3585 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirasawa, T. Ishihara, T. Goto, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Physica B, 1994, 201, 427 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23126 CAS .

          S. M. Sze and K. M. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, M. Kulbak, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 429–433 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional PES/IPES data and j–V characteristics. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00168kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
In the past two years, methylammonium lead halides have generated considerable interest as candidates for the next generation of solid state hybrid photovoltaic devices. Named after their crystal structure, these hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite absorbers have recently been used in solar cells with power conversion efficiencies of more than 16%. The compounds are solution-processable and therefore interesting for low energy fabrication of large area photovoltaic platforms. They owe their suitability for high performance cells in part to a suitable optical band gap, a relatively large fraction of which is translated into a high open-circuit voltage, and respectable large charge carrier diffusion lengths, which result in high photocurrents. A key requirement for achieving maximum power conversion efficiencies is to match the electronic energy levels in the perovskite layer to those of the adjacent transport layers with minimal energy loss. We present the first direct measurements of the relevant electronic energy levels, conduction band and valence band, for a range of perovskite absorber materials. Moreover we determine the energy alignment of these levels with those of organic hole transport layers which allows us to provide guidelines for optimum interface engineering.


 	Fig. 1  Device structure and schematic energy diagram of a perovskite absorber (MAPbX)-based solar cell with an organic hole transport layer. The electronic structure of the device can be completed only through direct determination of the electron affinity (EA), ionization energy (IE) and electronic band gap (BG) of the MAPbX (X = I3, I3−xClx, Br3) film and of the HTL, and of the position of the relevant energy levels of these materials across all interfaces. Alignment between the conduction bands at the perovskite/oxide interface governs electron extraction, while alignment between the perovskite valence band and the HTL hole transport level (EHOMO) determines hole extraction. Energy level alignments are also subject to the formation of interfacial dipoles which lead to a shift in the vacuum level (ΔEvac).	 

 	Fig. 2  UPS/IPES spectra of MAPbI3, MAPbI3−xClx and MAPbBr3 on TiO2, bare (black line) and with a spiro-MeOTAD overlayer (increasing thickness, 5–80 Å). Left panels: photoemission cut-off for the bare perovskite and as a function of HTL thickness, from which the vacuum level of the film is extracted. The work functions of the bare perovskite films are in the range of 4.0–4.1 eV. Middle panels: UPS spectra of the top of occupied states, i.e. VBM for the bare perovskites and HOMO for spiro-MeOTAD/perovskites as a function of HTL thickness. Right panels: IPES spectra of the bottom of unoccupied states of bare perovskites and 80 Å spiro-MeOTAD/perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 3  Experimentally determined energy level diagrams of interfaces between spiro-MeOTAD and MAPbX (X = I3, I3−xClx, Br3) films on TiO2. Each diagram provides the perovskite band gap, Fermi level position, electron affinity, ionization energy and work function. The HTL HOMO and LUMO positions with respect to the perovskite VBM and CBM underline key points of hole extraction and electron blocking, respectively. Minor band bending is observed throughout the spiro-MeOTAD film.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, additional PES/IPES data and j–V characteristics. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00168k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
