Recent progress in the synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2DT12266A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2DT12266A
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5089-5120Recent progress in the synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles

        
          
            C. N. R. 
            Rao
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            H. S. S. 
            Ramakrishna Matte
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rakesh 
            Voggu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            A. 
            Govindaraj
          
          
        
      ab
aChemistry and Physics of Materials Unit, CSIR Centre of Excellence and International Centre for Materials Science, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur P. O., Bangalore 560 064, India. E-mail: cnrrao@jncasr.ac.in;  Fax: (+91) 80-2208 2760
bSolid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, India
Received 
      25th November 2011
    , Accepted 27th January 2012First published on 19th March 2012AbstractNanoparticles probably constitute the largest class of nanomaterials. Nanoparticles of several inorganic materials have been prepared by employing a variety of synthetic strategies. Besides synthesizing nanoparticles, there has been considerable effort to selectively prepare nanoparticles of different shapes. In view of the great interest in inorganic nanoparticles evinced in the last few years, we have prepared this perspective on the present status of the synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles. This article includes a brief discussion of methods followed by reports on the synthesis of nanoparticles of various classes of inorganic materials such as metals, alloys, oxides chalcogenides and pnictides. A brief section on core–shell nanoparticles is also included.C. N. R. RaoC. N. R. Rao obtained his PhD degree from Purdue University (1958) and DSc degree from the University of Mysore (1961). He is the National Research Professor and Linus Pauling Research Professor at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research and Honorary Professor at the Indian Institute of Science (both at Bangalore). His research interests are mainly in the chemistry of materials. He is a member of many of the science academies and an honorary fellow of RSC. He is the recipient of the Einstein Gold Medal of UNESCO, the Hughes and Royal Medals of the Royal Society, the August Wilhelm von Hofmann medal of the German Chemical Society, the Dan David Prize for materials research and the first India Science Prize.H. S. S. Ramakrishna MatteH. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte obtained his BSc degree from Government College (Autonomous), Rajahmundry in 2006 and MS degree in chemical science in 2009 from the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research. He is completing his PhD work related to synthesis, characterization and properties of graphene and its inorganic analogues.Rakesh VogguRakesh Voggu received his MSc (Chemistry) degree from University of Hyderabad, India in 2005. He obtained his PhD degree in 2010 from Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR). He is presently working as a Research Associate at JNCASR and his work pertains to various aspects of nanocrystals and carbon nanostructures.A. GovindarajA. Govindaraj obtained his PhD degree from University of Mysore and is a Principal Scientific Officer at the Indian Institute of Science, and Honorary Associate Professor at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research. He works on different types of nanomaterials. He has authored more than 100 research papers and co-authored a book on nanotubes and nanowires with Prof. Rao.
1. Introduction
Synthesis of nanomaterials constitutes a crucial aspect of nanoscience and technology. Several strategies have been employed for the synthesis of nanomaterials of different dimensionalities. In particular, zero-dimensional nanoparticles (NPs) have received greater attention because of the wide-spectrum of uses. Chemical methods have been very useful in the generation of nanoparticles of various inorganic materials such as metals, oxides, chalcogenides and pnictides and some of the reviews cover various aspects of these nanocrystals.1,2 A perspective article that appeared a few years ago in this journal3 covered the synthesis of inorganic NPs, nanotubes and nanowires. Since then, there has been an explosion in publications dealing with the synthesis of nanomaterials, specially of NPs. We, therefore, considered restricting ourselves to the synthesis of inorganic NPs in this article. This perspective provides an up-to-date report on the synthesis of inorganic NPs covering the period 2007–2011. We have briefly introduced some of the important methods employed for the synthesis of NPs in Section 2, citing typical examples from the literature. We then discuss the synthesis of NPs of metals, alloys, metal oxides, metal chalcogenides and metal pnictides in separate sections. We have included a brief section on the synthesis of core–shell NPs. We trust that practitioners as well as beginners will find this article useful in their efforts to prepare inorganic NPs. We apologize for any omissions and errors in judgment in citing articles from the literature.
2. Some synthetic methods
2.1. Use of microemulsions
Microemulsions consist of a ternary mixture of water, a surfactant or a mixture of surface-active agents and oil. Micelles are aggregates of surfactant molecules formed above a critical micellar concentration (CMC).4,5 Micelles are responsible for the enhancement of the solubilization of organic compounds in water (oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion) or hydrophilic compounds in the oil phase (water-in-oil (w/o) emulsion). This process has been used for the synthesis of various NPs by mixing two microemulsions containing appropriate reactants (see schematic representation in Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for the formation of nanoparticles by microemulsion approach. 
Au NPs have been prepared by the reduction of HAuCl4 with NaCN–BH3 in sodium 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexoxy)-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate (AOT) water-in-hexane microemulsion.6 Ag NPs are prepared by mixing reverse micellar solutions of 30% Ag(AOT), 70% Na(AOT) and NaBH4 respectively.7 Cu NPs are obtained by the reduction of a micellar solution of Cu(DS)2(DS, dodecyl sulfate) with NaBH4. Below the CMC, CuO2 NPs occur along with the metal NPs where as above the CMC, only metallic nanostructures are obtained.8 Pd NPs are obtained by the inverse micelle formed by AOT in isooctane, by the addition of capping agents to the suspension.9 Bimetallic Au–Ag NPs are synthesized in a water–AOT–isooctane microemulsion by the co-reduction of HAuCl4 and AgNO3 with hydrazine at room temperature.10 SnO2 NPs are prepared by mixing microemulsions formed by cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), 1-butanol, isooctane, SnCl4·5H2O and 0.1 M NH3 solution, followed by heating the precipitate formed at 500 °C.11 Addition of aqueous methylamine, to mixed micelles of Co(DS)2 and Fe(DS)2 results in the formation of CoFe2O4 NPs.12 Cu2S NPs are prepared by the reaction of the copper ammonia complex with an equimolar thiourea solution in Triton-X 100–cyclohexane water-in-oil microemulsion.13
2.2. Thermal decomposition
Thermal decomposition of organometallic precursor compounds and metal–surfactant complexes in hot surfactant solutions has been used to synthesize inorganic NPs. Metal NPs are generated by the thermal decomposition of molecules containing zero-valent metals, such as metal carbonyls.14 Thus, Pd NPs with particle sizes in the 3.5–7 nm range are prepared by the thermal decomposition of Pd–trioctylphosphine (TOP) complex at 300 °C for 30 min.15 Monodisperse Co NPs can be synthesized via a high-temperature thermal decomposition of Co2(CO)8 in the presence of oleic acid (OA) and triphenylphosphine at 220 °C.16 Bimetallic FePt and CoPt NPs are obtained by reacting Pt(acac)2 with 1,2-hexadecanediol (HDD) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) at 100 °C followed by the addition of Fe(CO)5 or Co2(CO)8 at 286 °C for 30 min respectively.17 Thermal decomposition of metal–oleate precursors in high boiling solvents produces monodisperse NPs (Fig. 1).18 Thus, the iron–oleate complex in octadecene (ODE) is slowly heated to 320 °C and aged at that temperature for 30 min to generate iron oxide NPs. Thermal decomposition of copper cupferronate (Cu(cupf)2), on a silicon substrate at 250 °C for 10 min produced an assembled film of Cu NPs which on oxidation transformed to Cu2O with retention of the assembly.19 Cadmium complexes of N,N-diethyl-N1-benzoylthiourea and N,N-diethyl-N1-benzoylselenourea are used as the precursors for the synthesis of CdS and CdSe NPs respectively in TOP and hexadecylamine at 200 °C for 60 min.20 Thermal decomposition of Cl2GaP(SiMe3)2 prepared from GaC13 with P(SiMe3)3 produces GaP NPs at 300 °C for 3 hours.21 Green and O'Brien22 report the synthesis of InP and GaP NPs by the thermal decomposition of M(PtBu2)3 (M = Ga, In). The decomposition of Fe(CO)4[PPh2CH2CH2–Si(OMe)3] in a silica xerogel matrix results in the formation of Fe2P nanoclusters.23 Thermal decomposition of long-chain iron carboxylates such as Fe(III) oleate, palmitate, and myristate influences the morphology of iron oxide NPs varying from spheres to nanostars.24 Synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles by combustion synthesis is well documented.25 CoFe2O4 NPs are synthesized by the decomposition of a mixture of Fe(acac)3 and Co(acac)3 in a mixture of ODE, OA and oleyl amine (OAm) at different temperatures ranging from 150–300 °C.26 GaN, AlN and InN NPs are readily prepared by decomposing the urea complexes of the corresponding trichlorides in trioctyl amine under refluxing conditions.27–30
 Fig. 1  The overall scheme for the ultra-large-scale synthesis of monodisperse NPs and TEM of magnetite. Reprinted with permission from Park et al., Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 891. ©2004 Nature Publishing Group. 
2.3. Hydrothermal and solvothermal synthesis
Hydrothermal–solvothermal synthesis is a common method to synthesize inorganic NPs. Properties of the reactants, such as their solubility and reactivity change in the solvent or water at elevated temperatures and pressures. Taking advantage of the high reactivity of metal salts and complexes at elevated temperatures and pressures, inorganic nanomaterials are conveniently prepared at temperatures considerably lower than in solid-state reactions. Reaction parameters such as time, temperature, pressure, reactant concentration, pH, reaction cell fill volume can be tuned to attain satisfactory nucleation rates and particle size distribution. NPs of metals, oxides, chalcogenides, pnictides and various materials have been prepared by the hydrothermal or solvothermal synthesis. Thus, an aqueous solution containing HAuCl4, trisodium citrate, and CTAB is heated at 110 °C for 6, 12, 24, 48, and 72 h to obtain Au octahedra with average sizes of 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 nm respectively.31 Nanoanatase TiO2 is obtained by using tetrabutyl titanate as the titanium precursor, acetic acid as an inhibitor, and diethyl ether anhydrous as a solvent at a temperature 100 °C.32 Monodispersed ZnO nanorods with an average diameter less than 50 nm are prepared solvothermally by using zinc nitrate, NaOH, ethanol and ethylenediamine at 180 °C for 20 h.33 ReO3 NPs (diameter range of 8.5–32.5 nm) can be prepared by the decomposition of the Re2O7–dioxane complex at 200 °C for 4 h under solvothermal conditions.34 To synthesize PbS and CdS NPs, the molecular precursors, 2,2′-bipyridyl(Pb(SC(O)(C6H5)2) and 2,2′-bipyridyl(Cd(SC(O)(C6H5)2) respectively are heated in aqueous media at 100 °C for 30 min.35 Monodisperse 3 nm CdSe particles are prepared solvothermally using Cd(sterate)2, Se, tetralin, dodecanethiol and toluene in a stainless steel autoclave heated to 250 °C for 5 h (Fig. 2).36 γ-Fe2O3 (10 nm dia.) and CoFe2O4 (7 nm dia.) are prepared by hydrothermal heating of the reaction mixtures containing Fe(cupf)3–Co(cupf)2, n-octylamine and toluene respectively at 220 °C for 1 hour.37
 Fig. 2  TEM image of a relatively dense arrangement of CdSe NPs showing a tendency to close packing in the plane (bar = 50 nm). The inset shows a histogram of particle sizes. Reprinted with permission from U. K. Gautam, M. Rajamathi, F. Meldrum, P. Morgan and R. Seshadri, Chem. Commun., 2001, 629. ©2001 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4. Sol–gel method
The sol–gel method is generally employed for the synthesis of metal oxide NPs as well as oxide nanocomposites. The sol–gel process involves the hydrolysis and condensation of metal precursors.38,39 Further condensation and polymerization lead to three-dimensional metal oxide networks forming the gel. The sol–gel process can be either in aqueous or non-aqueous medium. In the aqueous sol–gel process, oxygen for the formation of the oxide is supplied by water molecules. In the nonaqueous process, oxygen is provided by a solvent (ethers, alcohols, ketones, or aldehydes) or by a organic constituent of the precursor (alkoxides or acetylacetonates).40
The aqueous sol–gel process can be represented as follows: M(OR)x + mH2O → M(OR)x−m(OH)m + mROH(OH)
If x = m, the reaction is said to be of total hydrolysis. This can happen in two stages, either by water or alcohol condensation.4 2M(OR)x−m(OH)m → (OH)m−1(OR)x−m–M–O–M(OR)x−m(OH)m−1 + H2O(OH) 2M(OR)x−m(OH)m → (OH)m−1(OR)x−m–M–O–M(OR)x−m−1 + ROH(OR)
The total process is expressed as follows M(OR)x + x/2H2O → MOx/2 + xHOR(OR)
The condensation process in non-aqueous sol–gel synthesis involves metal–oxygen–metal bonds formed either by alkyl halide elimination, ether elimination, ester elimination, or by aldol-like condensation.
del Monte et al.41 obtained γ-Fe2O3 NPs in a size range between 6 and 15 nm by direct heat treatment of gels at 400 °C. Ceria NPs are prepared by a reverse micelle sol–gel technique by using cerium isopropoxide in cyclohexane.42 A nonhydrolytic sol–gel method to prepare TiO2 NPs, involving condensation of titanium halide with titanium alkoxide has been reported by Trentler et al.43 Various metal oxides such as ZnO,44 ZrO2,45 iron oxide,46 CeO247 and ferrites48 have been synthesized by a nonhydrolytic sol–gel method. Niederberger et al.18 have developed a general nonaqueous sol–gel route to prepare NPs of binary metal oxide such as γ-Ga2O3, ZnO and cubic In2O3 by the reaction between the corresponding metal acetylacetonates and benzylamine.
2.5. Phase-transfer method
Phase-transfer mediated synthesis is widely used for the preparation of various NPs. This method involves the transfer of reactants from a polar medium to a non-polar medium, followed by further processing in a non-polar medium. NPs prepared in a nonpolar medium can also be phase-transferred to a polar medium. One of the earliest reports of this method is by Brust et al.49 for the synthesis of Au NPs. The method involves the phase-transfer of chloroaurate ions into toluene using a phase-transfer reagent such as tetraalkylammonium bromide, followed by the reduction of gold ions using sodium borohydride, giving rise to Au NPs capped with alkanethiol molecules. The gold ions from the aqueous solution are transferred to toluene due to electrostatic interaction with tetraoctylammonium bromide. The movement of aqueous gold NPs into non-polar organic solvents requires hydrophobization of the NPs. Yang et al.50 report a general protocol for the phase transfer of various metal ions from an aqueous to an organic medium for the synthesis of NPs. Here, phase-transfer of metal ions from water to an organic medium is carried out by dodecylamine by using ethanol as solvent. Using this method, it was possible to synthesize noble metal NPs, semiconductor–noble-metal composite NPs. Heterogeneous deposition of noble metals on semiconductor NPs, and homogeneous growth of semiconductors on noble metal NPs could also be accomplished. Fig. 3 shows TEM images of various NPs prepared by the transfer of metal ions from water to organic media. Thiol-derivatized NPs of Au, Pt, and Ag have been prepared as organosols by the acid-facilitated transfer of the NPs from a hydrosol to the toluene layer containing an alkanethiol.51 Phase-transfer of nanostructures from aqueous medium to fluorous solvent has been carried out.52 By using this approach, it has been possible to phase-transfer Au NPs from water, and semiconductor NPs such as CdSe and CdS from toluene, to perfluorohexane using perfluoroalkanethiol as capping agent. A one-step method for synthesis and phase-transfer of NPs from hydrocarbon medium such as toluene to a fluorous medium such as perfluorohexane has been reported recently.53 This method is based on the fact that fluorous and organic solvents become miscible at elevated temperatures (Fig. 4). In this manner, NPs of metal chalcogenides such as CdSe, CdS, PbSe, ZnSe and metal oxides such as γ-Fe2O3 and ZnO and bimetallic FePt have been transferred to fluorous media.
 Fig. 3  (1) Ag derived with HDD, (2) Au, (3) worm-like Pd and (4) Pt from Pt(IV), derived with TBAB alloy NPs of (5) Ag–Au, (6) Pd–Pt, (7) Pt–Rh and (8) Pt–Ru, synthesized by co-reduction of the metal precursors with tetrabutylammonium borohydride. Core–shell NPs of (9) 7.4 nm Au@Ag, (10) 12.7 nm Au@Ag, (11) 3.9 nm Pt@Ag and (12) 9.2 nm Pt@Ag, synthesized by seed-mediated growth. Core–shell NPs of (13) Ag@Au and (14) Ag@Pt, synthesized by the replacement reaction. (15) Pt hollow spheres synthesized by bis(p-sulphonatophenyl)phenylphosphane dihydrate dipotassium salt treatment of Ag@Pt NPs. (16) Ag–Pd alloy synthesized by the replacement reaction. Semiconductor NPs of (17) Ag2S, (18) CdS, (19) HgS and (20) PbS. Hybrid NPs of (21) Ag2S–Au, (22) CdS–Au, (23) CuS–Au, (24) PbS–Au, (25) Ag2S–Ag, (26) CdS–Ag, (27) CuS–Ag and (28) PbS–Ag. Core–shell NPs of Au@Ag2S synthesized with Au–Ag2S precursor molar ratios of (29) 1:1 and (30) 1:3. The scale of each image is identical. Reprinted with permission from J. Yang, E. Sargent, S. Kelley and J. Y. Ying, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 683. ©2009 Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 4  Schematic showing the thermomorphic nature of fluorous and hydrocarbon solvents. Reproduced with permission from R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.6. Microwave synthesis
Microwave synthesis is commonly employed for the synthesis of inorganic NPs since it is fast, simple and energy-efficient. Microwaves are generally generated using a magnetron. Microwave energy is absorbed by the reactants, which is then converted to heat thereby causing the rapid decomposition of the precursors and creating highly supersaturated solutions, where nucleation and growth occur to produce the desired nanocrystalline products.54 Au NPs (spherical, hexagons, truncated prisms) have been prepared in a microwave using HAuCl4 in HCl as the gold precursor and OAm and OA as capping agents (Fig. 5).55 CdSO4, Pb(Ac)2, and CuSO4 are reacted with Na2SeSO3 in water in the presence of potassium nitrilotriacetate to synthesize of CdSe and PbSe NPs, or using triethanolamine to obtain Cu2−xSe NPs, in 10 minutes.56 Core–shell Au–Pd NPs are prepared by the simultaneous reduction of palladium(II) chloride and hydrogen tetrachloroaurate(III) in ethylene glycol (EG) for 1 hour.57 FePt NPs are obtained from microwave process using Fe(acac)3 and Pt(acac)2 as metal precursors and tetraethyleneglycol (TEG) as solvent as well as reducing agent at 250 °C.58 Amorphous Fe2O3 NPs have been synthesized by microwave heating of an aqueous solution containing ferric chloride, polyethyleneglycol (PEG) and urea.59
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis spectra for Au NPs prepared using different ratios of OA–OAm varied from 0 to 50% after 1 min. microwave time. TEM images of gold NPs prepared using pure amine (b) and in a 1:1 ratio of OA–OAm (c). The scale bar is 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from M. B. Mohamed, K. M. AbouZeid, V. Abdelsayed, A. A. Aljarash and M. S. El-Shall, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2766. ©2010 American Chemical Society. 
2.7. Use of the liquid–liquid interface
The liquid–liquid interface is conveniently used for the preparation of assemblies or thin films of inorganic NPs. The interface is a nonhomogeneous region with a thickness of a few nanometers. NPs are highly mobile at the interface and rapidly achieve an equilibrium assembly due to reduced interfacial energy. The parameters that influence assembly process at the liquid–liquid interface are: (i) nature of the interface, (ii) surface modification of NPs at the interface, and (iii) the effective radius of NPs, also smaller NPs generally attached more weakly to interface than larger ones.60 To synthesize inorganic nanomaterials, an organic precursor of relevant metal is taken in the organic layer and an appropriate reagent in the aqueous layer. The product formed by the reaction at the interface contains ultra-thin nanocrystalline films of the nanomaterial.61 This technique has been used to prepare NPs of metals such as Au, Ag, and Pd, of metal chalcogenides such as CdS and NiS, as well as extended ultrathin single crystalline films of CuO, ZnO, CuS, PbS, and ZnS.62 In a typical preparation of Au–Cu–Ag nanocrystalline film, a solution of Au(PPh3)Cl–Cu(PPh3)Cl or Ag2(PPh3)4Cl2 in toluene is allowed to stand in contact with aqueous alkali in a beaker at 300 K. Once the two liquid layers are stable, tetrakishydroxymethylphosphonium chloride (THPC) is injected into the aqueous layer using a syringe with minimal disturbance to the toluene layer.63 By taking mixtures of the corresponding metal precursors in organic layer, nanocrystalline films of binary Au–Ag and Au–Cu alloys and ternary Au–Ag–Cu alloys are prepared.64 Polycrystalline thin films of CdSe–CuSe have been prepared at the organic–water interface by reacting Cd(cupf)2–Cu(cupf)2 in the toluene layer with dimethylselenourea in the aqueous layer.65 By reacting Cu(cupf)2 in the organic layer with an aqueous NaOH–Na2S solution, a single-crystalline film of CuO–CuS is formed at the organic–aqueous interface.66Fig. 6 shows electron microscopy images of Au, Ag, CdS and CuS NPs formed at the liquid–liquid interface.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of (a) gold (b) Ag (c) CdS and (d) CuS NPs formed at the liquid–liquid interface. Reprinted with permission from C. N. R. Rao and K. P. Kalyanikutty, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 489–499. ©2008 American Chemical Society. 
2.8. Use of ionic liquids
There have been several attempts during last five to six years to use ionic liquids as media for the synthesis of inorganic nanomaterials.67,68 Ionic liquids are organic salts with low melting points and no measurable vapour pressure, and do not evaporate. They remain as liquids over a wide range of temperatures, in some cases in excess of 400 °C. The low interfacial tension and the associated high nucleation rate as well as high thermal stability make ionic liquids attractive to carry out the synthesis of nanostructures. Ionic liquids have received much attention due to their potential use as green recyclable alternatives to traditional organic solvents. Polar reactions can be carried out in these liquids in the absence of water, and crystalline NPs can be synthesized conveniently at relatively low temperatures. The pronounced self-organization of a solvent is made use of in synthesis of self-assembled, highly organized hybrid nanostructures. Synthesis and functionalization of gold NPs in ionic liquids has been reported, wherein the color of the gold NPs can be tuned by changing the anion of ionic liquid.69 NPs of Rh and Ir have been prepared by the reduction of appropriate compounds in 1-n-butyl-3-methylimidazolium-hexafluorophosphate, ([BMIM][PF6]), in the presence of hydrogen.70 RuO2 NPs of 2 to 3 nm in diameter have been obtained by NaBH4 reduction of RuCl3 dissolved in the ionic liquid, 1-n-butyl-3- methylimidazolium-hexaflurophosphate.71 Biswas and Rao72 successfully synthesized nanostructures of CdS, CdSe, ZnS, ZnSe and PbS in ionic liquid media. They have examined effects of changing the anion of the ionic liquid as well as addition of surfactants and capping agents on the size and shape of nanostructures.
2.9. Other methods
There are many other methods employed for the synthesis of inorganic NPs.1–3 Some of these are: photochemical syntheses as typified by radiation-induced decomposition and reduction of gold compounds, electrochemical synthesis of metal NPs, arrested precipitation, the sonochemical method and solvated metal atom dispersion involving trapping of metal atoms in a cold matrix of a liquid followed by growth on warming the matrix. Biological media and reagents have been used to prepare NPs of metals and other inorganic materials.
3. Metal nanoparticles
The first scientific study of metal NPs was by Michael Faraday73 in 1857. Enüstün and Turkevich74 in 1963 prepared spherical NPs of Au and Ag of tunable sizes by the reduction of gold or silver salts by citrate in aqueous solutions. During the past three decades research on NPs has greatly intensified due to the development of improved synthetic procedures which enable precise control over the size and shape.1,2,75 Metal NPs can now be made in large quantities at low cost, there by expanding the possible range of applications. Besides the methods described earlier, metal NPs have been prepared by employing many variants and by using a variety of reducing agents ranging from alcohols to fungi.76
3.1. Gold
The popular citrate route to synthesize Au NPs was first reported by Hauser and Lynn.77 The procedure involves the addition of chloroauric acid to a boiling solution of sodium citrate,74,78 and enables one to obtain NPs with an average diameter in the 10–100 nm range by varying the concentration of the reactants.64,69 Au NPs with diameters between 1 and 2 nm are obtained by the reduction of HAuCl4 with alkaline tetrakis(hydroxymethyl)phosphonium chloride (THPC) which also acts as a capping agent.79 Brust and co-workers49 developed a general method to obtain organic-capped metal NPs in biphasic mixture of an organic solvent and aqueous solution of a metal salt in the presence of a phase-transfer reagent. Ji et al.80 have studied the growth kinetics and temporal size/shape evolution of the Au NPs by citrate reduction in boiling water. Kanehara et al.81 report the size control and evolution of decanethiol-protected Au NPs at room-temperature using a quaternary ammonium salt and proton acid (Fig. 7). Ohyama et al.82 have used a one-phase method for the reduction of HAuCl4 in a DMF solution containing a porphyrin-cored tetradentate passivant giving horizontal porphyrin monolayer-coated gold NPs.
 Fig. 7  TEM images of (a) decanethiol(DT)–Au seed NPs acid treated DT–Au NPs with trifluoroacetic acid and tetraoctylammonium bromide for (b) 5 h at room temperature (rt) (c) 75 h at rt, and (d) 21 h at 55 °C. The scale bar length is 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from M. Kanehara, J.-I. Sakurai, H. Sugimura and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1630. ©2009 American Chemical Society. 
Redel et al.83 obtained Au NPs by thermal, photolytic and microwave-assisted decomposition–reduction under argon from Au(CO)Cl or KAuCl4 in the presence of n-butylimidazol dispersed in ionic liquids. Han et al.84 have developed a reactive template method to synthesize Au (or Ag) NPs with controllable size and morphology supported on both inner and outer surfaces of poly(o-phenylenediamine) hollow microspheres. The size of the Au NPs could be tuned from 3 to 15 nm by changing the concentration of the Au source. Goulent and Lennox85 provide new insight to the Brust–Schiffrin method for the synthesis of metal NPs. It was believed that M(I) thiolate polymers are the precursors in both one- and two-phase reactions in this method. It was proposed that tetraammonium metal complexes are precursors in two-phase reactions, whereas M(I) thiolates are precursors in one-phase reactions.
Au NPs are prepared by using Irgacure-2959 (1-[4-(2-hydroxyethoxy) phenyl]-2-hydroxy-2-methyl-1-propane-1-one) and HAuCl4 under illumination of 350 nm wavelength light.86 Christian and Bromfield87 report a method to prepare colloids of Ag, Au, and Cu NPs in a variety of solvents from water to toluene where the reduction of Ag, Au or copper ions is carried out in the presence of a PEG-based stabilizer. Biswas et al.88 have investigated growth of gold NPs by reduction of HAuCl4 using THPC, by combined use of small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and isothermal titration calorimetry and transmission electron microscopy techniques. They show that the growth of the NPs does not follow the diffusion-limited Ostwald ripening but instead follows a sigmoidal rate curve. Fig. 8 shows TEM images of gold NPs grown at different time intervals and their diameter distribution as insets.
 Fig. 8  TEM images of gold NPs prepared from 125 mL (0.006 mmol) of 50 mM HAuCl4, obtained after (a) 15, (b) 65, (c) 185, and (d) 630 min of growth. Insets compare the diameter distributions obtained from TEM and SAXS for the same time of growth. NF: normalized frequency. Reprinted with permission from K. Biswas, N. Varghese and C. N. R. Rao, Small, 2008, 4, 649–655. ©2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. K GaA. 
Egusa et al.89 observed the spontaneous formation of hexagonal and square arrays of sub-10 nm Au NPs by asymmetric heating of alkanethiol-passivated atomic Au cluster solutions on amorphous carbon films. Personick et al.90 synthesized Au nanostructures with different shapes (Fig. 9) (such as octahedra, rhombic dodecahedra, truncated ditetragonal prisms, and concave cubes) using a seed-mediated growth method by varying the Ag+ concentration in reaction medium. Niu et al.91 employed a seed-mediated growth method for selectively synthesizing single-crystalline rhombic dodecahedral, octahedral and cubic Au NPs by using cetylpyridinium chloride capped 41.3 nm Au NPs as seeds. Icosahedral Au NPs exhibiting 5-fold symmetry are formed on a glass surface using an aerosol spray process at 600 °C.92 Yavuz et al.93 describe a protocol to generate 18 nm Au icosahedra by mixing aqueous solutions of HAuCl4 and PVP. Polyhedral Au NPs with decahedral, icosahedral, and truncated tetrahedral shapes are synthesized by the polyol process by reduction of HAuCl4 in the presence of PVP by using either diethylene or tetraethylene glycols.94 Ma et al.95 have reported use of AuCl–OAm as a precursor to produce Au seeds to form truncated Au decahedrons in tetrahydrofuran (THF) at room temperature. Well-defined Au NPs of icosahedral shape are obtained in high yields by the rapid reduction of Au precursors with EG in the presence of PVP under hydrothermal conditions for 1 h.96 Li et al.97 used a modified polyol process in which a small amount of NaBH4 was added to a PEG 600 solution of PVP to a hot aqueous gold(III) chloride solution to obtain octahedral NPs. Trisoctahedral Au NPs have been prepared by the reduction of an aqueous solution of HAuCl4 with ascorbic acid in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) at room temperature.98
 Fig. 9  SEM images of (A) octahedra, (B) rhombic dodecahedra, truncated ditetragonal prisms, and (D) concave cubes synthesized from reaction solutions containing different ratios of Ag+–Au3+. Scale bars: 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from M. L. Personick, M. R. Langille, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3394. ©2011 American Chemical Society. 
Huang et al.99 describe a surfactant-promoted reductive route for the shape-controlled synthesis of Au nanostructures by hydrothermal treatment of chloroauric acid in presence of the surfactant CTAB. A simple low-cost electrochemical route to synthesize hierarchical flower-like Au microstructures has been reported using Au nanoplates or nanopricks as building blocks, without introducing any template or surfactant.100 Monodisperse star-shaped Au NPs are obtained by the reduction of HAuCl4 by L-ascorbic acid at room temperature in the deep eutectic solvents (DES) and various shapes and surface structures of Au are produced by adjusting the content of water in the DES.101 Santos and Liz Marzán102 used DMF as a solvent and reducing agent for preparing Au and Ag metal NPs, with tailored morphologies. A procedure for shape and size selection of Au NPs through formation of reversible flocculates by surfactant micelle-induced depletion interaction has been described by Park et al.103 Polygonal Au NPs can be produced from an aqueous HAuCl4 solution by a modified citrate reduction technique using ferric ammonium citrate instead of sodium citrate as the reducing agent, in absence of a surfactant or polymeric template.104Table 1 lists some of the methods of synthesis of gold NPs.
Table 1 Typical synthetic routes to prepare gold nanoparticles




Method
Reactants and reaction conditions
Reference




Reduction
HAuCl4 gold precursor, Na2[Mo3(μ3-S)(μ-S)3(Hnta)3] serves both as a reducing and a capping agent, at room temperature

105



HAuCl4 as gold precursor, o-diaminobenzene as reducing agent, PVP as capping agent, at room temperature

106



HAuCl4 as gold precursor, 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethanesulfonic acid, serving as both reducing and shape-directing agents, at room temperature

107



HAuCl4 as gold precursor, cellulose as reducing agent, 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium chloride as solvent at 110 to 200 °C

108



HAuCl4 as gold precursor, hydroquinone as the reducing agent

109



Hydrothermal
HAuCl4 as gold precursor, trisodium citrate as reducing agent and CTAB as capping agent, 110 °C for 6–72 h

31





3.2. Silver
Chen et al.110 have synthesized a series of nano/submicrometer Ag particles using ascorbic acid to reduce AgCl in an aqueous solution at ambient conditions. Ag NPs are prepared by reducing AgNO3 by EG in the presence of PVP, followed by the addition of the so-obtained Ag seeds to a DMF solution containing Ag+ ions for obtaining overgrowth of Ag crystals with {111} facets.111 Richards et al.112 have carried out a mechanistic study of Ag-NPs grown by reaction of [(PPh3)2Ag(O2CC13H27)] and azoisobutyronitrile at 130 °C under reflux conditions to demonstrate the occurrence of an aggregative nucleation and growth process. Dong et al.113 have examined the growth of Ag NPs by the stepwise citrate reduction of silver nitrate in the pH range 5.7–11.1 and have found that the reduction of the silver precursor (Ag+) is promoted with an increase in pH. Kundu et al.114 have prepared Ag NPs and nanochains in large quantities in the presence of alkaline 2,7-dihydroxy naphthalene as a reducing agent under microwave heating in a nonionic surfactant (Triton X-100) in just 60 s. Liang et al.115 describe the synthesis of monodisperse Ag NPs in high yields by using PVP–AgNO3 with a molar ratio of 8 at 260 °C, in which the PEG is used both as a solvent and reducing reagent and PVP acts as capping agent. A crude mixture of red- and blue-green-emitting clusters Ag8(H2MSA)8 and Ag7(H2MSA)7 (H2MSA: mercaptosuccinic acid), are obtained in gram quantities by an interfacial etching reaction conducted at an aqueous–organic interface starting from the H2MSA-protected Ag NPs (Ag@H2MSA) as precursor.116
Kind et al.117 prepared nanoscale Ag hollow spheres via a microemulsion approach using [Ag(PPh3)4]NO3 as the starting material. Stable, fluorescent, water-soluble Ag nanoclusters have been obtained by a sonochemical approach, using polymethylacrylic acid (PMAA), as the capping agent and AgNO3 as the silver source.118 Li et al.119 describe a polyol method that generates dimers of Ag nanospheres in one-step in which EG serves as the solvent. Ag nanocubes with controllable edge lengths in the range of 30–200 nm have been prepared by using AgNO3 as the precursor.120 Xue et al.121 have developed a method in which they use pseudo-spherical Au NPs as plasmonic cores and experimental labels to determine role of plasmon excitation in the photochemical conversion of Ag NPs into nanoprisms.
Ag cubes and tetrahedra have been prepared by Wiley et al.122 reducing silver nitrate with ethylene glycol heated to 148 °C in the presence of PVP and a trace amount of sodium chloride. An oxidative environment (chloride and oxygen from air) leads to preferential etching and dissolution of multiply twinned particles leaving only the single crystalline ones to grow into nanoscale cubes and tetrahedra. Later the same group replaced the chloride ion by bromide ion, which resulted in etching the seeds with multiple twin defects leading to the formation of bipyramids of silver.123 Changing the concentration of Fe(II) or Fe(III) ions in the polyol reduction of silver nitrate allows production of either nanocubes or nanowires. A high concentration of iron ions facilitates the growth of multiply twinned seeds to form nanowires by preventing oxidative etching whereas at low concentrations oxidative etching dominates resulting in single-crystal nanocubes.124 Ag nanocubes with sharp corners and edges could be obtained by using PVP as the capping agent in mixture with citric acid in aqueous solution under ambient conditions. As the reaction proceeds, the nanocubes transform into spheres.125 Both PVP and Br-ions can selectively bind to the {100} facets of Ag resulting in the formation of Ag nanocubes and nanobars.126 Ag octahedra and cubes were selectively obtained by introducing sodium citrate and PVP respectively as the capping agent.127
Courty et al.128 report formation of triangular single crystals of Ag with a fcc structure by mild annealing of self-organized, ordered mono- and multi-layers of 5 nm Ag NPs, under atmospheric pressure at 50 °C. Monodisperse Ag right-triangular bipyramids are obtained by photoinduced or plasmon-mediated particle growth and the edge length of bipyramids is controlled by the wavelength of exciting radiation.129 It has been shown that heating EG in air results in its oxidation to glycolaldehyde which is a dominant reductant in polyol synthesis and is capable of reducing Ag ions to Ag nanostructures.130 Ag nanorice with uniform shape has been prepared in high yield by a polyol route.131 Au nanocages are obtained from Ag nanocubes by a NaHS-mediated polyol synthesis with argon protection (Fig. 10).132
 Fig. 10  TEM images of four aliquots taken from the same synthesis (under argon) after a AgNO3 solution had been added for different periods of time (min): (A) 5; (B) 10; (C) 15; (D) 20. Reprinted with permission from Q. Zhang, C. Cobley, L. Au, M. McKiernan, A. Schwartz, L.-P. Wen, J. Chen and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2044. ©2009 American Chemical Society. 
Ag NPs (truncated cubes, cuboctahedra, and octahedral) have been synthesized using the polyol method in the presence of PVP. The growth of polyhedral NPs seems to be the result of kinetically limited equilibrium conditions.133 The hydroxyl groups of PVP appears to reduce the metal salts of Au, Ag, Pt and Pd at a sufficiently slow rate so that the growth becomes kinetically controlled, leading to the formation of thin plates.134 Liu et al.135 report the use of a polyol process to produce Ag nanohexapods with six branches. Monodisperse decahedral Ag NPs with excellent shape selectivity are obtained by the photochemical transformation of aqueous Ag NP precursors.136 Giuffrida et al.137 have prepared water-soluble, uncapped Ag NPs in a single step, by spontaneous decomposition of Ag(acac), in the absence of an external reducing agent and conventional stabilizing ligands. Uniform hexagonal Ag nanoplates can be prepared from triangular Ag nanoplates which are in turn obtained by the seed-mediated growth of Ag particles in the presence of trisodium citrate.138 Branched flower like Ag nanostructured particles have been prepared using rutin, which acts as a reducing and stabilizing agent.139
3.3. Platinum and palladium
Synthesis of NPs of Pt and Pd is of importance because of their use in fuel cells, sensors, petroleum and in various industrial applications. Teranishi and Miyake140 synthesized monodisperse Pd NPs by refluxing H2PdCl4 in a mixture of water and alcohol, in the presence of PVP. Platinum and palladium NPs have been prepared by various chemical methods.141–144 In general, the synthesis involves the reduction of Pt or Pd precursors in the presence of a polymeric capping agent, using reducing agents such as alcohol, sodium borohydride, or hydrogen gas. Ahmadi et al.145 reported the formation of well-faceted platinum NPs by using hydrogen gas as the reducing agent and sodium polyacrylate as the capping agent. Pt NPs were prepared by NaBH4 reduction of K2PtCl6 in an aqueous medium. By using HCl, Pt nanoparticles were transferred to a toluene solution containing dodecanethiol, forming a toluene organosol of Pt nanoparticles protected by dodecanethiol.146,147 Nagy and co-workers148 prepared Pt colloids in the range of 4 to 6.6 nm, by varying the concentration of K2PtCl4 from 0.12 to 0.55 mM. Kim et al.149 synthesized monodisperse Pd NPs with particle sizes of 3.5, 5, and 7 nm from the thermal decomposition of a Pd–surfactant complex where the particle size of Pd NPs was controlled by varying the concentration of stabilizing surfactant. Xia and co-workers150 reported the preparation of palladium nanocubes between 8 to 50 nm by controlling the number of seeds formed at the nucleation stage. Various sizes and shapes of palladium NPs have been obtained by means of the aqueous-phase reaction between Pd2+ ions and triblock copolymers.151
Pd NPs are obtained by reducing Pd(acac)2 with OAm and the boranetributylamine complex in the temperature range of 60–90 °C (Fig. 11).152 Sun et al.153 synthesized highly crystalline rectangular Pd NPs by the reduction of K2PdCl4 using ascorbic acid in presence of CTAB at room temperature. By changing injection sequence of reductant and surfactant, cubic, multi-armed, and dendritic Pd NPs with efficient electrocatalytic activity towards formic acid oxidation could be prepared in high yields. Nearly monodisperse single-crystalline fcc Pd nanocubes and nanodendrites have been successfully prepared in aqueous solution at room temperature by utilizing the equilibrium between dissolution and precipitation of the Pd–CTAB complexes, where the morphology of the Pd NPs can be tuned by the addition of halide ions.154 Bisson et al.155 have studied the mechanism of formation of the Pd NPs of different shapes (cubes, penta-twinned nanorods, pyramids, and penta-twinned decahedra) by the seed-mediated reduction of a palladium salt in aqueous medium, in the presence of CTAB surfactant, through an oriented-attachment-directed aggregation. Coronado et al.156 prepared water soluble, monodisperse Pd NPs with a narrow particle size distribution by the controlled reduction of [PdCl4]2−, by an aqueous solution of sodium borohydride with tetraoctylammonium bromide acting as the capping agent. The size of NPs could be reduced from the nanometer to the subnanometer size range.
 Fig. 11  (A) TEM and (B) HRTEM images of the 4.5 nm Pd NPs prepared by the reduction of Pd(acac)2 in OAm and the boranetributylamine complex. Reprinted with permission from V. Mazumder and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4588. ©2009 American Chemical Society. 
Cubooctahedral NPs of Pd were prepared by a modified polyol process, in which [PdCl4]2− was reduced by EG at 110 °C in the presence of PVP. It was found that oxidative etching of Pd NPs by air might lead to the removal of twinned particles and the formation of cubooctahedra.157 Pd icosahedra were formed when citrate was used as the capping agent because of its strong affinity to the {111} facets of Pd.158 When PVP was used, formation of nanocubes with truncated corners was favored.150
Chen et al.159 have synthesized 5 nm Pt NPs by the reduction of H2PtCl6 in EG in the presence of PVP at 110 °C, while Tian et al.160 report a novel electrochemical approach to prepare tetrahexahedral (THH) Pt NPs with high-index facets on glass carbon substrates (Fig. 12). Faceted Pt NPs are obtained on reducing H2PtCl6 with PVP in aqueous solution with a trace amount of FeCl3.161 Wang et al.162 produced Pt nanodendrites by sonicating an aqueous solution containing K2PtCl4 precursor and formic acid in the presence of nonionic organic molecules. Pt NPs are obtained by the decomposition of Pt2(dba)3 (dba = dibenzylidene acetone) by using HDA as the stabilizer.163
 Fig. 12  Size control of THH Pt NPs and their thermal stability. SEM images of THH Pt NPs grown at (A) 10, (B) 30, (C) 40, and (D) 50 min. The insets in (A) and (B) are the high-magnification SEM images that confirm the shape of THH. Scale bars, 200 nm. (E) Size distributions of THH Pt NPs in (A), (B), (C), and (D), respectively, after counting more than 500 particles for each sample. (F) In situ TEM observation on the thermal stability of THH Pt NPs. The images were recorded at various temperatures in TEM at a heating rate of 7 °C min−1. The NP preserves its shape to ∼815 °C and even higher with a slight truncation at the corners and apexes, as seen in the TEM image. Reprinted with permission from N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 4, 732. ©2007 AAAS. http://www.sciencemag.org. 
Pt nanopetals can be electrodeposited on Si nanocone arrays in an aqueous solution of 1 M H2PtCl6 and 1 M H2SO4 at room temperature by potentiostatic pulse plating in a three-electrode cell system.164 Pt NPs supported on carbon black are prepared from Cs2PtCl6 by applying an electrochemical square-wave potential method.165 Dendritic Pt NPs are synthesized by the reduction of a Pt complex by reducing agent ascorbic acid in aqueous solution, mediated by block copolymer.166 Pt nanocubes with porous morphology are prepared by using EG, HCl, PVP and H2PtCl6 under refluxing conditions.167 Pt spheres with sizes ranging from 10 to 100 nm are prepared from an aqueous solution containing H2PtCl6, sodium citrate and sodium borohydride.168
Soft template synthesis of Pt nanoballs with hexagonal cells formed by connected nanorods has been accomplished by using a mesophase with CTAB as the surfactant and Pt(NH3)4Cl2 as the platinum source.169 Demortière et al.170 employ liquid–liquid phase transfer to synthesize Pt NPs with a cubic morphology, wherein a quaternary ammonium salt serves as the phase-transfer agent for the metallic platinum complex, sodium borohydride is the reducing agent and an alkylamine is a capping agent. Zheng et al.171 have studied the growth of Pt NPs by in situ transmission electron microscopy and have proposed that the growth is either by monomer attachment from solution or by particle coalescence through the combination of these two processes. An initial broad size distribution spontaneously narrows into a nearly monodisperse distribution, suggesting that colloidal NPs take different pathways of growth based on their size- and morphology-dependent internal energies. Nanoflowers of Pt, Pd and Au, are prepared by mixing metal precursors and sodium N-(4-n-dodecyloxybenzoyl)-L-isoleucinate (SDBIL) at pH 5.0, using L-ascorbic acid as a reducing agent.172 Cheong et al.173 have reviewed different approaches in solution phase synthesis adopted for achieving shape controlled Pd and Pt NPs with specific crystallographic facets and catalytic properties depends on the shape of the NPs.
Varghese and Rao174 have investigated platinum NPs prepared by two different methods by employing SAXS and TEM. One of the methods of synthesis involved the reduction of chloroplatinic acid by sodium citrate while in the other method reduction was carried out in the presence of PVP as the capping agent. The growth of platinum NPs prepared by citrate reduction in the absence of any capping agent follows Ostwald ripening growth with a D3 dependence (D = diameter) while in the presence of PVP, the growth of platinum NPs does not follow the Ostwald ripening model, making it necessary to include a surface reaction term in growth equation. The growth of platinum NPs in the presence of PVP has contributions both from diffusion and surface reaction, exhibiting a D3 + D2 type dependence.
3.4. Iron, cobalt, nickel, copper and other transition metals
Kura et al.175 synthesized monodisperse Fe NPs with high saturation magnetization by the thermal decomposition of the Fe(CO)x–OAm precursor, where CO ligands in Fe(CO)5 are partially replaced by OAm. This procedure provides a control over the size of the NPs over the range 2.3 to 10 nm by changing the reaction temperature (Fig. 13). Ling et al.176 deposited fcc Fe NPs with a variety of morphologies on a carbon film coated copper TEM grids by drop casting of PEG–Fe(NO3)3 solution and annealing at 400 °C for 1 h in vacuum. Ling et al.177 have also synthesized icosahedral fcc Fe NPs using PVP and ferric nitrate. By applying a voltage of 20 kV, a PVP–Fe3+ fluid jet is sprayed on an amorphous carbon or silicon monoxide film coated Cu grid and the grid heated at 400 °C for 1 h in vacuum to yield icosahedral fcc-Fe NPs. Hollow Fe nanoframes are obtained by thermal decomposition of the Fe(II)–stearate complex in the presence of sodium oleate and OA.178
 Fig. 13  TEM images of Fe NPs synthesized from Fe(CO)x–OAm at various reaction temperatures and times: (a) 30 °C for 1 min, (b) 30 °C for 60 min, (c) 30 °C for 180 min, (d) 70 °C for 60 min, (e) 100 °C for 60 min, and (f) 130 °C for 60 min. All scale bars represent 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from H. Kura, M. Takahashi and T. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5835. ©2010 American Chemical Society. 
Scariot et al.179 report the synthesis of ligand-free Co NPs with either cubic or spherical shapes by in situ decomposition of Co2(CO)8 dispersed in 1-n-decyl-3-methylimidazolium trifluoro-tris-(pentafluoroethane) phosphate at 150 °C. De Silva et al.180 have investigated the influence of surfactants such as OA, TOPO, ODA and TOP on the reaction pathway, crystal structure, particle size, size distribution and magnetic properties of the Co NPs obtained from acetylene-bridged dicobalthexacarbonyl. Monodisperse water-soluble Co NPs have been prepared by the reduction method in aqueous media in the presence of alkylthioether end-functionalized poly(methacrylic acid).181 Co NPs (diameter, <5 nm) are obtained by pulsed laser irradiation of Co2(CO)8 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene in the presence of stabilizers OA and TOPO.182 Single-crystalline Co hollow nanoparallelepipeds have been prepared by the thermolysis of CoO solid nanoparallelepipeds in OAm at 290 °C for 2 h and 270 °C for 1 h.183 Wang et al.184 report the synthesis of cubic Co nanoskeletons from a dispersion of cobalt acetate tetrahydrate and sodium fluoride in absolute ethanol at 180 °C for 48–60 h.
Metin et al.185 synthesized monodisperse Ni NPs from the reduction of Ni(acac)2 with borane tributylamine in OAm and OA. Size-tunable monodispersed hierarchical metallic Ni NPs (58–190 nm in diameter) are obtained by the reduction of Ni2+ with HDA under atmospheric pressure.186 Plouet et al.187 report the formation of metastable hcp and air-stable fcc Ni NPs from organically functionalized layered phyllosilicates of nickel(II) at temperatures less than 573 K in an inert atmosphere. Carenco et al.188 have investigated the preparation of size-tunable monodisperse Ni NPs, by the reaction of Ni(acac)2 with OAm and TOP. Monodisperse Ni NPs with tunable phase (fcc, hcp) and size are prepared by the thermal-decomposition of nickel acetate in the presence of hexadecylamine which is used as the solvent, reducing agent as well as stabilizing agent.189 Ni NPs in the size range of 4–16 nm are obtained by high-temperature reduction of Ni(CH3COO)2 or Ni(acac)2 followed by annealing.190
Nanoparticles of Cu, Ag, and Au have been prepared by mechanical stirring of solid mixtures of the metal salt and ammonia borane at 60 °C.191 Engels et al.192 have reported the synthesis of Cu NPs by using modified polyol-based reduction method in EG that incorporates PVP as polymeric anti-agglomerant and a reducing additive (N2H4·H2O, NaBH4, NaH2PO2·H2O). Chang et al.193 have reported the growth of arrays of tetragonal Cu nanopillars on Au–glass by the electrochemical reduction of an aqueous solution of CuCl2 by Al metal in dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride. Haas et al.194 prepared Cu dendrite nanostructures by a sonoelectrochemical process from an aqueous solution of Cu2+ in the presence of PVA. Cu NPs with controllable size and shape are obtained by the reduction of copper(II) in an aqueous solution of hydrazine under an air atmosphere in the presence of polyacrylic acid (PAA) as a capping agent.195 Huang et al.196 obtained nanosize particles of Cu, Ag, Pd and Ni as well as CuPd and CuAg alloys encapsulated in inert carbon shells by the carbonization of metal–cyclodextrin complexes.
Bondi et al.197 report a solution chemistry method for the synthesis of air-stable NPs of α-Mn, in which n-butyllithium is used as the reducing agent in diphenyl ether medium and OA is used to bind to the Mn NPs to render them air-stable. Redel et al.198 report the synthesis of stable Cr, Mo and W NPs by thermal or photolytic decomposition of mononuclear metal carbonyl precursors under argon in ionic liquid media. Ruthenium(0) nanoclusters are prepared by the borohydride reduction of a colloidal solution of ruthenium(III) chloride at room temperature and stabilized by a nanozeolite framework. Rh multipods can be synthesized by taking Na3RhCl6 as the precursor of Rh. The branched morphology is retained only under inert conditions, while a spherical shape occurs in an oxidation environment.199 NPs, nanorods and other nanostructures of nickel, ruthenium, rhodium and iridium have been prepared by a simple solvothermal procedure involving the decomposition of corresponding metal acetate or acetylacetonate in the presence of n-octyl amine.200 Zhang et al.201 report the synthesis of five-fold twinned, starfish-like Rh NPs by a facile polyol approach by replacing RhCl3 or Na3RhCl6 with [{Rh(CF3COO)2}2] to eliminate oxidative etching. Ru(0) NPs have been prepared in imidazolium ionic liquids from [Ru(COD)(2-methylallyl)2] in hydrogen atmosphere at 50 °C.202 Vollmer et al.203 have carried out microwave irradiation of metal–carbonyls for the facile synthesis of transition-metal NPs in ionic liquids. Yuan et al.204 report tunable rhodium nanostructures with highly selective morphologies such as cubes, horned particles, dendrites and network-shaped wires from RhCl3, PVP, SDS and sodium salts of different halides in water by heating at 220 °C for the desired time. Zhang et al.205 report the synthesis of nafion-stabilized Ir NPs by taking nafion, H2IrCl6, NaOH, water and ethanol as reactants and heating at 125 °C for 5 hours in an autoclave.
3.5. Other metals
Metallic Mg NPs of 4 nm size can be prepared in polar aprotic solvents such as THF and dibutyldiglyme by the sonoelectrochemical method using a Grignard reagent. Large scale synthesis of hexagonal prismatic sub-micro sized Mg crystals can be grown via thermal decomposition of MgB2 at 800 °C and for 1 h, followed by further heating to 1400 °C for 3 h.206 Mg NPs are prepared by room temperature digestive ripening in the presence of HDA resulting in highly monodisperse colloidal Mg-HDA NPs of size 2.8 nm.207 Meziani et al.208 have investigated the wet-chemical synthesis of Al NPs by using dimethylethylamine alane and 1-methylpyrrolidine. Decomposition of an organometallic precursor of indium such as cyclopentadienyl indium (InC5H5) in methanol and PVP at room temperature to prepare small indium NPs.209 Indium NPs are also prepared by reduction of indium chloride using lithium borohydride as the reducing agent in primary amine media.210 Indium NPs are synthesized by the drop-wise addition of a solution of NaBH4 in TEG to a solution of InCl3 and PVP in isopropyl alcohol.211 Ge NPs (1 to 15 nm) are obtained by the thermal decomposition trichlorogermane, tetraethylgermane or tetrabutylgermane in high boiling organic solvents such as trioctylamine, squalene, and octacosane.65 Ge NPs stabilized by PVP are synthesized by borohydride reduction of GeCl4 in EG and triglime.212 Prabakar et al.213 report size-controlled synthesis of Ge NPs by a hydride reduction of germanium tetrachloride in inverse micelles.
Adams et al.214 prepared Cd NPs by the reduction of cadmium acetate around 200 °C in three different media (ODE, diphenyl ether, and dioctyl ether) resulting in nanostructures ranging from monodisperse spheres to hexagons. Resa et al.215 have reported a method to produce a large quantity of monodisperse superconducting Pb NPs by the alcohol reduction of a mixture of lead oleate and lead acetate in the presence of TOP in ODE at 80 °C. Hu et al.216 performed electron-beam irradiation in a TEM to fabricate NPs of low-melting-point metals such as Zn, Ga, Sn, and Cd and IV–VI semiconducting lead chalcogenides PbE (E = S, Se, and Te). Bi spheres are prepared via the thermolysis of a bismuth–thiolate precursor in a mild solventless condition with the help of organic capping reagents such as 1-dodecanethiol and PVP.217
4. Metal alloy nanoparticles
Alloy NPs consisting of two or more metals show additive as well as new properties of interest.10,218,219 For example, magnetic alloy NPs are preferred to single metal NPs because of their relative stability under ambient conditions. Hollow triangular AuAg nanoboxes have been prepared from Ag nanoprisms by employing galvanic replacement reactions using ascorbic acid and HAuCl4.220 Silver in these nanoboxes was removed with an aqueous etchant, Fe(NO3)3 or NH4OH.221 AuAg bimetallic NPs have been prepared by the sonochemical co-reduction of Au(III) and Ag(I) ions in aqueous solutions.222 Co-reduction of Au(III) and Ag(I) produces bimetallic NPs with a Au core–Ag shell morphology. AuAg alloy NPs can be prepared in a cellulose matrix by the co-reduction of corresponding metal ions using NaBH4.223 One-pot synthesis of OAm-coated AuAg alloy NPs are obtained by the simultaneous reduction of HAuCl4 and AgNO3 in the presence of octadecane and OAm at 120 °C for 0.5 h in a N2 atmosphere.224
AuCu NPs are obtained by heating a mixture of Cu(CH3COO)2 and presynthesized Au NPs in OA and TOA at an appropriate temperature for 50–100 min.225 AuCu and AuCu3 NPs have been prepared by Chen et al.226 by a seed-based diffusion route using Au NPs and Cu(CH3COO)2 as precursors (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  TEM images of the intermetallic CuAu with different sizes: (a) (4.22 ± 0.2) nm, (b) (6.0 ± 0.2) nm, (c) (7.4 ± 0.3) nm; (d) TEM image of a multilayer hcp superlattice consisting of (6.00.2) nm CuAu NPs; inset shows the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern. Reprinted with permission from W. Chen, R. Yu, L. Li, A. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2917–2921. ©2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. K GaA. 
AuPd hybrid nanostructures are obtained from the galvanic replacement reaction between single-crystal Pd nanorods and AuCl4− ions.227 Colloidal dispersions of the PdAu bimetallic clusters are obtained by successive alcoholic reduction of their constituent metal ions refluxed in EG at 160 °C in the presence of PVP have a three layer core–shell morphology composed of an evenly alloyed inner core, an Au-rich intermediate layer, and a Pd-rich outer shell.228 Cu60Pd40 NPs are prepared by the co-reduction of Cu(acac)2 and Pd(acac)2 using the superhydride LiBEt3H in THF.229
Au21Fe10, Au22Fe12, Au28Fe14, and Au34Fe14 clusters have been synthesized by the oxidation of [Fe3(CO)11]2− with [AuCl4]− in acetone in an inert atmosphere.230 Intermetallic compounds of Au3Fe, Au3Co, and Au3Ni with the cubic (Cu3Au) structure are formed by the reaction of HAuCl4·3H2O, OAm, and an appropriate quantity of Fe(acac)3, Co(acac)2, or Ni(acac)2 in octyl ether and n-butyllithium at 80 °C under Ar.231
Synthesis of bimetallic AuPt NPs is carried out by using HAuCl4 and H2PtCl6 as precursors and OAm as the solvent, stabilizer, and reducing reagent.232 Heterostructured PtAun NPs are obtained through a seed-mediated process in the presence of Pt NPs as seeds, wherein HAuCl4 is reduced by OAm in ODE.233 AuPt nanodendrites can be prepared by the hydrothermal co-reduction of H2PtCl6 and HAuCl4 in ammonium formate along with etched Ti plates in a Teflon lined autoclave at 180 °C for 8 h.234 AuPt alloy NPs have been prepared by the reduction of DMF-coordinated Au3+ and Pt4+.235 In this process, DMF serves as the solvent, ligand, and reductant.
PtPd alloy NPs with well-defined twinned structures are synthesized by simple co-reduction of Na2PdCl4 and K2PtCl4 with PVP in aqueous solution.236 PtPd bimetallic nanodendrites consisting of a dense array of Pt branches on a Pd core have been prepared by Lim et al.237 by reducing K2PtCl4 with L-ascorbic acid in the presence of Pd NP seeds in aqueous solution (Fig. 15). A wet-chemical approach has been used for the synthesis of Pt3Ni nanooctahedra and nanocubes, wherein the reaction is carried out between Ni(acac)2 and Pt(acac)2 in a mixture of OA and OAm at ∼200 °C in the presence of W(CO)6.238
 Fig. 15  (A) TEM image of truncated octahedral Pd NPs synthesized by reducing Na2PdCl4 with L-ascorbic acid in an aqueous solution. The inset shows a geometrical model of the truncated octahedron, where the green and yellow colors denote the {100} and {111} facets, respectively. (B) HRTEM image of a single truncated octahedron of Pd recorded along the [011] zone axis and the corresponding FT pattern (inset). (C) TEM image of Pd–Pt nanodendrites synthesized by reducing K2PtCl4 with L-ascorbic acid in the presence of truncated octahedral Pd NP seeds in an aqueous solution. (D) HAADF-STEM image of Pd–Pt nanodendrites. Reprinted with permission from B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 5, 324. ©2009 AAAS. http://www.sciencemag.org. 
Intermetallic PtPb nanodendrites can be obtained by hydrothermal-assisted co-reduction of Pt and Pb inorganic precursors by formic acid in aqueous media in the absence of a surfactant or polymer.239 Yang et al.240 synthesized PtPb nanostructures by the simultaneous reduction of Pt(acac)2 and Pb(acac)2 by the tert-butylamine–borane complex in the presence of adamantanecarboxylic acid, hexadecanethiol and HDA in diphenylether at a temperature between 180 and 200 °C. Liu et al.241 describe the synthesis of PtSn NPs by the co-reduction of Pt(acac)2 and SnCl4 in ODE by using NaBEt3H and with OAm and OA as capping agents to control the particle size and shape. Pt3Sn NPs are obtained starting with Pt(dba)2 and (n-Bu)3SnH and carrying out the reaction under H2 at room temperature.242 RuPt bimetallic NPs have been deposited on the surface of alumina by the atomic layer deposition technique using 2,4-(dimethylpentadienyl) (ethylcyclopentadienyl)-ruthenium and trimethyl(methylcyclopentadienyl) platinum as the precursors.243
Sun and coworkers244 have reported a general method to synthesize monodisperse FePt alloy NPs by the simultaneous reduction of Pt(acac)2 and the thermal decomposition of Fe(CO)5 in the presence of OA and OAm. A similar method has been employed for the synthesis of monodisperse, crystalline CoPt3 NPs by the reduction of Pt(acac)2 and thermal decomposition of Co2(CO)8 in the presence of 1-adamantanecarboxylic acid.245 Thermal decomposition of anionic bimetallic carbonyl clusters [FeCo3(CO)12]−, [Fe3Pt3(CO)15]2−, [FeNi5(CO)13]2− and [Fe4Pt(CO)16]2 gives alloy NPs of FeCo3, FePt, FeNi4, and Fe4Pt respectively.246 Wellons et al.247 demonstrate a one-step synthesis of ferromagnetic Fe–Pt NPs by the reductive decomposition of the single-source precursor, FePt(CO)4dppmBr, on a water-soluble support (Na2CO3) at 600 °C. FePt3 NPs are also prepared by the thermal decomposition of the bimetallic precursor [(CO)3Fe(μ-dppm)(μ-CO)PtCl2] in the presence of OAE and OA in nonadecane.248 Fe–Pt NPs can be prepared at 350 °C using Na2Fe(CO)4 and Pt(acac)3 as reagents and nonadecane and tetracosane as solvents.249 Hydrophobic to superhydrophobic surfaces are obtained by having fluorinated ligands on the surface of FePt.250 FePt NPs capped with perfluorinated ligands (Fig. 16) are prepared by simultaneous thermal decomposition of Fe(CO)5 and reduction of Pt(acac)2.53
 Fig. 16  TEM images of fluorous ligand capped (a) 4 nm γ-Fe2O3 and (b) 3.5 nm FePt NPs with size distribution histograms as inset. Reproduced with permission from R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021. ©Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hollow CoPt NPs are prepared wherein Co NPs are first reduced by NaBH4 which act as in situ template, followed by the spontaneous galvanic displacement reaction with PtCl62− with Co NPs in the presence of a citrate stabilizer.251 NixPt1–x NPs are synthesized via reduction of Pt(acac)2 and Ni(acac)2 in the presence of OA, OAm and HDD.252 By dissolving Pt(acac)3 and Ni(acac)2 in diphenyl ether, followed by the addition of a mixture of the borane–tert-butylamine complex and HDD along with long-alkane-chain amines, truncated-octahedral Pt3Ni NPs are obtained.253
CoFe NPs are synthesized via an organometallic route using Fe(CO)5 and [Co(h3-C8H13)(h4-C8H12)] in toluene in the presence of stabilizing agents such as a mixture of OA and HDA at 150 °C under H2 for 48 h.254 Nanocubes of FeCo alloys are formed on a large scale by the reduction of aqueous Fe2+ and Co2+ with hydrazine in the presence of PEG and cyclohexane at 80 °C.235 CoFe NPs embedded in a MgO crystal matrix have been prepared starting from MgCoIIFeIII layered double hydroxides (LDHs) by hydrogen gas phase reduction at 450 °C.255 Decomposition of Fe(acac)3 and Co(acac)2 in a mixture of surfactants and HDD in Ar + H2 atmosphere at 300 °C yields FeCo NPs.256
Cable and Schaak257 have reported a general strategy for the solution-mediated synthesis of nanocrystalline zinc-based intermetallic compounds, M–Zn (M = Au, Cu, Pd), involving the low-temperature chemical conversion of preformed metal NPs into intermetallics via reaction with zero-valent organozinc reagents such as Et2Zn and Ph2Zn. NPs of the bismuth–antimony–telluride alloy, Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3, are obtained by a direct chemical solution route, in which the bismuth and antimony precursors dissolved in a phenyl ether and coordinated with dodecanethiol, are reacted with tellurium in TOP.258
Iron silicide NPs are prepared via solution phase synthesis by the reaction of silicon tetrachloride with ironpentacarbonyl in the presence of HDD at 180 °C.259 Single-crystal intermetallic M–Sn (M = Fe, Cu, Co, Ni) nanospheres can be obtained via a modified polyol process.260
5. Metal oxide nanoparticles
A nonaqueous sol–gel approach has been employed by Koziej et al.261 to prepare TiO2 (anatase) NPs by mixing Ti(OiPr)4 and benzyl alcohol. Wu et al.262 report a nonaqueous synthesis of nanostructured TiO2 by condensation of titanium isopropoxide in the presence of benzyl alcohol and OAm at room temperature (Fig. 17). Liao et al.263 have synthesized TiO2 NP colloids from the peroxotitanate complex solution, starting from titanium(IV) sulfate and H2O2 in a water–alcohol media, under solvothermal conditions. Dai et al.264 obtain TiO2 (anatase) NPs with chemically active facets, by digesting electrospun nanofibers consisting of amorphous TiO2 and PVP in aqueous acetic acid solution, followed by hydrothermal treatment at 150 °C for 20 h. TiO2 (brookite) NPs are obtained by aminolysis of titanium carboxylate complexes.265
 Fig. 17  Representative TEM images of NS-TiO2 and NP-TiO2. (a) Low magnification image of as-made NS-TiO2. (b and c) High-magnification images of nanosheets obtained by treating NS-TiO2 with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide. (d and e) Low-magnification and high-resolution TEM images of NP-TiO2. The inset in (e) is the Fourier transfer image corresponding to HRTEM of NP TiO2 (NS – nanosheets; NP-nanoparticles). Reproduced with permission from Wu, C. Guo, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563. ©2009 American Chemical Society. 
Tenne et al.266 report the synthesis of hollow V2O5 NPs by laser ablation of V2O5. The as-prepared V2O5 NPs are crystalline with a low-energy surface {010} pointing outward and with some defects between the facets. Different sized VOx hierarchical hollow spheres aggregated by small NPs can be obtained by a template-free method involving the decomposition of V(acac)2.267
Yu et al.268 report the synthesis of uniform Mn3O4 NPs by the low-temperature decomposition of a mixture of manganese acetate, carboxylic acid and OAm in xylene. The size and shape of the NPs could be controlled by varying the experimental conditions such as precursors, surfactants and injection temperature. Mn3O4 NPs were obtained by Pike et al.269 by mixing aqueous solutions of manganese nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine at a temperature between 20 and 80 °C. Bruce et al.270 report the formation of ordered three-dimensional array of monodispersed 8 nm Mn3O4 NPs with a core–shell structure, by the thermal decomposition of Mn(acac)2 in OAm. The self-assembled three-dimensional array exhibits a behavior similar to a spin-glass rather than superparamagnetic particles. The as-prepared MnO2 NPs are able to remove organic pollutants from waste water. Nanoplates with a thickness of 5 nm and side dimensions of 9, 15 and 22 nm are obtained by using OAm as the surfactant where as by using a carboxylic acid as the cosurfactant along with OAm, spherical NPs are obtained in the size ranges of 5.5, 6.2, 7.2, 8.5 and 15 nm.268 Rusakova et al.271 report the conversion of hexagonal-, square- and cross-shaped MnO NPs into MnO–Mn3O4 NPs. Octahedral MnO NPs were synthesized by Xie et al.272 by the thermal decomposition of Mn(OOC2H5)2 in a mixed organic solvent containing trioctylamine and OA. MnO NPs with average diameters in the 6–14 nm range are produced by the decomposition of manganese cupferronate in the presence of TOPO, under solvothermal conditions.273 Jiang et al.274 report the synthesis of single-crystalline Mn3O4 nanooctahedra from the ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt using the hydrothermal route. Fei et al.275 demonstrate that hierarchical hollow MnO2 can be synthesized by KMnO4 oxidation of micrometer-scale manganese carbonate structures at room temperature, followed by the selective removal of MnCO3 with HCl.
γ-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 are synthesized by microemulsions as well as by other methods.276–280 Coprecipitation from the iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride solutions is a convenient method to synthesize iron oxides, by using a base under inert atmosphere at room temperature or at an elevated temperature.278 One of the most widely used methods is the thermal decomposition of organic soluble precursors such as Fe(CO)5 and Fe(acac)3 for the synthesis of monodisperse iron oxide NPs.281 Sun et al.282 report the synthesis of spherical, truncated octahedral Fe3O4 NPs by the high-temperature thermal decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in the presence of OA and OAm. Another method is the nonaqueous solvothermal decomposition of iron acetylacetonate.18 The iron NPs are prepared by the thermal decomposition of Fe(CO)5 in the presence of OAm and the Fe NPs upon air oxidation, followed by heating gives rise to hollow Fe3O4 NPs (Fig. 18).283 Spherical and cubic iron oxide NPs are obtained by the decomposition of iron oleate complex by using OA and OAm as capping agents in ODE solvent.284 Magnetite NPs have been prepared by Sun et al.285 from Fe(acac)3 by using OAm as both reducing agent and stabilizer. Superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs are synthesized by coprecipitation from a ferrous + ferric salts solution by concentrated sodium hydroxide solution inside the aqueous cores of AOT–n-hexane reverse micelles.159 Glucose and gluconic acid-coated magnetite NPs can be prepared by hydrothermal synthesis from FeCl3 in the presence of sucrose.286 Synthesis and characterization of iron oxide-derivatized mutant cowpea mosaic virus hybrid NPs have been reported and the NPs were found to be good candidates for MRI imaging.287 Peng and Sun288 report a facile solution-phase synthesis of monodisperse hollow Fe3O4 NPs by the controlled oxidation of Fe–Fe3O4 NPs.
 Fig. 18  TEM images: (a) 13 nm Fe–Fe3O4 nanoparticle seeds, (b) 16 nm hollow Fe3O4 NPs, (c) a single hollow Fe3O4 nanoparticle (scale bar 10 nm), and (d) a superlattice array of the hollow Fe3O4 NPs. Reproduced with permission from Peng et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4155. ©2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Abou Hassan et al.289 show that aqueous dispersions of 6 nm superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs can be prepared on a chip in a millichannel reactor by the use of tetramethylammonium hydroxide as the alkaline reagent. Hu et al.290 use ionic liquid mediated microwave heating for the synthesis of magnetite NPs by the reaction of Fe(acac)3 and HDD in dibenzyl ether in the presence of OA and [bmim][BF4] at 250 °C. Here, [bmim][BF4] acts as both stabilizing agent and a microwave-absorbing medium (Fig. 19). Cysteine-capped amorphous magnetite is prepared by the sonochemical decomposition of Fe(CO)5 in the presence of cysteine.291 Synthesis of organic soluble monodisperse iron oxide NPs has been carried out by the digestion of submicrometer hematite powder in the presence of OA at high temperatures.292 Salazar-Alvarez et al.293 have synthesized cubic and spherical shaped Fe3O4 NPs by the decomposition of iron oleate and shown that the spherical ones exhibit larger blocking temperatures (TB) than the cubic ones. Thermal decomposition of FeOOH has also been employed to prepare spherical and cubic iron oxide NPs.294 The difference in TB and other magnetic properties of spherical and cubic forms appears to be due to the change in the percent content of FeO. Feyen et al.295 obtain mushroom nanostructures of iron oxides by partial coating of Fe3O4 or Fe2O3 with polymer spheres followed by attachment to silica hemispheres. Octahedral Fe3O4 NPs can be synthesized from iron(III)oleate in tetracosane medium.296 Cuboid iron-manganese oxide NPs with dimensions as large as 33 nm are obtained by surfactant-mediated synthesis.297
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image, and (c) XRD pattern of Fe3O4 NPs synthesized by typical process and standard. Reproduced with permission from Hu et al., Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3866–3868. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Monodisperse fluorous amine capped γ-Fe2O3 have been prepared by the thermal decomposition of Fe(CO)5 (Fig. 16(b)).53 Different morphological single-crystal magnetites with a nanoporous structure, exhibiting excellent magnetic properties, have been obtained by a polyol process using FeSO4 and EG.298 Tan et al.299 report room-temperature synthesis of magnetite NPs by the reduction of Fe(acac)3 with NMP or pyrrole in the presence of surfactants OA and OAm in air. Qu et al.300 used hydrothermal growth for the synthesis magnetite nanooctahedra coated with aspartic acid by using the precursor FeCl3·6H2O.
Synthesis of various-shaped (i.e., capsule, nanorings) NPs by the decomposition of Fe(acac)3 has been accomplished by varying the chain length of the carboxylic acid or by the use of hydrazine.301 Initially capsule-shaped α-Fe2O3 NPs are formed, which on preferential dissolution along the long dimension of the elongated NPs (c-axis of α-Fe2O3) form nanorings. The shape of the nanorings is regulated by the adsorption of phosphate ions on the faces parallel to the c-axis. The hollow structure of the NPs arises from the preferential dissolution of the α-Fe2O3 along the c-axis due to the strong coordination of the sulfate ions. α-Fe2O3 nanorings can be converted to magnetite and maghemite by reduction or reduction–oxidation, while preserving the morphology. Hu et al.302 report microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of α-Fe2O3 nanorings by using FeCl3·6H2O dissolved in aqueous NH4H2PO4 solution. Jia et al.303 have obtained single-crystal α-Fe2O3 nanorings by using the double anion-assisted hydrothermal method starting with FeCl3, NaH2PO4, and Na2SO4. Kim et al.304 report the synthesis of iron oxide nanocubes in the size range of 20 nm to 160 nm by the thermal decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in a mixture of OA and benzyl ether. They show that the nanocubes are formed as a result of fast growth along a direction, with the surfaces of the nanocubes corresponding to the {100} planes. Tetrakaidecahedral and oblique parallelepiped iron oxide NPs with high index facets are obtained in high yields with the assistance of the sodium carboxymethyl cellulose.305 Liz-Marzán et al.306 report on the shape-controlled synthesis of iron oxide NPs from TOAB and iron oleate.

Table 2 presents some of the methods of synthesis of iron oxide NPs.
Table 2 Various synthetic conditions for the synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles




Method
Compound
Reactants and reaction conditions
Reference




Thermal decomposition
Fe3O4
Iron oleate in the presence of OA and OAm at 320 °C

307



Iron oleate is decomposed in a sealed tube at low pressures and at 563 K

308



by decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in benzyl ether using large excess of OA (15:1 OA–Fe)

309



By thermal decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in a liquid mixture of triethylene glycol and triethanolamine at the refluxing temperature (245–280 °C) under the argon flow for 1 h

310



By decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in imidazolium based ionic liquids by using oleylamine as the reducing and surface modifier agent at 150–250 °C

311



γ-Fe2O3
Decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in the presence of poly(N-isopropyl-co-t-butylacrylamide)

312



By decomposition of Fe(Cupf)3 complex in octylamine at 250–300 °C

313



Solvothermal– Hydrothermal
Fe3O4
Mixture of anhydrous FeCl3 and anhydrous CH3COONa at high temperature

314



FeCl2·4H2O in basic aqueous solution at 138 °C

315



Using ultra colloidal iron hydroxide at 150 °C for 4 h

316



Using Fe(acac)3 as the iron source, n-octylamine as the reductant, and n-octanol as the solvent 240 °C for 2 h

317



α-Fe2O3
FeCl3·6H2O,5-sulfosalicylic acid dehydrate and ammonia at 150 °C

318



By dissolving FeCl3·6H2O in DMF at 180 °C

319



Coprecipitation
Fe3O4
Hydrolysis of FeCl3 by NaOH at a temperature above 200 °C in DEG in the presence of PAA

320



Aerosol pyrolysis
α-Fe2O3
Ferrous acetate and ferric nitrate as precursors with hydrazine at 300–500 °C

321





Hu et al.322 report controllable synthesis of Co3O4 NPs with different shapes via hydrothermal processing of cobalt hydroxide and subsequent thermal decomposition. The high index {112} crystal planes of Co3O4 NPs appear to be more reactive for CH4 combustion than the {001} and {011} planes. Co3O4 nanopolyhedra have been synthesized at 80 °C in aqueous solution by using Co(NO3)2·6H2O and hexamethylenetetramine.323 NPs of cobalt hydroxide, cobalt oxyhydroxide, and cobalt oxide are prepared by a soft chemical route by using Co(NO3)2 solution at 60 °C under the basic conditions.324 Single-crystalline Co3O4 hollow octahedral cages with tunable surface aperture are obtained by the carbothermal method, by using colloidal carbon spheres as templates and cobalt chloride as the reactant.325 Zhang et al.326 report the synthesis of cubic CoO NPs with different morphologies and sizes by the decomposition of cobalt(II) oleate at 280–320 °C in noncoordinating solvents such as ODE containing dodecanol–OA. Synthesis of rocksalt and wurtzite phases of CoO through thermodynamically and kinetically controlled reactions of Co(acac)3 has been reported.327 NPs of NiO with average diameters in the 3–24 nm range have been prepared by the decomposition of nickel cupferronate or acetate under solvothermal conditions.273
Cu2O NPs have also been prepared by the thermal decomposition of copper(I) acetate in trioctylamine in the presence of tetradecylphosphonic acid and further oxidation.328 The Cu2O seed NPs are first prepared with SDS as the capping surfactant and sodium ascorbate as the reducing agent. Addition of NaOH forms Cu(OH)42–, which subsequently gets reduced to form Cu2O seed particles. The seed particles aggregate and undergo surface reconstruction to evolve cubic morphology. Polyhedral Cu2O particles are prepared by adding a weak reducing agent such as glucose to a solution of copper citrate with PVP as capping agent.329 Cu2O nanoframes and nanocages are obtained in situ by oxidative etching at room temperature. Cu2O nanocages and nanoframes possessing truncated rhombic dodecahedral structures are obtained from aqueous solution containing CuCl2, SDS, NH2OH·HCl and NaOH.330 Yao et al.331 report the synthesis of monodisperse Cu2O NPs by the decomposition of Cu(II) acetate in presence of hexadecyamine. The polyol method can be employed for the synthesis of Cu2O NPs using Cu(NO3)2 and PVP as reagents and EG as the solvent.332 Synthesis of monodisperse truncated cubic, cuboctahedral, truncated octahedral and octahedral Cu2O NPs has been carried out in aqueous solution starting with CuCl2, SDS, hydroxylamine reductant, and NaOH, followed by varying the volume of hydroxylamine added to the reaction mixture.333 Differently shaped Cu2O NPs are prepared by reducing copper citrate with glucose.334 Park et al.335 have reported gram-scale synthesis of uniform Cu2O nanocubes by a one-pot polyol process wherein Cu(acac)2 is dissolved in hot PVP. Monodisperse Cu2O nanocubes with average sizes of 40, 65, 100, 230 and 420 nm are formed from seed-mediated synthesis in aqueous medium.336 Cu2O cubes are converted to polycrystalline CuO hollow nanostructures in air through a sequential dissolution–precipitation process by adding aqueous ammonia solution.
NPs of ZnO are usually prepared by a variety of physical and chemical methods.44,195,337,338 Precipitation through acid-catalyzed esterification of zinc acetate dihydrate with 1-pentanol at 130 °C yields ZnO NPs.339 The sol–gel process has also been employed by several workers to prepare ZnO NPs.340
Blue-emitting ZnO NPs synthesized by various means are of considerable interest. The blue emission is attributed to surface states created by OA. Investigation of the blue luminescence of ZnO NPs has been carried out by Zeng et al.341 by laser ablation of zinc metal in an aqueous medium. Kaluza et al.342 report high surface area ZnO NPs synthesized by a continuous precipitation method using a micromixer coupled directly to a spray dryer. Highly luminescent ZnO NPs have been synthesized by using a semiconductive polyalkyloxythiophene template.343 ZnO NPs exhibiting various colors, including blue, green, yellow and orange, are obtained through an ethanol-based precipitation method by adjusting the pH of the solution.344
ZnO hollow spheres (400–500 nm in diameter) consisting of ZnO NPs of approximately 15 nm have been prepared by a rapid sonochemical process.345 Uncapped ZnO NPs can be obtained from mixing an ethanol solution containing Zn2+ ions with a solution of alkali metal oxides and the method can also be used for the synthesis of organic amine capped ZnO NPs.346 A novel method to synthesize organic-capped and colloidal ZnO NPs has been developed by Omata et al.347 The method involves hydrolysis of zinc-di-t-butoxide and zinc-di-n-butoxide in hydrophilic benzylamine followed by polymerization to ZnO by dehydration and/or elimination of butanol. Growth of ZnO NPs and exchange of the surface-capping ligand from the hydroxyl group or benzylamine to OAm is achieved by heating the colloidal solution at 100–180 °C after addition of OAm. Formation of ZnO hollow spheres is attributed to oriented attachment and subsequent Ostwald ripening. Alivisatos et al.348 report anion exchange in ZnO colloidal NPs with the sulfur to form hollow ZnS NPs, whose shape is dictated by the initial ZnO structure. Crystallographic and elemental analyses provide insight into the mechanism of anion exchange which is accompanied by nanoscale Kirkendall effect where in thin layers of ZnS grow epitaxially onto the ZnO core. The surface anion exchange, generates a highly strained interface between the ZnO core and the ZnS shell. To release this interface energy, the ZnO core spontaneously diffuses into the ZnS shell, which is finally exchanged with the sulfur precursor at the outer shell surface, forming fully converted ZnS hollow NPs (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  TEM and HRTEM images of initial ZnO NPs (a, c) and ZnS hollow NPs obtained after anion exchange (b, d). Reprinted with permission from J. Park, H. Zheng, Y.-W. Jun and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13943. ©2009 American Chemical Society. 

Table 3 summarizes the typical methods used for the synthesis of ZnO NPs.
Table 3 Synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles




Method
Reactants and reaction conditions
Reference




Solvothermal
Zinc cupferronate in toluene at 180 °C

338



Zinc(II) acetylacetonate in acetonitrile at 100 °C

349



Coprecipitation
Di-ethyl zinc into TOPO at 200 °C

350



Thermal decomposition
Di-ethyl zinc into TOPO at 200 °C

44



Oxidation
[Zn(c-C6H11)2] in tetrahydrofuran at room temperature

351



Stirring
Zn(NiBu2)2]2 with hexylamine and diethylether and stirred at room temperature with particular humidity

352





Monodisperse zirconia (tetragonal: T-ZrO2; monoclinic: M-ZrO2) NPs are prepared by the thermal decomposition of zirconium oleate by using ethanol or octane as a solvent in presence of OAm and OA as capping agents.353 Guiot et al.354 have synthesized yttria-stabilized zirconia NPs by hydrothermal synthesis, using ZrO(NO3)2·xH2O and (Y(NO3))3·6H2O in the presence of acetylacetone. In another method, Ninjbadgar et al.355 have prepared Eu3+ doped ZrO2 NPs by using a zirconium(IV) isopropoxide–isopropanol complex, europium(III) acetate hydrate and benzyl alcohol. NPs of Mn- and Cr-doped ZrO2 and HfO2 have been obtained by nonaqueous sol–gel decomposition of zirconium(IV) isopropoxide and hafnium(IV)-tetrabutoxide.356 WO3 NPs in the 5–30 nm range are prepared by solvothermal treatment of tungsten chloride in benzyl alcohol up to 210 °C, followed by annealing in air.357 Flame spray pyrolysis of tungsten chloride and tungsten hexacarbonyl is reported to yield 6–10 nm NPs of WO3.358,359
In2O3 NPs with a narrow size distribution have been prepared by one-pot solvothermal synthesis using indium oleate in 1-hexanol.360 Caruntu et al.361 have employed the decomposition of indium precursors such as indium(III) acetate, indium(III) acetylacetonate and indium isopropoxide to obtain differently shaped In2O3 NPs. In2O3 NPs are obtained in solution phase by peroxide-mediated route at relatively low temperatures (120–180 °C) using indium acetylacetonate as the precursor in the presence of lauric acid and OAm.362
Han et al.363 report the hydrothermal synthesis of high energy faceted SnO2 nanooctahedra by mixing SnCl4·5H2O and PVP in water–ethanol mixture where the octahedral SnO2 NPs are enclosed result from the coordinative effect of H+ and Cl−. Microwave synthesis of SnO2 NPs involving decomposition of tin(IV) acetate in the presence of OA and OAm has been reported.364 Gilstrap et al.365 report the formation of organic soluble ∼5 nm indium tin oxide (ITO) particles with a narrow size distribution by the thermal decomposition of indium acetate and tin acetate in ODE, by using ODA as the capping agent. Ionic liquid-mediated synthesis of conductive ITO NPs is reported by Bühler et al.366 by using SnCl4·5H2O and InCl3·4H2O as precursors. Sasaki et al.367 have developed a one-step solvothermal method for the synthesis of cube shaped ITO NPs by mixing SnCl4·5H2O, InCl3·4H2O and EG in 1-butanol. A one-pot synthesis of colloidal, monodisperse ITO NPs with various sizes have been prepared by Choi et al.368 by using In(acac)3 and Sn(acac)2Cl, with OAm as the capping agent. Spray pyrolysis can be employed for the synthesis of tellurium dioxide NPs by using telluric acid (Te(OH)2) in deionized water as the precursor.369 The NPs are amorphous with mean particle diameters ranging from 10 to 40 nm. Monodisperse CeO2 NPs and super lattice-like colloidal particles have been successfully synthesized in ethanol–water by a one-pot procedure using icosahedral (NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 as the precursor.370 Dicarboxylic acid-modified CeO2 NPs are obtained under hydrothermal conditions from Ce(OH)4.371 The morphology and displayed crystallite plane of the CeO2 NPs is determined by the length of the dicarboxylic acid, long dicarboxylic acids producing cubooctahedral or cubic CeO2 NPs. TOPO capped CeO2−δ and CeOCl NPs are prepared using nonhydrolytic condensation of cerium alkoxides with cerium halides. The NPs could be solubilized in nonpolar solvents.47 Arita et al.372 report the formation of uniform sized colloidal CeO2 NPs stabilized with dodecanoic acid and decanoic acid in cyclohexane (Fig. 21). Mesoporous CeO2 NPs have been prepared by Masson et al.42 by the reverse micelle sol–gel technique using cerium isopropoxide in the presence of the surfactant Triton-X 100 in cyclohexane. Yang et al.373 have synthesized CeO2 hollow spheres by assembling CeO2 nanooctahedra which are in turn prepared by hydrothermal synthesis by mixing CeCl3·7H2O and PVP. Template-free synthesis of single-crystalline CeO2 nanooctahedra has been carried out by a hydrothermal process by using Ce(NO3)3·6H2O as the cerium source and Na3PO4·6H2O as the mineralizer.374 Xu et al.375 report the synthesis of SnO2 quantum dots in the diameter range of ∼0.5–2.5 nm from SnCl4·5H2O, OA, and OAm under solvothermal conditions.
 Fig. 21  TEM images of colloidal CeO2 NPs stabilized with (a) dodecanonic acid (b) decanoic acid. Reproduced with permission from T. Arita, J. Yoo, Y. Ueda and T. Adschiri, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 689. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Monodisperse CoFe2O4 NPs are prepared by controlled thermal decomposition of [(h5-C5H5)CoFe2(CO)9].376 MnFe2O4 NPs are obtained by the thermal decomposition of metal–surfactant complexes which in turn are prepared from Fe(CO)5, Mn2(CO)10 and OA followed by mild chemical oxidation.377 The particle size varies from 5 to 13 nm depending on the experimental conditions. Sun et al.48 have synthesized monodisperse NPs of CoFe2O4 and MnFe2O4 from the high-temperature reaction of Fe(acac)3 and Co(acac)2 or Mn(acac)2 with HDD. The particle diameter can be varied from 3 to 20 nm by varying the reaction conditions or by seed mediated-growth. Ferrite NPs (MFe2O4, MCo, Ni, Mn, and Fe) can be prepared by decomposing the mixed metal–oleate complexes dissolved in ODE at 300 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere.378 The mechanism of formation of different shapes from NPs to nanostars by controlling the nucleation and growth dynamics and through changes in the heating rate, temperature, and precursor concentration has been discussed.379 Oxidation of CoFe2 also yields CoFe2O4 NPs.380 MnFe2O4 NPs modified with o-alkene-terminated ligands are successfully prepared in a one-pot reaction and covalently bound by UV irradiation to the surface of hydrogen-terminated silicon, creating stable, ordered monolayer arrays of magnetic NPs.381 MnFe2O4 NPs are also prepared by a coprecipitation method by reacting manganous salts mixed with either ferric or ferrous salts with sodium hydroxide and subsequent digestion to form 5 to 25 nm particles.382 Spherical and cubic CoFe2O4 NPs can be realized with greater shape control by controlling the growth rate.383 Monodisperse NPs of CoFe2O4 covered by a bifunctional molecule containing free vinyl end groups able to link onto a silicon substrate, have been prepared from the metal–undecanoate complexes.384
Monodisperse BaTiO3 NPs with a diameter of 6 to 12 nm have been prepared by injection hydrolysis of barium titanium ethyl hexano-isopropoxide in a mixture of diphenyl ether and OA at 140 °C in an argon atmosphere.385 A nonhydrolytic and halide-free procedure is used to synthesize nanocrystalline BaTiO3, SrTiO3, and (Ba,Sr)TiO3 particles with diameters ranging from 4 to 10 nm by using the titanium isopropoxide and barium or strontium metal in benzyl alcohol as precursors.386 Wang et al.387 report a strategy to synthesize a variety of NPs based on the phase transfer and separation mechanism occurring at the interfaces of the liquid–solid-solutions by using NaOH, Ba(NO3)2 and TiCl3 as starting materials. Hydrophobic BaTiO3 NPs with an average crystallite size of 3.7 nm are prepared in oil–water (typical oil phases used are hexadecene, toluene, and heptane) solvothermal method using barium acetate and titanium(IV)-n-butoxide.388 Cube-like BaTiO3 NPs have been synthesized by the thermal decomposition of metal-fatty salts under hydrothermal conditions at temperatures as low as 135 °C.389 Hydrothermal microwave synthesis of tetragonal BaTiO3 NPs is reported with the NPs showing photoluminiscence.390 CaTiO3 nanostructures are prepared through an in situ hydrothermal method on the titanium surface.391 Titanium citrate, lead acetate, EG, KOH and surfactants are used as reactants to form PbTiO3 NPs under hydrothermal conditions in the temperature range of 90–200 °C.392 Lead acetate, anhydrous benzyl alcohol and titanium isopropoxide are stirred for 30 min to form a uniform solution along with OA and the mixture kept at 200 °C for 2 h to yield yellow powder lead titanate of 4 nm particle size.393,394
Nanoparticulate perovskite oxides, LnBO3 (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu; B = Cr, Fe), have been prepared by polyol-mediated synthesis.395 Nanosized heterobimetallic precursors prepared from Ln and Fe oleates from their corresponding metal nitrates and sodium oleate are used for the synthesis of nanocrystalline rare-earth orthoferrites LnFeO3 (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd) at 500 °C.396 Sol–gel method based on the glycol–gel reaction is used for the synthesis of single-crystalline BiFeO3 NPs.397 Uniform microcrystals of BiFeO3 with various morphologies such as microspheres and microcubes are obtained by reacting Fe(NO3)3·9H2O (0.01 mol), Bi(NO3)3·5H2O (0.01 mol) and PEG at 200 °C under hydrothermal conditions.398
A hydrothermal method to prepare colloidal rare earth orthovanadate NPs, LnVO4 (Ln = Y and lanthanides), by the reaction of OA, and Na3VO4 and Ln(NO3)3·xH2O at 140 °C has been reported.399 YVO4 NPs doped with rare earth and phosphorous ions are obtained in aqueous media by using PVP, Na3VO4, Na3PO4 and LnCl3 as reactants and heating at 180 °C for 2 h.400 One-dimensional YVO4:Ln and Y(V, P)O4:Ln nanofibers and quasi-one-dimensional YVO4:Ln microbelts (Ln = Eu3+ Sm3, Dy3+ 3+) are prepared by a combination of sol–gel processing and electrospinning.401
Nanostructures of Fe2(MoO4)3, ZnMoO4, MnMoO4 and CoMoO4 have been synthesized by heating a mixture of the corresponding metal nitrates with ammonium heptamolybdate at 400 °C.402 NPs of molybdate hydrates, MMoO4·nH2O (MCo, Ni, Mn, n = 0, 3:4, 1) are prepared hydrothermally from (NH4)6Mo7O24, M(NO3)2 or MCl2 (MCo, Ni, Mn) and NH3·H2O.403
6. Metal chalcogenide nanoparticles
Semiconductor NPs are often referred to as quantum dots, whose wave functions are confined in all the three spatial directions.404 Since Murray et al.405 reported the pyrolysis method to synthesize CdSe NPs, there have been significant advances in the synthesis of chalcogenide NPs. Similar strategies have been employed for the synthesis of NPs of CdTe, CdS, PbS, PbSe, PbTe, ZnS and ZnSe.406,407 NPs of metal chalcogenides are also prepared by the reaction of metal salts with an appropriate sulfiding or seleniding agent under solvothermal or thermolysis conditions. Thus, toluene-soluble CdSe NPs with a diameter of 3 nm are obtained solvothermally by reacting cadmium stearate with elemental Se in toluene in the presence of tetralin.408 Synthesis of CdS NCs of 5–10 nm has been carried out by the reaction between cadmium stearate with sulfur in the presence of tetralin.409 Decomposition of single molecular precursors provides a convenient and effective method for the synthesis of metal chalcogenide NPs.410,411 Metal chalcogenide NPs of different shapes such as CdTe and CdSe tetrapods,412 CdSe–CdTe nanobarbells,413 PbTe cubes and CdSe hyperbranched structures have been prepared.414 A fluorous chemical procedure for the one-step synthesis of metal chalcogenides (e.g., CdSe, PbSe, ZnSe) using the fact that perfluorohydrocarbon, and hydrocarbon solvents become miscible at high temperatures has been reported (Fig. 22).53 Growth of capped CdSe and CdS NPs formed by the reaction of selenium or sulfur with cadmium stearate in toluene solution in the presence of dodecanethiol or trioctylphosphine oxide and tetralin, has been investigated by a variety of techniques. These studies suggest that the growth of the NPs is controlled by diffusion-limited Ostwald ripening.415 Structural transformation of hydrophobic CdSe and CdTe NPs to nanopencils and hexagonal structures is achieved through an Ostwald ripening process induced by Cl− and surfactants (Fig. 23).416
 Fig. 22  TEM images of fluorous thiol capped (a) 4 nm CdSe and (b) 3.5 nm CdS NPs with size distribution histograms as inset. Photographs of the dispersions of the NPs in PFC are also given as insets. Reproduced with permission from R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 23  TEM images of (a) CdS seed NPs and (b) CdS nanopencils after reaction at 260 °C for 20 min. The inset in (b) shows a side view of the nanopencils. (c) XRD patterns of (i) CdS seed NPs and (ii) CdS nanopencils. (d) HRTEM image of a single nanopencil showing stacking faults. (e) HRTEM image of single nanopencil taken from the [001] zone axis. (f) Fast Fourier transform pattern of the rectangular region in (e). Reproduced with permission from M. Saruyama, M. Kanehara and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3280. ©2010 American Chemical Society. 
Ma et al.417 report a one-pot synthesis of nucleic acid-functionalized chalcogenide NPs. This procedure allows the simultaneous synthesis and functionalization of CdTe NPs using DNA as the ligands. DNA-passivated NPs exhibit specific binding to nucleic acids, proteins and cell targets. The synthesis of CdSe QDs in P3HT solution without surfactants has been carried out for use in photovoltaic solar cells.418 Choi et al.419 have developed a general method for the synthesis of metal sulfide (CdS, ZnS, MnS, and PbS) NPs by the solution-phase thermal decomposition of metal–oleate complexes in alkanethiol. The size of the NPs can be tuned from 7 to 20 nm by varying the reaction conditions. Cabot et al.420 report the sulfidation of spherical cadmium crystals to form hollow CdS via the Kirkendall effect. NPs of CdS, CdSe, ZnS, ZnSe and PbS have been obtained by using ionic liquids as solvents.421 Changing the anion of the ionic liquid and of the addition of surfactants and capping agent's results in the change of size and shape of the nanostructures. A series of metal-chalcogenide NPs with controllable shape and size are prepared via a facile wet chemical route involving metal nitrates and sulfur or selenium powder and octadecylamine as solvent.422
Synthesis of optically active, water-soluble chiral CdS QDs, has been achieved by using rac, D- and L- enantiomeric forms of penicillamine as stabilizers.423 CdS QDs prepared in ferritin show left-handed circularly polarized luminescence from the both direct transition and from surface-trapping sites with relatively large anisotropy factors.424 Linear and dendritic peptides are used as capping agents in the synthesis of CdS nanostructures. The composition of the peptides affects the size, aggregation, and optical properties of the NPs.425 Molecular vapor–solvent co-condensation method which involves vaporization of bulk materials followed by controlled nucleation of the molecular vapor species in cold solvent has been used to prepare metal sulfide, selenide, and telluride nanomaterials.426 The microemulsion of water in CO2 is used as a nanoreactor for the preparation of CdS and ZnS semiconductor NPs in supercritical fluid CO2 by mixing microemulsions containing the appropriate ionic species in the water core.427 Porous aerogels of thiol-capped CdS, CdSe, ZnS, PbS NPs are prepared through gelation, controlled loss of surface-groups and supercritical CO2 drying.428 Weller et al.429 synthesized the thiol-capped CdTe NPs in aqueous solutions. Water soluble CdTe quantum dots have also been prepared using (NH4)2Te as the tellurium source.430 CdTe quantum dots are obtained by using hydrothermal431 and microwave conditions as well.432 Amphiphilic CdTe NPs are prepared by using thiol-modified PEG oligomers.433
ZnS and ZnSe crystallize in both the zinc blende (ZB) and wurtzite (WZ) structures, of which ZB is the more stable structure. The synthetic conditions employed favor one or the other structure for ZnSe NPs. ZnSe NPs in WZ structure with different morphologies have been successfully obtained by the tetraethylenepentamine directed solvothermal method.434 Synthetic strategies for shape and phase control of ZnS NPs from a lamellar molecular precursor ZnS(NH2CH2CH2NH2)0.5, are reported in ethylenediamine medium.435 ZnS (WZ) NPs are formed at 150 °C in a polyol medium.436 ZnS NPs with ZB structure with diameters less than 10 nm are synthesized from zinc diethyldithiocarbamate as the single-source precursor using spray pyrolysis method.437 ZnO NPs, with the WZ structure, are used as templates for the formation of WZ-type ZnS and ZnSe.438 Lactobacillus streptococcus thermophilus (Str. thermophilus), bacteria have been employed as templates to form ZnS hollow spheres.439
CuS NPs and their assembly to form wires and tubes by an amine-assisted hydrothermal process at low temperatures (90–110 °C) from CuCl and thiourea as reactants have been reported.440 CuS flakes and nanodisks are obtained by using the hydrothermal microemulsion method.441 Cu2S NPs with disk-like morphologies are synthesized by solventless thermolysis of a copper alkylthiolate molecular precursor.442 Cu2S NPs can also be prepared by the reaction between Cu(acac)2 and ammonium diethyldithiocarbamate in a mixed solvent containing dodecanethiol and OA.443 Single-crystalline CuS hexagonal nanoplates are produced through the facile chemical vapor reaction wherein sulfur vapor is reacted with copper films in a vacuum chamber around 450 °C for about 7 h. Cu2−xSe NPs are prepared by the solvothermal method from CuI and Se at low temperatures.444 Xie et al.445 report nonstoichiometric and stoichiometric CuSe by a sonochemical procedure at room temperature. Phosphine-free synthesis of CuSe NPs is reported using ODE and OAm (Fig. 24).446
 Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of size-selected Cu2−xSe NPs grow for 15 min at 300 °C, having an average size of 16 nm (the size estimated by XRD was 18 nm). The inset shows a sketch of the hexagonal projection of a cuboctahedron shape. (b) HRTEM image of Cu2−xSe NPs. Most of the displayed NPs are seen under their [111] zone axis. The inset shows their two-dimensional fast Fourier transform. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of Cu2−xSe NPs drop-casted from solution onto a glass substrate. (d) Elastic-filtered (ZL) image of several NPs. (e, f) Cu and Se elemental maps from the same group obtained by filtering the Cu L edge (at 931 eV) and the Se L edge (at 1436 eV). (g) Elemental quantification of a group of NPs by EDS. Reproduced with permission from S. Deka et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8912. ©2010 American Chemical Society. 
SnS and SnSe adopt an orthorhombic layered crystal structure that can be considered as a distorted NaCl structure. They are optically active in the near-infrared and infrared and are of interest for their applications in photovoltaics, near-infrared detectors, and biomedical applications. Eychmuller et al.447 used organometallic Sn[N(SiCH3)2]2 as a tin precursor for the synthesis of hydrophobic SnS NPs. Hydrophilic SnS NPs are prepared starting with SnBr2 and Na2S in the presence of various ethanolamines in EG.448 SnS NPs with shape control have been synthesized using simple tin oxide hydroxide (Sn6O4(OH)4) and thioacetamide dissolved in OA and OAm as precursors.449 2D SnS2 nanoplates are synthesized through the thermal decomposition of Sn(S2CNEt2)4 in an organic solvent at elevated temperatures.450 SnS2 NPs are also obtained by heating elemental tin metal powder and CS2 in a horizontal tube furnace at 800–1000 °C.451 SnSe NPs are obtained by a method involving di-tert-butyl diselenide, tin(II) chloride in DDA and dodecanethiol.452 SnSe NPs with size control are prepared by the reaction of selenium and bis[bis(trimethylsilyl)amino]tin(II).453
Au2S NP superstructures are synthesized by a hydrothermal procedure at 175 °C using HAuCl4 and Na2S as reagents and CTAB as the surfactant.454 Shape-controlled synthesis of AgS NPs is carried out by using anhydrous silver nitrate, OAm and elemental sulfur at 100 °C.455 Cubic GdS NPs are made in solution from GdCl3 and Na2S in the presence of dextrose, under continuous stirring for 2 h at 70 °C.456 ReS2 NPs are obtained by a high-temperature MOCVD process starting from Re2(CO)10 and elemental sulfur.457 Monodisperse α-MnS NPs have been synthesized by decomposing manganese oleate and elemental sulfur in ODE at 250–320 °C.458 Chen and Fan459 have prepared a series of metal sulfides MS2 (M = Ni, Co, Fe, Ni, Mo) and selenides MSe2 (M = Ni, Mo) hydrothermally using metal chlorides and Na2S2O3 or Na2SeSO3 as starting materials. Nanoplates of single-crystal antimony telluride are obtained by hydrothermal treatment of SbCl3, tartaric acid, ammonia, K2TeO3 and hydrazine hydrate at 180 °C for 5 hours.460
7. Metal pnictide nanoparticles
Large GaN NPs (32 nm) were prepared by Xie et al.461 by treating GaCl3 with Li3N in benzene under solvothermal conditions. GaN NPs of various sizes have been prepared under solvothermal conditions, by employing gallium cupferronate or chloride as the gallium source and 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) as the nitriding agent and toluene as solvent.29 Manz et al.462 have obtained NPs of hexagonal GaN of varying diameters. With GaCl3 as the precursor, the reaction is, GaCl3 + (CH3)3SiNHSi(CH3)3 → GaN + Si(CH3)3Cl + HCl. This method has been applied for the synthesis of AlN and InN NPs as well (Fig. 25).27,28,463 GaN NPs have also been obtained by the thermal decomposition of precursor compounds such as (C2H5)N·Ga(N3)3 and polymeric [Ga(NH)3/2]n.464–466 Hexagonal NPs of GaN, AlN, and InN have been obtained by refluxing the urea-complexes prepared from metal chlorides in tri-n-octylamine.30 Nanocrystalline InN powder is obtained by the metathesis reaction of InBr3 and NaN3 in superheated toluene and refluxing hexadecane around 553 K467 and from the reaction of NaNH2 and In2S3 around 463 K.468 Three-dimensional urchin-like nanostructures of AlN are formed by the DC arc-plasma reaction between Al vapor and N2 gas in the absence of any catalyst or template.469 Arrays of gallium–indium oxide NPs are heated in ammonia in a CVD reactor at temperatures in the range 600–850 °C to obtain monodisperse GaN and InN NPs with PS-P4VP as the block copolymer template.470
 Fig. 25  (a) TEM image of CTAB-capped 2.5 nm GaN NPs prepared starting with Ga cupferron. The upper right inset shows the size distribution. The lower inset shows a HREM image (scale bar is 2 nm) and upper inset also shows the PL spectrum of CTAB capped 2.5 nm GaN NPs; (b) TEM image of InN NPs of 15 nm average diameter prepared starting with In cupferron. The upper inset shows a HREM image of a single nanocrystal. The lower inset shows a TEM image of InN NPs prepared starting with InCl3. Reproduced with permission from K. Sardar and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2004, 6, 425 and K. Sardar, F. L. Deepak, A. Govindaraj, M. M. Seikh and C. N. R. Rao, Small, 2005, 1, 91. ©2004 and 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Boron nitride has been a subject of extensive investigations because of its useful properties. BN NPs have been prepared using urea as the N-source and boric acid as the source of boron.471–473 Spray pyrolysis of poly(borazinylamine) dissolved in liquid ammonia has been used to prepare spherical BN particles.474 Spherical BN NPs are also prepared by the chemical vapor deposition of trimethoxyborane with ammonia.475 Nanosheets and nanopans of BN are obtained from the vapour phase reaction between BBr3 and NH3.476 A solid-state reaction involving ammonium dicyanamide and the corresponding metal oxides is used to prepare NPs of BN, NbN, WN and Mo2N.477 By heating mixtures of H3BO3, TiCl4, and NbCl5 with urea in 1:6 molar ratio in the 900–1000 °C range produces NPs of BN, TiN, and NbN respectively.471 BN with hollow sphere, onion, and peanut structures are obtained by the liquid–solid reaction between BBr3 and NaNH2, NH4Cl at 400–450 °C for 6–12 h.478 On reaction of cyanamide or urea with metal oxide NPs, the later are transformed into nanocrystalline metal nitrides.479 Metal nitride and metal carbide NPs have been prepared by the urea route using polymeric or gel-like metal-urea complexes as the precursors.480,481 TiN NPs are obtained by the reaction of TiCl4 and NaNH2.482,483 NbN NPs are prepared by the reaction of NbCl5 with NaN3.484 The benzene-thermal route has also been employed to synthesize NbN.485 Lengauer486 has investigated the formation of γ-Mo2N and δ-MoN by the reaction between MoCl5 and ammonia. Bull et al.487 obtained phase-pure δ-MoN by this reaction carried out at 933 K. γ-Mo2N and δ-MoN with superconducting Tc values of 3.8 K and 7.5 K respectively, have been prepared by heating hydroxylamine complexes of molybdenum in NH3.488 Gomathi et al.489 have prepared γ-Mo2N nanoparticles of ∼4 nm (Tc = 6.5 K) diameter by a simple procedure involving the reaction of MoCl5 with urea at 873 K. The γ-Mo2N nanoparticles are transformed to nanoparticles of δ-MoN with a slightly larger diameter on heating in a NH3 atmosphere at 573 K.
NPs of cobalt phosphides have been synthesized by the reaction of sodium phosphide with the metal salts in benzene or toluene in a Teflon-lined autoclave at 150 °C.490 This route has been successfully applied to prepare Ni2P491 and FeP.492 FeP NPs are also formed by the reaction between Fe(acac)3 with P(SiMe3) in TOPO at 280 °C.493 Decomposition of organometallic species to generate transition metal species for the reaction with alkyl phosphines like TOP, has proven to be a general and less expensive route to transition metal phosphide NPs.494,495 White phosphorous (P4) in a solution of ammonium hydroxide or ethylene diamine has been used to obtain single phase particles of Co2P, Ni2P, and Cu3P.496,497 Henkes et al.498 transformed a variety of transition metal NPs into their respective phosphide phases by reacting them with TOP (Fig. 26). TOP can be used to convert not only metal NPs into metal phosphides but also bulk-scale metal powders, foils, wires, films, supported NPs, and patterned substrates.499 A surfactant-aided solvothermal route has been utilized to synthesize Ni2P aggregates.500 Yang et al.501 have synthesized Ni2P with high surface area by the reduction of the phosphate in the presence of a surfactant, while Park et al.502 have utilized a continuous-injection method to synthesize Ni2P nanorods by the thermal decomposition of a Ni-alkylphosphine complex. A strategy based on the transformation of Ni NPs into hollow and dense Ni2P NPs by reaction with TOP has been reported, exploiting the Kirkendall effect for hollow NP formation.498,503 Ni2P NPs are also obtained using the solid phase reaction between nickel hypophosphite and ammonium hypophosphite in N2.504
 Fig. 26  (a) Powder XRD data for Ni NPs and Ni2P formed after their reaction with TOP; TEM/SAED data for (b) Ni NPs and (c) Ni2P formed by reacting the particles in (b) with TOPA Reprinted with permission from A. E. Henkes, Y. Vasquez and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1896. ©2007 American Chemical Society. 
InP–GaP NPs with sizes ranging from 2 to 6.5 nm can be prepared from the reaction of chloroindium oxalate–chlorogallium oxalate complex and P[Si(CH3)3]3 in a mixture of TOPO and TOP at 270 °C for 3 days.505,506 The growth of InP and InAs NPs is facilitated by using the noncoordinating solvent ODE with precursors such as indium acetate and tris(trimethylsilyl)-phosphine.507 Xu et al.508 have prepared monodisperse InP NPs from (CH3)3In and P[Si(CH3)3]3 in weakly coordinating solvents such as methyl myristate or dibutyl sebacate. MnAs NPs are prepared by the reaction of triphenylarsine oxide (Ph3AsO) and dimanganesedecacarbonyl (Mn2CO10) at temperatures ranging from 250 to 330 °C in the presence of TOPO.509
8. Core–shell nanoparticles
Core–shell nanoparticles exhibit unique properties with several possible applications. In the case of fluorescent semiconductor NPs, core–shell NPs help to increase the robustness and enhance the photoluminescence quantum yield as well as the probability of radio-active recombination. NPs with magnetic, plasmonic and semiconducting properties can be used as cores or shells for manipulating the properties of these hybrid structures. Properties of each component within the hybrids can be modulated through a conjugating component or interface.
Au@Ag core–shell nanostructures are prepared at room temperature through the selective reduction of Ag+ ions onto the surface of Au nanorods, using hydroquinone as the reducing agent.510 A modified two-step seed-mediated growth procedure for synthesizing Au@Pd nanocubes, has been reported.511 Here Au NPs of about 3 nm in diameter are used as the seeds for growing about 30 nm Au nanooctahedra as the cores (Fig. 27). Uniform Au@Pd nanocubes have been generated by reducing H2PdCl4 on octahedral Au cores with ascorbic acid in the presence of CTAB. Feng et al.512 carried out the synthesis of Au@Pt nanostructures by Au nanorod seed mediated growth wherein Pt nanodots are decorated on Au nanorods by reducing K2PtCl4 with ascorbic acid. NPs composed of magnetic cores with continuous Au shell layers have been synthesized. The procedure converts hydrophobic iron oxide NPs to water-soluble Au coated bifunctional NPs.513 Zhang et al.514 report nonepitaxial growth of hybrid Au@CdS core–shell nanostructures with large lattice mismatch by controlling the soft acid–base coordination reaction between the molecular complexes and the colloidal nanostructures (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 27  (a, b) SEM and TEM images of the overall morphology of Au@Pd nanocubes self-assembled on the Si wafer and Cu grid, respectively. The dashed frames indicate the core area of particles. (c) STEM images of the octahedral Au seed within a cubic Pd shell and cross-sectional compositional line profiles of a Au@Pd nanocube along the diagonal (indicated by a red line). (d) TEM image of a Au@Pd nanocube at high magnification. The inset is the SAED pattern taken from individual nanocube. Fan et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6949. ©2008 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 28  Au–CdS core–shell nanostructures with monocrystalline shell. (A) Typical TEM image showing uniform core–shell nanostructures. Scale bar, 20 nm. (B to E) High-resolution TEM images of core–shell nanostructures from (A). Whereas Au core NPs can manifest monocrystalline (B), single-fold twin (C), fivefold twin (D), and multiple-twin (E) lattice structures, all CdS shells are monocrystalline. The red lines highlight the lattice orientations within the Au core NPs. Scale bar, 5 nm. (F) XRD pattern of Au–CdS sample shown in (A). Bulk Au [red solid lines] and wurtzite CdS (blue solid lines) are also provided for reference and comparison. (Inset) A ball-and-stick molecular model of Au–CdS, illustrating a cubic core and wurtzite shell. (G to J) Angle-dependent high resolution TEM characterization. The sample depicted has a larger shell thickness than the one in (A) to emphasize the extremely high-quality crystallinity of the shell. The CdS shell shows perfect monocrystalline features without detectable structural defects under a different viewing angle. Scale bar, 5 nm. Reprinted with permission from J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Lee and M. Ouyang, Science, 2010, 327, 1634. ©2010 AAAS. http://www.sciencemag.org. 
Pd–Pt core–shell nanoplates with hexagonal and triangular shapes have been synthesized through the heterogeneous, epitaxial growth of Pt on Pd nanoplates.515 One-dimensional Ni–Ni3C core–shell nanoball chains with an average diameter of around 30 nm have been prepared in one step using TOPO as a soft template at low temperatures.516 Temperature-responsive γ-Fe2O3-core–Au-shell NPs are obtained from smart diblock copolymers as templates.517 Rh@Pt core–shell, NPs can be prepared using polyol reduction in EG solvent using Pt and Rh salts with PVP as the stabilizer.518 Catalytic studies show that the Rh@Pt core–shell NPs are superior to alloy and monometallic mixtures. RucorePtshell bimetallic NPs can be prepared by the reduction of Ru NPs in TEG followed by the addition of Pt2+ ions in EG solution.519 By taking advantage of the different kinetics of hydrogenation of the organometallic precursors, Rh(allyl)3 and Fe[N(Si(CH3)3)2]2, core–shell Rh@Fe NPs are prepared.520
Core–shell NPs based on metallic ReO3 NPs have been prepared with the metallic shell ReO3@Au, ReO3@Ag, by the reduction of metal salts over ReO3 NP seeds as well as ReO3@SiO2, ReO3@TiO2 are prepared by the hydrolysis of the organometallic precursors over the ReO3 NPs.521 Cu–Cu2O core–shell NPs of different shapes are obtained on a H-terminated Si(100) substrate using CuSO4·5H2O and NaClO4 as electrolytes.522
Peng et al.523 report the synthesis of a series of CdSe–CdS NPs with core diameters ranging from 2.3 to 3.9 nm with shell thicknesses of up to 3 monolayers. Their results indicate that in the excited state the hole is confined to the core and the electron is delocalized throughout the entire structure. ZnSe–CdS core–shell NPs, are synthesized via the traditional pyrolysis of organometallic precursors.524 The two-step synthesis involved fabrication of 4.5–6 nm ZnSe seeds followed by a subsequent deposition of the CdS shell. Lifshitz and coworkers525 report the synthesis of air-stable PbSe–PbS and PbSe–PbSexS1−x core–shell NPs with lead(II) acetate, TOPSe and TOPS as precursors, OA as the stabilizer, and diphenyl ether as the solvent. Single-step synthesis of InP–ZnS core–shell NPs without precursor injection has been reported.526 Based on the different reactivity of the core and shell precursors, the reagents are mixed at room temperature and subsequently heated to 250–300 °C. Xie et al.527 report the synthesis of ZnTe–CdTe core–shell nanostructures by the addition of cadmium oleate, TOPTe, TOPSe, and sulfur dissolved in ODE to a dispersion of ZnTe core NPs.
Core–shell structures of FePt–CdSe, NiPt–CdSe, and Au–CdSe are prepared starting with a mixture of noble metal (alloy) NPs, cadmium stearate and OAm, HDA and HDD at 290–300 °C and then injecting the Se precursor solution before cooling to room temperature.528 Hybrid NPs are prepared by decomposition of Fe(acac)3 on the surfaces of Au NPs (prepared by the two-phase Brust method) in high-boiling-point solvents in the presence of OA and OAm. Octyl ether produced peanut-like particles, benzyl ether and phenyl ether gave core–shell particles and ODE yielded a mixture of peanut-like and core–shell structures.529 Nanostructures of FePt and PbS or PbSe in form of core–shells or nanodumbbells have been obtained and the morphology-directing role of amine is examined.530 Fe3O4 microspheres are synthesized and added to the mixture of thioacetamide and Zn(Ac)2 in regular intervals, the mixture is irradiated by 40 kHz ultrasonic waves and maintained the temperature at 45 °C gives nanocomposites of Fe3O4–MS (M = Zn, Cd, Hg, Pb, Co, and Ni).531
Noble metal–metal oxide dumbbell shaped NPs have been synthesized based on seed-mediated growth. Metal oxides are grown over the presynthesized noble metal seeds by the thermal decomposition of the metal carbonyl followed by oxidation in air. They show enhanced catalytic activity toward CO oxidation in comparison with their counterparts.532 Heterostructured Cu2S–In2S3 with various shapes and compositions can be obtained by a high-temperature precursor-injection method in which Cu1.94S is used as the catalyst for the nucleation and growth of In2S3 NPs.533
CeO2@Ce1−xZrxO2 nanocages have been prepared by using colloidal ceria as both the chemical precursor and physical template via Kirkendall effect.534 A colloidal seeded-growth strategy is used to synthesize bimagnetic hybrid NPs that consist of a tetrapod-shaped ferrimagnetic iron oxide functionalized with spherical ferromagnetic Co clusters giving rise to exchange coupling between them.535 Multiferroic and magnetoelectric properties of core–shell CoFe2O4@BaTiO3 nanocomposites which are prepared by a combination of solution processing and high temperature calcinations have been explored.536
9. Conclusions
The discussion in the previous sections should clearly indicate the great interest evinced in the last few years in the synthesis of inorganic NPs. In spite of this progress, we still need well-established protocols for the synthesis of many of the important inorganic NPs of desired sizes and shapes. In this context, it is necessary to develop methods, which are simple and do not use expensive and poisonous chemicals. A green chemical approach to NP synthesis is therefore important. We believe that there will be continued effort to prepare nanoparticles of various inorganic materials of different sizes and shapes in the years to come. Functionalization and chemical manipulation of inorganic nanoparticles are of considerable importance in using these materials in the preparation of composites and such applications. We have not dealt with these aspects in this perspective, since we had to limit the scope only to synthesis. We do hope that the article will serve as a ready guide to all those pursuing synthesis of nanoparticles.
References

          P. J. Thomas and P. O'Brien, in Nanomaterials Chemistry, ed. C. N. R. Rao, A. Muller and A. K. Cheetham, Wiley-VCH, Weinhiem,  2007, pp. 1–36 Search PubMed .

          C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni, Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2007 Search PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, S. R. C. Vivekchand, K. Biswas and A. Govindaraj, Dalton Trans., 2007, 3728–3749 RSC .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Ganguli, A. Ganguly and S. Vaidya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 474–485 RSC .
A. B. Smetana, J. S. Wang, J. Boeckl, G. J. Brown and C. M. Wai, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10429–10432 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit, P. Lixon and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 12974–12983 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lisiecki, F. Billoudet and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 4160–4166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y.-G. Feng, L.-Y. Wang, L. Zhang and J.-Y. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2006, 281, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Chen and C.-J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1557–1562 RSC .
A. K. Ganguli, T. Ahmad, S. Vaidya and J. Ahmed, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 2451–2477 CrossRef CAS .
N. Moumen and M. P. Pileni, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Haram, A. R. Mahadeshwar and S. G. Dixit, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 5868–5873 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kwon and T. Hyeon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1696–1709 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, J. Park, Y. Jang, Y. Chung, S. Hwang, T. Hyeon and Y. W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1289–1291 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Yang, C. M. Shen, Y. G. Wang, Y. K. Su, T. Z. Yang and H. J. Gao, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 70–74 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. S. Samia, J. A. Schlueter, J. S. Jiang, S. D. Bader, C. J. Qin and X. M. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5203–5212 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna, G. Garnweitner, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5608–5612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Diab, B. Moshofsky, I. Jen-La Plante and T. Mokari, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11626–11630 RSC .
J. C. Bruce, N. Revaprasadu and K. R. Koch, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1647–1653 RSC .
R. L. Wells, M. F. Self, A. T. McPhail, S. R. Aubuchon, R. C. Woudenberg and J. P. Jasinski, Organometallics, 1993, 12, 2832–2834 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 629–636 RSC .
J. P. Carpenter, C. M. Lukehart, S. B. Milne, S. R. Stock, J. E. Wittig, B. D. Jones, R. Glosser and J. G. Zhu, J. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 557, 121–130 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Bronstein, J. E. Atkinson, A. G. Malyutin, F. Kidwai, B. D. Stein, D. G. Morgan, J. M. Perry and J. A. Karty, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3044–3050 CrossRef CAS .

Chemistry of Nanocrystalline Oxide Materials, ed. K. C. Patil, M. S. Hegde, T. Rattan and S. T. Aruna, World Scientific Publishers,  2008 Search PubMed .
V. L. Calero-DdelC, A. M. Gonzalez and C. Rinaldi, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng.-Trans. ASME, 2010, 132, 7 Search PubMed .
K. Sardar and C. N. R. Rao, Solid State Sci., 2005, 7, 217–220 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sardar, F. L. Deepak, A. Govindaraj, M. M. Seikh and C. N. R. Rao, Small, 2005, 1, 91–94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sardar and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sardar, M. Dan, B. Schwenzer and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2175–2177 RSC .
C.-C. Chang, H.-L. Wu, C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7570–7574 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, G. Ye and G. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4031–4037 CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4430–4431 CrossRef CAS .
K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 110, 842–845 CrossRef .
D. Berhanu, K. Govender, D. Smyth-Boyle, M. Archbold, D. P. Halliday and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4709–4711 RSC .
U. K. Gautam, M. Rajamathi, F. Meldrum, P. Morgan and R. Seshadri, Chem. Commun., 2001, 629–630 RSC .
S. Thimmaiah, M. Rajamathi, N. Singh, P. Bera, F. Meldrum, N. Chandrasekhar and R. Seshadri, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 3215–3221 RSC .
L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, Academic Press, Boston,  1990 Search PubMed .
M. Niederberger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 793–800 CrossRef CAS .
F. del Monte, M. P. Morales, D. Levy, A. Fernandez, M. Ocaña, A. Roig, E. Molins, K. O'Grady and C. J. Serna, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3627–3634 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masson, P. Holliman, M. Kalaji and P. Kluson, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3517–3522 RSC .
T. J. Trentler, T. E. Denler, J. F. Bertone, A. Agrawal and V. L. Colvin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1613–1614 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shim and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11651–11654 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, T. Yu, Y. W. Kim, H. M. Park, F. Wu, J. Z. Zhang and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6553–6557 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Redl, C. T. Black, G. C. Papaefthymiou, R. L. Sandstrom, M. Yin, H. Zeng, C. B. Murray and S. P. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14583–14599 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Depner, K. R. Kort, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer and S. Banerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14126–14134 CAS .
S. Sun, H. Zeng, D. B. Robinson, S. Raoux, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 126, 273–279 CrossRef .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801 RSC .
J. Yang, E. Sargent, S. Kelley and J. Y. Ying, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 683–689 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vijaya Sarathy, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 1997, 537–538 RSC .
R. Voggu, K. Biswas, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20752–20755 CrossRef CAS .
R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021–6023 RSC .
I. Bilecka and M. Niederberger, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1358–1374 RSC .
M. B. Mohamed, K. M. AbouZeid, V. Abdelsayed, A. A. Aljarash and M. S. El-Shall, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2766–2772 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, O. Palchik, S. Chen and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 7344–7347 CrossRef CAS .
R. Harpeness and A. Gedanken, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3431–3434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kitamoto, R. Minami, Y. Shibata, T. Chikata and S. Kat, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2005, 41, 3880 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, J. Zhu, W. Zhong and H.-Y. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2001, 50, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao and K. P. Kalyanikutty, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 489–499 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, V. V. Agrawal, K. Biswas, U. K. Gautam, M. Ghosh, A. Govindaraj, G. U. Kulkarni, K. R. Kalyanikutty, K. Sardar and S. R. C. Vivekchandi, Pure Appl. Chem., 2006, 78, 1619–1650 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, G. U. Kulkarni, V. V. Agrawal, U. K. Gautam, M. Ghosh and U. Tumkurkar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 289, 305–318 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, G. U. Kulkarni, P. J. Thomas, V. V. Agrawal and P. Saravanan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7391–7395 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Agrawal, P. Mahalakshmi, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, Langmuir, 2005, 22, 1846–1851 CrossRef .
N. Zaitseva, Z. R. Dai, C. D. Grant, J. Harper and C. Saw, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5174–5178 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Gautam, M. Ghosh and C. N. R. Rao, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10775–10778 CrossRef CAS .
M. Antonietti, D. Kuang, B. Smarsly and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4988–4992 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Curr. Nanosci., 2005, 1, 35 CrossRef CAS .
H. Itoh, K. Naka and Y. Chujo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3026–3027 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Fonseca, A. P. Umpierre, P. F. P. Fichtner, S. R. Teixeira and J. Dupont, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 3263–3269 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Rossi, J. Dupont, G. Machado, P. F. P. Fichtner, C. D. Radtke, I. J. R. Baumvol and S. R. Teixeira, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2004, 15, 901–910 CrossRef .
K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faraday, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1857, 147, 145–181 CrossRef .
B. V. Enüstün and J. Turkevich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 3317–3328 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mukherjee, A. Ahmad, D. Mandal, S. Senapati, S. R. Sainkar, M. I. Khan, R. Parishcha, P. V. Ajaykumar, M. Alam, R. Kumar and M. Sastry, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 515–519 CrossRef CAS .

          E. A. Hauser and J. E. Lynn, Experiments in Colloid Chemistry, MacGraw-Hill, New York,  1940 Search PubMed .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1951, 11, 55 RSC .
D. G. Duff, A. Baiker and P. P. Edwards, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 2301–2309 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, X. Song, J. Li, Y. Bai, W. Yang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13939–13948 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanehara, J.-i. Sakurai, H. Sugimura and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1630–1631 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohyama, Y. Hitomi, Y. Higuchi, M. Shinagawa, H. Mukai, M. Kodera, K. Teramura, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6300–6302 RSC .
E. Redel, M. Walter, R. Thomann, C. Vollmer, L. Hussein, H. Scherer, M. Krüger and C. Janiak, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 10047–10059 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Y. Liu and R. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1112–1117 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. G. Goulet and R. B. Lennox, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9582–9584 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. McGilvray, M. R. Decan, D. Wang and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15980–15981 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christian and M. Bromfield, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1135–1139 RSC .
K. Biswas, N. Varghese and C. N. R. Rao, Small, 2008, 4, 649–655 CrossRef CAS .
S. Egusa, P. L. Redmond and N. F. Scherer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17993–17996 CAS .
M. L. Personick, M. R. Langille, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu, S. Zheng, D. Wang, X. Liu, H. Li, S. Han, J. Chen, Z. Tang and G. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 697–703 CrossRef .
S. W. Lu, V. Frain and M. Arbab, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12850–12854 CAS .
M. S. Yavuz, W. Li and Y. Xia, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 13181–13187 CrossRef CAS .
D. Seo, C. I. Yoo, I. S. Chung, S. M. Park, S. Ryu and H. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2469–2475 CAS .
Y. Ma, J. Zeng, W. Li, M. McKiernan, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1930–1934 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. Li, J. Weng, X. Wang, Z. Zhou, K. Yang, M. Liu, X. Chen, Q. Cui, M. Cao and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 277–284 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, K. L. Shuford, Q. H. Park, W. Cai, Y. Li, E. J. Lee and S. O. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3264–3268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Q. Kuang, Z. Jiang, Z. Xie, R. Huang and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8901–8904 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, W. Wang, H. Liang and H. Xu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 9, 858–862 Search PubMed .
S. Guo, L. Wang and E. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3163–3165 RSC .
H.-G. Liao, Y.-X. Jiang, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-P. Chen and S.-G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9100–9103 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pastoriza-Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 679–688 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, H. Koerner and R. A. Vaia, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1433–1439 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Rashid and T. K. Mandal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2261–2271 CrossRef CAS .
B. Keita, R. N. Biboum, I. M. Mbomekalle, S. Floquet, C. Simonnet-Jegat, E. Cadot, F. Miserque, P. Berthet and L. Nadjo, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3196–3199 RSC .
S. Guo and E. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6740–6743 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Y. Lee and D. I. C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2823–2830 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, A. Friedrich and A. Taubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1008–1014 RSC .
S. D. Perrault and W. C. W. Chan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17042–17043 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, X. Jiao and D. Chen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 3378–3386 CAS .
M. Tsuji, Y. Maeda, S. Hikino, H. Kumagae, M. Matsunaga, X.-L. Tang, R. Matsuo, M. Ogino and P. Jiang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4700–4705 CAS .
V. N. Richards, N. P. Rath and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3556–3567 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, X. Ji, H. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Li and W. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6573–6576 CAS .
S. Kundu, K. Wang and H. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 113, 134–141 Search PubMed .
H. Liang, W. Wang, Y. Huang, S. Zhang, H. Wei and H. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7427–7431 CAS .
T. U. B. Rao and T. Pradeep, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3925–3929 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kind, R. Popescu, E. Muller, D. Gerthsen and C. Feldmann, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2223–2229 RSC .
H. Xu and K. S. Suslick, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3209–3214 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, P. H. C. Camargo, X. Lu and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 485–490 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, W. Li, C. Moran, J. Zeng, J. Chen, L.-P. Wen and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11372–11378 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, J. E. Millstone, S. Li and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8436–8439 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wiley, T. Herricks, Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1733–1739 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Wiley, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 765–768 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wiley, Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8077–8080 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1580–1582 RSC .
B. J. Wiley, Y. Chen, J. M. McLellan, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, D. Ginger and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1032–1036 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, Y. Zheng, M. Rycenga, J. Tao, Z.-Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8552–8553 CrossRef CAS .
A. Courty, A. I. Henry, N. Goubet and M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Li, J. Wu, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7787–7791 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Skrabalak, B. J. Wiley, M. Kim, E. V. Formo and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2077–2081 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, H. Yang, W. Wang, J. Li and H. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6068–6069 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Cobley, L. Au, M. McKiernan, A. Schwartz, L.-P. Wen, J. Chen and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2044–2048 CAS .
A. Tao, P. Sinsermsuksakul and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4597–4601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, I. Washio, J. Chen, H. Cai, Z.-Y. Li and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 8563–8570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Huang and J. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 192–197 CrossRef .
B. Pietrobon and V. Kitaev, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5186–5190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giuffrida, G. Ventimiglia and S. Sortino, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4055–4057 RSC .
J. An, B. Tang, X. Ning, J. Zhou, B. Zhao, W. Xu, C. Corredor and J. R. Lombardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18055–18059 CAS .
B. K. Jena, B. K. Mishra and S. Bohidar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14753–14758 CAS .
T. Teranishi and M. Miyake, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .
T. Teranishi, M. Hosoe, T. Tanaka and M. Miyake, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3818–3827 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and K. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5397–5403 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wakayama, N. Setoyama and Y. Fukushima, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 742–745 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. M. McLellan, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 804–808 CrossRef .
T. S. Ahmadi, Z. L. Wang, T. C. Green, A. Henglein and M. A. El-Sayed, Science, 1996, 272, 1924–1925 CAS .
K. V. Sarathy, G. Raina, R. T. Yadav, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9876–9880 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Zhao, S.-H. Chen, S.-Y. Wang, D.-G. Li and H.-Y. Ma, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3315–3318 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kurihara, J. n. H. Fendler, I. Ravet and J. n. B. Nagy, J. Mol. Catal., 1986, 34, 325–335 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Kim, J. Park, Y. Jang, Y. Chung, S. Hwang, T. Hyeon and Y. W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1289–1291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. Chen, B. Wiley, Y. Xia, Y. Yin and Z.-Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1237–1242 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Piao, Y. Jang, M. Shokouhimehr, I. S. Lee and T. Hyeon, Small, 2007, 3, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mazumder and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4588–4589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, L. Zhang, H. Zhou, Y. Zhu, E. Sutter, Y. Ji, M. H. Rafailovich and J. C. Sokolov, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2065–2070 CrossRef CAS .
F.-R. Fan, A. Attia, U. K. Sur, J.-B. Chen, Z.-X. Xie, J.-F. Li, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2335–2340 CAS .
L. Bisson, C. Boissiere, L. Nicole, D. Grosso, J. P. Jolivet, C. c. Thomazeau, D. Uzio, G. Berhault and C. m. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2668–2678 CrossRef CAS .
E. Coronado, A. Ribera, J. Garcia-Martinez, N. Linares and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5682–5688 RSC .
Y. Xiong, J. Chen, B. Wiley, Y. Xia, S. Aloni and Y. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7332–7333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. M. McLellan, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 790–794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2589–2592 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, X. Lu, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4043–4047 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Nemoto and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2835–2841 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramirez, L. Eradès, K. Philippot, P. Lecante and B. Chaudret, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2219–2228 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari and K.-L. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2231–2237 CAS .
Z.-Y. Zhou, Z.-Z. Huang, D.-J. Chen, Q. Wang, N. Tian and S.-G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 411–414 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9152–9153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nogami, R. Koike, R. Jalem, G. Kawamura, Y. Yang and Y. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 568–571 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Bigall, T. Hätling, M. Klose, P. Simon, L. M. Eng and A. Eychmüller, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4588–4592 CrossRef CAS .
G. Surendran, L. Ramos, B. Pansu, E. Prouzet, P. Beaunier, F. Audonnet and H. Remita, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5045–5048 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demortière, P. Launois, N. Goubet, P. A. Albouy and C. Petit, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14583–14592 CrossRef .
H. Zheng, R. K. Smith, Y.-w. Jun, C. Kisielowski, U. Dahmen and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2009, 324, 1309–1312 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohanty, N. Garg and R. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4962–4966 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheong, J. D. Watt and R. D. Tilley, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2045–2053 RSC .
N. Varghese and C. N. R. Rao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 365, 117–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kura, M. Takahashi and T. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5835–5838 CAS .
T. Ling, J. Zhu, H. Yu and L. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9450–9453 CAS .
T. Ling, L. Xie, J. Zhu, H. Yu, H. Ye, R. Yu, Z. Cheng, L. Liu, G. Yang, Z. Cheng, Y. Wang and X. Ma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1572–1576 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, J. Park, K. An, N.-K. Yang, J.-G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5812–5813 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scariot, D. O. Silva, J. D. Scholten, G. Machado, S. R. Teixeira, M. A. Novak, G. Ebeling and J. Dupont, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9075–9078 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. de Silva, V. Palshin, K. M. N. de Silva, L. L. Henry and C. S. S. R. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 738–747 RSC .
L. T. Lu, L. D. Tung, I. Robinson, D. Ung, B. Tan, J. Long, A. I. Cooper, D. G. Fernig and N. T. K. Thanh, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2453–2458 RSC .
I. Robinson, M. Volk, L. D. Tung, G. Caruntu, N. Kay and N. T. K. Thanh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9497–9501 CAS .
K. M. Nam, J. H. Shim, H. Ki, S.-I. Choi, G. Lee, J. K. Jang, Y. Jo, M.-H. Jung, H. Song and J. T. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9504–9508 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Fu, A. Peng, T. Zhai, Y. Ma, F. Yuan and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1636–1640 CrossRef CAS .
O. Metin, V. Mazumder, S. Ozkar and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1468–1469 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, G. Li and J. C. Yu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2812–2815 CAS .
M. Richard-Plouet, M. Guillot, S. Vilminot, C. d. Leuvrey, C. Estournès and M. Kurmoo, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carenco, C. d. Boissière, L. Nicole, C. m. Sanchez, P. Le Floch and N. Mézailles, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1340–1349 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Jiao and D. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18793–18797 CAS .
H. Winnischofer, T. C. R. Rocha, W. C. Nunes, L. M. Socolovsky, M. Knobel and D. Zanchet, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1313–1319 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Kalidindi, U. Sanyal and B. R. Jagirdar, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 3965–3967 CrossRef CAS .
V. Engels, F. Benaskar, D. A. Jefferson, B. F. G. Johnson and A. E. H. Wheatley, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6496–6502 CAS .
I. C. Chang, T.-K. Huang, H.-K. Lin, Y.-F. Tzeng, C.-W. Peng, F.-M. Pan, C.-Y. Lee and H.-T. Chiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1375–1378 CAS .
I. Haas, S. Shanmugam and A. Gedanken, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4696–4703 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Huang, H. P. Wang, J.-E. Chang and E. M. Eyring, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4663–4665 RSC .
J. F. Bondi, K. D. Oyler, X. Ke, P. Schiffer and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9144–9145 CrossRef CAS .
E. Redel, R. Thomann and C. Janiak, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1789–1791 RSC .
N. Zettsu, J. M. McLellan, B. Wiley, Y. Yin, Z.-Y. Li and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, M. Ghosh and C. N. R. Rao, J. Cluster Sci., 2007, 18, 97–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Xia, W. Li, J. Zeng, Y. Dai, D. Yang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5296–5300 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. G. Prechtl, M. Scariot, J. D. Scholten, G. Machado, S. r. R. Teixeira and J. Dupont, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 8995–9001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vollmer, E. Redel, K. Abu-Shandi, R. Thomann, H. Manyar, C. Hardacre and C. Janiak, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 3849–3858 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yuan, Z. Zhou, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 5515–5521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, H. Zhong and H. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6589–6591 RSC .
J. Hu, Z. Chen, N. Wang, Y. Song, H. Jiang and Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4503–4505 RSC .
S. B. Kalidindi and B. R. Jagirdar, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4524–4529 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Meziani, C. E. Bunker, F. Lu, H. Li, W. Wang, E. A. Guliants, R. A. Quinn and Y.-P. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 703–709 CAS .
H. Yu, P. C. Gibbons, K. F. Kelton and W. E. Buhro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9198–9199 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Lim, B. Ingham, K. H. Kamarudin, P. G. Etchegoin and R. D. Tilley, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 3854–3858 CAS .
N. H. Chou, X. Ke, P. Schiffer and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8140–8141 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Chou, K. D. Oyler, N. E. Motl and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4105–4107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Prabakar, A. Shiohara, S. Hanada, K. Fujioka, K. Yamamoto and R. D. Tilley, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 482–486 CrossRef .
L. L. A. Adams, W. R. Sweeney and H. M. Jaeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6304–6310 CAS .
I. Resa, H. l. n. Moreira, B. Bresson, B. Mahler, B. Dubertret and H. Aubin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7120–7122 CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Sun and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5201–5205 CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Chen, L. Chen, Y.-B. Chen and L.-M. Wu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1578–1584 CAS .
K. Gschneidner, A. Russell, A. Pecharsky, J. Morris, Z. Zhang, T. Lograsso, D. Hsu, C. H. Chester Lo, Y. Ye, A. Slager and D. Kesse, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 587–591 CrossRef CAS .
T. Krenke, E. Duman, M. Acet, E. F. Wassermann, X. Moya, L. Manosa and A. Planes, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 450–454 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aherne, M. Gara, J. M. Kelly and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1329–1338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, L. Au, J. McLellan, Z.-Y. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anandan, F. Grieser and M. Ashokkumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15102–15105 CAS .
Y. Shin, I.-T. Bae, B. W. Arey and G. J. Exarhos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4844–4848 CAS .
C. Wang, H. Yin, R. Chan, S. Peng, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 433–435 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and A. R. H. Walker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6781–6785 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, R. Yu, L. Li, A. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 122, 2979–2983 CrossRef .
P. H. C. Camargo, Y. Xiong, L. Ji, J. M. Zuo and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15452–15453 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ferrer, A. Torres-Castro, X. Gao, S. Sepúlveda-Guzmán, U. Ortiz-Méndez and M. José-Yacamán, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1701–1705 CrossRef CAS .
M. Friedrich and M. Armbrüster, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5886–5891 CrossRef CAS .
C. Femoni, M. C. Iapalucci, G. Longoni, C. Tiozzo and S. Zacchini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6666–6669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Vasquez, Z. Luo and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11866–11867 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, C. E. Carlton, L. F. Allard, Y. Shao-Horn and K. Hamad-Schifferli, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2514–2518 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Ding, Y.-q. Ma, Z. L. Wang, N. M. Markovic, V. R. Stamenkovic, H. Daimon and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6524–6529 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. F. Thomas and A. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5010–5012 RSC .
X.-W. Wei, G.-X. Zhu, Y.-J. Liu, Y.-H. Ni, Y. Song and Z. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6248–6253 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, J. Wang, P. H. C. Camargo, C. M. Cobley, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6304–6308 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Fang and S. Zou, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 638–644 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, R. M. Asmussen, B. Adams, D. F. Thomas and A. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1716–1724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Z. Peng and H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2745–2753 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. S. Jackson and B. W. Eichhorn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3173–3176 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boualleg, D. Baudouin, J.-M. Basset, F. Bayard, J.-P. Candy, J.-C. Jumas, L. Veyre and C. Thieuleux, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4722–4724 RSC .
S. T. Christensen, H. Feng, J. L. Libera, N. Guo, J. T. Miller, P. C. Stair and J. W. Elam, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3047–3051 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989–1992 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11480–11485 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robinson, S. Zacchini, L. D. Tung, S. Maenosono and N. T. K. Thanh, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3021–3026 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wellons, W. H. Morris, Z. Gai, J. Shen, J. Bentley, J. E. Wittig and C. M. Lukehart, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2483–2488 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Song, W. S. Kim, Y. B. Lee, J. H. Hong, H. G. Lee and N. H. Hur, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3677–3681 RSC .
H. L. Nguyen, L. E. M. Howard, G. W. Stinton, S. R. Giblin, B. K. Tanner, I. Terry, A. K. Hughes, I. M. Ross, A. Serres and J. S. O. Evans, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6414–6424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ofir, B. Samanta, P. Arumugam and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4075–4079 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, J. Zhai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1500–1502 RSC .
K. Ahrenstorf, H. Heller, A. Kornowski, J. A. C. Broekaert and H. Weller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3850–3856 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Peng, S. Yang, F. T. Wagner and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4984–4985 CrossRef CAS .
C. Desvaux, P. Lecante, M. Respaud and B. Chaudret, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 103–109 RSC .
L. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Song, J. He and D. G. Evans, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3911–3913 RSC .
G. S. Chaubey, C. Barcena, N. Poudyal, C. Rong, J. Gao, S. Sun and J. P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7214–7215 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Cable and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4098–4104 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and C. Burda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1259–1263 CAS .
N. Dahal and V. Chikan, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2892–2897 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Wang, W.-Q. Han, J. Chen and J. Graetz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1548–1551 CAS .
D. Koziej, F. Fischer, N. KraÃànzlin, W. R. Caseri and M. Niederberger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1097–1104 CAS .
B. Wu, C. Guo, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563–17567 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liao, L. Shi, S. Yuan, Y. Zhao and J. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18778–18783 CAS .
Y. Dai, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2455–2459 CrossRef CAS .
R. Buonsanti, V. Grillo, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, T. Kipp, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11223–11233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Levi, M. Bar-Sadan, A. Albu-Yaron, R. Popovitz-Biro, L. Houben, C. Shahar, A. Enyashin, G. Seifert, Y. Prior and R. Tenne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11214–11222 CrossRef CAS .
L.-j. Mao, C.-y. Liu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1640–1643 RSC .
T. Yu, J. Moon, J. Park, Y. I. Park, H. B. Na, B. H. Kim, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon and T. Hyeon, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2272–2279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pike, J. Hanson, L. Zhang and S.-W. Chan, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5609–5616 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao, A. Harrison and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 4020–4024 CrossRef .
I. Rusakova, T. Ould-Ely, C. Hofmann, D. Prieto-Centurion, C. S. Levin, N. J. Halas, A. Lüttge and K. H. Whitmire, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1369–1375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, X. Zhou, X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Y. Jiang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19107–19111 CAS .
M. Ghosh, K. Biswas, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 106–111 RSC .
H. Jiang, T. Zhao, C. Yan, J. Ma and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2195–2198 RSC .
J. B. Fei, Y. Cui, X. H. Yan, W. Qi, Y. Yang, K. W. Wang, Q. He and J. B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 452–456 CrossRef .
G. R. Patzke, Y. Zhou, R. Kontic and F. Conrad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 826–859 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Gupta and M. Gupta, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3995–4021 CrossRef CAS .
A.-H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kang, S. Risbud, J. F. Rabolt and P. Stroeve, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 2209–2211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. Vander Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hyeon, S. S. Lee, J. Park, Y. Chung and H. B. Na, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12798–12801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. Xu and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6329–6332 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4155–4158 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhen, B. W. Muir, B. A. Moffat, P. Harbour, K. S. Murray, B. Moubaraki, K. Suzuki, I. Madsen, N. Agron-Olshina, L. Waddington, P. Mulvaney and P. G. Hartley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 115, 327–334 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, C. Shen, Y. Hou, H. Gao and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1778–1780 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, C. Zheng, F. Zhang, Y. Yang, G. Wu, A. Yu and N. Guan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16002–16008 CAS .
A. A. Martinez-Morales, N. G. Portney, Y. Zhang, G. Destito, G. Budak, E. Ozbay, M. Manchester, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4816–4820 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 4233–4236 CrossRef .
A. Abou Hassan, O. Sandre, V. Cabuil and P. Tabeling, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1783–1785 RSC .
H. Hu, H. Yang, P. Huang, D. Cui, Y. Peng, J. Zhang, F. Lu, J. Lian and D. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3866–3868 RSC .
H. Cohen, A. Gedanken and Z. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15429–15438 CAS .
C.-J. Cheng, C.-C. Lin, R.-K. Chiang, C.-R. Lin, I. S. Lyubutin, E. A. Alkaev and H.-Y. Lai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 877–883 CAS .
G. Salazar-Alvarez, J. Qin, V. Sepelak, I. Bergmann, M. Vasilakaki, K. N. Trohidou, J. D. Ardisson, W. A. A. Macedo, M. Mikhaylova, M. Muhammed, M. D. Baro and J. Nogues, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13234–13239 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chalasani and S. Vasudevan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18088–18093 CAS .
M. Feyen, C. Weidenthaler, F. Schuth and A.-H. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6791–6799 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Liao, Y. Hou and S. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4378–4380 RSC .
G. Leem, S. Sarangi, S. Zhang, I. Rusakova, A. Brazdeikis, D. Litvinov and T. R. Lee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 9, 32–34 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Xing, S. Song, S. Yu, W. Shi, X. Guo, J. Yang, Y. Lei and F. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 198–204 CrossRef .
Y. Tan, Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5029–5034 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Qu, G.-T. Zhou, Q.-Z. Yao and S.-Q. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 284–289 Search PubMed .
P. Guardia, A. Labarta and X. Batlle, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 115, 390–396 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, J. C. Yu, J. Gong, Q. Li and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2324–2329 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Jia, L.-D. Sun, F. Luo, X.-D. Han, L. J. Heyderman, Z.-G. Yan, C.-H. Yan, K. Zheng, Z. Zhang, M. Takano, N. Hayashi, M. Eltschka, M. Klaui, U. Rudiger, T. Kasama, L. Cervera-Gontard, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, G. Tzvetkov and J. Raabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16968–16977 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, N. Lee, M. Park, B. H. Kim, K. An and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 454–455 CrossRef .
J. Yin, Z. Yu, F. Gao, J. Wang, H. Pang and Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6328–6332 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shavel, B. Rodríguez-González, J. Pacifico, M. Spasova, M. Farle and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1326–1332 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, K. An, Y. Hwang, J.-G. Park, H.-J. Noh, J.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Park, N.-M. Hwang and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 891–895 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Cha, D. K. Lee, Y. H. Kim, C. W. Kim, C. S. Lee and Y. S. Kang, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 47, 121–127 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, C. Shen, Y. Hou, H. Gao and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1778–1780 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maity, P. Chandrasekharan, P. Pradhan, K.-H. Chuang, J.-M. Xue, S.-S. Feng and J. Ding, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14717–14724 RSC .
F. C. C. Oliveira, F. B. Effenberger, M. H. Sousa, R. F. Jardim, P. K. Kiyohara, J. Dupont, J. C. Rubim and L. M. Rossi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13558–13564 RSC .
I. Robinson, C. Alexander, L. T. Lu, L. D. Tung, D. G. Fernig and N. T. K. Thanh, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4602–4604 CAS .
J. Rockenberger, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11595–11596 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, D. Chen, X. Jiao and S. Zhai, Chem. Commun., 2009, 968–970 RSC .
S. Ge, X. Shi, K. Sun, C. Li, C. Uher, J. R. Baker, M. M. Banaszak Holl and B. G. Orr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13593–13599 CAS .
L. Xiao, J. Li, D. F. Brougham, E. K. Fox, N. Feliu, A. Bushmelev, A. Schmidt, N. Mertens, F. Kiessling, M. Valldor, B. Fadeel and S. Mathur, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6315–6324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, B. Yu, X. Li and K. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2476–2481 RSC .
W. Yin, X. Chen, M. Cao, C. Hu and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15897–15903 CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Ni, J. Hong and X. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7003–7008 CAS .
J. Ge, Y. Hu, M. Biasini, C. Dong, J. Guo, W. P. Beyermann and Y. Yin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 7153–7161 CrossRef CAS .
S. Basak, K. S. Rane and P. Biswas, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4906–4914 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16136–16137 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, J. M. Raitano, L. Zhang and S.-W. Chan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7569–7571 RSC .
J. Yang, H. Liu, W. N. Martens and R. L. Frost, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 111–119 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Yu, X.-L. Wu, F. Yuan, Y.-G. Guo, Y. Ma and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15553–15558 CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Song and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5322–5327 CAS .
K. M. Nam, J. H. Shim, D. W. Han, H. S. Kwon, Y. M. Kang, Y. Li, H. Song, W. S. Seo and J. T. Park, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4446–4454 CrossRef CAS .
L.-I. Hung, C.-K. Tsung, W. Huang and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1910–1914 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sui, W. Fu, Y. Zeng, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Li, M. Li and G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4282–4285 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12815–12820 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Yao, X. M. Yin, T. H. Wang and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6131–6144 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Kim, B. Lim, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4069–4073 RSC .
J.-Y. Ho and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14159 CAS .
Y. Sui, W. Fu, H. Yang, Y. Zeng, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Zhou, Y. Leng, M. Li and G. Zou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 10, 99–108 Search PubMed .
J. C. Park, J. Kim, H. Kwon and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 803–807 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kuo, C. H. Chen and M. H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3773–3780 CrossRef CAS .
H. Usui, Y. Shimizu, T. Sasaki and N. Koshizaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 109, 120–124 CrossRef .
M. Ghosh, R. Seshadri and C. N. R. Rao, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2004, 4, 136 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Demir, R. Muñoz-Espí, I. Lieberwirth and G. Wegner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2940 RSC .
L. Yeghiazarian, S. Mahajan, C. Montemagno, C. Cohen and U. Wiesner, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zeng, G. Duan, Y. Li, S. Yang, X. Xu and W. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 561–572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaluza, M. K. Schröter, R. Naumann d'Alnoncourt, T. Reinecke and M. Muhler, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3670–3677 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lai, W.-F. Lee, I. C. Wu, C.-C. Kang, D.-Y. Chen, L.-J. Chen and P.-T. Chou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7284–7289 RSC .
X. Tang, E. S. G. Choo, L. Li, J. Ding and J. Xue, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3383–3388 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. He, B.-X. Lei, Y.-F. Wang, C.-Y. Su, Y.-P. Fang and D.-B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757–8761 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Xu, J. D. Holmes and M. A. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2003–2011 CAS .
T. Omata, K. Takahashi, S. Hashimoto, Y. Maeda, K. Nose, S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo and K. Kanaori, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 355, 274–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, H. Zheng, Y.-w. Jun and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13943–13945 CrossRef CAS .
J. Buha, I. Djerdj and M. Niederberger, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 133 Search PubMed .
U. Koch, A. Fojtik, H. Weller and A. Henglein, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 122, 507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Monge, M. L. Kahn, A. Maisonnat and B. Chaudret, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5321–5324 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, J. E. Rossini and W. L. Gladfelter, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13133–13141 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu and X. Wang, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 891–902 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guiot, S. Grandjean, S. Lemonnier, J.-P. Jolivet and P. Batail, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3548–3550 CAS .
T. Ninjbadgar, G. Garnweitner, A. Börger, L. M. Goldenberg, O. V. Sakhno and J. Stumpe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1819–1825 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pucci, G. Clavel, M.-G. Willinger, D. Zitoun and N. Pinna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12048–12058 CAS .
N. Le Houx, G. Pourroy, F. Camerel, M. Comet and D. Spitzer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 155–161 Search PubMed .
S. Pokhrel, J. Birkenstock, M. Schowalter, A. Rosenauer and L. MaÃàdler, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 10, 632–639 Search PubMed .
S. Pokhrel, C. E. Simion, V. S. Teodorescu, N. Barsan and U. Weimar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, D. Chen, X. Jiao and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18039–18043 CAS .
D. Caruntu, K. Yao, Z. Zhang, T. Austin, W. Zhou and C. J. O'Connor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4875–4886 CAS .
M. A. Franzman, V. Pérez and R. L. Brutchey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 113, 630–636 Search PubMed .
X. Han, M. Jin, S. Xie, Q. Kuang, Z. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9180–9183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 115, 118–124 Search PubMed .
R. A. Gilstrap, C. J. Capozzi, C. G. Carson, R. A. Gerhardt and C. J. Summers, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4163–4166 CAS .
G. Bühler, D. Thölmann and C. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2224–2227 CrossRef .
T. Sasaki, Y. Endo, M. Nakaya, K. Kanie, A. Nagatomi, K. Tanoue, R. Nakamura and A. Muramatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8153–8157 RSC .
S.-I. Choi, K. M. Nam, B. K. Park, W. S. Seo and J. T. Park, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2609–2611 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Zhang and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1290–1301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huo, C. Chen, X. Liu, D. Chu, H. Li, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3741–3743 RSC .
M. Taguchi, S. Takami, T. Naka and T. Adschiri, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 5297–5303 CAS .
T. Arita, J. Yoo, Y. Ueda and T. Adschiri, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 689–693 RSC .
Z. Yang, D. Han, D. Ma, H. Ling, L. Liu and Y. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 291 CAS .
L. Yan, Y. Ranbo, J. Chen and X. Xing, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1474 CAS .
X. X. Xu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12527–12535 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hyeon, Y. Chung, J. Park, S. S. Lee, Y.-W. Kim and B. H. Park, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6831–6833 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kang, J. Park, Y. Hwang, M. Kang, J.-G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13932–13935 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, Y. Wang, P. Padhan and A. Gupta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12374–12375 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, W. An, P. Padhan, C. Heath Turner and A. Gupta, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3458–3468 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Mooney, J. A. Nelson and M. J. Wagner, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3155–3161 CrossRef CAS .
G. Leem, A. C. Jamison, S. Zhang, D. Litvinov and T. R. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4989–4991 RSC .
Z. X. Tang, C. M. Sorensen, K. J. Klabunde and G. C. Hadjipanayis, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1991, 146, 38–52 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song and Z. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6164–6168 CrossRef CAS .
C. Altavilla, E. Ciliberto, A. Aiello, C. Sangregorio and D. Gatteschi, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5980–5985 CrossRef CAS .
S. O'Brien, L. Brus and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12085–12086 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niederberger, G. Garnweitner, N. Pinna and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9120–9126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
H.C. Du, S. Wohlrab, M. Weiss and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4605–4610 RSC .
S. Adireddy, C. Lin, B. Cao, W. Zhou and G. Caruntu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1946–1948 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Moreira, G. P. Mambrini, D. P. Volanti, E. R. Leite, M. O. Orlandi, P. S. Pizani, V. R. Mastelaro, C. O. Paiva-Santos, E. Longo and J. A. Varela, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5381–5387 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Z. Guo, Y. Chen, J. Hao and W. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7707–7709 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, P. M. Rærvik, A. T. J. van Helvoort, R. Holmestad, T. Grande and M.-A. Einarsrud, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Pang, M. Akinc and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5945–5949 RSC .
S. Xuan, F. Wang, Y.-X. J. Wang, J. C. Yu and K. C.-F. Leung, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5086–5094 RSC .
M. Siemons, A. Leifert and U. Simon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2189–2197 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, X. Hu and L. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2061–2065 CAS .
T.-J. Park, G. C. Papaefthymiou, A. J. Viescas, A. R. Moodenbaugh and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 766–772 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y.-H. Lin, B.-P. Zhang, Y. Wang and C.-W. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2903–2908 CAS .
J. Liu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1797–1803 RSC .
F. Wang, X. Xue and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 906–909 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, P. Yang, C. Li, L. Wang, H. Lian, Z. Quan and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6686–6696 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, L. Gao, S. Yang and J. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5601–5603 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Wan, Y.-L. Min, W. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7813–7823 CrossRef CAS .
F. o. H. Julien and A. Alexandrou, Science, 1998, 282, 1429–1430 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Gautam, M. Rajamathi, F. Meldrum, P. Morgan and R. Seshadri, Chem. Commun., 2001, 629 RSC .
U. K. Gautam, R. Seshadri and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 375, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ludolph, M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien and N. Revaprasadu, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1849 RSC .
N. Pradhan and S. Efrima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2050–2051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, D. J. Milliron, A. Meisel, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 382–385 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Halpert, V. J. Porter, J. P. Zimmer and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12590–12591 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Kanaras, C. Sönnichsen, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2164–2167 CrossRef CAS .
N. Varghese, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 1435–1442 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saruyama, M. Kanehara and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3280–3282 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ma, E. H. Sargent and S. O. Kelley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17726–17727 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Choi, K. An, E.-G. Kim, J. H. Yu, J. H. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cabot, R. K. Smith, Y. Yin, H. Zheng, B. M. Reinhard, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1452–1458 CrossRef CAS .
K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Wang, W. Zheng, C.-H. Hao, Q. Peng and Y.-D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1870–1875 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Moloney, Y. K. Gun'ko and J. M. Kelly, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3900–3902 RSC .
M. Naito, K. Iwahori, A. Miura, M. Yamane and I. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7006–7009 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Spoerke and J. A. Voigt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2031–2037 CrossRef CAS .
D. Heroux, A. Ponce, S. Cingarapu and K. J. Klabunde, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3562–3568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohde, M. Ohde, F. Bailey, H. Kim and C. M. Wai, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 721–724 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mohanan, I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, Science, 2005, 307, 397–400 CAS .
A. L. Rogach, L. Katsikas, A. Kornowski, D. S. Su, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1996, 100, 1772–1778 CAS .
M. Green, H. Harwood, C. Barrowman, P. Rahman, A. Eggeman, F. Festry, P. Dobson and T. Ng, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1989–1994 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Xiong, L. Hu, B. Yang and W. Li, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1712–1715 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, H. Qian and J. Ren, Chem. Commun., 2005, 528–530 RSC .
A. Dubavik, V. Lesnyak, W. Thiessen, N. Gaponik, T. Wolff and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4748–4750 CAS .
B. Xi, S. Xiong, D. Xu, J. Li, H. Zhou, J. Pan, J. Li and Y. Qian, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9786–9791 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu and M. Yoshimura, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 296–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Zhu, G. C. Hadjipanayis and J. Q. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6874–6875 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sha, H. Zhang and M. T. Swihart, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 235603 CrossRef .
F. Dawood and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 424–425 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, T. Fan, D. Zhang, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2144–2146 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, F. Gao and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 725–728 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2007–2010 RSC .
M. B. Sigman, A. Ghezelbash, T. Hanrath, A. E. Saunders, F. Lee and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16050–16057 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551–2555 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, P. Yan, F. Liu, Y. Xie, Y. Geng and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2321–2322 RSC .
Y. Xie, X. Zheng, X. Jiang, J. Lu and L. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 41, 387–392 CrossRef .
S. Deka, A. Genovese, Y. Zhang, K. Miszta, G. Bertoni, R. Krahne, C. Giannini and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8912–8914 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Hickey, C. Waurisch, B. Rellinghaus and A. Eychmuller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14978–14980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, N. Al-Salim, C. W. Bumby and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15990–15991 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ning, K. Men, G. Xiao, L. Wang, Q. Dai, B. Zou, B. Liu and G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1699–1703 RSC .
J.-w. Seo, J.-t. Jang, S.-w. Park, C. Kim, B. Park and J. Cheon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4269–4273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, E. Mugnaioli, H. A. Therese, M. PanthoÌfer, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2474–2481 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Franzman, C. W. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4060–4061 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, Y.-F. Lim and T. Hanrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9519–9521 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11661–11666 CAS .
K. Jang, S. Y. Kim, K. H. Park, E. Jang, S. Jun and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4474–4476 RSC .
V. Parashar, S. K. Pandey and A. C. Pandey, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3143–3145 RSC .
A. Yella, H. A. Therese, N. Zink, M. PanthoÌfer and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3587–3593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Puglisi, S. Mondini, S. Cenedese, A. M. Ferretti, N. Santo and A. Ponti, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2804–2813 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and R. Fan, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 802–805 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, L. Zhou, S. Song, J. Yang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1892–1897 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, Y. Qian, W. Wang, S. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Science, 1996, 272, 1926–1927 CAS .
A. Manz, A. Birkner, M. Kolbe and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 569–573 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Gautam, K. Sardar, F. L. Deepak and C. N. R. Rao, Pramana, 2005, 65, 549–564 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micic, S. P. Ahrenkiel, D. Bertram and A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 478–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Coffer, M. A. Johnson, L. Zhang, R. L. Wells and J. F. Janik, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2671–2673 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Frank, F. Stowasser, H. Sussek, H. Pritzkow, C. R. Miskys, O. Ambacher, M. Giersig and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 3512–3513 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi and E. G. Gillan, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3774–3784 RSC .
J. P. Xiao, Y. Xie, R. Tang and W. Luo, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, D. Liu, J. Zhang, P. Zhu, Q. Cui and G. Zou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1489–1493 CAS .
S. Bhaviripudi, J. Qi, E. L. Hu and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3512–3517 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomathi and C. N. R. Rao, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 941–947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nag, K. Raidongia, K. P. S. S. Hembram, R. Datta, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1539–1544 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao and A. Nag, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 2010, 4244–4250 CrossRef .
D. A. Lindquist, T. T. Kodas, D. M. Smith, X. M. Xiu, S. L. Hietala and R. T. Paine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 74, 3126–3128 CAS .
C. Tang, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, C. Zhi and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3653–3661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Raidongia, A. Gomathi and C. N. R. Rao, Isr. J. Chem., 2010, 50, 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lei, H. Z. Zhao, H. Yang, B. Song, P. G. Li and W. H. Tang, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1539–1542 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, Y. Xie, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Liu and X. Tian, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 43, 822–829 CrossRef .
J. Buha, I. Djerdj, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3499–3505 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. Yao and M. Antonietti, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4659–4663 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. Yao, B. Milke and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5136–5144 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qixun, X. Yi, W. Xinjun, L. Shichang, H. Tao and B. Chuannan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 249–251 Search PubMed .
X. Feng, Y.-J. Bai, B. Lu, C.-G. Wang, Y.-X. Qi, Y.-X. Liu, G.-L. Geng and Li, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 3558–3560 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Gu, L. Chen, Z. Yang, J. Ma and Y. Qian, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 296–299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Du and Y. Qian, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 389, 296–298 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lengauer, J. Cryst. Growth, 1988, 87, 295–298 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Bull, P. F. McMillan, E. Soignard and K. Leinenweber, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 1488 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Gajbhiye and R. S. Ningthoujam, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2004, 1, 3449–3454 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomathi, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 291–295 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Qian, Y. Xie, Y. T. Qian, X. M. Zhang, W. Z. Wang and L. Yang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B-Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 1997, 49, 135–137 CrossRef .
X. F. Qian, X. M. Zhang, C. Wang, W. Z. Wang and Y. T. Qian, Mater. Res. Bull., 1998, 33, 669–672 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yunle, G. Fan, Q. Yitai, Z. Huagui and Y. Ziping, Mater. Res. Bull., 2002, 37, 1101–1105 CrossRef .
S. C. Perera, P. S. Fodor, G. M. Tsoi, L. E. Wenger and S. L. Brock, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4034–4038 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Brock and K. Senevirathne, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1552–1559 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Brock, S. C. Perera and K. L. Stamm, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 3364–3371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, H. L. Su, X. F. Qian, X. M. Liu and Y. T. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 149, 88–91 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Su, Y. Xie, B. Li, X. M. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 122, 157–160 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Henkes, Y. Vasquez and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1896–1897 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Henkes and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4234–4242 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Chen, M. Shao, C. An, W. Yu and Y. Qian, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 252, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, C. Liang and R. Prins, J. Catal., 2006, 241, 465–469 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, B. Koo, K. Y. Yoon, Y. Hwang, M. Kang, J.-G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8433–8440 CrossRef CAS .
R.-K. Chiang and R.-T. Chiang, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 46, 369–371 CrossRef .
G. Shi and J. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2295–2297 RSC .
O. I. Micic, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. R. Sprague and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4966–4969 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micic, J. R. Sprague, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. L. Machol, A. J. Nozik, H. Giessen, B. Fluegel, G. Mohs and N. Peyghambarian, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 7754–7759 CrossRef CAS .
D. Battaglia and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1027–1030 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, S. Kumar and T. Nann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1054–1055 CrossRef CAS .
K. Senevirathne, R. Tackett, P. R. Kharel, G. Lawes, K. Somaskandan and S. L. Brock, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1129–1138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sánchez-Iglesias, E. Carbó-Argibay, A. Glaria, B. Rodríguez-González, J. Pérez-Juste, I. Pastoriza-Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 5558–5563 Search PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, D.-Y. Liu, Y.-F. Wu, S. Duan, Z.-X. Xie, Z.-Y. Jiang and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6949–6951 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, X. Wu, L. Ren, Y. Xiang, W. He, K. Zhang, W. Zhou and S. Xie, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9764–9771 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Levin, C. Hofmann, T. A. Ali, A. T. Kelly, E. Morosan, P. Nordlander, K. H. Whitmire and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1379–1388 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Lee and M. Ouyang, Science, 2010, 327, 1634–1638 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, J. Wang, P. H. C. Camargo, M. Jiang, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2535–2540 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, K. Zheng, L. He, R. Wang, L. Guo, C. Chen, X. Han and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Nash, J. J. Lai, A. S. Hoffman, P. Yager and P. S. Stayton, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 85–91 CrossRef .
S. Alayoglu and B. Eichhorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17479–17486 CrossRef CAS .
B.-J. Hwang, L. S. Sarma, C.-H. Chen, C. Bock, F.-J. Lai, S.-H. Chang, S.-C. Yen, D.-G. Liu, H.-S. Sheu and J.-F. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19922–19929 CAS .
D. Ciuculescu, C. Amiens, M. Respaud, A. Falqui, P. Lecante, R. E. Benfield, L. Jiang, K. Fauth and B. Chaudret, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4624–4626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2412–2417 RSC .
A. Radi, D. Pradhan, Y. Sohn and K. T. Leung, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1553–1560 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019–7029 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nemchinov, M. Kirsanova, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9301–9307 CAS .
E. Lifshitz, M. Brumer, A. Kigel, A. Sashchiuk, M. Bashouti, M. Sirota, E. Galun, Z. Burshtein, A. Q. Le Quang, I. Ledoux-Rak and J. Zyss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25356–25365 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li and P. Reiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11588–11589 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie, X. Zhong and T. Basché, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2741–2745 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Tian, Z.-L. Zhang, P. Jiang, M.-X. Zhang, H.-Y. Xie and D.-W. Pang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3039–3041 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, H. Zeng, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, M. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 875–881 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, M. I. Bodnarchuk, E. V. Shevchenko and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6382–6391 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Q. Hu, X. Zhang, Z. Fang and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12728–12735 CAS .
C. Wang, H. Yin, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han, L. Yi, N. Zhao, A. Tang, M. Gao and Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13152–13161 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, X. Wang, Y. Zhuang, B. Xu, S. Kuang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2736–2737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Casavola, A. Falqui, M. A. Garcila, M. Garcila-Hernandez, C. Giannini, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 366–376 CrossRef .
K. Raidongia, A. Nag, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 062904 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
C. N. R. Rao	C. N. R. Rao obtained his PhD degree from Purdue University (1958) and DSc degree from the University of Mysore (1961). He is the National Research Professor and Linus Pauling Research Professor at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research and Honorary Professor at the Indian Institute of Science (both at Bangalore). His research interests are mainly in the chemistry of materials. He is a member of many of the science academies and an honorary fellow of RSC. He is the recipient of the Einstein Gold Medal of UNESCO, the Hughes and Royal Medals of the Royal Society, the August Wilhelm von Hofmann medal of the German Chemical Society, the Dan David Prize for materials research and the first India Science Prize.
H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte	H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte obtained his BSc degree from Government College (Autonomous), Rajahmundry in 2006 and MS degree in chemical science in 2009 from the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research. He is completing his PhD work related to synthesis, characterization and properties of graphene and its inorganic analogues.
Rakesh Voggu	Rakesh Voggu received his MSc (Chemistry) degree from University of Hyderabad, India in 2005. He obtained his PhD degree in 2010 from Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR). He is presently working as a Research Associate at JNCASR and his work pertains to various aspects of nanocrystals and carbon nanostructures.
A. Govindaraj	A. Govindaraj obtained his PhD degree from University of Mysore and is a Principal Scientific Officer at the Indian Institute of Science, and Honorary Associate Professor at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research. He works on different types of nanomaterials. He has authored more than 100 research papers and co-authored a book on nanotubes and nanowires with Prof. Rao.

 	Scheme 1  Proposed mechanism for the formation of nanoparticles by microemulsion approach.	 

 	Fig. 1  The overall scheme for the ultra-large-scale synthesis of monodisperse NPs and TEM of magnetite. Reprinted with permission from Park et al., Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 891. ©2004 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM image of a relatively dense arrangement of CdSe NPs showing a tendency to close packing in the plane (bar = 50 nm). The inset shows a histogram of particle sizes. Reprinted with permission from U. K. Gautam, M. Rajamathi, F. Meldrum, P. Morgan and R. Seshadri, Chem. Commun., 2001, 629. ©2001 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
M(OR)x + mH2O → M(OR)x−m(OH)m + mROH	(OH)
2M(OR)x−m(OH)m → (OH)m−1(OR)x−m–M–O–M(OR)x−m(OH)m−1 + H2O	(OH)
2M(OR)x−m(OH)m → (OH)m−1(OR)x−m–M–O–M(OR)x−m−1 + ROH	(OR)
M(OR)x + x/2H2O → MOx/2 + xHOR	(OR)

 	Fig. 3  (1) Ag derived with HDD, (2) Au, (3) worm-like Pd and (4) Pt from Pt(IV), derived with TBAB alloy NPs of (5) Ag–Au, (6) Pd–Pt, (7) Pt–Rh and (8) Pt–Ru, synthesized by co-reduction of the metal precursors with tetrabutylammonium borohydride. Core–shell NPs of (9) 7.4 nm Au@Ag, (10) 12.7 nm Au@Ag, (11) 3.9 nm Pt@Ag and (12) 9.2 nm Pt@Ag, synthesized by seed-mediated growth. Core–shell NPs of (13) Ag@Au and (14) Ag@Pt, synthesized by the replacement reaction. (15) Pt hollow spheres synthesized by bis(p-sulphonatophenyl)phenylphosphane dihydrate dipotassium salt treatment of Ag@Pt NPs. (16) Ag–Pd alloy synthesized by the replacement reaction. Semiconductor NPs of (17) Ag2S, (18) CdS, (19) HgS and (20) PbS. Hybrid NPs of (21) Ag2S–Au, (22) CdS–Au, (23) CuS–Au, (24) PbS–Au, (25) Ag2S–Ag, (26) CdS–Ag, (27) CuS–Ag and (28) PbS–Ag. Core–shell NPs of Au@Ag2S synthesized with Au–Ag2S precursor molar ratios of (29) 1:1 and (30) 1:3. The scale of each image is identical. Reprinted with permission from J. Yang, E. Sargent, S. Kelley and J. Y. Ying, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 683. ©2009 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic showing the thermomorphic nature of fluorous and hydrocarbon solvents. Reproduced with permission from R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis spectra for Au NPs prepared using different ratios of OA–OAm varied from 0 to 50% after 1 min. microwave time. TEM images of gold NPs prepared using pure amine (b) and in a 1:1 ratio of OA–OAm (c). The scale bar is 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from M. B. Mohamed, K. M. AbouZeid, V. Abdelsayed, A. A. Aljarash and M. S. El-Shall, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2766. ©2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of (a) gold (b) Ag (c) CdS and (d) CuS NPs formed at the liquid–liquid interface. Reprinted with permission from C. N. R. Rao and K. P. Kalyanikutty, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 489–499. ©2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of (a) decanethiol(DT)–Au seed NPs acid treated DT–Au NPs with trifluoroacetic acid and tetraoctylammonium bromide for (b) 5 h at room temperature (rt) (c) 75 h at rt, and (d) 21 h at 55 °C. The scale bar length is 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from M. Kanehara, J.-I. Sakurai, H. Sugimura and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1630. ©2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM images of gold NPs prepared from 125 mL (0.006 mmol) of 50 mM HAuCl4, obtained after (a) 15, (b) 65, (c) 185, and (d) 630 min of growth. Insets compare the diameter distributions obtained from TEM and SAXS for the same time of growth. NF: normalized frequency. Reprinted with permission from K. Biswas, N. Varghese and C. N. R. Rao, Small, 2008, 4, 649–655. ©2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. K GaA.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of (A) octahedra, (B) rhombic dodecahedra, truncated ditetragonal prisms, and (D) concave cubes synthesized from reaction solutions containing different ratios of Ag+–Au3+. Scale bars: 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from M. L. Personick, M. R. Langille, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3394. ©2011 American Chemical Society.	 

Reduction	HAuCl4 gold precursor, Na2[Mo3(μ3-S)(μ-S)3(Hnta)3] serves both as a reducing and a capping agent, at room temperature	
105

HAuCl4 as gold precursor, o-diaminobenzene as reducing agent, PVP as capping agent, at room temperature	
106

HAuCl4 as gold precursor, 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethanesulfonic acid, serving as both reducing and shape-directing agents, at room temperature	
107

HAuCl4 as gold precursor, cellulose as reducing agent, 1-butyl-3-methyl imidazolium chloride as solvent at 110 to 200 °C	
108

HAuCl4 as gold precursor, hydroquinone as the reducing agent	
109

Hydrothermal	HAuCl4 as gold precursor, trisodium citrate as reducing agent and CTAB as capping agent, 110 °C for 6–72 h	
31


 	Fig. 10  TEM images of four aliquots taken from the same synthesis (under argon) after a AgNO3 solution had been added for different periods of time (min): (A) 5; (B) 10; (C) 15; (D) 20. Reprinted with permission from Q. Zhang, C. Cobley, L. Au, M. McKiernan, A. Schwartz, L.-P. Wen, J. Chen and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2044. ©2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) TEM and (B) HRTEM images of the 4.5 nm Pd NPs prepared by the reduction of Pd(acac)2 in OAm and the boranetributylamine complex. Reprinted with permission from V. Mazumder and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4588. ©2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Size control of THH Pt NPs and their thermal stability. SEM images of THH Pt NPs grown at (A) 10, (B) 30, (C) 40, and (D) 50 min. The insets in (A) and (B) are the high-magnification SEM images that confirm the shape of THH. Scale bars, 200 nm. (E) Size distributions of THH Pt NPs in (A), (B), (C), and (D), respectively, after counting more than 500 particles for each sample. (F) In situ TEM observation on the thermal stability of THH Pt NPs. The images were recorded at various temperatures in TEM at a heating rate of 7 °C min−1. The NP preserves its shape to ∼815 °C and even higher with a slight truncation at the corners and apexes, as seen in the TEM image. Reprinted with permission from N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 4, 732. ©2007 AAAS. http://www.sciencemag.org.	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM images of Fe NPs synthesized from Fe(CO)x–OAm at various reaction temperatures and times: (a) 30 °C for 1 min, (b) 30 °C for 60 min, (c) 30 °C for 180 min, (d) 70 °C for 60 min, (e) 100 °C for 60 min, and (f) 130 °C for 60 min. All scale bars represent 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from H. Kura, M. Takahashi and T. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5835. ©2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM images of the intermetallic CuAu with different sizes: (a) (4.22 ± 0.2) nm, (b) (6.0 ± 0.2) nm, (c) (7.4 ± 0.3) nm; (d) TEM image of a multilayer hcp superlattice consisting of (6.00.2) nm CuAu NPs; inset shows the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern. Reprinted with permission from W. Chen, R. Yu, L. Li, A. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2917–2921. ©2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. K GaA.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) TEM image of truncated octahedral Pd NPs synthesized by reducing Na2PdCl4 with L-ascorbic acid in an aqueous solution. The inset shows a geometrical model of the truncated octahedron, where the green and yellow colors denote the {100} and {111} facets, respectively. (B) HRTEM image of a single truncated octahedron of Pd recorded along the [011] zone axis and the corresponding FT pattern (inset). (C) TEM image of Pd–Pt nanodendrites synthesized by reducing K2PtCl4 with L-ascorbic acid in the presence of truncated octahedral Pd NP seeds in an aqueous solution. (D) HAADF-STEM image of Pd–Pt nanodendrites. Reprinted with permission from B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 5, 324. ©2009 AAAS. http://www.sciencemag.org.	 

 	Fig. 16  TEM images of fluorous ligand capped (a) 4 nm γ-Fe2O3 and (b) 3.5 nm FePt NPs with size distribution histograms as inset. Reproduced with permission from R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021. ©Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Representative TEM images of NS-TiO2 and NP-TiO2. (a) Low magnification image of as-made NS-TiO2. (b and c) High-magnification images of nanosheets obtained by treating NS-TiO2 with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide. (d and e) Low-magnification and high-resolution TEM images of NP-TiO2. The inset in (e) is the Fourier transfer image corresponding to HRTEM of NP TiO2 (NS – nanosheets; NP-nanoparticles). Reproduced with permission from Wu, C. Guo, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563. ©2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  TEM images: (a) 13 nm Fe–Fe3O4 nanoparticle seeds, (b) 16 nm hollow Fe3O4 NPs, (c) a single hollow Fe3O4 nanoparticle (scale bar 10 nm), and (d) a superlattice array of the hollow Fe3O4 NPs. Reproduced with permission from Peng et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4155. ©2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image, and (c) XRD pattern of Fe3O4 NPs synthesized by typical process and standard. Reproduced with permission from Hu et al., Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3866–3868. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Thermal decomposition	Fe3O4	Iron oleate in the presence of OA and OAm at 320 °C	
307

Iron oleate is decomposed in a sealed tube at low pressures and at 563 K	
308

by decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in benzyl ether using large excess of OA (15:1 OA–Fe)	
309

By thermal decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in a liquid mixture of triethylene glycol and triethanolamine at the refluxing temperature (245–280 °C) under the argon flow for 1 h	
310

By decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in imidazolium based ionic liquids by using oleylamine as the reducing and surface modifier agent at 150–250 °C	
311

γ-Fe2O3	Decomposition of Fe(acac)3 in the presence of poly(N-isopropyl-co-t-butylacrylamide)	
312

By decomposition of Fe(Cupf)3 complex in octylamine at 250–300 °C	
313

Solvothermal– Hydrothermal	Fe3O4	Mixture of anhydrous FeCl3 and anhydrous CH3COONa at high temperature	
314

FeCl2·4H2O in basic aqueous solution at 138 °C	
315

Using ultra colloidal iron hydroxide at 150 °C for 4 h	
316

Using Fe(acac)3 as the iron source, n-octylamine as the reductant, and n-octanol as the solvent 240 °C for 2 h	
317

α-Fe2O3	FeCl3·6H2O,5-sulfosalicylic acid dehydrate and ammonia at 150 °C	
318

By dissolving FeCl3·6H2O in DMF at 180 °C	
319

Coprecipitation	Fe3O4	Hydrolysis of FeCl3 by NaOH at a temperature above 200 °C in DEG in the presence of PAA	
320

Aerosol pyrolysis	α-Fe2O3	Ferrous acetate and ferric nitrate as precursors with hydrazine at 300–500 °C	
321


 	Fig. 20  TEM and HRTEM images of initial ZnO NPs (a, c) and ZnS hollow NPs obtained after anion exchange (b, d). Reprinted with permission from J. Park, H. Zheng, Y.-W. Jun and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13943. ©2009 American Chemical Society.	 

Solvothermal	Zinc cupferronate in toluene at 180 °C	
338

Zinc(II) acetylacetonate in acetonitrile at 100 °C	
349

Coprecipitation	Di-ethyl zinc into TOPO at 200 °C	
350

Thermal decomposition	Di-ethyl zinc into TOPO at 200 °C	
44

Oxidation	[Zn(c-C6H11)2] in tetrahydrofuran at room temperature	
351

Stirring	Zn(NiBu2)2]2 with hexylamine and diethylether and stirred at room temperature with particular humidity	
352


 	Fig. 21  TEM images of colloidal CeO2 NPs stabilized with (a) dodecanonic acid (b) decanoic acid. Reproduced with permission from T. Arita, J. Yoo, Y. Ueda and T. Adschiri, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 689. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  TEM images of fluorous thiol capped (a) 4 nm CdSe and (b) 3.5 nm CdS NPs with size distribution histograms as inset. Photographs of the dispersions of the NPs in PFC are also given as insets. Reproduced with permission from R. Voggu, A. Shireen and C. N. R. Rao, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6021. ©2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  TEM images of (a) CdS seed NPs and (b) CdS nanopencils after reaction at 260 °C for 20 min. The inset in (b) shows a side view of the nanopencils. (c) XRD patterns of (i) CdS seed NPs and (ii) CdS nanopencils. (d) HRTEM image of a single nanopencil showing stacking faults. (e) HRTEM image of single nanopencil taken from the [001] zone axis. (f) Fast Fourier transform pattern of the rectangular region in (e). Reproduced with permission from M. Saruyama, M. Kanehara and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3280. ©2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of size-selected Cu2−xSe NPs grow for 15 min at 300 °C, having an average size of 16 nm (the size estimated by XRD was 18 nm). The inset shows a sketch of the hexagonal projection of a cuboctahedron shape. (b) HRTEM image of Cu2−xSe NPs. Most of the displayed NPs are seen under their [111] zone axis. The inset shows their two-dimensional fast Fourier transform. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of Cu2−xSe NPs drop-casted from solution onto a glass substrate. (d) Elastic-filtered (ZL) image of several NPs. (e, f) Cu and Se elemental maps from the same group obtained by filtering the Cu L edge (at 931 eV) and the Se L edge (at 1436 eV). (g) Elemental quantification of a group of NPs by EDS. Reproduced with permission from S. Deka et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8912. ©2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) TEM image of CTAB-capped 2.5 nm GaN NPs prepared starting with Ga cupferron. The upper right inset shows the size distribution. The lower inset shows a HREM image (scale bar is 2 nm) and upper inset also shows the PL spectrum of CTAB capped 2.5 nm GaN NPs; (b) TEM image of InN NPs of 15 nm average diameter prepared starting with In cupferron. The upper inset shows a HREM image of a single nanocrystal. The lower inset shows a TEM image of InN NPs prepared starting with InCl3. Reproduced with permission from K. Sardar and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2004, 6, 425 and K. Sardar, F. L. Deepak, A. Govindaraj, M. M. Seikh and C. N. R. Rao, Small, 2005, 1, 91. ©2004 and 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Powder XRD data for Ni NPs and Ni2P formed after their reaction with TOP; TEM/SAED data for (b) Ni NPs and (c) Ni2P formed by reacting the particles in (b) with TOPA Reprinted with permission from A. E. Henkes, Y. Vasquez and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1896. ©2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a, b) SEM and TEM images of the overall morphology of Au@Pd nanocubes self-assembled on the Si wafer and Cu grid, respectively. The dashed frames indicate the core area of particles. (c) STEM images of the octahedral Au seed within a cubic Pd shell and cross-sectional compositional line profiles of a Au@Pd nanocube along the diagonal (indicated by a red line). (d) TEM image of a Au@Pd nanocube at high magnification. The inset is the SAED pattern taken from individual nanocube. Fan et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6949. ©2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Au–CdS core–shell nanostructures with monocrystalline shell. (A) Typical TEM image showing uniform core–shell nanostructures. Scale bar, 20 nm. (B to E) High-resolution TEM images of core–shell nanostructures from (A). Whereas Au core NPs can manifest monocrystalline (B), single-fold twin (C), fivefold twin (D), and multiple-twin (E) lattice structures, all CdS shells are monocrystalline. The red lines highlight the lattice orientations within the Au core NPs. Scale bar, 5 nm. (F) XRD pattern of Au–CdS sample shown in (A). Bulk Au [red solid lines] and wurtzite CdS (blue solid lines) are also provided for reference and comparison. (Inset) A ball-and-stick molecular model of Au–CdS, illustrating a cubic core and wurtzite shell. (G to J) Angle-dependent high resolution TEM characterization. The sample depicted has a larger shell thickness than the one in (A) to emphasize the extremely high-quality crystallinity of the shell. The CdS shell shows perfect monocrystalline features without detectable structural defects under a different viewing angle. Scale bar, 5 nm. Reprinted with permission from J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Lee and M. Ouyang, Science, 2010, 327, 1634. ©2010 AAAS. http://www.sciencemag.org.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
