Recent advances in the interface engineering of solid-state Li-ion batteries with artificial buffer layers: challenges, materials, construction, and c ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00515C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00515C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1780-1804Recent advances in the interface engineering of solid-state Li-ion batteries with artificial buffer layers: challenges, materials, construction, and characterization†

        
          
            Mingjie 
            Du‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Kaiming 
            Liao‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Lu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 210009, China. E-mail: kaimingliao@njtech.edu.cn; shaozp@njtech.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6845, Australia
Received 
      14th February 2019
    , Accepted 26th April 2019First published on 26th April 2019AbstractAlthough solid-state Li-ion batteries (SSBs) provide opportunities to simplify safety measures (e.g., sophisticated thermal management systems, overpressure vents, charge interruption devices) currently used in conventional Li-ion batteries (LIBs) with flammable organic liquid electrolytes, the poor interface compatibility (both physically and chemically) between the electrode materials and solid electrolyte strongly hinders the practical application of SSBs. The fabrication of artificial buffer layers (ABLs) was therefore proposed, and it has been an effective approach for overcoming the interface issues of SSBs. In this review paper, we provide a comprehensive summary of recent progress in interface engineering and advanced techniques for characterization of such interfaces in SSBs. First, the critical issues and challenges facing SSBs associated with the stability of the cathode/solid electrolyte and anode/solid electrolyte interfaces are discussed. The latest research approaches and synthetic strategies to improve the performance of SSBs that rely on interface engineering with ABLs are extensively reviewed. The characterization strategies for in situ and ex situ interfacial observation and analysis are comprehensively summarized. Finally, the critical issues associated with electrode–electrolyte interfaces are emphasized, and perspectives regarding the development of high-quality buffer layers are presented.
Kaiming Liao
Kaiming Liao obtained his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2013. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST, Tsukuba), Japan, from 2013 to 2016. He joined the College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, as an Associate Professor in September 2016. His current research interests include Li–air batteries, Zn–air batteries, Li–sulfur batteries, and solid-state Li-ion batteries.
Zongping Shao
Zongping Shao is a professor of chemical engineering at Curtin University, Australia, and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at the Institute Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and a research associate at the California Institute of Technology, USA, from February 2000 till June 2005. He joined Nanjing Tech University in July 2005. His current research interests include fuel cells, rechargeable batteries, solar cells, oxygen-permeable membranes, and environmental treatment.

Broader context
Compared with conventional Li-ion batteries with flammable liquid electrolytes, solid-state Li-ion batteries (SSBs) offer an attractive option owing to their potential in improving the safety and achieving both high power and high energy densities. It is anticipated that the development of SSBs will result in many commercial applications, particularly for electric vehicles. Despite extensive research efforts, SSBs still suffer from obstacles, including limited rate capability, insufficient power and energy density, and poor cycle life. Most of these obstacles are fundamentally associated with the properties of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in SSBs. In recent years, considerable research work has been done regarding interface engineering of SSBs with artificial buffer layers (ABLs). By taking advantage of the ABLs, highly stable interfaces with improved physical contact and increased (electro)chemical stabilities between the solid electrolyte and electrodes were achieved. Accordingly, substantial research efforts are required to develop advanced ABLs for large-scale applications of SSBs.

1. Introduction
Since the commercialization of rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LIBs) by Sony-Japan in the 1990s, LIBs have been considered the most suitable, and are the most commonly used, energy storage device for consumer electronics due to their negligible memory effect, low self-discharge rate, high voltage, favourable energy density, and environmental friendliness.1,2 More recently, LIBs have been increasingly used as power sources for electric vehicles.3–5 A typical LIB is composed of a negative electrode (anode, typically graphitic carbon with low potential), an organic solvent electrolyte (with high stability over a wide potential window), a microporous polymeric separator (allowing easy diffusion of the liquid electrolyte and avoiding the direct contact between the two electrodes), and a positive electrode (cathode, typically Li-containing oxides with high discharge potential). For the charging process, Li ions start to de-intercalate from the cathode (e.g., LiCoO2), diffuse across the organic liquid electrolyte (mixtures of organic solvents and lithium salts), and finally intercalate into the anode (e.g., graphite). Meanwhile, electron transport is realized through the external circuit. The reverse process takes place during the discharging process. Although organic solvent electrolytes offer the merits of high Li-ion conductivity (up to 10−2 S cm−1) and superior wetting capability for the electrodes, they often suffer from the important issues of poor safety, inadequate thermal and electrochemical stabilities, and a risk of leakage.6–8 To address these safety issues, solid-state Li-ion batteries (SSBs), in which solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) play the role of both the electrolyte and separator, have been proposed and widely studied.9–11 Such batteries offer the advantageous features of improved safety, high energy density, and a wide operating temperature window. With increasing concerns about battery safety for large-scale applications, SSBs have attracted tremendous attention both in the scientific and industrial communities in the past several years as the power source for electric vehicles.12,13
Although there is increasing interest in SSBs, their large-scale commercialization is still far from successful. This is because conventional SSBs suffer from low power density and poor cycle life due to a combination of the low Li+ conductivity of the SSEs at room temperature, the large charge transfer resistance at the SSE/electrode interface and the unstable solid electrolyte/solid electrode interface under cycling.10,14,15 During the past several decades, substantial research effort has been directed towards improving the ionic conductivity of the SSEs (both bulk conductivity and grain boundary conductivity) and the stability of the solid–solid electrolyte/electrode interfaces.13,16–23 This includes the development of new material compositions and new membrane densification techniques.24–29 To date, a variety of SSE prototypes have been explored, such as garnet-type (since 1969),30 NASICON-type (since 1976),31,32 sulfide-type (since 1986),33 and perovskite-type (since 1987)34 materials. To date, the bulk Li-ion conductivities of the SSEs at room temperature have been successfully improved from 10−7 to 10−3 S cm−1.14,35 Among them, some even show higher conductivity than most organic liquid electrolytes at elevated temperatures.11,36,37 Although the ionic conductivities of the state-of-the-art SSEs have been improved to an impressive level, they still face the other basic problem of their poor interfacial compatibility, including physical contact and chemical/electrochemical stabilities with other components (e.g., cathode or/and anode electrodes), which introduces a new challenge to the design of high-performance SSBs.
To achieve good interface compatibility between the SSE and electrode, artificial buffer layers (ABLs) were proposed to stabilize the interfaces in SSBs.38–45 By taking advantage of the ABLs, highly stable interfaces with improved physical connections between the solid electrolyte and electrodes and increased chemical/electrochemical stabilities of the interfaces were realized. During the past several years, considerable related research work has been done regarding ABL-modified electrode–electrolyte interfaces and significant progress has been achieved. This suggests that a timely review of the recent progress in such a field is appropriate because it will provide useful tutoring for newcomers to this field and guidance for further development.
Herein, we provide a review of this topic. We begin by briefly describing the main challenges and issues of SSBs associated with the stability of the solid cathode/SSE and solid anode/SSE interfaces, which are of great importance for the rational design of versatile ABLs. Then, we discuss the key materials for the construction of high-quality ABLs. Moreover, we systematically survey the different synthetic routes (techniques) for the fabrication of ABLs for both the cathode-side interface and the anode-side interface. Moreover, we discuss and review the characterization strategies for in situ and ex situ interfacial observation and analysis. Finally, we conclude by summarizing the essential understanding of ABLs and providing our outlook for future research in the optimization of ABLs for the unfettered development of SSBs.
2. Challenges
A fundamental understanding of the characteristic and multiple aspects of the interfaces between a solid-state electrolyte (SSE) and other cell components (e.g., cathode, anode) is of great importance for the rational design of high-performance ABLs for SSBs because of the complex processes and reactions (e.g., physical contact, chemical/electrochemical stability) arising from the unstable SSE–electrode interfaces and their possible unfavourable impacts on the operation of the SSBs. Fig. 1 displays a typical schematic illustration of the SSB components, the interfacial challenges, and the corresponding characterization methods (techniques).
 Fig. 1  Summary of compatibility problems associated with interfaces in the SSBs and the experimental approaches for assessing these issues. 
2.1. Physical contact
Achieving good electrical and ionic contact between the SSE and other cell parts (cathode and anode) is of importance in the fabrication of a high-performance all-solid battery, not only for thin-film SSBs but also for bulk-type SSBs.46 In SSBs, very often, only point-to-point connections can be achieved at the electrode/SSE interfaces even when fabricated by hot pressing (Fig. 2a and b), leading to a large interfacial resistance and concentrated local electric field during battery operation. Referring to the above issue, many attempts have been made with the purpose of improving the physical contact between the solid electrolyte and electrodes in SSBs to enable low interface impedances. For the anode–SSE interface, the mismatch of their surface energies could induce the poor wetting behaviour of the SSE towards molten Li, resulting in an insufficient contact between the SSEs and the Li anode, leading to a large charge-transfer polarization, poor rate performance, and low energy density of the full cell. Another challenge of the metallic lithium anode in SSBs is the volume variation upon cycling, which originates from Li dendrite growth.47 Note that dendritic Li formation in an SSB is highly dependent on the current density during the cell operation. At a high current density, the resultant large electric field will cause uneven Li plating/stripping, and grain boundaries of the SSE are easier for Li plating, resulting in the potential penetration of the bulk SSE and an ultimate short circuit in the SSB (Fig. 2a). Usually, the rate of dendrite growth in SSBs is faster than that in conventional liquid-electrolyte batteries.48–50 Therefore, engineering the interface between the Li anode and SSE is indispensable for the design of a high-performance SSB. Many routes have been proposed to engineer the Li/SSE interface, e.g., employing a polymer electrolyte as a buffer layer, using an artificial solid electrolyte as a buffer layer, and pre-active cycling under a small current density.41,49,51
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the interfacial contact issues between SSEs and (a) Li metal electrode and (b) cathode electrode. 
Similar to the Li anode, the physical contact between the cathode and SSE is also a critical challenge to realize a low-impedance SSB, as shown in Fig. 2b. The design of a low-resistance cathode/SSE interface is more complicated than the corresponding interface in conventional LIBs because there are many factors that can significantly affect the contact between the active materials and the SSE, including the surface topography of the SSEs, morphology of the active cathode materials, conductive additives in the cathodes (e.g., carbon), and volume and stress changes of the cathode materials during the charge–discharge cycles. Tremendous effort has been made to enhance the physical contact between the electrode (anode and cathode) and SSE. For instance, by inserting a thin buffer layer of metal oxides,39,52 sulfides,53 polymers,54 or their hybrids,55,56 an intimate physical contact can be achieved, resulting in a substantial reduction in interfacial resistance, improved rate, prolonged cycling life, and increased energy density.
2.2. Chemical contact
The chemical contact associated with the chemical and electrochemical stabilities of the interfacial reaction zone (interphase) is an important concern for SSBs to achieve stable performance. Unfortunately, most of the reported SSEs, particularly those containing sulfide, germanium, titanium or thiophosphate, are not stable in contact with a thermodynamically unstable Li metal anode, and a solid passivating film will be formed gradually at the Li metal anode/SSE interface. For instance, the by-products (e.g., Li2S, Li3P, or LiGe alloys) related to the parasitic reactions between the SSE and Li metal could be detected at the Li/Li10GeP2S12 interface by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).57 Considering the compatibility of SSEs with metallic Li, Fan et al.58 pointed out that there are three types of interfaces (interphases). (I) There can be an intrinsically stable interface, in which the SSE is nonreactive with the Li metal and a distinct two-dimensional interface is formed (Fig. 3a), such as a Li3N electrolyte. (II) There can be a solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI), in which the electron conductivity is poor but Li-ion conductivity is sufficient (Fig. 3b). An ultimately stable interphase may be formed via a self-limiting reaction between the SEI and Li, which can effectively block electron transport, such as a LiPON electrolyte. (III) There can be a mixed-conducting interphase, in which the electronic conductivity is higher than the SSE (Fig. 3c). Thus, it is hard to form a stable interphase to stop electron transport because the electronic conducting interphase prefers to be continually reduced by metallic Li during Li plating at a negative potential, such as a Li0.5La0.5TiO3 (LLTO) electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 3d, the potentials drop from the SSE potentials to Li metal at the interfaces for the first two types of SSEs, whereas the partial potential region of the third type of interphase drops below the potential of Li deposition. Thus, Li dendrites were easily formed in the third type of interphase. Moreover, the overpotentials during Li plating and the high electronic conductivity of SSEs even induced the growth of Li dendrites within the bulk SSEs. Therefore, the thermodynamically or electrochemically formed unstable interphase should be avoided by introducing an ABL that is nonreactive with Li or reactive with Li but can form a stable SEI, as demonstrated by Xu et al.,51 Reinacher et al.,59 Imanishi et al.,60 Liao et al.,40 and Visco et al.,61 in their concepts for stabilizing Li metal/SSE interfaces.
 Fig. 3  Formation of different types of Li/SSE interphases. (a) Intrinsically stable interface between the Li metal and the SSE. (b) Metastable solid–electrolyte interphase between the Li metal and the SSE. (c) Reactive mixed-conducting interphase between the Li metal and the SSE. (d) The corresponding Li potentials between the Li metal and different SSEs. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In contrast to the Li-metal anode/SSE interface, the (electro-) chemical processes that occur at the cathode/SSE interface are much more complicated and involve electrons flowing across the cathode and ions that pass through the cathode/SSE interface. Usually, the positive electrode is composed of active materials, such as LiFePO4 (LFP), LiCoO2 (LCO), LiMn2O4 (LMO), LiNiCoAlO2 (NCA), and LiNiCoMnO2 (NCM), appropriate amounts of ionic conductors (solid electrolytes), electronic conductors (carbon materials) and/or binders (polymers) that are mixed together to allow simultaneous transportation of both electrons and ions (lithium). As mentioned, one type of inherent resistance in SSBs is contact resistance, resulting from poor solid–solid interfacial contact or/and contact loss upon cycling. Sometimes, there is another kind of resistance in SSBs that originates from the space-charge layer, which occurs at the interface if two ionic conductors (e.g., active material in the cathode and ceramic electrolyte) that have different chemical potentials for the Li+ ions are in direct contact. For instance, a sulfide SSE has a weaker attraction to Li+ and lower chemical potential of Li+ ions compared with those of an oxide cathode, such as LiFePO4. As shown in Fig. 4, Li+ ions in sulfide SSE will move into the oxide cathode, leading to the redistribution of Li+ ions and the formation of a Li-depletion layer at the oxide cathode/sulfide SSE interface, which brings about an extra energy barrier for Li+ ion transfer. 62 The rate of SSBs will be severely restricted by such a space-charge zone.63 To understand its formation and elimination, a large number of studies have been conducted. For example, Yamamoto and co-workers revealed how the electrostatic potential was redistributed when Li+ ions moved across the SSE/LiCoO2 interface during the charge and discharge processes using quantitative electron holography.64 Fingerle and co-workers employed XPS to map the energy-level diagram of the space-charge layer that was generated at the SSE/LiCoO2 cathode interface.65 In 2006, Sasaki and co-workers successfully demonstrated that the space-charge layer between the LiCoO2/sulfide electrolyte could be suppressed by coating the LiCoO2 cathode with a Li4Ti5O12 buffer layer.43 In addition, LiNbO3,52 LiAlO2,66 and LiTaO367 have also been successfully used as buffer layers to effectively suppress the space-charge layer along the cathode/SSE interface. Therefore, it is meaningful for the rational design of the composition and structure of the buffer layers to enhance the interface compatibility between the cathode electrodes and the SSEs.
 Fig. 4  Diagrams of the LiFePO4 cathode/sulfide SSE interface during the charging process. (a) The initial stage before charging. (b) The stage at the beginning of charging. (c) The charging stage. (d) The final stage after formation of the Li-depleted layer. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
3. Materials
Currently, the ABLs used for SSBs can be summarized into three general types. (1) There are organic buffer layers, e.g., polymer electrolyte materials, formed by encapsulating an appropriate amount of lithium salts in polymer matrices, which have the merits of high interfacial compatibility with the cathode and/or Li metal anode, high processing capability and high mechanical flexibility; these have been widely exploited as artificial buffer layers in engineering both the cathode-side interface and anode-side interface to enhance physical contact and reduce chemical contact between them. (2) There are inorganic buffer layers, e.g., ceramic Li+ conductor materials, which are thermally stable, nonflammable, have good mechanical strength, are less reactive with the cathode materials and/or Li metal and are frequently invoked to engineer electrode interfaces, especially cathode-side interfaces. (3) There are hybrid buffer layers, e.g., polymer–ceramic composite Li+ conductors, which share the merits of both flexibility and good mechanical strength, and they can endure volume and stress changes of the electrode materials upon cycling, especially for conversion-type materials, alloys, and Li metal. Although these strategies have effectively enhanced the physical contact and reduced the side reactions between the electrode and SSE interfaces, there are still some disadvantages in practice, as listed in Table S1 (ESI†). For instance, although the organic buffer layer addressed the issue of contact loss-associated ionic conductivity at room temperature with a volume change of the electrode material upon cycling, it is still limited by its relatively low Li-ion conductivity at room temperature, poor thermal stability, insufficient mechanical strength, and low oxidation potential. Compared with an organic buffer layer, an inorganic buffer layer possesses high chemical and electrochemical stability and high thermal stability; however, they suffer from fracture and peeling from the electrode material due to volume changes during discharge and charge. The hybrid buffer layer shares the merits of both the organic buffer layer and inorganic buffer layer, and the fabrication of a hybrid buffer layer seems to be an appealing strategy to solve the problems associated with the interfaces. Nevertheless, it is still restricted by limited thermal stability and insufficient Li-ion conductivity and is expensive for large-scale production. As a result, further design of a robust and low-cost artificial buffer layer with improved Li-ion conductivity, thermal stability, mechanical strength, and chemical and electrochemical stability should be carried out in the future.
4. Fabrication
Solid-state batteries, as potentially safe and high-energy storage systems, are supposed to be the next important frontier for the development of full electric vehicles. For full-scale commercialization of SSBs, the realization of stable solid–solid SSE–electrode interfaces with a small impedance is crucial. To this end, many strategies have been proposed for engineering the solid–solid interfaces in SSBs, including improving the physical contact and enhancing the chemical and electrochemical stabilities. Among the various strategies, creating an ABL between the electrode and electrolyte is generally considered an effective way to enhance the interfacial compatibility. Thus, the fabrication of a reliable and cost-competitive (effective) ABL is critical for the practical application of SSBs; this challenge is meaningful for both the scientific and industrial communities. To obtain a high-quality ABL, many techniques have been employed. In this section, different dedicated fabrication methods (techniques) are introduced. For simplicity, they are summarized into three types, i.e., top-down approaches, bottom-up approaches, and other attempts. The limitations of the different methods are also discussed.
4.1. Top-down approaches

4.1.1. Magnetron sputtering. 
Magnetron sputtering (MS) is a plasma vapor deposition process in which a plasma is produced from the target and positively charged ions from the plasma are accelerated by an electrical field. Generally, a conductive target can be sputtered utilizing a direct current (DC) power supply whereas an insulating target can be sputtered employing a radio frequency (RF) power supply. It is an advanced technique to create a dense microcrystalline interface on the surface of different substrates, which can reduce the energy barrier and control the interfacial contact. A study was performed for a thin film of lithium phosphorous oxynitride (LIPON), which was prepared by sputtering a Li3PO4 target in a low pressure N2 atmosphere. The Li+ conductivity of the LIPON film is approximately 1 × 10−6 S cm−1, and its electrochemical window reaches up to 5.5 V vs. Li, which is a promising result for thin-film SSBs.68–70
More recently, LIPON was also frequently invoked as a buffer layer to engineer the solid–solid interfaces of bulk-type and thin-film SSBs. For example, LIPON has been used as an ABL to address the chemical stability issue of the NASICON-type solid electrolyte in contact with Li metal. West et al.71 reported that sputter deposition of a LIPON buffer layer directly onto a lithium ion conducting glass-ceramic solid electrolyte plate could allow direct electrochemical plating and stripping of metallic Li. Jadhav et al.72 also found that LIPON could act as a buffer layer between a B2O3–Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4) solid electrolyte and Li metal anode to mitigate the side reactions between them. In addition, LIPON could also be used as an ABL to engineer the cathode/SSE interface in SSBs. As displayed in Fig. 5a, the LIPON-buffer layer was deposited on LiCoO2 by sputtering of a Li3PO4 target in a 20 mTorr nitrogen atmosphere, as reported by Kim et al.73 During sputtering, the LiCoO2 powder was contained in an Al foil pan, which was shaken continuously to expose all the surfaces of the powder to the LIPON plasma flux. It was found that a 1 nm thick layer of the LIPON-buffer layer coated on the preformed LiCoO2 cathode retained approximately 90% of its initial capacity over 40 cycles in the 3.0–4.4 V range, which was much better than that of the uncoated cathode, as shown in Fig. 5b. Yoon et al.74 developed a LIPON/lithium lanthanum titanate (LLT)/LIPON multilayer structure based on the magnetron sputtering technique, which attempted to add an ABL to both sides of the LLT to solve not only the chemical instability between the LLT and Li metal but also the short circuiting of the LLT thin-film batteries.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of a magnetron sputtering system. (b) Comparison of the cycling performance of the LiCoO2 cathode with and without a LiPON buffer layer in the potential window of 3–4.4 V vs. Li. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (c) STEM image and EDX mapping of a cross-sectional interface between LLZ and LiCoO2 with a Nb buffer layer. (d) Comparison of the discharge capacity and rate capability of the SSBs with and without a Nb buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image and photo image of the Ge-coated LAGP pellets. (f) EIS plots of Li- and Ag-symmetric cells with a Ge buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the LIPON buffer layer, other materials, such as LLTO,75 Nb,38 Ge,76 Si,77 and Al2O3,78 have also been prepared as buffer layers using the MS technique to improve the cell performance and minimize the interfacial resistances of the SSBs. For example, Lee et al.75 deposited an LLTO (Li2.3La2.1Ta1.2O15.3) buffer layer with different thicknesses between a Li5La3Ta2O12 solid electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode by the MS technique using a Li5La3Ta2O12 target. By considering both the XPS and ICP-AES analyses, the composition of the fabricated LLTO buffer layer was estimated as Li2.3La2.1Ta1.2O15.3. After 100 cycles, the SSB with a 100 nm LLTO buffer layer had a high capacity (33 mA h cm−3) and low capacity fading (72%), revealing that the LLTO buffer layer improved Li+ ion transport and reduced the contact resistance between the Li5La3Ta2O12 solid electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode. Following the same route, Kato et al.38 reported the MS deposition of a Nb buffer layer between Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZ) and LiCoO2, which effectively decreased the interfacial resistance from 2600 Ω cm2 to 150 Ω cm2 by tuning the Nb buffer layer thickness; the Nb also improved the rate capability and discharge capacity of the SSB, as shown in Fig. 5c and d. In addition to the Nb buffer layer, Ge has also been developed as a buffer layer to reduce the interfacial resistance. For example, Liu et al.76 used MS to deposit a 60 nm thick Ge buffer layer on a NASCION-type Li1.5Al0.5Ge0.5P3O12 (LAGP) solid electrolyte (Fig. 5e), which not only produced intimate contact between the LAGP and Li metal but also enhanced the chemical stability of the LAGP in contact with the Li metal. It was postulated that the Ge buffer layer was lithiated when in contact with the Li anode, which led to the formation of a high ionic conducting layer of Li–Ge alloy. As shown in Fig. 5f, a long tail in the low frequency range appeared using Ag as the blocking electrodes, whereas the long tail disappeared at a low frequency when the Li metal served as an unblocking electrode, indicating that the Ge buffer layer had good Li+ ion conductivity. A similar method was also applied to build a protective buffer layer on the surface of Li metal. For instance, Li et al.78 deposited a 20 nm-thick Al2O3 buffer layer on Li metal anodes, which enabled an SSB to be cycled over 660 h at a moderate current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. It is worth noting that the MS technique has demonstrated commercial success in the microelectronics industry since the 1960s. However, controllable preparation of Li-containing buffer layers (e.g., Li5La3Ta2O12) while conserving the stoichiometry of the sputtering target is challenging, and the properties of the obtained buffer layers are highly dependent on the effects of the sputtering parameters, such as power supply, working vacuum, nitrogen pressure, target density, and the distance between the target and the substrate.


4.1.2. Spark plasma sintering. 
Spark plasma sintering (SPS), which combines uniaxial pressure and a pulsed direct electrical current, is a feasible sintering method to densify powder compacts and is widely used for the fabrication of dense ceramics.28,79 Recently, it was also used for the fabrication of versatile ABLs to modify the solid–solid interface in SSBs. One significant feature of SPS is that the heating rate (up to 600 °C min−1) is one order of magnitude higher than that of the ordinary sintering techniques (usually less than 50 °C min−1).27,80 As shown in Fig. 6a–c,28 the direct electrical current, high heating rate, short processing time, and high pressure in the SPS process enhance the densification of powders through grain-boundary diffusion and by avoiding grain coarsening compared to that of conventional sintering techniques, which is an effective way for the unfettered development of various SSBs, such as sulfide-,81,82 garnet-,26,83 perovskite-,84 and NASICON-85–87 based prototypes with improved interface contact and ionic conductivity.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of (a) a spark plasma sintering system, (b) micro-scale energy dissipation among the contacted powder particles, and (c) material transfer route between two contacted particles. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Microstructures of LATP glass-ceramic processed by (d and e) conventional heat treatment and (f and g) spark plasma sintering. Complex impedance for LATP glass-ceramics measured at room temperature for (h) conventional heat-treated and (i) SPS-treated samples. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Takahara et al.81 prepared carbon-coated LiCoO2 using the SPS technique, which could improve the electrical conductivity of the cathode without hampering the diffusion of lithium ions. In the SPS process, a microscopic electrical discharge flows past the particles loaded in a carbon die under pressure for a short time, which makes intimate contact between the particles and carbon, promoting the production of dense pellets with uniform carbon coatings. With the improvement due to this carbon-coated buffer layer, the rate capability of the sulfide-type SSB was much better than that of the pristine LiCoO2 and acetylene black–LiCoO2 mixture. This result suggested that SPS treatment was a good method for preparing carbon-coated active materials to achieve full utilization of the SSBs. Similarly, Takeuchi et al.82 prepared a carbon-coated Li2S cathode by the SPS technique. When used in an SSB with a Li3PO4–Li2S–SiS2 solid electrolyte, the carbon-coated cathode could deliver a high specific discharge and charge capacities of approximately 920 and 1010 mA h g−1, respectively. By introducing the carbon buffer layer on a lithium sulfide cathode using SPS, the polysulfide shuttle can be suppressed effectively, thus improving the delivered capacity, coulombic efficiency, and cycling performance of the cells. In addition, Duan et al.85 found that a non-equilibrium microstructure of the LATP buffer layer (Fig. 6d–g) with an intermediate short-range ordered interphase between the amorphous glass phases and well-crystallized ceramic could be established by the SPS technique, which relaxed the interfacial structures, resulting in enhanced ionic transport capabilities (Fig. 6h–i). Overall, the SPS technique offers several advantages, e.g., a short processing time, low sintering temperature, and a single step co-sintering protocol without thermal mismatch; this is a very promising technique to create high-quality ABLs between solid electrode/electrolyte interfaces that improve the overall performance of the SSBs. Despite many advantages of the SPS technique, there are still some constraints in their practical large-scale application due to the complicated manipulation, high price, and low production efficiency.


4.1.3. Electron-beam evaporation. 
E-beam evaporation is a process similar to thermal evaporation. A schematic representation of an e-beam evaporation system is shown in Fig. 7a. By using a high voltage, electrons are extracted from the filament and form a fine beam by the manipulation of the electric and magnetic fields. The electrons are converted into heat energy where the focused beam collides with the source material in the crucible. When the source material in vacuum is heated above its boiling temperature, it evaporates and forms a thin film on the substrate surfaces. Recently, using such an advanced technique, several artificial buffer layers have been reported to manipulate solid–solid electrode–SSE interfaces in SSBs with improved battery performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of an E-beam evaporation system. (b) SEM image and the corresponding digital photograph (inset) of the Li3N-coated LLZT surface. (c) The rate performance and Coulombic efficiency of the LFP/LLZT/Li cell with a Li3N buffer layer tested at 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic representation of the LiGe alloy buffer layer fabrication process. (e–g) Digital photographs of the LLZO pellet with a Ge buffer layer in different states when in contact with molten Li. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
The solid–solid Li/SSE interface plays a critical role in the electrochemical performance of SSBs due to the poor contact, wetting, and stability of the SSE with Li metal. Previous results by Park et al.88,89 have suggested that Li3N has a good wetting ability with Li metal. Inspired by Park's results to achieve an intimate physical contact with Li metal using lithiophilic Li3N, Xu et al.51 removed the original Li2CO3 covering layer and then constructed a thin Li3N buffer layer on the Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12 (LLZT) surface by a two-step fabrication process; the process involved e-beam evaporation of a thin Li metal layer onto the LLZT pellet in vacuum and filling of the reaction chamber with N2 gas to produce a Li3N layer via a nitriding reaction (Fig. 7b). In addition, the thickness of the Li3N buffer layer could be tuned by adjusting the e-beam evaporation time of the Li metal on the LLZT pellet. The results showed that the total impedance of the Li3N-engineered Li/LLZT/Li symmetric cell could be remarkably decreased. When paired with a LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode, as shown in Fig. 7c, the LFP/LLZT/Li battery displayed good rate performance and high Coulombic efficiency. Moreover, the Li3N-engineered LFP/LLZT/Li cell showed high capacity retention and cycling efficiency even when operated at 40 °C. Luo et al.90 reported that the interfacial resistance of garnet-structured Li7LLa3Zr2O12 (LLZO)/Li metal could be greatly reduced by sputtering a thin lithiophilic Ge-based buffer layer on the LLZO pellet using the e-beam evaporation technique. Fig. 7d is a schematic representation of the Ge-based buffer layer preparation process. Note that a slice of Li metal foil was attached on a Ge buffer layer-coated LLZO pellet and then heated on a hot plate in an Ar-filled glovebox to produce a LiGe alloy buffer layer. The corresponding reaction processes were recorded by a camera, as shown in Fig. 7e–g. Following a similar route, Fu et al.91 used e-beam evaporation of the Al-buffer layer to engineer a garnet LLCZN (Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12)/Li metal interface by forming a LiAl alloy buffer layer. By introducing the LiAl alloy buffer layer on the LLCZN ceramic electrolyte, the wettability of the LLCZN surface changed from lithiophobic to lithiophilic, thus decreasing the interfacial resistance from 950 to 75 Ohm cm2, respectively, at 20 °C. Recently, Fu et al.92 also used e-beam evaporation of Mg as a model system to produce a LiMg alloy on a garnet electrolyte, which placed the garnet electrolyte in close physical contact with the Li metal.
Overall, the e-beam evaporation technique offers two noticeable advantages for interface engineering: (1) it is possible to add a large amount of energy into the desired source material, thus yielding a high-density film with enhanced adhesion to the SSE pellets; (2) the contaminations from the crucible will be minimized because the e-beam focuses only on the desired source material and not the entire crucible. However, the e-beam evaporation technique also suffers from several disadvantages, e.g., precise manipulation of the electric and magnetic fields is difficult, obscure compound stoichiometries are induced by radiation damage, and it is expensive and has a low evaporation rate for mass production.


4.1.4. Pulsed laser deposition. 
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is an attractive technique to prepare high-quality thin films with nearly the initial stoichiometry of the bulk target; films are produced by controlling a series of parameters, such as the laser fluence and gas pressure, and have low contamination and a high deposition rate.93 In previous studies on SSEs, the PLD technique has been used not only for preparing crystalline thin films (e.g., LiCoO2,94 LiMn2O4,95 and LiFePO496) but also for fabricating amorphous thin films (e.g., LixLa(2−x)/3TiO3,97 Li2SiO3,98 and Li3PO499). Recently, the PLD technique was also proposed to engineer a solid–solid interface in SSBs, enabling operation of the batteries with a reduced charge transfer resistance and improved cycling life. For instance, Sakurai et al.100 reported that an amorphous 50Li4SiO4–50Li3PO4 buffer layer could be deposited on LiCoO2 cathode particles by the PLD technique (Fig. 8a and b). The room temperature ionic conductivity of the prepared buffer layer reached up to 1.6 × 10−6 S cm−1. Note that a dense and flat buffer layer in good contact with LiCoO2 could be obtained under an argon pressure of 10−2 Pa and a laser intensity of 6 J cm−2. The interfacial resistance of the bulk type SSB using the Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte and 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4-coated LiCoO2 cathode was much lower than that of the LiCoO2 without a coating layer (Fig. 8c); this finding was consistent with their discharge potentials of the two cells (Fig. 8d), suggesting that the PLD coating of the oxide buffer layer with a high Li-ion conductivity on LiCoO2 is useful for reducing the interfacial resistance of the SSBs. Similarly, Takamura et al.101 reported three buffer layers, i.e., Li3PO4, LiNbO3 and Al2O3, which were deposited on LiCoO2 cathode particles with a thickness of 5–150 nm by the PLD technique to prevent parasitic reactions between the LiBH4 electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode. The experimental results showed that the Li3PO4 buffer layer with a thickness of 10–25 nm had the lowest interfacial resistance compared to that of all other films, and it was almost threefold lower in magnitude than that of LiCoO2 without a buffer layer. In addition to the LiCoO2 cathode, a high-voltage LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode coated with a Li3PO4 buffer layer was also produced by the PLD technique (Fig. 8e).102 As shown in Fig. 8f and g, the Li3PO4 buffer layer had a significant effect on reducing the interfacial resistance of the SSBs, and the reversible capacity of SSBs with the Li3PO4 buffer layer reached up to 62 mA h g−1 at a high voltage of 4.7 V vs. Li, which is much higher than that of the non-coated one (<1 mA h g−1). In addition to direct coating a buffer layer on cathode particles, Gittleson et al.103 also employed PLD to fabricate a thin, Li-ion conducting LiNbO3 buffer layer between the LiCoO2 cathode and LIPON electrolyte interface that could effectively mitigate the loss of Li+ ions and suppress space-charge separation in SSBs. Many similar works have also prepared a series of buffer layers using the PLD technique for reducing the charge transfer resistance of SSBs.53,104–106
 Fig. 8  SEM images of LiCoO2 particles (a) without and (b) with a 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4 buffer layer. (c) Impedance spectrum of SSBs with non-coated and 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4-coated layers after the first charge process. (d) Discharge curves of SSBs with non-coated and 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4-coated LiCoO2. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (e) SEM image of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 particles coated with Li3PO4 buffer layers. (f) Impedance profiles of SSBs with non-coated and Li3PO4-coated buffer layers after charging to 4.8 V vs. Li. (g) Discharge/charge curves of SSBs using non-coated and Li3PO4-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
The merits of the PLD technique include (1) conserving the stoichiometry of the target, (2) only requiring a small target, and (3) producing a small amount of contamination from the vacuum chamber. However, the PLD technique has challenges with the large-scale and controllable preparation of buffer layers on electrode/SSE interfaces with good contact. This is probably due to the complicated growth procedure, which leads to variation of the buffer layer quality depending on the preparation parameters.

4.2. Bottom-up approaches

4.2.1. Sol–gel derived synthesis. 
The sol–gel process is a typical wet chemical method to fabricate homogeneous coatings for various areas of research due to its mild synthesis conditions, such as low temperature and normal pressure.107 In recent years, the sol–gel approach has also been widely used for the preparation of various coatings on electrode surfaces to stabilize the solid–solid interfaces in SSBs. Up to now, ordinary oxides (SiO2,108 Al2O3,109 ZnO,110 ZrO2,111etc.) and Li-ion conductive oxides (LiNbO3,52,112 Li4Ti5O12,43,113,114 LiTaO3,67 Li2SiO3,108,115,116etc.), as coating buffer layers of cathode materials, have been prepared using the sol–gel method. For example, Sakuda et al.108 reported that the electrochemical performance of SSBs could be dramatically boosted by coating LiCoO2 cathodes with SiO2- and Li2SiO3-buffer layers using the sol–gel method. When equipped with Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolytes and Li–In anodes, the entire resistance of the SSBs using SiO2-coated, Li2SiO3-coated, and non-coated LiCoO2 cathodes were 437, 355, and 495 Ω, respectively. The discharge/charge rates of the SSBs using the SiO2-coated and Li2SiO3-coated LiCoO2 cathodes were both better than that of the SSB using a non-coated LiCoO2 cathode. In addition, it was found that the Li2SiO3-buffer layer was superior to the SiO2-buffer layer in improving rate capability. Note that the SSB after modification with a Li2SiO3-buffer layer could be discharged even at a current density of 6.4 mA cm−2. In addition to the LiCoO2 cathode, LiNi1−xMxO2 (0 < x < 0.5, M = Co, Mn) with high nickel content were also frequently invoked as a cathode material in SSBs due to their low cost, high capacity, and environmental friendliness.117 However, the side reaction related to the poor stability of Ni3+ in LiNi1−xMxO2 will cause increased interface resistance and severe capacity decay during the operation of SSBs. Okada et al.66 reported the sol–gel synthesis of LiAlO2-coated LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cathode material and then investigated the influence of the LiAlO2 buffer layer on the electrochemical performance of the all-solid-state LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2/Li3PS4/Li4.4Si batteries, as shown in Fig. 9a–c. Compared to the non-coated LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 reference, all the batteries using the LiAlO2-buffer-layer-coated LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 electrodes showed much higher initial discharge capacities at current densities of 11, 43, and 86 mA g−1. In addition, the charge-transfer resistances at the cathodes of the batteries with the LiAlO2 buffer layer were much smaller than those of the batteries without the LiAlO2 buffer layer, suggesting that the LiAlO2 buffer layer effectively decreased the solid interfacial resistance of LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2/a-Li3PS4. More recently, Oh et al.112 reported a LiNbO3-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 by the sol–gel method to stabilize the oxide electrode/sulfide electrolyte interfaces (Fig. 9d). The CV measurements of the LiNbO3/Au/LGPS electrode show no redox currents between 3.5 and 5 V for the first two scans, whereas the AB/LGPS electrode exhibits a remarkable redox current in the first scan and shows no distinct decrease in the redox current during the second scan, as shown in Fig. 9e and f. This reveals that the LiNbO3 buffer layer is relatively stable against LGPS even at a high voltage and has the potential to address the poor cycling capability of high-voltage SSBs. A similar method was also adopted to produce ZrO2,111 LiNbO3,118 and Li2O–ZrO239 buffer layers for improving the physical contact and chemical stability of the cathode/SSE interface in SSBs.
 Fig. 9  (a) TEM image of the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 particles with a LiAlO2-coated buffer layer annealed at 350 °C. (b) Discharge profiles of the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2/a-Li3PS4/Li4.4Si batteries at different current densities. (c) Impedance plots of the SSBs with and without a 1.0 mol% LiAlO2-coated buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (d) SEM image and EDX mappings of the LNMO cathode particles with a 3 wt% LiNbO3-coated buffer layer. The CV curves of LiNbO3 (LNO)/Au/LGPS and AB (acetylene black)/LGPS electrodes for (e) the first and (f) second scans. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Although the sol–gel method has been proven to be effective in producing various buffer layers for engineering the cathode/SSE interfaces, it is still not suitable for the fabrication of a buffer layer on a highly reactive Li metal anode because the sol–gel process involves considerable quantities of solvent and precursor. In addition, most sol–gel-derived buffer layers are amorphous in nature and require further thermal treatment to promote crystallization. The subsequent heating process may induce phase transformation, grain growth, and particle agglomeration.


4.2.2. Atomic layer deposition. 
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) produces tailored conformal coatings with sequential and self-limiting surface reactions with Å-level thickness control, requires minimal amounts of precursors, and is an advanced coating method that is capable of creating buffer layers for engineering electrolyte–electrode interfaces.119,120 Studies that used ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layers not only addressed the compatibility between the Li metal and SSEs but also overcame the interface issue between the cathode and SSEs.121–124 For example, Woo et al.124 reported that utilization of an ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer onto the LiCoO2 cathode could greatly improve the cycle stability of solid-state LiCoO2/Li3.15Ge0.15P0.85S4/Li2S–P2S5/Li batteries. The battery using the LiCoO2 cathode with the Al2O3 buffer layer retained 90% of the capacity after 25 cycles, while only 70% of the capacity was retained for the cell without the application of the Al2O3 buffer layer for its LiCoO2 electrode. Later, Woo et al.121 further revealed the diffusion pathways of the Li+ ions at the SSE/LiCoO2 interface with and without the ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer. As displayed in Fig. 10a, they pointed out that without the ALD-deposited Al2O3 buffer layer, effective Li-ion intercalation could only occur when the Li-ion flow direction was along the gap between the CoO2 sheets of LiCoO2. By contrast, the ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer on LiCoO2 allowed it to serve as a Li-ion pathway and provide additional access to intercalation sites for Li-ions in LiCoO2. Moreover, heat treatment of the ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer further improved the galvanostatic cycling performance of SSBs between 3.3 and 4.3 V vs. Li, as shown in Fig. 10b. Many studies have also reported an improved compatibility between the SSE and metallic Li anode using an ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer. For example, Han et al.123 reported that the large interfacial impedance between the metallic Li anode and a garnet-type electrolyte of Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLCZN) could be greatly reduced from 1710 Ω cm2 to 1 Ω cm2 by an ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer on the surface of LLCZN. Liu et al.125 reported that an ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer on Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) surfaces could stabilize the metallic Li anode/LATP electrolyte interface by reducing the side/parasitic reactions between them. In conjunction with the HE-XPS and HRTEM-EELS analyses, it was determined that the Li penetration into the bulk LATP pellet and Ti4+ reduction were distinctly suppressed with the help of the ALD-coated Al2O3 buffer layer.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the interface of uncoated LiCoO2/SSE and Al2O3-coated LiCoO2/SSE. (b) Cycling performances of SSBs without an Al2O3 layer and with Al2O3-coating layers heated in different environments. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2015, The Electrochemical Society. (c) Wetting processes between the molten Li metal and garnet LLCZNO with a ZnO buffer layer. (d) Schematic representation and SEM image of the molten Li infiltration into the porous garnet LLCZNO with a deposited ZnO buffer layer. (e) Nyquist plots of Li/garnet LLCZNO/Li symmetric cells with ZnO buffer layers after pretreatment at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to ALD-coated Al2O3, buffer layers of ZnO126 and Li3NbO4127 have also been prepared by ALD to stabilize the electrolyte–electrode interface in SSBs with reduced interfacial resistance and side reactions. For example, Wang et al.126 demonstrated that an ALD-coated ZnO buffer layer could improve the wettability of the garnet LLCZNO (Li6.75La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12) to molten Li, as illustrated in Fig. 10c. Note that the porous structure of garnet LLCZNO was fabricated as a Li metal host to overcome its volume change during the charge–discharge cycling (Fig. 10d). However, it was found that direct infiltration of metallic Li into porous garnet electrolytes is quite difficult. As shown in Fig. 10e, with an ALD-coated ZnO buffer layer, the interfacial resistances of the Li/garnet LLCZNO/Li symmetric cells dropped dramatically. Additionally, the interfacial resistances depended on the heating temperature of the molten Li. The lowest interfacial resistance of ∼100 Ω cm2 could be achieved after heating at a high temperature of 300 °C for 30 min. This may result from the fact that a high temperature promoted full lithiation of the ZnO buffer layer to the Li+ conductive phase. This study offered a proof-of-concept, where the buffer materials were deposited on 3D porous SSE networks by using ALD. To use highly conductive sulfide-type SSEs in practical SSBs, creating a buffer layer to protect the cathodes is necessary, especially for the layered cathodes, such as LiCoO2, NCA (LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2), and NCM (LiNi1−x−yCoyMnxO2). For example, Vinado et al.127 reported that ALD coating of an ultrathin Li3NbO4 buffer layer on a LiCoO2 cathode could effectively improve both the cycling and the rate performance of the SSB using Li10SnP2S12 as a solid electrolyte. Li3NbO4 was selected as the buffer layer because of its high Li-ion conductivity and good chemical stability against both LiCoO2 and Li10SnP2S12, thus effectively suppressing the atomic inter-diffusion at the interface during the battery operation. Although the ALD technique enables the creation of buffer layers with controllable nanoscale conformity, atomic scale thickness, and uniformity over large areas, it is still facing challenges such as the high cost of the precursors, a complicated operation system, and a time-consuming deposition process.


4.2.3. Chemical vapor deposition. 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a surface coating technology through which the substrates (electrode materials, SSE plates, etc.) are in contact with flowing volatile precursors (e.g., gas or liquid vapor), and the desired solid materials are deposited on the substrates from the precursors by a chemical reaction, typically under vacuum, as shown in Fig. 11a.128 The deposited materials (e.g., carbon, Si, oxides) are in the form of amorphous, monocrystalline, or polycrystalline thin films, to name a few. Recently, various CVD techniques, such as plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD), atomic-layer CVD (ALCVD), metal–organic CVD (MOCVD), laser-assisted CVD (LACVD), and pulsed-laser CVD (PLCVD), have created interest in creating high-performance thin films or buffer layers on electrode components, offering enhanced stabilities for Li-ion batteries, especially for SSBs.129–131
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of a CVD apparatus. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Cross-section TEM image of a DLC-coated NCA cathode particle. (c) Cycle performance of the SSBs using DLC-coated NCA (blue), plasma-pretreated NCA (red), and pristine NCA (black). (d) TOF-SIMS mass spectrum for the DLC-coated NCA, plasma-pretreated NCA, and pristine NCA after 100 cycles. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (e) Digital images and SEM images of pristine LLZ (1,2) and Si-coated LLZ (3,4). (f) DFT calculation of mutual reaction energy between LLZ and LixSi interfaces. (g) EIS measurements of Li/LLZ/Li symmetric cells with and without a Si buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Kanehori et al.132 produced a particularly relevant report of the first thin-film Li/TiS2 solid-state battery that was fabricated with CVD. Subsequently, modified CVD techniques were used to deposit electrode and electrolyte films for thin-film SSBs,128,133 such as LACVD Li7La3Ta2O12 solid-state electrolyte,134 and a LiCoO2 cathode deposited by PLCVD.135 In addition to thin-film SSBs, the CVD technique was also used for the fabrication of buffer layers coated on the electrode/electrolyte interface for bulk-type SSBs. For example, Visbal et al.136 first reported the CVD coating of an ∼4 nm-thick diamond-like carbon (DLC) layer on LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) as a buffer layer used in a sulfide-based SSB (Fig. 11b). The sulfide-based SSB employing the DLC-coated NCA cathode showed better cycle ability and rate performance than the SSBs using the pristine or plasma-treated NCA cathode (Fig. 11c). After 100 cycles, the cathode pellets were analysed by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). As shown in Fig. 11d, a strong peak related to SO3 (m/z ∼ 79.96) could be detected for the pristine (black curve) or plasma-treated sample (red curve), while a relatively weak peak could be measured for the DLC-coated sample (blue curve). The results suggested that the side reactions between the NCA cathode and sulfide electrolyte could be effectively suppressed by the DLC buffer layer. A similar enhancement in interfacial compatibility has also been reported by Luo et al., using CVD coatings of a 10 nm-thick Si buffer layer on garnet electrolyte (Fig. 11e).137 By introducing the Si buffer layer, the interface properties of the garnet SSEs changed from superlithiophobicity to superlithiophilicity, thus improving the wettability between garnet Li6.85La2.9Ca0.1Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLZ) and molten Li. When the garnet LLZ pellet was fully submerged into the molten Li metal, the Li metal could immediately be coated onto the side with a Si buffer layer, but the other side without a Si buffer layer remained clean. Such a dramatic transition of its wettability towards Li metal was mainly attributed to the lithiation of Si and the formation of LixSi alloy (Fig. 11f). Promoted by such a Si buffer layer, the LLZ/Li interfacial resistance decreased from 925 Ω cm2 to 127 Ω cm2 (Fig. 11g), indicating that the inexpensive Si buffer layer coated by CVD was a promising approach for engineering Li/SSE interfaces. According to the above-mentioned reports, CVD coating technology opens opportunities for the unfettered development of SSBs with improved interfacial compatibility. However, the CVD coating process is complicated and costly, and the coating uniformity is dependent on the nucleation and film formation process, which need to be further studied.


4.2.4. Electrochemical-assisted synthesis. 
Electrochemical-assisted synthesis indicates an interface buffer layer formed spontaneously by an electrochemical process. Typically, a solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI), which is a passivation film formed spontaneously from a reaction of the Li metal and electrolyte in SSBs during the charging process, can block electron transfer and slow down further decomposition of the electrolyte.138 Here, the buffer layers obtained from the electrochemical-assisted synthesis approach were denoted as an SEI buffer layer. To use high-capacity Li metal in SSBs, surface protection of the Li or SSE is necessary. For example, Goodenough et al.139 reported a NASICON-type solid electrolyte, LiZr2(PO4)3, which could form a stable SEI buffer layer after pre-cycling of Li/LiZr2(PO4)3/Li at 80 °C for 10 h. As shown in Fig. 12a, a thin buffer layer with black colour was formed on the surface of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet using electrochemical-assisted synthesis. To explore the composition and formation process of the SEI buffer layer, a visualization experiment was performed. A Li metal foil was heated on the surface of a LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet, and then a dense, black thin layer was formed on the surface of LiZr2(PO4)3 at 350 °C for 30 min (Fig. 12b and c). The XRD result (Fig. 12d) of the black thin layer on the pellet confirmed the decomposition of LiZr2(PO4)3 to trigonal Li8ZrO6 and hexagonal Li3P phases via the reaction: 24Li + LiZr2(PO4)3 → 2Li8ZrO6 +3Li3P. As a result, the SEI buffer layer containing Li8ZrO6 and Li3P was suspected for the reaction between the LiZr2(PO4)3 and Li metal. The obtained SEI buffer layer was wetted by the Li metal, which effectively suppressed Li dendrite formation and provided a safe SSB. Zhang et al.140 provided an ex situ electrochemical strategy for constructing a stable implantable SEI buffer layer by precycling the Li metal electrode in an electrolyte containing LiTFSI–LiNO3–Li2S5 ternary salt, as shown in Fig. 12e, and applied to not only ordinary Li-NCM but also advanced Li–S batteries. To further investigate the element depth distribution in such an electroplated SEI buffer layer, they performed TOF-SIMS depth profiling and cross-section chemical mapping of the SEI buffer layer-protected Li metal (Fig. 12f and g), demonstrating that the LiF played a critical role in creating an efficient and stable SEI buffer layer; therefore, an SEI buffer layer with a LiF-rich component provided excellent protection to the Li metal. In addition to creating an SEI buffer layer on the Li metal, the electrochemical-assisted synthesis approach could also fabricate an SEI buffer layer on the cathode side. For example, Fu et al.141 demonstrated the compatibility of a garnet Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) solid electrolyte in a Li–S battery, as shown in Fig. 12h. Both a computational study and experimental results indicated that an electronic insulating SEI buffer layer composed of Li2S and Li2SO4 was formed upon cycling, and the formation of a self-inhibiting SEI layer at the interface on the cathode side could prevent further reactions between the garnet LLZO and sulfur cathodes (Fig. 12i). Therefore, the results indicated that electrochemical-assisted formation of a self-inhibiting SEI layer could act as a promising buffer layer to improve the interfacial compatibility between the SSEs and the electrodes.
 Fig. 12  (a) Surface SEM image of a LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet disassembled from the cell after 100 h cycling. The inset shows the SEM image of Li metal after being charged for 20 h in the symmetric cell at 150 μA cm−2. (b) Digital photograph of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet after cycling in Li/LiZr2(PO4)3/Li symmetric cells for 10 h. (c) Digital photograph of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet with Li metal on the surface after being fired at 350 °C for 0.5 h. (d) XRD pattern of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet after reaction with Li metal at 350 °C for 0.5 h. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. (e) Implantable SEI buffer layer formation on the Li metal foil through an electrochemical method. (f and g) TOF-SIMS chemical mapping and depth profiles of the as-prepared SEI buffer layer to reveal the formation species. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (h) Schematic representation of the formation of a self-inhibiting SEI buffer layer between the sulfur cathode and garnet electrolyte. (i) Reaction energy of garnet Li7La3Zr2O12 with polysulfides of Li2S and Li2S8 based on computational calculation. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Overall, the SEI buffer layers obtained from the electrochemical-assisted synthesis approach were simple, controllable, and cost-effective. A desired SEI buffer layer should be ionically conducting, electrically insulating, and highly stable. However, this is often not the case in practice, especially for the SEI buffer layer on the cathode side due to its reversible decomposition at a high voltage. In addition, the formed SEI buffer layer will lose contact with the solid interface because of the volume change of the electrode material during the battery operation, particularly when Li metal is used in the SSBs.

4.3. Other attempts
In addition to the above-mentioned methods, spray coating,43 spin coating,142 solvent casting,42 and pencil drawing44 were also proposed for creating various ABLs. For example, Ohta et al.43 used a spray-coating method to modify the surface of LiCoO2 with Li4Ti5O12 by a rolling fluidized coating machine. Compared to the uncoated LiCoO2 reference, the Li4Ti5O12-coated LiCoO2 is more stable in contact with the solid sulfide electrolytes. It was found that the Li4Ti5O12 as an artificial buffer layer could effectively prevent the development of a space-charge layer in the sulfide-type electrolytes, such as thio-LISICON, thus reducing the interfacial resistance and boosting the rate capability of SSBs. Zhang et al.142 reported an ingenious interface re-engineering strategy by spin-coating an 80 wt% H3PO4 solution on a Li metal anode, which formed an in situ LiH2PO4 artificial buffer layer at the interface between the Li metal and Li10GeP2S12 electrolyte. As a result, the physical contact and chemical stability of the Li metal/Li10GeP2S12 interface both increased, allowing stable cycling of Li metal in Li-symmetrical cells (over 950 h at 0.1 mA cm−2) and all-solid-state LiCoO2/Li10GeP2S12/Li batteries (over 500 cycles at 0.1C). In addition to spin-coating, another simple strategy of pencil drawing was also proposed. For example, Shao et al.44 fabricated a graphite-based buffer layer on a garnet-type Li5.9Al0.2La3Zr1.75W0.25O12 pellet by directly drawing with a pencil (Fig. 13a). Due to the buffer layer, the wetting behaviour of the garnet-type SSE with molten Li metal improved significantly (Fig. 13b), which enabled stable symmetric Li cell cycling for over 1000 h. When equipped with a NCM523 cathode, the solid-state battery displayed excellent rate capability and long cycling performance (Fig. 13c). Solvent casting is a general method for engineering soft buffer layers (e.g., PEO10–LiN(CF3SO2)2,42 PEG/SiO2,41 PEO–LiFTFSI,143 PAN/LiPF655 and Cu3N/SBR144) in solid-state batteries. For example, Zhang et al.145 reported an advanced cell construction strategy through spin-coating with a PEO-based buffer layer in the interface of a Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP)/Li-metal anode, leading to a cell with superior interfacial contact and ultralong cycle life (Fig. 13d and e). Liu et al.42 reported that the interfacial resistance of the all-solid-state LiMn2O4/Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP)/Li batteries can be greatly reduced by solvent-casting the PEO10–LiN(CF3SO2)2 buffer layer at the interfaces of both the anode and cathode.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photograph of the fabrication of a graphite-based interface layer on a garnet-type SSE by pencil drawing. (b) The wetting behaviour of molten Li contact with the garnet-type SSE with and without a graphite-based buffer layer. (c) Charge and discharge curves of the SSB with a graphite-based buffer layer at different rates. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the SSB with the PEO-optimized cell structure. (e) Voltage–time profiles of the Li/LAGP/Li symmetric cell without and with a PEO-based buffer layer with 0.1 mA cm−2 current density at 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Characterization
The properties of the electrode–electrolyte interface play a decisive role in the electrochemical performance of bulk-type SSBs. In recent years, researchers have developed advanced techniques for the characterization of solid–solid interfaces in SSBs from different aspects to reveal the degradation mechanism of the battery performances associated with interfaces, including the variation of electronic and crystal structures, morphology, crystalline order, the transport and distribution of Li+ ions, interfacial dynamics, and local potential changes during battery operation.
5.1. Electrochemical characterization
The characterization of the electrochemical performance of SSBs (with or without a buffer layer) is essential for their large-scale commercialization. Cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT), galvanostatic cycling (GC), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) are employed to track the cycling reversibility, interfacial contact area, cycling stability, and interfacial dynamics of SSBs, respectively. In general, CV monitors the current as a function of the voltage to provide current–voltage profiles, which offers effective information on electrochemical reactions, electrochemical windows, and cycling reversibility. The degree of electrode reversibility and potential side reactions are analysed according to the difference in the peak position and ratio. For example, Kato et al.38 investigated Li+ insertion/extraction reactions in Li/Li7La3Zr2O12/LiCoO2 SSBs with and without a Nb-buffer layer by voltage sweeping using CV. As shown in Fig. 14a, the redox peaks in the pristine LiCoO2 SSB (broken black line) are very weak and not symmetrical, indicating poor reversibility and a low reaction rate of the Li+ insertion/extraction reactions in the SSB without a buffer layer. By introducing Nb buffer layers (thickness of 7–15 nm) at the Li7La3Zr2O12/LiCoO2 interfaces, two sharp redox peaks related to Li+ insertion/extraction reactions of LiCoO2 are observed at 3.9 V vs. Li. Meanwhile, two small redox peaks representing the LiCoO2 reversible transition from the hexagonal to monoclinic crystal phase are detected at 4.05 V and 4.15 V vs. Li. Note that the peak position and intensity also depend on the thickness of the Nb buffer layers, and the results suggested that an optimum thickness for the Nb layer is 10 nm. In addition to the detection of the electrochemical windows and redox peaks, CV can also be employed for monitoring the cycling stability of SSBs. For example, Zhang et al.69 observed the cycling performance degradation of a LiCoO2/Li10GeP2S12/Li–In battery according to the continuous cyclic voltammetry data from 300 cycles and demonstrated that the evolution of the peak current and peak width of the redox pairs was caused by a change in the surface properties and crystallite degradation of the LiCoO2 cathode.
 Fig. 14  (a) CV measurements of Li/LLZ/LiCoO2 cells without and with Nb buffer layers (with thickness of 0–15 nm) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Transient discharge voltage curves and their corresponding polarization plots obtained by GITT for LiCoO2/LPS/Li–In cells. (c) Transient discharge voltage curve for GITT during a pulse of reduction current for 60 s followed by a rest period. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Galvanostatic cycling performance of Li/LLZO/Li symmetric cells with and without a nano-Si buffer layer at room temperature and a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. The inset in (d) is a digital photograph of the cycled LLZO pellet harvested from the failed cell, while the inset in (e) is the enlarged cycling curves with a time range from 50 to 80 h. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Representative EIS spectrum and proposed equivalent circuit for the SSB using LiCoO2 with a Li2CO3 buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (g) EIS measurements of Li/garnet SSE/Li cells without and with an Al-coated buffer layer at a frequency of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (h and i) Comparison of Nyquist plots of Li4.4Si/a-Li3PS4/LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cells without and with a ZrO2-coated buffer layer, respectively. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
For most Li-ion chemistries and SSB designs, solid phase diffusivity (Ds) dominates the electrochemical dynamics because Li+ intercalation is the slowest process during operation of the battery, especially in the case of a solid–solid interface with poor contact.121,146–148 Park et al.146 investigated the effective ionic contacts between the solid electrolyte and cathode-active materials by comparing the transient voltage profiles and polarization curves obtained by GITT for LiCoO2/Li3PS4/Li–In batteries. As shown in Fig. 14b, the battery with a 0.4LiI–0.6Li4SnS4-coated LiCoO2 electrode (abbreviated as SE-coated electrode) showed a lower polarization than that with an uncoated LiCoO2 electrode (i.e., conventional mixture electrode) in the whole tested range. Based on the transient voltage profile obtained by the GITT, the interfacial contact area between the solid electrolyte and LiCoO2 can be calculated by the equation , where D is the chemical diffusion coefficient of Li+ ions through LiCoO2, τ is the pulse duration, S is the interfacial contact area, V is the molar volume of LiCoO2, and ΔEs and ΔEt are the steady-state voltage change and transient voltage change, respectively (Fig. 14c). Here, M and m are the molecular weight and mass of the host, respectively, i.e., CoO2. As a result, the effective interfacial contact area (surface coverage) of the electrode with the SE-coated LiCoO2 was approximately 2.6 times higher than that of the uncoated LiCoO2 (i.e., mixture electrode). More recently, Choi et al.148 also demonstrated that the effective interfacial contact area between the sulfide-based SSE and the sulfur-active material in all-solid-state Li–S batteries could be calculated in relation to the GITT test using Li metal as the counter electrode.
GC tests were widely performed for commercial and laboratory batteries; this test has been frequently invoked for evaluation of the performance of ABLs used in SSBs. For example, Wu et al.49 discovered that a nano-Si ABL between Li metal and LLZO (Li6.1Ga0.3La3Zr2O12) played a critical role in suppressing the growth of dendritic Li based on GC tests. As shown in Fig. 14d, Li/LLZO/Li symmetric cells without the nano-Si artificial buffer layer could only be cycled for 30 h, even when the cell cycling at a low current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 was done by adding one drop of a liquid electrolyte to both sides of the LLZO pellet. After a 30 h GC test, the Li/LLZO/Li symmetric cell eventually shorted, as shown in the dark lines in Fig. 14d inset. Surprisingly, as displayed in Fig. 14e, the Li/LLZO/Li symmetric cell with the nano-Si artificial buffer layer not only achieved stable cycling for more than 220 h but also reduced the Li-stripping/deposition overpotentials to less than 50 mV. Similarly, the cycling performance of the SSBs with anode-side buffer layers such as Ge,90 Al2O3,123 ZnO,126 Li3N,51 PEG–SiO2,41 and PEO–LiTFSI42 have also been investigated by performing GC tests. In addition to the evaluation of anode-side buffer layers, the electrochemical performance of the ABLs between the SSEs and cathode electrodes can also be assessed through GC tests, such as buffer layers of Nb,38 Li3PO4,105 Li3NbO4,127 Li2O–ZrO2,39 diamond-like carbon,136 and Li–La–Ta–O thin films.75
One of the most vexing challenges in SSBs is the poor solid–solid contact at the SSE/electrode interfaces, which induces large interfacial resistances during battery operation. Therefore, monitoring the interfacial resistance after battery assembly and upon cycling is crucial for a rational design of SSBs. EIS is a powerful and widely used electrochemical characterization technique for SSBs that provides information on the diffusion impedance (low-frequency area) and the ionic impedance (high-frequency area) to evaluate the validity of the constructed buffer layers. Kim et al.149 reported that the effect of the Li2CO3-buffer layer on the sulfide SSE/LiCoO2 interface could be evaluated quantitatively by EIS characterization. As shown in Fig. 14f, the equivalent circuit was set up for quantitative analysis of the EIS spectra. Note that the simulated curve (shown as yellow line) fits well with the measured data (shown as black dots), indicating that the proposed equivalent circuit represents the cell impedance. Here, ROhm and Rc are the resistance components resulting from the solid electrolyte and composite cathode, respectively. Typically, Rc includes two components in SSBs, i.e., R1 and R2. R1 is related to the Li+ ion migration across the interface layer (buffer layer), while R2 is the charge-transfer resistance in the composite cathode. In addition, Ra is ascribed to the Li+ ion diffusion in the anode, which is dependent on the Li+ ion concentration according to the charging state of the SSBs. The Zw (Warburg impedance) is attributed to the solid-state diffusion of Li+ ions into the active cathode materials. By taking advantage of the EIS characterization, a reduced charge-transfer resistance was observed for the sulfide-type SSB using LiCoO2 with a Li2CO3-buffer layer. Fu et al.91 evaluated the effect of an Al-buffer layer on a garnet SSE upon contacting the Li metal anode. As shown in Fig. 14g, the resistance of the Al-buffer layer engineered garnet SSE symmetrical cell is ∼300 Ω cm2, which is almost one order of magnitude lower than the pristine garnet SSE, indicating that the Al-buffer layer can significantly reduce the interfacial resistance between garnet SSE and metallic Li. In addition to reporting the impedance information after battery assembly, EIS can also be used to monitor the battery impedance during charge–discharge cycling, which is crucial for evaluating the long-term stability of artificial buffer layers. For example, Machida et al.111 compared the charge–discharge cycle performance of the SSBs using LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 with and without a ZrO2-buffer layer. Fig. 14h and i show the impedance profiles of the SSBs charged to 4.3 V over 30 cycles. For the SSB without the ZrO2-buffer layer, the charge-transfer resistance in the cathode increased with the cycle number. Surprisingly, the impedance profile of the SSB with the ZrO2-buffer layer after 30 cycles was almost the same as that of the first cycle, suggesting that the ZrO2-buffer layer was effective in suppressing the increase of the interfacial resistance between the sulfide-based SSE and the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cathode upon cycling.
5.2. Structure and composition characterization
Compared with traditional liquid-electrolyte batteries, the characterization of the interfacial structure and composition of SSBs is a critical challenge because intact interfaces are difficult to separate without damaging them. For an in-depth understanding of the solid–solid interfaces with and without artificial buffer layers, it is imperative to find more intensive and intuitive characterization techniques. In addition to electrochemical characterization techniques, other advanced techniques, such as TEM (transmission electron microscopy), XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy), EDS (energy dispersive spectroscopy), EELS (electron energy loss spectroscopy), NDP (neutron depth profiling), and TOF-SIMS (time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry), have been utilized to obtain direct information related to the morphology, composition, and structure of the SSB interfaces. In general, SEM and TEM provide the morphology information of the interfaces, whereas XRD, XPS, EDS, EELS, NDP, and TOF-SIMS reveal the composition and structure of the interfaces. Additionally, some operando characterization techniques, such as in situ XRD, XPS, Raman, TEM, and NDP, have also been frequently invoked, which provide real-time monitoring of the solid–solid interfaces.150,151 Conventional characterization techniques are generally ex situ; further development of advanced in situ characterization techniques with spatial resolution and energy resolution has become a trend, and such in situ characterization techniques make it possible to analyse or verify interface morphology and reactions more accurately and reliably. In this section, the interfacial characterizations are classified into two aspects, i.e., ex situ characterization and in situ characterization.

5.2.1. 
            Ex situ characterization. 
Due to their relative simplicity in operation, ex situ characterization techniques have been extensively used in most interfacial studies. Microscopy techniques, such as TEM, possess excellent temporal and spatial resolution. TEM is a powerful technique to observe the composition, structure and morphology at the nanometre scale when coupled with an EDS or EELS detector.125,152,153 For example, Brazier et al.152 first demonstrated an ex situ TEM-EDX characterization method to observe the SSB interface structure/composition evolution upon cycling, utilizing a focused ion beam-processed cross section of a microbattery. Compared with an EDS detector, an EELS detector discriminates light elements better, similar to lithium, and the energy resolution is 1–2 orders of magnitude higher. Santhanagopalan et al.151 investigated the SSB interfacial chemical changes by semi-quantitative TEM-EELS analysis. Recently, Yamamoto et al.153 revealed Li+ ion movement in SSBs and its impact on the crystal structures and interface compositions during the charge–discharge process. To obtain an in-depth understanding of the SSB interface with an artificial buffer layer, Liu et al.125 used the TEM-EELS technique to observe the Li penetration into bulk Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) and corresponding Ti4+ reduction at the LATP/Li interface with and without an Al2O3 buffer layer. Fig. 15a and b show the TEM images of the bare LATP and Al2O3-coated LATP after 100 cycles and their Ti valence state depth profiles. Based on the Ti line scan results, the Ti3+ dominant depth decreased from 24 nm in pristine LATP to 16 nm in Al2O3-coated LATP, providing direct evidence that the Al2O3 buffer layer is effective in stabilizing the LATP/Li anode-side interface during SSB operation. With the assistance of the TEM coupled with an EDS detector, Sakuda et al.116 investigated diffusion behaviour of P, S, and Co at the cathode-side interface between the Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte and the LiCoO2 cathode with and without a Li2SiO3 buffer layer. For the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface without the Li2SiO3 buffer layer, the coexistence of P, S, and Co was detected at the interfacial layer, suggesting that the elements in the Li2S–P2S5 and LiCoO2 mutually diffused. The EDS line profiles showed that the diffusion of Co from LiCoO2 to Li2S–P2S5 was measurable (the Co element was detected even at a distance of 50 nm from the interface), whereas the diffusion of S into LiCoO2 was not measurable. For the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface with the Li2SiO3 buffer layer, as shown in Fig. 15c and d, the interfacial layer and the Si in the Li2SiO3 were visible at the interface. Note that the Co diffusion distance was observed to be approximately 30 nm, which was shorter than that without the Li2SiO3 buffer layer (a distance more than 50 nm), suggesting that Co diffusion at the interfacial region can be suppressed by adding the Li2SiO3 buffer layer.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) EELS mapping of Ti valence states recorded at the LATP interface without and with the Al2O3-coated buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c and d) HAADF-STEM image and EDX line profiles of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface with the Li2SiO3 buffer layer after initial charging. The yellow arrow in the figure indicates the positions of the EDX measurement. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic representation of structures of Li/Li7P3S11/Li symmetric cells with SiAu and LiAlO buffer layers. (f and g) S 2p XPS spectra collected at the Li7P3S11 surface before and after being assembled or cycled in Li/Li7P3S11/Li symmetric cells with AuSi and LiAlO buffer layers, respectively. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to TEM-EELS/EDS, XPS, which can identify chemical bonds and the chemical state of each component, has become another powerful technique for the characterization of interface composition in SSBs. For example, Dedryvère et al.154 explored the interface stability between the Li6PS5Cl solid electrolyte and cathode electrodes (e.g., LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, and LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2) by XPS in all-solid-state half-cells. The results showed that Li6PS5Cl was unstable towards these cathode active materials, which would decompose into several oxidation products during cell operation, such as Li2Sn, P2Sx, LiCl, elemental sulfur, and phosphates. Very recently, Sang et al.155 employed XPS and revealed that the Li7P3S11/Li interface could be stabilized by using SiAu and LixAl2−x/3O3 (LiAlO) buffer layers, as illustrated in Fig. 15e. Fig. 15f and g show their S 2p XPS results obtained at the Li7P3S11 surface with protection of SiAu and LiAlO buffer layers after different treatments, such as 48 h of contact with metallic Li, 10 CV cycles at 0.2 mV s−1 between −0.1 and +0.1 V vs. Li, and cell shorting. In both cells (i.e., Li7P3S11 with SiAu and LiAlO buffer layers), the XPS spectra showed little change in the peak intensity between the terminal S (P–S–Li in PS43− and P2S74−) and bridging S (P–S–P in P2S74−) that contacted the Li for 48 h. Following 10 CV cycles, the XPS spectra of the Li7P3S11 with the SiAu buffer layer showed the presence of the reduced S species associated with Li2S, while no Li2S was found at the Li7P3S11 with the LiAlO buffer layer. These XPS results suggested that the CV potentials were sufficient to reduce Li7P3S11 at the Li7P3S11/Si interface since the Si could be lithiated at potentials of ca. +0.050 V vs. Li. The LiAlO buffer layer might enable a decrease in the potential between the Li metal and Li7P3S11, thus protecting the Li7P3S11 solid electrolyte from reduction. When the cells shorted, new signals associated with the Li2S were observed for both cells. This XPS observation suggested that Li7P3S11 was exposed to the reducing potentials due to the existence of Li dendrites in the shorted cells. In addition to the above-mentioned characterizations, ex situ SEM,42,51,66,90 XRD,39,69 TOF-SIMS,92,136,140 AFM,74 and Raman101,156,157 have also been employed to evaluate the positive effects of the artificial buffer layers used in SSBs.


5.2.2. 
            In situ characterization. 
Although ex situ characterization can detect the properties of the interface of the electrode/electrolyte to some degree, it cannot provide real-time monitoring. Recently, operando characterizations have also been invoked to explore the evolution of the electrode/SSE interfaces before and after being assembled/cycled in SSBs with and without buffer layers. Usually, in situ TEM-EELS is employed in solid battery chemistry, which provides specific information about the morphology and structure of the interfaces. For example, Santhanagopalan et al.158 employed in situ TEM-EELS (Fig. 16a) to reveal the interfacial phenomena along with Li+ ion transport and charge transfer in SSBs. This in situ TEM-EELS approach can observe nanoscale interfacial phenomena with higher energy resolution (<0.1 eV) and greater temporal resolution (Fig. 16b). Fig. 16c shows selected Li K-edge spectra taken from various parts of the layers (i.e., LiPON, disordered LiCoO2 layer, ordered LiCoO2 layer, and their interfaces from the three samples). Recently, operando characterizations of surface analysis techniques, such as in situ XPS, have been applied to interface analysis in SSBs. Different from ex situ XPS, in situ XPS explores interfacial chemical reactions and identifies the reaction products at the interface intuitively. For example, Kazzi et al.159 utilized operando XPS, which can monitor the surface electronic properties and the electrochemical reactions between the electrolyte and composite cathode electrode in real time. Wenzel et al.160 employed in situ XPS to monitor the interphase formation at the Li metal/Li10GeP2S12 interface (Fig. 16d). Fig. 16e shows the XPS spectra recorded during deposition of 31 nm Li metal on Li10GeP2S12 at different deposition states. Note that the changing intensities of different waterfall plots for the S 2p, Ge 3d, and P 2p regions represent compositional changes. Zhang et al.142 investigated the elements in the LiH2PO4 buffer layer between the Li anode and LGPS interface by in situ XPS. Compared to the original interface, the Li anode surface contained Ge and sulfur after contact for 14 days, and the oxidation state of Ge was not lowered, demonstrating that the LiH2PO4 buffer layer is protective to LGPS. Hitosugi et al.161 developed an all-in-vacuum system, which can enable the fabrication and in situ XPS characterization in thin-film SSBs. FTIR is also an advanced technique for the in situ detection of electrochemical systems because of its superior surface sensitivity and non-destructive nature. Yang et al.162 used in situ micro-FTIR to investigate the interface between a Li-metal anode and polymer solid electrolytes and showed that the formation of a thin buffer layer at the electrolyte–electrode interface had a great influence on the cell performance. In addition, Müller-Buschbaum et al.163–165 developed an operando small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) method to probe both structural and crystalline evolution of solid polymer electrolytes on a length scale ranging from several hundreds of nanometers down to Angstroms within a real working battery. As shown in Fig. 16f, the solid electrolyte is sandwiched between two opposing electrodes inside of a glass capillary, while the X-ray beam is oriented orthogonally to the ionic current. The results suggested that the large mismatch between the polymer morphologies at the interface under heating was a major reason for the deteriorated battery performance. The authors also pointed out that an ill-defined structured polymer electrolyte seems morphologically more favourable for improving the battery performance.163 Besides, the neutron depth profiling (NDP) technique is highly sensitive to elements with a low atomic number, such as Li, B, and Na, making it a powerful tool for studying solid-state batteries. Wang et al.24 used in situ NDP to explore the interfacial evolution of garnet SSE in direct contact with Li metal and monitored Li stripping and plating processes in real time (Fig. 16g). NDP enables the prediction of an imminent short-circuit before the discharge/charge voltage profiles show any apparent change. Therefore, NDP is an advanced quantitative technique that allows a fundamental understanding of Li-ion transport in solid interfaces and the failure modes of SSBs.166
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of in situ TEM biasing and the experimental setup of the nanobattery. (b and c) HAADF image and Li K-edge spectra collected from the nanobattery mounted on a TEM grid. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d and e) Schematic of in situ XPS detecting the interphase formation at the Li10GeP2S12/Li metal interface and the corresponding XPS spectra. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic representation of the operando small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) characterization including battery components of the cycling unit and the heating unit. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of the in situ NDP characterization of Li-ion transport in SSBs. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Compared to ex situ characterization used in SSBs, advanced in situ characterization methods are still not widely used for researching electrode/SSE interfaces, especially in the case of an interface with artificial buffer layers, since it is a time-consuming and complicated process to produce a nano/microscale SSB for in situ characterization and most of the operando equipment is rather expensive. Thus, more convenient operando equipment with a low cost should be developed for further understanding of the behaviour and multiple features of buffer layers during battery operation, including their evolution mechanisms, conductivity of electrons/ions, crystal structures, and mechanical strength, which are essential for the rational design of advanced buffer layers for solid battery chemistry.

6. Summary and outlook
The application of solid electrolytes not only solves the safety issues arising from flammable organic liquid electrolytes but also allows the use of better electrode materials, such as Li metal and high-voltage positive materials, to improve the energy density of the SSBs. Studies in the past several decades in this field have been directed at seeking better fast ion conductors as SSEs rather than designing practical batteries. Today′s solid-state Li-ion batteries still suffer from obstacles, including limited rate capability, insufficient power and energy density, and poor cycle life. Most of these obstacles are fundamentally associated with the properties of the solid–solid interfaces, which hinder the practical application of SSEs. Current studies have gradually shifted from seeking better SSEs to solving the interface stability and interfacial resistance issues of SSBs. In recent years, to establish an electrode/SSE interface with good physical contact and chemical/electrochemical stabilities, the use of an artificial buffer layer to modify the SSE or/and electrode surface has been frequently invoked. In this review, we provide an overview of the progress made in fabricating a buffer layer to address the interface issues of SSBs.
To rationally design the artificial buffer layer, a fundamental understanding of the main issues and challenges facing SSBs associated with the properties of the cathode/SSE and anode/SSE interfaces is indispensable. In general, the interface challenge can be summarized as due to physical contact and chemical contact, which include the following: (1) the insufficient physical contact between the SSE and cathode/anode could result in inherently high interfacial resistance and uneven current distribution during battery operation, which causes poor rate performance and formation of Li dendrites; (2) the volume and stress changes of the electrode materials during charge–discharge cycles could deteriorate physical contact, which leads to poor cycle life and insufficient power and energy density; (3) chemical or/and electrochemical side reactions between the electrode and SSE could form a thick passivated layer, which hinders Li+ diffusion across the electrode/SSE interfaces; and (4) a space-charge layer could form at the interface when two ionic conductors (e.g., active material in cathode and the ceramic electrolyte) with different chemical potentials of the Li+ ions are in direct contact, which results in a poor rate and cycling performance. The appealing strategies capable of solving these multifaceted problems primarily focus on the interface engineering of SSBs with artificial buffer layers. Herein, we provide an outlook based on our understanding.
Poor physical contact between the anode and SSE is a critical challenge to realize a low-impedance SSB. Although some SSEs are stable with Li metal due to the self-limiting reaction, most SSEs are thermodynamically unstable with Li metal, forming a poor Li-ion conductive layer. Several nanotechnology-based approaches for fabricating artificial buffer layers have successfully addressed stability and contact issues. The addition of a soft polymer-based buffer layer is believed to be an effective way to address such problems. Unfortunately, the polymer buffer layer has a low conductivity at room temperature and poor mechanical strength against Li dendrites. Thus, challenges to balance the conductivity, safety and thickness remain.
Regarding the stability with cathodes, coating the active cathode materials with an inorganic artificial buffer layer is a promising approach to improve the cathode/SSE interface stability, especially for sulfide-type SSEs. However, the volumetric change at the cathode side during repeated charging/discharging inevitably causes buffer layer breakage and contact loss. The large contact area of hosting active materials in a porous and flexible matrix with high ionic conductivity seems to be a promising strategy. Advanced 3D printing technology may shed light on realizing such goals.
To create a high-quality artificial buffer layer on the surface of SSE or/and electrode materials, many dedicated fabrication techniques can be used, which can be generally summarized as top-down approaches (e.g., magnetron sputtering, spark plasma sintering, electron-beam evaporation, and pulsed laser deposition) and bottom-up approaches (e.g., sol–gel-derived synthesis, atomic layer deposition, chemical vapor deposition, and electrochemical-assisted synthesis). All of these techniques enable modification of the cathode interfaces, some of which are also suitable for engineering Li metal anode interfaces. Specifically, the magnetron sputtering technique has gained commercial success in thin-film SSBs, atomic layer deposition has demonstrated promising results in improving the cycle stability of sulfide-type SSBs, and pulsed laser deposition is an attractive method to prepare high-quality buffer layers with nearly the original stoichiometry of the bulk target. Further exploration of the buffer layers by optimizing the synthetic techniques is needed. The expense for large-scale production is also a concern that needs to be addressed. Although characterization analysis methods have been applied to study liquid-based battery systems, a challenge remains in investigating interfacial behaviour in solid-type batteries. Compared with interfaces in liquid-based batteries, tightly embedded solid–solid interfaces in SSBs are difficult to isolate, making it difficult to learn the ion transport mechanism in interfacial zones or in buffer layers and to gain information about the interfacial reaction kinetics, especially for Li metal/SSE interfaces. We expect that in operando diagnostics and more advanced synergistic characterization techniques can be developed. In conjunction with these characterization techniques, more reliable artificial buffer layers can be rationally designed to achieve large-scale production. This would enable the application of SSEs and help SSBs realize their potential in electric vehicle applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Z. Shao and K. Liao thank the funding support from the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFB0905400); K. Liao thanks the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51802152) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (No. BK20170974).
Notes and references
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. D. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7854–7863 RSC .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 RSC .
A. Manthiram, X. W. Yu and S. F. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Linford and S. Hackwood, Chem. Rev., 1981, 81, 327–364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, S. Hori, T. Saito, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama, A. Mitsui, M. Yonemura, H. Iba and R. Kanno, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16030 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H. H. Chang, N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp, L. Giordano and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 140–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, H. Sun, L. Fu, F. Ye, Y. Zhang, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705702 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xu, S. Tang, Y. Cheng, K. Wang, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y.-C. Cao, F. Wei and L. Mai, Joule, 2018, 2, 1991–2015 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thangadurai, S. Narayanan and D. Pinzaru, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4714–4727 RSC .
Y. Inaguma, L. Q. Chen, M. Itoh, T. Nakamura, T. Uchida, H. Ikuta and M. Wakihara, Solid State Commun., 1993, 86, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Subramanian, R. Subramanian and A. Clearfield, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cussen, Chem. Commun., 2006, 412–413 RSC .
S. Ramakumar, C. Deviannapoorani, L. Dhivya, L. S. Shankar and R. Murugan, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 88, 325–411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Liu, P. He and H. S. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701602 CrossRef .
J. Dai, C. Yang, C. Wang, G. Pastel and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802068 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Huang, B. Xu, Y. Li, W. Zhou, Y. You, S. Zhong, C. A. Wang and J. B. Goodenough, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14552–14557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Wang, Y. H. Gong, J. Q. Dai, L. Zhang, H. Xie, G. Pastel, B. Y. Liu, E. Wachsman, H. Wang and L. B. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14257–14264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Tan, F. Wu, J. Lu, R. J. Chen, L. Li and K. Amine, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10611–10622 RSC .
Y. H. Zhang, F. Chen, R. Tu, Q. Shen and L. M. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 960–964 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Baek, J. M. Lee, T. Y. Kim, M. S. Song and Y. Park, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Zhu and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 391, 10–25 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Kozen, A. J. Pearse, C. F. Lin, M. Noked and G. W. Rubloff, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5324–5331 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Kasper, Inorg. Chem., 1969, 8, 1000–1002 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y.-P. Hong, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y.-P. Hong, J. B. Goodenough and J. A. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef .
S. S. John, H. Kennedy, S. W. Shea and Z. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 368–371 Search PubMed .
A. G. Belous, G. N. Novitskaya, S. V. Polyanetskaya and Y. I. Gornikov, Inorg. Mater., 1987, 23, 412–415 Search PubMed .
K. H. Park, Q. Bai, D. H. Kim, D. Y. Oh, Y. Z. Zhu, Y. F. Mo and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800035 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, H. G. Xue and S. P. Guo, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 3927–3938 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lau, R. H. DeBlock, D. M. Butts, D. S. Ashby, C. S. Choi and B. S. Dunn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800933 CrossRef .
T. Kato, T. Hamanaka, K. Yamamoto, T. Hirayama, F. Sagane, M. Motoyama and Y. Iriyama, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. Fujiki, T. Yamada, Y. Aihara, Y. Park, T. Y. Kim, S. W. Baek, J. M. Lee, S. Doo and N. Machida, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 943–950 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Liao, S. C. Wu, X. W. Mu, Q. Lu, M. Han, P. He, Z. Shao and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705711 CrossRef PubMed .
P. R. Chinnam and S. L. Wunder, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, R. J. Milcarek, R. L. Falkenstein-Smith and J. Ahn, J. Electrochem. Energy Convers. Storage, 2016, 13, 021008 CrossRef .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, L. Q. Zhang, R. Z. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2226–2229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Shao, H. C. Wang, Z. L. Gong, D. W. Wang, B. Z. Zheng, J. P. Zhu, Y. X. Lu, Y. S. Hu, X. X. Guo, H. Li, X. J. Huang, Y. Yang, C. W. Nan and L. Q. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1212–1218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Xu, P. H. Chien, N. Wu, S. Xin, L. Xue, K. Park, Y. Y. Hu and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8587–8591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16141 CrossRef .
K. C. Santosh, R. C. Longo, K. Xiong and K. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F3104–F3110 CrossRef .
S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. Kruger, J. Sann and J. Janek, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Wu, S. Y. Wang, J. Lochala, D. Desrochers, B. Liu, W. Q. Zhang, J. H. Yang and J. Xiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1803–1810 RSC .
P. Bai, J. Guo, M. Wang, A. Kushima, L. Su, J. Li, F. R. Brushett and M. Z. Bazant, Joule, 2018, 2, 2434–2449 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Xu, Y. T. Li, A. J. Zhou, N. Wu, S. Xin, Z. Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7414–7418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, I. Sakaguchi, L. Q. Zhang, R. Z. Ma, K. Fukuda, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1486–1490 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6735–6741 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, C. P. Yang, K. Fu, Y. G. Yao, F. Jiang, E. Hitz, B. Y. Liu, S. Wang and L. B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703474 CrossRef .
K. Yoshima, Y. Harada and N. Takami, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, Y. Shen, J. Y. Jiang, Y. B. Zhang, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13332–13337 RSC .
P. Hartmann, T. Leichtweiss, M. R. Busche, M. Schneider, M. Reich, J. Sann, P. Adelhelm and J. Janek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21064–21074 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Fan, X. Ji, F. D. Han, J. Yue, J. Chen, L. Chen, T. Deng, J. J. Jiang and C. S. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau9245 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Reinacher, S. Berendts and J. Janek, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 258, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1392–1397 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Visco, V. Y. Nimon, A. Petrov, K. Pridatko, N. Goncharenko, E. Nimon, L. De Jonghe, Y. M. Volfkovich and D. A. Bograchev, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 1443–1456 CAS .
M. Sumita, Y. Tanaka, M. Ikeda and T. Ohno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13332–13339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Y. Han, K. Takada and Y. Tateyama, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4248–4255 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, Y. Iriyama, T. Asaka, T. Hirayama, H. Fujita, C. A. J. Fisher, K. Nonaka, Y. Sugita and Z. Ogumi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4414–4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fingerle, R. Buchheit, S. Sicolo, K. Albe and R. Hausbrand, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7675–7685 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okada, N. Machida, M. Naito, T. Shigematsu, S. Ito, S. Fujiki, M. Nakano and Y. Aihara, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 255, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, N. Ohta, L. Q. Zhang, K. Fukuda, I. Sakaguchi, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Yu, J. B. Bates, G. E. Jellison and F. X. Hart, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 524–532 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Zhang, F. H. Richter, S. P. Culver, T. Leichtweiss, J. G. Lozano, C. Dietrich, P. G. Bruce, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22226–22236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Suzuki, S. Shirai, N. Takahashi, T. Inaba and T. Shiga, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 191, 49–54 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. West, J. F. Whitacre and J. R. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2004, 126, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jadhav, R. S. Kalubarme, A. H. Jadhav and J. G. Seo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 199, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, G. M. Veith, J. Nanda, R. R. Unocic, M. F. Chi and N. J. Dudney, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6573–6580 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lee, S. H. Kim, Y. Tak and Y. S. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Lee and Y. S. Yoon, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 579, 75–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Liu, C. Li, B. J. Li, H. C. Song, Z. Cheng, M. R. Chen, P. He and H. S. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702374 CrossRef .
W. Tang, X. S. Yin, S. J. Kang, Z. X. Chen, B. B. Tian, S. L. Teo, X. W. Wang, X. Chi, K. P. Loh, H. W. Lee and G. W. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801745 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Wang, W. Li, B. Wu, W. Jia, Y. Wang, J. Li and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 16–23 CrossRef .
R. Kali and A. Mukhopadhyay, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 920–931 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukhopadhyay and B. Basu, Int. Mater. Rev., 2007, 52, 257–288 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takahara, T. Takeuchi, M. Tabuchi, H. Kageyama, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Kurisu, S. Kondo and R. Kanno, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1539–A1544 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takeuchi, H. Kageyama, K. Nakanishi, M. Tabuchi, H. Sakaebe, T. Ohta, H. Senoh, T. Sakai and K. Tatsumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1196–A1201 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ahmad, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 6398–6408 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mei, Q. H. Jiang, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 486, 871–875 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Duan, H. Y. Jin, J. X. Yu, E. N. Esfahani, B. Yang, J. L. Liu, Y. Z. Ren, Y. Chen, L. H. Lu, X. C. Tian, S. E. Hou and J. Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Duluard, A. Paillassa, L. Puech, P. Vinatier, V. Turq, P. Rozier, P. Lenormand, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and F. Ansart, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 33, 1145–1153 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okumura, T. Takeuchi and H. Kobayashi, Electrochemistry, 2014, 82, 906–908 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700732 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, A. Pei, K. Chen, A. Vailionis, Y. Li, G. Zheng, J. Sun and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 97–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, Y. H. Gong, Y. Z. Zhu, Y. J. Li, Y. G. Yao, Y. Zhang, K. Fu, G. Pastel, C. F. Lin, Y. F. Mo, E. D. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606042 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Fu, Y. H. Gong, B. Y. Liu, Y. Z. Zhu, S. M. Xu, Y. G. Yao, W. Luo, C. W. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Q. Dai, Y. N. Chen, Y. F. Mo, E. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601659 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. H. Gong, Z. Z. Fu, H. Xie, Y. G. Yao, B. Y. Liu, M. Carter, E. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14942–14947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kuwata, N. Iwagami and J. Kawamura, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 644–648 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Bouwman, B. A. Boukamp, H. J. M. Bouwmeester and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A699–A709 CrossRef CAS .
C. Julien, E. Haro-Poniatowski, M. A. Camacho-Lopez, L. Escobar-Alarcon and J. Jimenez-Jarquin, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, 72, 36–46 CrossRef .
C. Yada, Y. Iriyama, S. K. Jeong, T. Abe, M. Inaba and Z. Ogumi, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
S. Furusawa, H. Tabuchi, T. Sugiyama, S. W. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 553–558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Furusawa, A. Kamiyama and T. Tsurui, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kuwata, N. Iwagami, Y. Tanji, Y. Matsuda and J. Kawamura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A521–A527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakurai, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 182, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, H. Maekawa and H. Takamura, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yubuchi, Y. Ito, T. Matsuyama, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 285, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Gittleson and F. El Gabaly, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6974–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aso, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 686–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, Y. Sakurai, S. Yubuchi, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1610–A1616 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, M. Otoyama, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
S. Amiri and A. Rahimi, Iran. Polym. J., 2016, 25, 559–577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A1–A3 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, Y. J. Kim and B. Park, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3788–3791 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wang, T. Fang and J. G. Duh, Key Eng. Mater., 2005, 280–283, 665–670 CAS .
N. Machida, J. Kashiwagi, M. Naito and T. Shigematsu, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oh, M. Hirayama, O. Kwon, K. Suzuki and R. Kanno, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2634–2640 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8821–8828 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Seino, T. Ota and K. Takada, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6488–6492 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 527–530 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nitta, F. X. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oh, M. Hirayama, O. Kwon, K. Suzuki and R. Kanno, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 288, 244–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Lin, X. L. Fan, A. Pearse, S. C. Liou, K. Gregorczyk, M. Leskes, C. S. Wang, S. B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and M. Noked, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8780–8791 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahmed, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 250–271 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Woo, J. J. Travis, S. M. George and S. H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A344–A349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, T. Hu, L. Yang and Y. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 63250–63255 RSC .
X. G. Han, Y. H. Gong, K. Fu, X. F. He, G. T. Hitz, J. Q. Dai, A. Pearse, B. Y. Liu, H. Wang, G. Rublo, Y. F. Mo, V. Thangadurai, E. D. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 572–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Woo, J. E. Trevey, A. S. Cavanagh, Y. S. Choi, S. C. Kim, S. M. George, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1120–A1124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu, Q. Sun, Y. Zhao, B. Q. Wang, R. Y. Li, P. Kaghazchi, K. R. Adair, C. Zhang, J. R. Liu, L. Y. Kuo, Y. F. Hu, T. K. Sham, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. G. Lu, X. P. Song and X. L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31240–31248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Wang, Y. H. Gong, B. Y. Liu, K. Fu, Y. G. Yao, E. Hitz, Y. J. Li, J. Q. Dai, S. M. Xu, W. Luo, E. D. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 565–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vinado, S. Y. Wang, Y. He, X. C. Xiao, Y. Li, C. M. Wang and J. H. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 824–830 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katsui and T. Goto, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 584, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Chen, R. A. Eichel and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electroceram., 2017, 38, 230–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. Loho, A. J. Darbandi, R. Djenadic, O. Clemens and H. Hahn, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014, 20, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thomas and G. M. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 274–280 RSC .
K. Kanehori, Y. Ito, F. Kirino, K. Miyauchi and T. Kudo, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 818–822 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katsui, Y. Yuji and T. Goto, Key Eng. Mater., 2012, 508, 300–303 CAS .
C. Loho, R. Djenadic, P. Mund, O. Clemens and H. Hahn, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 313, 32–44 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. M. Oudenhoven, T. van Dongen, R. A. H. Niessen, M. H. J. M. de Croon and P. H. L. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, D169–D174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Visbal, Y. Aihara, S. Ito, T. Watanabe, Y. Park and S. Doo, J. Power Sources, 2016, 314, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, Y. H. Gong, Y. Z. Zhu, K. K. Fu, J. Q. Dai, S. D. Lacey, C. W. Wang, B. Y. Liu, X. G. Han, Y. F. Mo, E. D. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12258–12262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao, F. Wei, J. G. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500213 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. T. Li, W. D. Zhou, X. Chen, X. J. Lu, Z. M. Cui, S. Xin, L. G. Xue, Q. X. Jia and J. B. Goodenough, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13313–13317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Cheng, C. Yan, X. Chen, C. Guan, J. Q. Huang, H. J. Peng, R. Zhang, S. T. Yang and Q. Zhang, Chem, 2017, 2, 258–270 CAS .
K. Fu, Y. H. Gong, S. M. Xu, Y. Z. Zhu, Y. J. Li, J. Q. Dai, C. W. Wang, B. Y. Liu, G. Pastel, H. Xie, Y. G. Yao, Y. F. Mo, E. Wachsman and L. B. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8037–8041 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhang, S. J. Chen, J. Yang, J. Y. Wang, L. L. Yao, X. Y. Yao, P. Cui and X. X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2556–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Eshetu, X. Judez, C. M. Li, M. Martinez-Ibanez, I. Gracia, O. Bondarchuk, J. Carrasco, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, H. Zhang and M. Armand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9921–9933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liu, D. C. Lin, P. Y. Yuen, K. Liu, J. Xie, R. H. Dauskardt and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605531 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Zhang, Y. R. Zhao, S. J. Chen, D. J. Xie, X. Y. Yao, P. Cui and X. X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16984–16993 RSC .
K. H. Park, D. Y. Oh, Y. E. Choi, Y. J. Nam, L. L. Han, J. Y. Kim, H. L. Xin, F. Lin, S. M. Oh and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1874–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, L. Cao, C. D. Rahn and C. Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1842–A1846 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Choi, J. S. Jin, J. Y. Park and H. T. Lim, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 723, 787–794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, M. Kim, S. Noh, G. Lee and D. Shin, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 2140–2146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, T. P. Wu and K. Amine, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17011 CrossRef CAS .
D. Santhanagopalan, D. Qian, T. McGilvray, F. Camino, Z. Y. Wang, F. Wang, J. Graetz, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 298–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Brazier, L. Dupont, L. Dantras-Laffont, N. Kuwata, J. Kawamura and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2352–2359 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, R. Yoshida, T. Sato, H. Matsumoto, H. Kurobe, T. Hamanaka, T. Kato, Y. Iriyama and T. Hirayama, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 414–421 CrossRef CAS .
J. Auvergniot, A. Cassel, J. B. Ledeuil, V. Viallet, V. Seznec and R. Dedryvere, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3883–3890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Sang, K. L. Bassett, F. C. Castro, M. J. Young, L. Chen, R. T. Haasch, J. W. Elam, V. P. Dravid, R. G. Nuzzo and A. A. Gewirth, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8747–8756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Otoyama, Y. Ito, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, K. Hattori, T. Yamazaki, K. Takada, M. Matsuo, S. Orimo, H. Maekawa and H. Takamura, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Santhanagopalan, W. Zhang, F. Wang, H. L. L. Xin, K. He, J. C. Li, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3760–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Wu, C. Villevieille, P. Novak and M. El Kazzi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 11123–11129 RSC .
S. Wenzel, S. Randau, T. Leichtweiss, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2400–2407 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, S. Shiraki, T. Ohsawa, T. Suzuki, A. Kumatani, Y. Takagi, R. Shimizu and T. Hitosugi, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 285, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, C. B. Zhu, M. Lu and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Möhl, E. Metwalli and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1525–1530 CrossRef .
N. Paul, J. Brumbarov, A. Paul, Y. Chen, J.-F. Moulin, P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Kunze-Liebhäuser and R. Gilles, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2015, 48, 444–454 CrossRef CAS .
E. Metwalli, M. V. Kaeppel, S. J. Schaper, A. Kriele, R. Gilles, K. N. Raftopoulos and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 666–675 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00515c‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Kaiming Liao
	Kaiming Liao obtained his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2013. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST, Tsukuba), Japan, from 2013 to 2016. He joined the College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, as an Associate Professor in September 2016. His current research interests include Li–air batteries, Zn–air batteries, Li–sulfur batteries, and solid-state Li-ion batteries.

Zongping Shao
	Zongping Shao is a professor of chemical engineering at Curtin University, Australia, and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at the Institute Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and a research associate at the California Institute of Technology, USA, from February 2000 till June 2005. He joined Nanjing Tech University in July 2005. His current research interests include fuel cells, rechargeable batteries, solar cells, oxygen-permeable membranes, and environmental treatment.

Broader context
Compared with conventional Li-ion batteries with flammable liquid electrolytes, solid-state Li-ion batteries (SSBs) offer an attractive option owing to their potential in improving the safety and achieving both high power and high energy densities. It is anticipated that the development of SSBs will result in many commercial applications, particularly for electric vehicles. Despite extensive research efforts, SSBs still suffer from obstacles, including limited rate capability, insufficient power and energy density, and poor cycle life. Most of these obstacles are fundamentally associated with the properties of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in SSBs. In recent years, considerable research work has been done regarding interface engineering of SSBs with artificial buffer layers (ABLs). By taking advantage of the ABLs, highly stable interfaces with improved physical contact and increased (electro)chemical stabilities between the solid electrolyte and electrodes were achieved. Accordingly, substantial research efforts are required to develop advanced ABLs for large-scale applications of SSBs.


 	Fig. 1  Summary of compatibility problems associated with interfaces in the SSBs and the experimental approaches for assessing these issues.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the interfacial contact issues between SSEs and (a) Li metal electrode and (b) cathode electrode.	 

 	Fig. 3  Formation of different types of Li/SSE interphases. (a) Intrinsically stable interface between the Li metal and the SSE. (b) Metastable solid–electrolyte interphase between the Li metal and the SSE. (c) Reactive mixed-conducting interphase between the Li metal and the SSE. (d) The corresponding Li potentials between the Li metal and different SSEs. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagrams of the LiFePO4 cathode/sulfide SSE interface during the charging process. (a) The initial stage before charging. (b) The stage at the beginning of charging. (c) The charging stage. (d) The final stage after formation of the Li-depleted layer. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of a magnetron sputtering system. (b) Comparison of the cycling performance of the LiCoO2 cathode with and without a LiPON buffer layer in the potential window of 3–4.4 V vs. Li. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (c) STEM image and EDX mapping of a cross-sectional interface between LLZ and LiCoO2 with a Nb buffer layer. (d) Comparison of the discharge capacity and rate capability of the SSBs with and without a Nb buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image and photo image of the Ge-coated LAGP pellets. (f) EIS plots of Li- and Ag-symmetric cells with a Ge buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of (a) a spark plasma sintering system, (b) micro-scale energy dissipation among the contacted powder particles, and (c) material transfer route between two contacted particles. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Microstructures of LATP glass-ceramic processed by (d and e) conventional heat treatment and (f and g) spark plasma sintering. Complex impedance for LATP glass-ceramics measured at room temperature for (h) conventional heat-treated and (i) SPS-treated samples. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of an E-beam evaporation system. (b) SEM image and the corresponding digital photograph (inset) of the Li3N-coated LLZT surface. (c) The rate performance and Coulombic efficiency of the LFP/LLZT/Li cell with a Li3N buffer layer tested at 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic representation of the LiGe alloy buffer layer fabrication process. (e–g) Digital photographs of the LLZO pellet with a Ge buffer layer in different states when in contact with molten Li. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of LiCoO2 particles (a) without and (b) with a 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4 buffer layer. (c) Impedance spectrum of SSBs with non-coated and 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4-coated layers after the first charge process. (d) Discharge curves of SSBs with non-coated and 50Li4SiO4·50Li3PO4-coated LiCoO2. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (e) SEM image of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 particles coated with Li3PO4 buffer layers. (f) Impedance profiles of SSBs with non-coated and Li3PO4-coated buffer layers after charging to 4.8 V vs. Li. (g) Discharge/charge curves of SSBs using non-coated and Li3PO4-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TEM image of the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 particles with a LiAlO2-coated buffer layer annealed at 350 °C. (b) Discharge profiles of the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2/a-Li3PS4/Li4.4Si batteries at different current densities. (c) Impedance plots of the SSBs with and without a 1.0 mol% LiAlO2-coated buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (d) SEM image and EDX mappings of the LNMO cathode particles with a 3 wt% LiNbO3-coated buffer layer. The CV curves of LiNbO3 (LNO)/Au/LGPS and AB (acetylene black)/LGPS electrodes for (e) the first and (f) second scans. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the interface of uncoated LiCoO2/SSE and Al2O3-coated LiCoO2/SSE. (b) Cycling performances of SSBs without an Al2O3 layer and with Al2O3-coating layers heated in different environments. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2015, The Electrochemical Society. (c) Wetting processes between the molten Li metal and garnet LLCZNO with a ZnO buffer layer. (d) Schematic representation and SEM image of the molten Li infiltration into the porous garnet LLCZNO with a deposited ZnO buffer layer. (e) Nyquist plots of Li/garnet LLCZNO/Li symmetric cells with ZnO buffer layers after pretreatment at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of a CVD apparatus. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Cross-section TEM image of a DLC-coated NCA cathode particle. (c) Cycle performance of the SSBs using DLC-coated NCA (blue), plasma-pretreated NCA (red), and pristine NCA (black). (d) TOF-SIMS mass spectrum for the DLC-coated NCA, plasma-pretreated NCA, and pristine NCA after 100 cycles. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (e) Digital images and SEM images of pristine LLZ (1,2) and Si-coated LLZ (3,4). (f) DFT calculation of mutual reaction energy between LLZ and LixSi interfaces. (g) EIS measurements of Li/LLZ/Li symmetric cells with and without a Si buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Surface SEM image of a LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet disassembled from the cell after 100 h cycling. The inset shows the SEM image of Li metal after being charged for 20 h in the symmetric cell at 150 μA cm−2. (b) Digital photograph of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet after cycling in Li/LiZr2(PO4)3/Li symmetric cells for 10 h. (c) Digital photograph of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet with Li metal on the surface after being fired at 350 °C for 0.5 h. (d) XRD pattern of the LiZr2(PO4)3 pellet after reaction with Li metal at 350 °C for 0.5 h. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. (e) Implantable SEI buffer layer formation on the Li metal foil through an electrochemical method. (f and g) TOF-SIMS chemical mapping and depth profiles of the as-prepared SEI buffer layer to reveal the formation species. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (h) Schematic representation of the formation of a self-inhibiting SEI buffer layer between the sulfur cathode and garnet electrolyte. (i) Reaction energy of garnet Li7La3Zr2O12 with polysulfides of Li2S and Li2S8 based on computational calculation. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photograph of the fabrication of a graphite-based interface layer on a garnet-type SSE by pencil drawing. (b) The wetting behaviour of molten Li contact with the garnet-type SSE with and without a graphite-based buffer layer. (c) Charge and discharge curves of the SSB with a graphite-based buffer layer at different rates. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of the SSB with the PEO-optimized cell structure. (e) Voltage–time profiles of the Li/LAGP/Li symmetric cell without and with a PEO-based buffer layer with 0.1 mA cm−2 current density at 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) CV measurements of Li/LLZ/LiCoO2 cells without and with Nb buffer layers (with thickness of 0–15 nm) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Transient discharge voltage curves and their corresponding polarization plots obtained by GITT for LiCoO2/LPS/Li–In cells. (c) Transient discharge voltage curve for GITT during a pulse of reduction current for 60 s followed by a rest period. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d and e) Galvanostatic cycling performance of Li/LLZO/Li symmetric cells with and without a nano-Si buffer layer at room temperature and a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. The inset in (d) is a digital photograph of the cycled LLZO pellet harvested from the failed cell, while the inset in (e) is the enlarged cycling curves with a time range from 50 to 80 h. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Representative EIS spectrum and proposed equivalent circuit for the SSB using LiCoO2 with a Li2CO3 buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (g) EIS measurements of Li/garnet SSE/Li cells without and with an Al-coated buffer layer at a frequency of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (h and i) Comparison of Nyquist plots of Li4.4Si/a-Li3PS4/LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cells without and with a ZrO2-coated buffer layer, respectively. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) EELS mapping of Ti valence states recorded at the LATP interface without and with the Al2O3-coated buffer layer. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c and d) HAADF-STEM image and EDX line profiles of the LiCoO2/Li2S–P2S5 interface with the Li2SiO3 buffer layer after initial charging. The yellow arrow in the figure indicates the positions of the EDX measurement. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic representation of structures of Li/Li7P3S11/Li symmetric cells with SiAu and LiAlO buffer layers. (f and g) S 2p XPS spectra collected at the Li7P3S11 surface before and after being assembled or cycled in Li/Li7P3S11/Li symmetric cells with AuSi and LiAlO buffer layers, respectively. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of in situ TEM biasing and the experimental setup of the nanobattery. (b and c) HAADF image and Li K-edge spectra collected from the nanobattery mounted on a TEM grid. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d and e) Schematic of in situ XPS detecting the interphase formation at the Li10GeP2S12/Li metal interface and the corresponding XPS spectra. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic representation of the operando small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) characterization including battery components of the cycling unit and the heating unit. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of the in situ NDP characterization of Li-ion transport in SSBs. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00515c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
