Recent progress in the development of thermal interface materials: a review  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP05514J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP05514J
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 753-776Recent progress in the development of thermal interface materials: a review

        
          
            Yingyan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Ma
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ning 
            Wei
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Yang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Qing-Xia 
            Pei
          
        
      *d
aSchool of Engineering, RMIT University, Bundoora, VIC 3083, Australia. E-mail: yingyan.zhang@rmit.edu.au
bUniversity of South Australia, UniSA STEM and Future Industries Institute, Mawson Lakes, South Australia 5095, Australia
cJiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Food Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, Jiangnan University, 214122 Wuxi, China
dInstitute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore 138632, Singapore. E-mail: peiqx@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
Received 
      21st October 2020
    , Accepted 27th December 2020First published on 28th December 2020AbstractModern electronic devices are characterized by high-power and high-frequency with excessive heat accumulation. Thermal interface materials (TIMs) are of crucial importance for efficient heat dissipation to maintain proper functions and lifetime for these devices. The most promising TIMs are those polymer-based nanocomposites consisting of polymers and low-dimensional materials with high thermal conductivity (TC). This perspective summarizes the recent progress on the thermal transport properties of newly discovered one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials and two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials as well as three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures consisting of these 1D and 2D nanomaterials. Moreover, the applications of various nanomaterials in polymer nanocomposites for advanced TIMs are critically reviewed and the mechanism of TC enhancement is analysed. It is hoped that the present review could provide better understanding of the thermal transport properties of recently developed 2D nanomaterials and various 3D nanostructures as well as relevant polymer-based TIMs, shedding more light on the thermal management research.
1. Introduction
The modern electronic devices, such as light-emitting diodes, integrated circuits and microprocessors, have been advanced with smaller size, a higher degree of integration yet more functions. This generates a significant amount of heat and the devices may become overheated during normal operation. It is of paramount importance to efficiently dissipate the excessive heat so that the devices can perform their function properly at the designed operating temperature. Operating temperature is also a key factor for the lifespan of the devices. It is reported that a small temperature increase of 10–15 °C may lead to a 50% reduction in the device's lifetime.1 In some cases, the overheated devices can explode or catch fire. Hence, thermal management plays a crucial role in electronic packaging by virtue of thermal interface materials (TIMs).
TIMs are the materials commonly used in removing the generated heat in electronic devices. They are located between the heat sink and the mating surfaces of heat-generating electronic components. For heat dissipation, it is desirable to have TIMs with ultrahigh thermal conductivity (TC) so that heat can be removed from the devices quickly. Conventional TIMs are made of polymer-based composites containing thermally conductive materials at high weight loading (wt%), such as Al2O3 and copper, to reach TC of 1–5 W m−1 K−1 or higher.2 Though TC of a composite can be increased significantly compared with that of polymer (e.g. 0.2 W m−1 K−1 for epoxy), it still fails to meet the high requirement due to the rapid increase of integration density and power consumption in electronics. Intensive research efforts have been devoted to exploring new conductive fillers for polymer-based TIMs. Graphene is the most exploited one.3–5 Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) carbon material with hexagonal lattice structure. The strong sp2 hybridized C–C covalent bonds endow graphene with many fascinating properties6 and the associated practical applications in nanodevices. It is reported experimentally that graphene possesses an intrinsic TC of 3500–5300 W m−1 K−1,5 which is the highest value in nature. Considerable efforts have been dedicated to the development of advanced polymer-based TIMs by using graphene as conductive filler as reviewed by Chen et al. recently.1 In addition to the ever-increasing applications as reinforcing fillers in composites, graphene has also motivated the development of a wide variety of 1D, 2D and 3D nanomaterials at a breathtaking pace as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Atomic structures of 1D nanomaterials, 2D nanomaterials and 3D nanostructures reviewed in this paper. 
In this review, we will present recent advances on new 1D, 2D and 3D carbon-based nanomaterials with focus on their TC and their applications as conductive filler in polymer nanocomposites. The article is organized as below. Section 2 gives a brief introduction of the widely used simulation methods in heat conduction of materials. Section 3 summarizes the TC of 1D carbon-based nanomaterials. Section 4 reviews the development of various 2D carbon-based or BN-based nanomaterials for their TC and applications in polymer nanocomposites. 3D graphene-based nanofillers incorporated in a polymer matrix (mainly epoxy) are reviewed in Section 5 and conclusion is presented in Section 6.
2. Simulation methods for heat transport
There are three commonly used atomistic simulation methods used in investigating the thermal transport of nanomaterials, e.g. the first-principle calculation based on density functional theory (DFT),7 the non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) simulation and the equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD) simulation. Since Bao et al. has recently reviewed these methods in micro/nanoscale heat conduction,7 herein a brief introduction is presented.
2.1 First-principle calculation based on DFT
First-principles method (also known as the ab initio method) solves Schrodinger equation numerically. Anharmonic lattice dynamics or lattice dynamics takes the interatomic force constants (IFCs) to generate phonon dispersion relation and relaxation time, which are used as the inputs of Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) to calculate total TC. The first-principles BTE method is the combination of the above three methods. Currently, first-principles based anharmonic lattice dynamics method coupled with the phonon BTE is one of the most popular methods to obtain TC (κ).8
For the non-metallic materials where heat transportation is dominated by phonon, the phonon BTE is expressed as (1)where n is phonon distribution function, v is the group velocity and  is the scattering rates. For the phonon mode λ, eqn (1) can be simplified based on the assumptions of linearization and steady state as (2)where τλ is the phonon relaxation time.  is the deviation of distribution function from equilibrium n0λ. n0λ follows the Bose–Einstein statistics, , where ℏ is the reduced Planck constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, ωλ denotes the phonon frequency and T represents the temperature.
Based on Fourier's law, the TC κ of a material is defined by J = −κ∇T(3)where J is the heat flux vector.
In the equilibrium state, n0λ = 0, so that . The microscopic expression for the heat flux contributed by phonons is given by (4)When the temperature gradient is in α direction, the TC can be obtained from eqn (2)–(4) as (5)where  is heat capacity, τλ and νλ are relaxation time and group velocity, respectively. To determine the TC based on eqn (5), one needs to use lattice dynamics method to calculate cλ, τλ and vλ, which involves calculation of IFCs.
The potential energy E of a system can be expressed as the Taylor series (6)where uαi is the displacement of atom i in α direction and Φ is the nth order IFCs.
From the second-order IFCs, Φαβij, the dynamical matrix can be constructed and the phonon dispersion (ωλ) are obtained by diagonalizing the dynamical matrix. Knowing ωλ, the specific heat of phonon mode λ can be determined. The group velocity of phonon mode λ (vλ) can be calculated from the gradient of ωλ with respect to reciprocal space coordinates. The anharmonic nature of the system is characterized by the third-order IFCs, Φαβγijk, while the contributions of the higher order terms are neglected for efficient computation.9 From the anharmonic IFCs, the scattering matrix can be constructed. Based on the scattering matrix, one can obtain the three-phonon scattering rates and then the phonon lifetime (τλ). Finally, the TC can be obtained in the framework of BTE based on the single mode relaxation time approximation.10
2.2 NEMD
NEMD simulation is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. In NEMD, a temperature gradient is imposed in the system by applying two thermostats at different temperatures to both ends of the sample (referring to cold and hot reservoirs). The different temperatures at both ends lead to the formation of heat flux traveling along the simulation cell from hot to cold regions. At each simulation step, a given amount of energy is added to the hot reservoir by the thermostat and an equivalent amount of energy is removed from the cold reservoir by the other thermostat. Thus the total energy in the system remains unchanged with a stable system temperature. The temperature difference between the cold and hot reservoirs leads to a temperature gradient along the length direction (∂T/∂x). The heat flux (Jx) is then given by the difference between the energy added and the energy removed from the system. After sufficient simulation times, the system reaches a nonequilibrium state with a constant heat flux (Jx) and temperature gradient (∂T/∂x). The TC can be determined by using the Fourier law as: (7)The temperature gradient ∂T/∂x along the heat transport direction can be extracted from the linear fitting of the temperature profile (red line in Fig. 2b). In the calculation of the cross-sectional area A for the heat flux Jx, the thickness of nanostructures is assumed to be a certain value according to literature. For instance, the thickness of graphene, blue phosphorene and graphitic carbon nitride are assumed to be 0.34 nm, 0.54 nm and 0.328 nm, respectively.11–14 It is worth mentioned that the absolute TC value of 2D nanomaterials is strongly dependent on its thickness as clearly clarified by Wu et al.15
 Fig. 2  (a) The simulation model used in NEMD. (b) A typical temperature profile in the heat flux direction of penta-graphene obtained from the simulations Zhang et al.16 (copyright permission from 2017 Elsevier). 
2.3 EMD
EMD method based on the fluctuation–dissipation theory can be used to furnish the directional-dependent TC of nanomaterials via Green–Kubo formalism. Thus this method is also called Green–Kudo (GK) method. The GK method calculates lattice TC as17 (8)where Ω is the system volume, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the system temperature, Jμ(t) is the heat flux in the direction of μ at time t, 〈Jμ(t)Jv(0)〉 refers to the ensemble average of the heat current autocorrelation function (HCACF), τ is the truncation time. GK method can calculate the TC tensor along different directions with the same set of EMD simulation results. For isotropic material, its TC is equal to the average of three diagonal components. Thereby a factor of three will appear in the denominator of eqn (8). The truncation time τ must be large enough to achieve convergent HCACF. To obtain stable effective TC by using eqn (8), several HCACFs shall be calculated and averaged by running several independent simulations with different initial velocity distributions. In order to avoid the finite-size effect on TC, periodic boundary conditions are often used in EMD. Comparing NEMD with EMD, NEMD method is more computational efficient than EMD method, but at the cost of less accuracy.18
3. 1D nanomaterials
In 2015, a new carbon nanotubes (CNTs) analogue, termed as diamond nanothread (DNT), was successfully synthesised through solid-state reaction of benzene under high pressure.19 The DNT is a carbon structures containing sp3 bonds only. The carbon atoms in DNT are arranged in a diamond-like tetrahedral motif (see Fig. 3a) and saturated with hydrogen atoms with the stoichiometric ratio H:C = 1:1. It can be viewed as seral fully hydrogenated (3,0) CNTs linked with Stone–Wales (SW) transformation. The presence of the SW transformation distinguishes DNTs from CNTs,20,21 endowing DNTs with unique mechanical and thermal properties. Detailed investigations on DNTs have been conducted by Gu's group and others.12,22–32 Herein we limit our attention to the thermal property of Ds available in literature.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram DNT and its forest structure;33 (b) TC plotted as a function of DNT length and constituent unit cells; the TC normalized by its respective minima shows a general valley trend;24 (c) strain engineering on the TC of DNT forest in the perpendicular direction and in the thread direction.33 (Copyright from 2016 Elsevier and 2019 IOP Publishing.) 
Using NEMD simulations, Zhan et al.24,27 found that the TC of DNTs is much lower than its CNT analogue due to the presence of the SW transformation which acts as the phonon scatter. Also due to the existence of the SW transformations, DNTs exhibit a superlattice thermal transport characteristic, namely the TC shows a uniformly decreasing-then-increasing trend with increasing number of poly-benzene rings connected by SW transformation links as illustrated in Fig. 3b. It is evident that the TC of DNTs can be easily manipulated by controlling its length, i.e. numbers of poly-benzene rings and SW transformation links. Hence DNTs is suitable for the thermal connection applications, where high and adjustable TC is required in order to match the working devices. Most recently, Xu et al.33 investigated the TC of DNT forest (a number of DNTs are closely packed and parallel to each other shown in Fig. 3a) by using NEMD simulation. They found a strong anisotropic thermal property in DNT forest due to the unique structure of DNT. The TC in the thread direction is over 300 times of that in the perpendicular direction. When subject to external strain in Fig. 3c, the TC of the DNT forest decreased with increasing compressive/tensile strain in the thread direction, whereas the TC increases exponentially with increasing compressive strain in the perpendicular direction.
Though DNT was predicted to be a good reinforcing filler for polymer composites23 in par with CNT, there is no study for its application as conductive filler in polymer composites for their thermal management application. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the properties of DNTs reported in literature mainly come from MD simulations while experimental verification is lacking. The practical applications of DNTs as strong and conductive filler in polymer composites demand experimental works along this line.
Other 1D nanostructures have been proposed recently from the derivatives of the various new 2D nanostructures, such as C3N nanotube (C3NNT),34,35 penta-graphene nanotubes,36 and CNT/hBN heteronanotubes (CBNNTs)37 (see Fig. 4). Wang and Cheng conducted a comparative study for the TC of single wall C3NNT with its CNT counterpart by using NEMD simulation. The TC of infinite long (10,10) CNT, (10,10) C3NNT, (10,0) CNT and (10,0) C3NNT are 1170.84, 545.01, 900.88 and 526.25 W m−1 K−1, respectively. The TC of C3NNT is found to be much lower than that of its CNT counterpart due to the phonon scattering induced by nitrogen atoms in the C3NNT. NEMD was employed by Elapolu et al.35 to study the effects of nanotube length and diameter on the TC of C3NNT. A phonon transport transition from ballistic to diffusive regime was found in C3NNT. Like the finding reported by Chen and Wang,34 the TC of C3NNT is significantly lower than those of CNTs across the entire ballistic-diffusive range due to the presence of nitrogen atoms, which leads to smaller relaxation time and group velocities of C3NNT. Chen et al.37 investigated the thermal transport from CNT to h-BN nanotube (BNNT) and back forth in a CBNNTs using NEMD simulations. The results reveal that the heat flows preferentially from BNNTs to CNTs, with obvious thermal rectification effect. When a big temperature difference of 300 K between the hot and cold bathes is used while the system temperature remains at 300 K, the thermal rectification factor could reach to 334%, indicating that CBNNTs are highly efficient thermal rectifier. This high thermal rectification efficiency stems from the strong coupling between low-frequency transverse phonons across the CNT/BNNT interface in the direction of reverse bias.
 Fig. 4  Atomistic structure of 1D nanomaterials (a) C3N nanotube (C3NNT);34 (b) CNT/h-BN heteronanotubes (CBNNTs);37 (c) penta-graphene nanotubes36 (copyright from 2019 IOP Publishing, 2019 Elsevier, 2017 American Chemical Society). 
4. 2D nanomaterials and their polymer nanocomposites
Numerous review papers are available for the thermal transport of 2D nanomaterials, including graphene, graphyne, and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN).38–41 Herein we focus on the most recent advance of new 2D heterostructures similar to graphene. The discovery of graphene has advanced the development of other 2D materials at the breathtaking pace. Among numerous 2D materials discovered after graphene, h-BN is one of the most studied ones.42,43 Analogous to graphene, h-BN is a 2D material with honeycomb structures in which equal boron and nitrogen atoms are bonded by sp2 hybridization. Owing to the similarity in atomistic structure and bond strength, h-BN possesses similar thermal properties as graphene. For instance, h-BN has a high TC of ∼2000 W m−1 K−1,44 high thermal stability and chemical inertness in air, as reported in the paper where a graphene/h-BN electro-thermal heater reached a heating temperature of 600 °C.45 But h-BN has a wide band gap of 5.971 eV,42 which makes it more suitable to be used as insulators than graphene.
Motivated by the fascinating properties of graphene and h-BN, continuing efforts have been devoted to predicting the other possible hexagonal structures (made of carbon, boron and nitrogen atoms) theoretically and synthesizing them. Till now, quite a few new hexagonal structures have been realized in experiments as reviewed below.
4.1 Carbon nitride
In order to find 2D nanomaterials with non-zero band gap and overcome graphene's limitation in nanoelectronics application, considerable researches have been done in exploring inherent semiconducting materials like h-BN42 (with a bandgap of 5.8 eV) and other nitride structures, including graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), C3N and C2N, as shown in Fig. 5. All the carbon nitride structures consist exclusively of covalently-bonded, sp2-hybridized carbon and nitrogen atoms.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of monolayer carbon nitride structures (red and blue balls represent carbon and nitrogen atoms, respectively)49 (copyright from 2020 Elsevier). 
In 2014, macroscopically large crystalline thin films of s-triazine-based, g-C3N4 (SgCN) films were fabricated using an ionothermal, interfacial reaction by Algara-Siller et al.46 The other fabricated g-C3N4 is tri-triazine-based (TgCN).47 Both g-C3N4 have a bandgap of 1.6–2.0 eV. Except for nanoelectronics applications, these two g-C3N4 have great potentials for energy conversion and storage, environmental applications including direct methanol fuel cells, catalysis and CO2 capture. In the thermal management application, the TC of SgCN and TgCN were predicted to be around 7.6 and 3.5 W m−1 K−1, respectively by EMD simulations.14 Volz and his group48 used EMD simulation to calculate the TC of SgCN and TgCN as 34.75 and 18.64 W m−1 K−1, respectively. Later they49 employed NEMD simulation and found that the TC of SgCN and TgCN are 44.4 and 17 W m−1 K−1, respectively. Except the g-C3N4, a large range of carbon nitride structures were analysed there49 (see Fig. 5). Among the materials under consideration,49 C3N, C3B and C2N monolayers were found to have the highest TC values, while the graphyne structures have the lowest TC values. The underlying mechanisms for the distinct TC results were discussed by analysing the phonon mean free path, the heat capacity and Young's modulus. A relationship between TC and Young's modulus (equivalent to density of porosity) of the structure was established. The structure with higher Young's modulus correspondingly has larger TC. In essence, it is the density of porosity, not Young's modulus, that has a direct relationship with the TC as the porosity could lead to the scattering of phonons. Anyway, the results in this paper49 provide useful database for the TC of these carbon-based structures which are useful for nanoelectronics applications.
The research team led by JB Baek from South Korean50,51 has successfully synthesized nitrogenated holey 2D structure (C2N) and 2D polyaniline (C3N) through a simple wet-chemical reaction and a direct solid-state reaction of organic single crystals, respectively. The nitrogenated holey 2D structure possesses evenly distributed holes and nitrogen atoms with a C2N stoichiometry in its basal plane. The 2D polyaniline consists of a phenyl ring surrounded by six nitrogen atoms periodically with a C3N stoichiometry. Based on the work of Mahmood et al.,50 Yang et al.52 have successfully developed a controllable large-scale fabrication of C3N by using the polymerization of 2,3-diaminophenazine.
Thermal transport properties of carbon nitride have attracted considerable research interest. By using first-principles calculation and the phonon BTE, Ouyang et al.53 predicted the lattice TC of monolayer C2N to be 82.22 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature, which is almost two orders of magnitude lower than that of graphene. Such low TC is mainly caused by the low group velocity and the enhancement of phonon–phonon scattering due to the presence of holes in the C2N structure. Using EMD simulation, Zhang et al.54 calculated TC of C2N at ∼40 W m−1 K−1 in both armchair and zigzag directions at room temperature, which is attributed to the reduced group velocities and phonon lifetimes. By using NEMD simulation, Mortazavi et al.55 predicted the TC of infinite-long C2N to be 64.8 W m−1 K−1 at 300 K and the effective phonon mean free path of 34.0 nm, which are smaller than respective values for graphene. The TC and effective phonon mean free path decrease with the temperature when the temperature is higher than 300 K. Similarly, Wang et al.56 used NEMD simulation to predict the TC of infinite-long bilayer C2N as 80 W m−1 K−1.
As shown in Fig. 5a, the distinct difference between C2N and C3N lies in the presence of holes in C2N structure. Therefore, it is expected that C2N has lower TC than C3N due to the phonon scattering induced by the holes. Hong et al.57 investigated the thermal transport in monolayer and bilayer C3N by using NEMD simulation. The in-plane TC for infinite-long monolayer and bilayer C3N structures are predicted to be 820 and 805 W m−1 K−1, respectively, which are much higher than those of many prevailing 2D semiconducting materials such as phosphorene and h-BN. From the detailed phonon power spectrum and spatiotemporal thermal dissipation analyses, they found that the phonon density of states (PDOS) of C3N have similar patterns as graphene. But in C3N, the low frequency flexural phonons (ZA) have an apparent blue shift comparable to those of graphene. The TC of monolayer C3N (39.7 nm long) decreases monotonically from 309 to 185 W m−1 K−1 when the temperature increases from 200 K to 600 K. At higher temperature, higher frequency phonons are activated and more phonon scattering around the nitrogen sites becomes stronger, which impedes the phonon transport and finally reduces the TC of C3N. It is also found that biaxial tensile strain is more efficient in reducing the TC of C3N than uniaxial tensile strain. Recently, An et al.58 performed in-depth NEMD simulations for the TC of monolayer C3N and its atomistic analogue, N-doped graphene. By comparison, the results indicate that the intrinsic physical mechanism behind the low TC of C3N is the mass difference between N and C atoms. The group velocity of C3N is smaller, and some acoustic phonons of C3N are more localized compared with graphene. Furthermore, from the electron density, it is found that the covalent bonds in C3N are strongly polarized, leading to a larger anharmonicity and more phonon scatterings than graphene. This study shed useful insights into the fundamental mechanisms (mass difference and polarization) for the low TC of C3N.
By replacing the nitrogen atoms with boron atoms, C3N structure is changed to boron-carbide (C3B). Most recently, a comparative study was conducted by Wang et al.59 for the properties of C3N and C3B. The first-principle calculations based on DFT reveal that the intrinsic TC of the monolayer C3B (301 W m−1 K−1 at 300 K) is lower than that of C3N (380 W m−1 K−1 at 300 K), while greater anisotropy of in-plane TC is found in C3B. This lower TC of C3B is resulted from the smaller phonon group velocity, which is closely related to the weaker C–B bond when compared with C–N bond in C3N.
4.2 N- and B-graphdiyne
In 2018, novel 2D N-graphdiyne structures have been successfully realized in experiment at the gas/liquid and liquid/liquid interfaces.60 These structures are made of carbon and nitrogen atoms only with low-density lattices as illustrated in Fig. 6. Comprehensive EMD simulation carried out by Mortazavi et al.61 found that the TC of monolayer C18N6, C12N2 and C36N6 structures at the room temperature are three orders of magnitude smaller than that of graphene, with maximum and minimum values of 5.75 W m−1 K−1 and ∼1.35 W m−1 K−1, respectively. In addition, the TCs of these three 2D graphdiyne nanostructures are temperature insensitive. The ultralow TC as well as the semiconducting electronic property may suggest the promising applications of the N-graphdiyne monolayers in the thermoelectric devices operating at low temperatures. The authors62 continued to study B-graphdiyne (C12B2) (Fig. 6b) for its TC by NEMD simulation. B-Graphdiyne (C12B2) is analogous to N-graphdiyne (C12N2). The calculated TC of the B-graphdiyne monolayer at room temperature is ultralow at ∼2.5 W m−1 K−1, which is far smaller than that of the corresponding N-graphdiyne.61 This result is expected since the C–B bonds are weaker than C–N bonds as indicated in the comparative studies of C3N and C3B by Wang et al.59
 Fig. 6  Atomic structures of various N-graphdiyne (a); (b) C12B2 B-graphdiyne (Mortazavi et al.61,62) (copyright from 2018 Elsevier, 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4.3 h-BCN
The fascinating properties of graphene and h-BN also motivates continuing efforts to explore their 2D hexagonal structures made of carbon, boron and nitrogen atoms theoretically and experimentally. Hexagonal graphitic BCN (h-BCN) is one of them. h-BCN63 with one-atom thickness have been successful synthesized in 2017. First principle calculations on h-BCN predicted a direct electronic band gap of 1.5 eV,63 indicating that h-BCN is intermediate between gapless graphene and insulting h-BN. In line with the continuous efforts in investigating hexagonal structures, Zhang et al.64 investigated the TC of the newly synthesized h-BCN monolayer (three different configurations illustrated in Fig. 7a) by using NEMD simulations. The effects of sample size, mechanical strain, and temperature on the TC have been closely examined. Their major findings are: (1) the three h-BCN structures with same stoichiometry but different arrangement of B, C, and N atoms, exhibit isotropic TC in the in-plane directions. h-BCN_v3 and v1 models have the highest and lowest TC among the three models (Fig. 7b); (2) analogous to graphene and h-BN in the hexagonal lattice, the h-BCN has the lowest TC; (3) under compressive strain, the h-BCN experiences buckling deformation and has a lower TC due to the increase of phonon scattering induced by buckled structure. Under tensile strain, the TC of h-BCN increase first (<0.04) and then drop as demonstrated in Fig. 7c; (4) unlike straining engineering for graphene, the external strain is not an effective tool in manipulating the TC of the h-BCN. Also the TC of the h-BCN is not very sensitive to temperature change as shown in Fig. 7d. Recently, Rohit et al.65 synthesized few layer BCN nanosheets via solid state reaction employing urea method and experimentally tested their TC, electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient. A low TC of 0.58–1.86 W m−1 K−1 was reported over the temperature range of 300–573 K. Such low TC was caused by the heterogeneity of bonds (e.g. C–B, C–N and B–N bonds), grain boundaries and ample point defects in the synthesized nanosheets.
 Fig. 7  (a) Atomistic structures of three different h-BCN models; (b) TC of three types of h-BCN structures along the zigzag and armchair directions; (c) relative TC of h-BCN_v3 monolayer as a function of strain. The TC is normalized by that at strain-free state; (d) relative TC of h-BCN as a function of temperature. (Zhang et al.64) (copyright from 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4.4 Graphene-based in-plane heterostructures
In order to take full advantages of the properties of graphene and its structural analogue, their heterostructures (in-plane or vertically stacked) were devised and investigated intensively by both experiments and theoretical simulations.66–76 Vertically-stacked heterostructures can be synthesized by mechanical stacking, while in-plane ones may be more easily fabricated by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. Herein we limit our review to the recent works of the in-plane heterostructures. There are two types of in-plane heterostructures. The first type is the structure made of two different materials connected by one single interface as shown in Fig. 8a. The other type is the structure made of two different materials patterned in a periodic format with several interfaces as illustrated in Fig. 9. This periodic patterned heterostructure is also called superlattice. The material properties of in-plane heterostructures are dependent on the individual properties of the constituting materials, the interfaces bonding structure and the unit length of the superlattice. Therefore, the superlattice endows us more freedom to tune its property. Owing to the rapid advancement in materials synthesis techniques, various in-plane heterostructures were successfully synthesized, such as h-BN/graphene66–69 and graphene/graphane.12,70
 Fig. 8  (a–c) Simulation models of BCnN/Gr heterostructures, where the subscript n denotes the number of carbon atoms; n = 0, 1, 2 representing h-BN, BCN and BC2N, respectively. (d) Temperature distribution along the heat flux direction in the h-BN/Gr heterostructure (δT = 100 K). Temperature jump ΔT is determined indirectly by the linear fitting and extrapolation from the temperature profiles in BCnN and graphene.90 (e) TR factor at two different temperature bias between the hot and cold regions. (f) Relationship between ITC and coverage of vacancy defect for three BCnN/Gr heterostructures.90 (Reprint from Zhang et al.,90 copyright from 2018 American Chemical Society.) 
 Fig. 9  (a) Unit cell of superlattices following the Fibonacci sequence up to fifth generation (5G). Domains of types A and B correspond h-BN and graphene. (b) Intrinsic thermal conductivity versus domain length. The valley present in some of the curves is associated with the crossover from the coherent to the incoherent heat transfer regime, and it disappears from 7G onwards. (Reprint from Felix and Pereira,93 copyright from 2020 Elsevier.) 
h-BN/graphene in-plane heterostructures66–69,77–80 are perhaps the most popular structure being studied until now. It was found from theoretical investigations that the interfacial thermal resistance of h-BN/graphene in-plane heterostructures could be reduced significantly by engineering the interface in a controllable manner. For example, Liu et al.69 showed surprisingly that topological defects (5/7 defects) can enhance (rather reduce) the interfacial thermal conductance (ITC) across the interface in h-BN/graphene heterostructures. This abnormal mechanism provides a new platform to control the ITC in 2D heterostructures. In addition to ITC, the thermal rectification (TR) of in-plane heterostructures was also explored intensively73,74,81–88 since it is an equally important physical phenomenon as TC. TR means that heat flows more easily in one direction than the reverse direction.81 This phenomenon is predicted to have potential applications in nanoscale thermal management and phonon-based information processing. Although intensive studies were performed on the TR in asymmetric graphene sheets of different structures74,82,84,85,89 and thickness,86 limited studies were carried out on the TR of h-BN/graphene or other heterostructures.87
Zhang et al.90 investigated the ITC of two new in-plane heterostructures, i.e. BCN/graphene (BCN/Gr) and BC2N/graphene (BC2N/Gr) by using NEMD simulations. These two new in-plane heterostructures have similar structures as that of h-BN/graphene (h-BN/Gr) (see Fig. 8a). It is found that the BCN/Gr heterostructure possesses the highest ITC among the three heterostructures because of its strong interfacial bonds consisting of one-third sp2 covalent C–C bonds. The stronger interfacial bonding strength in the BCN/Gr heterostructure facilitates the heat transfer across the interface, thus enhancing its ITC. In addition, it is found that the heat flux travels preferentially from BCnN to graphene domain, i.e. TR occurs in the heterostructures as shown in Fig. 8e. They also found that ITC and TR of these heterostructures can be manipulated by defect engineering. Single-atom vacancies exert a positive effect on the ITC of these three heterostructures, in particular at a small vacancy concentration (0.36% under consideration here) as illustrated in Fig. 8f.
Most recently, Song et al.91 investigated the thermal transport in Gr/C3N in-plane heterostructures by NEMD simulations. It is found that the ITC depends on the heat flux direction and larger value occurs when the heat travels from C3N to graphene. The effective TC of infinite-long Gr/C3N in-plane heterostructures are predicted to be 1346 W m−1 K−1 and 1183 W m−1 K−1, respectively for Gr/C3N system (heat flux flows from graphene to C3N) and C3N/Gr system (heat flux flows from C3N to graphene). The magnitudes of ITC can be effectively manipulated by temperature, nitrogen doping, external strain and substrate. The temperature, nitrogen doping and a compressive strain (perpendicular to the heat flux direction) and amorphous silicon dioxide substrate exert positive effect on the ITC while tensile strain and crystalline silicon dioxide substrate exert negative effect. At the same time, Eshkalak et al.92 used NEMD simulations to investigate the thermal property of Gr/C3N in-plane heterostructures with the focus on the morphology of interface. Various possible atomic structures of the interface (zigzag and armchair, defective and pristine) between graphene and C3N have been systematically explored. Their results show that zigzag interface yields a much better result than the armchair one in the thermal transport phenomenon. The presence of the single-vacancy defect in the interface significantly reduces the interfacial thermal resistance due to the decreasing phonon transfer rate at the interface. The reduction rate is proportional to the number of vacancy defects. Furthermore, they found that it is more effective to reduce the interfacial thermal resistance by using defect than mechanical strain.
The special type of heterostructures, i.e. periodic superlattices, are proved to be promising materials for novel electronic devices due to their unique physical properties, which can be manipulated by the superlattice period. Numerous graphene-based periodic superlattices have been studied for their potential applications in thermal management, including graphene–h-BN,80,93 graphene-nitrogenated holey graphene,94 isotopically modified graphene.95 Wang et al.94 explored the transition between coherent and incoherent phonon transport in a graphene and nitrogenated holey graphene (C2N) superlattice by employing NEMD simulation. It is found that the TC of the superlattice is much lower than its constituting materials. The TC also shows a positive correlation with the system length.
Most recently, Felix and Pereira80,93 studied the graphene–h-BN superlattice successively by using NEMD simulations. In their first work,80 they investigated the TC of graphene/h-BN superlattice nanoribbons with equal-sided domains of graphene and h-BN. The TC depends on the domain sizes (equivalent to superlattice period shown in Fig. 9a), and the total length of the superlattice. A minimum value of 89 W m−1 K−1 was obtained with a minimum superlattice period of 3.43 nm. As shown in Fig. 9b, they observed that periodic superlattices facilitate coherent (wave-like) phonon thermal transport due to constructive wave interference at the boundaries between graphene and h-BN. But this coherent transport regimes can be converted into incoherent (particle-like) transport regimes by increasing the superlattice period (i.e. increasing the lengths of individual domains). In the second work, Felix and Pereira93 extend their study to more complicated graphene/h-BN superlattice structures, alternating equal domains of graphene and h-BN according to the Fibonacci sequence (see Fig. 9a). They observed that the length of individual domains for which the TC reaches minimum decreases as the Fibonacci generation increases. The presence of a quasiperiodicity hinders coherent phonon transport in these superlattices. Based on the simulation results, they concluded that from the seventh Fibonacci generation and beyond, the heat transport in graphene/h-BN superlattices is mostly incoherent for any realizable domain length at room temperature. The suppression in coherent thermal transport in graphene/h-BN superlattices offers another degree of control on heat conduction at the nanoscale, which has the potential to improve the design of novel thermal management devices.
4.5 Other 2D nanomaterials proposed but not yet synthesized
Along with the efforts in synthesizing various 2D nanomaterials, researchers also devote in designing possible 2D nanomaterials and evaluating their properties theoretically. The newly proposed 2D materials include hexagonal boron arsenide (h-BAs) and penta-graphene (PG) (see Fig. 1).
By employing first principles density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) combined with the BTE, Raeisi et al.96 investigated the thermal transport along the monolayer h-BAs and further tuned the TC by strain engineering. The TC of a stress-free h-BAs was predicted to be 180.2 W m−1 K−1, which can be significantly increased to 375.0 W m−1 K−1 and 406.2 W m−1 K−1 along the armchair and zigzag directions, respectively at 3% tensile strain. The underlying mechanism for such a remarkable TC enhancement in h-BAs was correlated to the fact that stretching makes the flexural out-of-plane mode the dominant heat carrier. By using DFPT+BTE, Shi and Luo97 theoretically simulated the 2D form of boron-V elements and calculated the TC of h-BAs as 362.62 W m−1 K−1, which was higher than other monolayer boron-V compounds like h-BP, h-BN and h-BSb.
Recently, penta-graphene (PG), a new carbon allotrope comprising entirely of carbon pentagons, was proposed by Zhang et al.98 Their theoretical calculations have affirmed that the new format of carbon structure (resembling Cairo-pentagonal tiling pattern) is not only dynamically and mechanically stable, but also can sustain high temperature up to 1000 K. Wang et al.99 systematically investigated its phonon transport properties by solving exactly the linearized phonon BTE together with first-principles calculations. The intrinsic lattice TC of PG was found to be about 645 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature (based on the assumed thickness of 0.12 nm). The lower TC of PG is due to the strong anharmonic effect induced by the buckled pentagonal structure with hybridized sp2 and sp3 bonding. Liu et al.100 investigated three different penta-structures (PG, penta-SiN2 and penta-SiC2) by first-principles calculations and found that their TCs respond to the tensile strain in different ways as shown in Fig. 10. The TC of PG (Fig. 10a) is reduced monotonically by stretching while that of penta-SiN2 (Fig. 10c) is enhanced by one order of magnitude due to the buckled to planar structure transition induced by strain. Similarly, Wu et al.101 used first-principles lattice dynamics and iterative solution of the phonon BTE to determine the TC of PG and its hydrogenated structure (insets in Fig. 10e). They found that, opposite to graphene, the 100% hydrogenation exerts positive effect on PG by increasing its TC (up to 76% increase) as illustrated in Fig. 10e. The underlying mechanism is the weaker bond anharmonicity in the hydrogenated PG due to the presence of hydrogen atoms. Zhang et al.16 performed NEMD simulations based on ReaxFF force field to investigate the TC of hydrogenated and oxidized PG at different functionalization levels. Both hydrogenated and oxidized PG structures show a down-and-up TC trend with respect to the coverage level. Hydrogenation is more efficient in reducing the TC of PG than oxidization. Later Zhang et al.102 also reported the unusual enhancing effect of functionalization on the fracture strength of PG, which is in sharp contrast to graphene. Santos et al.103 extend to bilayer PG and perform DFT study to examine the effect of doping (boron, nitrogen and oxygen) on the magnetic properties of bilayer PG. Most recently, Sun et al.104 studied the effect of grain boundaries on the thermal transport properties of PG by using NEMD simulations. The presence of grain boundaries (GBs) in polycrystalline penta-graphene (PPG) leads to about 20% reduction in the TC as compared to that of pristine PG (151.52 W m−1 K−1). This reduction is attributed to three main factors: phonon scattering induced by the existence of GBs; the reduced group velocity; and the mismatch of vibrational density of states resulted from the geometric anisotropy of PPG.
 Fig. 10  Strain-modulated lattice TC of (a) penta-Gr, (b) penta-SiC2, and (c) penta-SiN2. L indicates the system size and L = ∞ refers to the infinite size. The same legends for length are used for all figures. (inset) The low buckled structure of penta-SiN2 for strain less than 9% and the perfectly planar structure for strain larger than 9%. (d) TC as a function of length: comparison between graphene versus hydrogenated graphene (100%) and (e) PG versus HPG (e). (a–c reprinted from Liu et al.,100 d and e, reprinted from Wu et al.,101 copyright from 2016 American Chemistry Society.) 
4.6 2D nanomaterials and its polymer composites
Pure polymers have a very low TC in the range of 0.10–0.25 W m−1 K−1. The addition of thermally conductive fillers is proved to be an effective way to enhance the TC of polymers. Since graphene is the first isolated 2D material and has the highest in-plane TC among all the known 2D materials, graphene fillers in the polymer-based TIMs have received the first and foremost attention in the past decade. Numerous research publications can be found about polymer-based TIMs with graphene as fillers.105–108 Most of these works have been summarized in recent review papers by Fu et al.109 Herein we only review the recent development of two non-graphene fillers: h-BN and graphdiyne. As for the other new 2D nanomaterials reviewed in the foregoing sections, rare works have been done to use them in the polymer composites as thermal interface materials.
h-BN is one of the most widely studied fillers after graphene. Although the in-plane TC of h-BN is not as high as of that of graphene, the out-of-plane TC in the h-BN/epoxy composite is shown to be higher than that of graphene/epoxy composite at the same volume fraction of the fillers.110 Besides, h-BN is an electrical insulator, which will not affect the function of the electronic devices when it directly contacts the circuits. The studies on the h-BN fillers mainly focused on the effects of coverage, orientation and functionalization of h-BN on the TC of the polymer composites.
Using MD simulations, Zhu et al.111 studied the effects of BN filler shapes (nanoparticle, nanotube and nanosheet) in epoxy resin on the TC of the composite and found that at the same volume fraction, the BN nanosheets (BNNS) are more effective than BN nanotubes (BNNTs) and BN nanoparticles (BNNPs) in improving the TC of the BN/epoxy composites (see Fig. 11). They showed that a small volume fraction (3%) of BNNS increased the TC of the composite to 0.61 W m−1 K−1, which is 239% higher than that of pure epoxy (0.2 W m−1 K−1). When the volume fraction of BNNS reaches to 15%, the TC is 1.86 W m−1 K−1, which is nearly ten times as large as pure epoxy.
 Fig. 11  Thermal conductivity of pure epoxy (pureEP), BN nanoparticle (BNNP)/EP, BN nanotube (BNNT)/EP and BN nanosheet (BNNS)/EP at the filler volume fraction of 3%.111 (Copyright from 2019 Elsevier.) 
The alignment of h-BN fillers on the TC of the composites was investigated by both experiments and computer simulations. Yuan et al.112 used magnetic fields to assemble the h-BN platelets into various microstructures and studied the TC of the designed composites. Their experimental and modelling results showed that TC are strongly associated with the alignment of the fillers in the composites. The TCs of the composites with h-BN platelets oriented parallel and perpendicular to the heat flux direction are respectively 44.5% higher and 37.9% lower than that of unaligned composites at the volume fraction of 9.14%. Using electrospinning, Chen et al.113 aligned and interconnected BNNS and obtained about 10 times of enhancement in the TC along the alignment direction. Sun et al.114 achieved orderly arrangement of BN plates in polycarbonate (PC) composites via a hot-pressing process. A high TC of 3.09 W m−1 K−1 was obtained at a BN content of 18.5 vol%, which is 1371% increase in comparison with that of pure PC. Using a vacuum filtration followed by slicing up process, Yu et al.115 fabricated vertically oriented and densely packed h-BN/epoxy composites. A high through-plane TC of 9 W m−1 K−1 was obtained at a h-BN loading of 44 vol% in the composites.
In addition to the fillers volume and orientation, the interfacial thermal resistance between the fillers and polymer matrix also plays a very important role in the thermal transport of the composites. The interface thermal resistance (ITR) between h-BN and epoxy in nanocomposites was calculated as (2.42–3.62) × 10−9 m2 K W−1, which is smaller than that between graphene and epoxy,110 as shown in Fig. 12. In order to enhance the interface adhesion and improve the interface thermal transport, surface coupling agents are widely used to modify the BN surface.116–120 Such surface functionalization is also helpful to improve the dispersibility of h-BN nanosheets in epoxy matrix. Li et al.116 studied the interface of h-BN/epoxy composites using NEMD simulations and found that the interface is composed of three regions including compact region, buffer region, and normal region. The structure at the interfacial region of nanocomposite is more compact, and the chain mobility is significantly lower than that of the epoxy away from the interface. Moreover, the interfacial interaction strength and compatibility increase with the density of the functional groups at h-BN surface. Jang et al.117 showed that a higher interfacial adhesion between BN and epoxy was obtained with a longer chain of the coupling agents on the BN surface. Compared to pure BN/epoxy composite, the surface functionalization of BN resulted in a 45.4% increase in the TC of the composite in their study. Yang et al.118 conducted EMD simulations to study surface functionalization of h-BN nanosheets on the TC of h-BN/epoxy composites. They found that the TC of almost fully functionalized h-BN monolayers are still over 100 W m−1 K−1, which is about 25% of the value of the pristine h-BN monolayer. The different functional groups (–OH and –O(CH2)4CH3 groups) was shown to have a similar effect on the TC.
 Fig. 12  (a) Simulation model of graphene/epoxy composites and the steady state temperature profile in the system, (b) the interface thermal resistance RI between graphene and epoxy as a function of graphene layer number n, (c) simulation model of h-BN/epoxy composite and the steady state temperature profile of the system, and (d) the interface thermal resistance RI between h-BN and epoxy as a function of hBN layer number n. (Adapted with permission from Yang et al.,110 copyright from 2020 Elsevier.) 
Normally, a TC enhancement of polymer composite will require a large mass fraction of fillers dispersed in polymer matrix. However, a large fraction of fillers brings new challenges, such as difficulty in material processing, high cost of material, and hardly meeting the practical requirements of industry and applications. Very recently, Wang et al.121 showed that graphdiyne (GDY), a novel 2D all-carbon allotrope, can significantly enhance the TC of polymer composites at ultralow mass fraction of the filler. At only 1 wt% GDY content, the polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) composites, fabricated by solution blend and hot pressing, exhibit a high in-plane TC of 3.86 W m−1 K−1, which is 2249% increase in the TC of the neat PVDF polymer, as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  The in-plane TC of neat PVDF and PVDF/GDY composite with 1 wt% of GDY as functions of (a) temperature and (b) heating and cooling cycles. (Adapted with permission from Wang et al.,121 copyright from 2020 IOP publishing.) 
Experimental efforts have also been devoted to using g-C3N4 in the epoxy composites. In a recent experimental work conducted by Song et al.,122 g-C3N4 was synthesised directly on the surface of the carbon fiber (CF). g-C3N4 modified-CF was then used to reinforce epoxy matrix. The presence of the g-C3N4 between CF and epoxy matrix greatly improved the roughness, functional groups and wettability on the CF surface, consequently enhancing the interfacial properties of epoxy composites significantly. Though no TC was presented in this work, it is predicted that the resultant TC of the composites shall be increased dramatically due to the improved interfacial properties, as revealed in numerous studies for the interface-dependent thermal transport properties.116–119
5. 3D structures and its polymer composites
Though 2D nanomaterials possesses high TC, direct incorporation of 2D nanomaterials into polymer composites fails to enhance the TC significantly. Considerable researches conducted in the past few years have pinpointed the main reasons, including poor dispersion, easy re-stacking and agglomeration due to their 2D characteristics. Particularly at high contents, it remains a huge challenge to achieve composites with uniformly dispersed 2D nanofillers. In order to maximize the reinforcement efficiency of 2D nanomaterials, a wide variety of new techniques have been proposed. Take graphene for example, it is experimentally proved that transforming 2D graphene into 3D configuration is highly efficient in improving the properties of polymer composites.123–125 Researchers have synthesized many different 3D graphene structures, such as carbon-based 1D CNT and 2D graphene hybrid nanofillers, 0D nanoparticles with 2D graphene, 3D interconnected graphene foam (GF), 3D graphene papers, to name a few. In the following, we comment the most recent research works in this direction, mainly from 2019 to date.
In 2011, Chen et al.126 synthesized 3DGF/polymer composites, by template-directed chemical vapour deposition (CVD) as schematically illustrated in Fig. 14. This synthesis method is facile with three main steps: (1) depositing graphene on the surface of Ni-template by CVD method; (2) etching Ni-template for free-standing GF; (3) infiltrating polymer matrix into GF for composites. The 3DGF consists of an interconnected flexible network of graphene, forming fast transport channel of charge carriers and thus endowing ∼6 orders of magnitude higher electrical conductivity for GF/poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) composites even with a low GF loading as ∼0.5 wt%. Inspired by this pioneer work of Chen et al.,126 many researchers fabricated 3DGF reinforced polymer composites and investigated their performance in fracture resistance,127 tribology, and heat conduction.128,129 Zhou et al.129 produced large-scale 3DGF/epoxy composites and found that 3DGF improved the TC of epoxy from 0.19 to 0.52 W m−1 K−1 with merely 0.14 vol% (equivalent to 0.27 wt%) graphene. This is the highest TC enhancement efficiency (174%) among all the highly conductive nanofillers (see Fig. 14g). The impressive TC enhancement induced by 3DGFs may originate from three factors: (1) the CVD-grown graphene has a high crystalline structure which retains its intrinsic high TC; (2) 3DGF possesses larger surfaces contacting with matrix for stronger interfaces; (3) the large 3DGFs are dispersed well in the matrix forming a heat transfer network (see Fig. 14h). However, further graphene loading from 0.14 to 0.28 vol% reduces TC due to poor dispersion. Shen et al.128 fabricated 3DGF/epoxy composites by using the same method but compressed Ni-template before depositing graphene there. The resultant composites contain well dispersed graphene in the matrix at high content. At a graphene content of 8.3 wt%, the TC of the 3DGF/epoxy composites is up to 8.8 W m−1 K−1. This high filler loading also gives rise to a remarkable fracture toughness of 2.18 MPa m1/2, well over 100% enhancement over the neat epoxy. The experimental works on the TC of 3DGF/epoxy composites128,129 clearly elaborate that it is promising to use 3DGF in improving the TC of the conductive polymers for their thermal management applications. However, further improvement in TC, especially in the through-plane direction, is still highly demanded. Most recently, an ultraflexible and foldable 3D hybridized carbon film was constructed by Li et al.130via the graphitization of graphene oxide on polyimide (g-GO/PI) skeleton and high-temperature annealing. In the g-GO/PI film, 2D wrinkled graphene nanosheets wrap along the 1D PI pulp, forming a 3D bridged microhinge-like structure. The hinge-like 3D-interconnected and nanowrinkled structure is endowed with extremely high TC (1428 W m−1 K−1 and 150 W m−1 K−1 at the in-plane and through-plane directions, respectively at 37.5 wt% of GO) as well as superflexibility.
 Fig. 14  (a and b) CVD growth of graphene films (Ni–G, b) using a nickel foam (Ni foam, a) as a 3D scaffold template. (c) An as-grown graphene film after coating a thin PMMA supporting layer (Ni–G-PMMA). (d) A GF coated with PMMA (GF-PMMA) after etching the nickel foam with hot HCl (or FeCl3/HCl) solution. (e) A free-standing GF after dissolving the PMMA layer with acetone. (f) A GF/PDMS composite after infiltration of PDMS into a GF. All the scale bars are 500 μm. (a–f reprinted from Chen et al.,126 copyright from 2011 Springer Nature.) (g) Comparisons of thermal conductivity enhancement efficiency of carbon nano-fillers to epoxy. (h) Schematic representation of 3DGF network in EP. The graphene foam network structure (represented by red colour dashed lines) (g and h reprinted from Zhou et al.,129 copyright from 2018 Elsevier). 
In addition to 3DGF, other types of 3D graphene structures have been designed to boost the heat dissipation of polymer composites. Dai et al.131 fabricated graphene hybrid paper by the intercalation of silicon source (SiO2 nanoparticles to decorate graphene sheet while SiC nanorods to connect adjacent graphene layers as illustrated in Fig. 15) with the aim for higher through-plane TC. The presence of the covalent C–Si bondings at the graphene–SiC interface improves the interfacial strength significantly. The through-plane TC is found to be up to 10.9 W m−1 K−1, which can be further increased to 17.6 W m−1 K−1 under packaging (compressive) conditions at 75 psi. The reported through-plane TC is the highest compared with the available graphene-based film. Along this line of research, Feng et al.132 fabricated polymer composite reinforced by 3D hybrid filler comprising of AgNP, Al2O3 and graphene nanoplatelets for the improvement of TC in the through-plane direction. The paper-like films exhibited a high through-plane TC value (9.09 W m−1 K−1) owing to the synergistic effect of the hybrid fillers. This TC value is close to that obtained by Dai et al.,131i.e. 10.9 W m−1 K−1.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of graphene hybrid paper with silicon source. (Reprinted from Dai et al.,131 copyright from 2019 American Chemistry Society.) (b and c) Thermal diffusivity, thermal conductivity and thermal conductivity enhancement of pure epoxy, R-AGE, AGE (⊥) and AGE (‖). (d) Heat transport model of AG&E composite. (b–d reprinted from Chen et al.,133 copyright from 2020 Elsevier.) 
Most recently, Chen et al.133 developed a “pea-pod-like” alumina–graphene binary nanofillers to boost the TC of epoxy composites. As shown in Fig. 15d, alumina is intercalated between graphene layers. The presence of alumina exerts two positive effects in the heat conduction process: (1) alumina itself has high TC; (2) alumina interconnect the adjacent graphene layers closely and provide more heat transfer paths, particularly in the through-plane direction (⊥). The obtained alumina/graphene/epoxy composites (with 42.4 wt% alumina and 12.1 wt% graphene) exhibited TC of 13.3 and 33.4 W m−1 K−1 in the through-plane and in-plane directions, respectively, as depicted in Fig. 15b and c. For comparison, the TC of random alumina/graphene/epoxy composite fabricated via simple blending has a TC of 1.73 W m−1 K−1, far below the results of its counterpart with “pea-pod-like” alumina–graphene. Similarly, Barani et al.134 fabricated epoxy composites with binary fillers of 2D graphene and 1D copper nanoparticles (Cu-NPs) (see Fig. 16). The synergistic effect induced by the hybrid fillers leads to ample improvement in the TC of the composites and this improvement closely depends on the combined wt% of graphene and Cu-NPs. The Cu-NPs fill the gaps between graphene fillers and facilitate the formation of the percolated network of graphene fillers. As shown in Fig. 16h–j, at low, medium and high wt% of graphene, the TC of the epoxy composite exhibits distinct trend with respect to Cu-NPs mass loading faction. The TC with 5 wt% of graphene increases gradually with the copper mass loading (Fig. 16h) till 40 wt% and then grows faster to 60 wt% due to the formation of thermally conductive paths in epoxy. With 15 wt% of graphene and around 35 wt% of Cu-NPs, a thermal percolation was observed, and the composite experienced an abrupt jump in the TC of the composite. The epoxy composite reaches the thermal percolation regime with 40 wt% of graphene, and then the TC increases linearly with the wt% of Cu-NPs. The composite has the highest TC of 13.5 ± 1.6 W m−1 K−1 with 40 wt% of graphene and 35 wt% of Cu-NPs. The above experimental results given by Chen et al.133 and Barani et al.134 confirm that the proper combination of 2D graphene with either 0D spherical nanoparticle133,134 or 1D SiC nanorods131 (or 1D CNTs135–137) for 3D hybrid nanofillers can boost the TC of polymer composites substantially. Such synergistic effects of hybrid fillers have been extensively explored in the past few years to enhance the overall properties of composites. Though 0D metal nanoparticles possesses high TC (in the order of hundred W m−1 K−1), they cannot enhance the TC of the polymer composite significantly. For instance, addition of 50 wt% of Cu-NPs in epoxy only slightly increases the TC of the pristine epoxy from 0.2 to 0.6 W m−1 K−1.134 In the binary fillers with 2D graphene and 0D or 1D nanomaterials, the main role the low dimensional nanomaterials between graphene layers play is the bridging role to link graphene layers closely, so that the high TC of graphene can be used fully to improve the TC of the composite. In the epoxy composites incorporated with the binary fillers of graphene and metal nanoparticles, the heat is primarily conducted by phonons in graphene while the contribution from electrons in metal nanoparticle is negligible.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the composite preparation and sample characterization. (a) Addition of Cu-NPs to the epoxy resin and mixing them inside the glove box in argon gas environment in order to prevent oxidation of Cu-NPs. (b) SEM image of large few-layer graphene (FLG) fillers with the lateral dimensions in the range of ≈15–25 μm. (c) Mixing FLG fillers and hardener with the prepared resin-Cu-NP mixture and vacuuming. (d) Curing the mixture in the temperature controlled oven for ≈2 h. (e) Optical image of a highly loaded composite with 15 wt% of FLG and 40 wt% Cu-NP fillers. (f) SEM image of the cross-section of the same sample demonstrating the overlapping of FLG fillers and intercalation of Cu-NPs between them. (g) Schematic of the thermal percolation network of the fillers. The Cu-NPs bridge between the FLG fillers and create thermal paths, which significantly enhance the thermal transport via the highly conductive filler. (h–j) TC of the epoxy composites with binary fillers of graphene and Cu-NPs as a function of copper mass loading fraction. (Reprinted from Barani et al.,134 copyright from 2020 Wiley-VCH.) 
It is well-known that a perfect TIM requires high TC but ultralow electrical conductivity for excellent electrical insulation. The high electrical conductivity of graphene somehow hinders the application of graphene as TIM. This can be overcome by boron nitride because boron nitride is electrical insulator with a band gap of 5.971 eV42 and comparably high TC (∼2000 W m−1 K−1).44 Therefore, along with the rapid development of 3D graphene nanofillers, more research efforts have been devoted to 3D boron nitride nanosheets (BNNS). In June 2020, Shen and Kim138 provided a comprehensive review on the polymer nanocomposites incorporated by 3D graphene and boron nitrides with tailoring TC for their applications in thermal conduction, thermal insulation and solar steam generations. Herein we review the recent new work in this direction published mainly in 2020.
Till now significant improvement has been achieved in the in-plane TC of 3D-BN/polymer composites. By contrast, low through-plane TC remains a challenge to be addressed. Most recently, Xu et al.139 reported the highest through-plane TC of 6.11 W m−1 K−1 for 3D-BN/epoxy composites at 59.43 vol% BN. The surprising high through-plane TC of 3D-BN/epoxy is comparable with that of “pea-pod-like” alumina–graphene/epoxy composite furnished by Chen et al.133 (Fig. 15d). The enhancement mechanism lies in the formation of a more effective thermal pathway induced by 3D-BN foam as in the case of 3D graphene foam in Fig. 14. The skeleton of the as-prepared 3D-BN foam is polymer free and pressure reinforced. The polymer-free 3D BN foam is in sharp contrast to previous works, where 3D interconnected filler was fabricated with polymer as supporting materials (including cellulose, PVA and gelatin). For instance, in the work of Chen et al.,140 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) was used for the construction of 3D interconnected BNNS filler skeletons before the impregnation of PDMS. The added thermally insulating PVA greatly reduces the effect of the thermally conductive skeleton, thereby attenuating the TC of the resultant composites. Most recently, Akhtar et al.141 synthesized hybrid structure of h-BN nanosheets and multi-layer graphene via chemical bonding and surface modification. The hybrid fillers were coupled by silane groups and silver (Ag) nanoparticles were grown on the interface of hybrid fillers as a bridging link. The resultant epoxy composites with 10 wt% of the hybrid filler shows a high in-plane TC of 5.4 W m−1 K−1, 2600% higher than 0.2 W m−1 K−1 of the neat epoxy. The TC enhancement is related to the homogeneous dispersion of the functionalized filler and stable hybrid structure of h-BN nanosheets and graphene induced by Ag nanoparticles. This study confirms that manipulating interfacial connection between hybrid fillers is an effective strategy in improving the TC of polymer composites. Similar to the work by Akhtar et al.,141 Meng et al.142 synthesized thermally conductive nanocomposites films with adjustable electrical conductivity by assembling graphene oxide (GO) and h-BN, which are dispersed in cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) (see Fig. 17a). In the self-assembly process, CNC not only acts as a dispersant for h-BN nanosheets, but also forms chiral-structured connection between h-BN and GO, which facilitate the formation of conductive network and hence improve the TC of the composite film significantly. Furthermore, the TC and electrical conductivity of the composite (BN/GO/CNC) film can be tuned by adopting different ratios of GO to h-BN with an appropriate reduction procedure. When the BN/GO/CNC (mass ratio 76/5/19) film was reduced by hydrazine, it is thermally conductive with a TC of 107.6 W m−1 K−1 yet electrically insulating with electric resistivity over 109 Ω cm as shown in Fig. 17b and c. When the RGO/BN/carbonized CNC nanorods (mass ratio 7.5/4.0/1.0) film was annealed at 1500 °C, it is thermally conductive and electrically conductive. The TC and electrical conductivity of this film is up to 2039.7 W m−1 K−1 and 1930.5 S cm−1 as shown in Fig. 17d and e. The TC enhancement of the film was originated from the 3D h-BN–RGO interconnected conductive structures. The tuneable electrical property was realized by changing the fraction of BN/CNC and choosing the reduction method. The tuneable thermal and electrical conductivities will endow the nanocomposites with wider applications in electric heating and heat removal of chips or LED lights. Similarly, enhanced through-plane TC was achieved for cellulose nanofiber (CNF) film reinforced by a hybrid filler comprising of BN and aluminium nitride (AlN).143 The TC increased from 0.5 W m−1 K−1 (neat CNF film) to 5.93 W m−1 K−1 (50 wt% filler loading) due to the positive effects of the hybrid fillers. The hybrid fillers not only disperse better in CNF matrix with improved interfacial adhesion between the filler and matrix via hydrogen bonding, they also assist in the formation of heat-transfer paths along the through-plane direction. For easy reference, the in-plane and through-plane TC of the abovementioned polymer composites reinforced by 2D and 3D fillers are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for assembly of two groups of nanocomposite film. In path A, a thermally conductive yet electrically insulating BN/RGO/CNC film was prepared, where h-BN was used as the matrix and hydrazine reduction was applied. In path B, a thermally and electrically conductive RGO/BN/CNR film was fabricated, where RGO was used as the matrix and high temperature annealing was applied to carbonize GO and CNC. (b and c) Thermal and electrical conductivity of BN/RGO/CNC nanocomposite films; (d and e) thermal and electrical performance of RGO/BN/CNR nanocomposite films (reprinted from Meng et al.,142 copyright from 2020 Elsevier). 
Table 1 Thermal conductivity of different 2D and 3D fillers/polymer composites




Filler type
Filler loading
Matrix
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Ref.


In-plane
Through-plane





a PC: polycarbonate.
b PVDF: polyvinylidene fluoride.
c NS: naphthalenesulfonate.





Orderly BNNS
18.5 vol%
PCa
3.09


Sun et al.114


Densely packed BN
44 vol%
Epoxy


9
Yu et al.115


Graphdiyne
1 wt%
PVDFb
3.86
—
Wang et al.121


3DGF
0.14 vol% (∼0.27 wt%)
Epoxy
0.52
—
Zhou et al.129


3DGF
8.3 wt%
Epoxy
8.8
—
Shen et al.128


Gr@NSc
10 wt%
PVA
13.8
0.6
Zhuang et al.144


Alumina/Gr
42.4/12.1 wt%
Epoxy
33.4
13.3
Chen et al.133


Cu-NPs/Gr
35 wt%/40 wt%
Epoxy
13.5 ± 1.6
—
Barani et al.134


3D BN
59.43 vol%
Epoxy
—
6.11
Xu et al.139


BN/Gr/Ag-NPs
10 wt%
Epoxy
5.4
—
Akhtar et al.141


3D BN/Gr
—
Cellulose nanocrystal
107.6
—
Meng et al.142


BN/AlN
50 wt%
Cellulose nanofiber
5.93
—
Lee and Kim143




6. Conclusion and perspectives
In this review, we have summarized the recent development of 1D and 2D nanomaterials made of carbon, boron and nitrogen, and their 3D nanostructures as well as the available polymer composites. We focused on the thermal conductivities of new 2D nanomaterials beyond graphene. These 2D materials have similar structure to graphene. The practical applications of these nanomaterials and their 3D structures in polymer composites for TIMs have also been reviewed. Developing new materials with tailored TC for thermal management applications remains one of the most important research areas, which advances the research landscape by discovering more new 2D materials as well as designing more novel 3D structures. Though significant progress has been made on these two lines of research, more works are expected in the following directions:
(1) To obtain TIMs with high TC and low compressive modulus. Though the hybrid filler of graphene and metal nanoparticles (such as copper and Ag) can boost the TC of the polymer composites significantly, it simultaneously increases their stiffness, giving rise to more packaging difficulty and eventually high interfacial contact thermal resistance under normal packaging conditions. For high heat transfer efficiency, soft TIMs are required to possess not only high TC but also low compressive modulus. Therefore, future research on TIMs shall focus on how to achieve good compressibility while maintain high TC.
(2) To obtain TIMs with high TC and light weight. In addition to high TC, advanced TIMs shall be strong yet light-weighted. Graphyne,145 graphdiyne146 and C2N50 with low density and high porosity will be better fillers than graphene in this aspect. However, they are weaker than graphene in strength and thus the resultant composite will possess lower compressive modulus. More experimental and theoretical works are needed to realize their potentials fully.
(3) The application of thermally conductive graphene and other 2D nanomaterials in modern devices ensure efficient heat dissipation. Most of the current researches put emphasis on the TC enhancement (in other words, quick heat removal) while ignoring the reuse of the waste heat. If the heat removed by the TIMs can be captured and reused, it will provide another solution for energy harvest, which is of great significance in saving energy. However, it remains a formidable challenge for a long period since efficient heat removal and waste heat recovery are two conflicting processes that is hard to be achieved simultaneously.
(4) Machine learning (ML) has attracted intensive attention in the computational material community around the world. ML is a powerful tool to show new insights from large data sets and to gain desired data more efficiently. Researchers in computational material start to use ML to predict the material properties and design new structures. In the search of new fillers with high TC, MD or DFT simulations usually demand intensive computation to characterize a variety of intricate parameters, which are also beyond the scope of experiments. Therefore, ML will be a cost-effective alternative to MD (or DFT) and experiments in exploiting new fillers for thermal manage applications. More and more researches using ML are appearing and will bloom in near future. To facilitate the data training in ML, we can either utilize the available data in the literature directly or obtain new data by experiments and MD (or DFT).
(5) This review focuses on the intrinsic TC of the newly developed 2D nanomaterials, which is dominated by the design of materials and structures. The TC of the new 2D nanomaterials can also be controlled by extrinsic fields, such as strain engineering13,33,96,147 and substrate modification148,149 as the previous works for various nanomaterials. It is expected that these two techniques can be extended to the investigation of the new 2D nanomaterials reviewed in this work.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Y. Zhang and J. Ma acknowledge the financial supports from the Australian Research Council Grant under Linkage Project scheme (LP180100005).
References
H. Chen, V. V. Ginzburg, J. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Du and B. Chen, Thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites: Fundamentals and applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 59, 41–85 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasher, Thermal interface materials: historical perspective, status, and future directions, Proc. IEEE, 2006, 94, 1571–1585 CAS .
A. A. Balandin, Phononics of Graphene and Related Materials, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(5), 5170–5178 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Shahil and A. A. Balandin, Graphene-multilayer graphene nanocomposites as highly efficient thermal interface materials, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(2), 861–867 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Superior Thermal Conductivity of Single-Layer Graphene, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6(3), 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bao, J. Chen, X. Gu and B. Cao, A Review of Simulation Methods in Micro/Nanoscale Heat Conduction, ES Energy Environ., 2018, 1, 16–55 Search PubMed .
G. Qin and M. Hu, Accelerating evaluation of converged lattice thermal conductivity, npj Comput. Mater., 2018, 4, 3 CrossRef .
N. M. Wu Li, L. Lindsay, D. A. Broido, D. A. Stewart and N. A. Katcho, Thermal conductivity of diamond nanowires from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 195436 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. Carrete, N. Katcho and N. Mingo, A solver of the Boltzmann transport equation for phonons, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2014, 185, 1747–1758 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Q. X. Pei, C. M. Wang and Y. Xiang, Thermal conductivity of defective graphene, Phys. Lett. A, 2012, 376(47–48), 3668–3672 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, Y. Zhang, J. M. Bell, Y.-W. Mai and Y. Gu, Structure-mediated thermal transport of monolayer graphene allotropes nanoribbons, Carbon, 2014, 77, 416–423 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Zhang, Q.-X. Pei, J.-W. Jiang, N. Wei and Y.-W. Zhang, Thermal conductivities of single- and multi-layer phosphorene: a molecular dynamics study, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(1), 483–491 RSC .
B. Mortazavi, G. Cuniberti and T. Rabczuk, Mechanical properties and thermal conductivity of graphitic carbon nitride: A molecular dynamics study, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2015, 99, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wu, V. Varshney, J. Lee, Y. S. Pang, A. K. Roy and T. F. Luo, How to Characterize thermal transport capability of 2D materials fairly? – Sheet thermal conductance and the choice of thickness, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2017, 669, 233–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Zhang, Q.-X. Pei, Y. Cheng, Y.-W. Zhang and X. Zhang, Thermal conductivity of penta-graphene: the role of chemical functionalization, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 137, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Schelling, S. R. Phillpot and P. Keblinski, Comparison of atomic-level simulation methods for computing thermal conductivity, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65(14), 144306 CrossRef .
Z. Ye, B. Cao and Z. Guo, High and anisotropic thermal conductivity of body-centered tetragonal C4 calculated using molecular dynamics, Carbon, 2014, 66, 567–575 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Fitzgibbons, M. Guthrie, E. S. Xu, V. H. Crespi, S. K. Davidowski, G. D. Cody, N. Alem and J. V. Badding, Benzene-derived carbon nanothreads, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(1), 43–47 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bao, C. Shao, S. Luo and M. Hu, Enhancement of interfacial thermal transport by carbon nanotube-graphene junction, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 053524 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, M. Hu and D. Tang, Thermal rectification at silicon/horizontally aligned carbon nanotube interfaces, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 194307 CrossRef .
H. F. Zhan, G. Zhang, V. B. C. Tan, Y. Cheng, J. M. Bell, Y. W. Zhang and Y. T. Gu, From brittle to ductile: a structure dependent ductility of diamond nanothread, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(21), 11177–11184 RSC .
H. Zhan, G. Zhang, V. B. C. Tan, Y. Cheng, J. M. Bell, Y.-W. Zhang and Y. Gu, Diamond Nanothread as a New Reinforcement for Nanocomposites, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(29), 5279–5283 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang, V. B. C. Tan, J. M. Bell and Y. Gu, Thermal conductivity of a new carbon nanotube analog: The diamond nanothread, Carbon, 2016, 98, 232–237 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, Y. Zhang, J. M. Bell and Y. Gu, Suppressed Thermal Conductivity of Bilayer Graphene with Vacancy-Initiated Linkages, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(4), 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, Y. Zhang, C. Yang, G. Zhang and Y. Gu, Graphene helicoid as novel nanospring, Carbon, 2017, 120, 258–264 CrossRef CAS .

          H. F. Zhan and Y. T. Gu, Thermal Conductivity of Diamond Nanothread, Elsevier Science Bv, Amsterdam,  2017, pp. 185–204 Search PubMed .
H. F. Zhan, G. Zhang, V. B. C. Tan, Y. Cheng, J. M. Bell, Y. W. Zhang and Y. T. Gu, Diamond Nanothread as a New Reinforcement for Nanocomposites, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(29), 5279–5283 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Zhan, G. Zhang, V. B. C. Tan and Y. T. Gu, The best features of diamond nanothread for nanofibre applications, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 8 CrossRef .
H. Zhan, G. Zhang, X. Zhuang, R. Timon and Y. Gu, Low interfacial thermal resistance between crossed ultra-thin carbon nanothreads, Carbon, 2020, 165, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhan, G. Zhang, J. M. Bell, V. B. C. Tan and Y. Gu, High density mechanical energy storage with carbon nanothread bundle, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–11 CrossRef .
P. Wang, H. Zhan and Y. Gu, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Chiral Carbon Nanothread Bundles for Nanofiber Applications, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(10), 10218–10225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xue, Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. W. Jiang, Y. Y. Zhang and N. Wei, Strain engineering for thermal conductivity of diamond nanothread forests, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52(8), 8 CrossRef .
X. Cheng and X. Wang, Thermal transport in C3N nanotube: a comparative study with carbon nanotube, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30(25), 255401 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. R. Elapolu, A. Tabarraei, A. Reihani and A. Ramazani, Phononic thermal transport properties of C3N nanotubes, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 035705 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, H. Zhan, Y. Zhu, H. Wu and Y. Gu, Mechanical properties of penta-graphene nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(17), 9642–9647 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Chen, Z.-X. Xie, Y. Zhang, Y.-X. Deng, T.-H. Zou, J. Liu and K.-Q. Chen, Highly efficient thermal rectification in carbon/boron nitride heteronanotubes, Carbon, 2019, 148, 532–539 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, H. L. Kagdada, P. K. Jha, P. Spiewak and K. J. Kurzydlowski, Thermal transport properties of boron nitride based materials: A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 120, 20 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Ma and M. Sun, Graphene, hexagonal boron nitride, and their heterostructures: properties and applications, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(27), 16801–16822 RSC .
X. K. Chen and K. Q. Chen, Thermal transport of carbon nanomaterials, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 32(15), 153002 CrossRef .
X. Xu, J. Chen and B. Li, Phonon thermal conduction in novel 2D materials, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28(48), 483001 CrossRef .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and H. Kanda, Direct-bandgap properties and evidence for ultraviolet lasing of hexagonal boron nitride single crystal, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3(6), 404–409 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, J. C. Park, S. J. Yun, H. Kim, D. H. Luong, S. M. Kim, S. H. Choi, W. Yang, J. Kong, K. K. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Large-Area Monolayer Hexagonal Boron Nitride on Pt Foil, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(8), 8520–8528 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin and J. W. Connell, Advances in 2D boron nitride nanostructures: nanosheets, nanoribbons, nanomeshes, and hybrids with graphene, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(22), 6908–6939 RSC .
K. Huang, J. X. Liu, L. F. Tan, J. L. Zuo and L. Fu, Ultrahigh temperature graphene molecular heater, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(6), 1701299 CrossRef .
G. Algara-Siller, N. Severin, S. Y. Chong, T. Björkman, R. G. Palgrave, A. Laybourn, M. Antonietti, Y. Z. Khimyak, A. V. Krasheninnikov, J. P. Rabe and U. Kaiser, Triazine-based graphitic carbon nitride: a two-dimensional semiconductor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(29), 7450–7455 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Graphitic carbon nitride materials: Controllable synthesis and applications in fuel cells and photocatalysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(5), 6717–6731 RSC .
A. Rajabpour, S. Bazrafshan and S. Volz, Carbon-nitride 2D nanostructures: thermal conductivity and interfacial thermal conductance with the silica substrate, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21(5), 2507–2512 RSC .
S. M. Hatam-Lee, A. Rajabpour and S. Volz, Thermal conductivity of graphene polymorphs and compounds: From C3N to graphdiyne lattices, Carbon, 2020, 161, 816–826 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. M. Jung, D. Kim, F. Li, M. S. Lah, N. Park, H. J. Shin, J. H. Oh and J. B. Baek, Two-dimensional polyaniline (C3N) from carbonized organic single crystals in solid state, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113(27), 7414–7419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I. Y. Jeon, S. M. Jung, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. Y. Bae, S. D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H. J. Shin and J. B. Baek, Nitrogenated holey two-dimensional structures, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6486 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Yang, W. Li, C. C. Ye, G. Wang, H. Tian, C. Zhu, P. He, G. Q. Ding, X. M. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, Z. H. Kang and M. H. Jiang, C3N-A 2D Crystalline, Hole-Free, Tunable-Narrow-Bandgap Semiconductor with Ferromagnetic Properties, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(16), 1605625 CrossRef .
T. Ouyang, H. Xiao, C. Tang, X. Zhang, M. Hu and J. Zhong, First-principles study of thermal transport in nitrogenated holey graphene, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 045709 CrossRef .
T. Zhang and L. Zhu, Giant reduction of thermal conductivity in a two-dimensional nitrogenated holey C2N nanosheet, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1757–1761 RSC .
B. Mortazavi, O. Rahaman, T. Rabczuk and L. F. C. Pereira, Thermal conductivity and mechanical properties of nitrogenated holey graphene, Carbon, 2016, 106, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Hong, D. Ma and J. Zhang, Molecular dynamics study of thermal transport in a nitrogenated holey graphene bilayer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5119–5127 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. C. Zhang and X. C. Zeng, Monolayer and bilayer polyaniline C3N: two-dimensional semiconductors with high thermal conductivity, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(9), 4301–4310 RSC .
M. An, L. Li, S. Hu, Z. Ding, X. Yu, B. Demir, N. Yang, W. Ma and X. Zhang, Mass difference and polarization lead to low thermal conductivity of graphene-like carbon nitride (C3N), Carbon, 2020, 162, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Li, H. Pan, Y. Gao and M. Sun, Comparative investigation of the mechanical, electrical and thermal transport properties in graphene-like C3B and C3N, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 126(23), 234302 CrossRef .
X. Kan, Y. Ban, C. Wu, Q. Pan, H. Liu, J. Song, Z. Zuo, Z. Li and Y. Zhao, Interfacial Synthesis of Conjugated Two-Dimensional N-Graphdiyne, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(1), 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mortazavi, M. Makaremi, M. Shahrokhi, Z. Fan and T. Rabczuk, N-graphdiyne two-dimensional nanomaterials: Semiconductors with low thermal conductivity and high stretchability, Carbon, 2018, 137, 57–67 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mortazavi, M. Shahrokhi, X. Zhuang and T. Rabczuk, Boron–graphdiyne: a superstretchable semiconductor with low thermal conductivity and ultrahigh capacity for Li, Na and Ca ion storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(23), 11022–11036 RSC .
S. Beniwal, J. Hooper, D. P. Miller, P. S. Costa, G. Chen, S. Y. Liu, P. A. Dowben, E. C. H. Sykes, E. Zurek and A. Enders, Graphene-like Boron-Carbon-Nitrogen Monolayers, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(3), 2486–2493 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Zhang, Q.-X. Pei, H.-Y. Liu and N. Wei, Thermal conductivity of a h-BCN monolayer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(40), 27326–27331 RSC .
R. Attri, S. Roychowdhury, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Low thermal conductivity of 2D borocarbonitride nanosheets, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 282, 121105 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, X. J. Song, H. W. Du, Y. F. Nie, Y. B. Chen, Q. Q. Ji, J. Y. Sun, Y. L. Yang, Y. F. Zhang and Z. F. Liu, Temperature-triggered chemical switching growth of in-plane and vertically stacked graphene-boron nitride heterostructures, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6835 CrossRef CAS .
Q. C. Li, M. X. Liu, Y. F. Zhang and Z. F. Liu, Hexagonal Boron Nitride-Graphene Heterostructures: Synthesis and Interfacial Properties, Small, 2016, 12(1), 32–50 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. L. Ma, G. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. J. Gong, S. D. Lei, X. B. Yang, J. N. Zhang, J. J. Yu, K. P. Hackenberg, A. Babakhani, J. C. Idrobo, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, In-plane heterostructures of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride with controlled domain sizes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8(2), 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Liu, G. Zhang and Y. W. Zhang, Topological Defects at the Graphene/h-BN interface Abnormally Enhance Its Thermal Conductance, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(8), 4954–4959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajabpour, S. M. V. Allaei and F. Kowsary, Interface thermal resistance and thermal rectification in hybrid graphene-graphane nanoribbons: A nonequilibrium molecular dynamics study, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99(5), 051917 CrossRef .
H. F. Zhan, Y. Y. Zhang, J. M. Bell, Y. W. Mai and Y. T. Gu, Structure-mediated thermal transport of monolayer graphene allotropes nanoribbons, Carbon, 2014, 77, 416–423 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guerrero-Bermea, L. P. Rajukumar, A. Dasgupta, Y. Lei, Y. Hashimoto, S. Sepulveda-Guzman, R. Cruz-Silva, M. Endo and M. Terrones, Two-dimensional and three-dimensional hybrid assemblies based on graphene oxide and other layered structures: A carbon science perspective, Carbon, 2017, 125, 437–453 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Chen, M. Pang, T. Chen, D. Du and K.-Q. Chen, Thermal Rectification in Asymmetric Graphene/Hexagonal Boron Nitride van der Waals Heterostructures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(13), 15517–15526 CrossRef CAS .
X.-K. Chen, J. Liu, Z.-X. Xie, Y. Zhang, Y.-X. Deng and K.-Q. Chen, A Local Resonance Mechanism for Thermal Rectification in Pristine/Branched Graphene Nanoribbon Junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 121906 CrossRef .
X.-K. Chen, J. Liu, Z.-H. Peng, D. Du and K.-Q. Chen, A wave-dominated heat transport mechanism for negative differential thermal resistance in graphene/hexagonal boron nitride heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 091907 CrossRef .
X.-K. Chen, Z.-X. Xie, W.-X. Zhou, L.-M. Tang and K.-Q. Chen, Phonon wave interference in graphene and boron nitride superlattice, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 023101 CrossRef .
S. Lu and A. J. H. McGaughey, Thermal conductance of graphene/hexagonal boron nitride heterostructures, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121(11), 115103 CrossRef .
A. Kinaci, J. B. Haskins, C. Sevik and T. Cagin, Thermal conductivity of BN-C nanostructures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86(11), 115410 CrossRef .
T. S. Zhu and E. Ertekin, Phonon transport on two-dimensional graphene/boron nitride superlattices, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90(19), 195209 CrossRef .
I. M. Felix and L. F. C. Pereira, Thermal Conductivity of Graphene-hBN Superlattice Ribbons, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2737 CrossRef .
C. W. Chang, D. Okawa, A. Majumdar and A. Zettl, Solid-state thermal rectifier, Science, 2006, 314(5802), 1121–1124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Y. Chen and X. L. Ruan, Tunable thermal rectification in graphene nanoribbons through defect engineering: a molecular dynamics study, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100(16), 163101 CrossRef .
H. Tian, D. Xie, Y. Yang, T. L. Ren, G. Zhang, Y. F. Wang, C. J. Zhou, P. G. Peng, L. G. Wang and L. T. Liu, A Novel Solid-State Thermal Rectifier Based On Reduced Graphene Oxide, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 523 CrossRef .
N. Yang, G. Zhang and B. W. Li, Thermal rectification in asymmetric graphene ribbons, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95(3), 033107 CrossRef .
N. Yang, G. Zhang and B. W. Li, Carbon nanocone: A promising thermal rectifier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(24), 243111 CrossRef .
W. R. Zhong, W. H. Huang, X. R. Deng and B. Q. Ai, Thermal rectification in thickness-asymmetric graphene nanoribbons, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99(19), 193104 CrossRef .
X. K. Chen, Z. X. Xie, W. X. Zhou, L. M. Tang and K. Q. Chen, Thermal rectification and negative differential thermal resistance behaviors in graphene/hexagonal boron nitride heterojunction, Carbon, 2016, 100, 492–500 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Ye and B. Y. Cao, Thermal rectification at the bimaterial nanocontact interface, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(32), 11480–11487 RSC .
G. Zhang and H. S. Zhang, Thermal conduction and rectification in few-layer graphene Y Junctions, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(11), 4604–4607 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Q.-X. Pei, C.-M. Wang, C. Yang and Y.-W. Zhang, Interfacial Thermal Conductance and Thermal Rectification of Hexagonal BCnN/Graphene In-Plane Heterojunctions, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(39), 22783–22789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, Z. Xu and X. He, Thermal energy transport across the graphene/C3N interface, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 157, 119954 CrossRef CAS .
K. Einalipour Eshkalak, S. Sadeghzadeh and F. Molaei, Interfacial Thermal Resistance Mechanism for the Polyaniline (C3N)–Graphene Heterostructure, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(26), 14316–14326 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Felix and L. F. C. Pereira, Suppression of coherent thermal transport in quasiperiodic graphene-hBN superlattice ribbons, Carbon, 2020, 160, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Wang, Y. Hong, Z. Wang and J. Zhang, Coherent and incoherent phonon transport in a graphene and nitrogenated holey graphene superlattice, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(35), 24240–24248 RSC .
X. Mu, T. Zhang, D. B. Go and T. Luo, Coherent and incoherent phonon thermal transport in isotopically modified graphene superlattices, Carbon, 2015, 83, 208–216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raeisi, S. Ahmadi and A. Rajabpour, Modulated thermal conductivity of 2D hexagonal boron arsenide: a strain engineering study, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(45), 21799–21810 RSC .

          C. Shi and X. Luo, Characterization of Lattice Thermal Transport in Two-Dimensional BAs, BP, and BSb: A First-Principles Study, 2018, arXiv:1811.05597.
S. H. Zhang, J. Zhou, Q. Wang, X. S. Chen, Y. Kawazoe and P. Jena, Penta-graphene: A new carbon allotrope, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112(8), 2372–2377 CrossRef CAS .
F. Q. Wang, J. B. Yu, Q. Wang, Y. Kawazoe and P. Jena, Lattice thermal conductivity of penta-graphene, Carbon, 2016, 105, 424–429 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Liu, G. Z. Qin, Y. Lin and M. Hu, Disparate Strain Dependent Thermal Conductivity of Two-dimensional Penta-Structures, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(6), 3831–3842 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wu, V. Varshney, J. Lee, T. Zhang, J. L. Wohlwend, A. K. Roy and T. F. Luo, Hydrogenation of Penta-Graphene Leads to Unexpected Large Improvement in Thermal Conductivity, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(6), 3925–3935 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Pei, Z. Sha, Y. Zhang and H. Gao, Remarkable enhancement in failure stress and strain of penta-graphene via chemical functionalization, Nano Res., 2017, 10(11), 3865–3874 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. d. C. Ramiro Marcelo dos Santos, R. T. de Sousa Jr, W. F. Giozza and L. A. Ribeiro Jr, Tuning
magnetic properties of penta-graphene bilayers through doping with boron, nitrogen, and oxygen, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 16748 CrossRef .
J. Sun, Y. Guo, Q. Wang and Y. Kawazoe, Thermal transport properties of penta-graphene with grain boundaries, Carbon, 2019, 145, 445–451 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Yang, Y.-W. Mai and Y. Zhang, Effect of non-covalent functionalisation on thermal and mechanical properties of graphene-polymer nanocomposites, Carbon, 2016, 102, 311–318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Yang, Q.-X. Pei and Y. Zhang, Some Aspects of Thermal Transport across the Interface between Graphene and Epoxy in Nanocomposites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(12), 8272–8279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. F. Zhan, Y. Xiang, C. Yang, C. M. Wang and Y. Y. Zhang, Effect of Covalent Functionalization on Thermal Transport across Graphene-Polymer Interfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(22), 12731–12738 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. F. Zhan, C. Yang, Y. Xiang and Y. Y. Zhang, Formation of carbon nanoscrolls from graphene nanoribbons: A molecular dynamics study, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2015, 96, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, J. Hansson, Y. Liu, S. Chen, A. Zehri, M. K. Samani, N. Wang, Y. Ni, Y. Zhang, Z.-B. Zhang, Q. Wang, M. Li, H. Lu, M. Sledzinska, C. M. S. Torres, S. Volz, A. A. Balandin, X. Xu and J. Liu, Graphene related materials for thermal management, 2D Mater., 2019, 7(1), 012001 CrossRef .
X. M. Yang, X. Wang, W. C. Wang, Y. Fu and Q. Xie, Atomic-scale insights into interface thermal resistance between epoxy and boron nitride in nanocomposites, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 159, 120105 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Zhu, J. C. Li, J. M. Chen, H. G. Song and H. Y. Zhang, Improving thermal conductivity of epoxy resin by filling boron nitride nanomaterials: A molecular dynamics investigation, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2019, 164, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, B. Duan, L. Li, B. Xie, M. Y. Huang and X. B. Luo, Thermal Conductivity of Polymer-Based Composites with Magnetic Aligned Hexagonal Boron Nitride Platelets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(23), 13000–13006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, X. Y. Huang, B. Sun, Y. X. Wang, Y. K. Zhu and P. K. Jiang, Vertically Aligned and Interconnected Boron Nitride Nanosheets for Advanced Flexible Nanocomposite Thermal Interface Materials, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(36), 30909–30917 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, J. J. Sun, X. L. Zeng, P. Chen, J. S. Qian, R. Xia and R. Sun, Hot-pressing induced orientation of boron nitride in polycarbonate composites with enhanced thermal conductivity, Composites, Part A, 2018, 110, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Yu, J. Zhang, Z. Li, W. Tian, L. J. Wang, J. Luo, Q. L. Li, X. D. Fan and Y. G. Yao, Enhanced through-plane thermal conductivity of boron nitride/epoxy composites, Composites, Part A, 2017, 98, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Li, J. M. Chen, M. X. Zhu, H. G. Song and H. Y. Zhang, Interfacial Characteristics of Boron Nitride Nanosheet/Epoxy Resin Nanocomposites: A Molecular Dynamics Simulation, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9(14), 2832 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jang, K. H. Shin, I. Yang, H. Kim, J. Kim, W. H. Kim, S. W. Jeon and J. P. Kim, Enhancement of thermal conductivity of BN/epoxy composite through surface modification with silane coupling agents, Colloids
Surf., A, 2017, 518, 64–72 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Yang, X. L. Zeng, J. B. Lu, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, Effect of chemical functionalization on the thermal conductivity of 2D hexagonal boron nitride, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113(17), 171904 CrossRef .
H. Shen, J. Guo, H. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Xu, Bioinspired Modification of h-BN for High Thermal Conductive Composite Films with Aligned Structure, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(10), 5701–5708 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, S. Han, T. Liu, J. Ma, S. Ji, J. Dai, H. Kang and J. Ma, Noncovalent Modification of Boron Nitrite Nanosheets for Thermally Conductive, Mechanically Resilient Epoxy Nanocomposites, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59(47), 20701–20710 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Wang, M. Z. Liao, L. H. Li, M. H. Li, Y. P. Chen, X. Hou, C. Yan, N. Jiang and J. H. Yu, Graphdiyne for significant thermal conductivity enhancement at ultralow mass fraction in polymer composites, 2D Mater., 2020, 7(3), 035007 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, T. Wang, L. Wang, H. Liu, X. Mai, X. Wang, N. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, Y. Lu, E. K. Wujcik and Z. Guo, Interfacially reinforced carbon fiber/epoxy composite laminates via in-situ synthesized graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), Composites, Part B, 2019, 158, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
F. An, X. Li, P. Min, H. Li, Z. Dai and Z.-Z. Yu, Highly anisotropic graphene/boron nitride hybrid aerogels with long-range ordered architecture and moderate density for highly thermally conductive composites, Carbon, 2018, 126, 119–127 CrossRef CAS .
F. An, X. Li, P. Min, P. Li, Z. Jiang and Z.-Z. Yu, Vertically Aligned High-Quality Graphene Foams for Anisotropically Conductive Polymer Composites with Ultrahigh Through-Plane Thermal Conductivities, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17383–17392 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, X. Li, P. Min, X. Chang, C. Shu, Y. Ding and Z.-Z. Yu, 3D Lamellar-Structured Graphene Aerogels for Thermal Interface Composites with High Through-Plane Thermal Conductivity and Fracture Toughness, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 22 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Three-dimensional flexible and conductive interconnected graphene networks grown by chemical vapour deposition, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, X. Sun, X. Lin, X. Shen, Y.-W. Mai and J.-K. Kim, Exceptional Electrical Conductivity and Fracture Resistance of 3D Interconnected Graphene Foam/Epoxy Composites, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(6), 5774–5783 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Liu, Y. B. He, Q. B. Zheng, Q. H. Yang, F. Y. Kang and J. K. Kim, A three-dimensional multilayer graphene web for polymer nanocomposites with exceptional transport properties and fracture resistance, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5(2), 275–284 RSC .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, X. Du, Y. Zhang, H. Zhou, H. Yuan, H.-Y. Liu and Y.-W. Mai, Facile fabrication of large 3D graphene filler modified epoxy composites with improved thermal conduction and tribological performance, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1168–1177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhu, G. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, J. Yang, J. Wang, J. Liu, X. Chen and Z. Chen, Boosting the Heat Dissipation Performance of Graphene/Polyimide Flexible Carbon Film via Enhanced Through-Plane Conductivity of 3D Hybridized Structure, Small, 2020, 16(8), e1903315 CrossRef .
W. Dai, L. Lv, J. B. Lu, H. Hou, Q. W. Yan, F. E. Alam, Y. F. Li, X. L. Zeng, J. H. Yu, Q. P. Wei, X. F. Xu, J. B. Wu, N. Jiang, S. Y. Du, R. Sun, J. B. Xu, C. P. Wong and C. T. Lin, A Paper-Like Inorganic Thermal Interface Material Composed of Hierarchically Structured Graphene/Silicon Carbide Nanorods, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(2), 1547–1554 CAS .
C.-P. Feng, L.-B. Chen, G.-L. Tian, L. Bai, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, K. Ke, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Robust polymer-based paper-like thermal interface materials with a through-plane thermal conductivity over 9 W m−1 K−1, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Chen, X. Hou, M. Z. Liao, W. Dai, Z. W. Wang, C. Yan, H. Li, C. T. Lin, N. Jiang and J. H. Yu, Constructing a “pea-pod-like” alumina-graphene binary architecture for enhancing thermal conductivity of epoxy composite, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 7 Search PubMed .
Z. Barani, A. Mohammadzadeh, A. Geremew, C. Y. Huang, D. Coleman, L. Mangolini, F. Kargar and A. A. Balandin, Thermal Properties of the Binary-Filler Hybrid Composites with Graphene and Copper Nanoparticles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30(8), 1904008 CrossRef .
S. Y. Yang, W. N. Lin, Y. L. Huang, H. W. Tien, J. Y. Wang, C. C. M. Ma, S. M. Li and Y. S. Wang, Synergetic effects of graphene platelets and carbon nanotubes on the mechanical and thermal properties of epoxy composites, Carbon, 2011, 49, 793–803 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chu, W.-s. Li, C.-c. Jia and F.-l. Tang, Thermal conductivity of composites with hybrid carbon nanotubes and graphene nanoplatelets, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 211903 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. H. Walther and P. Koumoutsakos, Covalently Bonded Graphene–Carbon Nanotube Hybrid for High-Performance Thermal Interfaces, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7539–7545 CrossRef .
X. Shen and J.-K. Kim, 3D graphene and boron nitride structures for nanocomposites with tailored thermal conductivities: recent advances and perspectives, Funct. Compos. Struct., 2020, 2(2), 022001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, R. Hu, M. Chen, J. Dong, B. Xiao, Q. Wang and H. Wang, 3D boron nitride foam filled epoxy composites with significantly enhanced thermal conductivity by a facial and scalable approach, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, X. Huang, B. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu and P. Jiang, Vertically Aligned and Interconnected Boron Nitride Nanosheets for Advanced Flexible Nanocomposite Thermal Interface Materials, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(36), 30909–30917 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Akhtar, J. S. Kim, M. A. Memon and M. M. Baloch, Hybridization of hexagonal boron nitride nanosheets and multilayer graphene: Enhanced thermal properties of epoxy composites, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 195, 108183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, J. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Li, Z. Chen, S. Liu, T. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Jiang and S. Zhu, Using cellulose nanocrystals for graphene/hexagonal boron nitride nanosheet films towards efficient thermal management with tunable electrical conductivity, Composites, Part A, 2020, 138, 106089 CrossRef .
W. Lee and J. Kim, Enhanced through-plane thermal conductivity of paper-like cellulose film with treated hybrid fillers comprising boron nitride and aluminum nitride, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 200, 108424 CrossRef .
Y. Zhuang, K. Zheng, X. Cao, Q. Fan, G. Ye, J. Lu, J. Zhang and Y. Ma, Flexible Graphene Nanocomposites with Simultaneous Highly Anisotropic Thermal and Electrical Conductivities Prepared by Engineered Graphene with Flat Morphology, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(9), 11733–11742 CrossRef CAS .
D. Malko, N. Christian, F. Viñes and A. Görling, Competition for Graphene: Graphynes with Direction-Dependent Dirac Cones, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(8), 086804 CrossRef .
M. Bartolomei, E. Carmona-Novillo, M. I. Hernández, J. Campos-Martínez, F. Pirani, G. Giorgi and K. Yamashita, Penetration Barrier of Water through Graphynes' Pores: First-Principles Predictions and Force Field Optimization, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(4), 751–755 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang and Y. W. Zhang, Strain effects on thermoelectric properties of two-dimensional materials, Mech. Mater., 2015, 91, 382–398 CrossRef .
J. Chen, G. Zhang and B. Li, Substrate coupling suppresses size dependence of thermal conductivity in supported graphene, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 532–536 RSC .
N. Wei, S. C. Li, Y. Y. Zhang, J. G. Chen, Y. Chen and J. H. Zhao, Thermal rectification of graphene on substrates with inhomogeneous stiffness, Carbon, 2019, 154, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Atomic structures of 1D nanomaterials, 2D nanomaterials and 3D nanostructures reviewed in this paper.	 
	(1)
	(2)
J = −κ∇T	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  (a) The simulation model used in NEMD. (b) A typical temperature profile in the heat flux direction of penta-graphene obtained from the simulations Zhang et al.16 (copyright permission from 2017 Elsevier).	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram DNT and its forest structure;33 (b) TC plotted as a function of DNT length and constituent unit cells; the TC normalized by its respective minima shows a general valley trend;24 (c) strain engineering on the TC of DNT forest in the perpendicular direction and in the thread direction.33 (Copyright from 2016 Elsevier and 2019 IOP Publishing.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Atomistic structure of 1D nanomaterials (a) C3N nanotube (C3NNT);34 (b) CNT/h-BN heteronanotubes (CBNNTs);37 (c) penta-graphene nanotubes36 (copyright from 2019 IOP Publishing, 2019 Elsevier, 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of monolayer carbon nitride structures (red and blue balls represent carbon and nitrogen atoms, respectively)49 (copyright from 2020 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 6  Atomic structures of various N-graphdiyne (a); (b) C12B2 B-graphdiyne (Mortazavi et al.61,62) (copyright from 2018 Elsevier, 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Atomistic structures of three different h-BCN models; (b) TC of three types of h-BCN structures along the zigzag and armchair directions; (c) relative TC of h-BCN_v3 monolayer as a function of strain. The TC is normalized by that at strain-free state; (d) relative TC of h-BCN as a function of temperature. (Zhang et al.64) (copyright from 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–c) Simulation models of BCnN/Gr heterostructures, where the subscript n denotes the number of carbon atoms; n = 0, 1, 2 representing h-BN, BCN and BC2N, respectively. (d) Temperature distribution along the heat flux direction in the h-BN/Gr heterostructure (δT = 100 K). Temperature jump ΔT is determined indirectly by the linear fitting and extrapolation from the temperature profiles in BCnN and graphene.90 (e) TR factor at two different temperature bias between the hot and cold regions. (f) Relationship between ITC and coverage of vacancy defect for three BCnN/Gr heterostructures.90 (Reprint from Zhang et al.,90 copyright from 2018 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Unit cell of superlattices following the Fibonacci sequence up to fifth generation (5G). Domains of types A and B correspond h-BN and graphene. (b) Intrinsic thermal conductivity versus domain length. The valley present in some of the curves is associated with the crossover from the coherent to the incoherent heat transfer regime, and it disappears from 7G onwards. (Reprint from Felix and Pereira,93 copyright from 2020 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Strain-modulated lattice TC of (a) penta-Gr, (b) penta-SiC2, and (c) penta-SiN2. L indicates the system size and L = ∞ refers to the infinite size. The same legends for length are used for all figures. (inset) The low buckled structure of penta-SiN2 for strain less than 9% and the perfectly planar structure for strain larger than 9%. (d) TC as a function of length: comparison between graphene versus hydrogenated graphene (100%) and (e) PG versus HPG (e). (a–c reprinted from Liu et al.,100 d and e, reprinted from Wu et al.,101 copyright from 2016 American Chemistry Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Thermal conductivity of pure epoxy (pureEP), BN nanoparticle (BNNP)/EP, BN nanotube (BNNT)/EP and BN nanosheet (BNNS)/EP at the filler volume fraction of 3%.111 (Copyright from 2019 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Simulation model of graphene/epoxy composites and the steady state temperature profile in the system, (b) the interface thermal resistance RI between graphene and epoxy as a function of graphene layer number n, (c) simulation model of h-BN/epoxy composite and the steady state temperature profile of the system, and (d) the interface thermal resistance RI between h-BN and epoxy as a function of hBN layer number n. (Adapted with permission from Yang et al.,110 copyright from 2020 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 13  The in-plane TC of neat PVDF and PVDF/GDY composite with 1 wt% of GDY as functions of (a) temperature and (b) heating and cooling cycles. (Adapted with permission from Wang et al.,121 copyright from 2020 IOP publishing.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) CVD growth of graphene films (Ni–G, b) using a nickel foam (Ni foam, a) as a 3D scaffold template. (c) An as-grown graphene film after coating a thin PMMA supporting layer (Ni–G-PMMA). (d) A GF coated with PMMA (GF-PMMA) after etching the nickel foam with hot HCl (or FeCl3/HCl) solution. (e) A free-standing GF after dissolving the PMMA layer with acetone. (f) A GF/PDMS composite after infiltration of PDMS into a GF. All the scale bars are 500 μm. (a–f reprinted from Chen et al.,126 copyright from 2011 Springer Nature.) (g) Comparisons of thermal conductivity enhancement efficiency of carbon nano-fillers to epoxy. (h) Schematic representation of 3DGF network in EP. The graphene foam network structure (represented by red colour dashed lines) (g and h reprinted from Zhou et al.,129 copyright from 2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of graphene hybrid paper with silicon source. (Reprinted from Dai et al.,131 copyright from 2019 American Chemistry Society.) (b and c) Thermal diffusivity, thermal conductivity and thermal conductivity enhancement of pure epoxy, R-AGE, AGE (⊥) and AGE (‖). (d) Heat transport model of AG&E composite. (b–d reprinted from Chen et al.,133 copyright from 2020 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the composite preparation and sample characterization. (a) Addition of Cu-NPs to the epoxy resin and mixing them inside the glove box in argon gas environment in order to prevent oxidation of Cu-NPs. (b) SEM image of large few-layer graphene (FLG) fillers with the lateral dimensions in the range of ≈15–25 μm. (c) Mixing FLG fillers and hardener with the prepared resin-Cu-NP mixture and vacuuming. (d) Curing the mixture in the temperature controlled oven for ≈2 h. (e) Optical image of a highly loaded composite with 15 wt% of FLG and 40 wt% Cu-NP fillers. (f) SEM image of the cross-section of the same sample demonstrating the overlapping of FLG fillers and intercalation of Cu-NPs between them. (g) Schematic of the thermal percolation network of the fillers. The Cu-NPs bridge between the FLG fillers and create thermal paths, which significantly enhance the thermal transport via the highly conductive filler. (h–j) TC of the epoxy composites with binary fillers of graphene and Cu-NPs as a function of copper mass loading fraction. (Reprinted from Barani et al.,134 copyright from 2020 Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for assembly of two groups of nanocomposite film. In path A, a thermally conductive yet electrically insulating BN/RGO/CNC film was prepared, where h-BN was used as the matrix and hydrazine reduction was applied. In path B, a thermally and electrically conductive RGO/BN/CNR film was fabricated, where RGO was used as the matrix and high temperature annealing was applied to carbonize GO and CNC. (b and c) Thermal and electrical conductivity of BN/RGO/CNC nanocomposite films; (d and e) thermal and electrical performance of RGO/BN/CNR nanocomposite films (reprinted from Meng et al.,142 copyright from 2020 Elsevier).	 



Orderly BNNS	18.5 vol%	PCa	3.09	
	Sun et al.114
Densely packed BN	44 vol%	Epoxy	
	9	Yu et al.115
Graphdiyne	1 wt%	PVDFb	3.86	—	Wang et al.121
3DGF	0.14 vol% (∼0.27 wt%)	Epoxy	0.52	—	Zhou et al.129
3DGF	8.3 wt%	Epoxy	8.8	—	Shen et al.128
Gr@NSc	10 wt%	PVA	13.8	0.6	Zhuang et al.144
Alumina/Gr	42.4/12.1 wt%	Epoxy	33.4	13.3	Chen et al.133
Cu-NPs/Gr	35 wt%/40 wt%	Epoxy	13.5 ± 1.6	—	Barani et al.134
3D BN	59.43 vol%	Epoxy	—	6.11	Xu et al.139
BN/Gr/Ag-NPs	10 wt%	Epoxy	5.4	—	Akhtar et al.141
3D BN/Gr	—	Cellulose nanocrystal	107.6	—	Meng et al.142
BN/AlN	50 wt%	Cellulose nanofiber	5.93	—	Lee and Kim143

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
