Influence of hole-transporting material addition on the performance of polymer solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C002771E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C002771E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1538-1543Show Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsInfluence of hole-transporting material addition on the performance of polymer solar cells

        
          
            Minjung 
            Shin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hwajeong 
            Kim†
*, 
      
        
          
            Sungho 
            Nam
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiho 
            Park
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Youngkyoo 
            Kim
          
        
      *
      Organic Nanoelectronics Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 702-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ykimm@knu.ac.kr; khj217@knu.ac.kr;  Web: http//one.knu.ac.kr Fax: +82 53 950 6615;   Tel: +82 53 950 5616
Received 
      9th February 2010
    , Accepted 15th June 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      16th August 2010
    AbstractWe report the effect of hole-transporting material (HTM) addition on the performance of polymer solar cells based on blends of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and soluble fullerene. N,N′-Diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-[1,1′-diphenyl]-4,4′-diamine (TPD) was chosen as a HTM because it is one of the well-established HTMs despite its drawback of wide band gap (3.1 eV) for solar cell applications. Two specialized measurement systems, synchrotron radiation grazing incidence angle X-ray diffraction (GIXD) and phase-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM), were employed to understand the correlation between device performance and nanostructures of blend films. Results showed that the addition of 3–7 wt% TPD improved the short circuit current density of unannealed devices due to the improved P3HT crystallization induced by the presence of TPD molecules. Although the short circuit current density of the binary blend device was recovered to the highest value after thermal annealing, the improved fill factor of TPD-added ternary blend devices at the 3–7 wt% TPD content led to the slightly enhanced power conversion efficiency at 3 wt% TPD in spite of reduced optical absorption in the ternary blend film.

Broader context
Polymer solar cells have been highlighted due to their great potential for low-cost manufacturing of ‘all plastic solar modules’ which are recognized as one of the futuristic solar energy conversion devices. In this work, as one of the intensive efforts to improve the performance of polymer solar cells, we attempted to dope a hole-transporting molecule (HTM) into conventional polymer/fullerene films. As a result, we found that doping 3–7 wt% HTM improved the short circuit current density of unannealed solar cells. In particular, thermal annealing of devices improved fill factors and slightly enhanced power conversion efficiency at the doping concentration of 3 wt% in spite of reduced optical absorption in the HTM-doped films. Hence we expect that the present doping approach could be widely applied for various donor–acceptor combinations of organic semiconducting materials.

1. Introduction
Polymer solar cells have recently attracted great attention because of their viable potential as a low-cost energy conversion medium from solar light to electricity.1–4 The cheap fabrication of polymer solar cells can be attributed to their relatively simple device structures as well as low temperature processes (<150 °C5–7), enabling continuous wet-coating processes by utilizing roll-to-roll coating systems.8,9 In addition, the advantage of polymer solar cells reaches evolution of various solar cell products such as bendable/flexible, semi-transparent, light-weight, ultra-thin (<0.3 mm) modules, which can make new markets that conventional inorganic solar cells could not create.
Among a variety of organic materials used for polymer solar cells, regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)-propyl-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61 (PCBM) have been widely used as an active layer and understood as a reference or control for comparison of further improvement by using newly synthesized materials,2,3,5–7 even though 6–7% power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been reported by introducing polymers with narrow band gap and/or high ionization potential.10–12 In particular, it is well known that the high charge (hole or electron) carrier mobility of P3HT and PCBM is mainly responsible for the >4% PCE.13–17
However, most of these previous works have been focused on the binary blends of P3HT and PCBM so that the control window of device performances was quite limited. Recently a couple of studies have been reported on ternary blend solar cells in which conjugated polymers were added as a third component to the P3HT:PCBM blends.18,19 Interestingly, a low molecular weight (small molecule) hole-transporting material (HTM) has not been significantly tried as a third component of the active layer for P3HT:PCBM based ternary blend solar cells.
In this study, N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-[1,1′-diphenyl]-4,4′-diamine (TPD) was introduced as a third component for P3HT:PCBM based ternary blend solar cells, because TPD molecules dissolve well in chlorobenzene, which is the key solvent for high efficiency P3HT:PCBM binary blend solar cells. Here we concentrated on understanding the effect of TPD contents on the performance of solar cells. Results showed that the PCE of ternary blend solar cells was slightly improved when the TPD content was 3 wt% but it was decreased by further increasing the TPD content. To understand this trend, we measured optical absorption spectra, synchrotron radiation grazing incidence angle X-ray diffraction (GIXD), and atomic force microscopy (AFM).
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials and solution preparation
Regioregular P3HT (regioregularity = 92.2%; weight-average molecular weight = 5.6 × 104; polydispersity index = 2.32), PCBM (purity = 99.5%), TPD (purity = 99%), and chlorobenzene (purity ≥ 99.5%) were used as received from Rieke Metals (USA), Nano-C, Sigma-Aldrich Co., and Sigma-Aldrich Co., respectively (see Fig. 1a). Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (PH500) was supplied from HC Starck. The P3HT:PCBM:TPD ternary blend solutions in chlorobenzene were prepared by varying the weight percent of TPD up to 20 wt% based on the total weight of P3HT and PCBM (P3HT:PCBM = 1:0.7 by weight).
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of materials, (b) schematic illustration of P3HT:PCBM:TPD solar cell structures, and (c) flat energy band diagram of solar cells [The unit (eV) was omitted from the values]. 
2.2 Film preparation and device fabrication
To prepare blend films, indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (10 Ω/□) were patterned to obtain ITO stripes by employing photolithography-etching technique and then cleaned with acetone and isopropyl alcohol. These cleaned ITO-glasses were dried with a nitrogen flow, followed by UV-ozone treatment. Next, the PEDOT:PSS solution was spun on the ITO-glass substrates and thermally annealed at 230 °C for 15 min. On top of the annealed PEDOT:PSS layer coated substrates, the blend films were deposited by spin-coating and softbaked at 50 °C for 15 min. The thickness of all blend films was controlled to be ∼170 nm. The coated samples were loaded into a vacuum chamber system for the deposition of metal (Al) electrodes, while some of these samples were kept for other analysis. The Al top electrode (thickness = ∼100 nm) was deposited by thermal evaporation at a base pressure of ∼10−6 Torr, leading to the active area of 0.09 cm2 (Fig. 1b). Both these devices and other sets of film samples were thermally annealed at 140 °C for 30 min.
2.3 Measurements
A surface profiler (Alpha Step 200, Tencor) was used for the measurement of film thickness. The current density–voltage (J-V) characteristics of solar cells were measured using a specialized solar cell measurement system equipped with an electrometer (Keithley 2400) and a solar simulator (air mass 1.5G filter, 100 mW cm−2, Newport-Oriel). A UV-visible spectrophotometer (optizen 2120UV, Mecasys) was employed to measure the optical density of blend films coated on the PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO-glass substrates. The nanostructure of blend films was measured using a synchrotron radiation GIXD system (Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, South Korea), while the surface morphology of blend films was measured using an AFM system (Nanoscope IIIa, Digital Instruments).
3. Results and discussion
Considering the flat energy band diagram in Fig. 1c, the TPD molecule added to P3HT:PCBM blends is not expected to contribute to light-harvesting when it comes to its band gap, which is as wide as ∼3.1 eV.20 However, as shown in Fig. 2a, the short current density (JSC) of unannealed devices was increased when the TPD content was 3–7 wt%. This result may be attributed to the improved charge (hole) mobility of blend films by adding TPD molecules, as supported by the slightly higher forward dark current density for these TPD contents at 0.4–0.6 V (open circuit condition in the case of light J-V curves) (Fig. 2b). However, all P3HT:PCBM:TPD ternary blend devices exhibited lower open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) than the P3HT:PCBM binary blend device. In particular, the VOC value was almost stepwisely decreased with the TPD content, which may indicate differently evolved bulk morphology in the P3HT:PCBM:TPD ternary blend films compared to the P3HT:PCBM binary blend. In addition, we note that all unannealed devices, irrespective of TPD contents, showed a sigmoidal shape of light J-V curves which has usually been observed for unannealed P3HT:PCBM binary blend devices.5 This means that the addition of TPD molecules could not be helpful for the recovery of the poor charge transport characteristics of the unannealed P3HT:PCBM binary blend device, even though its minor contribution is noticed for the slight JSC improvement as discussed above.
 Fig. 2  Light (a) and dark (b) J-V curves of unannealed devices with P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: Inset in (b) shows the dark J-V curves in linear scale. 
After thermal annealing, as shown in Fig. 3a, the shape of light J-V curves was greatly improved for all devices. The JSC value of annealed devices was decreased as the TPD content increased, which can be attributed to the influence of wide band gap TPD molecules leading to the reduction in relative light aborption coefficient of blend films with the same thickness. However, the addition of 3 wt% TPD seems to marginally improve the FF value of binary blend device, which is supported by the slightly improved forward dark current density (88 mA cm−2 at +1 V versus 48 mA cm−2 at +1 V for the P3HT:PCBM binary device) for the device with 3 wt% TPD (Fig. 3b). In terms of rectification ratio (R), the ternary blend device with 3 wt% TPD (R = 148 at ±1 V) was apparently lower than the binary device (R = 489 at ±1 V). Interestingly, the ternary blend device with 7 wt% TPD exhibited marginally improved rectification ratio (R = 508 at ±1 V).
 Fig. 3  Light (a) and dark (b) J-V curves of annealed devices with P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: Device annealing was carried out at 140 °C for 30 min. 
As discussed in Fig. 2 and 3, the JSC value of unannealed ternary blend devices was higher than the unannealed binary blend device at the low TPD contents (< 10 wt%), whereas it was gradually decreased for the annealed ternary blend devices with increasing TPD content (Fig. 4a). In the case of VOC, the unannealed ternary blend devices exhibited almost monotonic decrease against the TPD content, whereas an increasing tendency was measured for the annealed ternary blend devices (Fig. 4b). Considering the gradual reduction in JSC value with increasing TPD content, the slightly increased VOC trend can be attributed to the effect of highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy of TPD (5.7 eV), as shown in Fig. 1c. However, the limited solar light absorption of TPD molecules owing to its wide band gap feature is responsible for the marginal improvement in VOC. In particular, the increased FF value of annealed ternary blend devices at low TPD contents (< 10 wt%) might reflect the improved charge transport in the ternary blend films by the presence of TPD molecules: Here the gradually decreased FF value of unannealed ternary blend devices with increasing the TPD content might be attributed to the unoptimized morphology of as-spun films. This speculation is supported by the decreased series resistance (RS) of annealed ternary blend devices at low TPD contents (< 10 wt%), as shown in Fig. 4e. In addition, the improved shunt resistance (RSH) at 3–7 wt% TPD contents is considered to help the increased FF trend. As a result, the PCE value was slightly improved for the annealed ternary blend device at the TPD content of 3 wt%, but other annealed ternary blend devices exhibited lower PCE values because of the lowered JSC values.
 Fig. 4  Variation of solar cell parameters for unannealed (filled squares) and annealed (140 °C for 30 min, filled circles) devices as a function of TPD content. 
To understand the trend of solar cell performances according to the TPD contents, we examined the optical absorption spectra of blend films. As shown in Fig. 5, the optical density (OD) was obviously decreased with increasing the TPD content at the same film thickness, irrespective of film annealing: Here we note that the OD value and shape of absorption spectra is clearly different before and after thermal annealing of blend films. Interestingly, the normalized OD spectra disclosed a gradual red shift with increasing the TPD content for both unannealed and annealed films. This result indicates that the presence of TPD molecules leads to the improved stacking of P3HT chains.13 However, the extent of red shift (improved P3HT chain packing) was too small to invert the negative effect of overall OD reduction (wide band gap effect) by the addition of TPD molecules. On the contrary, this minimal red shift effect might be a cause for the decreased RS values at the low TPD contents (< 10 wt%), which is pronounced for the annealed ternary blend devices (see Fig. 4e).
 Fig. 5  Optical density spectra of P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a) unannealed films, (b) annealed films (140 °C for 30 min). Inset in each figure represents the normalized OD spectra. 
To investigate the nanostructure change in the blend films as noticed from the red shift trend in the optical absorption spectra, we employed synchrotron radiation GIXD measurements which can trace out polymer chain stacking and/or evolution of crystal structures on the nanoscale. As shown in the 2D GIXD images (Fig. 6), the Debye ring of (100) diffraction became thicker (brighter) as the TPD content increased, irrespective of thermal annealing. Hence it is considered that the P3HT packing in the out-of-plane (OOP) direction might be destroyed with increasing TPD content. Here it is noteworthy that the (200) peaks are still present, even though 20 wt% TPD molecules were added, for both unannealed and annealed blend films, meaning the secured high order packing of P3HT chains in the presence of 20 wt% TPD. In other words, the mixing level between P3HT chains and TPD molecules might be larger than the molecular scale (i.e. nanoscale or bigger).
 Fig. 6  2D GIXD images of unannealed (a,b,c) and annealed (d,e,f) P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a,d) TPD = 0 wt%, (b,e) TPD = 3 wt%, and (c,f) TPD = 20 wt%. 
For further analysis of the nanostructure changes in the blend films, we extracted 1D GIXD profiles from corresponding 2D images. As shown in Fig. 7, clear (100) and (200) peaks in the OOP direction were observed from all blend films irrespective of thermal annealing, while the (200) peaks in the in-plane (IP) direction were faintly detected. This implies that the P3HT chain packing (ordering) in the present blend films is still predominant in the OOP direction. Here the intensity ratio of (200) to (100) peaks [IR = I(200)/I(100)] in the OOP direction was compared to determine the influence of TPD addition on the degree of higher order diffractions which can measure the extent of well-ordered P3HT chain portion in the films. In the case of unannealed blend films, the IR value was 0.02, 0.04, and 0.07 for 0, 3, and 20 wt% TPD contents, respectively. This result indicates that the degree of high order packing was improved by the addition of TPD molecules, which might be a reason for improved JSC for the unannealed devices at TPD contents lower than 10 wt% (we note that this synergy effect was screened by the greatly reduced optical absorption in the case of 20 wt% TPD addition). However, after thermal annealing, the IR value became almost 0.03–0.04, indicating the thermally induced recovery of P3HT chain packing. This result might also back up the imperfect (larger than molecular level) mixing between P3HT chains and TPD molecules as mentioned above. As evidence for this insufficient mixing, we found the weak diffraction peaks of TPD aggregates at the diffraction angle wider than the angle of the (200) peaks of P3HT chains.
 Fig. 7  1D GIXD profiles of unannealed (a) and annealed (b) P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content. 
Finally, we examined the surface morphology of blend films through height and phase-mode AFM measurements. As shown in Fig. 8 (left images), the surface roughness of unannealed blend films became slightly milder as the TPD content increased. However, the phase images (Fig. 8, right) showed the change of material phases by the addition of TPD molecules. Here it is noteworthy that only 3 wt% TPD addition resulted in a considerably different phase structure in the blend film. This can also be additional evidence for the big change in the device performance as discussed in Fig. 2. After thermal annealing, however, the surface roughness was increased for all blend films (Fig. 9 left). In particular, as the TPD content increased, the surface roughness became coarser in the presence of bigger domains (coming out), which is opposed to the result of unannealed films (see Fig. 8, left). The phase images (Fig. 9, right) also exhibited remarkable changes in the morphology of annealed blend films. This huge morphology change in the blend films by thermal annealing is attributed to the phase demixing process between P3HT chains and TPD molecules—the annealing temperature (140 °C) is higher than the glass transition temperature (Tg) of both materials. Here we consider that the slight phase-segregated morphology in the case of 3 wt% TPD might play a role in improving the FF value of annealed ternary blend device due to the formation of better charge percolation paths in the ternary blend films compared to the binary blend film.
 Fig. 8  Height (left) and phase (right) mode AFM images of unannealed P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a) TPD = 0 wt%, (b) TPD = 3 wt%, and (c) TPD = 20 wt%. 
 Fig. 9  Height (left) and phase (right) mode AFM images of annealed P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a) TPD = 0 wt%, (b) TPD = 3 wt%, and (c) TPD = 20 wt%. 
4. Conclusions
The influence of TPD addition to the P3HT:PCBM blend films has been studied by fabricating polymer solar cells and analyzing their nanostructures. In the case of unannealed devices, the JSC value became initially increased by the addition of 3–7 wt% TPD at the expense of lowered VOC, which was assigned to the improved high order packing of P3HT chains induced by the presence of TPD molecules as evidenced from GIXD measurements. After thermal annealing, the high order packing of P3HT chains in the P3HT:PCBM binary film was recovered so that its JSC value became the highest. However, the 3 wt% TPD added ternary blend device resulted in the slightly higher PCE (3.58%) due to the improved FF (54%), in spite of the marginally reduced JSC value (11.2 mA cm−2) caused by the reduced optical absorption owing to the wide band gap (∼3.1 eV) feature of TPD molecules. The improved FF of annealed ternary blend devices has been attributed to the formation of better charge percolation morphology induced by the presence of TPD molecules, which was indirectly seen from the nanostructure changes from GIXD profiles and AFM images. Finally we expect that the use of lower band gap materials as a third component, instead of TPD, will be helpful for further improvement in the performance of P3HT:PCBM solar cells.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Korean government grants (Priority Research Center Program:2009-0093819, Pioneer Research Center Program:2010-0002231, NRF:20090072777, KETEP-2008-N-PV08-J-01-30202008, NRF:20100004164).
Notes and references
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef .
C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502 CrossRef .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 287 Search PubMed .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 Search PubMed .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. K. J. van Duren, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, J. M. Kroon, M. T. Rispens, W. J. H. Verhees and M. M. Wienk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 43 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Tuladhar, D. Poplavskyy, S. A. Choulis, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1171 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Choulis, Y. Kim, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, M. Shkunov and I. McCulloch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3890 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
Y. Kim, M. Shin, H. Kim, Y. Ha and C. S. Ha, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 225101 CrossRef .
H. Kim, M. Shin and Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1620 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Park, S. S. Park, Y. Kim, I. Kim and C. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1137 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Formerly at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering (IBE), Imperial College London, London, SW7 2BW, United Kingdom.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Broader context
Polymer solar cells have been highlighted due to their great potential for low-cost manufacturing of ‘all plastic solar modules’ which are recognized as one of the futuristic solar energy conversion devices. In this work, as one of the intensive efforts to improve the performance of polymer solar cells, we attempted to dope a hole-transporting molecule (HTM) into conventional polymer/fullerene films. As a result, we found that doping 3–7 wt% HTM improved the short circuit current density of unannealed solar cells. In particular, thermal annealing of devices improved fill factors and slightly enhanced power conversion efficiency at the doping concentration of 3 wt% in spite of reduced optical absorption in the HTM-doped films. Hence we expect that the present doping approach could be widely applied for various donor–acceptor combinations of organic semiconducting materials.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of materials, (b) schematic illustration of P3HT:PCBM:TPD solar cell structures, and (c) flat energy band diagram of solar cells [The unit (eV) was omitted from the values].	 

 	Fig. 2  Light (a) and dark (b) J-V curves of unannealed devices with P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: Inset in (b) shows the dark J-V curves in linear scale.	 

 	Fig. 3  Light (a) and dark (b) J-V curves of annealed devices with P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: Device annealing was carried out at 140 °C for 30 min.	 

 	Fig. 4  Variation of solar cell parameters for unannealed (filled squares) and annealed (140 °C for 30 min, filled circles) devices as a function of TPD content.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optical density spectra of P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a) unannealed films, (b) annealed films (140 °C for 30 min). Inset in each figure represents the normalized OD spectra.	 

 	Fig. 6  2D GIXD images of unannealed (a,b,c) and annealed (d,e,f) P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a,d) TPD = 0 wt%, (b,e) TPD = 3 wt%, and (c,f) TPD = 20 wt%.	 

 	Fig. 7  1D GIXD profiles of unannealed (a) and annealed (b) P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content.	 

 	Fig. 8  Height (left) and phase (right) mode AFM images of unannealed P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a) TPD = 0 wt%, (b) TPD = 3 wt%, and (c) TPD = 20 wt%.	 

 	Fig. 9  Height (left) and phase (right) mode AFM images of annealed P3HT:PCBM:TPD blend films as a function of TPD content: (a) TPD = 0 wt%, (b) TPD = 3 wt%, and (c) TPD = 20 wt%.	 
Footnote
† Formerly at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering (IBE), Imperial College London, London, SW7 2BW, United Kingdom.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
