Quinone and its derivatives for energy harvesting and storage materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA03123D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03123D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11179-11202Quinone and its derivatives for energy harvesting and storage materials

        
          
            Eun Jin 
            Son
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jae Hong 
            Kim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kayoung 
            Kim
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chan Beum 
            Park
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 335 Science Road, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: parkcb@kaist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-42-350-3310;   Tel: +82-42-350-3340
bThe Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 67 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Received 
      15th April 2016
    , Accepted 17th June 2016First published on 20th June 2016AbstractIn nature, quinone plays a vital role in numerous electrochemical reactions for energy transduction and storage; such processes include respiration and photosynthesis. For example, fast proton-coupled electron transfer between primary and secondary quinones in green plants triggers the rapid charge separation of chlorophyll molecules, achieving unparalleled photosynthesis with near-unity quantum yield. In addition, quinone-rich polymers such as eumelanin and polydopamine show unique optical and electrical properties (e.g., strong broadband absorbance or a switching response to external stimuli), mostly arising from their chemically disordered structures. Understanding the unique features of quinone and its derivatives can provide solutions to the construction of bio-inspired systems for energy harvesting and conversion. This paper reviews recent advances in the design of quinone-functionalized hybrid materials based on quinone's redox, electrical, optical, and metal chelating/reducing properties to determine these materials' applications in energy-harvesting and -storage systems, such as artificial photosynthetic platforms, rechargeable batteries, pseudocapacitors, phototransistors, plasmonic light harvesting platforms, and dye-sensitized solar cells.
1. Introduction
Quinone is a class of redox-active organic compounds that contain two adjacent (or separated) carbonyl groups in an unsaturated six-member ring structure.1,2 The redox behavior of quinone plays a vital role in the electrochemical reactions during biological energy transduction and storage. For example, natural photosynthesis occurs through a series of photoinduced electron transfer reactions that convert solar energy to chemical energy in the chloroplasts of green plants. The unparalleled features of photosynthesis, such as its near-unity quantum yield, originate from primary and secondary acceptor quinones (QA and QB), which facilitate a fast charge separation (∼200 ps) from chlorophyll molecules.3 Furthermore, reduced quinone forms (QAH2 and QBH2), which are obtained by accepting electrons and protons, lead to long-lived charge separation with minimal charge recombination. The unique mechanism of quinone-based, proton-coupled electron transfer inspired researchers to improve the efficiencies of human-made energy conversion systems, such as solar cells and photochemical water splitting devices by using quinone derivatives as electron mediators.4–10 Biological respiration also operates through multiple redox reactions involving redox-active quinone species.11 For example, ubiquinone is an essential cofactor in the respiratory chain that serves as a mobile redox carrier, transferring electrons and protons from NADH–ubiquinone oxidoreductase and succinate–quinone oxidoreductase to cytochrome bc1 complex.12 The transferred protons are used to produce energetic molecules such as ATP. The biological role of ubiquinone can be utilized for the development of man-made energy storage systems such as redox flow batteries. Many researchers have attempted to replace the redox flow battery's inorganic redox couples, such as M3+/2+ (M = V, Cr, or Fe), which are toxic and expensive,13,14 with quinone-based molecules [e.g., benzoquinone (BQ), anthraquinone (AQ)].15–18 Also, various quinone derivatives were applied to the development of new types of lithium batteries through computational simulation studies.19–23
Recent studies provide evidence for quinone's utilities in energy applications through the hybridization of quinone molecules with various organic and inorganic materials.24–28 For instance, quinone-decorated, highly conductive materials (e.g., carbon onions or reduced graphene oxides) exhibit high capacitance and stable performance for use in pseudocapacitors.29–32 One of the simplest methods to hybridize quinone with nanomaterials is to use quinone-rich polydopamine (PDA)—a mimic of mussel adhesive proteins that contain 3,4-dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine (DOPA)—through self-polymerization of dopamine molecules under slightly alkaline conditions.33 PDA serves as a versatile agent for the surface functionalization of any material (e.g., noble metals, oxides, semiconductors, and synthetic polymers) without geometric restriction in size or morphology.34,35 The redox property of the quinone ligands in PDA is known to maintain after the polymerization;36,37 thus, PDA-coated materials have been recently applied to different energy systems, such as artificial photosynthetic platforms, fuel cells, and Li-ion batteries.38 Moreover, PDA-coated materials have unique optical and electrical properties because of the unique chemical structure that originates from aromatics and conjugated molecules.39,40 The π–π system of PDA triggers a highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and a lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), providing semiconducting properties and charge-transfer capabilities, which makes PDA a useful photosensitizer for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and organic phototransistors.41,42 Another useful property of PDA is its ability to bind to various multivalent metal ions (e.g., Fe3+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Ag+, and Au+), which has led to a new way of preparing metal nanocomposites for plasmonic light-harvesting platforms.43–45
In this article, we primarily review the recent progress in the development of quinone-functionalized hybrid materials for energy harvesting and storage, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The applications are categorized in terms of three of quinone's key properties: (1) redox, (2) electrical and optical properties and (3) metal chelation/reduction (Table 1). First, we introduce quinone and its derivatives (e.g., 1,4-benzoquinone, 1,2-benzoquinone, 1,4-naphthoquinone, 9,10-anthraquinone, 9,10-phenanthrenequinone, and 4,5-pyrenedione) for artificial photosynthetic platforms, rechargeable batteries, and pseudocapacitors that utilize proton-coupled electron transfer through the carbonyl groups of quinone-based materials. Second, we focus on the electrical and optical properties of quinone-containing eumelanin for phototransistor applications. We also highlight the progress made on plasmonic light-harvesting platforms and DSSCs based on quinone-functionalized hybrid materials that are synthesized using 1,2-benzoquinone's chelating and reducing properties. In the later part of this review, we briefly summarize current issues and the potential of quinone-functionalized hybrid materials for energy harvesting and storage.
 Fig. 1  Illustrative description of quinone-functionalized materials' applications for energy harvesting and storage, such as artificial photosynthesis, rechargeable batteries, pseudocapacitors, phototransistors, plasmonic light-harvesting platforms, and dye-sensitized solar cells. The figure in the section of Artificial photosynthesis was reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. The figure in the section of Plasmonic light-harvesting platforms was reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 A list of quinone-hybridized materials and their applications for energy harvesting and storage, which are categorized according to the quinone moiety's redox, electrical, optical, and metal chelation/reduction properties




Quinone moiety
Properties
Functions
Applications
Quinone-based hybrid materials
Ref.





a Photosystem II.
b Polydopamine.
c Carbon nanotubes.
d Reduced graphene oxide.
e Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene).
f Polynorepinephrine.
g Eosin Y.
h Polyepinephrine.
i Covalent organic frameworks.








Redox
Redox mediator for charge separation
Artificial photosynthesis
ITO/PS IIa/2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone

6



DNA-assembled CdS/benzoquinone/TiO2

140



Ubiquinone 10 electrolyte

145



Tetramethylammonium hydroquinone electrolyte

5



 





Redox
Redox mediator for charge separation
Artificial photosynthesis
PDAb/CNTsc

7



Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage
Redox flow battery
1,2-Benzoquinone-3,5-disulfonic acid catholyte

18



Pseudocapacitor
Catechol/Black Pearls carbon

178



Catechol/polypyrrole

182



PDA/RGOd/PEDOTe

179



PNEf/RGO sponge

180



 


Electrical and optical properties
Charge transport under light illumination
Phototransistor
PDA active layer

41



 


Metal chelation/reduction
Reducing agent and scaffold for dye encapsulation
Plasmonic light-harvesting platform
PDA/Au/EYg

44



Anticorrosive protective layer and scaffold for dye encapsulation
PDA/Al/EY and PDA/Al/SnTPyP

210



Reducing agent and light absorber
Carbonized-PDA/Ag/ZnO

45



Photosensitizer and chemical binder to TiO2
Dye-sensitized solar cell
Ruthenium(II)-polypyridyl/catechol/TiO2

235



Zinc phthalocyanine/catechol/TiO2

128



Pyridine–vinyl–catechol/TiO2 and quinoline–vinyl–catechol/TiO2

125



Thiophene–catechol/TiO2

123



PDA/TiO2

42



PEPh/TiO2

126






Redox
Redox mediator for charge separation
Artificial photosynthesis
ITO/PS II/1,4-naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate

6



Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage
Pseudocapacitor
1,4-Naphthoquinone/carbon onion

29






Redox
Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage
Redox flow battery
9,10-Anthraquinone-2,7-disulphonic acid anolyte

16



2,6-Dihydroxyanthraquinone anolyte

15



9,10-Anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid anolyte

18



Pseudocapacitor
2D COFsi linked by β-ketoenamine and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone

183 and 184



Anthraquinone/hierarchical porous CNTs

177



2,6-Dibromoanthraquinone/Ketjenblack carbon

185



9,10-Anthraquinone/carbon fabric

188






Redox
Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage
Pseudocapacitor
9,10-Phenanthrenequinone/carbon onion

29






Redox
Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage
Pseudocapacitor
4,5-Pyrenedione/carbon onion

29





2. Physicochemical properties of quinone and its derivatives
2.1. Redox properties
Redox reactions of quinone and its derivatives involve the transfer of two electrons and two protons because of these compounds' chemical structures that involve two carbonyl ligands. According to Laviron's theory,46 quinone can be sequentially coupled with protons and electrons through many possible reduction and oxidation reactions. Electrochemical studies on quinone in aprotic, unbuffered, and buffered aqueous solutions were conducted previously to understand their redox behavior.47–52 In this review, we focus on quinone's electrochemical properties in buffered aqueous solutions, considering quinone's recent energy applications in artificial photosynthesis, aqueous redox flow batteries, and pseudocapacitors that generally operate in buffered media. Quinone exhibits a single redox peak that corresponds to the reduction and oxidation of quinone/hydroquinone (Q/QH2) in buffered aqueous solutions. The reduction potential has a good linear dependence on pH, with a slope of −59 mV pH−1.53 The two-electrons-and-two-protons-involving redox reaction creates three protonations and three redox states, resulting in the generation of nine species (Fig. 2).52,54 The sequence of electron and proton transfer at pH 7 is as follows: quinone (Q) → quinone anion radical (Q˙−) → semiquinone radical (QH˙) → semiquinone anion (QH−) → hydroquinone (QH2).55–57 The reduction potentials of Q/Q˙− and QH˙/QH− are known to be −0.58 and −0.60 V, respectively,54,58 which are suitable for extracting excited electrons from photosensitizers in solar-driven energy conversion systems such as DSSCs and artificial photosynthetic platforms. The energy level of photosensitizers (e.g., xanthenes, porphyrins, and quantum dots) is approximately in the range of −0.9 to −0.6 V (vs. NHE).59–61 Note that the redox potential of an electron mediator should be lower than that of a photosensitizer to facilitate electron transfer.62 Moreover, the protonation of quinone molecules drives long-lived charge separation by preventing back electron transfer from quinone to photosensitizers because the hydroquinone form is stable at neutral pH due to its high pKa value (∼10.0).46 Taken together, quinone can act as an electron shuttle to enhance the efficiency of solar energy conversion.
 Fig. 2  Thermodynamic cycles of 1,4-benzoquinone. The sequential transfer of electrons and protons makes the quinone molecule suitable as a redox mediator. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 1992, Elsevier Inc. 
Quinone and its derivatives can be promising redox-active molecules for aqueous redox flow batteries because of these molecules' high energy density—based on the two electron-related redox property—when compared to the conventional metal-based redox couples (e.g., vanadium, chromium, and iron).18 The redox potential of quinones, which is a critical factor in gaining a high cell voltage in a redox flow battery, can be controlled by the introduction of suitable substituents in their benzene rings; the electronegative substituents (e.g., the halogen, nitro, and carbonyl groups) make quinone stronger oxidants; conversely, electron-donating groups (e.g., the amine, hydroxyl, and methoxy groups) make quinones weaker oxidants.63 Based on quinone's structural and electrochemical properties, electronegative (or electron-donating) groups-containing quinones could be attracted to the positive (or negative) side of a redox flow battery. Er et al.64 screened quinone derivatives that vary with eighteen different substituents to achieve high cell voltage in a redox flow battery. According to the density functional theory (DFT) calculation, the electron-donating groups (e.g., hydroxyl and amine) decreased the electron affinity of the compounds, resulting in low redox potentials. Conversely, quinones containing electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., sulfonate, nitro, and potassium) exhibited high redox potentials. In addition, the position of functional groups added on the quinone ring is another critical factor affecting the redox properties. Flores et al.65 reported that the degree of redox potential change is largest when two functional groups are on the opposite rings, and smallest when they are both on the same ring in the case of thiophenoquinone-based derivatives. Their computational simulation analysis suggested common patterns of possible candidates having high (or low) redox potential based on the type and site of functional groups placed in the quinone ring.
2.2. Electrical and optical properties
Eumelanin has unique optical properties40,66–69 that are rarely found in other organic chromophores: (i) strong, broadband absorbance from deep UV to near IR without a chromophoric band and (ii) excitation-energy-dependent emission and extremely low radiative quantum yields. Eumelanin's exotic spectroscopic properties provide important clues in predicting its structure. It is widely accepted that eumelanin is composed of many chemically distinct and nanoscale-aggregated oligomers made up of 5,6-dihydroxyindole (DHI) or 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid (DHICA) monomers.40,66,70–73 Because an ensemble of thermodynamically stable redox monomers (e.g., indolequinone, semiquinone, and hydroquinone) comprises chemically disordered oligomers, they have different HOMO–LUMO gaps; the average sum of the individual oligomers' absorbance appears in the form of a broad monotonic spectrum and an excitation-dependent emission as a result of selective pumping of the oligomers' subsets.66
Since McGinness et al.74,75 revealed the bistable electrical switching property of a solid eumelanin pellet, it is now widely accepted that eumelanin has amorphous organic semiconductor characteristics.76–78 As described above, eumelanin has an electronic structure consisting of an ensemble of HOMO and LUMO levels of chemically distinct oligomers, which leads to many localized states due to non-uniform chemical binding between the subsets of oligomers that consist of various redox states of DHI and DHICA monomers. The localized states existing in the electronic structure of eumelanin strongly affect its electrical charge transport behaviors; the movement of charge carriers is limited to a local volume by the localized state. However, when the charge carriers acquire sufficient energy, they can move relatively freely as a result of their transition to delocalized states. Thus, eumelanin displays different electrical behaviors upon external stimuli, such as bias and light. For example, at a low gate-bias regime below the threshold, a solid pellet of eumelanin (1 mm thick) shows low conductivity (10−5 S cm−1), but its conductivity is enhanced 100- to 1000-fold above the threshold voltage of 200 V cm−1.75 Mostert et al.79 detected a 1% increase in eumelanin film's conductivity under white-light illumination; the film recovered its original equilibrium conductivity after the light was turned off.
The origin of eumelanin's conductivity is still controversial. Some researchers have suggested that the conductivity of eumelanin is derived not from π-electrons but from ions.80–84 The ionic conductor model notes eumelanin's need for a hydration process to generate conductivity. Previously, the hydration-dependent conductivity was interpreted in the framework of an organic semiconductor model based on a modified dielectric theory proposed by Powell and Rosenberg.85 The activation energy for hopping the transport of the charge carriers can be lowered by eumelanin's binding with water molecules due to the change in the local dielectric constant, which can be represented by a sub-exponential increase in conductivity with a higher degree of hydration. In contrast, according to Mostert et al.,84 the sub-exponential characteristic of eumelanin's conductivity is not observed when the geometry of the electrode is changed from a sandwich to a van der Pauw electrode (Fig. 3A and B). Note that the van der Pauw electrode can reflect an equilibrium hydration state better than a sandwich electrode can. In addition, Mostert et al. detected locally mobile protons and extrinsic free radicals through muon-spin relaxation and electron-spin resonance measurements, in which the population increased as the degree of hydration increased. Upon the adsorption of water, protons and free radicals are formed during a comproportionation equilibrium reaction (Fig. 3C), and the adsorbed water molecules act as a matrix for transporting protons through a hydrogen-bonded network. This explains not only the inconsistency between the observation and the amorphous semiconductor theory but also the reason for eumelanin's increased conductivity in hydrated states. Wünsche et al.81,83 further supported the ionic conductive model by investigating the contributions of ionic and electronic interactions to eumelanin's electrical current at different relative humidities and by measuring the ionic conductivity of the hydrated eumelanin, which was approximately in the 10−4 to 10−3 S cm−1 range at 90% relative humidity largely due to proton migration.
 Fig. 3  Conductivity of a eumelanin pellet as a function of water content with: (A) a sandwich electrode and (B) a van der Pauw electrode. The solid lines indicate the amorphous semiconductor model prediction. The dots represent the experimental data. The van der Pauw conductivity shows more unconformable behavior than does the sandwich conductivity. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (C) The comproportionation reaction of eumelanin upon water adsorption. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2012, National Academy of Sciences. 
In contrast to the results for eumelanin, only a few results have been reported so far on the electrical properties of PDA. According to the literature,86,87 PDA also exhibits the characteristic of an intrinsic semiconductor, and the electrical conductivity of PDA films is on the order of 10−9 S cm−1 at 60% humidity when synthesized by dip coating. However, electron movement in eumelanin and PDA is extremely limited by the localized state, resulting in poor electrical conductivity. Ambrico et al.88 suggested that the electrical property of PDA can be chemically tuned through oxidative copolymerization of dopamine and the co-monomer including an aromatic amine functional group (e.g., 3-aminotyrosine or p-phenylenediamine). The electron-donating amine group, conjugated to the catechol moiety of dopamine, can not only extend π-electron delocalization, but also enhance the electronic mobility of the copolymer. The covalent incorporation of aromatic amines into the PDA during polymerization shifts the Fermi level position of PDA to the conduction band (i.e., n-doping effect), tuning its intrinsic properties to n-type semiconducting features. Additionally, introduction of substituents to quinone derivatives can modify the HOMO–LUMO gap. It has been found that adding electron-withdrawing groups, such as fluorine, bromine, and imide moieties, into the quinone molecules can lower the energy level of LUMO, leading to an n-type behavior of quinone molecules.89,90 Taken together, a systematic investigation of tailoring strategies from the polymer to the molecular level may facilitate further research progress in the application of quinone derivatives to energy conversion devices.
2.3. Metal chelation and reduction
Catechol, a fully reduced form of 1,2-benzoquionone, has a strong binding affinity for various multivalent metal ions (e.g., Cu2+, Fe3+, Ti3+, Ti4+, Mn2+, Mn3+, and Zn2+) and even substrates containing those ions (e.g., TiO2, Fe2O3, and MnO2).91–96 In particular, catechol and its derivatives are known to strongly bind to the TiO2 surface through bidentate bonding,97–103 creating a new dye-to-TiO2 charge-transfer band. This leads to a Type II photoinjection that involves a direct electron injection from the ground state of the dye molecules to the conduction band of the semiconductor without any intermediation of excited dye molecular states. Note that in Type I photoinjection, electrons are transferred indirectly to the conduction band of a semiconductor after their excitation from the HOMO level to the LUMO level of a dye. As a result, the new absorption spectrum of the created charge-transfer complex red-shifts significantly more than in TiO2 and catechol, which can enhance light-harvesting efficiency. Catechol and its derivatives can reversibly bind to multivalent ions because the catechol group has 4-fold stronger binding affinity for multivalent cations than its oxidized ortho-quinone forms. Kim et al.104 demonstrated that this reversibility can be applied to a multivalent ion-energy storage system; the two-electron oxidation of catechol to quinone can extract Mg2+ cations during charging, and the reverse reaction inserts Mg2+ ions during discharging, showing both a stable capacity of 61.6 ± 0.3 mA h g−1 at the current density of 0.1 A g−1 [Mg(NO3)2, 0.5 M] and a stable cycle retention (>99.2%) after 500 cycles. Eumelanin can also bind to multivalent metal ions, but unlike catechols it contains various sites for metal chelation, such as the carboxyl, amine, hydroxyl, phenolic, quinone, and semiquinone groups; thus, it exhibits a different affinity for metal ions depending on the pH conditions.105–109 For example, Fe3+ makes a complex with an o-dihydroxyl group in eumelanin at neutral pH.110 The chelating sites of Cu2+ vary with pH conditions;106,111 at pH 3 to 4, the hydroxyl group activates, while at pH 4.5, the phenolic group activates.
The catecholic moiety is well-known for its ability to reduce noble metal ions (e.g., Au3+, Ag+, or Pt3+) after chelating with them.33,112–120 Under reductive conditions, catechol groups can be rapidly oxidized to quinone forms by releasing two electrons and two protons (Fig. 4). Because catechols have a higher redox potential (E0) than metal ions (e.g., E0 of benzene-1,2-diol = −795 mV and E0 of Au3+ = 1.52 V),121 they can provide electrons to metal ions, resulting in the growth of metallic nanomaterials, whereas the oxidized form of catechols is less reductive. PDA also has reduction power because of its abundant catecholic moieties. According to electron spin resonance spectroscopic and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analyses performed by Ball et al.,122 the electrons that reduce Ag+ ions originate from nonoxidized catechol groups in PDA, not from PDA's unpaired electrons (or free radicals). The metal-chelating and -reducing properties of quinone played integral roles in their hybridization with functional materials for plasmon-enhanced light-harvesting platforms43–45 and DSSCs.42,123–128 In particular, the simplest and most versatile route for hybridization is the use of PDA, which requires no intricate setup and which can be carried out in aqueous solutions under mild conditions, enabling large-scale production.129–131 PDA can further serve as an encapsulative scaffold for organic molecules and/or a bridged layer between a substrate and functional components, which can give flexibility in the design of hybrid energy-harvesting and -storage systems.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of metal nanoparticles via the reduction of metal ions, which is coupled with the oxidation of catechol to quinone groups. 
3. Applications of quinone-functionalized materials to energy harvesting and storage
3.1. Energy devices utilizing the redox properties of quinone moieties
Quinone can enhance the efficiencies of energy-harvesting and -storage systems because of its unique electrochemical properties and cost-effectiveness. Furthermore, quinone and its derivatives bind readily to carbon-based nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, through π–π interaction. The hybridization can provide facile charge transfer from quinone to the current-carrying elements, which can boost the power capability of electrochemical energy storage devices. In this section, we review recent applications of quinone-functionalized materials in artificial photosynthesis, rechargeable batteries, and pseudocapacitors.

3.1.1. Artificial photosynthesis. 
Recently, solar-driven fuel synthesis has attracted global interest as a sustainable route for obtaining clean energy resources.132 Photosynthesis is a fascinating way of harvesting solar energy through a series of photoinduced electron transfers between photosynthetic units composed of light-harvesting molecules, redox mediators, and metal clusters.133 In particular, quinone species (e.g., primary and secondary quinones; QA and QB) are key redox mediators in photosynthetic units. Quinone intermediates (QAH2 and QBH2), which are formed through the coupling of quinone's ligands with the excited electrons from chlorophylls and protons, lead to a long-lived charge separation with a minimal charge recombination, enhancing quantum efficiency.134 Inspired by the role of quinones in natural photosynthesis, many researchers have attempted to construct efficient light-harvesting systems that contain quinone and its derivatives.135–138 Herein we summarize such efforts to apply quinone molecules to solar water-splitting, hydrogen production, and DSSCs.4–7,139
Quinone derivatives were employed as redox mediators for efficient charge separation from photosensitizers in solar water oxidation. Kato et al.6 reported a photoelectrochemical water oxidation system that consisted of natural photosystem II and an indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode with 1,4-naphthaloquinone-2-sulfonate (NQS) and 2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone (DCBQ) as soluble redox mediators. The reduction potentials of NQS and DCBQ are positioned at −60 and +21 mV (vs. NHE), respectively, which are lower than those of QA and QB in photosystem II (QA: about −140 mV; QB: about −60 mV). The favorable energetic relationship between photosystem II and the quinone-based mediators significantly enhanced the turnover frequency (TOF) of photoelectrochemical water oxidation with NQS (TOF: ∼1.4 s−1) and DCBQ (TOF: ∼3.2 s−1) when compared to the TOF without NQS or DCBQ (TOF: ∼0.18 s−1). Recently, Kim et al.7 demonstrated that quinone-rich PDA can accelerate solar water oxidation when used with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer and cobalt phosphate as a water oxidation catalyst (Fig. 5A and B). The quinone ligands of PDA have a reduction potential at 0.07 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which is suitable to accept excited electrons from the lowest triplet state of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (−1.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The TOF of photochemical water oxidation in the presence of 0.02 mg mL−1 PDA (TOF: ∼0.88 s−1) is much higher than it is in the absence of PDA (TOF: ∼0.32 s−1), which indicates that PDA facilitates the fast charge separation of [Ru(bpy)3]2+. Kim et al. also showed that the redox property of PDA-decorated CNTs is 10-fold higher than that of PDA without CNTs, suggesting that the high conductivity of CNTs boosts the charge-transfer rate from [Ru(bpy)3]2+ to PDA (Fig. 5C). Unlike pristine CNTs, PDA-decorated CNTs exhibited a new reduction potential at 0.08 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) due to the PDA ad-layer, which prevented back-electron transfer from CNTs to [Ru(bpy)3]2+. The synergistic effect of the redox property of PDA and the high conductivity of CNTs increased the quantum yield of solar water oxidation from 3.0% to 6.6%. Quinone derivatives were also applied to photochemical hydrogen production based on a DNA-assembled TiO2/CdS photocatalyst system.140 The hybridization of BQ inbetween TiO2 and CdS via a DNA strand (CdS–BQ–TiO2) increased the yield of hydrogen production 3.4-fold relative to CdS-only and 1.2-fold relative to TiO2–CdS without BQ. Taken together, the recent reports show that quinone is a promising redox-active species for enhancing the efficiencies of solar water oxidation and hydrogen production.
 Fig. 5  (A) Natural photosystem II. (B) Artificial photosystem composed of PDA (a redox mediator), [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (a photosensitizer), and Co–Pi (an oxygen evolution catalyst). PDA functions as a redox mediator, mimicking the role of quinone in natural photosystem II. (C) Schematic illustration of photochemical water oxidation by Co–Pi, [Ru(bpy)3]2+, and PDA-coated CNTs. The highly conductive CNTs boost the charge-transfer rate from [Ru(bpy)3]2+ to PDA. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
The role of natural quinone derivatives, such as ubiquinone and plastoquinone, is similar to that of electrolytes used in conventional DSSCs. The electrolytes in DSSCs are usually based on an iodide/triiodide (I−/I3) shuttle;141 but this has many drawbacks, such as light absorption, corrosion of the metal current collector, and a potential mismatch between the photosensitizer and the I−/I3− shuttle.142–144 To address these problems, Yu et al.145 employed biological redox molecules such as ubiquinone 10 (UQ10) to replace I−/I3− in DSSCs based on an N719-sensitized electrode. Yu et al. obtained an efficiency of 8.2% in the presence of UQ10 under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), which is higher than that obtained with I−/I3− (7.4%). Spectrophotometric and electrochemical impedance spectroscopic analyses suggested that the enhanced efficiency originated from UQ10's lower absorption under visible light and longer electron lifetime relative to I−/I3−. Other quinone-based redox couples, such as tetramethylammonium hydroquinone (HQ)/benzoquinone (BQ), also resulted in improved efficiency (8.4%).5 The recombination resistance changed from 19.5 Ω cm−2 (I−/I3−) to 41.1 Ω cm−2 (HQ/BQ) to retain the electrons transferred to HQ/BQ better than those transferred to I−/I3−.


3.1.2. Rechargeable batteries. 
Reversible redox couples of quinone have been recently applied to rechargeable energy-storage systems, such as Li-ion batteries19,146–151 and redox flow batteries.152–156 Quinone-based organic molecules are a particularly attractive cathode material for rechargeable Li-ion batteries because of their relatively high redox potential against Li or Li-intercalated anode in the range of 1.8 to 3.1 V (vs. Li/Li+).157 Their two consecutive one-electron-involving redox activity in organic electrolytes along with their low molar mass resulted in high theoretical charge capacities up to 500 mA h g−1,157 exhibiting energy densities comparable to those of conventional inorganic cathode materials, such as LiCoO2 and LiFePO4.23,158–161 Importantly, redox properties of quinones can be further optimized for high-performance Li-ion batteries through the introduction of electron-withdrawing groups.22 For example, functionalization with carboxylic groups increases the redox potential by making more electrophilic quinones, as well as the number of bound Li atoms in some quinones (e.g., anthraquinone-2-carboxylic acid and anthraquinone-2,6-dicarboxylic acid), which results in improved charge capacities. On the other hand, dissolution of quinones in organic electrolytes is unavoidable due to their hydrophobicity and low molecular weights, and it often limits the cyclic life of Li-ion batteries with capacity loss during repeated charging/discharging steps.162–165 The solubility of quinones in organic electrolytes can be tuned with proper substitutions toward the high cyclability of Li-ion batteries. Shimizu et al.163 reported that the introduction of two lithiooxycarbonyl groups to quinones (e.g., 9,10-anthraquinone, 9,10-phenanthrenequinone, and pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone) diminished the dissolution of the quinones in organic electrolytes, while not influencing their redox potentials. They suggested that the Li atom of the lithiooxycarbonyl group was responsible for the decreased solubility via network formation by Li-coordination, which made lithiooxycarbonyl-functionalized quinones act like polymers. Yao et al.164 further demonstrated that the solubility of 1,4-benzoquinone functionalized with two methoxy groups could be lowered because intramolecular forces (e.g., π–π interaction and hydrogen bonding) between the molecules suppress the dissolution. Recent studies suggest other approaches to address the dissolution issue by the attachment of quinone molecules to carbon-based conducting nanomaterials (e.g., CNTs and graphene) through π–π interaction,166 covalent anchoring,167,168 the use of solid electrolytes,146 or quinone-based polymers.169
In contrast to Li-ion batteries operating in organic (or solid) electrolytes, aqueous redox flow batteries can store electrical energy via reversible electrochemical reactions between redox-active aqueous electrolytes and cell electrodes. Redox flow batteries are suitable for large-scale applications because of the scalability of their energy storage density, which is accomplished by controlling the size of the external tank that contains the electrolytes.17,170,171 The energy density of redox flow batteries is governed by the redox potential and solubility of reversible redox-active components; thus, the appropriate selection and design of the redox couple is imperative. Quinone/hydroquinone redox couples are attractive candidates for rechargeable, metal-free redox flow batteries because of their fast kinetic rate constants of charge transfer [e.g., 7.2 × 10−3 cm s−1 for 9,10-anthraquinone-2,7-disulphonic acid (AQDS)], high solubility in aqueous solvent (>1 M in a pH 0 electrolyte for AQDS), and earth-abundance.16,52 In particular, quinone's redox potential and solubility can be further tailored through the introduction of functional groups such as electron-donating, electron-withdrawing, and hydrophilic groups.18,64,152–156 Substitutions of hydrophilic groups (e.g., phosphonic and sulfonic) can increase the water solubility of quinones, enhancing the energy density of redox flow cells.64,65 In general, water solubility tends to improve with increasing number of substituted functional groups, especially when the hydrophilic groups are attached far from the ketone units in the quinones. For a long cycle life of redox flow batteries, quinones should be stable in aqueous solutions. Er et al.64 considered that oxidizing quinones can cause decomposition reactions (e.g. oxidation of the carbon backbone and polymerization), which are detrimental to the long-term performance of the devices. They suggested that the stability issue can be alleviated by introducing substituents (e.g., hydroxyl, sulfonyl, amino, and carboxyl) to quinones' C–H groups adjacent to CO groups that are susceptible to oxidation. Note that the dependency of the redox potential of quinones on the substituents is discussed in detail in Section 2.1. Redox properties.
A high-throughput computational screening study64 suggested that the class of 9,10-AQ is a suitable redox component for the anodic side of redox flow batteries because of their low reduction potential (<0.2 V vs. SHE). Aziz's group reported a quinone–bromide acidic redox flow battery (QBFB) that contained an AQDS anolyte and bromide catholyte in H2SO4 (1 M).16 The QBFB showed a peak galvanic power density that exceeded 0.6 W cm−2 at 1.3 A cm−2 (at 40 °C), with over 99% retention of its galvanic discharge capacity (i.e., the number of coulombs extracted in one cycle divided by the number of coulombs extracted in a previous cycle) at 0.5 A cm−2. More importantly, chemical modification of the AQDS backbone with the hydroxyl group could improve both the solubility of AQDS in aqueous medium and the cell voltage. For example, the E0 of 1,8-dihydroxy-AQDS was 90 mV lower than that of pristine AQDS, resulting in an 11% increase in the redox flow-cell potential, which suggests that additional molecular design can expand the space for the improvement of energy density of redox flow batteries.
Hydroxylated AQ [e.g., 2,6-dihydroxyanthraquinone (2,6-DHAQ)] undergoes charging/discharging reactions in an alkaline redox flow battery, where the toxic bromide catholyte can be replaced by ferrocyanide (Fig. 6A).15 According to the Pourbaix diagram of 2,6-DHAQ, its equilibrium potential is pH-dependent with a slope of −61 mV pH−1 at pH below ∼12, while the potential becomes pH-independent at pH above ∼12. Thus, using 2,6-DHAQ in an alkaline solution (1 M KOH) lowers its E0 more so than using it in acidic solution due to the hydroxylated quinone's enhanced solubility and electron-donating capability by deprotonation at high pH. There are additional advantages of alkaline redox flow batteries over acidic ones; the slow kinetics of hydrogen-evolution in alkaline solutions can widen the practical window of potential stability, which can provide more space for the chemical design of 2,6-DHAQ to have a more negative reduction potential. An alkaline redox flow battery can help avoid an electro-active molecule's crossover through a proton-conducting membrane because of the existence of negatively charged molecules at high pH. Membrane resistance, a critical factor in determining power density, is by an order of magnitude lower than that at pH 0. As a result, the 2,6-DHAQ-based alkaline redox flow battery's open-circuit voltage increased by 47% compared to the previously reported acidic QBFB case, with an equilibrium potential of 1.2 V (vs. ferri/ferrocyanide; Fig. 6B). Further modification of 2,6-DHAQ to 2,3,6,7-tetrahydroxyquinone or 1,5-dimethyl-2,6-DHAQ reduced the E0, making the cell potential (vs. ferri/ferrocyanide) close to 1.35 V. Overall, the cell showed a power density higher than 0.45 W cm−2 at room temperature, exhibiting cell stability with the current efficiency over 99% for 100 cycles at 0.1 A cm−2.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of a charge-mode redox flow battery that is composed of 2,6-DHAQ on the negative side and ferrocyanide on the positive side. (B) Cyclic voltammogram of 2 mM 2,6-DHAQ (dark cyan curve) and ferrocyanide (gold curve) on glassy carbon (scan rate of 100 mV s−1). The dotted line represents the background cyclic voltammogram of a graphite foil electrode in KOH (1 M). Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The class of 1,2-BQ and 2,3-naphthoquinone (NQ) can be used as catholyte constituents of redox flow batteries because these compounds show relatively high E0 (>0.9 V vs. SHE) for practical applications.64 Further functionalization of 1,2-BQ (or 2,3-NQ) with electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., –CHO, –CN, –COOH, –COOCH3, and –NO2) increased the E0, especially when the groups were substituted adjacent to the ketone units in the quinones. Yang et al.18 reported an acidic redox flow battery with 1,2-benzoquinone-3,5-disulfonic acid (E0 = 0.85 V) as a catholyte. Coupled with anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid (E0 = 0.09 V) as an anolyte, the all quinone flow-cell achieved an equilibrium potential of 0.94 V.


3.1.3. Pseudocapacitors. 
Supercapacitors are electrical energy storage devices that exhibit high power capabilities and long cycle life but they still show lower energy densities than batteries.172–175 In terms of the charge storage mechanism, supercapacitors can be classified as either electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) or pseudocapacitors. EDLCs store charge via the accumulation of the electrolyte ions at the electrode/electrolyte interface of mostly carbon-based materials, whereas pseudocapacitors employ electrochemical faradaic reactions of reversible redox species at the electrode surface for this purpose. For the development of efficient pseudocapacitors, the fast and reversible kinetics of redox-active species are required, so quinone/hydroquinone redox couples have been considered promising organic molecules for pseudocapacitors. Table 2 summarizes recent reports on quinone-functionalized electrode materials for pseudocapacitors along with these materials' specific capacitance and cyclic stability values. The energy storage capabilities of supercapacitors could be improved by proper combination of materials that show pseudocapacitance and electrical double layer capacitance;176 thus, attempts to incorporate quinone derivatives into carbon-based materials (e.g., CNTs, carbon onions, activated carbon, and graphene) were made to enhance the charge storage capability of EDLCs. For example, Chen et al.177 decorated hierarchical porous carbon nanotubes (HPCNTs) with AQ molecules via a solvothermal reaction. Compared with the specific capacitance of 304 F g−1 exhibited by an unmodified HPCNT electrode, the AQ-HPCNT electrode showed a specific capacitance of 650 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in H2SO4 (1 M). The AQ-HPCNT electrode also showed a capacitance retention of 96.45% at 10 A g−1 after 1000 charging/discharging cycles. Pognon et al.178 demonstrated that the specific capacitance of Black Pearls carbon increased from 150 to 250 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in H2SO4 (1 M) after the covalent attachment of catechol groups on the pristine carbon. During the initial 2000 cycles, a specific capacitance loss occurred due to the progressive leaching of catechol moieties, but afterwards, the capacitance was maintained, with only about a 1.5% decrease per 1000 cycles at 7.5 A g−1. Anjos et al.29 attached quinone derivatives such as 1,4-naphthoquinone, 9,10-phenanthrenequinone and 4,5-pyrenedione to carbon onions through a simple hydrophobic interaction, which increased the specific capacitance of the carbon onions (which is normally 30–40 F g−1). Carbon onions functionalized with 1,4-naphthoquinone and 9,10-phenanthrenequinone showed respective specific capacitances of 91 and 124 F g−1 in H2SO4 (1 M) at 5 mV s−1 with respective capacitance retention of 80 and 94% after 10000 cycles. The decoration with 4,5-pyrenedione showed the best performance among the quinone derivatives in their work, with a specific capacitance of 130 F g−1 in H2SO4 (1 M) at 5 mV s−1 and 97% capacitance retention after 10000 charging/discharging cycles at 1.3 A g−1. Recently, PDA and polynorepinephrine (PNE) were used as pseudocapacitive compounds to prepare graphene-based hybrid electrodes.179,180 Despite the fact that PNE and PDA exhibit similar chemical properties, PNE induces the formation of a smoother coating on a substrate than does PDA.181 The use of PDA (or PNE) is advantageous due to the reduction of graphene oxide (GO). Furthermore, the functionalization with quinone moieties can occur simultaneously through a simple immersion process under mild conditions. For example, Cha et al.179 reported a pseudocapacitor with PDA-decorated graphene oxide/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (GO/PEDOT) hybrid that showed 2-fold higher specific capacitance (∼126 F g−1) than unmodified GO/PEDOT at 1 A g−1 in LiClO4 (0.1 M). Hong et al.180 synthesized a PNE-functionalized GO-sponge pseudocapacitor that exhibited 2.5-fold higher specific capacitance (232.1 F g−1) than a pristine GO sponge at 1 A g−1 in H2SO4 (1 M).
Table 2 A list of quinone-functionalized electrode materials for pseudocapacitors, their specific capacitances and cyclic stabilitiesa




Electrode materials
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Cyclic stability (%)
# of cycles
Electrolyte
Ref.





a * F cm−3, ** mF cm−2.





Anthraquinone/hierarchical porous CNTs
650@1 A g−1
96.45@10 A g−1
1000
1 M H2SO4

177



Catechol/Black Pearls carbon
250@2 mV s−1
88@7.5 A g−1
10000
1 M H2SO4

178



1,4-Naphthoquinone/carbon onion
91@5 mV s−1
80@1.3 A g−1
10000
1 M H2SO4

29



9,10-Phenanthrenequinone/carbon onion
124@5 mV s−1
94@1.3 A g−1
10000
1 M H2SO4

29



4,5-Pyrenedione/carbon onion
130@5 mV s−1
97@1.3 A g−1
10000
1 M H2SO4

29



PDA/RGO/PEDOT
126@1 A g−1
75
1000
0.1 M LiClO4

179



PNE/RGO sponge
232.1@1 A g−1
81@200 mV s−1
2000
1 M H2SO4

180



Catechol/polypyrrole
130*@0.4 A cm−3
75@2 A cm−3
10000
0.1 M HClO4

182



Randomly oriented slurry of 2D COFs linked by β-ketoenamine and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone
48 ± 10@0.1 A g−1
83@0.1 A g−1
5000
1 M H2SO4

183



Oriented thin film of 2D COFs linked by β-ketoenamine and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone
3**@150 μA cm−2
93@150 μA cm−2
5000
1 M H2SO4

184



2,6-Dibromoanthraquinone/Ketjenblack carbon
650@5 mV s−1
85
1000
0.5 M LiClO4/acetronitrile

185





The quinone redox couple can provide increased charge storage capability of capacitors through hybridizing with a conducting polymer or covalent organic framework (COF). Kim et al.182 synthesized a 3D mesostructured hybrid electrode consisting of polypyrrole and catechol through a polystyrene colloidal crystal-templated electrosynthesis (Fig. 7A). The resultant 3D porous structure showed good ion transport due to its interconnected macropores and good electron mobility due to the continuously conductive polypyrrole scaffold. As a result, the mesostructured hybrid electrode showed an increased volumetric capacitance of 130 F cm−3 at 0.4 A cm−3 in HClO4 (0.1 M), which exceeded those of the fibrous catechol/polypyrrole composite (117 F cm−3) made without the polystyrene template and the bare polypyrrole electrode (95 F cm−3). The mesostructured electrode exhibited 75% capacitance retention over 10000 charging/discharging cycles at a constant current of 2 A cm−3. Recently, a new approach of incorporating redox-active quinone molecules into 2D COFs was reported by the Dichtel group.183 Taking advantage of the unique properties of 2D COFs, such as the facile control of porosity and surface area and their flexible material design, the research group synthesized a 2D COF-based pseudocapacitor (i.e., DAAQ–TFP COFs) by incorporating 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ) moieties into COFs linked by an electro-active β-ketoenamine (i.e., 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol) (Fig. 7B). The DAAQ–TFP COFs exhibited a significant increase in current density compared to COFs without any redox-active species [i.e., p-diaminobenzene (DAB)–TFP COF]; this was attributed to the pseudocapacitive properties of DAAQ. Furthermore, the electrochemical characterization of the material indicated that the porous 2D COF architecture exhibited increased electron and proton transfer rates derived from β-ketoenamine and high surface area of the 2D COF. DAAQ–TFP COFs exhibited a specific capacitance of 48 ± 10 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 (1 M H2SO4), which is higher than those of the DAAQ monomer (35 ± 7 F g−1) and COFs without any redox-active species [i.e., p-diaminobenzene (DAB)–TFP COF] (15 ± 6 F g−1); DAAQ–TFP COFs' specific capacitance was maintained at 40 ± 9 F g−1 after 5000 charge/discharge cycles. The specific capacitance of DAAQ–TFP COFs was further improved in the follow-up work184 by growing the DAAQ–TFP COFs directly on an Au electrode. Unlike when a GC electrode was used with a randomly oriented DAAQ–TFP COF slurry, the more uniform arrangement of the DAAQ–TFP COFs on the Au electrode increased the electrochemically active amount of anthraquinone moieties, which was attributed to charge transfer between anthraquinones in the dense and oriented layers (i.e., self-exchange). This resulted in a capacitance increase from 0.4 to 3 mF cm−2 at 150 μA cm−2 in H2SO4 (1 M) and a capacitance retention of 93% after 5000 cycles at 150 μA cm−2. Through the synthesis of integrated pseudocapacitive compounds using the conductive 2D COF platform, the dissolution of quinone moieties can be diminished, providing more design flexibility for quinone-based, pseudocapacitive materials with long-term stability.
 Fig. 7  (A) Synthesis procedure for the fabrication of a 3D mesostructured hybrid electrode consisting of polypyrrole and catechol using the polystyrene colloidal crystal-templated electrosynthesis method. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (B) Synthesis of DAAQ- and DAB–TFP COF. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
The operating potential window of capacitors in aqueous electrolytes is restricted to ∼1 V due to water splitting, limiting the accumulated electrical energy. The use of organic electrolytes can facilitate broader potential windows of operation (∼3 V) than can aqueous electrolytes. Zhou et al. reported that the two-electron reduction of 2,6-dibromoanthraquinone in organic media leads to high energy storage capabilities.185 The authors polymerized 2,6-dibromoanthraquinone onto a Ketjenblack carbon electrode to diminish the extensive leaching of quinone to the organic electrolyte. The hybrid electrode exhibited a maximum specific capacitance of 650 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in a LiClO4/acetonitrile mixture (0.5 M). Importantly, capacitance retention was moderate because of the anchoring effect, which remained above 85% after 1000 cycles. The design of asymmetric supercapacitors has been proposed for expanding the working voltage window in aqueous solution and achieving improved energy and power densities.186–189 They consist of dissimilar positive and negative electrode materials, exhibiting different ranges in the working voltage of the electrodes, thus can enlarge the potential window of the device. Algharaibeh et al.188 reported an asymmetric capacitor with anthraquinone-modified carbon fabric as a negative electrode and ruthenium oxide as a positive electrode. The use of the anthraquinone-modified carbon fabric electrode extended the negative potential limit to −0.4 V in H2SO4 (1 M), compared to ruthenium oxide (−0.2 V), achieving a higher operating voltage of 1.3 V than that (1 V) of the ruthenium oxide-based symmetric capacitor. The energy density of the anthraquinone-based asymmetric device was 12.7 W h kg−1 (at 0.8 A discharge rate) and it showed an average power density of 17.3 kW kg−1.

3.2. Energy devices utilizing the electrical and optical properties of quinone moieties
Eumelanin and PDA exhibit unique electrical and optical characteristics, such as semiconducting properties,75 broadband absorption,70 and photoconductivity.79 For a high-performance organic electronic device, it is important to use a suitable active layer that exhibits strong light absorption and efficient charge transport. In this section, we will describe recent advances in preparing device-quality thin films of eumelanin and PDA and the development of PDA-based phototransistors.

Table 3 summarizes the recently reported protocols for making thin layers of eumelanin and PDA on a substrate. Two ways of producing eumelanin (or PDA) films exist. The first is the direct deposition of eumelanin dissolved in a solution. Because eumelanin is insoluble in aqueous media at neutral pH,190 alkaline solutions and organic solvents (e.g., dimethyl sulfoxide and dimethyl formamide) are considered the best solvents for dissolving eumelanin.190,191 The dissolved eumelanin solution can then be directly spin-coated onto a substrate. Other techniques, such as electrospray deposition192 and matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation193 have also been used to overcome the poor solubility of eumelanin. Another route is to start with the compound's precursors (e.g., DOPA, DHI, or dopamine) and to then conduct post-treatments to convert the precursors to eumelanin and PDA films. Subianto et al.194 used DOPA as a precursor and fabricated a eumelanin film on an ITO substrate using electropolymerization. The synthesis of a eumelanin film using soluble DHI as a precursor has also been reported.195 DHI is soluble in many organic solvents, ensuring the generation of homopolymers rather than copolymers of various intermediates. Furthermore, dopamine has drawn much attention recently because it can form a PDA ad-layer on a substrate through self-polymerization under slightly alkaline conditions (pH 8.5) through a simple dipping process.33,196 A major concern in developing eumelanin- or PDA-based devices is producing a homogeneous film. The presence of impurities (or inconsistencies) in a film can form trap sites that hinder the efficient transport of charge carriers. Several strategies for producing homogeneous eumelanin and PDA films have been demonstrated by controlling the film-processing conditions. For example, Bothma et al.197 succeeded in producing a uniform eumelanin film by selecting appropriate solvents that can solubilize eumelanin well and minimize the impurities during the process. They used ammonium hydroxide (instead of sodium hydroxide) as a solvent, as it can be easily evaporated to produce a smooth film with a root mean squared (Rms) surface roughness of 0.6 nm. The uniform eumelanin film exhibited a high electrical conductivity of 2.5 × 10−5 S cm−1 (under 100% humidity at 24 °C), which is comparable to that of amorphous silicon. Another attempt was made by changing the polymerization conditions of the PDA precursors. Because PDA precursors are oxidized during polymerization, the oxidant type and amount can influence the polymerization kinetics and affect the film morphology. Kim et al.198 succeeded in producing a homogeneous PDA film by using oxygen as an oxidant (instead of air) to increase the oxidation rate during the self-polymerization of dopamine to PDA. The PDA layer, deposited on a Si wafer under oxygen rich-conditions, showed a smoother surface, with a Rms surface roughness of 0.52 nm according to AFM analysis; the PDA layer made in air had a Rms surface roughness of 2.58 nm.
Table 3 A list of protocols for the fabrication of eumelanin and PDA thin films and their electrical conductivities




Method
Starting compound
Thin film fabrication
Electrical conductivity (S cm−1)
Remarks
Ref.


Reaction medium
Process





a (CH3)2SO.
b Matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation.
c 5,6-Dihydroxyindole.
d Ammonia-induced solid state polymerization.
e Tris-(hydroxyl methyl)aminomethane; Rms: root mean squared surface roughness.





Direct deposition
Synthetic melanin
—
Powder pressing
10−5
Thickness: 1 mm

75



NH4OH
Spin coating
2.5 × 10−5
Relative humidity 100%, Rms: 0.6 nm

197



DMSOa
Spin coating
7.0 × 10−5
100% humid condition, thickness: 160 nm

251



10−4 to 10−3
Relative humidity 90%, ionic conductivity

81



Electrospray deposition
10−10
Thickness: 100 nm, 360 K

192



Distilled water
MAPLEb
5.1 × 10−9
Thickness: 1.5 μm

193



Precursor polymerization
DOPA
Sodium tetraborate
Electro-polymerization
1.4 × 10−6
Ambient conditions

194



DHIc
Methanol
AISSPd
10−7
Moisture-equilibrated conditions, Rms: 0.3 nm

195



Dopamine hydrochloride
THAM buffere
Dip coating
3 × 10−9
Relative humidity 70%

86



5.9 × 10−5
Ambient conditions

41





Recently, Nam et al.41 reported the fabrication of an organic phototransistor that utilizes an O2-induced PDA film as an organic active layer (Fig. 8A); this phototransistor exhibited a good charge transport property and high photosensitivity. The PDA-based phototransistor exhibited a significant increase in drain current (ID) at a negative VG (Fig. 8B), which suggests that the PDA film was a p-type semiconductor. The Ion/Ioff ratio was 1.2 × 105, which indicates that the PDA-based phototransistor has a switching property depending on the applied voltage. No flat-band shift appeared in the capacitance–voltage hysteresis loop, which implies that the charge trapping was hindered in the O2-induced PDA layer (Fig. 8C). The PDA-based phototransistor exhibited very sensitive photoresponse properties under light irradiation (Fig. 8D); its photoresponsivity, which is defined as the photocurrent generated per unit of light power absorbed by the photodetector, was found to be 9 A W−1 at VG = −12 V and I = 19.3 mW cm−1. This photoresponsivity value is larger than those of pentacene-based organic phototransistors199 and P3HT-capped amorphous indium–gallium–zinc oxide phototransistors.200 PDA's electrical switching property and its good photoresponsivity suggest that it has potential as an organic semiconductor for organic devices. Regarding the development of PDA-based devices with practical applications, however, several issues remain for further studies. It is still unclear how the processing parameters, such as O2 concentration in dopamine solution, affect the electrical properties of the PDA layer. It is known that the dopamine oxidation reaction becomes more favorable as the O2 level increases, resulting in improved molecular stacking of the PDA layer.198 In the work by Nam et al.,41 PDA thin films were synthesized in an O2-rich environment. This may lead to the formation of a PDA layer with a more regularly stacked geometry to improve the charge-carrier transport of the PDA thin film, but the exact O2 concentration needed in the dopamine solution is still ambiguous. While O2 level in the dopamine solution plays a significant role in accelerating the deposition kinetics, the initial dopamine concentration can affect the thickness of a PDA film.198,201 The active layer thickness affects not only the transistor's electrical characteristics202 but also the thin film's hall mobility.203 While Nam et al.41 measured the thickness change in the PDA layer using only a scanning electron microscope, further multifaceted analyses are needed using other tools, such as AFM and ellipsometry.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of a PDA-based organic phototransistor. (B) Transfer characteristics of the PDA phototransistor at VD = −10 V under dark conditions. (C) C–V hysteresis loop for a Au/PDA/p-Si device. The lack of a flat-band shift implies that the charge trapping is hindered in the PDA layer. (D) Current versus gate voltage (VG) plot for a PDA-based organic phototransistor at VD = −10 V under dark and light illumination conditions. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3. Energy devices based on the metal-chelating and -reducing activity of quinone moieties
The dual features of catechol moieties (such as metal chelation and reduction) have been widely utilized for the synthesis of organic/inorganic hybrid energy materials. In particular, PDA is a facile scaffold for hybridization because of its multifunctionality, as it can be coated virtually to any material,204–206 binds to metal ions,207–209 encapsulates small molecules,44 and provides anticorrosive protection,210 as illustrated in Fig. 9. In this section, we describe recent advances in the applications of the metal-chelating and -reducing properties of quinone moieties in the synthesis of energy materials for plasmonic light-harvesting platforms and DSSCs.
 Fig. 9  Illustrative description of PDA's multifunctionality, including versatile coating for any material regardless of type and shape, metal chelation and reduction, small-molecule encapsulation, and anticorrosive protection. 

3.3.1. Plasmonic light-harvesting platforms. 
The localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) characteristic of metal nanoparticles (e.g., Ag, Au, and Al NPs) can boost the photoelectrocatalytic activities of photoactive materials.211–217 The photoexcitation of the photoactive species can be significantly enhanced by the presence of adjacent plasmonic NPs because of the intense and local electric field induced by collective electron oscillation in metals upon resonant excitation. The primary issue in the construction of a plasmon-enhanced light-harvesting system is how to tailor such elaborate metallic nanostructures (with precise control of the size, geometry, and morphology of plasmonic NPs). In this regard, many synthesis strategies have been developed in the past decades, including focused ion-beam milling,218,219 electron-beam lithography,220 and wet chemical synthesis.221 However, such methods have often suffered from the disadvantages of low throughput, poor cost effectiveness, and toxicity. Recently, researchers have suggested43–45,210,222,223 that PDA can immobilize plasmonic metal NPs and couple a metallic nanostructure with a molecular chromophore (or semiconductor) through a biocompatible, encapsulative coating. In addition to the metal-reducing property of PDA, it is also possible to control the thickness of the PDA ad-layer (with ∼1 nm accuracy) and the size of metal NPs by adjusting polymerization time and the concentrations of dopamine and metal-ion precursors. Considering that the LSPR effect is highly sensitive to the size and distance arrangement of the plasmonic metal NPs, these multifunctional features of PDA are advantageous for fabricating plasmon-enhanced, light-harvesting architectures in the nanoscale.
Recently, Lee et al.44 introduced PDA to the facile synthesis of nanohybrids of plasmonic metal (core)/photosensitizer (shell). They applied the core/shell nanostructure to the plasmon-enhanced solar regeneration of nicotinamide cofactors (NADH) to mimic natural photosynthesis. The plasmonic core/shell assembly utilized the multiple roles of PDA: (1) as a reducing agent for metal NP synthesis, (2) as a scaffold for the encapsulation of an organic photosensitizer [e.g., eosin Y (EY)], and (3) as an adhesive layer between the assembly and the substrate (Fig. 10A). The nanohybrid was synthesized in three steps. First, a substrate was coated with a PDA ad-layer in a simple immersion process. Then, metal NPs were created on the PDA-coated substrate by utilizing the reducing power of the catecholic moieties in PDA, followed by the encapsulation of EY in another PDA layer on top of the metal NP-deposited PDA core. Light absorption by EY in the plasmonic assembly was boosted due to the enhanced local electromagnetic field near the metal cores according to UV-visible absorption, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopic analyses, and a finite-difference time-domain computational calculation (Fig. 10B). As a result, the solar regeneration yield of NADH was 14.7%, much higher than the 2.1% yield for the nanoassembly without plasmonic metal NPs. The authors suggested that the improvement in the photosynthetic yield was due to the plasmon-enhanced effect, considering that the NADH photoregeneration yield was strongly dependent on the thickness of the PDA layer between the metal NP core and the EY-encapsulated PDA shell. With the thicker PDA spacing layer, the LSPR effect faded out as the metal NPs moved farther from the photosensitizer (i.e., the EY). Wei et al.45 also utilized the reducing capability of PDA to synthesize Ag-decorated ZnO photoanodes. After the reduction process, they applied a post-annealing treatment to the Ag-decorated ZnO to make a carbonized PDA layer that showed excellent electrical conductivity224–231 and increased the charge-transfer rate between Ag NPs and ZnO. The carbonized PDA layer played an important role in separating Ag NPs from ZnO, and this was used to determine an effective distance for the energy transfer from Ag to ZnO based on the LSPR effect. The Ag-carbonized PDA–ZnO photoanode had a higher photocurrent conversion efficiency (3.9%) than the pristine ZnO photoanode (1.5%). The enhancement effect was attributed to the concentrated light-harvesting due to the LSPR effect of Ag NPs, with the aid of improved light absorption and charge recombination inhibition due to the carbonized PDA layer.
 Fig. 10  (A) Mussel-inspired, PDA-based plasmonic nanohybrid for light harvesting. (B) The distribution of electric field intensity around Au NPs (70 nm) with an EY-incorporated PDA shell (20 nm) shows that PDA plays an important role as a spacing controller for the LSPR effect. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
PDA can also act as an anticorrosive agent in the creation of Al-based plasmonic light-harvesting platforms. Al is an emerging alternative to expensive noble metals, such as Au and Ag, because of its cost-effectiveness and wide-range absorbance over visible light. However, its instability and corrosiveness in aqueous environments have hindered practical utilization. According to a recent report,210 Al nanodots were protected from corrosion when they were immersed in a photocatalytic aqueous solution after a PDA coating. According to electron microscopic and UV-visible spectroscopic analyses, the morphology and the LSPR characteristic of the PDA-coated Al nanodots were well-preserved even after 2 weeks in a redox aqueous solution. The corrosion resistance of the PDA-coated Al dots was further verified by an electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurement—a highly accurate tool for evaluating a metal's corrosion behavior. After the immersion of a PDA-coated Al film in the redox solution for 2 hours, the Nyquist plot showed a much bigger radius of semicircles for the PDA-coated film than bare Al film at low frequency (e.g., 0.1 Hz); the radius increased as the PDA layer became thicker, indicating the high corrosion resistance of Al film in the presence of the conformal PDA ad-layer. The authors attributed the resistive capability to the PDA layer preventing direct contact between the Al and the corrosive electrolyte and to the passivation effect on Al atoms caused by the chelation of catecholic moieties in PDA.


3.3.2. Dye-sensitized solar cells. 
DSSCs inject photoinduced electrons from organic dyes into a semiconducting photoanode (usually TiO2) and are considered an alternative to the more expensive p–n junction semiconductor solar cells. Catechols are known to create a new dye-to-TiO2 charge-transfer band after their strong binding to TiO2, thus exhibiting a new absorption band; due to this property, catechol and its derivatives serve as Type II photosensitizers and anchors that bridge chromophores and TiO2.127,128,232–235 As an anchoring group, catecholate has a higher pKa value (∼9.6) than carboxylate (∼3.5) and phosphate (∼6.5);128 catecholate's high pKa value can prevent dye molecules from desorption from TiO2 in the presence of water, thus ensuring cell stability even at high pH due to the strong electronic coupling between the catecholic moiety and TiO2. Kar et al.235 synthesized a ruthenium(II)–polypyridyl complex modified with catechol groups and found that the strong electronic coupling between catechols and TiO2 widened the absorption range of the ruthenium(II)–polypyridyl sensitizer to near IR and significantly diminished the solvatochromic effect caused by the change in the binding affinity between the photosensitizer and TiO2. Sarker et al.128 prepared a zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) sensitizer with pendant catechols, whose Q-band shifted from 680 to 750 nm with a tail extending into the near-IR range after binding to TiO2. Although carboxylate exhibited weaker bonding to TiO2 than did catecholate, a ZnPc–carboxylate-sensitized solar cell showed a higher photovoltaic efficiency (3.05%) than a ZnPc–catechol-based cell (0.92%) because the catechol-to-TiO2 charge-transfer complex may also be conductive to induce back electron transfer. In principle, the efficiency of charge transfer in Type II photoinjection should be unity, but the actual efficiency of DSSCs that employ catechol or its derivatives has been reported as being only moderate due to the detrimental charge recombination. To address the back-electron-transfer problem, molecular modification of catechols has been attempted through the introduction of electron donors, with the aim of destabilizing the electrons in the HOMO level of the dye to drive them to move forward to the conduction band of TiO2. For example, Tae et al.125 reported that attaching electron-donating functional groups, pyridine and quinoline, to catechol via a vinyl group resulted in 2- and 2.7-fold increases of photovoltaic efficiency, respectively, compared to a plain catechol dye. They suggested that a consecutive charge shift from pyridine (or quinoline) to Ti–catechol–vinyl moiety lowered the back-electron-transfer rate and increased the donor strength, thus enhancing overall electron injection efficiency and the short circuit current. An et al.123 further revealed that photovoltaic efficiency could be enhanced by adjusting the conjugation length of the electron-donating groups of a catechol–thiophene dye sensitizer. The absorption band red-shifted as the thiophene unit became longer, resulting in a higher light-harvesting efficiency and a maximum photovoltaic efficiency of 0.76%. The phenomenon was attributed to the destabilization of the catechol HOMO level and to the increased dipole moment of the surface-bound Ti–ligand complex.
Chemical modification of catechol dyes to tune their photoelectrical properties is an attractive strategy for the development of high-performance Type II DSSCs. Recently, Ooyama et al.236 investigated the effect of the substituents of a catechol dye on the photovoltaic efficiency of Type II DSSCs. According to their studies, functionalization with strongly electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., nitro/formyl and tricyanoethenyl groups) significantly stabilized the LUMO level of catechol, which induced a small red-shift of photoabsorbance after binding to TiO2, and facilitated back-electron-transfer from TiO2 because of the strong electron-accepting ability. Chemical modification with other strong electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., nitro group) showed efficient dye-to-TiO2 charge transfer efficiency and prevented back-electron-transfer, which was attributed to the destabilization of the LUMO level of the dye caused by interaction between the nitro group and I− in the electrolyte. On the other hand, the introduction of a strong electron-donating group (e.g., diphenylamino group) significantly increased the HOMO level of catechol, making electron transfer from the I3−/I− redox couple in the electrolyte thermodynamically unfavorable. The authors suggested that a moderately electron-withdrawing substituent such as the cyano group was effective in increasing dye-to-TiO2 charge transfer efficiency and suppressing the back-electron-transfer.
On the other hand, PDA itself can function as an organic photosensitizer when catechol groups in PDA chelate with TiO2. The π–π system of PDA, which is induced by many aromatic and conjugated molecules, generates HOMO and LUMO levels, providing PDA with amorphous semiconducting characteristics.40 Furthermore, PDA has a broad absorbance, from UV to near IR, and it can easily coat any organic (or inorganic) materials, as described earlier.196,237–243 Nam et al.42 utilized a PDA-coated TiO2 composite as a photoanode material in a DSSC system (Fig. 11). In this work, the attachment of the PDA layer to TiO2 was performed by dip coating in a N2-saturated, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer (pH 8.5)—rather than using air- or an oxidant-induced polymer solution—which significantly reduced PDA aggregation by slowing down the polymerization rate. The TiO2/PDA complex showed max. photovoltaic efficiency of 1.2%. Considering that the maximum efficiency of the dopamine-to-TiO2 complex was only 0.1%, this result indicates the possibility of developing a facile polymer-based DSSC without the need for multistep synthesis procedures. Polyepinephrine (PEP), another catechol-containing polymer, can also be utilized as a photosensitizer for DSSCs, according to a recent report.126 An epinephrine monomer has three anchoring hydroxyl groups in its backbone, which can make for a stronger bond to TiO2 than PDA can produce, thus enhancing the stability and charge-transfer rate in a PEP-sensitized cell, which has a 1.5-fold higher short circuit current than a PDA-sensitized cell. Although the increased injection density of the photosensitizer-to-TiO2 charge carriers caused more charge recombination than in the PDA-sensitized cell, the PEP-sensitized cell's overall energy conversion efficiency (0.41%) was 63% higher than that of the PDA-sensitized cell, suggesting that increasing the number of anchoring groups in catecholic dyes could improve DSSCs' photovoltaic efficiency through stronger binding of the dyes to TiO2.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of a PDA-sensitized solar cell. PDA can strongly bind to TiO2 to form a new PDA-to-TiO2 charge-transfer complex. Upon illumination, excited electrons in the HOMO level of PDA are directly injected into the conduction band of TiO2 without the intermediation of excited dye molecular states. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 

4. Summary and outlook
Biological energy transduction and storage systems inspire the design and improvement of human-made energy devices. Quinone is a key redox mediator in natural photosynthesis and cellular respiration, delivering electrons and protons with minimal charge recombination. People have utilized the unique features of quinone, such as its inherent redox, optical, electrical, and metal chelating/reducing properties, to fabricate energy-harvesting and -storage materials. For example, quinone can function as an electron shuttle to increase solar-energy conversion efficiency. The reduction potentials of quinone/quinone-anion-radical and semiquinone-radical/semiquinone-anion are lower than those of photosensitizers (e.g., xanthenes, porphyrins, and quantum dots), making quinone and its derivatives suitable for extracting excited electrons from the photosensitizers in solar-energy conversion applications, such as artificial photosynthetic platforms and DSSCs. Furthermore, the protonation of quinone molecules drives a long-lived charge separation by preventing back-electron transfer from quinone to photosensitizers. Quinone's reversible and fast redox reactions can support fast ion insertion/extraction processes, so it can be applied to rechargeable energy storage systems (e.g., Li-ion batteries, redox flow batteries, and pseudocapacitors). Quinone and its derivatives are advantageous as redox-active compounds for rechargeable batteries and pseudocapacitors because of their fast charging/discharging rate, relatively high energy density, tunable solubility in electrolytes, cyclic stability, and abundance. The strong binding affinity of catechols to metal ions also facilitates the synthesis of hybrid organic/inorganic energy materials. For example, when catechols bind to TiO2, a new dye-to-charge complex is created to red-shift the absorbance range and increase the light-harvesting efficiency of DSSCs. On the other hand, eumelanin and PDA show strong broadband absorbance along with photostability and semiconducting behavior under light illumination (or external bias). These compounds' unique electrical and optical properties hint at their utility in active layers of phototransistors or as photosensitizers of DSSCs to be coupled with TiO2. In particular, PDA is a useful scaffold for the hybridization because of its multifunctionality (e.g., versatile coating for any substrate, metal chelation/reduction, small-molecule encapsulation, and anti-corrosive protection) and its simple preparative procedures. For example, the reduction of plasmonic metals by PDA can increase the light-harvesting efficiency of the dye chromophores that are encapsulated in the PDA ad-layer.
Despite the recent progress in the utilization of quinone and its derivatives in the fabrication of energy materials, several issues still need to be addressed for the construction of more efficient energy-harvesting and -storage systems. For example, the low conductivity and solubility of eumelanin and PDA limit their applications in electronic devices. As listed in Table 3, eumelanin and PDA exhibit conductivities in the range of 10−3 to 10−10 S cm−1, which are much lower than those of other conducting polymers, such as polypyrrole (102 to 103 S cm−1), polyaniline (30–200 S cm−1), and polythiophene (10 to 103 S cm−1).244 The limited solubility of eumelanin and PDA can easily induce aggregate formation during polymerization, and the lack of standardized protocols for controlling molecular disordering hinders the synthesis of homogeneous thin films which is mandatory for the fabrication of high-performance electronic devices. A primitive approach to mitigate these issues is to define a clear framework for the structure–property–function relationship of eumelanin and PDA. This will reveal the compounds' fundamental molecular structures and charge-transport mechanisms and provide insights into the rational design of eumelanin- and PDA-based energy materials that have well-defined conductivity and solubility for their applications to bioelectronic devices.
A critical issue of long-term stability should be taken into account when quinone is used as a redox couple in energy storage devices such as Li-ion batteries and pseudocapacitors. The aromatic nature of quinone-based molecules often causes problems through their dissolution into electrolytes, decreasing the rate performance and cyclic stability of the energy storage devices. In this regard, several strategies have been suggested for enhancing long-term stability, including the hybridization of quinone via covalent bonding to conductive electrode materials,167 the anchoring of quinone through polymerization,185 and the use of solid electrolytes.146 In addition, in-depth studies on the relationship between quinone's molecular structure and its electrochemical behavior may provide further insights for the chemical engineering of quinone molecules toward solubility optimization.64,245,246 These efforts will make the construction of sustainable and practical energy-storage systems with enhanced cyclic lives more feasible.
A well-coordinated integration of photosensitizers with quinone-based electron mediators is critical for efficient photoinduced electron transfer without unwanted processes, such as back-electron transfer and charge recombination, leading to highly efficient artificial photosynthetic devices.247 For example, quinone-rich polymers such as PDA can be easily self-assembled on the surface of photosensitizing nanomaterials, and PDA can act as an electron shuttle to improve the efficiencies of photochemical water oxidation and organic pollutant degradation.7,248 In this regard, the development of better strategies for hybridizing quinone and its derivatives with photosensitizers may boost the efficiency of artificial photosynthesis. Lastly, the interface state created between catechol-based chromophores and semiconducting materials decisively affects the efficiency of the resulting energy devices, but the nature of the electronic state at the interface remains unclear.91,249,250 For example, strong electronic coupling between catechol and TiO2 enables ultra-fast electron injection but it may also be conductive to induce detrimental back-electron transfer from TiO2 to catechols, which can significantly reduce the photovoltaic efficiency of DSSCs. Future studies on the detailed binding type, electronic structure, and competing mechanism and dynamics between electron injection and recombination in catechol-based, dye-sensitized semiconductors should increase dye-to-semiconductor electron transfer efficiencies, thus establishing high-performance light-harvesting and photovoltaic devices.
Despite unsolved issues and challenges, quinone-based energy materials have a bright future because of their facile synthesis procedures, flexibilities, and inherent redox, electrical, optical, and metal chelating/reducing properties. Furthermore, the multifunctionality of catechol-rich polymers such as PDA can provide an effective tool for the construction of hybrid architectures in nanoscale, integrating organic and inorganic energy materials. The chemical tailoring of quinone molecules through the introduction of other functional groups should facilitate the modification of their redox potentials, solubilities, and electron equilibrium states, which will help tune the performance of quinone-functionalized materials at the molecular level. The unique properties of quinone and its derivatives along with this rational tunability should provide more opportunities for the design of bio-inspired energy-harvesting and -storage materials.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Demetra Achilleos at the University of Cambridge for helpful discussions on quinone-functionalized pseudocapacitive materials. This study was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) via the Creative Research Initiative Center (NRF-2015 R1A3A2066191), Republic of Korea.
References
J. F. Allen and W. Martin, Nature, 2007, 445, 610–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, Hoboken, NJ,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Ishizaki and G. R. Fleming, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 17255–17260 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, C. Chen, J. Zhao, F. Zhang and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15146–15152 RSC .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, F. Zhang, J. Zhao and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9896–9899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kato, T. Cardona, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8332–8335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, M. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6364–6368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Walsh, N. M. Sanchez-Ballester, V. P. Ting, K. Ariga and M. T. Weller, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 3718–3722 CAS .
R. D. Milton, D. P. Hickey, S. Abdellaoui, K. Lim, F. Wu, B. Tan and S. D. Minteer, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4867–4875 RSC .
A. Rodenberg, M. Orazietti, M. Mosberger, C. Bachmann, B. Probst, R. Alberto and P. Hamm, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 1321–1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Osyczka, C. C. Moser, F. Daldal and P. L. Dutton, Nature, 2004, 427, 607–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Sazanov, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2015, 16, 375–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, H. Zhang, X. Li, T. Liu and F. Xing, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1281–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, Q. Chen, M. R. Gerhardt, L. Tong, S. B. Kim, L. Eisenach, A. W. Valle, D. Hardee, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and M. P. Marshak, Science, 2015, 349, 1529–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, C. Suh, S. Er, M. R. Gerhardt, C. J. Galvin, X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Perry and A. Z. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A5064–A5067 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, L. Hoober-Burkhardt, F. Wang, G. K. Surya Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1371–A1380 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, D.-S. Shin, J. Ryu, M. Choi, N. Park, S. Y. Hong and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5141–5146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 4850–4854 CrossRef .
T. Ma, Q. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Pan and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6428–6432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Kim, T. Liu, S. W. Lee and S. S. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2374–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nokami, T. Matsuo, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo, T. Tsukagoshi, H. Yoshizawa, A. Shimizu, H. Kuramoto, K. Komae, H. Tsuyama and J.-i. Yoshida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19694–19700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schmidt, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1500369 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Li, B. Zhu, L. Guo, Y. Yang, R. Hao, H. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. Guo and X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3472–3479 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Yang, J. Lin and L. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3486–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oyaizu, Y. Niibori, A. Takahashi and H. Nishide, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2012, 23, 243–250 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Wang, R. Hao and L. Guo, Small, 2016 DOI:10.1002/smll.201503924 .
D. M. Anjos, J. K. McDonough, E. Perre, G. M. Brown, S. H. Overbury, Y. Gogotsi and V. Presser, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 702–712 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Campbell, M. D. Merrill, B. C. Wood, E. Montalvo, M. A. Worsley, T. F. Baumann and J. Biener, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17764–17770 CAS .
S.-K. Kim, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, S. B. Lee and H. S. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeiger, D. Weingarth and V. Presser, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1117–1127 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Postma, Y. Yan, Y. Wang, A. N. Zelikin, E. Tjipto and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3042–3044 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ku, J. Ryu, S. K. Hong, H. Lee and C. B. Park, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 2535–2541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, L. Niu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao and L. Chou, Anal. Lett., 2015, 48, 2031–2039 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, J. Liu, S. Liu and F. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5900–5902 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. d’Ischia, A. Napolitano, V. Ball, C.-T. Chen and M. J. Buehler, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3541–3550 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Meredith and T. Sarna, Pigm. Cell Res., 2006, 19, 572–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Nam, J. Cha, S. H. Lee, W. J. Yoo and D. Y. Jung, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1458–1461 RSC .
H. J. Nam, B. Kim, M. J. Ko, M. Jin, J. M. Kim and D.-Y. Jung, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14000–14007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, W. Zhu, Y. Lan, M. Zhang, T. Tian, H. Wang and G. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10754–10763 CAS .
M. Lee, J. U. Kim, J. S. Lee, B. I. Lee, J. Shin and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4463–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, J. Kong, L. Yang, L. Ke, H. R. Tan, H. Liu, Y. Huang, X. W. Sun, X. Lu and H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5045–5052 CAS .
E. Laviron, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1984, 164, 213–227 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Guin, S. Das and P. C. Mandal, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 2011, 1–22 CrossRef .
M. D. Hawley, S. V. Tatawawadi, S. Piekarski and R. N. Adams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 447–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Rich, Farad. Discuss., 1982, 74, 349–364 RSC .
N. Gupta and H. Linschitz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6384–6391 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sasaki, T. Kashimura, M. Ohura, Y. Ohsaki and N. Ohta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2437–2443 CrossRef CAS .
M. Quan, D. Sanchez, M. F. Wasylkiw and D. K. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12847–12856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. A. Laitinen and W. E. Harris, Chemical Analysis: an Advanced Text and Reference, McGraw-Hill, Tokyo,  1975 Search PubMed .
T. J. Monks, R. P. Hanzlik, G. M. Cohen, D. Ross and D. G. Graham, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 1992, 112, 2–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang and I. J. Burgess, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2151–2159 RSC .
E. Laviron, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1984, 169, 29–46 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kim and T. D. Chung, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2014, 35, 3143–3155 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jeftić and G. Manning, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1970, 26, 195–200 CrossRef .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2589–2594 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Nam, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, Small, 2010, 6, 922–926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. S. Lee, M. Lee and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10227–10229 RSC .
S. H. Lee, J. H. Kim and C. B. Park, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4392–4406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Q. Chambers, Quinonoid Compounds, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Hoboken, NJ,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Er, C. Suh, M. P. Marshak and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 885–893 RSC .
S. D. Pineda Flores, G. C. Martin-Noble, R. L. Phillips and J. Schrier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21800–21809 CAS .
M. d'Ischia, A. Napolitano, A. Pezzella, P. Meredith and T. Sarna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3914–3921 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Nighswander-Rempel, J. Riesz, J. Gilmore and P. Meredith, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 194901 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Nighswander-Rempel, J. Riesz, J. Gilmore, J. P. Bothma and P. Meredith, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20629–20635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Pezzella and J. Wünsche, Organic Electronics, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. L. Tran, B. J. Powell and P. Meredith, Biophys. J., 2006, 90, 743–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, D. J. Miller, B. D. Freeman, D. R. Paul and C. W. Bielawski, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6428–6435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Meredith, B. J. Powell, J. Riesz, S. P. Nighswander-Rempel, M. R. Pederson and E. G. Moore, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 37–44 RSC .
M. d'Ischia, A. Napolitano and A. Pezzella, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 2011, 5501–5516 CrossRef .
J. E. McGinness, Science, 1972, 177, 896–897 CAS .
J. McGinness, P. Corry and P. Proctor, Science, 1974, 183, 853–855 CAS .
P. R. Crippa, V. Cristofoletti and N. Romeo, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1978, 538, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Jastrzebska, H. Isotalo, J. Paloheimo and H. Stubb, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 1996, 7, 577–586 CrossRef .

          P. Meredith, K. Tandy and A. Mostert, Organic Electronics, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Bernardus Mostert, B. J. Powell, I. R. Gentle and P. Meredith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 093701 CrossRef .
M. Ambrico, P. F. Ambrico, A. Cardone, T. Ligonzo, S. R. Cicco, R. D. Mundo, V. Augelli and G. M. Farinola, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3332–3336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wünsche, Y. Deng, P. Kumar, E. Di Mauro, E. Josberger, J. Sayago, A. Pezzella, F. Soavi, F. Cicoira, M. Rolandi and C. Santato, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 436–442 CrossRef .
P. J. Gonçalves, O. B. Filho and C. F. O. Graeff, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 104701 CrossRef .
J. Wunsche, F. Cicoira, C. F. O. Graeff and C. Santato, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3836–3842 RSC .
A. B. Mostert, B. J. Powell, F. L. Pratt, G. R. Hanson, T. Sarna, I. R. Gentle and P. Meredith, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 8943–8947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Powell and B. Rosenberg, J. Bioenerg. Biomembr., 1970, 1, 493–509 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mihai, F. Addiégo, D. Del Frari, J. Bour and V. Ball, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 434, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ambrico, P. F. Ambrico, T. Ligonzo, A. Cardone, S. R. Cicco, M. d'Ischia and G. M. Farinola, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6413–6423 RSC .
M. Ambrico, P. F. Ambrico, A. Cardone, N. F. Della
Vecchia, T. Ligonzo, S. R. Cicco, M. M. Talamo, A. Napolitano, V. Augelli, G. M. Farinola and M. d'Ischia, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1018–1028 RSC .
Z. Liang, Q. Tang, J. Liu, J. Li, F. Yan and Q. Miao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6438–6443 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Zhong and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 11075–11082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ye, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4244–4258 RSC .
M. J. Sever and J. J. Wilker, Dalton Trans., 2004, 1061–1072 RSC .
S. T. Martin, J. M. Kesselman, D. S. Park, N. S. Lewis and M. R. Hoffmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 2535–2542 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Taylor, D. B. Chase, M. H. Emptage, M. J. Nelson and J. H. Waite, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 7572–7577 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rodríguez, M. A. Blesa and A. E. Regazzoni, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1996, 177, 122–131 CrossRef .
M. J. Harrington, A. Masic, N. Holten-Andersen, J. H. Waite and P. Fratzl, Science, 2010, 328, 216–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Redfern, P. Zapol, L. A. Curtiss, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11419–11427 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 365–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 143–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Li, J.-G. Wang, P. Jacobson, X. Q. Gong, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 980–984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-M. Liu, S.-C. Li, H. Cheng, U. Diebold and A. Selloni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7816–7823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manzhos, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 504, 230–235 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson, R. Bergström and S. Lunell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10348–10351 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, W. Wu, S.-E. Chun, J. F. Whitacre and C. J. Bettinger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6572–6579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong, Y. Liu and J. D. Simon, Photochem. Photobiol., 2004, 80, 477–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong and J. D. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 7938–7947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Felix, J. S. Hyde, T. Sarna and R. C. Sealy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 3922–3926 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lydén, B. S. Larsson and N. G. Lindquist, Acta Pharmacol. Toxicol., 1984, 55, 133–138 CrossRef .
B. Szpoganicz, S. Gidanian, P. Kong and P. Farmer, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2002, 89, 45–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Hong, V. R. Kempf, K. Wakamatsu, S. Ito and J. D. Simon, Pigm. Cell Res., 2004, 17, 262–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong and J. D. Simon, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1265–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Son, J. H. Ryu, H. Lee and Y. S. Nam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6381–6390 CAS .
K. C. L. Black, Z. Liu and P. B. Messersmith, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1130–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Faure, C. Falentin-Daudré, C. Jérôme, J. Lyskawa, D. Fournier, P. Woisel and C. Detrembleur, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 236–270 CrossRef CAS .
A. GhavamiNejad, L. E. Aguilar, R. B. Ambade, S.-H. Lee, C. H. Park and C. S. Kim, Colloids Interface Sci. Commun., 2015, 6, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Park, M. Do, H.-E. Jin, S.-W. Lee and H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18653–18660 CAS .
M. Sureshkumar, D. Y. Siswanto and C.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6948–6955 RSC .
H. Y. Son, J. H. Ryu, H. Lee and Y. S. Nam, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 547–554 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sureshkumar, P.-N. Lee and C.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12316–12320 RSC .
H. Xu, X. Shi, H. Ma, Y. Lv, L. Zhang and Z. Mao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 6799–6803 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee and T. G. Park, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2965–2971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ball, I. Nguyen, M. Haupt, C. Oehr, C. Arnoult, V. Toniazzo and D. Ruch, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 364, 359–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. An, W. Hu, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17964–17974 CAS .
I. Hod, M. Shalom, Z. Tachan, S. Rühle and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10015–10018 CAS .
E. L. Tae, S. H. Lee, J. K. Lee, S. S. Yoo, E. J. Kang and K. B. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22513–22522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mozaffari, M. R. Nateghi and M. B. zarandi, Solar Energy, 2014, 106, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Rice, M. D. Ward, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, New J. Chem., 2000, 24, 651–652 RSC .
A. K. Sarker, M. G. Kang and J.-D. Hong, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 92, 1160–1165 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ku and C. B. Park, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1445–1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kim, S. Lee, S. Hong, G. Jin, M. Kim, K. I. Park, H. Lee and J.-H. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8288–8294 CAS .
J. W. Ko, J. H. Kim and C. B. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 241–245 CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo and T. Suenobu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1455–1464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie and E. Bakker, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19781–19789 RSC .
T. Nagata, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2014, 40, 3183–3198 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Liu, Y.-T. Long and H. Tian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 57263–57266 RSC .
G. Knör, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 304–305, 102–108 CrossRef .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13656–13659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ma, O. Yehezkeli, D. W. Domaille, H. H. Funke and J. N. Cha, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11490–11494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10592–10601 RSC .
S. Hattori, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19756–19764 CAS .
Z. Yu, S. You, C. Wang, C. Bu, S. Bai, Z. Zhou, Q. Tai, W. Liu, S. Guo and X.-z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9007–9010 CAS .
Z. Zhu, M. Hong, D. Guo, J. Shi, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16461–16464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 448–450 RSC .
Y. Liang, P. Zhang and J. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1330–1337 RSC .
Y. Liang, P. Zhang, S. Yang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, Y. Qian, X. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Yu, M. Otani and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4077–4086 CAS .
T. Yokoji, H. Matsubara and M. Satoh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19347–19354 CAS .
B. H. Saraf Nawar and M. Aziz, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2013, 1491, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Eisenach and M. J. Aziz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A5057–A5063 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, M. R. Gerhardt and M. J. Aziz, ECS Trans., 2014, 61, 27–30 CrossRef .
B. Huskinson, S. Nawar, M. R. Gerhardt and M. J. Aziz, ECS Trans., 2013, 53, 101–105 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, M. R. Gerhardt, L. Hartle and M. J. Aziz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A5010–A5013 CrossRef CAS .
B. Häupler, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402034 Search PubMed .
W. Choi, D. Harada, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19839–19843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 348–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4404–4409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, J. Hong, D.-H. Seo, D. H. Nam, K. T. Nam, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8322–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 CAS .
A. Shimizu, H. Kuramoto, Y. Tsujii, T. Nokami, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo, H. Suzuki and J.-i. Yoshida, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, H. Senoh, S.-i. Yamazaki, Z. Siroma, T. Sakai and K. Yasuda, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8336–8340 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, W. Wei-kun, W. An-bang, Y. Zhong-bao, C. Shi and Y. Yu-sheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A991–A996 CrossRef .
M. Lee, J. Hong, H. Kim, H.-D. Lim, S. B. Cho, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Genorio, K. Pirnat, R. Cerc-Korosec, R. Dominko and M. Gaberscek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7222–7224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pirnat, R. Dominko, R. Cerc-Korosec, G. Mali, B. Genorio and M. Gaberscek, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 308–314 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, W. Wang, A. Wang, K. Yuan, S. Chen and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 23–27 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Soloveichik, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11533–11558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang and Q. Wang, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 312–322 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2000, 91, 37–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
D. S. Achilleos and T. A. Hatton, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 447, 282–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Wang, H. Yi, X. Wang, X. Yan and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8262–8270 CAS .
G. Pognon, C. Cougnon, D. Mayilukila and D. Bélanger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3788–3796 CAS .
I. Cha, E. J. Lee, H. S. Park, J.-H. Kim, Y. H. Kim and C. Song, Synth. Met., 2014, 195, 162–166 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Hong, X. Yu, B. M. Bak, C. Pang and H. S. Park, Carbon, 2015, 83, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, J. Kim, Y. S. Na, J. Park, S. Kim, K. Singha, G.-I. Im, D.-K. Han, W. J. Kim and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9187–9191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Kim, J. Cho, J. S. Moore, H. S. Park and P. V. Braun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 903–910 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. DeBlase, K. E. Silberstein, T.-T. Truong, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16821–16824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. Hernández-Burgos, K. E. Silberstein, G. G. Rodríguez-Calero, R. P. Bisbey, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, B. Wang, C. Liu, N. Han, X. Xu, F. Zhao, J. Fan and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 654–661 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Algharaibeh and P. G. Pickup, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 147–149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, G. Ma, J. Mu, K. Sun and Z. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10384–10388 CAS .
Z. Algharaibeh, X. Liu and P. G. Pickup, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 640–643 CrossRef CAS .
V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Piñero and F. Béguin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4234–4241 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Dezidério, C. A. Brunello, M. I. N. da Silva, M. A. Cotta and C. F. O. Graeff, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 338–340, 634–638 CrossRef .
E. S. Bronze-Uhle, A. Batagin-Neto, P. H. P. Xavier, N. I. Fernandes, E. R. de Azevedo and C. F. O. Graeff, J. Mol. Struct., 2013, 1047, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abbas, M. Ali, S. K. Shah, F. D'Amico, P. Postorino, S. Mangialardo, M. Cestelli Guidi, A. Cricenti and R. Gunnella, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 11199–11207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bloisi, A. Pezzella, M. Barra, M. Alfè, F. Chiarella, A. Cassinese and L. Vicari, Appl. Phys. A, 2011, 105, 619–627 CrossRef CAS .
S. Subianto, G. Will and P. Meredith, Polymer, 2005, 46, 11505–11509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pezzella, M. Barra, A. Musto, A. Navarra, M. Alfè, P. Manini, S. Parisi, A. Cassinese, V. Criscuolo and M. d'Ischia, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 212–220 RSC .
J. Ryu, S. H. Ku, H. Lee and C. B. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2132–2139 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Bothma, J. de Boor, U. Divakar, P. E. Schwenn and P. Meredith, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3539–3542 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim, B. D. McCloskey, T. H. Choi, C. Lee, M. J. Kim, B. D. Freeman and H. B. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 233–238 CAS .
X. Liu, G. Dong, L. Duan, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11836–11842 RSC .
H.-W. Zan, W.-T. Chen, H.-W. Hsueh, S.-C. Kao, M.-C. Ku, C.-C. Tsai and H.-F. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 203506 CrossRef .
V. Ball, D. D. Frari, V. Toniazzo and D. Ruch, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 386, 366–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Reséndiz, M. Estrada, A. Cerdeira, B. Iñiguez and M. J. Deen, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1920–1927 CrossRef .
H. Ogawa, M. Nishikawa and A. Abe, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 4448–4455 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Q. Liu, G. Li, J. Shi, J. Liu, T. Wang and G. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5864–5867 RSC .
X. Liu, J. Cao, H. Li, J. Li, Q. Jin, K. Ren and J. Ji, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9384–9395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, N. F. Scherer and P. B. Messersmith, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 12999–13003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Odusote, F. Qu and R. D. Priestley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9167–9171 CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Zhang and J. Tang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 118–123 RSC .
J.-J. Feng, P.-P. Zhang, A.-J. Wang, Q.-C. Liao, J.-L. Xi and J.-R. Chen, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 148–154 RSC .
M. Lee, J. U. Kim, K. J. Lee, S. Ahn, Y.-B. Shin, J. Shin and C. B. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6206–6213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramadurgam, T.-G. Lin and C. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4517–4522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Lee, W.-C. Law, D. Zhu, M. Liu, M. Jeon, J. Kim, P. N. Prasad, C. Kim and M. T. Swihart, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4333–4339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. DuChene, B. P. Williams, A. C. Johnston-Peck, J. Qiu, M. Gomes, M. Amilhau, D. Bejleri, J. Weng, D. Su, F. Huo, E. A. Stach and W. D. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501250 Search PubMed .
D. Sun, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, M. Y. Sfeir, M. Cotlet and O. Gang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5657–5665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Gangishetty, R. W. J. Scott and T. L. Kelly, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14352–14359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-G. Lin, Y.-K. Hsu, Y.-C. Chen, S.-B. Wang, J. T. Miller, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8917–8922 CAS .
I. Carmeli, M. Cohen, O. Heifler, Y. Lilach, Z. Zalevsky, V. Mujica and S. Richter, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–6 Search PubMed .
W. Srituravanich, N. Fang, C. Sun, Q. Luo and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1085–1088 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, H. Hu, K. Kumar, Z. Shen and J. K. W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7593–7600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fan, C. Wu, K. Bao, J. Bao, R. Bardhan, N. J. Halas, V. N. Manoharan, P. Nordlander, G. Shvets and F. Capasso, Science, 2010, 328, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, M. Zhang, W. Li, L. Wang, J. Zheng, W. Gan and J. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 17020–17025 RSC .
G. Loget, J. E. Yoo, A. Mazare, L. Wang and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 52, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, K. Parvez, F. Hinkel, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 5645–5648 CrossRef .
S. Ryu, J. B. Chou, K. Lee, D. Lee, S. H. Hong, R. Zhao, H. Lee and S.-g. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3250–3255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, S. M. Mahurin, C. Li, R. R. Unocic, J. C. Idrobo, H. Gao, S. J. Pennycook and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6799–6802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. Shen, K. Yin, J. Ji, J. Wang, X. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7270–7276 CAS .
J. Kong, W. A. Yee, L. Yang, Y. Wei, S. L. Phua, H. G. Ong, J. M. Ang, X. Li and X. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10316–10318 RSC .
H. Jiang, L. Yang, C. Li, C. Yan, P. S. Lee and J. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1813–1819 CAS .
T. Naresh Kumar, N. Chandrasekaran and K. Lakshminarasimha Phani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5052–5055 RSC .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zheng and S. Hao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6824–6827 RSC .
S. Verma, P. Kar, A. Das, D. K. Palit and H. N. Ghosh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 611–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, P. Kar, A. Das and H. N. Ghosh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1561–1568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, P. Kar, A. Das, D. K. Palit and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2918–2926 CAS .
P. Kar, S. Verma, A. Sen, A. Das, B. Ganguly and H. N. Ghosh, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 4167–4174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ooyama, M. Kanda, K. Uenaka and J. Ohshita, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3049–3057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xie, K. Zhang, F. Wu, N. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1764–1771 CAS .
Z. Iqbal, E. P. C. Lai and T. J. Avis, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21608–21612 RSC .
V. K. Thakur, D. Vennerberg, S. A. Madbouly and M. R. Kessler, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6677–6684 RSC .
Z. Dong, D. Wang, X. Liu, X. Pei, L. Chen and J. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5034–5040 CAS .
S. M. Kang, I. You, W. K. Cho, H. K. Shon, T. G. Lee, I. S. Choi, J. M. Karp and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9401–9404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Lynge, R. van der Westen, A. Postma and B. Stadler, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4916–4928 RSC .
J. Park, T. F. Brust, H. J. Lee, S. C. Lee, V. J. Watts and Y. Yeo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3347–3356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Balint, N. J. Cassidy and S. H. Cartmell, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 2341–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, M. Lee, B. Lee, D.-H. Seo, C. B. Park and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Y. Morita, S. Nishida, T. Murata, M. Moriguchi, A. Ueda, M. Satoh, K. Arifuku, K. Sato and T. Takui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 947–951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 28, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Du, Z. Liao, Z. Qin, F. Zuo and X. Li, Catal. Commun., 2015, 72, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
A. Calzolari, A. Ruini and A. Catellani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17158–17163 CAS .
A. Calzolari, A. Ruini and A. Catellani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5893–5899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Bettinger, J. P. Bruggeman, A. Misra, J. T. Borenstein and R. Langer, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 3050–3057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustrative description of quinone-functionalized materials' applications for energy harvesting and storage, such as artificial photosynthesis, rechargeable batteries, pseudocapacitors, phototransistors, plasmonic light-harvesting platforms, and dye-sensitized solar cells. The figure in the section of Artificial photosynthesis was reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. The figure in the section of Plasmonic light-harvesting platforms was reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 




	Redox	Redox mediator for charge separation	Artificial photosynthesis	ITO/PS IIa/2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone	
6

DNA-assembled CdS/benzoquinone/TiO2	
140

Ubiquinone 10 electrolyte	
145

Tetramethylammonium hydroquinone electrolyte	
5

 


	Redox	Redox mediator for charge separation	Artificial photosynthesis	PDAb/CNTsc	
7

Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage	Redox flow battery	1,2-Benzoquinone-3,5-disulfonic acid catholyte	
18

Pseudocapacitor	Catechol/Black Pearls carbon	
178

Catechol/polypyrrole	
182

PDA/RGOd/PEDOTe	
179

PNEf/RGO sponge	
180

 
Electrical and optical properties	Charge transport under light illumination	Phototransistor	PDA active layer	
41

 
Metal chelation/reduction	Reducing agent and scaffold for dye encapsulation	Plasmonic light-harvesting platform	PDA/Au/EYg	
44

Anticorrosive protective layer and scaffold for dye encapsulation	PDA/Al/EY and PDA/Al/SnTPyP	
210

Reducing agent and light absorber	Carbonized-PDA/Ag/ZnO	
45

Photosensitizer and chemical binder to TiO2	Dye-sensitized solar cell	Ruthenium(II)-polypyridyl/catechol/TiO2	
235

Zinc phthalocyanine/catechol/TiO2	
128

Pyridine–vinyl–catechol/TiO2 and quinoline–vinyl–catechol/TiO2	
125

Thiophene–catechol/TiO2	
123

PDA/TiO2	
42

PEPh/TiO2	
126



	Redox	Redox mediator for charge separation	Artificial photosynthesis	ITO/PS II/1,4-naphthoquinone-2-sulfonate	
6

Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage	Pseudocapacitor	1,4-Naphthoquinone/carbon onion	
29



	Redox	Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage	Redox flow battery	9,10-Anthraquinone-2,7-disulphonic acid anolyte	
16

2,6-Dihydroxyanthraquinone anolyte	
15

9,10-Anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid anolyte	
18

Pseudocapacitor	2D COFsi linked by β-ketoenamine and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone	
183 and 184

Anthraquinone/hierarchical porous CNTs	
177

2,6-Dibromoanthraquinone/Ketjenblack carbon	
185

9,10-Anthraquinone/carbon fabric	
188



	Redox	Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage	Pseudocapacitor	9,10-Phenanthrenequinone/carbon onion	
29



	Redox	Redox couple for electrochemical charge storage	Pseudocapacitor	4,5-Pyrenedione/carbon onion	
29


 	Fig. 2  Thermodynamic cycles of 1,4-benzoquinone. The sequential transfer of electrons and protons makes the quinone molecule suitable as a redox mediator. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 1992, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Conductivity of a eumelanin pellet as a function of water content with: (A) a sandwich electrode and (B) a van der Pauw electrode. The solid lines indicate the amorphous semiconductor model prediction. The dots represent the experimental data. The van der Pauw conductivity shows more unconformable behavior than does the sandwich conductivity. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2012, American Institute of Physics. (C) The comproportionation reaction of eumelanin upon water adsorption. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2012, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of metal nanoparticles via the reduction of metal ions, which is coupled with the oxidation of catechol to quinone groups.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Natural photosystem II. (B) Artificial photosystem composed of PDA (a redox mediator), [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (a photosensitizer), and Co–Pi (an oxygen evolution catalyst). PDA functions as a redox mediator, mimicking the role of quinone in natural photosystem II. (C) Schematic illustration of photochemical water oxidation by Co–Pi, [Ru(bpy)3]2+, and PDA-coated CNTs. The highly conductive CNTs boost the charge-transfer rate from [Ru(bpy)3]2+ to PDA. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of a charge-mode redox flow battery that is composed of 2,6-DHAQ on the negative side and ferrocyanide on the positive side. (B) Cyclic voltammogram of 2 mM 2,6-DHAQ (dark cyan curve) and ferrocyanide (gold curve) on glassy carbon (scan rate of 100 mV s−1). The dotted line represents the background cyclic voltammogram of a graphite foil electrode in KOH (1 M). Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 


Anthraquinone/hierarchical porous CNTs	650@1 A g−1	96.45@10 A g−1	1000	1 M H2SO4	
177

Catechol/Black Pearls carbon	250@2 mV s−1	88@7.5 A g−1	10000	1 M H2SO4	
178

1,4-Naphthoquinone/carbon onion	91@5 mV s−1	80@1.3 A g−1	10000	1 M H2SO4	
29

9,10-Phenanthrenequinone/carbon onion	124@5 mV s−1	94@1.3 A g−1	10000	1 M H2SO4	
29

4,5-Pyrenedione/carbon onion	130@5 mV s−1	97@1.3 A g−1	10000	1 M H2SO4	
29

PDA/RGO/PEDOT	126@1 A g−1	75	1000	0.1 M LiClO4	
179

PNE/RGO sponge	232.1@1 A g−1	81@200 mV s−1	2000	1 M H2SO4	
180

Catechol/polypyrrole	130*@0.4 A cm−3	75@2 A cm−3	10000	0.1 M HClO4	
182

Randomly oriented slurry of 2D COFs linked by β-ketoenamine and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone	48 ± 10@0.1 A g−1	83@0.1 A g−1	5000	1 M H2SO4	
183

Oriented thin film of 2D COFs linked by β-ketoenamine and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone	3**@150 μA cm−2	93@150 μA cm−2	5000	1 M H2SO4	
184

2,6-Dibromoanthraquinone/Ketjenblack carbon	650@5 mV s−1	85	1000	0.5 M LiClO4/acetronitrile	
185


 	Fig. 7  (A) Synthesis procedure for the fabrication of a 3D mesostructured hybrid electrode consisting of polypyrrole and catechol using the polystyrene colloidal crystal-templated electrosynthesis method. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (B) Synthesis of DAAQ- and DAB–TFP COF. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 



Direct deposition	Synthetic melanin	—	Powder pressing	10−5	Thickness: 1 mm	
75

NH4OH	Spin coating	2.5 × 10−5	Relative humidity 100%, Rms: 0.6 nm	
197

DMSOa	Spin coating	7.0 × 10−5	100% humid condition, thickness: 160 nm	
251

10−4 to 10−3	Relative humidity 90%, ionic conductivity	
81

Electrospray deposition	10−10	Thickness: 100 nm, 360 K	
192

Distilled water	MAPLEb	5.1 × 10−9	Thickness: 1.5 μm	
193

Precursor polymerization	DOPA	Sodium tetraborate	Electro-polymerization	1.4 × 10−6	Ambient conditions	
194

DHIc	Methanol	AISSPd	10−7	Moisture-equilibrated conditions, Rms: 0.3 nm	
195

Dopamine hydrochloride	THAM buffere	Dip coating	3 × 10−9	Relative humidity 70%	
86

5.9 × 10−5	Ambient conditions	
41


 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of a PDA-based organic phototransistor. (B) Transfer characteristics of the PDA phototransistor at VD = −10 V under dark conditions. (C) C–V hysteresis loop for a Au/PDA/p-Si device. The lack of a flat-band shift implies that the charge trapping is hindered in the PDA layer. (D) Current versus gate voltage (VG) plot for a PDA-based organic phototransistor at VD = −10 V under dark and light illumination conditions. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustrative description of PDA's multifunctionality, including versatile coating for any material regardless of type and shape, metal chelation and reduction, small-molecule encapsulation, and anticorrosive protection.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Mussel-inspired, PDA-based plasmonic nanohybrid for light harvesting. (B) The distribution of electric field intensity around Au NPs (70 nm) with an EY-incorporated PDA shell (20 nm) shows that PDA plays an important role as a spacing controller for the LSPR effect. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of a PDA-sensitized solar cell. PDA can strongly bind to TiO2 to form a new PDA-to-TiO2 charge-transfer complex. Upon illumination, excited electrons in the HOMO level of PDA are directly injected into the conduction band of TiO2 without the intermediation of excited dye molecular states. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
