Liquid infused surfaces with anti-icing properties  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR06934H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR06934H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22615-22635Liquid infused surfaces with anti-icing properties

        
          
            Guowei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Zhiguang 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab
aHubei Collaborative Innovation Centre for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zguo@licp.cas.cn;  Fax: +86-931-8277088;   Tel: +86-931-4968105
bState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, People's Republic of China
Received 
      12th August 2019
    , Accepted 1st November 2019First published on 4th November 2019AbstractIce accretion on solid surfaces, a ubiquitous phenomenon that occurs in winter, brings much inconvenience to daily life and can even cause serious catastrophes. Icephobic surfaces, a passive way of processing surfaces to prevent surface destruction from ice accumulation, have attracted much attention from scientists because of their special ice-repellent properties, and many efforts have been made to rationally design durable icephobic coatings. This review is aimed at providing a brief and crucial overview of ice formation processes and feasible de-icing strategies. Here, the excellent anti-icing performance of liquid infused surfaces (LIS) inspired from Nepenthes is emphatically introduced. After a short introduction, the recent progresses in ice nucleation theory and ice adhesion decrease mechanism are comprehensively reviewed to gain a general understanding of the long freeze process and low ice adhesion on LIS. Subsequently, the anti-icing performance of LIS is systematically evaluated from four aspects regarding water repellence, condensation-frosting, long freeze process, and low ice adhesion. Finally, this review focuses on discussing the advantages and disadvantages of LIS and the potential measures to eliminate and alleviate these drawbacks.Guowei WangMr Guowei Wang joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at Hubei University in 2018 to pursue his PhD degree. His current scientific interests are focused on surface wettability and designing functional materials with special wettability.Zhiguang GuoProfessor Zhiguang Guo received his PhD from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2007. After that, he joined Hubei University. From October 2007 to August 2008, he worked at the University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, in a postdoctoral post. From September 2008 to March 2011, he worked in Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Charge de Researcher”. During February 2009 to February 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. Now he is a full professor in LICP financed by “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. He has published more than 250 papers about the interfaces of materials.
1. Introduction
Ice formation and accumulation on powerlines, ships, roads, airplanes, etc., may give rise to tremendous economic and energy losses to humanity and can even cause catastrophic events that threaten our safety. According to the data from America Safety Advisor, for ten years from 2000, the fraction of aircraft incidents arising from bad weather was 12% of the total, among which 92% of flight events took place with ice formation on airplanes.1 Far more than this, the extreme weather that occurred in the south of China in 2008 resulted in ice accretion on roads and power facilities, which led to 151.6 billion RMB in direct economic losses.2,3 Ice accretion on wind turbines, solar cell roofs, refrigerators and heat exchangers may aggravate the global energy crisis.4–7 To remove bulk ice from surfaces, various active approaches have been developed such as mechanical,8 chemical,9 ultrasonic vibration,10 heating,11etc. Nevertheless, it is undeniable that all these methods are too expensive or harmful to the environment, or limited by applied conditions.12 For example, the common measure to alleviate the risk caused by ice accumulation on airplanes is to spray antifreeze liquids containing salt or glycol-based chemicals onto the structure of airplanes. Although this can decrease the freezing point and even promote the melting of ice forming within the structure, it also involves frequent maintenance and thus it is expensive and not friendly to the environment.13 Sometimes, these measures to remove ice from power towers are limited. Often, there is no other choice than manpower, which is dangerous for the workers. Therefore, it is desirable to develop other ways to prevent ice formation on solid surfaces or lower the adhesion strength to help in the removal of bulk ice.
In recent years, passive ways through precisely designing surface structures and chemical properties to achieve anti-icing goals have attracted more and more attention. Inspired by nature, superhydrophobic surfaces have been exploited through imitating lotus leaves14 and the feet of water striders.15 Superhydrophobic surfaces have been considered as ideal anti-icing surfaces because of their structural features and low surface tension. Benefiting from their micro-/nano-textured structure and low surface energy, superhydrophobic surfaces can trap air within their special structure, which is considered to be the main reason for the formation of the Cassie state.16 The air trapped within the structure reduces the contact area between a droplet and the structure, which helps to delay droplet freezing and remove droplets from surfaces with a slight sliding angle.17 Boreyko et al. showed that the structure of superhydrophobic surfaces is able to facilitate the removal of partially melting frost with a low titling angle due to the low contact angle hysteresis of melting water with respect to frost.18 However, it cannot be neglected that the interactions between ice or water and surfaces are different, and ice adhesion on surfaces is determined by the receding contact angle and the size of the initial crack as subsequently introduced. Nosonovsky et al. argued that low ice adhesion on superhydrophobic surfaces may be generated by the voids occurring at interfaces between ice and surface since the voids can act as crack initiators.19 Thus, if the content of voids existing at the interface is too small to efficiently reduce ice adhesion, strong ice adhesion can also appear on superhydrophobic surfaces.20 In addition, when the superhydrophobic surface is in a high humidity environment or the droplets impact the surface at high speed, the droplet infiltrates into the structure of surface and results to the air escape, so the wetting state changes from the Cassie to Wenzel state, and consequently the surface lose its superhydrophobic performance.21 Once the water filling the structure freezes at low temperature, it can lead to ice adhesion enhancement on superhydrophobic surfaces and structural destruction under icing/deicing cycles.21
There is an interesting phenomenon in which a quasi-liquid layer exists at the interface between ice and surfaces, which is helpful for enabling ice to slip easily with respect to surfaces, similar to that which occurs in skating sports.22–24 Based on this principle, low ice adhesion surfaces have been exploited and termed hydrated surfaces. According to reports, ice adhesion on these surfaces is able to be reduced to 30.0 kPa even at −53 °C and maintains a low value after experiencing 30 icing–deicing cycles.22 However, there are fewer reports of other performances of this type of surface with respect to anti-icing. It is essential to demonstrate that hydrated surfaces are able to maintain a low ice adhesion when faced with supercooled droplets with high-velocity impacting or condensation-frosting because of their hydrophilicity.25
Liquid infused surfaces (LIS), substituting the trapped air with lubricant, exhibit excellent anti-icing performance since the liquid film forming at the top of surfaces can prolong the ice formation process and decrease ice adhesion.26–28 Meanwhile, the liquid film can avoid Cassie–Wenzel conversion under complex conditions,29–31 and its self-healing ability derived from the fluidity of the liquid film, what is more, it is able to ensure that its performance can rapidly recover once the lost lubricant is replenished.32 In general, the preparation of a stable LIS should follow three basic principles: 1, the substrate needs to have sufficient roughness and chemical properties to ensure that the lubricant can be stably adhered on the substrate; 2, the infused lubricant requires a better affinity with the substrate than with other liquids and therefore it cannot be replaced with other liquids; 3, the selected lubricant cannot be miscible with the liquid to be repelled. Although some reviews reported ice/deicing mechanism of ice-phobic surfaces, the majority of which focused on superhydrophobic surfaces, less attention has been paid to systematic evaluation of the anti-icing performance of LIS. It is necessary to understand the recent work with respect to the wettability, mobility, condensation, freeze process and de-icing mechanism of LIS to rationally design ice-phobic surfaces.
Here, the classic nucleation theory, the concept of nucleation sites as well as recent advances in ice adhesion mechanism are firstly reviewed to comprehend the effect of liquid film with respect to the processes of freezing supercooled droplets as well as detaching bulk ice from LIS. Then, the interaction between LIS and droplets is discussed since removing supercooled droplets from surfaces before being frozen is an important characteristic of anti-icing surfaces. Next, considering the vapor-condensation-ice transition, the processes of vapor condensation and growth into stable size, as well as the heat transport performance are discussed. After these discussions, a comprehensive evaluation of anti-icing performance of LIS is conducted. In addition, some efforts put into preparing durable LIS are introduced here. Finally, the superior performance of LIS to help protect the surface from bulk ice is summarized, and the advantages and disadvantages of LIS and some potential methods to alleviate these shortcomings are discussed.
2. Fundamental theory of icing/de-icing
Ice nucleation always occurs under wet conditions, which can be achieved in two ways, where the vapor in the air is supersaturated with water, or is not saturated with water but saturated with ice.33 From the decades of study of ice nucleation in the atmosphere, two different ways for ice nucleation have been found, which are called homogeneous nucleation and heterogeneous nucleation, as is shown in Fig. 2h.39 In general, heterogeneous nucleation mainly refers to all nucleation that occurs when a nucleus interacts with any impurity or occurs at any interface. Specifically, it mainly refers to three cases: 1, contact between the nucleus and the solid surface; 2, the presence of impurity molecules or ions on the surface of the nucleus; 3, occurs at the interface of two phases, such as nucleation at the liquid–vapor interface. Thus, when nucleation occurs within the bulk phase away from any interface, or there are no impurity molecules or ions on the surface of the nucleus, it is termed as homogeneous nucleation.34
 Fig. 1  The hydrogen bond network structure of water at given times in inherent structures (a–e). (a) At time t = 208 ns; (b) at t = 256 ns; (c) at t = 290 ns; (d) at t = 320 ns; and (e) at t = 500 ns. Lines indicate hydrogen bonds among water molecules, and the intermolecular bonds of water participating in such hydrogen bonds. Bright blue lines indicate ‘long-lasting’ hydrogen bonds, which have persisted longer than a specified threshold value before a given time t. The brightest blue lines are those with a lifetime longer than 2 ns. An initial nucleus is formed in the region circled in (b). (f) The total potential energies of the instantaneous structures in the trajectory for 512 water molecules after quenching (at t = 0 ns) from higher temperature to 230 K. Sufficient thermalization at high temperature (400 K) is performed before the temperature jump. A constant-temperature and constant-volume molecular dynamics method is used for a system with 512 water molecules, confined in a cubic box under a periodic boundary condition. The TIP4P water model is used. The shaded graph shows the total potential energies of the inherent structures, corresponding to the instantaneous structures in the trajectory for t = 250–320 ns. Inherent structures are calculated by local quenching at 10 ps intervals. Energy is in kJ mol−1 and time in ns (10−9 s). The freezing process can be divided into four stages: (1) a long quiescent period (indicated by a red line); (2) a slow energy-decreasing period (green line); (3) a fast energy-decreasing period (dark blue line); and (4) a crystallization–completion period (purple line). Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Nature, copyright [2002]. 
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Three-dimensional projections of AFM micrographs obtained for a 100 μm−2 region containing the region in which ice formation began. Deep pits, or micropores, are seen in the surface. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (c) Optical micrograph of a pocket. (d) Optical micrograph showing crystals of various compounds crystallizing from the two corners of one or more mica pockets. (c) and (d) reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright [2016]. (e) Preferential orientation of ice crystals nucleated on the surface of weathered feldspar, (001) surface of Maloso region, Malawi (FS04 at 244 K), side view. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Science, copyright [2016]. (f) The nucleated crystal is oriented with the basal plane aligned with the imaging plane, thereby showing a hexagonal shape, but this is not necessarily the preferred orientation. (g) The crystal has nucleated on the surface of a silicon wafer at or near the contact line. The crystal has nucleated at the silicon surface but away from the contact line. (f) and (g) reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright [2011]. (h) Schematic depiction of the regions within a water droplet where ice can nucleate and potential influences (e.g., evaporation). Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2015]. (i) Interface confinement on a heterogeneously formed ice embryo with an interfacial quasi-liquid layer in a nanoscale cavity (nanopit). Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2014]. (j) Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation barriers. Nuclei must reach a critical size before they become thermodynamically stable. In addition, nucleation preferentially occurs on substrates due to the reduced nucleation barrier. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2016]. (k) The geometrical factor f plotted against the ratio x = R/rc for convex spherical surface roughness element (a bump). (l) The geometrical factor f plotted against the ratio x = R/rc for concave spherical surface roughness element (a pit). Different curves are obtained with cos(θiw) = 1, 0, 0.5, 0.8, 0.9, and 0.95 starting from the top, thereby spanning the θiw range from 180° to 18.2°. (k) and (l) reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2014]. 
Cantrell and Heymsfield showed in a review that although there is a debate as to whether homogeneous nucleation indeed has been observed in experiments, homogeneous nucleation may occur within a droplet when the temperature reduces to −40 °C or on further cooling.35 In addition, a lot of work proves that it is extremely difficult to eliminate the effects of heterogeneous nucleation in the process of ice nucleation, which brings great challenges to the study of homogeneous nucleation. Thus, instead, heterogeneous nucleation has been the focus of many researchers in experiments. As discussed above, heterogeneous nucleation occurs more favorably at the interface between water and another phase, which can be explained by three aspects. Firstly, ice nucleates on the surfaces of droplets promoted by the defects caused by topography and chemical property difference at interfaces between droplet and other phases. Secondly, an impurity contained within a droplet leads to ice nucleation within the droplet but it is heterogeneous. Thirdly, the vapor first condenses into microdroplets at the exposed defects on the solid surface, and then these microdroplets are rapidly frozen and form an ice core under the condition that vapor in the ambient environment with respect to water is supersaturated and the temperature is appropriate. Besides these nucleation dynamic theories, surface defects also can influence the ice nucleation on solid surfaces. Sometimes it is difficult to avoid the formation of ice on solid surfaces, so how to properly design a surface to reduce the workload of removing bulk ice requires a deep understanding of the deicing mechanism.
2.1 Homogeneous nucleation
Ice nucleation is a phase transition under the condition where the new ice phase is stable compared to liquid, and this process is also accompanied by latent heat release. The process of ice nucleation is difficult to directly observe in experiments, so researchers have applied molecular simulation technology to study the freeze process. Simulation showed that a large number of water molecules aggregate to form a cluster and then generate the ice nucleus. Taking advantage of molecular dynamic simulations, the freeze process can be described as in Fig. 1a–e.36 Water molecules firstly aggregate to nucleation sites and connect by hydrogen bonds between each other, forming a ring structure, but this structure is not stable, which can be destroyed, so the entire system is overall accompanied by new ring formation and the old ring deforms and regenerates. However, there is a small probability in the entire system that a few hydrogen bonds distributed randomly can exist for a long time and then form a polyhedral structure with the adjacent ring, as is shown in Fig. 1b. The region of the polyhedral structure is also metastable and needs to grow to a critical nucleation size by continuously connecting with other rings through hydrogen bonds over time. Meanwhile, when the size of the structure reaches critical nucleation, the free water molecules within the nucleus can also be displaced by the more stable polyhedral structure and then ice nucleation occurs in this region, as shown in Fig. 1b. In addition, because total free energy can be decreased by the phase transition as in Fig. 1f, this also provides the driving force to promote the phase transition from the disordered state to an ordered state. The relationship between the free energy barrier and critical nucleation sites can be described using classical nucleation theory (CNT).
According to CNT, the minimum thermodynamic barrier for homogeneous nucleation ΔG* can be described as follows: (1)
And it is essential to note that there is an assumption that the initial ice nucleus should be thought of as spherical and it possesses a well-defined radius and the interface energy can be replaced by the planar surface tension multiplied by the surface area of the nucleus at a certain temperature. In general, the interface energy is 23 mJ m−2 at 253 K.37 Here, γil represents the interface energy between ice and water and ΔG corresponds to the free energy difference of the bulk ice and water, which can also be described by the Gibbs–Helmholtz equation, as follows: (2)where ΔH is the volumetric enthalpy of water fusion, ΔH = 287 mJ m−3, and Tm is the ice melting temperature, Tm = 273 K. After overcoming the free energy barrier, the initial nucleus size can grow to the critical nucleation size, then it will grow rapidly and will not degrade to water. And the critical nucleation size can be calculated using CNT, as follows: (3)
In addition, the supercooled degree of water (bulk of supercooled water vs. constant temperature water) can also affect critical nucleation sizes but is not contained within this equation. It was reported that the critical nucleation sizes varied from 1.7 to 2.2 and 2.6 nm when the ambient temperature was −25, −20, and −15 °C.38–40
Next, the nucleation rate is worth discussing in order to predict the freeze time, for the reason that the total freeze process takes most of the time. According to the result of CNT, the process of initial nucleus growth up to critical sizes was simplified as a water molecule absorbed by the nucleus and or escaped from it, and the initial nucleus also can be aggregated through actual mutual contact. Thus, the equation for predicting the homogeneous nucleation rate can be obtained as: (4)where kB and T correspond to the Boltzmann constant and environmental temperature, respectively. J0 is the pre-factor for ice nucleation and can be described as follows:41 (5)where ρ represents the density of water, D is the diffusion coefficient, l represents the distance of atomic jump within the liquid, and Δμ is the difference in free energy between the liquid and ice phases. Thus, nucleation rate has a strong relationship with J0 and , and owing to an exponential relationship,  may play a dominant role in the process of ice nucleation. Meanwhile, Li and coworkers also showed that the nucleation rate varies greatly with a small change in Δμ and γil; nevertheless the nucleation rate always has a weak response to the pre-factor within a linear relationship so that it may be regarded as a constant.42
2.2 Heterogeneous nucleation
As discussed above, the condition required for homogeneous nucleation is difficult to accomplish since impurities contained within water are difficult to remove; furthermore, the temperature for heterogeneous nucleation is higher than that for homogeneous nucleation so that heterogeneous nucleation is always the dominant ice nucleation process in nature. Therefore, understanding the heterogeneous nucleation mechanism is very important to help us find ways to eliminate or reduce this effect. Different from ice nucleation within droplets, heterogeneous nucleation tends to occur at the interface of water and another phase so a solid nucleus at the interface always exhibits a cap shape (with volume Vcap) not a sphere (with volume Vsphere), which is also the premise of CNT. Meanwhile, ice nucleation always prefers to occur on the part of the volume of the sphere but not on all of the cap-shaped part, which is different from homogeneous nucleation triggered through spontaneous heat fluctuation to generate a spherical nucleus.43 Thus, the critical nucleation size can be reduced and so the critical free energy barrier for heterogeneous nucleation also decreases, as is shown in Fig. 2j.44 Meanwhile, surface topography also plays a key role in the ice nucleation process. For example, a great deal of experiments conducted to explore ice nucleation have proved that structural features existing on the surface also can increase the ice nucleation probability, such as pits,45 cracks46 and steps,47 as is shown in Fig. 2a–e. In addition, molecular dynamics simulations have demonstrated that the closer the pore size on the surface of the substrate is to the critical nucleation size, the smaller the free energy barrier that ice nucleation needs to overcome.48 However, Patric et al. discovered that if the root mean square roughness of a substrate varies from 0.17 to 173 nm, the temperature and critical size of ice nucleation can keep unchanged, and the temperature and critical size are −25 °C and 1.7 nm respectively.49 The free energy barrier for heterogeneous nucleation can be described as follows:50,51 (6)where  corresponds to the critical free energy barrier of heterogeneous nucleation and f(m,R*) represents the comprehensive effect caused by the chemical properties and topography of surfaces on reducing the free energy barrier of ice nucleation. In addition, this formulation also suggests that the free energy barrier of heterogeneous nucleation can also vary with the free energy barrier of homogeneous nucleation. The parameter m is approximately equivalent to the value of cosθwi, where θwi is the contact angle between ice and water. It is worth noting that the affinity and lattice match between nucleus and surface also can affect the parameter m by stabilizing the nucleus on the substrate.52 The factor R*, which represents the ratio between the radius of surfaces R and the critical size of ice nucleation, can be calculated using , and thus the formulation can be obtained as follows:53 (7)
The factor ω in this formulation can be described as ω = (1 + R*2 − 2R*m)1/2. In addition, the Gibbs-Thomas effect caused by the curve of the interface also should be taken into account in the case of a given parameter m. For ice nucleation on curved surfaces, the nucleation requires extra driving force in the curved region where the interface is thermodynamically unstable owing to the vapor pressure and the increasing chemical potential.52 Meanwhile, through investigating the effect of surface size on ice nucleation, Patric et al. demonstrated that the effect induced by the surface curvature may be more important for f(m,R*) since the curvature of the surface can vary within a large range.49 For different convex and concave surface structural features, the interfacial factor as a function of R* is plotted in Fig. 2k and l, the contact angle θwi ranging from 180° to 18° from top to bottom.49 It is obvious that if the value of R* is less than 10, then the interface factor varies with R*. In addition, they also pointed out that the influence of the quasi-liquid layer on the nucleation process of ice is also important, as shown in Fig. 2i.49 Then the rate of heterogeneous nucleation also can be expressed as follows: (8)where Ahet, which is analogous to J0, corresponds to the pre-factor but the value is different under the two different nucleation processes. It is worth mentioning that although the qualitative description of ice nucleation in the CNT has been accepted in general, the quantitative calculation still needs discussion.
Ice nucleation tends to occur at the interface between water and another phase. In practice, it is worth noting that when water contacts with a solid surface, the interface can be divided into three types: solid–water, water–air and solid–water–air three-phase contact line. A large number of experiments have also shown that the promotion of ice nucleation is not the same at different interfaces. For example, using particles as nucleation initiators, the temperature needed for ice nucleation is higher when water only contacts with dry particles compared to when particles are immersed within bulk water.54 In addition, experiments also showed that ice nucleation can occur on the three-phase contact line, and it is worth noting that the promoting effect on this line is better than that at air–liquid and liquid–solid interfaces.55 Furthermore, the results obtained from molecular dynamic simulation experiments also showed that the air–liquid interface may accelerate the rate of nucleation by several orders of magnitude compared to bulk liquid.56 Nevertheless, contrary to ice nucleating along the three-phase contact line, Gurganus et al. observed that ice nucleation prefers to occur on the contact region between water and substrate.57 As is shown in Fig. 2f and g, crystals nucleate and grow near or along the contact line as shown in Fig. 2f; however, this process occurs away from the contact line and on the region between water and substrate as shown in Fig. 2g.57 However, it is difficult to understand the result obtained by Sear et al. in their system. Sear proposed two considerations to help to explain this phenomenon.34 Firstly, as emphasized in the paper about homogeneous nucleation by Djikaev et al., the free energy barrier of ice nucleation at the air–liquid interface is lower than that within bulk liquid except for the condition of all crystal surfaces melting.58 If all crystal surfaces can melt at the melting point or lower, the ice nucleus may keep away from the air–liquid interface and contact line under the condition that ignores the effect of line tension. The free energy of ice nucleation can also increase when the ice nucleus is pushed to the air–liquid interface from bulk water. And bulk ice can escape from vapor by the liquid layer due to the surfaces of ice crystal melting.34 Secondly, the contribution of contact lines to ice nucleation can be attributed to some of the effects that are neglected during the ice nucleation process to simplify the estimation of free energy barriers. For example, the temperature of the supercooling system is not absolutely uniform; moreover, impurities may also concentrate on the gas–liquid interface and the contact line.34 The free energy barrier for ice nucleation can also be regarded as the sum of two components of the ice–liquid interface (ΔGs) contribution and volumetric contribution (ΔGv). In the case of surface-induced ice nucleation, the free energy change of the air–liquid interface contribution may be not obvious compared to the bulk liquid contribution since the ice nucleus is surrounded by a liquid layer near the air–liquid interface.59 Nevertheless, the variation of volumetric free energy can be induced by the small lateral pressure near to the air–liquid interface; thus the introduced term δGv depends on pressure (Plat) as follows:59 (9)where Pl and Pi represent the density of the liquid and ice nucleus respectively. Under the condition of ρi < ρl and Plat = 0 in the bulk phase, the value of δGv is negative, which leads to the free energy barrier at the air–liquid interface being slightly lower than that of bulk liquid, and thus ice nucleation prefers to occur at the former. In addition, the nucleation rates of two superhydrophobic surfaces with the same contact angle but different surface texture resistivity are different, which may be attributed to the migration of surface-active particles from the surface to the gas–liquid interface, thereby enhancing heterogeneous nucleation.60
2.3 Nucleation sites
A great deal of research has investigated the sites existing on the surfaces on which ice nucleation prefers to occur. In practice, ice nucleation occurs only on a few sites which are called “nucleation sites”.61–64 The phenomenon that ice nucleation only occurs on a few regions was observed for two substrate surfaces, the natural cleavage plane of feldspar and α-quartz substrate, using high-speed imaging as shown in Fig. 3a and b.63 Reviewing the recent works dedicated to exploring the effect of surface chemical groups and geometric defects on heterogeneous ice nucleation, Freedman hypothesized that the chemical components and geometric defects of surfaces can determine surface heterogeneities and have an impact on the ice nucleation process.62 Based on exploring the vapor-ice phase transition on the cleaved surfaces of Muscovite mica, two different ice crystal growth processes were observed within the same pocket at different temperatures (Fig. 3c), which demonstrated the hypothesis proposed by Campbell et al., that the ice crystal growth within the pocket is determined by the ambient temperature of nucleation sites.61 The growth process of confined phase within a pore into the bulk phase is shown in Fig. 4d.64 A small difference of temperature may exist in the process of ice crystal growth up from the pocket. In addition to the chemical properties and structures that are prone to water condensation and freezing, the nucleation sites also require appropriate geometries to help the ice crystals emerge from the pocket at environmental saturation.61 As the temperature decreases, the activity of the nucleation site increases. It is worth noting that, as shown in Fig. 4f, the initial ice nucleation has a temperature difference at different ice nucleation sites distributed on the surface.63 Both of two substrates, feldspar and a-quartz, are the ingredients of the atmosphere aerosols, which were regarded as a nucleating agent existing on the cirrus cloud for its promoting effect to ice nucleation.65 For heterogeneous nucleation, a long-term debate is still ongoing as to whether the nucleation process is a stochastic event or a singular event, which means nucleation occurs on specific geometric surfaces at a definite temperature.66 Niedermeier et al. pointed out that for certain nucleation sites, heterogeneous nucleation may be a random event. But on entire surfaces where more than one nucleation site exists, owing to ice nucleation temperature varying at different nucleation sites, the total process of heterogeneous nucleation exhibits a singular nature.66 Holden et al. observed the ice nucleation process of nine droplets on two thin natural cleavage planes (001) and (010) over multiple freeze/melt cycles as shown in Fig. 4c. They found that the nucleation temperature exhibits a small range of fluctuations.63 More precisely, an initial nucleation temperature change of 2 °C was observed on eight droplets relative to the average initial nucleation temperature of the nine droplets of −12.3 °C, with three to five nucleation sites located in the droplet on the interface with the substrate. The initial temperature fluctuation for the rest of the droplets ranged within 4 °C relative to the average initial temperature resulting from eight nucleation sites, as shown in Fig. 4a.63 All data obtained from experiments demonstrate that ice nucleation on these nucleation sites requires a specific temperature, but the nucleation temperature also can vary within a small range due to the stochastic effect. This theory also can be called as “modified singular site mode” proposed by Vali and Herbert et al.67,68 Although many experiments showed that the geometric defects of a substrate, such as step, crack, cavity structural features, etc., have a strong correlation to nucleation sites, not all of those structural features have identical ability for ice nucleation.63,69 Kiselev et al. applied electron microscopy to observe the phase transition process from water vapor to bulk ice on feldspar at low temperature, and they found that ice nucleation occurs on or near the crack, step, cavity etc. structural features.69 Benefiting from molecular dynamic simulation, they hypothesized that the promoting effect of feldspar may arise from the high-energy face (100) within geometric defect structure.69 Nevertheless, instead of the basal plane, Wang et al. observed that ice nucleation prefers to occur on the edge of stacked kaolinite platelets on individual kaolinite particles as shown in Fig. 4b, and they suggested this different behavior for ice nucleation on basal plane and edges may be attributed to the difference in chemistry of the two surfaces.70 The chemical difference can be explained by the theory that the basal plane of the platelets is covered with non-hydroxylated siloxane and the protonated or non-protonated edges of the platelets are decorated with hanging OH groups.70,71 Thus, according to the theoretical chemistry model, compared to the basal plane, the protonated or non-protonated edges of platelets can attract water vapor from lower relative humidity.70,71 Fitzner et al. explored the correlation between a hydroxylated substrate decorated with varied hydroxyl group array and the ice nucleation capacity as shown in Fig. 4e, and they surmised that the density of OH groups and the affinity between ice, water and substrate should be responsible for the ice nucleation capacity of the substrate, instead of the symmetry arrangement of OH groups.72 It is stressed that the crack and edge of hydrophilic surfaces have a pronounced effect on the capacity of ice nucleation. The crack and edge may possess a higher density of OH groups than the basal plane due to the broken covalent bonds existing on cracks and edges.72 Thus, based on those discussions above, the conclusion can be drawn that the ice nucleation capacity of a substrate dependent on a few nucleation sites is a comprehensive effect caused by geometric restriction and chemistry.63 Ice nucleation on solid surfaces is an extremely complex process; thus, it is very difficult to summarize the influencing factors of ice nucleation comprehensively and in detail. It is undeniable that the freezing process of water on a solid surface can be regulated by changing the structural and chemical properties of the surface, since these parameters can alter the free energy barrier for ice nucleation and nucleation site density. More work needs to be done for further understanding the interaction between water and surfaces under phase transition processes.
 Fig. 3  (a) and (b) Two typical sequences of video images taken at 3000 fps (frames per second) during the cooling of water droplets on the (010)- and (001)-oriented sections of feldspar, respectively. (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (c) Two representative time sequences of growth in the same pocket: at frost points −37.4 °C (c1–c3) and −48.5 °C (c4–c6). For the upper sequence, two bulk crystals emerge simultaneously (c2) before visible growth along the wedge apex (c3). For the lower sequence, a confined solid phase is visible (c5) before the emergence of a single bulk crystal (c6). Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2016]. 
 Fig. 4  (a) The regions and the corresponding runs at which ice froze in that region. The freezing temperatures over the entire freeze–thaw experiment are shown below the light micrograph. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (b) Isothermal nucleation of ice on an individual kaolinite particle at 205.4 K. Ice formations is initiated at 124 Pa. False-colored images of kaolinite (brown) and ice crystals (blue) are shown for clarity. Dashed contour line shows the basal plane and arrows indicate the direction of the stacked kaolinite platelets. Images show (b1) prior to ice nucleation; (b2) onset of ice formation, 124.2% RH ice; (b3–b6) post ice nucleation event and growth of ice crystals. ESEM images (b1–b6) were acquired sequentially, separated by 3 seconds. Scale bars are 5 mm. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2016]. (c) Images showing a freezing experiment for an array of water droplets on a feldspar thin section, where frozen droplets scatter more light. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (d) Illustration of how a phase confined in a pore emerges into a bulk phase. (d1) The phase initially has a concave interface, allowing it to be stable in confinement even in undersaturated conditions. (d1) Before it can emerge into a bulk phase it must briefly form a highly convex interface, requiring supersaturation. (d2) As the bulk phase grows its interface curvature reduces, tending toward a planar interface. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright [2016]. (e) Ice nucleation rate constants relative to the homogeneous nucleation rate constants for the range of OH tiling patterns considered. Independent of the symmetry of the substrate, both good and bad ice nucleation efficiencies exist. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright [2016]. (f) Droplet fraction frozen as a function of temperature for LD3 microcline samples. Green and blue triangles represent thin sections prepared by cleaving along both the (010) and (001) faces, respectively. The clear red squares and circles represent the ground particles, immersed in the liquid droplets. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. 
2.4 Decrease ice adhesion
Ice adhesion, which characterizes the strength of the interaction between bulk ice and surfaces, is defined as the ratio of the force required to de-ice the area of contact between the ice and the surface.73 Surface chemistry, which affects the contact area between supercooled water and substrate, is considered as an influencing factor on ice adhesion. Kulinich et al. investigated the freezing process of supercooled droplets on fluoropolymer surfaces where droplets exhibit different contact angle and contact angle hysteresis. They demonstrated that the main reason for low ice adhesion on rough surfaces is the low contact angle hysteresis rather than contact angle.74 Meuler et al. probed the strong relation between ice adhesion and receding contact angle through fitting the data of ice adhesion and different parameters of surface wettability on notionally smooth surfaces.75 The concept of the practical work of adhesion was also induced, adhesion referring to the additional work to break the interface between ice and substrate surfaces. They explained the phenomenon in terms of the fitting plot exhibiting optimum linear relation when using the ice adhesion as a function scaled with (1 + cosθrec).75 Furthermore, after analyzing the relationship of ice adhesion strength on 24 types of polymer surfaces with different surface properties such as roughness, hardness, elastic modulus, water adhesion force as well as wettability, He et al. concluded that low water adhesion force may be responsible for low ice adhesion strength (below 60 kPa) at room temperature.76 Considering the complexity of the ice–solid interface, the influence of surface roughness on ice adhesion was discussed inevitably. Ling et al. pointed out that it is difficult to predict the ice adhesion by surface wettability in practice. In addition, they stressed that ice adhesion may depend on a competing effect: additional effect caused by interlocking between ice and surface geometry, reducing the effect of microcracks caused by the concentration of interface stress on inescapably rough surfaces.77 In general, ice adhesion strength (τc) on a non-ideal smooth surface can be predicted by the following equation:19,78 (10)where E, G, and α correspond to the apparent bulk elastic modulus, surface energy and the length of cracks respectively. And the non-dimensional constant Λ represents the effect of crack structure. This indicates that, in addition to surface chemistry, the cracks occurring at the ice–solid interface caused by stress concentration can also affect the ice adhesion strength. In addition, parameters such as the number, length and geometry can affect ice adhesion strength.78 Focusing on the effect of crack formation at the ice–solid interface on reducing ice adhesion, He et al. took advantage of different structural features as crack initiators to reduce ice adhesion.78,79 They found that the introduction of a designed substructure under a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film can reduce, by at least half, the ice adhesion strength; especially the lowest ice adhesion strength can be reduced to 5.7 kPa.79 Furthermore, they explored the influences of different geometry, height, and distribution of hollow substructures and the shear force direction applied to remove bulk ice from substrate on ice adhesion strength, and then they stressed that the potential sites of crack formation may determine the adhesion strength of the ice. And the direction of the applied shear force will also change the value of ice adhesion strength, when the initial maximum crack length is different.79 Those works provided a new approach to reduce ice adhesion through designing structural features to promote the formation of cracks. Nevertheless, the size of sample also needs to be taken into account since the shear force required for removing bulk ice from surfaces is proportional to the contact area between ice and surfaces. Recently, Golovin et al. designed a series of plastic substrates to reduce ice adhesion. More precisely, the shear force cannot vary with the ice–solid contact area, and thus ice can be removed from those material surfaces even merely by the weight of ice itself or wind, even though the solid–ice contact area is larger than the size in the laboratory.73 Instead of applying ice adhesion strength to reflect the interaction strength between bulk ice and surfaces, they proposed that the concept of interfacial toughness may be more reasonable to characterize interfacial interaction strength between ice and solid on large-area surfaces.73 In addition, contrary to ice adhesion strength theory where the shear force scales with the contact area between ice and surface, the data obtained from experiments showed that the shear force may nearly keep constant once the length of bulk ice is beyond the critical transition length Lc. The critical transition length is determined by both ice adhesion strength and the toughness effect that plays a dominant role in the fracture of ice–solid interface.73 All the above discussion has focused on the condition that bulk ice can directly contact surfaces, but in practice, the presence of lubricant is able to weaken the interaction between ice and surface and complicate the deicing process on LIS. In addition, the presence of lubricant film can also affect the interaction between water and surface in both dynamic and static states; thus, the interaction between lubricant, surface, water as well as bulk ice needs to be further understood, which is facilitated to rationally design LIS to face the challenges caused by ice.
3. The wettability of LIS
3.1 Contact angle
According to Young's equation, which balances the surface tension at the three-phase contact line, the shape of a droplet and the contact area between droplet and substrate can be predicted by the substrate surface tension.80 However, the premise of this equation is that the surface of the substrate is ideally smooth. In fact, the solid surface inevitably exhibits a certain degree of roughness to some extent. The wetting model of droplets on rough surfaces can be described by the Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter model as shown in Fig. 5a.81,82 A superhydrophobic surface inspired by the lotus leaf exhibits a high contact angle (beyond 150°) when a droplet is sitting on it because of the comprehensive effect of its rough structure and low surface energy.83 However, once the droplets were placed on LIS or soft polymer surfaces having a high modulus of elasticity, the contact area beneath a droplet is not a solid surface or trapped air but lubricant or soft substrate.84 As Li et al. reported, the apparent contact angle on hydrophobic surfaces was 123 ± 1° but it decreased to 112 ± 1° after infusing lubricant into an identical textured substrate.85 Similarly, Liu et al. also found that the apparent contact angle on LIS (about 100°) is smaller than that on identical hydrophobic substrate surfaces (about 120°).86 However, considering water evaporation, Guan et al. imaged the shape of a wet ridge surrounding a droplet on LIS, and the corresponding model is also shown in Fig. 5c.87 Meanwhile, they also developed a facile way to predict the shape of the droplet despite the wetting ridge by extending the arc of the cap profile to intersect the substrate.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrations of possible wetting configurations of a textured surface (top) and of a LIS (bottom): (a1) the liquid completely impregnates the grooves (Wenzel state); (a2) the liquid is suspended on the asperities (Cassie state or lotus effect); (a3) the liquid partially impregnates the texture (petal effect); (a4) the liquid rests on a chemically heterogeneous surface forming an apparent contact angle θ described by the Cassie equation; (a5) and (a6) the lubricant does not cloak the drop; (a7) and (a8) the lubricant cloaks the drop. Drops on LIS can exhibit zero (a6), one (a5) and (a8) or two (a7) three-phase contact lines. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Taylor & Francis Online, copyright [2017]. (b) Cloaking of drops or a liquid three-phase contact line. (b1–b6) Confocal images of vertical sections through a water drop placed on lubricant-impregnated micropillar arrays (black rectangles). FC70 (a fluorinated oil, 97%, C15F33N), decanol and ionic liquid were used as lubricants. (b1 and b2) Fluorescence signals (yellow) of FC70 and the reflection of light from the lubricant–air interface (cyan). (b3 and b4) Fluorescence signals (yellow) of decanol. The combined image (b4) shows the fluorescence signal of the lubricant, the water droplet (red) and reflection of light (cyan). (b5 and b6) Fluorescence signals (yellow) of ionic liquid. The combined image (b8) shows the fluorescence signal of the lubricant, the water droplet (red) and reflection of light (cyan). Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2015]. (c1) Image of a sessile droplet of water on a LIS showing a wetting ridge formed by the balance of forces between the nonevaporating lubricating liquid and the evaporating droplet. (c2) Cross section schematic of the droplet on a lubricant-impregnated textured surface showing defined parameters and a wetting skirt of nonvolatile lubricant created by the wetting ridge. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2015]. (d) Overlays reflection and fluorescent channel images. Inset: the droplet shape and the wetting ridge of a 5 μL water droplet obtained with contact angle goniometry. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Wiley Online Library, copyright [2018]. (e) Sketch illustrating the derivation of the closed form expression for θsapp. In the limit of small oil ridge the water–gas interface is flat in proximity of the Neumann triangle, while the oil–water and oil–gas interfaces can be approximated by circular arcs. The surface corrugation is not explicitly depicted in this sketch. However, its effect is accounted for by using the Cassie-Baxter rather than the Young angle for the oil–water and oil–gas interfaces. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2017]. 
Once the droplets are placed on LIS, there are 12 types of thermodynamic configurations with respect to droplet, lubricant and substrate due to the comprehensive effect of textured structure, spreading coefficient of lubricant as well as droplet, but four of which are facilitated by the appearance of slippery behavior on LIS as shown in Fig. 5a.82,88 In addition to rough structure and low surface energy, a wetting ridge formed by the interface tension can cloak the lubricant–water–vapor three-contact point, which also leads to a change of apparent contact angle. For example, assuming the vapor is a fluidic phase, the contact line is composed of three fluidic phases, and the angle between two fluidic phases can be represented by Neumann triangle, as follows:84 (11)
This formulation describes the relationship between contact angles and surface tension via applying the view of mechanical equilibrium that the vector sum of the tension at the three-contact line is zero. Schellenberger and colleagues applied laser scanning confocal microscopy to directly observe the contact angle of a droplet seated on the LIS. In that study, the contact angle between droplet and lubricant concealed by the lubricant ridge can be viewed when the droplet and lubricant are dyed by different colors as shown in Fig. 5b.89 The contact angle they observed well agrees with the predicted angle by Neumann theory, which indicates that the contact angle can not only be affected by the roughness of the substrate but also by surface energy. The apparent contact angle also can be affected by the wetting ridge which not only depends on the topography and chemistry, but the size of the drop also can influence the shape of the wetting ridge, so it is difficult to precisely predict the contact angle only by the chemical property and geometry as for rigid surfaces. Similarly, using identical measurements, Niemelä-Anttonen et al. observed the contact angle cloaked by the wet ridge may be beyond 170° as shown in Fig. 5d, which is far beyond to the apparent contact angle of 113 ± 2° measured by optical apparatus.90 Benefiting from the combination of numerical calculation and phasic model as shown in Fig. 5e, Kusumaatmaja et al. described the relationship between the apparent contact angle and the ratio of drop size and lubricant ridge using a closed expression under the limit of vanishing lubricant ridge condition as follows:91 cosθ = cosθS + 2ΛγwsinθSΔPoaR′(12)where superscript S represents the limit of vanishing lubricant ridge, cosθS = cosθwoγwo/γw + cosθogγo/γwg, ΔPoa is the difference in pressure between oil and gas obtained by the Laplace law (ΔPoa = 2koaγoa, where k is the curvature of the interface), Λ is a coefficient, and R is the radius of contact area. This formulation indicates that the size of the droplet also plays a key role in the apparent contact angle since it influences the factor for ΔPoa and then alters the shape of the wetting ridge, which indicates that the volume of the droplet can be regarded as a parameter to characterize the wettability of the LIS.
3.2 Droplet moves on LIS
Before the droplet moves over the surface, it must undergo sufficient deformation on the advancing and receding contact lines, which may also result in different apparent angles relative to the two directions.92 Considering the deformation caused by the contact angle hysteresis, dissipation force can be described by Furmidge's formulation as follows:93 Fd = 2rγΔcosθ(13)where r is the radius of the droplet base and Δcosθ = cosθA − cosθR. Once the partial force of whole body force in the advancing direction is beyond the retention force due to the increasing tilting angle, the droplet may begin to move on the surface. Since the homogeneous liquid film floating on the top of textured substrate can reduce defects and eliminate contact line pinning, a droplet can easily move on LIS with extremely low contact angle hysteresis. For example, a great deal of experimental data showed that tilting angle relative to the droplet beginning to move on LIS is only a few degrees (always below 5°).94–96 After investigating the dynamic behavior of droplets on LIS at high temperature, Zhang et al. demonstrated that LIS can exhibit excellent water-repellent performance even at high temperature. Meanwhile, they also pointed out that the velocity of droplets moving on LIS can increase with temperature since the moving mode changes from sliding to rolling.97 Wong et al. showed that supercooled droplets can be quickly shed from LIS but pinned on superhydrophobic surfaces, as shown in Fig. 6c and d.98 The droplet mobility in the Wenzel state is always poor compared to the Cassie state since the adhesion between the drop and the surface increases. Meanwhile, Wong and colleagues found that droplet mobility on LIS in the Wenzel state is also better than that on solid surfaces in the Cassie state. The reduction in pinning force is attributed to molecular-scale smooth, homogeneous and defect-free lubricant film and the migration of lubricant below the interface, which leads to a decrease in contact angle hysteresis and an increase in droplet mobility.99
 Fig. 6  (a) Intercalated lubricant film on lubricated surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright [2018]. (b) Fringes observed at wavelengths λ1 = 458 nm and λ2 = 633 nm are due to a silicone oil film sandwiched between a water droplet and a flat PMP substrate at times t = 10 s, 10 min and 15 min after the droplet was deposited. Droplet size is decreasing due to evaporation. Scale bar, 0.1 mm. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Nature, copyright [2017]. (c) and (d) Ice mobility on a LIS (highlighted in green) compared to strong adhesion to an epoxy-resin-based nanostructured superhydrophobic surface (highlighted in yellow). Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Nature, copyright [2011]. (e) The upper schematic of a water droplet moving on a lubricant-impregnated surface shows the various parameters considered in our scaling model. The bottom trajectories of a number of coffee particles measured relative to the water droplet reveal that the drop rolls rather than slips across the surface. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2013]. (f) Confocal microscopy images monitoring the advancement of a drop on an FC70-impregnated micropillar array. Advancement was induced by applying air flow. (g) Confocal microscopy images monitoring the contact angle of water drop (red) as it recedes because of evaporation on an FC70-impregnated micropillar array (blue). (f) and (g) reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2015]. 
To further understand the excellent water repellent ability of LIS, it is important to comprehend the interaction between water, lubricant and substrate under dynamic condition. According to Schellenberger's report, the receding contact angle can vary periodically under pinning–depinning process caused by droplet evaporation, as is shown in Fig. 6f and g.89 On the contrary, Guan et al. found that droplets evaporate on LIS with constant receding contact angle and they attributed this difference to that droplets can directly contact the substrate.87 Conclusions drawn by Semprebon et al. showed that the deformation of contact line at advancing and receding directions of droplets on LIS may be not synchronic.91 They also discussed the effect of wetting ridge on contact angle hysteresis and argued that contact angle hysteresis increases with wetting ridge on LIS after theoretic calculation.91 By simply adding dye liquid into droplets, Smith et al. showed that droplets moving on LIS may apply roll mode rather slide mode, as is shown in Fig. 6e.88 The steady velocity of droplets shed from LIS is also an important factor to evaluate the water-repellent ability of LIS. From the aspect of thermodynamics, the loss of gravitational potential energy may arise from the increasing kinetic energy and other dissipation once droplets move on LIS along the tilting direction. According to conservation of energy, Smith et al. considered that the viscous dissipation occurring at the wetting ridge, lubricant and droplet may be another factor responsible for the loss of droplet energy in addition to depinning; more precisely, viscous dissipation formed at the wetting ridge is more important than lubricant.88 Different regimes of friction were revealed by Keiser et al. through varying the ratio of viscosity between droplets and lubricant.100 If the viscosity of water is greater than that of lubricant (ηw > ηl) and the size of the droplet is not less than millimeter scale, dissipation occurring at water plays dominant role in the whole of the dissipation and the influence of droplet volume on slip movement is weakened. However, once the size of the droplet is reduced to the size of the texture, a new friction regime is revealed since the influence of droplet volume on slip movement is increased. On the other hand, once the viscosity of water is less than that of lubricant (ηw < ηl), the position of dissipation mainly occurring may be the wetting ridge near the droplet, where viscous effect may be mainly responsible for the nonlinear friction.100 Taking advantage of the data obtained from the paper of Keiser et al., Sadullah et al. explored the role played by comprehensive effect of viscous dissipation and contact line pinning in droplet behavior under partial wetting condition by applying computation simulation.101 Result obtained from computation showed that the contact line pinning effect is more important than viscous dissipation at large apparent contact angle and the velocity of droplets increased with the wetting ability of lubricant to substrate. However, inverse dynamic behavior occurs since viscous dissipations arising from wetting ridge play a dominant role at low apparent contact angle. Benefiting from the advances in technology, Daniel et al. observed a few-nanometer thickness lubricant film existing beneath a droplet on LIS via applying confocal reflection interference contrast microscopy, as is shown in Fig. 6b, which is different from previous results observed by laser scanning confocal microscopy, and they supposed that this difference arises from the resolution of the equipment.102 Profiting by this technology, the dynamic interaction between droplet base and LIS can be clearly observed as shown in Fig. 6a.103 After investigating the dynamic behavior of LIS where lubricant completely wets substrate, they concluded that once excess lubricant forms a stable film floating on the top of LIS, the effect of contact line pinning would be eliminated thoroughly. If only the space within textured structure is filled up with lubricant, the effect caused by viscous dissipation can be ignored at high velocity (>0.2 mm s−1), but droplets also can pin on surfaces at lower velocity because of the high dissipation force generated at the wetting ridge.102,103 Based on the reports discussed above, it is easy to guess that LIS possess excellent drag reduction performance. As reported by Solomon et al., the drag reduction of laminar flows moving on LIS can reach 16% and a corresponding 18 μm slip length can be observed when measured by a cone-plate rheometer under the condition that the viscosity ratio of working flow and lubricant is 260.104 Both theoretical computation and experimental data demonstrated that the friction of LIS depends on the ratio of lubricant and work flows. In brief, although the apparent contact angle of droplets on LIS is lower than that on superhydrophobic surfaces with identical substrate, a homogeneous lubricant film is able to reduce the contact line pinning of droplets and lower the sliding angle on LIS. Droplets on LIS can be shed easily due to the presence of lubricant film, which also is able to prevent droplets permeating into structure, and thus the excellent anti-icing performance of LIS can be maintained even under condensation-frosting condition.
4. Condensation-frosting on LIS
In addition to the freezing of subcooled droplets on surfaces below freezing temperature, ice coverage caused by the transition from vapor to condensation to ice is also a disturbing problem in a wide range of industrial areas.105 It is undeniable that superhydrophobic surfaces exhibit excellent icephobic performance at low humidity condition since supercooled droplets can be removed rapidly before freezing.106,107 However, in the face of low temperature and high-humidity environmental conditions, the anti-icing performance of the superhydrophobic surfaces may be degraded since the vapor condenses in the texture structure and then grows rapidly, and finally the bulk ice occupies the space of the texture structure.108 As a consequence of the interlock formation between bulk ice and textured structure, ice adhesion strength on superhydrophobic surfaces may be greater than on smooth surfaces.109,110 In addition, the textured structure may be destroyed under deicing process due to the mechanical interlock. Thus, it is important to avoid condensed droplets permeating into the textured structure and reduce the mechanical interlock between bulk ice and textured structure for decreasing the ice adhesion strength. LIS, filling up the textured structure with lubricant and even excess lubricant can form a thermodynamic film on top of the structure, also effectively preventing droplets from being pinned or infiltrating into the structure.98,111
In general, vapor condensation on LIS always uses a dropwise condensate model, as is shown in Fig. 7a, since the low contact angle hysteresis of LIS reduces the departing size of condensate droplets.112 Besides low adhesion to water, the comprehensive effect of low vapor–lubricant interface energy, surface structure and surface heterogeneity results in a one-order-of-magnitude increase of high nucleation density on LIS. Meanwhile, it is worth noting that three key factors are responsible for the high heat transfer efficiency: small departing size of droplet, low contact angle and high nucleation density.113 Therefore, it is not surprising that LIS have excellent heat transfer performance. For example, Xiao et al. showed the condensation heat transfer coefficient on LIS was almost twice that on a superhydrophobic surface, as shown in Fig. 7d.112 Furthermore, Tsuchiya et al. fabricated a durable LIS on a smooth substrate by replacing the capillary force with π interaction, and the heat transfer coefficient on this LIS can increase to 175% that on uncoated surfaces.114 The high heat transfer on the LIS is not only suitable for steam condensation, but also for certain hydrocarbon condensation processes. Rykaczewski et al. demonstrated that LIS can efficiently promote low surface tension fluid dropwise condensation, instead of film condensation on omniphobic surfaces.115 After measuring heat transfer properties of hydrocarbon toluene condensation on flat, hydrophobic surfaces and LIS, Preston et al. concluded that the LIS can improve heat transfer performance by approximately 450% over the uncoated surface.116 Both condensation model and heat transfer performance can affect the freeze behavior of condensed droplets. Zhang et al. observed that the freezing temperature required to form condensed droplets by dropwise condensation can be reduced by more than 10 °C compared to the temperature required to form condensed droplets by filmwise condensation, and the freeze time was prolonged in the former.117 Meanwhile, the high heat transfer efficiency of substrate facilitates the release of latent heat from frozen droplet to substrate under the freeze process, which may lead to the formation of rime ice rather than glaze ice, in general rime ice being more difficult to remove from surfaces than glaze ice.118,119 Due to various factors, the freezing will initially occur in the droplets of the edge, and then through the ice bridge between each other diffuse to the adjacent condensed droplets.120 Based on the ice front propagation model as shown in Fig. 7b, two parameters, the average size of condensed droplets and the distance between frozen droplets and the adjacent droplets, can affect the spreading velocity of frost over the surfaces, which has been verified by Seo et al.121 The spreading process of frost over the LIS is shown in Fig. 7c. Thus, understanding the entire process of vapor condensation on LIS is also important to rationally design anti-icing LIS. After comparing the free energy barrier of solid–air, lubricant–air, and solid–lubricant interfaces as well as within the lubricant on LIS, Anand et al. drew maps to show the sites at which vapor nucleation tends to occur as shown in Fig. 7e, where the nucleation rate also can be enhanced even at lower supersaturation.122 Since it is difficult for the supersaturation of vapor within the lubricant to reach the level required for nucleation, condensation favorably occurs at the air–lubricant interface. After vapor nucleates at the surfaces, it reaches the steady size and must experience the process of growth. After comparing the processes of growth of condensed droplets on LIS infused with lubricant of different surface tension, Anand et al. found that the cloaking effect of lubricant with respect to droplets evidently suppresses the growth of droplets.123 Then, they showed that the viscosity of lubricant cannot change the process of vapor nucleation as like the growth of condensation, since before the coalescence of adjacent condensed droplets, the lubricant cloaking the droplets has been drained out.122 However, it cannot be ignored that the net attractive force caused by the identical wet ridges between adjacent droplets enhances the condensed droplet coalescence due to the excellent mobility of nanoliter size of condensation on LIS.124,125 Weisensee et al. observed that the size distribution of condensed droplets on LIS will not vary with the change of lubricant viscosity though the maximum size required for droplet sliding reduces dramatically on a vertical plate.126 In brief, the ratio of the average diameter and distance of condensed droplets on LIS is larger than on hydrophobic surfaces, which reduces the spreading velocity of frost so delaying the freeze time of whole surfaces.121
 Fig. 7  (a) Image of condensation on an oil-infused TFTS-coated CuO surface. Significantly higher droplet density was observed on the oil-infused surface while a low departure radius of 0.98 ± 0.13 mm was maintained. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Nature, copyright [2013]. (b) Frost propagates as an ice root from a frozen drop reaching a neighboring drop. (c) Time-lapse images showing frost propagation on LIS 5cst. (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (d) Experimental immersion condensation heat transfer measurement. Comparison of overall heat transfer coefficient during condensation on hydrophobic surface, TFTS-coated superhydrophobic surface, and oil-infused composite surface with an initial chamber pressure of 30 Pa (primarily non-condensable gases). The supersaturation was varied in the range 1 < S < 1.6. The heat transfer coefficient on the oil-infused surface increased by approximately 100% compared to the dropwise and superhydrophobic surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Nature, copyright [2013]. (e) Nucleation states and regime maps of nucleation preference. The subscripts w, a, o and s denote droplet, air, oil and solid interfaces, respectively. The superscripts d and l denote the droplet and lens. In states I and III, Adws and Adwa correspond to droplet–solid and droplet–air interfacial areas. In state II, Adws and Adwa correspond to the droplet–oil interfacial area. In state IV, Alwo and Alwa correspond to lens–oil and lens–air interfacial areas. (e1) The regime map showing conditions where nucleation within the oil is preferred over nucleation in vapor for different ratios of γwo/γwa. (e2) The regime map showing conditions where nucleation at the oil–air interface is preferred over nucleation at the solid–air interface for different solid surface wettabilities (θws(a)). (e3) The regime map showing conditions where nucleation at the oil–air interface is preferred over nucleation within the oil for different surface wettabilities in oil (θws(o)). In (e2) and (e3), the region with a blue background corresponds to oils that satisfy the criterion γwo/γwa while the region with a green background corresponds to oils with γwo/γwa. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2015]. 
5. Anti-icing performance of LIS
5.1 Delay freeze process
As discussed above, ice nucleation is a significant process for the entire freeze behavior on surfaces because once ice nuclei form they would quickly spread to the whole surface. Thus, the anti-icing performance of surfaces also can be affected by surface inhibition ability of ice nucleation. LIS exhibit excellent capacity for ice nucleation, which corresponds to their low surface energy and surface homogeneity.25,27,28,111 In order to compare the ice nucleation suppression ability of LIS coating on Al substrate and naked Al substrate, Kim et al. prepared LIS on Al substrate in this way: first, a textured polypyrrole structure was formed on Al substrate by electro-deposition and then its surface free energy was reduced by fluorination; finally low-viscosity perfluorinated oil was infused into the textured structure.28 Those examples and controlled examples were placed in a custom chamber and the freeze process observed at −2 °C in 60% relative humidity. The result obtained from those experiments is shown in Fig. 8a. Naked Al substrate is rapidly covered with bulk ice, but frost only occurs on the edges of Al substrate with LIS, which can be attributed to the edge effect.28 Furthermore, after prolonging the freeze time to 100 min, the coverage fraction of bulk LIS is only 64%, which also is much lower than that of controlled examples.28 Focusing on the inhibition of ice nucleation on LIS, Wilson et al. measured the average freeze nucleation temperature of LIS-coated scanning calorimeter (DSC) pans to alleviate the stochastic effect under 150 cooling/melting cycles, and average freeze time referred to 50% freezing event temperature is shown in Fig. 8b.27 After multiple cycles, the average temperature of LIS decreases to −24.9 °C as shown in Fig. 8d. In addition, they compared the level of supercooling of pans in four treatments, as show in Fig. 8c. The level of supercooling required for ice nucleation on LIS increases visibly. They suggested the capacity of LIS to inhibit ice nucleation results from the ultra-smooth and chemically homogeneous surfaces, which may eliminate potential ice nucleation sites.27 In addition, two different ice nucleation modes were observed before and after lubricant depletion under multiple icing–deicing cycles as shown in Fig. 10.127 Ice nucleates only in the edge region of LIS due to the edge effect and spreads into the central region through the ice bridge in the first icing–deicing cycle, and the spreading velocity is about 0.7 mm min−1 in the first cycle. However, once the lubricant is depleted due to various factors after 14 cycles, ice nucleation on this surface exhibits randomness and spreads over the surfaces faster, the velocity of spreading being about 3 mm min−1. In recent work, Wei et al. showed that the freeze temperature on LIS decreased to −17 °C and the freeze time of entire surfaces was retarded to more than 1000 s and which on glass is only 62 s.128 Thus, their assumption is that the different processes of frost formation on LIS and other controlled examples may arise from different frost growth modes, frost growing up from sides into center and from bottom to top.128 Benefiting from advanced electron microscope technology, Rykaczewski et al. systematically investigated the freeze process of supercooled droplets on LIS. As shown in their paper, with identical substrate structure, LIS obviously prolongs the time required to freeze entire surfaces compared to superhydrophobic surfaces.26 In addition to ice nucleation inhibiting capacity of LIS, they demonstrated that the oil locked in the structure can migrate to the surface to cover the ice crystals to hinder their growth, as is shown in Fig. 9a. They explained that the driving force for oil migration is the capillary force resulting from the surface roughness of ice crystals increasing as they grow. To improve the anti-icing performance of LIS, Irajizad et al. exploited a novel strategy to fabricate LIS by introducing magnetic volumetric force to suppress ice formation on magnetic slippery surfaces (MAGSS), as is shown in Fig. 8e, which further decreased the ice nucleation temperature to −34 ± 1 °C and prolonged the freezing time by 2–3 orders magnitude.129 It cannot be denied that the problem of applying and maintaining the magnetic field in practice limits these surfaces from being put into use, but it also provides a novel way to improve the performance of LIS.130 It is worth noting that some hydrophilic liquids also can act as lubricants and infuse into textured structure to prepare LIS, in addition to fluorinated oil and silicone oil. Infused hydrophilic LIS also exhibit excellent anti-icing performance since the water vapor pressure above the surfaces can be reduced to below ambient saturation pressure, which was termed as the “humidity sink” effect arising from hygroscopic materials.131 Furthermore, Sun et al. demonstrated that the ice nucleation time can be postponed to 2 h at −10 °C ambient temperatures on LIS prepared through infusing propylene glycol into a nano-porous coating.132 By applying cheap polyols as lubricants and combining with magnetic Fe3O3 nanoparticles previously decorated with amino groups, Zhang et al. developed a new tactic to fabricate LIS, which showed a significant effect on depressing the freeze point to −36.8 °C, and prolonged the freeze time to 2700 s at −18 °C.105 Polyols, which can act as anti-freeze liquids due to the low freezing temperature of water–polyol mixtures, were infused into a structure as a component of lubricant to lower the cost as well as suppress the freeze process.105,133 In addition, this fine designed multifunctional surface created by magnetic particles exhibited excellent active thermal deicing capability when exposed to light.134 Apart from depressing the freeze temperature and having active de-icing ability, polyol-infused surfaces also can decrease ice adhesion strength and the lowest value of ice adhesion strength can reach 0.1 kPa, so that bulk ice may shed from these surfaces by the weight of the ice itself. Moreover, to avoid the problem of LIS degradation resulting from lubricant depletion, Chen et al. prepared a self-lubricating surface on PDMS substrate by infiltrating it with PDMS-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) copolymers.40 Water molecules constrained on surfaces by hydrogen bonds between water and the PEG component of the copolymers can form thin quasi-lubricant layers, which can decrease the ice nucleation temperature to −23.0 °C. After carefully analyzing the factors that reduce the temperature of ice nucleation, Chen et al. believed that the high viscosity of the water microenvironment in the quasi-lubricating layer at the interface is the main reason for the reduction of freezing point rather than the surface roughness or the conductivity of the quasi-lubricating layer.40 Phase-change liquids (PSLs), always being liquid at room temperature and possessing higher melting temperature than the ice nucleation temperature, are excellent alternative choices of lubricant infused into structures. Chatterjee et al. developed a conceptual strategy to create LIS to delay the freezing process by utilizing the endothermic capabilities of organic PSLs.135 More precisely, they prepared PSLs-LIS by covering the substrate with cyclohexane, melt point being about 6.52 °C, and then rapidly cooling the sample to a temperature below its melt point so the cyclohexane solidified film can form on the top of the substrate at controlled condition.135 Subsequently, they investigated the freeze behavior of condensed droplets on supercooled PSLs-LIS and found that condensed droplets can remain in an unfrozen state on these surfaces for longer than 2 h. In addition to the ultra-smooth surfaces increasing the critical free energy of ice nucleation, they speculated that the increasing temperature of the contact area between condensed droplets and the region beneath is disadvantageous for ice formation. Furthermore, they evaluated the anti-icing performance of different PSL surfaces as shown in Fig. 9b as well as Fig. 9c, and the data obtained from that study provided multiple selections to fabricate LIS.135
 Fig. 8  (a) The morphology of accumulated ice on LIS-Al is significantly different from that on bare Al. Condensation/freezing cycle: from room temperature to −10 °C at 5 °C min−1. Melting (defrost) cycle: from −10 to 25 °C at ∼10 °C min−1. Ice still forms mostly around the edges of LIS-Al by bridging from the surrounding aluminum substrate, while it forms uniformly all over the aluminum substrate. Several defects (tall features above the level of the lubricant layer) on the surface of LIS-Al led to the pinning of droplets while they were sliding which eventually led to the formation of large ice crystals on LIS-Al. The samples are mounted with 75° tilt angle, and the widths of the substrates are approximately 3 cm. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2012]. (b) Plot showing a typical survival curve, and is data from a LIS-coated, S, pan. The temperature at which the sample has frozen half of the 150 times is called “T50” and represents the average nucleation temperature of that sample, in that container. (c) A plot comparing the level of supercooling (T50s, black bars) for each type of surface-treated aluminum DSC pans. Those labeled N are untreated, hydrophilic pans; T are textured, hydrophobic; H are superhydrophobic; and S are LIS-coated pans. Note that S1 is the actual H4 pan with lubricant added to turn it into a LIS-coated pan; similarly S2 is the actual H5 pan. Also shown are the 10–90 widths, halved, to give a natural error bar to each T50 and survival curve. The relatively narrow 10–90 widths indicate that none of the samples changed in any measurable way during the 150 freeze/thaw cycles of each of these data sets. (d) A typical data set from an automatic lag time apparatus is shown (in this case for an untreated, N, pan) and the stochastic nature of nucleation is evident, as each run freezes at a different temperature. (b)–(d) Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2013]. (e) Schematic of magnetic liquid–liquid interfaces. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Nature, copyright [2016]. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Cryo-FIB/SEM images of drops before and after freezing on 10 μm LIS. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2013]. (b) Condensation–frosting dynamics on different bulk S-PSL surfaces. (b1) Optical transparency of PSL (dimethyl sulfoxide, cyclohexane, and hexadecane)-coated aluminum surfaces at Tpel = 4 °C, RH = 15%. Scale bars: 1 cm. (b2) SEM images (imaged at 45°) of photopolymer replica molds delineating S-PSL surface morphologies (Tpel = −5 °C, RH = 11%). Scale bars: 25 μm. (b3) Optical microscopy images of typical condensation behavior on corresponding bulk S-PSL surfaces at Tpel = −15 °C, RH = 80%. Scale bars: 200 μm. (b4) S-PSL surface roughness (left) was measured using an optical profilometer in 5% RH environment. “Average roughness” is the arithmetic mean of absolute height shifts about the mean reference plane while “Z-roughness” denotes the distance between the highest peak and lowest valley on the surface. Condensation–frosting performance of various bulk S-PSLs (right) cooled to Tpel = −15 °C in 80% RH environment. The “freezing initiation time” depicts the occurrence of the first condensate freezing event in the field of view (2.1 mm2), while the “total freezing delay time” represents the net time required for all the condensed droplets on S-PSL surface (2375 mm2) to freeze since the onset of freezing initiation. The error bars (left and right) denote standard deviations, obtained from experimental measurements on different S-PSLs repeated at least four times each. (c) Time-lapse images of condensation-frosting experiments on vertically mounted SPS, LIS, and PSL (glycerol)-infused hydrophilic surface (each of 6.45 cm2 size) subjected to Tpel = −7 °C, 60% RH. (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Wiley Online Library, copyright [2019]. 
 Fig. 10  Ice build-up on lubricated S-FNM surface. (a) Morphology of the freezing process at 738 s in the first cycle showing “edge mode nucleation”, (b) 1521 s in the first cycle, (c) 183 s in the 14th cycle showing “random-point mode nucleation”, and (d) 256 s in the 14th cycle. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2015]. 
5.2 Reduce ice adhesion
Low ice adhesion on LIS has been reported in a great deal of work, to below 100 kPa in general, and it can even decrease to below 10 kPa so ice can be shed from surfaces only depending on wind or gravity.129,136–138 According to previous reports, ice adhesion on LIS coated on Al substrate can decrease to 15.6 kPa, which is much lower than that on naked Al (1359 kPa).28 After systematically investigating the connection between the amounts of oil maintained on a structure and ice adhesion strength, Subramanyam et al. showed that with excess lubricant flooding on the top of the structure, ice adhesion strength can reduce by a factor of 15 when compared to lubricant forming a thermodynamically stable thin-film LIS, as is shown in Fig. 11a.139 Nevertheless, lubricant depletion is multifaceted; for example, lubricant can migrate to ice crystals when the ice grows on LIS, which will cause the problem that ice crystals will contact the structure directly. Thus, it is worth understanding the effect of structure on anti-icing performance of LIS.26,139 When bulk ice is in contact with the structure shown in Fig. 11c, the edge of the post can act as a crack initiator due to stress concentration, which results in the reduction of ice adhesion strength on the LIS. Thus Subramanyam et al. deduced that the higher the textured density, the lower the ice adhesion strength.139 In addition to structure, the properties of lubricant also play a significant role in the anti-icing performance of LIS. Nguyen et al. systematically investigated the variation of ice adhesion strength on LIS when infused with hydrophobic lubricant with different parameters such as surface tension, viscosity and density. There is a plausible concept that low-surface-tension lubricant is beneficial to decrease ice adhesion strength. However, the data obtained by Nguyen et al. indicated that there is no correlation between ice adhesion strength and low surface tension.140 In addition, they demonstrated that it is the diffusion coefficient of lubricant that mainly affects ice adhesion strength on LIS rather than other parameters as previously mentioned.140
 Fig. 11  (a) Cryo-stabilized SEM images of an FIB-cut LIS with excess (a1) and (a2) equilibrium films. (a3) Comparison of the ice adhesion strength on lubricant-impregnated surfaces having excess and thermodynamically stable lubricant films. The ice adhesion strength is normalized to that on a smooth, uncoated silicon surface. The textured surface of the LIS consists of lithographically textured silicon with 10 μm square posts with an edge-to-edge spacing of 50 μm. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2013]. (b) Force curves for ice adhesion measurement on LP-OG surface (top) and PDMS surface (bottom) verify a liquid-like layer as a lubricant on the LP-OG. Ice adhesion force corresponds to the value in the curve at the moment of ice detachment marked by the black arrow. Gray dashed lines represent the zero-force baseline. The inset is a schematic illustration of the force measurement process. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Springer, copyright [2015]. (c1) Effect of micropost density on the adhesion strength of ice on LIS. (c2) Cross section of the ice–LIS interface obtained via cryo-FIB/SEM imaging. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2013]. (d) Schematic of skin-like LIS. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2018]. (e) Schematic illustration of the principle of solid organogel materials for the easy removal of foreign materials on top and the mechanism for the regeneration of the solid alkane layer. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley Online Library, copyright [2017]. 
In recent years, infusing other materials into structures to prepare LIS has also been shown to decrease ice adhesion strength. As previously mentioned, infused polyol LIS can delay the freeze process as well as decrease ice adhesion strength. Similarly, Yamazaki et al. developed hydrophilic LIS via infusing ethylene glycols into superhydrophilic matrix, also exhibiting extremely low ice adhesion of only 17 kPa.141 More systematic works were conducted by Ozbay et al., which were aimed at comparing the anti-icing performance of LIS prepared with different combinations of hydrophobic or hydrophilic lubricant and substrate.142 After testing ice adhesion strength on all of these LIS and four types of reference materials, the data obtained from these experiments showed that all LIS significantly reduced ice adhesion strength. Especially, ice adhesion strength can decrease to only 16 ± 3 kPa on those LIS prepared by infusing ethylene glycols, formamide, and GLY-85% (water–glycerine mixture) into textured filter paper.142 Liquid paraffin, a natural lubricant, can also be used as a lubricant to infuse into a textured structure to construct an ultra-slip surface. After comparing ice adhesion on dry polymer with liquid paraffin-infused crossed-linked polymer surfaces, Wang et al. found that ice adhesion strength was reduced dramatically on the latter. The ice adhesion strength on the surface of the liquid paraffin-infused PDMS is only 1.7 ± 1.2 kPa, which is two orders of magnitude lower than that on the dry PDMS surface.143 As is shown in Fig. 11b, the force required to remove ice from PDMS surfaces and liquid paraffin-infused organogel (LP-OG) surfaces appears evidently different. To be more specific, the maximum shear force to remove bulk ice on PDMS surfaces is approximately 18 N, but only nearly 0.3 N on LP-OG surfaces though the shape of ice is identical. After overcoming the maximum value of friction, the de-icing force on the PDMS surfaces dramatically decreases to zero, but remains at nearly 0.1 N on LP-OG surfaces, which may be caused by the quasi-liquid interlayer between ice and surface.143 Durability testing of this liquid paraffin-infused LIS showed that the low ice adhesion strength remains even at very low temperature of −70 °C or 35 icing/de-icing cycles.143 Furthermore, taking advantage of liquid paraffin, LIS was prepared by Zhuo et al. through a simple phase-separation method as shown in Fig. 11d, and it can also exhibit low ice adhesion strength below 70 kPa and regeneration properties.144 Similarly, Sandhu et al. applied perfluoroalkane wax as lubricant infused into gels to fabricate LIS, where ice adhesion strength can reduce to 19.6 kPa because of weaker intermolecular bonding.145 It is worth noting that those obtained LIS with different carbon number can exhibit different optical properties. For example, the obtained LIS are almost opaque since the infused lubricant forms a thin wax-like frost film on surfaces except C9F and C17H.145 Wang et al. prepared LIS by infusing alkane into solid organogel, and this type of LIS can also reduce ice adhesion strength since the deposited ice can be removed easily from surfaces with alkane.146 The principle of removing bulk ice and regenerating an alkane layer on the top of this LIS is shown in Fig. 11e. Meanwhile, ice adhesion strength on those LIS varies with the carbon number of the alkane and the LIS infused with the lowest number C10 possesses the lowest ice adhesion strength of only 8.7± 5.5 kPa.146
Substrate materials, another key component of LIS, act as a reservoir with respect to lubricant and can also facilitate crack formation at the interface between bulk ice and substrate because of its rough texture. As mentioned earlier, LIS were successfully prepared on Al surfaces and exhibited extremely low ice adhesion.28 In recent years, researchers have successfully fabricated LIS on alloy substrates such as Mg and Zn and those LIS can also significantly decrease ice adhesion strength.147,148 Furthermore, Coady et al. prepared UV-cured LIS. UV-cured cross-linked silicone resins were introduced on PAAO surfaces to enhance LIS durability. They manifest low ice adhesion strength of 10 kPa once combined with diacrylated silicone resin Ebecryl 350.137 Nevertheless, after seven ice/deice cycles, ice adhesion strength on this LIS can increase to 50 kPa since the resin-oil layer was removed from surfaces under the de-icing process.137 In addition to the aforementioned alloy materials, ice adhesion strength on LIS prepared with some polymers can also decrease significantly as well as exhibiting improved durability. For example, Juuti et al. prepared LIS through directly depositing SiO2 particles on low-density polyethylene film by liquid flame spray technology, and then infusing with silicone oil.149 Compared with identical dry porous surfaces, ice adhesion strength on these obtained surfaces decreased from 110 kPa to 12 kPa.149 Subsequently, they studied the ice adhesion behavior on LIS prepared on commercially available porous polymers PP and PFTE.90 After four icing/deicing cycles conducted in a wind tunnel, they found that ice adhesion strength on LIS prepared on porous PFTE can keep below 15 kPa, which is lower than that on the LIS prepared on PP substrate though infused with identical lubricant, and they attributed this phenomenon to the irregular surface morphology of porous PP.90 Liu et al. developed a simple way to prepare LIS on rubber surfaces by the electrospray method as well as phase separation.127 These obtained LIS not only delay the ice process, but also decrease ice adhesion by 1 or 2 orders of magnitude compared to conventional materials. Contrary to the previously mentioned concept of ice adhesion strength reducing with increasing texture density when surfaces are exposed to bulk ice due to lubricant depletion, they stressed the conclusion drawn from their experiments that ice adhesion strength on these LIS may mainly depend on the rubber surface area exposed to bulk ice since the stress concentration effect is small with respect to the structural features of engineered rubber.127 Applying functionalized polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) as co-crosslinking agents, Tao et al. prepared efficient and durable LIS by infusing silicone oil into polymethylvinylsiloxane and polymethylhydrosiloxane cross-linked polymers.138 Ice adhesion strength on these LIS can reduce to an extremely low value of 3.8 ± 1.8 kPa due to the low affinity with water and the loose ice structure at the interface between bulk ice and substrate. Yeong et al. investigated the anti-icing performance of LIS prepared on micro-textured PDMS infused with silicone oils with different content and viscosity.150 What is most interesting in their paper is that ice adhesion strength does not significantly vary with increasing lubricant viscosity at low lubricant content, but on increasing lubricant viscosity from 100 cSt to 1000 cSt at the highest infused level (15%), ice adhesion reduces dramatically on these LIS.150 Golovin et al. believed that a durable design of low-ice-adhesion LIS (less than 0.2 kPa) depends on changing the crosslink density of the elastomer to support the interface slip effect regardless of the chemical property of the material, since the slip effect occurs at the interface between bulk ice and elastomeric substrate generated from the comprehensive effect of non-crosslinked polymers and lubricants.151 Recently, Gao et al. improved the durability and anti-icing performance of LIS by introducing short linear PDMS into a branched PDMS network to prepare a substrate and then infused dimethylsilicone into the obtained matrix as a lubricant.152 Benefiting from the added POSS cross-linker, which is favorable for decreasing the elastic modulus of the substrate and trapping lubricant within the matrix, a low ice adhesion strength (11.2 ± 2.7 kPa) was found for the obtained LIS and it only slightly increased to 14 kPa after 50 icing–deicing cycles.152
6. Conclusion and outlook
Ice accretion on solid surfaces creates a series of disturbing problems since it can influence the working state of building infrastructure, vessels, aircrafts, vehicles, refrigeration equipment, telecommunications, power grids as well as other equipment. This review focused on introducing passive anti-icing surfaces, namely LIS, inspired from the natural plant Nepenthes, from four aspects: static/dynamic interaction between water and surfaces, condensation-frosting, delaying freeze times as well as reducing ice adhesion strength. Supercooled droplets can be easily shed from LIS with excellent water repellence arising from the extremely low contact angle hysteresis, so decreasing the probability of freeze behavior. Once faced with complex conditions, some droplets may still adhere to surfaces, and thus it is necessary to prolong the freeze process. The large contact angle and low surface energy of LIS contribute to the increase of the free energy barrier required for ice nucleation, which is considered to be an important reason for delaying the formation of ice on the surface. It is worth emphasizing that the presence of lubricant layer can efficiently reduce the interaction between bulk ice and surfaces when ice formation on surfaces is inevitable. All in all, LIS possess enormous potential for application in both everyday life and industrial fields.
However, the durability of LIS is still a challenge that should be faced. Especially, the lubricant infused into the structure can be depleted because of various factors such as evaporation, shedding accompanying droplet or bulk ice, mechanic abrasion etc. The absence of lubricant degrades the performance of LIS such that ice adhesion can evidently increase due to bulk ice directly contacting the structure. The interlock between bulk ice and structure not only increases the ice adhesion strength, it also may result in damage to the structure under the de-icing process. Therefore, how to extend the service life of LIS under complex conditions is the primary aim of recent research. It is undeniable that the durability of LIS has been greatly improved over the past few years through a variety of methods, including rational design and use of functional structures, and the selection of suitable lubricants. Nevertheless, the improvement of durability only depending on the optimal combination of parameter is insufficient; one also needs to fully recognize the interaction of each component during the processes of removing droplets and bulk ice from thermodynamic and mechanic viewpoints. Meanwhile, it cannot be ignored that incorporating the advantages of other anti-icing materials is also helpful to enhance the durability of LIS. For example, the combination of LIS and elastomers can reduce the ice adhesion strength to an extremely low value. After lubricant depletion, the exposed structure of elastomer also can reduce ice adhesion and the structure cannot be damaged under multiple icing–deicing processes; on replenishment of lubricant, the excellent performance can be quickly recovered. More attention should be paid to developing smart responsive and regenerating LIS, which also can effectively prolong the working life of LIS. In terms of the lubricant, cheaper and environmentally friendly liquids should be applied to prepare LIS to face the fact that lubricant depletion cannot be avoided. New mechanisms of icing/de-icing could be discovered and integration of LIS performance with other technologies such as heat, electricity, magnetism etc. needs in-depth research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (no. 51675513 and 51735013).
Notes and references
Y. Cao, Z. Wu, Y. Su and Z. Xu, Prog. Aerosp. Sci., 2015, 74, 62–80 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, J. C. Chan, W. Chen, J. Ling, J. G. Pinto and Y. Shao, Min. Weather. Rev., 2009, 137(11), 3978–3991 CrossRef .
Z. Hao, J. Zheng and Q. Ge, 
            et al.
          , Clim. Res., 2011, 50(2–3), 161–170 CrossRef .
H. Zheng, S. Chang and Y. Zhao, Prog. Chem., 2017, 29(1), 102–108 CAS .
B. P. Jelle, Energy Build., 2013, 67, 334–351 CrossRef .
R. Carriveau, A. Edrisy, P. Cadieux and R. Mailloux, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2012, 26, 447–461 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shao, L. Yang and C. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 1187–1197 CrossRef .

          M. Farzaneh, C. Volat and A. Leblond, in Atmospheric icing of power networks, Springer,  2008, pp. 229–268 Search PubMed .
A.-C. Norrström and E. Bergstedt, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2001, 127, 281–299 CrossRef .
J. Palacios, E. Smith, J. Rose and R. Royer, AIAA J., 2011, 49, 1158–1167 CrossRef .
R. Mirzanamadi, C. E. Hagentoft and P. Johansson, 
            et al.
          , Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 2018, 145, 106–118 CrossRef .
J. Lv, Y. Song, L. Jiang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3152–3169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gent, N. Dart and J. Cansdale, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2000, 358, 2873–2911 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, Y. Zhao and J. Zhai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4338–4341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
P. Tourkine, M. Le Merrer and D. Quéré, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7214–7216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Boreyko, B. R. Srijanto, T. D. Nguyen, C. Vega, M. Fuentes-Cabrera and C. P. Collier, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9516–9524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nosonovsky and V. Hejazi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8488–8491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kulinich, S. Farhadi, K. Nose and X. Du, Langmuir, 2010, 27, 25–29 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Maitra, S. Jung, M. E. Giger, V. Kandrical, T. Ruesch and D. Poulikakos, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500330 CrossRef .
R. Dou, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Cui, Y. Song, L. Jiang and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6998–7003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Luo, Q. Fan, J. Lv and J. Wang, Small, 2014, 10, 4693–4699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, R. Dou, D. Cui, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Xu, X. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4026–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kreder, J. Alvarenga, P. Kim and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15003 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rykaczewski, S. Anand, S. B. Subramanyam and K. K. Varanasi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5230–5238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Wilson, W. Lu, H. Xu, P. Kim, M. J. Kreder, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 581–585 RSC .
P. Kim, T.-S. Wong, J. Alvarenga, M. J. Kreder, W. E. Adorno-Martinez and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6569–6577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, H. Kim and Y. Nam, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8400–8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, D. Xiong, S. Pan, K. Wang, Y. Shi and Y. Deng, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1846–1853 RSC .
M. Muschi, B. Brudieu, J. Teisseire and A. Sauret, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 1100–1107 RSC .
C. Howell, T. L. Vu, J. J. Lin, S. Kolle, N. Juthani, E. Watson, J. C. Weaver, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13299–13307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. R. Pruppacher and J. D. Klett, in Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation, Springer,  1978, pp. 9–55 Search PubMed .
R. P. Sear, Int. Mater. Rev., 2012, 57, 328–356 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cantrell and A. Heymsfield, Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 2005, 86, 795–808 CrossRef .
M. Matsumoto, S. Saito and I. Ohmine, Nature, 2002, 416, 409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Pruppacher, J. D. Klett and P. K. Wang, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1998, 28, 381–382 CrossRef .
S. Jung, M. Dorrestijn, D. Raps, A. Das, C. M. Megaridis and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3059–3066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Schutzius, S. Jung, T. Maitra, P. Eberle, C. Antonini, C. Stamatopoulos and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir, 2014, 31, 4807–4821 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen, M. D. Gelenter, M. Hong, R. E. Cohen and G. H. McKinley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4202–4214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, D. Donadio, G. Russo and G. Galli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19807–19813 RSC .
T. Li, D. Donadio and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 224519 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Cabriolu and T. Li, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2015, 91, 052402 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Lin and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7881 RSC .
P. Conrad, G. E. Ewing, R. L. Karlinsey and V. Sadtchenko, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 572 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Marcolli, B. Nagare, A. Welti and U. Lohmann, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2016, 16, 8915–8937 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Anderson and J. Hallett, J. Atmos. Sci., 2010, 33, 822–832 CrossRef .
A. J. Page and R. P. Sear, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 065701 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Patric, M. K. Tiwari, M. Tanmoy and P. Dimos, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4874–4881 RSC .
X. Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11550–11558 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Liu, K. Maiwa and K. Tsukamoto, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 10351–10352 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(18), 7116–7139 RSC .
X. Y. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Durant, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2005, 109(20), 9865–9868 Search PubMed .
S. Suzuki, A. Nakajima, N. Yoshida, M. Sakai, A. Hashimoto, Y. Kameshima and K. Okada, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 445, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, D. Donadio, L. M. Ghiringhelli and G. Galli, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gurganus, A. B. Kostinski and R. A. Shaw, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 2, 1449–1454 CAS .
Y. S. Djikaev, A. Tabazadeh and H. Reiss, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 6572–6581 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, D. Donadio, L. M. Ghiringhelli and G. Galli, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 726–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Boinovich, A. M. Emelyanenko, V. V. Korolev and A. S. Pashinin, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 1659–1668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Campbell and H. K. Christenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 12(2), 750–755 Search PubMed .
M. A. Freedman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Holden, T. F. Whale, M. D. Tarn, D. O'Sullivan, R. D. Walshaw, B. J. Murray, F. C. Meldrum and H. K. Christenson, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav4316 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Campbell, F. C. Meldrum and H. K. Christenson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., India, Sect. B, 2017, 114, 810–815 CAS .
B. J. Murray, T. W. Wilson, S. Dobbie, Z. Cui, S. M. R. K. Al-Jumur, O. Möhler, M. Schnaiter, R. Wagner, S. Benz and M. Niemand, Nat. Geosci., 2010, 3, 233–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Niedermeier, R. A. Shaw, S. Hartmann, H. Wex, T. Clauss, J. Voigtländer and F. Stratmann, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2011, 11, 3161–3180 Search PubMed .
R. J. Herbert, B. J. Murray, T. F. Whale, S. J. Dobbie and J. D. Atkinson, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2014, 14, 8501–8520 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vali, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2014, 14, 5271–5294 CrossRef .
A. Kiselev, F. Bachmann, P. Pedevilla, S. J. Cox, A. Michaelides, D. Gerthsen and T. Leisner, Science, 2017, 355, 367–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, D. A. Knopf, S. China, B. W. Arey, T. H. Harder, M. K. Gilles and A. Laskin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 29721–29731 RSC .
T. Croteau, A. Bertram and G. Patey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8396–8405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pedevilla, M. Fitzner and A. Michaelides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 96, 115441 CrossRef .
K. Golovin, A. Dhyani, M. Thouless and A. Tuteja, Science, 2019, 364, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8854–8856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Meuler, J. D. Smith, K. K. Varanasi, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3100–3110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, E. T. Vågenes, C. Delabahan, J. He and Z. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Y. Ling, V. Uong, J.-S. b. Renault-Crispo, A.-M. Kietzig and P. Servio, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8789–8800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, Y. Zhuo, F. Wang, J. He and Z. Zhang, Soft Matter, 2019, 15(13), 2905–2910 RSC .
Z. He, S. Xiao, H. Gao, J. He and Z. Zhang, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 6562–6568 RSC .

          P.-G. De Gennes, F. Brochard-Wyart and D. Quéré, Capillarity and wetting phenomena: drops, bubbles, pearls, waves, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
D. Quéré, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2008, 38, 71–99 CrossRef .
G. Mistura and M. Pierno, Adv. Phys.: X, 2017, 2, 591–607 CAS .
J. Bico, U. Thiele and D. Quéré, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 206, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marchand, S. Das, J. H. Snoeijer and B. Andreotti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 236101 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li and Z. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 536, 507–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Hou, J. Li, L. Tie and Z. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 337, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Guan, G. G. Wells, B. Xu, G. McHale, D. Wood, J. Martin and S. Stuart-Cole, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 11781–11789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Smith, R. Dhiman, S. Anand, E. Reza-Garduno, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley and K. K. Varanasi, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 1772–1780 RSC .
F. Schellenberger, J. Xie, N. Encinas, A. Hardy, M. Klapper, P. Papadopoulos, H.-J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 7617–7626 RSC .
H. Niemelä-Anttonen, H. Koivuluoto, M. Tuominen, H. Teisala, P. Juuti, J. Haapanen, J. Harra, C. Stenroos, J. Lahti and J. Kuusipalo, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800828 CrossRef .
C. Semprebon, G. McHale and H. Kusumaatmaja, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 101–110 RSC .
H. Eral and J. Oh, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 247–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. Furmidge, J. Colloid Sci., 1962, 17, 309–324 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and Z. Guo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19879–19889 RSC .
D. Li, J. Huang, G. Han and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22741–22748 RSC .
A. Eifert, D. Paulssen, S. N. Varanakkottu, T. Baier and S. Hardt, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300138 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Zhang and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12212–12220 RSC .
T. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, B. B. Stogin, S. Yang and T. Wong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9260–9267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Keiser, L. Keiser, C. Clanet and D. Quéré, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 6981–6987 RSC .
M. S. Sadullah, C. Semprebon and H. Kusumaatmaja, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 8112–8118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Daniel, J. V. Timonen, R. Li, S. J. Velling and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 1020 Search PubMed .
D. Daniel, J. V. Timonen, R. Li, S. J. Velling, M. J. Kreder, A. Tetreault and J. Aizenberg, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 244503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Solomon, K. S. Khalil and K. K. Varanasi, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10970–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Q. Zhang, T. Cheng, X. Zhan and F. Chen, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 4052–4058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, V. Bahadur, J. A. Taylor, T. Krupenkin and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7699–7707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Oberli, D. Caruso, C. Hall, M. Fabretto, P. J. Murphy and D. Evans, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 210, 47–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Pei, B. Yu and F. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4237–4245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, M. K. Tiwari, N. V. Doan and D. Poulikakos, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 615 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Liu, M. He, K. Li, D. Cui, Q. Zhang, X. Zeng, Y. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 111603 CrossRef .
H. A. Stone, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6536–6540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiao, N. Miljkovic, R. Enright and E. N. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1988 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Miljkovic, R. Enright and E. N. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1776–1785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsuchiya, M. Tenjimbayashi, T. Moriya, R. Yoshikawa, K. Sasaki, R. Togasawa, T. Yamazaki, K. Manabe and S. Shiratori, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 8950–8960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rykaczewski, A. T. Paxson, M. Staymates, M. L. Walker, X. Sun, S. Anand, S. Srinivasan, G. H. McKinley, J. Chinn and J. H. J. Scott, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4158 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Preston, Z. Lu, Y. Song, Y. Zhao, K. L. Wilke, D. S. Antao, M. Louis and E. N. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 540 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, M. He, X. Zeng, K. Li, D. Cui, J. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 8285–8288 RSC .
S. Chavan, D. Park, N. Singla, P. Sokalski, K. Boyina and N. Miljkovic, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 6636–6644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13549–13581 RSC .
S. Nath, S. F. Ahmadi and J. B. Boreyko, Nanosc. Microsc. Therm., 2017, 21, 81–101 CrossRef .
D. Seo, S. Oh, B. Moon, H. Kim, J. Kim, C. Lee and Y. Nam, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 128, 217–228 CrossRef .
S. Anand, K. Rykaczewski, S. B. Subramanyam, D. Beysens and K. K. Varanasi, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 69–80 RSC .
S. Anand, A. T. Paxson, R. Dhiman, J. D. Smith and K. K. Varanasi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10122–10129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Guan, É. Ruiz-Gutiérrez, B. B. Xu, D. Wood, G. McHale, R. Ledesma-Aguilar and G. G. Wells, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 3404–3410 RSC .
Q. N. Pham, S. Zhang, K. Montazeri and Y. Won, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 14439–14447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Weisensee, Y. Wang, H. Qian, D. Schultz, W. P. King and N. Miljkovic, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 109, 187–199 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Yang, M. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu and X. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 346, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, B. Jin, Q. Zhang, X. Zhan and F. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 765, 721–730 CrossRef CAS .
P. Irajizad, M. Hasnain, N. Farokhnia, S. M. Sajadi and H. Ghasemi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, X. Wu, J. Tao, C. Zhu, Y. Lai and Z. Chen, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 509–557 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guadarrama-Cetina, R. Narhe, D. Beysens and W. Gonzalez-Vinas, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2014, 89, 012402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun and K. Rykaczewski, ACS Nano, 2016, 11, 906–917 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chanda, L. Ionov, A. Kirillova and A. Synytska, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 9126–9134 RSC .
T. Cheng, R. He, Q. Zhang, X. Zhan and F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21637–21646 RSC .
R. Chatterjee, D. Beysens and S. Anand, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1807812 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Yeong, A. Milionis, E. Loth and J. Sokhey, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 2018, 148, 29–37 CrossRef .
M. J. Coady, M. Wood, G. Q. Wallace, K. E. Nielsen, A.-M. Kietzig, F. o. Lagugné-Labarthet and P. J. Ragogna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2890–2896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tao, X. Li, B. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Zhao, K. Zhu and X. Yuan, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 103, 48–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Subramanyam, K. Rykaczewski and K. K. Varanasi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13414–13418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Nguyen, S. Park, Y. Jung and H. Lim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 69, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamazaki, M. Tenjimbayashi, K. Manabe, T. Moriya, H. Nakamura, T. Nakamura, T. Matsubayashi, Y. Tsuge and S. Shiratori, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58(6), 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ozbay, C. Yuceel and H. Y. Erbil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22067–22077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Yao, J. Chen, Z. He, J. Liu, Q. Li, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Sci. China Mater., 2015, 58, 559–565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhuo, F. Wang, S. Xiao, J. He and Z. Zhang, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 10139–10144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sandhu, O. J. Walker, A. Nistal, K. L. Choy and A. J. Clancy, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3215–3218 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Yao, S. Wu, Q. Li, J. Lv, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700865 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Luo, S. Yin, S. Huang, F. Chen, Q. Tang and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 1139–1147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Gu and J. Tu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11247–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Juuti, J. Haapanen, C. Stenroos, H. Niemelä-Anttonen, J. Harra, H. Koivuluoto, H. Teisala, J. Lahti, M. Tuominen and J. Kuusipalo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 161603 CrossRef .
Y. H. Yeong, C. Wang, K. J. Wynne and M. C. Gupta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32050–32059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Golovin, S. P. Kobaku, D. H. Lee, E. T. DiLoreto, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501496 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, B. Liu, J. Peng, K. Zhu, Y. Zhao, X. Li and X. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4654–4666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Guowei Wang	Mr Guowei Wang joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at Hubei University in 2018 to pursue his PhD degree. His current scientific interests are focused on surface wettability and designing functional materials with special wettability.
Zhiguang Guo	Professor Zhiguang Guo received his PhD from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2007. After that, he joined Hubei University. From October 2007 to August 2008, he worked at the University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, in a postdoctoral post. From September 2008 to March 2011, he worked in Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Charge de Researcher”. During February 2009 to February 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. Now he is a full professor in LICP financed by “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. He has published more than 250 papers about the interfaces of materials.

 	Fig. 1  The hydrogen bond network structure of water at given times in inherent structures (a–e). (a) At time t = 208 ns; (b) at t = 256 ns; (c) at t = 290 ns; (d) at t = 320 ns; and (e) at t = 500 ns. Lines indicate hydrogen bonds among water molecules, and the intermolecular bonds of water participating in such hydrogen bonds. Bright blue lines indicate ‘long-lasting’ hydrogen bonds, which have persisted longer than a specified threshold value before a given time t. The brightest blue lines are those with a lifetime longer than 2 ns. An initial nucleus is formed in the region circled in (b). (f) The total potential energies of the instantaneous structures in the trajectory for 512 water molecules after quenching (at t = 0 ns) from higher temperature to 230 K. Sufficient thermalization at high temperature (400 K) is performed before the temperature jump. A constant-temperature and constant-volume molecular dynamics method is used for a system with 512 water molecules, confined in a cubic box under a periodic boundary condition. The TIP4P water model is used. The shaded graph shows the total potential energies of the inherent structures, corresponding to the instantaneous structures in the trajectory for t = 250–320 ns. Inherent structures are calculated by local quenching at 10 ps intervals. Energy is in kJ mol−1 and time in ns (10−9 s). The freezing process can be divided into four stages: (1) a long quiescent period (indicated by a red line); (2) a slow energy-decreasing period (green line); (3) a fast energy-decreasing period (dark blue line); and (4) a crystallization–completion period (purple line). Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Nature, copyright [2002].	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Three-dimensional projections of AFM micrographs obtained for a 100 μm−2 region containing the region in which ice formation began. Deep pits, or micropores, are seen in the surface. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (c) Optical micrograph of a pocket. (d) Optical micrograph showing crystals of various compounds crystallizing from the two corners of one or more mica pockets. (c) and (d) reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright [2016]. (e) Preferential orientation of ice crystals nucleated on the surface of weathered feldspar, (001) surface of Maloso region, Malawi (FS04 at 244 K), side view. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Science, copyright [2016]. (f) The nucleated crystal is oriented with the basal plane aligned with the imaging plane, thereby showing a hexagonal shape, but this is not necessarily the preferred orientation. (g) The crystal has nucleated on the surface of a silicon wafer at or near the contact line. The crystal has nucleated at the silicon surface but away from the contact line. (f) and (g) reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright [2011]. (h) Schematic depiction of the regions within a water droplet where ice can nucleate and potential influences (e.g., evaporation). Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright [2015]. (i) Interface confinement on a heterogeneously formed ice embryo with an interfacial quasi-liquid layer in a nanoscale cavity (nanopit). Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2014]. (j) Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation barriers. Nuclei must reach a critical size before they become thermodynamically stable. In addition, nucleation preferentially occurs on substrates due to the reduced nucleation barrier. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2016]. (k) The geometrical factor f plotted against the ratio x = R/rc for convex spherical surface roughness element (a bump). (l) The geometrical factor f plotted against the ratio x = R/rc for concave spherical surface roughness element (a pit). Different curves are obtained with cos(θiw) = 1, 0, 0.5, 0.8, 0.9, and 0.95 starting from the top, thereby spanning the θiw range from 180° to 18.2°. (k) and (l) reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2014].	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 3  (a) and (b) Two typical sequences of video images taken at 3000 fps (frames per second) during the cooling of water droplets on the (010)- and (001)-oriented sections of feldspar, respectively. (a) and (b) reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (c) Two representative time sequences of growth in the same pocket: at frost points −37.4 °C (c1–c3) and −48.5 °C (c4–c6). For the upper sequence, two bulk crystals emerge simultaneously (c2) before visible growth along the wedge apex (c3). For the lower sequence, a confined solid phase is visible (c5) before the emergence of a single bulk crystal (c6). Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2016].	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The regions and the corresponding runs at which ice froze in that region. The freezing temperatures over the entire freeze–thaw experiment are shown below the light micrograph. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (b) Isothermal nucleation of ice on an individual kaolinite particle at 205.4 K. Ice formations is initiated at 124 Pa. False-colored images of kaolinite (brown) and ice crystals (blue) are shown for clarity. Dashed contour line shows the basal plane and arrows indicate the direction of the stacked kaolinite platelets. Images show (b1) prior to ice nucleation; (b2) onset of ice formation, 124.2% RH ice; (b3–b6) post ice nucleation event and growth of ice crystals. ESEM images (b1–b6) were acquired sequentially, separated by 3 seconds. Scale bars are 5 mm. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2016]. (c) Images showing a freezing experiment for an array of water droplets on a feldspar thin section, where frozen droplets scatter more light. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019]. (d) Illustration of how a phase confined in a pore emerges into a bulk phase. (d1) The phase initially has a concave interface, allowing it to be stable in confinement even in undersaturated conditions. (d1) Before it can emerge into a bulk phase it must briefly form a highly convex interface, requiring supersaturation. (d2) As the bulk phase grows its interface curvature reduces, tending toward a planar interface. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright [2016]. (e) Ice nucleation rate constants relative to the homogeneous nucleation rate constants for the range of OH tiling patterns considered. Independent of the symmetry of the substrate, both good and bad ice nucleation efficiencies exist. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright [2016]. (f) Droplet fraction frozen as a function of temperature for LD3 microcline samples. Green and blue triangles represent thin sections prepared by cleaving along both the (010) and (001) faces, respectively. The clear red squares and circles represent the ground particles, immersed in the liquid droplets. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Science, copyright [2019].	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrations of possible wetting configurations of a textured surface (top) and of a LIS (bottom): (a1) the liquid completely impregnates the grooves (Wenzel state); (a2) the liquid is suspended on the asperities (Cassie state or lotus effect); (a3) the liquid partially impregnates the texture (petal effect); (a4) the liquid rests on a chemically heterogeneous surface forming an apparent contact angle θ described by the Cassie equation; (a5) and (a6) the lubricant does not cloak the drop; (a7) and (a8) the lubricant cloaks the drop. Drops on LIS can exhibit zero (a6), one (a5) and (a8) or two (a7) three-phase contact lines. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Taylor & Francis Online, copyright [2017]. (b) Cloaking of drops or a liquid three-phase contact line. (b1–b6) Confocal images of vertical sections through a water drop placed on lubricant-impregnated micropillar arrays (black rectangles). FC70 (a fluorinated oil, 97%, C15F33N), decanol and ionic liquid were used as lubricants. (b1 and b2) Fluorescence signals (yellow) of FC70 and the reflection of light from the lubricant–air interface (cyan). (b3 and b4) Fluorescence signals (yellow) of decanol. The combined image (b4) shows the fluorescence signal of the lubricant, the water droplet (red) and reflection of light (cyan). (b5 and b6) Fluorescence signals (yellow) of ionic liquid. The combined image (b8) shows the fluorescence signal of the lubricant, the water droplet (red) and reflection of light (cyan). Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2015]. (c1) Image of a sessile droplet of water on a LIS showing a wetting ridge formed by the balance of forces between the nonevaporating lubricating liquid and the evaporating droplet. (c2) Cross section schematic of the droplet on a lubricant-impregnated textured surface showing defined parameters and a wetting skirt of nonvolatile lubricant created by the wetting ridge. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2015]. (d) Overlays reflection and fluorescent channel images. Inset: the droplet shape and the wetting ridge of a 5 μL water droplet obtained with contact angle goniometry. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Wiley Online Library, copyright [2018]. (e) Sketch illustrating the derivation of the closed form expression for θsapp. In the limit of small oil ridge the water–gas interface is flat in proximity of the Neumann triangle, while the oil–water and oil–gas interfaces can be approximated by circular arcs. The surface corrugation is not explicitly depicted in this sketch. However, its effect is accounted for by using the Cassie-Baxter rather than the Young angle for the oil–water and oil–gas interfaces. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2017].	 
	(11)
cosθ = cosθS + 2ΛγwsinθSΔPoaR′	(12)
Fd = 2rγΔcosθ	(13)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Intercalated lubricant film on lubricated surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright [2018]. (b) Fringes observed at wavelengths λ1 = 458 nm and λ2 = 633 nm are due to a silicone oil film sandwiched between a water droplet and a flat PMP substrate at times t = 10 s, 10 min and 15 min after the droplet was deposited. Droplet size is decreasing due to evaporation. Scale bar, 0.1 mm. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Nature, copyright [2017]. (c) and (d) Ice mobility on a LIS (highlighted in green) compared to strong adhesion to an epoxy-resin-based nanostructured superhydrophobic surface (highlighted in yellow). Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Nature, copyright [2011]. (e) The upper schematic of a water droplet moving on a lubricant-impregnated surface shows the various parameters considered in our scaling model. The bottom trajectories of a number of coffee particles measured relative to the water droplet reveal that the drop rolls rather than slips across the surface. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2013]. (f) Confocal microscopy images monitoring the advancement of a drop on an FC70-impregnated micropillar array. Advancement was induced by applying air flow. (g) Confocal microscopy images monitoring the contact angle of water drop (red) as it recedes because of evaporation on an FC70-impregnated micropillar array (blue). (f) and (g) reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2015].	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Image of condensation on an oil-infused TFTS-coated CuO surface. Significantly higher droplet density was observed on the oil-infused surface while a low departure radius of 0.98 ± 0.13 mm was maintained. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Nature, copyright [2013]. (b) Frost propagates as an ice root from a frozen drop reaching a neighboring drop. (c) Time-lapse images showing frost propagation on LIS 5cst. (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2019]. (d) Experimental immersion condensation heat transfer measurement. Comparison of overall heat transfer coefficient during condensation on hydrophobic surface, TFTS-coated superhydrophobic surface, and oil-infused composite surface with an initial chamber pressure of 30 Pa (primarily non-condensable gases). The supersaturation was varied in the range 1 < S < 1.6. The heat transfer coefficient on the oil-infused surface increased by approximately 100% compared to the dropwise and superhydrophobic surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Nature, copyright [2013]. (e) Nucleation states and regime maps of nucleation preference. The subscripts w, a, o and s denote droplet, air, oil and solid interfaces, respectively. The superscripts d and l denote the droplet and lens. In states I and III, Adws and Adwa correspond to droplet–solid and droplet–air interfacial areas. In state II, Adws and Adwa correspond to the droplet–oil interfacial area. In state IV, Alwo and Alwa correspond to lens–oil and lens–air interfacial areas. (e1) The regime map showing conditions where nucleation within the oil is preferred over nucleation in vapor for different ratios of γwo/γwa. (e2) The regime map showing conditions where nucleation at the oil–air interface is preferred over nucleation at the solid–air interface for different solid surface wettabilities (θws(a)). (e3) The regime map showing conditions where nucleation at the oil–air interface is preferred over nucleation within the oil for different surface wettabilities in oil (θws(o)). In (e2) and (e3), the region with a blue background corresponds to oils that satisfy the criterion γwo/γwa while the region with a green background corresponds to oils with γwo/γwa. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2015].	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The morphology of accumulated ice on LIS-Al is significantly different from that on bare Al. Condensation/freezing cycle: from room temperature to −10 °C at 5 °C min−1. Melting (defrost) cycle: from −10 to 25 °C at ∼10 °C min−1. Ice still forms mostly around the edges of LIS-Al by bridging from the surrounding aluminum substrate, while it forms uniformly all over the aluminum substrate. Several defects (tall features above the level of the lubricant layer) on the surface of LIS-Al led to the pinning of droplets while they were sliding which eventually led to the formation of large ice crystals on LIS-Al. The samples are mounted with 75° tilt angle, and the widths of the substrates are approximately 3 cm. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2012]. (b) Plot showing a typical survival curve, and is data from a LIS-coated, S, pan. The temperature at which the sample has frozen half of the 150 times is called “T50” and represents the average nucleation temperature of that sample, in that container. (c) A plot comparing the level of supercooling (T50s, black bars) for each type of surface-treated aluminum DSC pans. Those labeled N are untreated, hydrophilic pans; T are textured, hydrophobic; H are superhydrophobic; and S are LIS-coated pans. Note that S1 is the actual H4 pan with lubricant added to turn it into a LIS-coated pan; similarly S2 is the actual H5 pan. Also shown are the 10–90 widths, halved, to give a natural error bar to each T50 and survival curve. The relatively narrow 10–90 widths indicate that none of the samples changed in any measurable way during the 150 freeze/thaw cycles of each of these data sets. (d) A typical data set from an automatic lag time apparatus is shown (in this case for an untreated, N, pan) and the stochastic nature of nucleation is evident, as each run freezes at a different temperature. (b)–(d) Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2013]. (e) Schematic of magnetic liquid–liquid interfaces. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Nature, copyright [2016].	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cryo-FIB/SEM images of drops before and after freezing on 10 μm LIS. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright [2013]. (b) Condensation–frosting dynamics on different bulk S-PSL surfaces. (b1) Optical transparency of PSL (dimethyl sulfoxide, cyclohexane, and hexadecane)-coated aluminum surfaces at Tpel = 4 °C, RH = 15%. Scale bars: 1 cm. (b2) SEM images (imaged at 45°) of photopolymer replica molds delineating S-PSL surface morphologies (Tpel = −5 °C, RH = 11%). Scale bars: 25 μm. (b3) Optical microscopy images of typical condensation behavior on corresponding bulk S-PSL surfaces at Tpel = −15 °C, RH = 80%. Scale bars: 200 μm. (b4) S-PSL surface roughness (left) was measured using an optical profilometer in 5% RH environment. “Average roughness” is the arithmetic mean of absolute height shifts about the mean reference plane while “Z-roughness” denotes the distance between the highest peak and lowest valley on the surface. Condensation–frosting performance of various bulk S-PSLs (right) cooled to Tpel = −15 °C in 80% RH environment. The “freezing initiation time” depicts the occurrence of the first condensate freezing event in the field of view (2.1 mm2), while the “total freezing delay time” represents the net time required for all the condensed droplets on S-PSL surface (2375 mm2) to freeze since the onset of freezing initiation. The error bars (left and right) denote standard deviations, obtained from experimental measurements on different S-PSLs repeated at least four times each. (c) Time-lapse images of condensation-frosting experiments on vertically mounted SPS, LIS, and PSL (glycerol)-infused hydrophilic surface (each of 6.45 cm2 size) subjected to Tpel = −7 °C, 60% RH. (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Wiley Online Library, copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 10  Ice build-up on lubricated S-FNM surface. (a) Morphology of the freezing process at 738 s in the first cycle showing “edge mode nucleation”, (b) 1521 s in the first cycle, (c) 183 s in the 14th cycle showing “random-point mode nucleation”, and (d) 256 s in the 14th cycle. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Elsevier, copyright [2015].	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cryo-stabilized SEM images of an FIB-cut LIS with excess (a1) and (a2) equilibrium films. (a3) Comparison of the ice adhesion strength on lubricant-impregnated surfaces having excess and thermodynamically stable lubricant films. The ice adhesion strength is normalized to that on a smooth, uncoated silicon surface. The textured surface of the LIS consists of lithographically textured silicon with 10 μm square posts with an edge-to-edge spacing of 50 μm. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2013]. (b) Force curves for ice adhesion measurement on LP-OG surface (top) and PDMS surface (bottom) verify a liquid-like layer as a lubricant on the LP-OG. Ice adhesion force corresponds to the value in the curve at the moment of ice detachment marked by the black arrow. Gray dashed lines represent the zero-force baseline. The inset is a schematic illustration of the force measurement process. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Springer, copyright [2015]. (c1) Effect of micropost density on the adhesion strength of ice on LIS. (c2) Cross section of the ice–LIS interface obtained via cryo-FIB/SEM imaging. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2013]. (d) Schematic of skin-like LIS. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from the American Chemistry Society, copyright [2018]. (e) Schematic illustration of the principle of solid organogel materials for the easy removal of foreign materials on top and the mechanism for the regeneration of the solid alkane layer. Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley Online Library, copyright [2017].	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
