Latest trends in the large-scale production of MOFs in accordance with the principles of green chemistry  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2GC03264C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2GC03264C
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 9402-9427Latest trends in the large-scale production of MOFs in accordance with the principles of green chemistry

        
          
            Kacper 
            Pobłocki
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joanna 
            Drzeżdżon
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Barbara 
            Gawdzik
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Dagmara 
            Jacewicz
          
          
        
      *a
aFaculty of Chemistry, Department of Environmental Technology, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 63, 80-308, Gdansk, Poland. E-mail: dagmara.jacewicz@ug.edu.pl
bInstitute of Chemistry, Jan Kochanowski University, Uniwersytecka 7, 25-406, Kielce, Poland
Received 
      31st August 2022
    , Accepted 10th November 2022First published on 11th November 2022AbstractAn increasing number of research groups are focusing on patents for the production of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) on a large scale. MOFs, due to their porous structure, have been used in industry and other fields for the catalysis, capture, and storage of gases such as methane and carbon dioxide. Due to the increasing number of European Union restrictions and the implementation of the idea of sustainable development, the basis for the evaluation of the chemical industry is the production of innovative, high-class materials according to the principles of green chemistry. In this review, we present the latest literature trends on the large-scale production of MOFs based on MIL, ZIF, UiO, BTC, NU, and HKUST using the principles of green chemistry. This manuscript is unique because it presents the trends on the latest patents from the most famous organometallic framework manufacturers including BASF, NuMat Technologies, novoMOF, MOF Apps, and MOF Technologies. Furthermore, it is an accessible collection of information for research centres. In addition, in this work, we present a critical review of the procedures for obtaining MOFs, considering the principles of green chemistry.Kacper PobłockiKacper Pobłocki is currently a master's student at the Department of Environmental Technology at the Faculty of Chemistry of the University of Gdańsk. His research topics focus on the design of syntheses of new organometallic compounds and their use as “green” precatalysts in olefins polymerization reactions.Joanna DrzeżdżonDr. Joanna Drzeżdżon is an assistant professor at the Department of Environmental Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk. Her scientific interests focus on olefin polymerization catalysts, including the application of “green chemistry” principles. She has published more than 50 academic papers in international journals, as well as 2 patents.Barbara GawdzikDr Barbara Gawdzik is an an Associate Professor in the Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University of Kielce, Poland. Her scientific interest: organic chemistry, bioorganic chemistry, especially the synthesis of biologically active hetero- and macrocyclic compounds. She has published over 60 academic papers 15 book chapters and 10 patents.Dagmara JacewiczDr Dagmara Jacewicz is an Associate Professor in the Department of Environmental Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, Poland. Her scientific interests are in inorganic chemistry, coordination chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, physical chemistry and green chemistry. She has published more than 100 academic papers 43 book chapters, co-author of 2 books – academic scripts.
1. Introduction
Scientists are joining forces to design new technologies, patents, and inventions to improve the ecological situation globally. However, large-scale action is needed to slow down climate change (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Recent weather anomalies in the world caused by climate change. Created with BioRender.com. 
This is important because we are still dealing with the following issues:
• Global warming (numerous fires and melting glaciers),
• Water and air pollution (caused by sewage, pesticides, smog, or acid rain),
• Consumerism (focusing on quantity, not quality),
• Deforestation (causes floods, droughts, and landslides, where the number of forests has decreased by 40% since the beginning of the 20th century),
• Desertification (loss of soil humus), and
• Loss of biodiversity.
According to the Global Footprint Network, the ecological debt, i.e., the day when humanity uses all natural resources that the Earth can regenerate in 365 days, is July 29 in 2021 (for comparison, it was August 22 in 2020).1 Therefore, raising the awareness of the largest industrial companies such as petroleum, chemical, pharmaceutical, and construction to issues related to green chemistry is crucial to achieving satisfactory results in the environmental field. This can enable the elimination of emissions from chemical substances to the environment and prevent climate disasters. One possibility of environmental protection is to use porous materials, which are characterized by large open spaces, i.e., so-called cages. Initially, these substances were zeolites and activated carbons.2
Nowadays, MOFs (metal–organic frameworks) are the fastest-growing class of materials in chemistry. Metallic-organic structures were presented for the first time in the publication by O. M. Yaghi in 1995.3,4 However, the MOF compounds published several years ago are constantly being modified, while new organometallic frameworks are being created with unique absorption and catalytic properties. MOFs are also used in gas storage, polymerization reactions, purifying the liquid fuel from nitrogenated compounds,5 separation,6 including cooling applications (through reversible adsorption of water), ion exchange,7 photodynamic anticancer therapy (PDT)8,9 biomedical imaging, biodiesel,10 luminescence,11 lithium-ion batteries, anti-corrosion agents,12 non-linear optics (NLO), doubling the frequency of solar cells,13,14 and, in particular, in energy technology, e.g., in the production of fuel cells and supercapacitors (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Schematic presentation of the various applications of MOFs. Created with BioRender.com. 
The companies that are pioneers in the production of MOFs on a large scale are undoubtedly BASF (which sells chemical compounds under the name Basolite) and MOF Technologies. These companies produce organometallic structures in accordance with the principles of green chemistry.15,16 MOF Technologies relies on mechanochemistry to obtain porous structures such as Mg-MOF-74, ZIF-67, MIL-53(Al) and HKUST-1. MOF Apps use solvothermal, mechanochemical, spray drying, and microwave-assisted processes to synthesize ZIF-88, MIl-68, UiO-66, MIL-53(Al) and HKUST-1. Also, BASF representatives predicted the great technological importance of MOFs using the electrochemical synthesis method of MOF-177, HKUST-1, ZIF-8, and MIL-53(Al). However, the turning point was the production of several tons of Al-fumarate Basolite® A520 by BASF via hydrothermal synthesis (no longer available). Chemical laboratories can purchase MOFs through the well-known Merck, which is one of the largest manufacturers and suppliers of chemical (approximately 90000), analytical, and biochemical reagents, and accessories for all types of chromatography. Consequently, the raw materials for the production of MOFs are commercialized and available to all chemists, with the number of customers exceeding 1.3 million.16,17 MOFs are typically produced under solvothermal conditions in the laboratory, where the solvent and solute are heated to reflux. However, the solvothermal method is not economically feasible and not recommended for commercial use because of the difficulty in scaling the production due to the extended reaction time (about 24 h) and poor quality of the resulting material. Polar solvents are usually employed to solubilize the large organic ligands used. The most common solvent appearing in the literature is DMF, which is poisonous and adversely affects the environment. Therefore, the green chemistry principles introduced in 1991 by Paul Anastas (and in publications related to MOFs in 2007)15 advise against the use of these solvents.16,17
In the field of science, patent reports on MOFs started to dominate, making it possible to produce MOFs on a large scale and implement them in the industrial market. The search for new MOFs is no longer a priority, where scientists and production scientists are focusing on optimizing the procedures for obtaining MOFs with already known structures. An important access requirement for potential MOF applications is the ability to routinely synthesize MOF materials in large quantities (kg scale or more) at an economical price. The process must be a comprehensive, efficient synthesis capable of producing large amounts of MOFs to introduce these materials in real applications. In addition, the synthesis procedure must be transferable to large-scale production. By observing research activities around the world, we can see a strong tendency to create new ideas, including interesting preparation methods, quick synthesis, and original modifications of MOFs. However, the transition from laboratory to commercial scale is often tedious.18 There are four “leapfrog barriers” described in the literature (Fig. 3). The first one is the wide availability of MOFs, where there is a need to create an innovative project. Secondly, there is a very low number of scientific articles on the modification of MOF structures without losing their most valuable physical property, i.e., porosity. Next, is fine-tuning of their structures. Finally, the last barrier is learning how to obtain MOFs together with the appropriate efficiency under laboratory and production conditions.18
 Fig. 3  Four main technical barriers in the commercialization of MOFs.18 Created with BioRender.com. 
The US5648508A patent explains how to prepare microporous structures NALCO Chemical Company and Omar Yaghi Crystalline metal–organic “microporous materials for the purification of liquids and gases”. This was a ground-breaking project, which cannot be omitted herein. The dominant companies and research and scientific centres in terms of patent applications of organometallic crystal networks are in the USA and Germany (BASF-Badische Anilin – und Soda-Fabrik). Fig. 4 presents the largest chemical concerns in the production of MOFs on a large scale.
 Fig. 4  Examples of the largest chemical concerns dealing with the production of MOFs on a large scale with exemplary compounds.16 Created with BioRender.com. 
According to the literature on MOFs, they are increasingly being produced according to the principles of green chemistry.3,4,16 “Green chemistry” has been clearly defined by IUPAC and can be summarized as “The invention, design, and application of chemical products and processes to reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances”. Fig. 5 presents the 12 principles of green chemistry.19–21 Despite the fact that the term “green chemistry” was known since 1991, the first articles related to the synthesis of MOFs without the use of harmful substrates and solvents appeared after 2000. The group of Lu and Babb reported the synthesis of single crystals of [Cu(INA)2]·solvent, where solvent = 2H2O, MeOH, EtOH, and n-PrOH.22 In 2006, the synthesis of the same compound by the mechanochemical method was presented.23
 Fig. 5  12 principles of green chemistry.19–21 Created with BioRender.com. 
The large-scale production of MOFs in accordance with the principles of green chemistry is an extremely interesting topic for chemists, material engineers, production technologists, and ecologists who are focused on a better standard of living on Earth, which is why we discuss the latest reports and patents in this field herein. We classify metal–organic frameworks into several types such as MIL, ZIF, UIO, BTC, NU, and HKUST.24,25 Over the years, new methods have been developed for the synthesis of organometallic frameworks, and thus we aim to present a timeline to better illustrate the chronological progress in this regard (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Modified Rubio-Martinez's timeline of the most common synthetic approaches patented for the synthesis of MOFs.16 Created with BioRender.com. 
2. General and green synthesis techniques used for production of MOFs
Metal hydroxides, oxides, sulfates and acetates have been selected to avoid the generation of toxic and corrosive by-products such as the corrosive HCl, instead producing by-products such as water and acetic acid. Another issue is the use of harmless, green solvents such as ionic liquids, deep eutectic solvent, water, Cyrene and surfactants. The toxic and commonly used DMF should be avoided because it can decompose into the harmful dimethylamine when heated.
2.1 Solvothermal
Secondary building blocks (SBUs) with organic linkers create fascinating network architectures, where the solvothermal method is the most effective and common method used in the synthesis of complex compounds and crystal engineering of MOFs. This method enables the creation of tailor-made designs with the desired application and physicochemical properties. In the solvothermal method, metal salts are dissolved together with the organic linker in a solvent. The most popular liquids used in the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks are DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide) and DMF (dimethylformamide) due to their high boiling point (DMSO, 189 °C, and DMF, 153 °C).26–28 There are cases when the solvent used is water, and in that case the synthesis is called hydrothermal. The advantage of the solvothermal method is the possibility of its optimization, i.e., selection of appropriate molar ratio of reagents (stoichiometry), temperature, solvents, pH, reaction time, concentration of precursors and counterions. The optimization of the reaction parameters undoubtedly influences the morphology, shape, yield and production cost of the porous material. However, complete control over the creation of predictable architectural structures still remains elusive given that the MOF crystallization process involves complex thermodynamic and kinetic aspects. The choice of solvent is especially important because it is one of the factors determining the structure of the chemical entity. In some cases, the crystal lattices contain a solvent that is uncoordinated with metal clusters. The presence of the solvent in the crystal lattice as coordinated or uncoordinated molecules adversely affects the sorption properties and porosity of MOFs. Furthermore, the presence of solvent molecules in the pores of MOFs reduces their porosity.28,29 Additionally, it can be concluded that polar protic solvents such as water, methanol and ethanol have the ability to form hydrogen bonds with ligands containing carboxylate and amide functionalities. In addition, polar protic and aprotic solvents can bind to metal ion centres. Among the structure-determining factors, pH is imortant.29 As the pH value of the reaction medium increases, the organic linker is deprotonated. Consequently, higher temperatures favour the formation of large crystals of higher quality. The reaction temperature may also change the rate of crystal growth and nucleation. It is also worth mentioning that vacuum drying and purification of the final product are necessary (usually using ethanol and methanol).30
Glass flasks are used for synthesis at low temperatures (up to 120 °C). Alternatively, above 125 °C, Teflon-lined autoclaves or bomb reactors are required, which can normally be used in the temperature range of approximately 80–250 °C.30 However, the disadvantage of the solvothermal method is its cost because it requires the use of reduced pressure and high temperature, which undoubtedly increases the costs. Another limitation is the long production time required to obtain the desired product.26
The biggest drawbacks of the solvothermal method are its long duration (re-up to several days) and requirement of very high temperatures, which increase the cost of the process on a large scale. Additionally, the use of metal chlorides results in the corrosion of the expensive heating furnaces and reactors.28–30

2.1.1 Ionothermal. 
Ionic liquids (ILs, green solvents) are usually defined as materials with a melting point below 100 °C that consist of only ions. Also, the synthesis with green solvents is called ionothermal (Fig. 7).31 ILs based on pyrrolidinium, pyridine, tetraalkylammonium, and 1,3-dialkylimidazolium cations and weakly coordinating inorganic anions, such as tetrafluoroborate ([BF4]−), hexafluorophosphate ([PF6]−), and trifluoromethane (OT) triflate, appear most often in the literature (Fig. 8). To date, ILs have been used in conjunction with IRMOF-1, CuBTC, ZIF-8, and MIL-101.32–34 Green solvents have many advantages, e.g., non-toxicity, resistance to combustion, ionic and thermal conductivity, high chemical and electrochemical stability, negligible volatility, and low (zero clearance) vapour pressure. Consequently, it is possible to carry out the process without reflux condensers, which undoubtedly reduces the cost of the synthesis.35 Also, due to the presence of high ion concentrations, it is possible to synthesize new, more porous materials. ILs can replace standard reagents and act as a solvent or electrolyte, but their presence often interferes with the final structure of MOFs.36 Recent literature reports show that IL/MOFs perform better in gas absorption, membrane separation, catalysis, and conductivity applications than traditional MOFs. However, their use in industry is hampered by their viscosity, low diffusion coefficients, clogging of their pores, problematic recycling, portability, and product purification. The introduction of IL/MOF on a large scale is also problematic due to the presence of impurities, e.g., a small amount of water in the process of gas separation by Cu-BTC, which causes a lack of selectivity in gas purification, as well as with a larger amount of H2O, resulting in the destruction of the metal–organic frameworks.32–36 Additionally, the use of ILs as solvents is problematic due to the reduced BET specific surface area of porous materials due to the clogging of their pores by ionic liquids. Authors dealing with IL/MOF composites propose the introduction of computational chemistry in their research to optimize the adsorption and separation processes, go from the micro to macro scale, and consciously and safely use ionic liquids.32–36
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of different post-impregnation methods used in the synthesis of IL/MOF composites.31 Created with BioRender.com. 
 Fig. 8  Cost common anions and cations forming ILs.31,32 


2.1.2. Deep eutectic solvent usage. 
Another green method for the synthesis of MOFs is the use of deep eutectic solvents (DES).37 Generally, DESs are characterized by a very large depression of freezing point and are liquid at temperatures lower than 150 °C. DESs have been known since 2003, as reported by Abbott et al.38 In their publication, they showed that mixtures of substituted quaternary ammonium salts such as hydroxyethyl-trimethylammonium (choline) chloride with urea produce eutectics that are liquid at ambient temperature (low melting point of 12 °C).37 In contrast, their individual components have a melting point of 302 °C (ChCl) and 135 °C (urea).38–41 Scientists attribute this phenomenon to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA) and donor (HBD) (Fig. 9). DESs are characterized by the high solubility of organic and inorganic compounds due to the production of a series of hydrogen bonds. For example, in a mixture of choline chloride and urea (molar ratio of 1:2), the high solubility of lithium chloride was observed at 50 °C (LiCl solubility > 2.5 mol dm−3). Further examples are silver chloride (AgCl solubility = 0.66 mol dm−3), aromatic acids (benzoic acid solubility = 0.82 mol dm−3) and amino acids (D-alanine solubility = 0.38 mol dm−3).37,38 The authors also reported an increase in conductivity with an increase in temperature, similar to imidazolium-based ionic liquids. Compared to ILs, deep eutectic solvents differ in that they have at least one neutral molecule (without charge); additionally, they are readily available, cheaper, and do not require additional purification by organic solvents. Thus, ecological solvents are considered.39 Interestingly, besides being reaction media for the preparation of MOFs, DESs can play many other roles, e.g., structure steering factor by internally participating in the formation of complex MOF structures. They can be synthesis carriers, making it possible to carry out the reaction at a lower temperature without a reflux condenser, which can also be used for post-synthetic modification for the creation of composites or hybrids.37–41
 Fig. 9  Examples of DES components.38–40 


2.1.3. Surfactant-thermal process. 
In addition to ILs and DESs, surfactants, which consist of polar water-soluble hydrophilic groups and oil-soluble hydrophobic groups, are also used for the synthesis of MOFs. They are characterized by high thermal and chemical stability and low vapour pressure, and also have a wide range of properties depending on the pH, e.g., acidic and basic, and charge, e.g., neutral, anionic, and cationic (with high ionic conductivity). Surfactants are amphiphiles and have the ability to self-assemble into micelles, which helps to control the size and shape of MOF crystals.42 A good example is the study by Duan et al., who designed a method for the synthesis of meso-Cu-BTC. They found that the size of the mesopore could be adjusted from 3.61 to 4.88 nm by increasing the long-chain in the alkyl groups of the surfactant (C12 to C18).43 The optimal H2O/EtOH ratio was 0.2 and the optimal amount of template (surfactant) was 1.35 mmol. Examples of the surfactants used for the synthesis of MOFs include polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), polyethene glycol (PEG-400) and dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB) as the reaction medium.27–29 PEG is particularly attractive due to its non-toxicity and quick biodegradability, wide temperature range applicability and the oxygen atom in its structure, which can bind with metal ions and influence the crystal growth of porous materials. Compared to ILs, the use of surfactants and DESs is much cheaper, making it a more cost-effective method for large-scale use.42,43 However, a serious drawback should be mentioned, which is the problem of the simultaneous formation of several MOF crystalline phases that are difficult to separate in pure forms.29

2.2 Mechanochemistry
Mechanochemical synthesis (Fig. 10) is considered to be one of the greenest methods, conforming with the idea of sustainable development.16 Depending on the needs, neat grinding (NG), liquid-assisted grinding (LAG) and liquid-ion-assisted grinding (ILAG) can be distinguished as the three main strategies used in the mechanochemical synthesis of MOFs.28,29 The other advantages of this process are it is carried out at room temperature (possibly slightly higher) and without the use of solvent (or a very small amount), undoubtedly reducing the production costs.44 Additional advantages include the repeatability, control of the speed and short duration of the process (5–60 min),18 which can be accelerated by the use of various types of electric grinders, whereas solvothermal methods last from several hours to several days. The most common metal salts used for the synthesis of MOFs are oxides and acetates, generating water or acetic acid as by-products, which are easy to remove by heating. However, the disadvantage is that the control of the crystal morphology and particle size of the product is limited. Also, special electric grinders, mortars and pestles are needed, increasing the cost. Additionally, the final product may not be pure due to contamination from the grinding reactors, which adversely affects its performance. Fig. 10 presents a comparison of the traditional synthesis method with the twin screw extrusion method.16,44
 Fig. 10  Comparison of the traditional manufacture of MOFs with that for the direct mechanochemical synthesis by twin screw extrusion.18 Created with BioRender.com. 
2.3 Aerogel or hydrogel synthetic method
The sol–gel method is a unique method for the synthesis of MOFs (Fig. 11). The use of MOF composite aerogels and aerogels is particularly attractive in biomedical applications due to their high porosity, high water content, and excellent biocompatibility.45 The high porosity of MOF composite aerogels leads to high potential adsorption applications, while their low density and excellent mechanical properties improve their transport and processability, respectively.46–48 Composite aerogels can also be reused after simply washing with water, which is ideal for industrial applications. For example, ZIF-67 with supporting material sodium alginate is used for water purification, ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 together with acrylamide (AM) and 2-hydroxyethyl (HEA) are applied for drug delivery and ZIF-8, ZIF-67, and Fe-MOF together with proteins (Burkholderia cepacia lipase and penicillin G acylase) is an excellent biocatalyst.49,50 However, the cost of large-scale production, including the cost of raw materials and equipment, is a downside of this method. The other limitations include the low efficiency of the resulting MOFs and the disposal of powdered metal–organic frameworks, during which dust formation is possible and is dangerous for employees.45–50
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram depicting the syntheses of 3D MOF-based aerogels or hydrogels via (top) direct mixing and (bottom) in situ growth methods.45–50 Created with BioRender.com. 
2.4 Electrochemical
The electrochemical method for the synthesis of MOFs is based on the mutual conversion between substrates and electricity. Electrochemical synthesis has specific advantages over traditional solvothermal synthesis including the use of ambient temperature instead of 120 °C,16 ambient pressure instead of high-pressure autoclaves, mild reaction conditions that recycle the nitrate counterions, and significantly reduced reaction time compared to the conventional solvothermal synthesis method. Additionally, it is possible to control the synthesis via the applied voltage. In addition, the electrochemical method makes it possible to synthesize thin films or coatings.51 According to the latest work by Ren and Wei,52 the electrochemical synthesis methods of MOF can be divided into three categories depending on the direction of electron transfer and the place where the nucleation process occurs, as follows: (1) surface electrode nucleation (ESN) including anodic dissolution (Fig. 12) and cathodic deposition, (2) indirect bipolar electrodeposition (IBED) and (3) electrophoretic deposition (EPD). The former two methods are based on the immediate MOF formation in the reaction system, while the latter is based on the initial MOF synthesis and subsequent deposition. HKUST-1 is synthesized on a large scale by BASF.52 The original synthesis design was based on immersing a copper plate (Cu2+ source) in a solution containing an organic linker (BTC) and electrolyte. When a specific current (1.3 A) and voltage (12–19 V) are applied, the copper(II) ions are released from the electrode into the solution. After 150 min, the HKUST-1 structure with a specific surface area of 1820 m2 g−1 is formed (compared with the solvothermal method of 1550 m2 g−1).27–29
 Fig. 12  Electrosynthesis of MOFs by anodic dissolution.16 Created with BioRender.com. 
2.5 Microwave-assisted synthesis
Microwave-assisted synthesis (MAS) is based on the interaction of electromagnetic waves with a material containing an electric charge, e.g., polar solvent molecules that conduct ions in a solid (Fig. 13). The MW rays interact directly with the substrates, causing the reaction medium to heat faster, thereby increasing the synthesis efficiency. Additionally, the MW heating is volumetric, which allows for an even reaction in the entire volume of the reactor.16,27 The other advantages include morphological control, easy change of reaction parameters and short synthesis time due to the fast nucleation and crystal growth. Unlike the surfactant-thermal process, MOF crystals can be easily separated from the undesirable by-products due to the phase selectivity.28 Similar to the previous methods for the synthesis of MOFs, MW has disadvantages, including the requirement of specialized equipment to generate optimal irradiation power, resulting in poor reproducibility of the product and preventing industrial implementation. Another issue that hinders the synthesis of MOFs on an industrial scale is the difficulty in isolating large single crystals.29
 Fig. 13  Microwave reactor. Created with BioRender.com. 
2.6 Sonochemical method
The sonochemical method uses ultrasonic waves of very high frequencies (20 kHz–10 MHz).16 It is a cost-effective, selective, environmentally friendly method that contributes to high-yield end products with a homogeneous structure and morphology. Compared to electrosynthesis or MW, it has been proven that the sonochemical method is better in terms of simplicity, ease of isolation of porous materials, reduced crystallization time and energy efficiency due to the use of the cavitation phenomenon.27–29 Cavitation is the process of dynamic formation, growth and disappearance of vapoured gas bubbles in a liquid.53 The formation of bubbles occurs in the cycle of thinning, that is, reducing pressure. Then, high tensile forces act, causing local rupture of the continuous medium (liquid). The excess energy carried by the acoustic waves causes the bubbles to grow and eventually implode, which is the source of local shock waves. The disadvantages of the sonochemical method are that ultrasonic waves can break up the crystals that are formed or hinder the formation of large single crystals, which will make it impossible to characterize them by X-ray diffraction.53
2.7 Continuous flow
According to the latest patent reports, Marta Rubio-Martinez et al. developed a synthetic method based on continuous flow chemistry (Fig. 14). The continuous flow method enables the continuous production of MOFs over a longer period. Moreover, the continuous flow approach can provide an increased reaction rate and enables the production of organometallic structures with greater efficiency, without wasting the material surface, while controlling the particle size, making it possible to easily optimize the synthesis and its reproducibility. Additionally, the surface area to volume ratio for the reaction mixture in the flow reactor is much higher than that in the batch reactor, contributing to improved heat and mass transfer. Another advantage is the use of less solvent and energy than with conventional synthesis methods. By using this process, it is possible to produce porous materials in amounts close to that required for wide application. This is a technique that combines many processes, including heating, thermal treatment and processing, which enables the large-scale synthesis of HKUST-1.54,55 Also, continuous synthesis can be combined with the electrochemical technique. Consequently, scientists obtained much larger BET areas ranging from 1550 m2 g−1 to 1716 m2 g−1 and used a higher BTC concentration ranging from 481 to 1531 m2 g−1.120,121 It is worth mentioning that systems with continuous flow can be broadly divided into three categories including continuous flow (hydro) solvothermal synthesis (CFHS/CFSS), continuously stirred tank reactors (CSTR), and micro or multi-fluid systems.56 A good example of the use of the ultrafast and low-cost continuous flow method was presented by Bagi et al.57 Highly crystalline monodisperse MOF-808 nanoparticles were synthesized in a residence time of 5 min under flow compared to 48 h in batch, resulting in a productivity of 95155 kg m−3 day−1, which represents a two-orders of magnitude increase to that in batch mode (335.5 kg m−3 day−1).57 However, there are several reports on the disadvantages of flow chemistry such as uneven flow of the solvent under pressure and problems with continuous flow reactors. Additionally, these reactors are very expensive. In summary, continuous flow chemistry is a cost-effective method for production on an industrial scale, which is consistent with the idea of sustainable development and the principles of green chemistry (if the solvent used is, for example, water and the metal source is metal oxides or acetates).
 Fig. 14  Diagram of continuous flow method for the synthesis of MOFs.55 Created with BioRender.com. 
3. Activation of MOFs
3.1 Thermal activation
To determine the porosity and surface area of MOFs, trapped solvent particles should be removed from the pores by an activation process. The most common method for the activation of stable MOFs is by heating them under vacuum,58 where the remaining less stable porous structures may decompose. Thus, to avoid this problem, the solvent is replaced with another substance with a low boiling point and lower surface tension before heating, e.g., ethanol and acetone.58
3.2 Supercritical CO2 drying
An interesting compound used in the synthesis of MOFs is supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2). Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a special chemical with a low critical temperature (304.21 K) and modest critical pressure (73.83 bar). The use of scCO2 is generally difficult due to the limitation of the ultra-low solubility of the MOF precursors. CO2 is a poor solvent due to its apolar nature and low dielectric constant; however, it is non-flammable, has low toxicity, and is abundant.58 Overall, scCO2 has been used to activate MOFs to generate new properties. By using scCO2, the solvent molecules in the pores can be eliminated without creating surface tension and capillary forces.59 This is attributed to the transition from phase scCO2 to gaseous CO2, which is released into the atmosphere or recycled. Hupp et al. found that zirconium-based metal–organic frameworks activated by scCO2 showed significantly higher surface area Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) values than that activated by other conventional processes such as solvent exchange. The advantage of this method is its speed and porosity control based on the CO2 pressure. This translates into the use of MOFs in water adsorption, hydrogen, and methane storage.59 Similar to the conventional activation process, scCO2 drying involves three general steps, as follows: (1) pre-exchanging the as-synthesized solvents with liquid CO2-compatible organic solvents (miscible with liquid CO2 and not causing any damage to the components, e.g., methanol and ethanol), (2) exchanging the organic solvents with liquid CO2 (the CO2 exchange process is usually carried out at 0–10 °C) and (3) evaporating CO2 in its supercritical state. This is done by reducing the pressure of the liquid CO2 above its critical temperature, which significantly reduces the surface tension. Therefore, it can be concluded that it is a cost-effective green and mild MOF activation alternative, but with low chemical and thermal stability.58,59
4. Production of MOFs based on MIL
In 2002, the world of science learned about a new type of metal–organic framework, i.e., MIL (Matériaux de l'Institut Lavoisier). The original compound presented by the Ferey group was MIL-47 (containing vanadium in the +3 and +4 oxidation states, a terephthalate anion, which acts as a ligand, and DMF was used as the solvent). MOFs based on MIL are characterized by the use of metal cations from group-d with different degrees of oxidation, e.g., MIL-53 contains V(III,IV),60 Cr(III),61 Fe(II,III),62,63 Al(III)64 and terephthalic acid derivatives, e.g., 2-aminobenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate.65 The second popular compound from the Lavoisier Institute is MIL-100 and MIL-88A. In 2009, Patricia Horcajad's research group proved that MIL materials are non-toxic nanocarriers for anti-cancer and retroviral drugs such as busulfan, cidofovir, and azidothymidine triphosphate. It has been shown that 40% of the mass of doxorubicin is stored in MIL-101-NH2, and then after 30 min, it is activated in liver cells. The presence of the drug was confirmed in animal cells for another two weeks. Due to the porous nature of the surface of metallic organic compounds, they act as molecular sponges, and thus the active substances of drugs were better absorbed and easier to visualize. Mössbauer spectroscopy proved that MOF compounds can act as contrast agents. Scientists applied MIL-88A nanoparticles in female rats by controlling the sequence of the gradient and the spin echo, and it was possible to observe that the treated organs were darker than usual.24,65
Human senses cannot fully determine the presence of pollutants, for example, with the naked eye. In cultural institutions such as museums or art exhibitions, organic pollutants such as aldehydes, acids and sulphides are present (Table 1). For example, acetic acid is produced by the hydrolysis of cellulose acetate in wood, plywood, furniture and flooring. To detect the concentration of harmful chemicals, a composite material based on MIL-101(Cr) has been patented. This invention acts as an optical indicator for detecting the saturation of an absorbent. The data is extremely satisfactory, where its large-scale synthesis takes place with an efficiency of approx. 70%, with a BET surface area of approx. 4000 m2 g−1. The only drawback of the experiments is the reduction of the process temperature from about 220 °C to 160 °C due to the addition of acetic acid.66 The course of the reaction was examined by means of environmental porosimetry (PEE) ellipsometry, which showed slow regeneration due to the interactions of the free spaces of the porous material and CH3COOH (Fig. 15).66
 Fig. 15  Block diagram of obtaining a film based on an MOF (MIL-100).66 
Table 1 Average pollution measurement in 17 cultural heritage institutions66




Pollutant
Average measurement score of 17 cultural heritage institutions




Formaldehyde
42 ppb


Formic acid
14 ppb


Acetaldehyde
23 ppb


Acetic acid
32 ppb




Another example of the application of MIL-based organic metal compounds is in lithium-ion (LiB) batteries, a rapidly growing sector of mobile energy sources used in electric cars, laptops, power banks, solar panels, electric bikes, and cameras. However, little information is available about the downside of introducing LiBs on a large scale. Namely, by 2030, 2 million tons of lithium-ion battery waste due to the popularization of electric cars may appear. However, despite EU regulations, only about 5% of waste is recycled due to technical reasons and the high cost of LiB recovery.67 As an example, MIL-96(Al) was obtained from the large-scale recycling of lithium-ion batteries (Fig. 16). It was formed in the process of solvothermal synthesis, during which the batteries were dissolved in an acidic environment (pH 1–3). Then the addition of the organic BTC ligand to the metal cations in the solution such as Cu2+, Al3+, and Mn2+ and heat treatment caused the crystallization of mainly MIL-96(Al) compounds. However, after removing the aluminium ions and re-adding BTC to the solution, MIL-96 based on Cu/Ni/Mn was co-precipitated.67–70
 Fig. 16  Flow chart of the recycling method of Li-ion batteries.67 Created with BioRender.com. 
Most synthetic methods use nitrate salt as the metal source. However, it should not be used in the solvothermal method because the toxic HNO3 is released. An exception to the rule is presented in the publication by Sánchez-Sánchez et al.,71 where they proposed the synthesis of MIL-53(Al) at room temperature using disodium terephthalate (Na2BTC). Consequently, nanocrystalline MIL-53(Al) with pores free of H2BDC was obtained (Fig. 17).71,72 The surface areas estimated using the BET method were 1048 and 1144 m2 g−1 depending on the reaction time (4 h–7 days), which improve the size of the crystal MIL-53. Moreover, it is one of the most stable MOFs given that it is thermally stable at temperatures higher than 500 °C in the presence of oxygen, which is related to high chemical stability under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 17  General reaction for the preparation of MIL-53(Al) by conventional (top) and the room temperature (green synthesis method).71,72 Created with BioRender.com. 
Subsequently, Martinez Joaristi et al.73 developed a green, electrochemical method for the synthesis of a homogeneous MIL-100(Al) porous material. A solution of BTC in 100 mL ethanol/waterer was used. The mixture was heated to 60 °C in an electrochemical cell with 2 aluminium electrodes spaced at least 3 cm apart and a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The resulting material was filtered and cleaned with ethanol at room temperature overnight, and then filtered again and dried at 100 °C.73 The given reaction conditions were from the optimization of the process, which led to the formation of a porous material with a specific surface area of 969 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 0.54 cm3 g−1.73
In 2017, Permyakova et al.74 synthesized MIL-160(Al) using the non-corrosive and slightly hygroscopic Al(OH)(CH3COO)2 as the metal source and 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid as the linker (1:1 molar ratio), while the solvent was water. The mixture was stirred and heated under reflux for about 24 h.75,76 The resulting white material was filtered, washed with ethanol and dried in an oven, yielding 13.9 g of dry MIL-160(Al) (STY = 185 kg m−3 day−1).74 Scientists successfully synthesized MIL-160(Al) on a larger scale, yielding 400 g of powder with an efficiency of 93%, specific surface area of 1150 m2 g−1 and Vpore = 0.479 cm3 g−1. The optimization of the synthesis to obtain the largest possible BET surface area was based on different reaction times (12–72 h) and temperature (100–150 °C). Material shaping was performed using the conventional wet granulation method by mixing MIL-160(Al) powder with 10 wt% silica salt. The physicochemical stability of MIL-160(Al) was characterized by seasonal nitrogen storage. The monitoring of 6 adsorption–desorption cycles in the reactor using a combination of PXRD, TGA, IR spectroscopy and nitrogen-sorption porosimetry demonstrated that MIL-160(Al) exhibits excellent physicochemical stability given that no changes were observed compared to the starting material.74–76
Another example is the synthesis of Al-MIL-68-Mes ([Al(OH) (O2C-C3H4-CO2)]·nH2O).77 This porous material was prepared by dissolving mesaconic acid (Mes) in water and mixing it after adding NaOH. Then, Al2(SO4)3·18H2O was added as the source of aluminium(III) ions (3 mmol). This suspension was placed in a microwave oven and heated for 45 min at 95 °C with stirring. The solid was then filtered and redispersed, while stirring in water at 25 °C for 30 min. Then, the product was filtered, rinsed with acetone and dried under ambient conditions.77 The MOF was heated for 30 min at 90 °C in an oven to activate it. The specific surface area of MIL-68-Mes was determined to be 1040 m2 g−1 and VMIC = 0.42 cm3 g−1. Its sorption behaviour towards water and methanol vapour was also investigated. The water vapour isotherm exhibited a sigmoidal shape without pronounced hysteresis and with a steep increase in uptake at around p/p0 of ≈0.5 (from 60 mg g−1 at p/p0 = 0.45 to 340 mg g−1 at p/p0 = 0.55) and a maximum capacity of 374 mg g−1 at p/p0 = 0.9, which indicate a similar capacity to that of other water-stable MOFs such as Al-MIL-53-Fum (450 mg g−1) 12 and CAU-10-H (340 mg g−1).77 Additionally, the nitrogen isotherms measured prior to and after water sorption were virtually identical, which indicates that the material is chemically stable.77
We would like to emphasize that we believe that mechanochemical synthesis is the most suitable for the large-scale production of MOFs in accordance with the principles of green chemistry. For example, Pilloni et al.78 reported the synthesis of MIL-100(Fe). These researchers mixed H3BTC and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O in a Teflon-coated stainless steel grinding jar, and then added 5 mL of tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide (TMAOH) aqueous solution. Subsequently, the mixture was milled on a vibrating ball mill. The thick paste was collected after 1 h of grinding. Then, the sample was dispersed in water and centrifuged three times at 2500 rpm.78 After washing, the sample was air-dried at room temperature. The synthesized material had a pore volume of 0.386 cm3 g−1 and surface area of 1033 m2 g−1. Its specific surface area was much lower than that reported using the solvothermal method, but more environmentally friendly because it does not use toxic solvents and the material was synthesized at room temperature, which reduces the energy costs.78 The commercially available MIL-100 has a specific surface area greater than 1300–1600 m2 g−1. The authors additionally investigated the thermal stability of MIL-100 using the TGA method, finding that the mechanochemically synthesized MIL-100(Fe) is more thermally stable than the commercially available material. The weight loss of the porous material sample by approximately 33 wt% occurred in the range of 298–393 K, which is the result of dehydration. The weight loss of about 39 wt% was observed in the range of 547–673 K, which is associated with the collapse of the MIL-100 structure.78 Additionally, the synthesized material showed a higher adsorption capacity towards 4,6-dimethyldibenzothiophene (4,6-DMDBT) from diesel fuel at ambient temperature than the commercially available MIL-100. Moreover, the ball-milled sample exhibited higher crystallinity than the commercial MIL material.78
In our opinion, the modern production of MIL-based MOFs should move from solvothermal (hydrothermal) methods to the modern mechanochemical method (Fig. 10). This solution is part of the ecological basis of “green chemistry” due to the fact that solvents are not required, especially organic solvents. Here, we present a comparison of the preparation of MILs using different synthetic techniques in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison of methods for the synthesis of MOFs based on MILs




MOF
Method
Substrates/solvent
Temperature [°C]
Surface area [m2 g−1]
Ref.





Large-scale production of MOFs based on MIL



MIL-53(Al.)
Electrochemical
Aluminium electrode, BDC (terephthalic acid), H2O, DMF, KCl
90
1200

73



MIL-53
Electrophoretic deposition
Fluorine-doped tin oxide FTO, BDC (1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid)
—
—

79



MIL-100
Spray-drying continuous flow
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, BTC, DMF
180
1039

80



MIL-53(Al.)
Flow chemistry
Al(NO3)3, terephthalic acid, water
250
919

81



MIL-88A
Spray-dryer with three-fluid nozzle
FeCl3·6H2O, fumaric acid, DMF, MeOH, H2O
180
—

82



MIL-53(Al.)
Flow chemistry
Metallic aluminium, BDC, DMF
—
1376

83



MIL-100(Fe)
Wet impregnation
FeCl3·6H2O, benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid, water, [SO3H-(CH2)3-IM]2C4[HSO4]2/Acidic chloroaluminate IL/[BMIM][Cys]/dual amino-functionalized ionic liquid (DAIL)
130
—

84



MIL-101(Cr)
Wet impregnation
Cr(NO3)3·9H2O, terephthalic acid, water, DAIL, or [NMP][CH3SO3]/EIMS-HTFSA
220
1587–2049

85




Methods for the synthesis of MIL in accordance with the principles of green chemistry



MIL-100(Al.)
Electrochemical
Aluminum electrode, BTC (benzene-1,3,5-tricarbocylate), EtOH, H2O
Above 60
969

76



MIL-100(Fe)
Electrochemical
Iron electrode, BTC, EtOH, H2O, MTBS
110
—

84



MIL-100(Fe)
Mechanochemical
H3BTC and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
Room temperature
1033

78



MIL-91(Ti)
Solvothermal

N,N′-Piperazinebis(methylenephosphonic acid), NaOH, water, titanium oxyacetylacetonate
Under reflux
360

85



MIL-160(Al.)
Hydrothermal
Al(OH)(CH3COO)2, 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid, distilled water
Under reflux
1150

86



MIL-68-mes
Microwave heating
Mesaconic acid (H2Mes), Al2(SO4)3·18H2O, NaOH, water
95
1040

77



MIL-160(Al.)
Solvothermal
Aluminium hydroxide acetate, 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), deionized water
Under reflux
1150

87



MIL-53(Al.)
Stirring at room temperature
Aluminium nitrate aqueous solution, Na2BDC, water
Room temperature
1048

71





5. Production of MOFs based on ZIF
Another class of metal–organic frameworks is ZIFs (zeolite imidazole frameworks). Their topology resembles naturally occurring porous materials, i.e., zeolites. The metals used in the synthesis of ZIFs are mainly the following cations, i.e., iron(II and III), cobalt(II), zinc(II), and copper(II). However, the element that distinguishes these structures from others is the presence of imidazole organic moieties and their modified derivatives.88 Alternatively, the physicochemical aspect of porosity that distinguishes this group of compounds is their higher thermal and chemical stability, and accordingly these compounds have better use in capturing pollutants. Another advantage is their higher stability in both water and oxygen environments (the metal–oxygen bond is hydrolysed in MOFs).88,89 This class of compounds also plays a significant role in large-scale production, having a significant impact on ecological, environmental, and economic aspects. The large-scale production of ZIFs is based on the patents of MOF Technologies and BASF, which use the mechanochemistry and electrochemical techniques to synthesise ZIF-67 and ZIF-8. Significantly, these patents use negligible amounts of solvents or none at all, which is consistent with the principles of green chemistry.90
The first example of the application of an MOF based on ZIF was zeolite imidazole frameworks in lithium–sulphur batteries.91 A combination of ZIF-8 containing zinc ions, ZIF-67 containing cobalt ions, and carbon tubing was used. The metal–organic frameworks were located in the part of the membrane to improve absorption and increase the chemical energy storage capacity.91 For the synthesis of the membrane, zinc nitrate hexahydrate and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate salts with 2-methylimidazole were used. The membrane constructed in this way possessed electronic adsorption channels for polysulfides. It had a large surface area and showed conductive properties, enabling it to fulfil this function. The modification of ZIF improved the synthesis reaction kinetics and inhibited the so-called pendulum effect of polysulfides and electrochemical inertia of the sulphur electrode. For the project to be commercialized on a large scale, complex nanostructures should be developed, due to which the electrode plates will possess a high specific energy density.91,92
Another invention with ZIF as the main material was related to a catalyst for the synthesis of methyl glycolate (MG) by the hydrogenation of dimethyl oxalate (DM).93 MG was used as the substrate for the synthesis of dimethyl acid, polyethylene, glycine, and methyl glyoxylate. Many industrial plants produce ethylene glycol (EG) through the DMO hydrogenation reaction (Fig. 18).93 Production on a larger scale has lower production costs and is respected by other companies around the world. However, to achieve satisfactory results including high efficiency and low cost, it was necessary to use an appropriate catalyst, i.e., ZIF based on cobalt(II).93 The hydrogenation reaction of dimethyl oxalate, methyl glycolate, and ethylene glycol is as follows:
An important addition was the use of cobalt(II) phosphide together with silicon(IV) oxide. The introduction of phosphorus molecules as an electron promoter resulted in improved electron efficiency. The zeolite catalyst was characterized by high stability at room temperature and in air (about 1000 h) and effective selectivity (reaching almost 100%); in addition, it was synthesized according to the principles of green chemistry.93
 Fig. 18  Hydrogenation reaction of dimethyl oxalate, methyl glycolate, and ethylene glycol.93 
Another example of the use of ZIF in large-scale glass production is ZIF-62-[Zn(Im)1.75(bIm)0.25] (Im = C3H3N2-imidazolate), (bIm = C7H5N2-benzimidazolate).57 The organometallic zeolite compound is a promising research product due to its unique properties such as thermal stability and high melting point viscosity. Scientists have shown that as the melting time of ZIF-62 increases, the resulting toughened glass changes from a transparent form (up to 5 min) to glass foam (30 min).94 In the intermediate stage (more than 10 min), the density of the glass material decreases. However, the structural composition does not change with an increase in the melting time.94
A new heterogeneous biocatalyst, ZIF-67, together with the enzyme lipase have attracted attention from one of the largest biofuel producers.95 This is a remarkable example, where the use of the biocatalyst produces biodiesel by esterifying soybean oil. Scientists have proven that after 6 transesterification cycles, the enzyme efficiency does not decrease.95 Consequently, it is an extremely efficient catalyst that can be used several times. Moreover, the organometallic scaffold of the complex compound protects the lipase against inactivation under harsh reaction conditions, e.g., high temperature. Therefore, the above-mentioned biocatalyst is an ideal example for industrial use on a large scale.95
An interesting article was presented by the Munn group96 who synthesized ZIF-8 on a large scale using 2-methylimidazole, ammonium hydroxide and an aqueous solution of zinc acetate dihydrate using a continuous flow method. Activated ZIF-8 was produced on the lab-scale and pilot-scale at a rate of 27 g h−1 and 810 g h−1, respectively, with the activated material showing a surface area of 1800 m2 g−1. This setup consisted of a concentric pipe-in-pipe arrangement, which allowed rapid mixing of the preheated downstream, delivered through the inner pipe, with the room temperature upstream.96 This arrangement allows for instant mixing of the reactants and short residence times given that the resultant particle suspension exits at the top of the reactor where it is rapidly cooled by a cooling jacket. The pilot-scale sample was synthesized at 100 °C, and XRD analysis confirmed that there was no trace of crystalline impurities. Additionally, the compliance of the BET surface with an equivalent sample on a laboratory scale was confirmed. However, the morphology of ZIF-8 differed from that synthesized on the laboratory scale. The authors optimized the activation of the porous material, which had a significant impact on its specific surface area. The synthesized ZIF-8 suspension was diluted with ethanol in a ratio of 1:1, 1:2 or 1:3. Then, it was pumped through the coil at ambient pressure, where the coil was (1) kept at room temperature, (2) heated to 50 °C in a water bath, (3) sonicated in a water bath at room temperature and (4) sonicated in a water bath at 50 °C. Finally, the collected samples were collected, centrifuged and dried at 70 °C in the air and at ambient pressure.96 The highest surface area was obtained by washing the ZIF-8 suspension with ethanol in a ratio of 1:2 with sonication at room temperature (BET = 1772 m2 g−1). A comparable value was obtained by washing the porous material with ethanol in a 1:1 ratio at room temperature (BET = 1700 m2 g−1). Alternatively, the least effective activation method was washing ZIF-8 with ethanol in a ratio of 1:3, using sonication at 50 °C (BET = 1276 m2 g−1).96
In 2018 Marrett et al.97 presented the synthesis of ZIF-8 using ZnO and HmeIm (ratio of 1:2.2) to ensure that sufficient ligand was present to obtain complete ZnO conversion. The reactants were placed on filter paper in an scCO2 extraction vessel at 130 bar and 65 °C for 5 min.97 Larger-scale reactions (150 g, 200 g) were carried out in a paddle mixer using scCO2 for 2 h at 130 bar and 65 °C. The reaction product was washed by stirring in MeOH overnight and pumped at 100 °C to remove the unreacted ligand. To illustrate its scalability, the 100 g synthesis of ZIF-8 was achieved in 2.5 h using a 50% stoichiometric excess of HmeIm. These larger-scale reactions gave a shaped product in the form of a cylindrical block. The BET area ranged from 1687 to 1894 m2 g−1. Optimization of the research showed that the change in temperature (45–90 °C) and pressure (90–130 bar) did not significantly affect the reaction.97
Schejn et al. reported98 the synthesis of a ZIF-8 crystal prepared by mixing 2-methylimidazole with various zinc salts (Zn(acac)2, Zn(NO3)2, ZnSO4 or Zn(ClO4)2) in methanol using the molar ratio of Hmim/Zn2+ salt of 8/1. The synthesis was conducted under nitrogen flow at room temperature with stirring for 1 h.98 Both the particle size and morphology were found to be dependent on the reactivity of the Zn(II) salt. By using ZnCl2, Zn(acac)2 or ZnI2, crystals with sizes ranging from ca. 350 and 650 nm were obtained. Finally, the ZnBr2 low reactive salt was found to generate microcrystals. By analysing the thermogravimetry and BET measurements of the ZIF-8 crystals made from Zn(NO3)2, Zn(acac)2 and ZnBr2, it was found that the changes in particle size induced changes in stability and adsorption properties. It was found that small ZIF-8 crystals made from Zn(NO3)2 showed the largest surface area (1700 m2 g−1 and pore volume 0.66 cm3 g−1) and the best catalytic activity in the Knoevenagel and Friedländer reactions. In turn, crystals were prepared from ZnBr2 (SBET = 1713 ± 45 m2 g−1 and pore volume = 0.63 cm3 g−1) and Zn(acac)2 (SBET = 1477 ± 36 m2 g−1 and pore volume = 0, 55 cm3 g−1).98 The most significant feature observed in the TGA results is the size-dependent thermal stability up to 300 °C in the case of the smaller 141 nm-sized nanocrystals prepared from Zn(NO3)2, and up to 390 °C in the case of the larger 1050 nm-sized crystals prepared from ZnBr2. A sharp weight loss step of ca. 63–64% was observed for all the nanocrystals upon further increasing the temperature from 400 °C to 500 °C, indicating the thermal decomposition of the ZIF-8 nanocrystals in this temperature range.98
In summary, the production of ZIFs on an industrial scale has many advantages because it is possible with several methods, not only the traditional methods of hydrothermal and solvothermal synthesis. Sonochemical, mechanochemical, and method-accelerating agent methods are used to obtain ZIFs. We present a comparison of the preparation of ZIFs using different synthetic techniques in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of methods for the synthesis of MOFs based on ZIFs




MOF
Method
Substrates
Solvent
Surface area [m2 g−1]
Ref.





Large-scale production of MOFs based on ZIF



ZIF- 8
Solvothermal
Zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 2-methylimididazole (Hmim)
DMF, H2O
1300–1800

99 and 100


ZIF-8
Electrochemical
Zinc electrode, 2-methyl imidazolate
AcN, H2O, DMF, EtOH, MTBS
1400–1700

101



ZIF-8
Electrochemical
Zinc electrode, 2-methyl imidazolate
DMF, H2O, MTBS
1730

102



ZIF-4
Electrochemical
Zinc electrode, imidazole
DMF, H2O, MTBAMS (tributylmethyl-ammonium methyl sulphate)
750

102



ZIF-14
Electrochemical
Zinc electrode, 2-ethylimidazole
DMF, H2O, MTBAMS
598

102



ZIF-7
Electrochemical
Zinc electrode, benzimidazole
DMF, H2O, MTBAMS
358

102



ZIF-67
Electrochemical
Cobalt electrode, 2- methylimidazole
DMF, H2O, MTBAMS
1521

102




Synthesis methods of ZIF in accordance with principles of green chemistry



ZIF-8
Bipolar electrochemistry
Zinc wire, 2-methylimidazole
Water
—

103



ZIF-8
Flow chemistry
Zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 2-methylimidazole
Ammonia, water
1770

104



ZIF-8
Flow chemistry
Zinc acetate,2-methylimidazole, ammonium hydroxide
Water, ethanol
1800

96



ZIF-8
Ionothermal
2-methylimidazolate, zinc cations with sodalite topology
[BMIM][Tf2N]/C5H15NO2
374

31



ZIF-8
Extraction with supercritical CO2
Zinc oxide, imidazole/2-ethylimidazole,
Supercritical carbon dioxide
1687–1894

105



ZIF-8
Extraction with supercritical CO2
2-Methylimidazole, ZnO
Water, supercritical carbon dioxide
1229–1315

98



ZIF-8
Hydrothermal
2-Methylimidazole, ZnO nanorods layer (hexamethylenetetramine, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O in water)
Water, methanol, ethanol
—

98



ZIF-8
Synthesis was conducted under nitrogen flow at room temperature
Zn(Oac)2, Hmim
Methanol
1477 ± 36

98



ZIF-8
Extraction with supercritical CO2
Zn(acac)2 ·H2O, Hmim
Supercritical carbon dioxide
1319–1702

106



ZIF-8
Extraction with supercritical CO2/Ionothermal
Zn(acac)2, Hmim
Supercritical carbon dioxide, [emim][BF4]
1156

106 and 107


ZIF-8/beech composite
Stirring at room temperature
Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 2-methylimidazole
Methanol, deionized water
26

107





6. Production of MOFs based on UiO
Removal of chemical pollutants in the ecosystem is extremely important because they endanger the lives of humans and animals. Ecologists control the parameters of pollution and the use of absorbents, and therefore another subclass of MOF structures discussed herein is UiO (University of Oslo), which was discovered by Lillerud.108 An example worth noting is UiO-66, which is made of zinc(IV) cations and SBU secondary building blocks (acting as Lewis acids due to free electron pairs). This organic metal network is described in the literature as an ideal absorbent for heavy metal ions, organic pollutants, and biomacromolecules. UiO-66 is the most popular compound of the UiO subclass due to its remarkable chemical and mechanical stability.108,109 It is resistant to acids and bases, and avoids the use of toxic organic compounds such as DMF, acetone, and methanol, and therefore it is perfect for wastewater treatment.109,110 An additional aspect of improving the issue of contamination monitoring is the modification of the obtained UiO by adding a luminescent group next to the linker. The luminescent groups in MOFs based on UiO are lanthanide groups. For example, Govindaraju et al. created a new photoluminescent compound (AuNCs@UiO-66)111 for the determination of Hg2+ at very low concentrations, Dong et al. prepared an Eu3+@UiO-66 nanocomposite (organic linkers were 1,3-benzenedicarboxylic acid, dipicolinic acid, and zirconium chloride),112 and Zhu and Yan synthesized Eu3+@UiO-66-NH2-IM (IM = imidazole-2-carboxaldehyde) for the determination of aniline up to about 0.1%.113
UiO-66-NH2 (containing zircon cations and terephthalic acid as the ligand) is also described as an excellent catalyst for the hydrolysis reactions of highly toxic substances such as poison warfare agents, e.g., organophosphonates (Fig. 19). Due to its numerous hydroxyl groups, it can decompose substances that threaten human life, such as paraoxon-methyl = MPO, diisopropyl fluorophosphate = DFP, and Soman = GD.84 UiO-66-NH2 is a heterogeneous catalyst synthesized according to the principles of green chemistry because scientists minimize the production of hazardous substances during the reaction and limit the use of solvents, minimizing their harmfulness.114
 Fig. 19  Scheme of a catalyst-fiber composite for adsorbing and decomposing a chemical agent, which involves the steps of electrospinning a nanofiber-forming polymer solution and dispersing a metal–organic framework between a nanofiber surface and a nanospace formed by the nanofibers by electro-spraying a UiO-66-based MOF-containing solution.114 Created with BioRender.com. 
In 2018 Karadeniz et al. reported115 the mechanochemistry synthesis of UiO-66-NH2 in a mill, where the precursors [Zr6O4(OH)4(CH3COO)12]2 and 2-aminoterephthalic acid (in a molar ratio of 1:12) were milled with 50 μL of H2O. This process took 90 min and the yield of the product was 95% and its specific surface area was 815 m2 g−1. Alternatively, changing the water to methanol increased the surface area to 945 m2 g−1. The synthesis of UiO-66-NH2 was readily applicable on a 10-gram scale by using a planetary mill (BET = 610 m2 g−1) and was also performed by solid-state flow synthesis using twin-screw extrusion (TSE) (BET = 885 m2 g−1), affording more than 100 g of catalytically active UiO-66-NH2 material in a continuous process at a rate of 1.4 kg h−1. In turn, UiO-66 was synthesized in two reaction steps. Terephthalic acid, triethylamine and 50 μL of H2O were placed in a Teflon apparatus, and then milled for 30 min at 25 Hz using two stainless steel beads. Then, the Zr12 precursor was ground and added to this mixture.115 The materials were stirred for an additional 90 min. The resulting final product was washed with methanol and dried in air (SBET = 1145 m2 g−1). Alternatively, changing water to methanol reduced the specific surface area to 1020 m2 g−1.115
An interesting article on the green synthesis of UiO-66 was presented by Zhang et al.116 Zirconium(IV) oxychloride octahydrate was dissolved in Cyrene, acetic acid and water. After terephthalic acid was dissolved in Cyrene, it was added to the mixture with Zr(IV). The mixture was heated at 80 °C for 12 h. The specific surface area was 500 m2 g−1. This is a much lower value than the synthesis with DMF, where SBET = 1300 m2 g−1.116
In summary, UiO-66 is supplied in large numbers on an industrial scale by Strem Chemicals.117 This compound is characterized by high chemical and mechanical stability and a large specific surface.117 Due to the variety of methods for obtaining MOFs based on UiO, namely, the mechanochemical method, microwave-assisted procedure, continuous flow method, and electrochemical method, the materials can be obtained based on environmentally safe procedures. Table 4 shows the preparation of UiO using different synthetic techniques.
Table 4 Comparison of the methods for the synthesis of MOFs based on UiO




MOF
Methods
Substrates
Reaction time
BET [m2 g−1]
Ref.





Large-scale production of MOFs based on UiO



UiO-66
Continuous flow chemistry
ZrCl4, 1,4-tricarboxylic acid (BDC), DMF
10 min
1186

118



UiO-66
Solvothermal
BDC, ZrCl4, water, DMF, benzene, and acetone
24 h
1187

119



UiO-66
Anodic and cathodic-electrophoretic deposition
Zirconium oxide foil, ZnO2, BDC, DMF, H2O, acetic acid, HNO3
—
—

120



UiO-66
Electrophoretic deposition
FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide), BDC, Zr-containing nodes
—
—

121



UiO-66-NO2
Continuous flow
ZrCl4, 2-nitro-BDC, acetic acid, H2O
63 s
679

121



UiO-66-NH2
Continuous flow
ZrCl4, 2-NH2-BDC, DMF, H2O
63 s
752

121



UiO-66
Continuous flow
ZrCl4, BDC, DMF, H2O
63 s
1106

121



Hf-UiO-66
Microwave
[Hf6O4(OH)4], BDC, DMF, CH3COOH
3 min
950

122



Zr-UiO-66
Microwave
[Zr6O4(OH)4], BDC, DMF, CH3COOH
3 min
1400

122



UiO-66
Wet impregnation
Zirconium tetrachloride, terephthalic acid, hydrochloric acid DMF, [PSMIM][HSO4]
16 h
523–996

31




Synthesis methods of UiO in accordance with principles of green chemistry



UiO-66
Synthesis with green bioderived solvent – Cyrene
Zirconium(IV) oxychloride octahydrate, terephthalic acid, Cyrene
24 h
500–1300

116



UiO-66
Solvothermal
Zr(SO4)2·4H2O, H2BDC-NH2(2-aminoterephthalic acid), water
—
—

123



UiO-66
Mechano-synthesis
[Zr6O4(OH)4(C6H5CO2)12], terephthalic acid, a small amount of methanol
75 min
1020

124



UiO-66
Mechano-synthesis
[Zr6O4(OH)4(C2H3CO2)12], terephthalic acid, a small amount of methanol
75 min
1020

124



UiO-66
Mechano-synthesis
[Zr12O8(OH)8(CH3COO)24], terephthalic acid,
90 min
1145

124



UiO-66
Mechano-chemistry
[Zr6O4(OH)4(CH3COO)12]2, triethylamine, terephthalic acid, 50 μL H2O
90 min
1145

124



UiO-66-NH2
Mechano-chemistry
[Zr6O4(OH)4(CH3COO)12]2, 2-aminoterephthalic acid, 50 μL H2O
90 min
815

124





7. Production of MOFs based on BTC
Currently, there are several MOFs based on BTC (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid) on the market.125,126 MOFs based on BTC are commercially available through Merck.127 They are also produced by BASF (Fe-BTC) and MOF Apps MOF Technologies (Cu-BTC and MOF-199).83 BASF also boasts a patented electrochemical synthesis method that uses sacrificial anodes as a metal source. In this way, harmful acid residues such as chlorides and nitrates are avoided.97 The validity of this method was confirmed by Campagnol et al. They reported the electrochemical synthesis and investigation of the luminescent properties of Gd-BTC and Tb-BTC (electrolyte: MTBS, solvent: methanol/water).128
Problems with water contamination with drugs or poisonous chemicals are still the main topic of scientists dealing with environmental analysis. Interesting physicochemical properties are demonstrated by the organometallic skeleton of Fe-BTC.129 This MOF based on BTC is combined with magnetite Fe3O4 in a solvothermal synthesis. This synthesis procedure increased the MOF absorption capacity. It was used in the adsorption of drugs such as diclofenac sodium (DCF), ibuprofen (IB), and naproxen sodium (NS) (Fig. 20). This represents a new functional and stable composite material.130,131
 Fig. 20  Chemical structure of diclofenac sodium (DCF), ibuprofen (IB), and naproxen sodium (NS). 
Textile technology is one of the fastest-growing industries. Unexpectedly, metal–organic frameworks have found application in this field. The resistance to moisture and the mechanical and temperature stability of porous structures make them attractive to many companies that provide protective clothing to healthcare professionals, chemists, biologists, and soldiers.17 Companies such as Norafin and Blucher are great examples of introducing metalorganic frameworks in the textile industry.17 The combination of MOFs with textiles based on PET, linen, and aramid, which have been coated with a polymer binder (latex and acrylate), is carried out by electro-prenaturation or chemical fixation. The penetration of HKUST-1 and Fe-BTC in the voids of the fibers turned out to be a brilliant idea because their adsorption performance against ammonia, hydrogen sulfide acid, and cyclohexane is promising17 (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Continuous and large-scale production process developed by Norafin in the context of the NanoMOF project.17 Continuously MOF-particle-loaded PET nonwovens (HKUST-1 < 63 mm from Johnson Matthey Company; loading capacity: 25 g m−2.17 Created with BioRender.com. 
It is also worth paying attention to a few examples of the synthesis of MOFs using deep eutectic solvents. Zhao et al. reported131 that they synthesized [NH4][Zn(BTC)(NH3)2]·H2O using Zn(CH3COO)2 as the zinc salt, BTC as the ligand, and choline chloride, urea, and deionized water as the solvent.131 The yield was 37.9%. The porous material showed a weight loss of 20.73% in the temperature range of 30–300 °C, corresponding to the loss of one water molecule, one NH4+ cation (5.26%), and two NH3 molecules (9.94%) per formula unit. The weight loss of [NH4][Zn(BTC)(NH3)2]·H2O between 300 °C and 550 °C may be related to the decomposition of BTC ligands and the collapse of the framework.131
Siew et al. presented an article in 2018132 about the green synthesis of an MOF based on BTC. Both Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·10H2O and Cu2(OH)(BTC)(H2O)·2H2O were successfully synthesized by changing the synthesis conditions. The slower rate of addition of the Cu(Oac)2 precursor solution to H3BTC prevented the formation of bidentate inter-cluster bridges during the in situ installation of Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·10H2O. In turn, Cu2(OH)(BTC)(H2O)·2H2O showed a lower BET surface area and a smaller pore volume compared to Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·10H2O. The specific surface area of Cu2(OH)(BTC)(H2O)·2H2O when mixing the reactants for 1 h was 36 m2 g−1, while that upon mixing for 24 h was SBET = 61 m2 g−1. Also, large differences were noted when the copper salt and H3BTC were mixed before adding water (SBET = 253 m2 g−1).132 In turn, the Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·10H2O synthesized by the dropwise addition of Cu(Oac)2 solution into the H3BTC mixture and mixing for 24 h contributed to the formation of a porous material with a specific surface area of 471 m2 g−1. The 10-fold higher concentration of Cu and H3BTC contributed to the material with SBET = 708 m2 g−1. Additionally, Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·10H2O had a higher adsorption capacity (16 mg g−1) compared to Cu2(OH)(BTC)(H2O)·2H2O (3.79 mg g−1). Therefore, it can be concluded that CuBTC with Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·10H2O is a potentially better adsorbent.132
Many reviews and articles demonstrate the synthesis of MOFs based on BTC; however, works with chloride salts, nitrates, and small amounts of DMF cannot be included herein. This creates an opportunity for the development and introduction of the principles of green chemistry in synthetic methods based on the BTC ligand.131
Summarizing the recent achievements in the synthesis of MOFs based on BTC, it is worth noting that with an increase in the amount of water as the solvent in the synthesis, the products are obtained in the form of larger crystals. Depending on how we intend to obtain the final morphological effect, the amount of water should be appropriately adjusted the synthesis protocol.
8. Production of MOFs based on NU
NU-1000 (NU = Northwestern University) is a well-known mesoporous photocatalyst with pore sized of above 2 nm, with the general formula of [Zr6(μ3-OH)4(μ3-O)4(H2O)4(OH)4(TBAPy)2] [H4TBAPy = 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic-acid)pyrene].133 MOFs based on NU have been reported as an organometallic skeleton capable of gas separation and heterogeneous catalysis.133–135 Their synthesis on a large scale is possible thanks to the use of inexpensive substrates such as tetrabromopyrene and 4-(ethoxycarbonylphenyl)boronic acid.112 The procedure for the preparation of NU-1000 can be performed in 10 days without the need for the purification of the final products, yielding 200 mg–2.5 g of NU-1000.136 One of the most popular methods for the synthesis of NU-1000 is presented in Fig. 22 and 23. This method was published in Nature and is most often used by scientists. However, due to the use of DMF in the final stage of the synthesis, it cannot be called a “green” method for the synthesis of MOFs. This research area remains a field for the development of new synthetic techniques because thus far it has not been possible to propose a method for the synthesis of NU-1000 consistent with the principles of green chemistry.133–136
 Fig. 22  Two-step synthesis of the tetra acid ligand for NU-1000. No need for chromatographic purification.133 Created with BioRender.com. 
 Fig. 23  Synthesis of NU-1000 from H4TBAPy and ZrOCl2 with benzoic acid as a modulator. NU-1000 can be prepared via a one-step reaction.133 Created with BioRender.com. 
Several products have been produced based on the modification of NU-1000 as the parent compound, which is a useful compound for several applications due to its rich physicochemical properties.109 BiOI@NU-1000 exhibits high porosity, crystallinity, and the best photocatalytic performance compared to other MOF compounds applied to date for PHE (photocatalytic hydrogen evolution), with the hydrogen production efficiency of 610 μmol h−1 g−1. It has also been reported that the photocatalyst separates photoinduced charge carriers, improves the photocurrent intensity, and reduces the photoelectric impedance.133,134 The high photocatalytic activity of BiOI@NU-1000 under visible light (400–800 nm) should also be emphasized due to its large specific surface area, the construction of the photocatalyst according to the “Z” scheme, and its highly dispersed heterojunction.132
An interesting example is the synthesis of NU-901 presented by the Fidelli group in 2018.135 These scientists used mechano-synthesis, in which the metal source was Zr12O8(OH)8(CH3COO)24 and the organic ligand was the widely used H4TBAPY. The surface area of NU-901 was 1250 m2 g−1. However, there are only a few examples in the literature on the synthesis of NU according to the principles of green chemistry. Chlorides or nitrates are still widely used metal salts. Most of the methods also use the environmentally harmful DMF in the final stage.135
More than 10 years ago, the production of NU-based MOFs was carried out with the use of environmentally toxic organic solvents such as DMF using the solvothermal method. However, currently, the synthesis of this type of MOF is partially carried out by the sonochemical method and mechano-synthesis. Here, we present a comparison of the preparation of NU-1000 using different synthetic techniques in Table 5.
Table 5 Comparison of MOF synthesis methods based on NU-1000




MOF
Method
Substrates
BET surface area [m2 g−1]
Ref.




NU-1000
Electrophoretic deposition
FTO
—

79



NU-1000
Phase-pure
Zirconyl chloride hydrate, benzoic acid in DMF, TBAPy (1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic acid)pyrene)
—

137 and 138


NU-1000-BzTz
Phase-pure
Benzothiazolium salt, BzTz, acetonitrile, zirconyl chloride hydrate, TBAPy
—

139 and 140


NU-1000
Phase-pure
Zirconyl chloride hydrate, TBAPy trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)
2220

141



NU-1000-TFA
Phase-pure
Zirconyl chloride hydrate, TBAPy trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)
2180

141





9. Production of MOFs based on HKUST
The last subclass of MOFs discussed herein is HKUST (Hong Kong University of Science and Technology). HKUST-1 is the most popular and widely known MOF, which is produced by BASF and distributed by Merck.83 Together with ZIF-8, it is synthesized via the electrochemical method using protector anodes with microwave heating (MW). The combination of these techniques has a positive effect on the yield (96%), STY (64800 kg d−1 m−3), BET number (1550 m2 g−1), pore volume (0.63 cm3 g−1), and quality of the obtained product, avoiding the use of metal salts such as chlorides and nitrates.44 The space–time efficiency (STY) is a parameter that determines whether a process is profitable. According to the calculations of scientists, the profitability of processes without the use of solvents (or a negligible amount) is 1 to 3 orders more financially advantageous.142,143
Also a method called synthesis by extrusion is notable.18 It is based on synthesis without solvents or their use in negligible amounts (mechanochemistry), which is consistent with the principles of green chemistry. Scientists using twin and single screw extruders made it possible to synthesize HKUST-1 on a macro scale. Cu(OH)2 together with BTC serve as substrates, with the addition of a small amount of industrial alcohol (32% by weight) (Fig. 24). The maximum throughput reached 1 kg per hour and the BET surface area was 1600–1850 m2 g−1.18,142
 Fig. 24  Reaction scheme for the synthesis of Cu3(BTC)2 metal organic framework (HKUST-1). Created with BioRender.com. 
Notably, an innovative method for the sonochemical synthesis of HKUST-1 using DESs was proposed by Kim et al.144 Copper(II) nitrate hydrate was mixed with benzenetricarboxylic acid dissolved in a mixture of choline chloride and 1,3-dimethylurea (1:2 molar ratio). The mixture was heated to about 70 °C and ultrasonically treated for 30 to 120 min at different power levels.144 The product was washed with deionized water and ethanol before being left to cool to room temperature and dried at 80 °C for 5 h and activated at 180 °C for 12 h under vacuum. Depending on the washing method, different BET specific surface areas were obtained.144 Washing with deionized water once gave SBET = 31 m2 g−1, while washing twice gave SBET = 1449 m2 g−1, and Vpore = 0.60 cm3 g−1. However, the highest specific surface was obtained by washing 2 times with water and twice with ethanol, giving SBET = 1822 m2 g−1 and Vpore = 0.76 cm3 g−1.144
Xu et al. also presented an interesting method for the synthesis of HKUST-1.145 NaOH was added to an aqueous Cu(NO3)2·3H2O solution, and then the ethanolic H3BTC solution was added and sonicated for 5, 10, 30, 60, 120 min at room temperature.145 The sample was washed thoroughly with ethanol and dried at 100 °C overnight. The BET surface area was 1721 m2 g−1. HKUST-1 was used as the adsorbent to remove sulfur compounds from a model liquid fuel. The results showed that the adsorbing capacity of Cu-BTC for DBT at room temperature is 8 mg S g−1.145
One of the first reports on the electrochemical synthesis of HKUST-1 was presented by Mueller et al.56 Specifically, 5 mm thick copper plates were placed as anodes in the electrochemical cell, while H3BTC was dissolved in methanol.56 HKUST-1 was synthesised within 150 min at a voltage of 12–19 V and current of 1.3 A. The specific surface area was 1649 m2 g−1, and finally 1820 m2 g−1 after activation at 250 °C. The size of the HKUST-1 crystals ranged from 0.5 nm to 5 nm.56
Currently, MOFs based on HKUST are produced with the use of solvents such as ethanol, isopropanol, and hydrochloric acid via the sonochemical method. This approach is halfway in line with the principles of “green chemistry” because, in our opinion, attempts should be made to develop protocols for the synthesis of these compounds using ionic liquids as solvents, given that they can be recovered during production and continuously reused. Here, we present a comparison of the preparation of HKUST using different synthetic techniques in Table 6.
Table 6 Comparison of the methods for the synthesis of MOFs based on HKUST-1




Method of synthesis
Substrates
Solvent and electrolyte
BET surface area [m2 g−1]
Ref.





Large-scale production of MOFs based on HKUST-1



Electrochemical
Copper electrode, benzene 1,3,5-tricarboxylate
EtOH, H2O, methanol acetonitrile, DMF, DMSO, MTBS
1153–1624

143



Electrochemical
Copper electrode, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, BTC (trimesic acid),
EtOH, H2O, MTBS
1309

146



Spray-dryer (two-fluid nozzles)
Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O, BTC
DMF, EtOH, H2O
1260

147



Mechanochemical
Copper(II) hydroxide trimesic acid
MeOH
1738

148



Solvothermal
Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O, BTC
DMF:H2O
1500–2100

149 and 150


Continuous flow scCO2 extraction
Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O, BTC
Dry DMSO, methanol, supercritical carbon dioxide
1616–1220

149




Synthesis methods of HKUST-1 in accordance with principles of green chemistry



Electrochemical
Copper electrode, 1,3,5-benzenetri-carboxylic acid
MeOH
1820

56



Electrochemical
Copper mesh, benzene 1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid
EtOH:H2O, MTBS
—

143



Electrochemical
Copper electrode, benzene 1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid
EtOH:H2O, MTBS
—

130



Sonochemical with heating and under pressure
Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, BTC,
Choline chloride/urea (molar ratio 1:2)
1506

151 and 152


Sonochemical
Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, BTC,
Choline chloride, 1,3-dimethylurea (molar ratio 1:2), the product was washed twice with de-ionized water and ethanol
31–1822

144



Ultrasonic at room temperature
(Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, H3BTC, ethanol
NaOH, deionized water
1721

145



Stirring at room temperature
Copper acetate monohydrate ([Cu(Oac)2·H2O]), BTC
Methanol, distilled water
708

153





10. Conclusions and future perspectives
Organometallic frameworks are widely used in catalysis, separation, absorption, and storage. The increasing number of patents have enabled the production of MOFs on a large scale. However, it is necessary to consider the economic limitations, excessive use of solvents, and attention to the possibility of using organometallic structures in several cycles. Future research should focus on combining synthetic techniques such as MW or electrosynthesis with flow-reactor post-processing. An interesting proposal is a novel method for the continuous synthesis of UiO-66 using supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) introduced by a custom counter-current mixer to provide enhanced heat and mass transfer to MOF precursor materials. The production rate was 104 g h−1 and the reaction time was <3 s. The authors showed that this method can be used on a large scale for the activation and continuous synthesis of MOF materials. In addition, it enables the recovery of wastewater and unreacted material, which is a challenge in water-based hydrothermal and supercritical systems. However, the authors used DMF, and therefore it is worth trying to use green solvents and other substrates to test whether it is possible to obtain MOFs other than UiO.154
Also, several pre- and post-synthetic modification methods usually alter the characteristics of the pores, which poses a challenge for subsequent applications. Therefore, in our opinion, experimental research should be combined with computational design to obtain materials with high physicochemical stability and high porosity. The precise location of the functional groups and a thorough understanding of the application mechanisms in stable metal–organic frameworks will ensure optimal reaction efficiencies and the possibility of large-scale application. Moreover, it seems attractive to conduct systematic studies on mechanical stability with the use of XRD diffraction, radial crushing strength, and theoretical calculations. Undoubtedly, the development of the stability of the MOF and its interaction with other fields of research will lead to more promising and innovative applications.
We sincerely hope that this review will inspire other scientists and research groups to create new, innovative porous materials to improve the environmental aspects. The unlimited possibilities of the application, modification, and creation of composite MOFs allow for their wide application following the principles of green chemistry. This should be a common topic these days, and thus we encourage the use of ionic liquids instead of harmful, poisonous solvents such as DMF.136 The new challenges for scientists represent a bright future for the development of MOFs around the world. We prepared a graphic presenting the solvents, metal ions, and organic linkers that comply with the principles of green chemistry, as well as those that should be avoided due to their harmfulness to people and the environment (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Examples of solvents, metal ions, and ligands that fit with the principles of green chemistry and those that are harmful and poisonous.155 Created with BioRender.com. 
Green solvents are non-toxic, recyclable, biodegradable, and may not involve a high energy cost of synthesis. Several alternative solvents that fulfill, to a greater or lesser extent, this definition are included in Fig. 26.137 Analyzing the articles on MOFs, we think that future perspectives will focus on the increasing use of biomass for the synthesis of new high-performance, biodegradable, porous green materials containing biocompatible transition metal ions, bioligands (amino acids, polypeptides, and saccharides) and green solvents (Ils and DES). However, there are many disadvantages in the preparation of bioMOF, e.g., poor chemical and thermal stability as well as lack of control over porosity. In addition, more advanced technology will be needed for potential industrialization. In contrast, in biomass@MOF, higher porosity and surface area are preferred, the formation of toxic by-products is avoided, improved mechanical properties and biocompatibility are noticeable and re-use is possible. The degradation of MOFs is particularly important due to the release of metal ions and organic linkers into the environment and their accumulation in organs where short-term oxidative stress may occur, causing severe toxicity. We suspect that the development of bioMOF may take a similar form to the topic related to nanoparticles, where new plant extracts are increasingly used for their production. In summary, in striving for sustainable development, the rational and effective use of biomass and biomolecules complies with the requirements of green development and undoubtedly contributes to environmental remediation.157–159
 Fig. 26  Division and examples of green solvents.156 Created with BioRender.com. 
Due to their extremely high level of porosity and large specific surface area, MOFs are considered important materials for a variety of applications. By selecting the appropriate metal fasteners and knots, the average pore size and MOF area can be easily adjusted. Analyzing the results presented herein, we can say that green solvothermal synthesis methods using Ils as solvents are troublesome due to the clogging of the MOF pores and reduction of their specific surface area. Therefore, we think that a good solution would be the design of carriers, e.g., carbon nanotubes, or to use cheaper DES equivalents. To date, the MOFs synthesized via mechanochemical and electrochemical methods and the continuous flow method have the highest porosity. However, each case should be analyzed individually because, depending on the optimization, where the range of SBET values varies between 1000–2000 m2 g−1. This shows how important it is to finally activate and remove the solvent from the MOF pores to make it as porous as possible.
The thermal decomposition of MOF materials is related to the breaking of their coordination bonds. The thermal stability of MOFs is usually determined by the strength of their coordination bonds, which can be increased by replacing low-value metal ions with that with a higher oxidation state. The second way to improve their thermodynamic stability is the frame interaction, through the interpenetration of the network, which can be modified by matching the organic linkers.27–29
Chemical stability refers to the preservation of the structural integrity of the framework under the influence of a specific chemical (external and internal factors). A way to improve the chemical stability of MOFs in water and prevent their degradation is to increase the resistance of coordination bonds by introducing hydrophobic functional groups (e.g., CF3 fluorine network or some long alkyl groups). This action prevents the replacement of organic linkers by OH− or H+ groups. Our observations show that MOFs composed of high-value metal ions and carboxylates show good stability in acid solutions. Alternatively, MOFs made of metal ions with a low oxidation state and linkers based on azolates are characterized by greater stability in basic solutions.27–29
In summary, designing the synthesis of new, stable MOFs should be guided by the Pearson hard/soft acid/base (HSAB) theory. The stability of porous materials and complex compounds is greater when a soft acid (low-value transition metal ions) is combined with a soft base (azolates) to form stronger bonds and the rate at which the substrates react with each other increases. In contrast, hard acids (high-value metal ions) form stronger acids with hard bases (carboxylates). The interactions between hard and soft pairs tend to be less stable.27–29
Finally, we would like to compare the advantages and disadvantages of the most important methods for the synthesis of MOFs, making this review very attractive (Table 7).
Table 7 Comparative collection of the methods for the synthesis of MOFs




Synthetic method
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Slow diffusion
Formation of single crystals (X-ray examination)
Slow process, taking several months

17, 160–163


No special conditions. Synthesis performed at ambient pressure and room temperature
Obtaining small amounts of MOFs


Solvothermal
Easy industrial transposition
The reactions take a long time, up to several days

17, 164–167


Possibility of alternating heating and cooling to support crystal growth
High energy consumption due to the fact that the synthesis is conducted at high temperatures (up to 250 °C)


It requires the purchase of airtight heating furnaces and small reactors into which one can introduce salts derived from one type of metal


Mechanochemical
Solvent-free, cheap, and easy method
Restricted control over crystal morphology and product particle size

17, 168–173


Using mechanical force instead of high temperature and reduced pressure
Secondary phases are usually obtained


Room temperature or slightly elevated
Special grinders/mills or mortar and pestle


One pot synthesis (timesaving)
Possible impurities from milling reactors


Microwave
A simple and ergonomically attractive method
No easy and quick industrial implementation

17, 174–179


Reduction of crystallization time and improvement of yield
Difficult to isolate large single-crystals


Ability to control the morphology of MOFs


Easy change and strict control of reaction parameters


MW heating is volumetric, which enables uniform reaction throughout the entire reactor volume and results in enhanced reaction rate


Ultrasound
Efficient in the isolation of phase-pure materials
Ultrasound waves can break crystallites, hindering the formation of large single-crystals for X-ray diffraction studies

17, 179–181


Homogeneous particle size and morphology in short periods


Continuous Flow
Tailor MOF crystal sizes
Some continuous flow reactors are expensive and cannot handle pressure

182–187



Short reaction time
Uneven flow at pressure


Highly controlled mass and heat transport conditions


Remarkable reproducibility


The perfect method for large-scale production


Aerogels or hydrogels
Owing to their large porosity, high water content, and excellent biocompatibility, MOF composite hydrogels have a strong potential for biomedical applications
High cost for large-scale production, including the cost of raw materials and equipment

176, 188–200


The high porosity of MOF composite aerogels leads to strong potential applications in adsorption, while their low densities and excellent mechanical properties enhance their transportation and processability, respectively
Low performance of MOFs


Composite aerogels can also be reused after simple cleaning with water, which is ideal for industrial use
The problem associated with the utilization of powdered MOFs is the possibility of dust formation


Ionothermal
Possibility of replacing harmful organic solvents such as DMF with ionic liquids
High viscosity, low diffusion coefficients, and problematic recycling

31, 130–135 and 190


There is no need for reflux condensers or a sealed system that may contain autogenous pressure due to low or zero vapor pressure of IL


High concentration of ions results in obtaining new, more porous materials
Reduced surface area compared to MOFs based on unmodified Ils due to pore clogging




Abbreviations

MOFsMetal–organic frameworks
(HMTA)(CuCN)5(Hexamethylenetetramine)penta[copper(I) cyanide]
ZIFZeolitic imidazolate framework
MILMaterials of Institut Lavoisier
HKUSTMaterials from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
UiOUniversity of Oslo
CAU-10[Al(OH)(benzene-1,3-dicarboxylate)]·nH2O
(CuI)4(DABCO)Bis(1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane)tetra (copper(I)iodide)
Porous [PCN-250(Fe)]Iron azobenzene tetracarboxylic
IUPACInternational Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
DMDimethyl oxalate
MGMethyl glycolate
EGEthylene glycol
ChClCholine chloride
APTMACl3-Acrylamidepropyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
BTBAClBenzyltributylammonium chloride
INAIsonicotinamide
MeOHMethanol
EtOHEthanol

n-PrOHPropan-1-ol
MTBAMSTributylmethyl-ammonium methyl sulphate
DMF
N,N′-Dimethylformamide
H2BDCTerephthalic acid
NH2-BDC2-Aminoterephthalic acid
[BMIM][BF4]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[BMIM][PF6]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate
[BMIM][Tf2N]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[BMIM][Cl]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
[BMIM][Cys]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium cysteine
[BuPy][Tf2N ChC]
N-Butylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate
[NMP][CH3SO3]
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidonium methyl sulphonate
C5H15NO2Choline hydroxide
[SO3H-(CH2)3-HIM][HSO4]1,4-Bis[3-(propyl-3-sulfonate)imidazolium]butane hydrogen sulfate
[PSMIM][HSO4]1-Methylimidazolium-3-propylsulfonate hydrosulfate
[SO3H-(CH2)3-IM]2C4[HSO4]21,4-Butanediyl-3,3′-bis(3-sulfopropyl)imidazolium dihydrogen sulfate
EIMS1-(1-Ethyl-3-imidazolium)propane-3-sulfonate
HTFSA
N,N-Bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide
IRMOFIsoreticular metal organic framework
CuBTCCopper benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate
ZMOFZeolite-like metal organic framework
BPRBack pressure
DMCsDimethylacetamide
scCO2Supercritical carbon dioxide
CyreneDihydrolevoglucosenone

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
A. Q. Shirinov, Sci. Educ., 2021, 2, 28–33 Search PubMed .
B. Gawdzik and J. Gawdzik, Ecol. Chem. Eng. S, 2011, 18, 345–357 Search PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef .
O. M. Yaghi, G. Li and H. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef .
H. E. Emam, A. E. Abdelhamid and R. M. Abdelhameed, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 218, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Amooghin, H. Sanaeepur, R. Luque, H. Garcia and B. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 7427–7508 RSC .
S. Tian, S. Xu, J. Liu, C. He, Y. Xiong and P. Feng, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 239, 117767 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, A. Xie, J. Zhou, R. Liu, L. Wang, H. Liu and W. Tao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4996–5041 RSC .
K. Pobłocki, J. Drzeżdżon, T. Kostrzewa and D. Jacewicz, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 8052 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, Y. Wang and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4629–4683 RSC .
C. Zhang, Z. P. Yan, X. Y. Dong, Z. Han, S. Li, T. Fu and S. Q. Zang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002914 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Wu, Y. Li, M. Liu, X. Feng, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4484–4536 RSC .
W. L. Chan, C. Xie, W. S. Lo, J. C. G. Bünzli, W. K. Wong and K. L. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12189–12257 RSC .
E. Gkaniatsou, B. Meng, F. Cui, R. Loonen, F. Nouar, C. Serre and J. Hensen, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106224 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Horvath and P. T. Anastas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rubio-Martinez, C. Avci-Camur, A. W. Thornton, I. Imaz, D. Maspoch and M. R. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3453–3480 RSC .
P. Silva, S. M. Vilela, J. P. Tome and F. A. A. Paz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6774–6803 RSC .
J. Casaban, Y. Zhang, R. Pacheco, C. Coney, C. Holmes, E. Sutherland and A. Moore, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 231, 312–325 RSC .
T. L. Chen, H. Kim, S. Y. Pan, P. C. Tseng, Y. P. Lin and P. C. Chiang, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 716, 136998 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Zimmerman, P. T. Anastas, H. C. Erythropel and W. Leitner, Science, 2020, 367, 397–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Reinsch, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 27, 4290–4299 CrossRef .
J. Y. Lu and A. M. Babb, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1340–1341 RSC .
A. Pichon, A. Lazuen-Garay and S. L. James, CrystEngComm, 2006, 8, 211–214 RSC .
C. Janiak and J. K. Vieth, New J. Chem, 2010, 34, 2366–2388 RSC .
H. B. T. Jeazet, C. Staudt and C. Janiak, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 14003–14027 RSC .
S. K. Das, S. Chatterjee, S. Bhunia, A. Mondal, P. Mitra, V. Kumari and A. Bhaumik, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 13783–13792 RSC .
Z. Zheng, H. L. Nguyen, N. Hanikel, K. K. Y. Li, Z. Zhou, T. Ma and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Protoc., 2022, 1–21 Search PubMed .
M. A. Abdelkareem, Q. Abbas, M. Mouselly, H. Alawadhi and A. G. Olabi, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2022, 100465 CAS .
X. J. Kong and J. R. Li, Engineering, 2021, 7, 1115–1139 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chakraborty, A. Chowdhury, M. Chandra, R. Jana, S. Shyamal, M. K. Bhunia, D. Chandra, M. Hara, D. Pradhan, A. Datta and A. Bhaumik, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 2614–2623 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Kinik, A. Uzun and S. Keskin, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2842–2863 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Vaid, S. P. Kelley and R. D. Rogers, IUCrJ, 2017, 4, 380–392 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Shi, S. Jungsuttiwong and S. Yuan, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 59, 320–333 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Luo, B. W. An, M. Ji and J. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 219–234 RSC .
V. C. Ramos, W. Han, X. Zhang, S. Zhang and K. L. Yeung, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2020, 25, 100391 CrossRef .
Y. Yoshida and H. Kitagawa, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 70–81 CrossRef .
S. Kaur, M. Kumari and H. K. Kashyap, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 10601–10616 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2003, 70–71 RSC .
R. A. Maia, B. Louis and S. A. Baudron, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 4145–4151 RSC .
R. A. Maia, B. Louis and S. A. Baudron, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 5016–5032 RSC .
Z. Lu, R. Wang, Y. Liao, O. K. Farha, W. Bi, T. R. Sheridan and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 3571–3574 RSC .
P. Li, F. F. Cheng, W. W. Xiong and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2693–2708 RSC .
J. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Wu, D. S. Li and Q. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 391, 30–43 CrossRef CAS .
T. Friščić, C. Mottillo and H. M. Titi, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 1030–1041 CrossRef .
P. Cheng, C. Wang, Y. V. Kaneti, M. Eguchi, J. Lin, Y. Yamauchi and J. Na, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 4231–4249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Xu, J. Gao, J. Yao and Q. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 398, 213016 CrossRef .
H. Y. Guan, R. J. LeBlanc, S. Y. Xie and Y. Yue, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 369, 76–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ma, Y. X. Sun, J. Yin, H. S. Sun, H. Wu, H. Wang, Y. F. Zhang, X. S. Feng, J. Q. Meng and J. Taiwan, Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 104, 273–283 CAS .
H. Z. Liu, H. Peng, Y. M. Xin and J. Y. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 2263–2272 RSC .
Y. J. Du, J. Gao, L. Y. Zhou, L. Ma, Y. He, X. F. Zheng, Z. H. Huang and Y. J. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801684 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Asghar, N. Iqbal, T. Noor, B. M. Kariuki, L. Kidwell and T. L. Easun, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1220–1227 RSC .
H. Ren and T. Wei, ChemElectroChem, 2022, 9, e202200196 CAS .
Z. Li, T. Zhuang, J. Dong, L. Wang, J. Xia, H. Wang and Z. Wang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2021, 71, 105384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vepsäläinen, D. S. Macedo, H. Gong, M. Rubio-Martinez, B. Bayatsarmadi and B. He, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 3340 CrossRef .
M. Rubio-Martinez, M. P. Batten, A. Polyzos, K. C. Carey, J. I. Mardel, K. S. Lim and M. R. Hill, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–5 Search PubMed .
U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt and J. Pastre, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 626–636 RSC .
S. Bagi, S. Yuan, S. Rojas-Buzo, Y. Shao-Horn and Y. Román-Leshkov, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 9982–9991 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Liu, S. L. Hanna, X. Wang, R. Taheri-Ledari and O. K. Farha, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7406–7427 RSC .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang and B. Han, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2610–2619 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, C. Zhang, B. Han and F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1608–1628 RSC .
H. Li, C. Zhao, X. Li, H. Fu, Z. Wang and C. C. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 844, 156147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, D. Yang, H. Ren, K. An, Y. Chen, Z. Zhou and Z. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125929 CrossRef CAS .
A. López-Olvera, J. A. Zárate, E. Martínez-Ahumada, D. Fan, M. L. Díaz-Ramírez, P. A. Sáenz-Cavazos and I. A. Ibarra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 39363–39370 CrossRef .
K. Leus, S. Couck, M. Vandichel, G. Vanhaelewyn and Y. Ya Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15562 RSC .
P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2009, 9, 172–178 CrossRef .

          Ch. Serre, N. Steunou, K. Dedecker, B. Lavedrine, C. Boissière and E. Dumas, PatentWO2021123570A1,  2020 Search PubMed .
M. Cognet, J. Condomines, J. Cambedouzou, S. Madhavi, M. Carboni and D. Meyer, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 385, 121603 CrossRef CAS .

          S.-C. Josh Wong, Patent WO2021163290A1,  2021 Search PubMed .
H. Furukawa, F. Gandara, Y. B. Zhang, J. Jiang, W. L. Queen, M. R. Hudson and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4369–4381 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Nelson and N. J. Trivedi, US PatUS8197619B1,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Sánchez-Sánchez, N. Getachew, K. Díaz, M. Díaz-García, Y. Chebude and I. Díaz, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1500–1509 RSC .
S. Dai, A. Tissot and C. Serre, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2021, 94, 2623–2636 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martinez Joaristi, J. Juan-Alcañiz, P. Serra-Crespo, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 3489–3498 CrossRef CAS .
A. Permyakova, O. Skrylnyk, E. Courbon, M. Affram, S. Wang, U. H. Lee and C. Serre, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1419–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wahiduzzaman, D. Lenzen, G. Maurin, N. Stock and M. T. Wharmby, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 32, 3626–3632 CrossRef .
N. Tannert, C. Jansen, S. Nießing and C. Janiak, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 2967–2976 RSC .
H. Reinsch, T. Homburg, N. Heidenreich, D. Fröhlich, S. Hennninger, M. Wark and N. Stock, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2173–2181 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pilloni, F. Padella, G. Ennas, S. Lai, M. Bellusci, E. Rombi and I. Ferino, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 213, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hod, W. Bury, D. M. Karlin, P. Deria, C. W. Kung, M. J. Katz and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6295–6300 CrossRef CAS .
L. Garzon-Tovar, M. Cano-Sarabia, A. Carné-Sánchez, C. Carbonell, I. Imaz and D. Maspoch, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 533–539 RSC .
P. A. Bayliss, I. A. Ibarra, E. Pérez, S. Yang, C. C. Tang, M. Poliakoff and M. Schröder, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3796–3802 RSC .
A. Carné-Sánchez, A. Imaz and M. I. Cano-Sarabia, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 203–211 CrossRef .
M. Taddei, D. A. Steitz, J. A. van Bokhoven and M. Ranocchiari, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 3245–3249 CrossRef CAS .
N. Campagnol, T. Van Assche, T. Boudewijns, J. Denayer, K. Binnemans, D. De Vos and J. Fransaer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5827–5830 RSC .
V. Benoit, R. S. Pillai, A. Orsi, P. Normand, H. Jobic, F. Nouar and P. L. Llewellyn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1383–1389 RSC .
A. Permyakova, S. Wang, E. Courbon, F. Nouar, N. Heymans and P. d’A. C. Serre, J. Mater. Chem., 2017, 5, 12889–12898 RSC .
M. I. Severino, E. Gkaniatsou, F. Nouar, M. L. Pinto and C. Serre, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 231, 326–341 RSC .
A. M. Nasir, N. M. Nordin, P. S. Goh and A. F. Ismail, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 250, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, G. Ren and D. Cai, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 38906–38911 RSC .

          Y. K. Hwang, J. S. Chang, Y. K. Seo and D. W. Hwang, PatentWO2011062412A2,  2013 Search PubMed .

          Ch. Zhang, PatentCN107394089B,  2017 Search PubMed .

          Ch. Chunjie and Z. Jinfeng, PatentCN113234435A,  2021 Search PubMed .

Patent CN113181939A, 2021 Search PubMed.
M. Stepniewska, M. B. Østergaard, C. Zhou and Y. Yue, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2020, 530, 119806 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rafiei, S. Tangestaninejad, P. Horcajada, M. Moghadam, V. Mirkhani, I. Mohammadpoor-Baltork and F. Zadehahmadi, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1233–1241 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Munn, P. W. Dunne, S. V. Y. Tang and E. H. Lester, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12811–12814 RSC .
J. M. Marrett, C. Mottillo, S. Girard, C. W. Nickels, J. L. Do, G. Dayaker, L. S. Germann, R. E. Dinnebier, A. J. Howarth, O. K. Farha, T. Friščić and Ch.-J. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 3222–3228 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schejn, L. Balan, V. Falk, L. Aranda, G. Medjahdi and R. Schneider, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4493–4500 RSC .
Y. Chen and S. Tang, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 276, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Crawford and J. Casaban, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5747–5754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martinez Joaristi, J. Juan-Alcañiz, P. Serra-Crespo, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12(7), 3489–3498 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Worrall, H. Mann, A. Rogers, M. A. Bissett, M. P. Attfield and R. A. Dryfe, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 197, 228–240 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yadnum, J. Roche, E. Lebraud, P. Négrier, P. Garrigue, D. Bradshaw and A. Kuhn, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 4082–4086 CrossRef .
A. Polyzoidis, T. Altenburg, M. Schwarzer, S. Loebbecke and S. Kaskel, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 971–977 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Ma, P. Nian, H. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 581, 344–354 CrossRef CAS .
P. López-Domínguez, A. M. López-Periago, F. J. Fernández-Porras, J. Fraile, G. Tobias and C. Domingo, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 147–155 CrossRef .
K. Tu, B. Puértolas, M. Adobes-Vidal, Y. Wang, J. Sun, J. Traber and T. Keplinger, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902897 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ru, X. Wang, F. Wang, X. Cui, X. Du and X. Lu, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2021, 208, 111577 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. T. Nguyen, N. M. Schweitzer, C. Y. Chang, T. L. Drake, M. C. So, P. C. Stair and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2496–2500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, Z. Niu, F. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Zhao and G. Lu, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 10328–10335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Govindaraju, P. Puthiaraj, M. H. Lee and K. Yun, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 12052–12059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, D. Zhao, Y. Lu and W. Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22744–22767 RSC .
S. Y. Zhu and B. Yan, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 1674–1681 RSC .

Patent KR102033780B1, 2019 Search PubMed.
B. Karadeniz, A. J. Howarth, T. Stolar, T. Islamoglu, I. Dejanovic, M. Tireli and K. Užarević, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15841–15849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, G. B. White, M. D. Ryan, A. J. Hunt and M. J. Katz, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 7186–7192 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Hafizovic, U. Olsbye, K. P. Lillerud, S. Jacobsen and N. Guillou, PatentUS20120115961A1,  2014 Search PubMed .

          M. Rubio-Martinez, M. Roland Hill, M. Batten, K. Seng Lim, A. Polyzos, T. Raymond Barton, T. Deon Hadley and A. A. Monch, PatentUS10906023B2,  2021 Search PubMed .
J. H. Cavka, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, N. Guillou, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga and K. P. Lillerud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13850–13851 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Stassen, M. Styles, T. Van Assche, N. Campagnol, J. Fransaer, J. Denayer and R. Ameloot, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1801–1807 CrossRef CAS .
L. Garzon-Tovar, M. Cano-Sarabia, A. Carné-Sánchez, C. Carbonell, I. Imaz and D. Maspoch, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 533–539 RSC .
Y. T. Dang, H. T. Hoang, H. C. Dong, K.-B. T. Bui, L. H. T. Nguyen, T. B. Phan and T. L. H. Doan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 298, 110064 CrossRef CAS .
H. Reinsch, B. Bueken, F. Vermoortele, I. Stassen, A. Lieb, K. P. Lillerud and D. De Vos, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 4070–4074 RSC .
S. Głowniak, B. Szczęśniak, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Today, 2021, 46, 109–124 CrossRef .
K. Pobłocki, J. Drzeżdżon and D. Jacewicz, Wiad. Chem., 2021, 75, 1041–1073 Search PubMed .
K. Pobłocki, D. Jacewicz, J. Walczak, B. Gawdzik, K. Kramkowski, J. Drzeżdżon and P. Kowalczyk, Materials, 2022, 15, 695 CrossRef .
A. U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev, 2009, 38, 1284–1293 RSC .
N. Campagnol, E. R. Souza, D. E. De Vos, K. Binnemans and J. Fransaer, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12545–12547 RSC .
A. A. Castañeda Ramírez, E. Rojas García, R. López Medina, J. L. Contreras Larios, R. Suárez Parra and A. M. Maubert Franco, Materials, 2021, 14, 2293 CrossRef .
K. Fujie and H. Kitagawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 382–390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Zhao, J. N. Zhu, P. Li, W. Li, T. Cai, F. F. Cheng and W. W. Xiong, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 10199–10209 RSC .
W. Y. Siew, N. H. H. Abu Bakar and M. Abu Bakar, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2018, 482, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, K. Gao, B. Mo, J. Tang, J. Wu and H. Hou, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Farha, A. Ö. Yazaydın, I. Eryazici, C. D. Malliakas, B. G. Hauser, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. T. Hupp, Nat. Chem, 2010, 2, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Fidelli, B. Karadeniz, A. J. Howarth, I. Huskić, L. S. Germann, I. Halasz and K. Užarević, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6999–7002 RSC .
T. C. Wang, N. A. Vermeulen, I. S. Kim, A. B. Martinson, J. F. Stoddart, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Nat. Protoc., 2016, 11, 149–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wang, N. A. Vermeulen, I. S. Kim, A. B. F. Martinson, J. F. Stoddart, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Nat. Protoc., 2015, 11, 149–162 CrossRef PubMed .
T. E. Webber, W. G. Liu, S. P. Desai, C. C. Lu, D. G. Truhlar and R. L. Penn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39342–39346 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Li and P. Deria, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 1841–1854 CrossRef .
A. Van Wyk, T. Smith, J. Park and J. P. Deria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2756–2760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Islamoglu, K. Otake, P. Li, C. T. Buru, A. W. Peters, I. Akpinar and O. K. Farha, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 5913–5918 RSC .
D. Crawford, J. Casaban, R. Haydon, N. Giri, T. McNally and S. L. James, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1645–1649 RSC .
T. R. Van Assche, G. Desmet, R. Ameloot, D. E. De Vos, H. Terryn and J. F. Denayer, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 158, 209–213 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, S. T. Yang, J. Kim and W. S. Ahn, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32, 2783–2786 CrossRef .
W. Xu, G. Li, W. Li and H. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 37530–37534 RSC .
M. Hartmann, S. Kunz, D. Himsl, O. Tangermann, S. Ernst and A. Wagener, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8634–8642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carne-Sanchez, I. Imaz, M. Cano-Sarabia and D. Maspoch, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 203–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Crawford and J. Casaban, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5747–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Y. Chui, S. M. F. Lo, P. H. Charmant, A. G. Orpen and I. D. Williams, Science, 1999, 283, 1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jeremias, D. Frhlich, C. Janiak and S. K. Henniger, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24073 RSC .
H. V. Doan, Y. Fang, B. Yao, Z. Dong, T. J. White, A. Sartbaeva and V. P. Ting, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7887–7893 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ameloot, L. Stappers, J. Fransaer, L. Alaerts, B. F. Sels and D. E. De Vos, Chem. Mater, 2009, 21, 2580–2582 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Siew, N. A. Bakar, M. A. Bakar and A. Z. Abidin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 125846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Rasmussen, J. Kramlich and I. V. Novosselov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9680–9689 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, S. Jain, M. Nehra, N. Dilbaghi, G. Marrazza and K. H. Kim, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 420, 213407 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Torres-Valenzuela, A. Ballesteros-Gómez and S. Rubio, Food Eng. Rev., 2019, 12, 83–100 CrossRef .
P. Li, F.-F. Cheng, W.-W. Xiong and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2693–2708 RSC .
N. Al Amery, H. R. Abid, S. Al-Saadi, S. Wang and S. Liu, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 17, 100343 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li and Z. Lou, Sustainability, 2022, 14, 5768 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Gao, A. D. Cardenal, C. H. Wang and D. C. Powers, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 3465–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Mashhadzadeh, A. Taghizadeh, M. Taghizadeh, M. T. Munir, S. Habibzadeh, A. Salmankhani and M. R. Saeb, J. Compos. Sci., 2020, 4, 75 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Ghazvini, M. Vahedi, S. N. Nobar and F. Sabouri, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104790 CrossRef .
Q. Qian, P. A. Asinger, M. J. Lee, G. Han, K. Mizrahi Rodriguez, S. Lin, F. M. Benedetti, A. X. Wu, W. Seok Chi and Z. P. Smith, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8161–8266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, M. Wen, X. Liang, Z. Shi, M. V. Kirillova and A. M. Kirillov, Crystals, 2018, 8, 83 CrossRef .
L. Ndlwana, N. Raleie, K. M. Dimpe, H. F. Ogutu, E. O. Oseghe, M. M. Motsa and B. B. Mamba, Materials, 2021, 14, 5094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Ng, G. K. Lim and C. P. Leo, Microchem. J., 2021, 165, 106116 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abdullahi, Z. Harun and M. H. D. Othman, Adv. Powder Technol., 2017, 28, 1827–1840 CrossRef CAS .
B. Szczęśniak, S. Borysiuk, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1457–1473 RSC .
S. Głowniak, B. Szczęśniak, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Today, 2021, 46, 109–124 CrossRef .
T. Stolar and K. Užarević, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 4511–4525 RSC .
T. Friščić, C. Mottillo and H. M. Titi, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 1030–1041 CrossRef .
A. P. Amrute, J. De Bellis, M. Felderhoff and F. Schüth, Chemistry, 2021, 27, 6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Głowniak, B. Szczęśniak, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103477 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Thomas-Hillman, A. Laybourn, C. Dodds and S. W. Kingman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11564–11581 RSC .
M. Ma, Y. Bi, Z. Tong, Y. Liu, P. Lyu, R. Wang and Y. Chen, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 16572–16591 RSC .
A. Kumar, Y. Kuang, Z. Liang and X. Sun, Mater. Today Nano, 2020, 11, 100076 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Z. Cai, Z. Wang, Y. Peng, L. Xia, S. Ma and Y. Huang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Le, H. T. Kwon, T. K. Vo, J.-H. Kim, W.-S. Kim and J. Kim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 253, 123278 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Li, X. Shi, M. Huang, X. Li, Q. Zeng and R. Che, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 2136–2156 RSC .
J. Abdi, A. J. Sisi, M. Hadipoor and A. Khataee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vaitsis, G. Sourkouni and C. Argirusis, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 52, 106–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al Obeidli, H. B. Salah, M. Al Murisi and R. Sabouni, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 47, 2561–2593 CrossRef .
C. Crivello, S. Sevim, O. Graniel, C. Franco, S. Pané, J. Puigmartí-Luis and D. Muñoz-Rojas, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 8, 168–178 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 26–45 RSC .
Y. Yao, C. Wang, J. Na, M. S. A. Hossain, X. Yan, H. Zhang and J. Li, Small, 2021, 18, 2104387 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Colella, C. Carlucci and R. Luisi, Accounts on Sustainable Flow Chemistry,  2020, pp. 29–65 Search PubMed .
N. Hanikel, M. S. Prévot and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 348–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Britton, S. Majumdar and G. A. Weiss, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5891–5918 RSC .
T. R. Van Assche, N. Campagnol, T. Muselle, H. Terryn, J. Fransaer and J. F. Denayer, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 224, 302–310 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Chattopadhyay and N. R. Singha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 446, 214125 CrossRef .
R. M. Rego, G. Kuriya, M. D. Kurkuri and M. Kigga, Recent trends, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, C. Li, J. Feng, H. Sun, M. Sun, Y. Feng and J. Feng, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2022, 146, 116497 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Larrea, R. F. de Luis, A. Fidalgo-Marijuan, E. Maya, M. Iglesias and M. I. Arriortua, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 2904–2913 RSC .
M. Urbaniak, K. Pobłocki, P. Kowalczyk, K. Kramkowski, J. Drzeżdżon, B. Gawdzik, P. Świtała, M. Miler, D. Heleniak, P. Rybiński and D. Jacewicz, Molecules, 2022, 27, 8038 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. T. Xu, K. C. Ren, Z. M. Tao, D. K. Sam, E. Feng, X. Wang and Y. Cao, Green Chem., 2022 10.1039/D2GC02527B .
R. G. Gavinehroudi, A. Mahjoub, M. Karimi, S. Sadeghi, A. Heydari, H. Mohebali and S. Ghamami, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 6965–6979 RSC .
N. A. Stini, P. L. Gkizis and C. G. Kokotos, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 6435–6449 RSC .
N. Hammi, S. Chen, A. Primo, S. Royer, H. Garcia and A. El Kadib, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 4533–4543 RSC .
T. Li, D. D. Zhi, Z. H. Guo, J. Z. Li, Y. Chen and F. B. Meng, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 647–674 RSC .
G. Wu, C. Shen, S. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Zhang and H. Zhang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 9254–9282 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Kacper Pobłocki	Kacper Pobłocki is currently a master's student at the Department of Environmental Technology at the Faculty of Chemistry of the University of Gdańsk. His research topics focus on the design of syntheses of new organometallic compounds and their use as “green” precatalysts in olefins polymerization reactions.
Joanna Drzeżdżon	Dr. Joanna Drzeżdżon is an assistant professor at the Department of Environmental Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk. Her scientific interests focus on olefin polymerization catalysts, including the application of “green chemistry” principles. She has published more than 50 academic papers in international journals, as well as 2 patents.
Barbara Gawdzik	Dr Barbara Gawdzik is an an Associate Professor in the Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University of Kielce, Poland. Her scientific interest: organic chemistry, bioorganic chemistry, especially the synthesis of biologically active hetero- and macrocyclic compounds. She has published over 60 academic papers 15 book chapters and 10 patents.
Dagmara Jacewicz	Dr Dagmara Jacewicz is an Associate Professor in the Department of Environmental Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, Poland. Her scientific interests are in inorganic chemistry, coordination chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, physical chemistry and green chemistry. She has published more than 100 academic papers 43 book chapters, co-author of 2 books – academic scripts.

 	Fig. 1  Recent weather anomalies in the world caused by climate change. Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic presentation of the various applications of MOFs. Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 3  Four main technical barriers in the commercialization of MOFs.18 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 4  Examples of the largest chemical concerns dealing with the production of MOFs on a large scale with exemplary compounds.16 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 5  12 principles of green chemistry.19–21 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 6  Modified Rubio-Martinez's timeline of the most common synthetic approaches patented for the synthesis of MOFs.16 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of different post-impregnation methods used in the synthesis of IL/MOF composites.31 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 8  Cost common anions and cations forming ILs.31,32	 

 	Fig. 9  Examples of DES components.38–40	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparison of the traditional manufacture of MOFs with that for the direct mechanochemical synthesis by twin screw extrusion.18 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram depicting the syntheses of 3D MOF-based aerogels or hydrogels via (top) direct mixing and (bottom) in situ growth methods.45–50 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrosynthesis of MOFs by anodic dissolution.16 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 13  Microwave reactor. Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 14  Diagram of continuous flow method for the synthesis of MOFs.55 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 15  Block diagram of obtaining a film based on an MOF (MIL-100).66	 

Formaldehyde	42 ppb
Formic acid	14 ppb
Acetaldehyde	23 ppb
Acetic acid	32 ppb

 	Fig. 16  Flow chart of the recycling method of Li-ion batteries.67 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 17  General reaction for the preparation of MIL-53(Al) by conventional (top) and the room temperature (green synthesis method).71,72 Created with BioRender.com.	 


Large-scale production of MOFs based on MIL

MIL-53(Al.)	Electrochemical	Aluminium electrode, BDC (terephthalic acid), H2O, DMF, KCl	90	1200	
73

MIL-53	Electrophoretic deposition	Fluorine-doped tin oxide FTO, BDC (1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid)	—	—	
79

MIL-100	Spray-drying continuous flow	Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, BTC, DMF	180	1039	
80

MIL-53(Al.)	Flow chemistry	Al(NO3)3, terephthalic acid, water	250	919	
81

MIL-88A	Spray-dryer with three-fluid nozzle	FeCl3·6H2O, fumaric acid, DMF, MeOH, H2O	180	—	
82

MIL-53(Al.)	Flow chemistry	Metallic aluminium, BDC, DMF	—	1376	
83

MIL-100(Fe)	Wet impregnation	FeCl3·6H2O, benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid, water, [SO3H-(CH2)3-IM]2C4[HSO4]2/Acidic chloroaluminate IL/[BMIM][Cys]/dual amino-functionalized ionic liquid (DAIL)	130	—	
84

MIL-101(Cr)	Wet impregnation	Cr(NO3)3·9H2O, terephthalic acid, water, DAIL, or [NMP][CH3SO3]/EIMS-HTFSA	220	1587–2049	
85


Methods for the synthesis of MIL in accordance with the principles of green chemistry

MIL-100(Al.)	Electrochemical	Aluminum electrode, BTC (benzene-1,3,5-tricarbocylate), EtOH, H2O	Above 60	969	
76

MIL-100(Fe)	Electrochemical	Iron electrode, BTC, EtOH, H2O, MTBS	110	—	
84

MIL-100(Fe)	Mechanochemical	H3BTC and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide	Room temperature	1033	
78

MIL-91(Ti)	Solvothermal	
N,N′-Piperazinebis(methylenephosphonic acid), NaOH, water, titanium oxyacetylacetonate	Under reflux	360	
85

MIL-160(Al.)	Hydrothermal	Al(OH)(CH3COO)2, 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid, distilled water	Under reflux	1150	
86

MIL-68-mes	Microwave heating	Mesaconic acid (H2Mes), Al2(SO4)3·18H2O, NaOH, water	95	1040	
77

MIL-160(Al.)	Solvothermal	Aluminium hydroxide acetate, 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), deionized water	Under reflux	1150	
87

MIL-53(Al.)	Stirring at room temperature	Aluminium nitrate aqueous solution, Na2BDC, water	Room temperature	1048	
71


 	Fig. 18  Hydrogenation reaction of dimethyl oxalate, methyl glycolate, and ethylene glycol.93	 


Large-scale production of MOFs based on ZIF

ZIF- 8	Solvothermal	Zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 2-methylimididazole (Hmim)	DMF, H2O	1300–1800	
99 and 100
ZIF-8	Electrochemical	Zinc electrode, 2-methyl imidazolate	AcN, H2O, DMF, EtOH, MTBS	1400–1700	
101

ZIF-8	Electrochemical	Zinc electrode, 2-methyl imidazolate	DMF, H2O, MTBS	1730	
102

ZIF-4	Electrochemical	Zinc electrode, imidazole	DMF, H2O, MTBAMS (tributylmethyl-ammonium methyl sulphate)	750	
102

ZIF-14	Electrochemical	Zinc electrode, 2-ethylimidazole	DMF, H2O, MTBAMS	598	
102

ZIF-7	Electrochemical	Zinc electrode, benzimidazole	DMF, H2O, MTBAMS	358	
102

ZIF-67	Electrochemical	Cobalt electrode, 2- methylimidazole	DMF, H2O, MTBAMS	1521	
102


Synthesis methods of ZIF in accordance with principles of green chemistry

ZIF-8	Bipolar electrochemistry	Zinc wire, 2-methylimidazole	Water	—	
103

ZIF-8	Flow chemistry	Zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 2-methylimidazole	Ammonia, water	1770	
104

ZIF-8	Flow chemistry	Zinc acetate,2-methylimidazole, ammonium hydroxide	Water, ethanol	1800	
96

ZIF-8	Ionothermal	2-methylimidazolate, zinc cations with sodalite topology	[BMIM][Tf2N]/C5H15NO2	374	
31

ZIF-8	Extraction with supercritical CO2	Zinc oxide, imidazole/2-ethylimidazole,	Supercritical carbon dioxide	1687–1894	
105

ZIF-8	Extraction with supercritical CO2	2-Methylimidazole, ZnO	Water, supercritical carbon dioxide	1229–1315	
98

ZIF-8	Hydrothermal	2-Methylimidazole, ZnO nanorods layer (hexamethylenetetramine, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O in water)	Water, methanol, ethanol	—	
98

ZIF-8	Synthesis was conducted under nitrogen flow at room temperature	Zn(Oac)2, Hmim	Methanol	1477 ± 36	
98

ZIF-8	Extraction with supercritical CO2	Zn(acac)2 ·H2O, Hmim	Supercritical carbon dioxide	1319–1702	
106

ZIF-8	Extraction with supercritical CO2/Ionothermal	Zn(acac)2, Hmim	Supercritical carbon dioxide, [emim][BF4]	1156	
106 and 107
ZIF-8/beech composite	Stirring at room temperature	Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 2-methylimidazole	Methanol, deionized water	26	
107


 	Fig. 19  Scheme of a catalyst-fiber composite for adsorbing and decomposing a chemical agent, which involves the steps of electrospinning a nanofiber-forming polymer solution and dispersing a metal–organic framework between a nanofiber surface and a nanospace formed by the nanofibers by electro-spraying a UiO-66-based MOF-containing solution.114 Created with BioRender.com.	 


Large-scale production of MOFs based on UiO

UiO-66	Continuous flow chemistry	ZrCl4, 1,4-tricarboxylic acid (BDC), DMF	10 min	1186	
118

UiO-66	Solvothermal	BDC, ZrCl4, water, DMF, benzene, and acetone	24 h	1187	
119

UiO-66	Anodic and cathodic-electrophoretic deposition	Zirconium oxide foil, ZnO2, BDC, DMF, H2O, acetic acid, HNO3	—	—	
120

UiO-66	Electrophoretic deposition	FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide), BDC, Zr-containing nodes	—	—	
121

UiO-66-NO2	Continuous flow	ZrCl4, 2-nitro-BDC, acetic acid, H2O	63 s	679	
121

UiO-66-NH2	Continuous flow	ZrCl4, 2-NH2-BDC, DMF, H2O	63 s	752	
121

UiO-66	Continuous flow	ZrCl4, BDC, DMF, H2O	63 s	1106	
121

Hf-UiO-66	Microwave	[Hf6O4(OH)4], BDC, DMF, CH3COOH	3 min	950	
122

Zr-UiO-66	Microwave	[Zr6O4(OH)4], BDC, DMF, CH3COOH	3 min	1400	
122

UiO-66	Wet impregnation	Zirconium tetrachloride, terephthalic acid, hydrochloric acid DMF, [PSMIM][HSO4]	16 h	523–996	
31


Synthesis methods of UiO in accordance with principles of green chemistry

UiO-66	Synthesis with green bioderived solvent – Cyrene	Zirconium(IV) oxychloride octahydrate, terephthalic acid, Cyrene	24 h	500–1300	
116

UiO-66	Solvothermal	Zr(SO4)2·4H2O, H2BDC-NH2(2-aminoterephthalic acid), water	—	—	
123

UiO-66	Mechano-synthesis	[Zr6O4(OH)4(C6H5CO2)12], terephthalic acid, a small amount of methanol	75 min	1020	
124

UiO-66	Mechano-synthesis	[Zr6O4(OH)4(C2H3CO2)12], terephthalic acid, a small amount of methanol	75 min	1020	
124

UiO-66	Mechano-synthesis	[Zr12O8(OH)8(CH3COO)24], terephthalic acid,	90 min	1145	
124

UiO-66	Mechano-chemistry	[Zr6O4(OH)4(CH3COO)12]2, triethylamine, terephthalic acid, 50 μL H2O	90 min	1145	
124

UiO-66-NH2	Mechano-chemistry	[Zr6O4(OH)4(CH3COO)12]2, 2-aminoterephthalic acid, 50 μL H2O	90 min	815	
124


 	Fig. 20  Chemical structure of diclofenac sodium (DCF), ibuprofen (IB), and naproxen sodium (NS).	 

 	Fig. 21  Continuous and large-scale production process developed by Norafin in the context of the NanoMOF project.17 Continuously MOF-particle-loaded PET nonwovens (HKUST-1 < 63 mm from Johnson Matthey Company; loading capacity: 25 g m−2.17 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 22  Two-step synthesis of the tetra acid ligand for NU-1000. No need for chromatographic purification.133 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 23  Synthesis of NU-1000 from H4TBAPy and ZrOCl2 with benzoic acid as a modulator. NU-1000 can be prepared via a one-step reaction.133 Created with BioRender.com.	 

NU-1000	Electrophoretic deposition	FTO	—	
79

NU-1000	Phase-pure	Zirconyl chloride hydrate, benzoic acid in DMF, TBAPy (1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic acid)pyrene)	—	
137 and 138
NU-1000-BzTz	Phase-pure	Benzothiazolium salt, BzTz, acetonitrile, zirconyl chloride hydrate, TBAPy	—	
139 and 140
NU-1000	Phase-pure	Zirconyl chloride hydrate, TBAPy trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)	2220	
141

NU-1000-TFA	Phase-pure	Zirconyl chloride hydrate, TBAPy trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)	2180	
141


 	Fig. 24  Reaction scheme for the synthesis of Cu3(BTC)2 metal organic framework (HKUST-1). Created with BioRender.com.	 


Large-scale production of MOFs based on HKUST-1

Electrochemical	Copper electrode, benzene 1,3,5-tricarboxylate	EtOH, H2O, methanol acetonitrile, DMF, DMSO, MTBS	1153–1624	
143

Electrochemical	Copper electrode, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, BTC (trimesic acid),	EtOH, H2O, MTBS	1309	
146

Spray-dryer (two-fluid nozzles)	Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O, BTC	DMF, EtOH, H2O	1260	
147

Mechanochemical	Copper(II) hydroxide trimesic acid	MeOH	1738	
148

Solvothermal	Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O, BTC	DMF:H2O	1500–2100	
149 and 150
Continuous flow scCO2 extraction	Cu(NO3)2·2.5H2O, BTC	Dry DMSO, methanol, supercritical carbon dioxide	1616–1220	
149


Synthesis methods of HKUST-1 in accordance with principles of green chemistry

Electrochemical	Copper electrode, 1,3,5-benzenetri-carboxylic acid	MeOH	1820	
56

Electrochemical	Copper mesh, benzene 1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid	EtOH:H2O, MTBS	—	
143

Electrochemical	Copper electrode, benzene 1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid	EtOH:H2O, MTBS	—	
130

Sonochemical with heating and under pressure	Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, BTC,	Choline chloride/urea (molar ratio 1:2)	1506	
151 and 152
Sonochemical	Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, BTC,	Choline chloride, 1,3-dimethylurea (molar ratio 1:2), the product was washed twice with de-ionized water and ethanol	31–1822	
144

Ultrasonic at room temperature	(Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, H3BTC, ethanol	NaOH, deionized water	1721	
145

Stirring at room temperature	Copper acetate monohydrate ([Cu(Oac)2·H2O]), BTC	Methanol, distilled water	708	
153


 	Fig. 25  Examples of solvents, metal ions, and ligands that fit with the principles of green chemistry and those that are harmful and poisonous.155 Created with BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 26  Division and examples of green solvents.156 Created with BioRender.com.	 

Slow diffusion	Formation of single crystals (X-ray examination)	Slow process, taking several months	
17, 160–163
No special conditions. Synthesis performed at ambient pressure and room temperature	Obtaining small amounts of MOFs
Solvothermal	Easy industrial transposition	The reactions take a long time, up to several days	
17, 164–167
Possibility of alternating heating and cooling to support crystal growth	High energy consumption due to the fact that the synthesis is conducted at high temperatures (up to 250 °C)
It requires the purchase of airtight heating furnaces and small reactors into which one can introduce salts derived from one type of metal
Mechanochemical	Solvent-free, cheap, and easy method	Restricted control over crystal morphology and product particle size	
17, 168–173
Using mechanical force instead of high temperature and reduced pressure	Secondary phases are usually obtained
Room temperature or slightly elevated	Special grinders/mills or mortar and pestle
One pot synthesis (timesaving)	Possible impurities from milling reactors
Microwave	A simple and ergonomically attractive method	No easy and quick industrial implementation	
17, 174–179
Reduction of crystallization time and improvement of yield	Difficult to isolate large single-crystals
Ability to control the morphology of MOFs
Easy change and strict control of reaction parameters
MW heating is volumetric, which enables uniform reaction throughout the entire reactor volume and results in enhanced reaction rate
Ultrasound	Efficient in the isolation of phase-pure materials	Ultrasound waves can break crystallites, hindering the formation of large single-crystals for X-ray diffraction studies	
17, 179–181
Homogeneous particle size and morphology in short periods
Continuous Flow	Tailor MOF crystal sizes	Some continuous flow reactors are expensive and cannot handle pressure	
182–187

Short reaction time	Uneven flow at pressure
Highly controlled mass and heat transport conditions
Remarkable reproducibility
The perfect method for large-scale production
Aerogels or hydrogels	Owing to their large porosity, high water content, and excellent biocompatibility, MOF composite hydrogels have a strong potential for biomedical applications	High cost for large-scale production, including the cost of raw materials and equipment	
176, 188–200
The high porosity of MOF composite aerogels leads to strong potential applications in adsorption, while their low densities and excellent mechanical properties enhance their transportation and processability, respectively	Low performance of MOFs
Composite aerogels can also be reused after simple cleaning with water, which is ideal for industrial use	The problem associated with the utilization of powdered MOFs is the possibility of dust formation
Ionothermal	Possibility of replacing harmful organic solvents such as DMF with ionic liquids	High viscosity, low diffusion coefficients, and problematic recycling	
31, 130–135 and 190
There is no need for reflux condensers or a sealed system that may contain autogenous pressure due to low or zero vapor pressure of IL
High concentration of ions results in obtaining new, more porous materials	Reduced surface area compared to MOFs based on unmodified Ils due to pore clogging
MOFs	Metal–organic frameworks
(HMTA)(CuCN)5	(Hexamethylenetetramine)penta[copper(I) cyanide]
ZIF	Zeolitic imidazolate framework
MIL	Materials of Institut Lavoisier
HKUST	Materials from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
UiO	University of Oslo
CAU-10	[Al(OH)(benzene-1,3-dicarboxylate)]·nH2O
(CuI)4(DABCO)	Bis(1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane)tetra (copper(I)iodide)
Porous [PCN-250(Fe)]	Iron azobenzene tetracarboxylic
IUPAC	International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
DM	Dimethyl oxalate
MG	Methyl glycolate
EG	Ethylene glycol
ChCl	Choline chloride
APTMACl	3-Acrylamidepropyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
BTBACl	Benzyltributylammonium chloride
INA	Isonicotinamide
MeOH	Methanol
EtOH	Ethanol

n-PrOH	Propan-1-ol
MTBAMS	Tributylmethyl-ammonium methyl sulphate
DMF	
N,N′-Dimethylformamide
H2BDC	Terephthalic acid
NH2-BDC	2-Aminoterephthalic acid
[BMIM][BF4]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[BMIM][PF6]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate
[BMIM][Tf2N]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[BMIM][Cl]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
[BMIM][Cys]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium cysteine
[BuPy][Tf2N ChC]	
N-Butylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate
[NMP][CH3SO3]	
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidonium methyl sulphonate
C5H15NO2	Choline hydroxide
[SO3H-(CH2)3-HIM][HSO4]	1,4-Bis[3-(propyl-3-sulfonate)imidazolium]butane hydrogen sulfate
[PSMIM][HSO4]	1-Methylimidazolium-3-propylsulfonate hydrosulfate
[SO3H-(CH2)3-IM]2C4[HSO4]2	1,4-Butanediyl-3,3′-bis(3-sulfopropyl)imidazolium dihydrogen sulfate
EIMS	1-(1-Ethyl-3-imidazolium)propane-3-sulfonate
HTFSA	
N,N-Bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide
IRMOF	Isoreticular metal organic framework
CuBTC	Copper benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate
ZMOF	Zeolite-like metal organic framework
BPR	Back pressure
DMCs	Dimethylacetamide
scCO2	Supercritical carbon dioxide
Cyrene	Dihydrolevoglucosenone

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
