Strategies for chemical modification of graphene and applications of chemically modified graphene  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM31218B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM31218B
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12435-12452Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsStrategies for chemical modification of graphene and applications of chemically modified graphene

        
          
            Jingquan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jianguo 
            Tang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            J. Justin 
            Gooding
          
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Chemistry, Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Laboratory of Fiber Materials and Modern Textile, The Growing Base for State Key Laboratory, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: jliu@qdu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemistry and the Australian Centre for NanoMedicine, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: justin.gooding@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      27th February 2012
    , Accepted 2nd April 2012First published on 2nd April 2012AbstractGraphene's unique thermal, electric and mechanical properties originate from its structure, including being single-atom thick, two-dimensional and extensively conjugated. These structural elements endow graphene with advantageous thermal, electric and mechanical properties. However, the application of graphene is challenged by issues of production, storage and processing. Therefore, the stabilization and modification of graphene have attracted extensive interest. In this review we summarize the strategies for chemical modification of graphene, the influence of modification and the applications in various areas. Generally speaking, chemical modification can be achieved via either covalent or non-covalent interactions. Covalent modifications often destroy some of the graphene conjugation system, resulting in compromising some of its properties. Therefore, in this review we focus mainly on the non-covalent modification methodologies, e.g. π–π stacking interactions and van der Waals force, because the non-covalent modifications are believed to preserve the natural structure and properties. We also discuss the challenges associated with the production, processing and performance enhancement. Future perspectives for production of graphene in large size with fewer defects and under milder conditions are discussed along with the manipulation of graphene's electric, mechanical and other properties.Jingquan LiuProfessor Jingquan Liu received his bachelor's degree from Shandong University in 1989. His master's and PhD degrees were obtained from the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 1999 and 2004, respectively, where his PhD was undertaken under the guidance of Prof. Justin Gooding. In 2004 he worked as a CSIRO-UTS post-doctoral fellow prior to returning to UNSW and working with Prof. Tom Davis as a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow in 2006. In 2010 he took up a professorship at Qingdao University. He has co-authored over 50 peer-reviewed research papers. His research interests focus on the synthesis of various bio- and nano-hybrids of versatile polymeric architectures.Jianguo TangProfessor Jianguo Tang earned his PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2000, after which he worked with Prof. Dr Hans-Werner Schmidt at University Bayreuth (Germany) as Visiting Professor (2001), followed by two years as Research Fellow at Colorado State University with Prof. Dr L. A. Belfiore (2002–2003). His research interest lies in hybrid functional materials of polymers with metal ions, metallic nanoparticles, and nanocarbon materials, especially concerns about the interface interaction and modifications. He has published 105 journal papers including 45 peer-reviewed ones.Justin GoodingProfessor Justin Gooding is an ARC Australian Professorial Fellow. He graduated with a BSc (Hons) from Melbourne University in 1988 and a DPhil from Oxford University. Subsequently he undertook a post-doctoral appointment at the Institute of Biotechnology in Cambridge University. He accepted a lectureship at UNSW in 1999 and was promoted to full professor in 2006. He was a recipient of the 2007 Royal Australian Chemical Institute Lloyd Smythe Medal for Analytical Chemistry, the 2009 Eureka Prize for Scientific Research, the 2011 RACI H.G. Smith Medal for Chemistry and the 2012 RACI R.H. Stokes Medal for Electrochemistry. His research interests are in surface modification using self-assembled mono-layers for sensing, molecular electronics and biomaterials applications.
1. Introduction
Fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene are the most studied allotropes of the nanocarbon family. Of these, graphene is the most recently discovered member of the family but has already attracted enormous interest due to its unique electric, optical, mechanical and thermal properties. Graphene's structure, including being single-atom thick, two-dimensional and completely conjugated accounts for its unique properties.1–7 Strictly speaking, graphene refers to a single-atom-layered aromatic carbon material; however, it is usually difficult to avoid double or few-layered byproducts during the synthesis.
The early research into producing graphene has mainly focused on graphite or graphite oxide.8–10 For example, the most widely used method to synthesize graphene in large scale is the Hummers method which involves an oxidation–reduction process, where the oxidation produces graphene oxide (GO) from graphite and the reduction converts the GO to graphene in the presence of a reductant, for example, hydrazine or sodium borohydride. It is noteworthy that the reduction of GO will remove most, but not all, of the oxygen-containing functionalities such as hydroxyl, carboxylic acid and epoxy groups. Hence, the reduction process gives reasonably hydrophobic graphene sheets, which tend to aggregate irreversibly. The irreversible aggregation of graphene via π–π stacking will greatly hinder its production, storage and processing. Therefore, stabilization and functionalization of graphene via modification of the material are necessary in order to avoid the undesired aggregation and maximize its application. It is well-known that the properties of graphene originate from its structure. Therefore, protection of the graphene structure is a priority during any modification. In this paper we review the methods for modifying graphene using either non-covalent or covalent methods and discuss their advantages and disadvantages. We also review the properties and applications of the modified graphene materials.
2. Techniques for preparation of graphene
Mechanical exfoliation,11 thermal deposition,12,13 oxidation of graphite14 and liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite1,4,15,16 are the mostly frequently used methods to synthesize graphene. The Tour and Dai groups have also successfully unzipped carbon nanotubes to obtain nanoribbons.17,18 Additionally, Zhang et al. produced pure single-layered graphene sheets based on a self-assembled template of surfactants.19 Mechanical exfoliation and thermal deposition methods, like chemical vapor deposition (CVD), are favored for the preparation of high quality, large-sized and defect-free graphene sheets, but in very limited quantity at present. N-doped graphene with n-type behavior was also achieved by Liu and coworkers using a CVD method.13 In 2005 Stankovich and coworkers20 developed a method to prepare graphitic nanoplatelets using an anionic polymer as a surfactant via the reduction of stable aqueous dispersions of graphite oxide nanoplatelets, enabling the simplification of the preparation of graphene–polymer composites. The graphitic nanoplatelets they prepared are actually single-layer graphene sheets, as determined by AFM analysis.
Graphene sheets can be produced in large scale using wet chemistry method, which usually involves an oxidation–reduction process. The oxidation process may assist the exfoliation of graphene oxide from the expanded graphite and the reduction process recovers the conductivity of graphene oxide by restoring its in-sheet conjugated structure.21 However, the graphene sheets prepared through these oxidation–reduction methods usually retain significant levels of defects and possess uncontrolled geometrical shapes due to the harsh oxidation conditions. As documented, all of the above methods have some disadvantages that the user must be conversant with when choosing a preparation method for specific applications. Indeed, oxidation–reduction methods have the advantage that they can produce graphene in relatively large quantity. However, oxidation–reduction methods usually require harsh reaction conditions, and the graphene sheets produced are usually small and retain many defects due to the tough oxidation condition. Therefore, other mild synthetic methods are needed and are expected to be developed.
Recently, some more environmentally friendly methods have been developed for the preparation of graphene with high efficiency and good quality. As shown in Fig. 1 an amphiphilic tetra-pyrene terminated precursor (Fig. 1a) has been successfully synthesized to bind tightly on the graphite surface via π–π stacking and simple ultrasonication could assist the top graphene layer(s) to exfoliate from the graphite.22,23 Single- or double-layered graphene nanosheets were then produced as evidenced by high resolution TEM. As shown in Fig. 1b a stable aqueous suspension was formed with the exfoliated graphene sheets, whereas this amphiphilic precursor could not disperse SWNTs. During the exfoliation process, the planar structure of the pyrene group works like a “sucking disc” to drag the bound graphene sheet off the graphite precursor as illustrated in Fig. 1c.24 Similar methodologies have also been employed to prepare graphene sheets by a few other research groups.22,23,25
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of amphiphile 1. (b) Photograph of graphene (A) and SWNT (B) in aqueous solution of 1. (c) Schematic representation of graphene dispersion. (Reproduced by permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Yuan et al. have also prepared graphene sheets by reducing the exfoliated graphite oxide (GO) with glucose. The as-prepared graphene exhibited a hydrogen storage capacity of 2.7 wt% at 298 K and 25 bar, demonstrating a promising material with outstanding property for hydrogen storage.26 However, as glucose is not a strong reductant compared with hydrazine and NaBH4, the as-prepared graphene sheets retained greater amounts of oxygen-containing functionalities. We believe however that these new methods may represent the future direction for graphene production because they have the potential to produce good quality, large graphene sheets in large quantity under milder conditions.
3. Chemical modification of graphene
Generally speaking, chemical modification can be realized through either covalent bondings or non-covalent interactions. The former is usually achieved via a few techniques, such as atom doping or reaction with residual functional groups on graphene formed during the production or destruction of graphene's unsaturated structure. In contrast, the non-covalent methods appear more versatile and promising as graphene's natural structure is unaffected. Hence, the emphasis in this review will be more on non-covalent methods of graphene modification. There are non-covalent methods to modify graphene, that employ van der Waals force, electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, coordination bonds or π–π stacking interactions. The interactions resulting from non-covalent modifications are relatively weak compared with covalent ones but as we know from biological systems, multiple noncovalent bonds working in concert can give highly stable modifications. Furthermore, they are easy to achieve over the entire graphene surface and reversible in some cases. When the graphene's electrical conductivity and large surface are required, non-covalent modification methods are typically preferred. Likewise, when the stability and the strong mechanical properties of modified graphene are expected covalent methods are usually better.
3.1 Modifications via non-covalent interactions

3.1.1 van der Waals force. 
Initial methods for preparing graphene–polymer composites were based on simple physical mixing, where the graphene sheets worked as conductive fillers to afford nanocomposites with very low percolation concentrations.5,27 Percolation concentration refers to an onset concentration at which the conductive filler forms an infinite network of connected paths through the insulating matrix and direct current electrical conductivity of composite materials takes place. Solvent processing, in situ polymerization and melt processing are the mostly adopted methods to achieve physical mixed graphene composites as summarized by Verdejo et al.28 Each of these three methods has advantages and disadvantages. The solvent processing method is better for producing quite homogeneous graphene–polymer composites.29,30 However, Barroso-Bujans et al. found that it is difficult to remove residual solvents.31 When the graphene sheets are produced by reduction of graphene oxide, the loss of hydrophilicity can lead to irreversible aggregation induced by a re-stacking process. In order to avoid the re-stacking induced aggregation, the preparation of the graphene–polymer composites can also be performed by a one-pot preparation method, that is, replacing the unstable graphene with more stable graphene oxide and then forming a GO–polymer composite in the presence of a reducing agent that converts the graphene oxide back to graphene.32In situ polymerization method can be a good alternative for generating homogeneous composites with much stronger interaction present between graphene and the polymer matrix. Direct chemical modification of graphene by photopolymerization was also performed to afford polystyrene brushes on graphene. As the polymerization took place at the graphene defects, its conjugated structure was not damaged; therefore, its electronic properties were maximally protected.33 The drawback of in situ grafting methodology is the decrease of the polymerization rate at the later stages of polymerization.34 Compared with the other two methods, melt processing requires milder conditions and can be applied to a more extensive range of polymers. The drawbacks of this method are the low degree of graphene dispersion, which leads to phase separation, and compromised mechanical and transport properties. The big issue with this protocol is how to control the feeding of the graphene filler because bad control might result in phase separation.28
Stankovich and coworkers have been pioneers in the preparation and modification of graphene.5 They have successfully prepared graphene nanosheets using the Hummers method and modified them with polystyrene using a solvent processing method to achieve a percolation threshold of 0.1 volume percent, the lowest reported value for any carbon-based composite except for those involving carbon nanotubes35 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Process of graphene–polymer composite fabrication: (a) SEM and image (inset) of natural graphite. (b) A typical AFM non-contact mode image of graphite oxide sheets deposited onto a mica substrate from an aqueous dispersion (inset) with superimposed cross-section measurements taken along the red line indicating a sheet thickness of ∼1 nm. (c) AFM image of phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide sheets on mica and a profile plot showing ∼1 nm thickness. (d) Suspension of phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide (1 mg mL−1) and dissolved polystyrene in DMF before (left) and after (right) reduction by N,N-dimethylhydrazine. (e) Composite powder obtained after coagulation in methanol. (f) Hot-pressed composite (0.12 vol% of graphene) and pure polystyrene of the same 0.4 mm thickness and processed in the same way. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.) 
Van der Waals interaction was also employed to prepare graphene-based sheets that can be made highly visible under a fluorescence microscope by quenching the emission from a dye coating. The dye can be conveniently removed afterwards by rinsing without disrupting the sheets.36 The traditional imaging techniques for graphene based sheets rely on the use of special substrates. In contrast, the fluorescence quenching mechanism is no longer limited by the type of substrate, therefore offering unprecedented imaging flexibility for graphene-based materials.36


3.1.2 Electrostatic interaction. 
Electrostatic interactions can be used as a convenient tool for the preparation of graphene composite materials via self-assembly. Multifunctional graphene oxide/reduced graphene oxide (GO/RGO) composites were prepared through electrostatic interaction between the biocompatible ingredients.37 Different functionalities were added to GO/RGO by anchoring materials such as native lactoferrin (NLf), NLf protected Au clusters (designated as Au@NLf), chitosan (Ch) and combinations thereof. Anchoring of Ch and NLf enhances the antibacterial property of RGO/GO. The addition of Ch to RGO/GO not only helped in forming stable dispersions but also helped in fabricating large (cm2) area films through a simple solvent evaporation technique. Functionalities such as photoluminescence were added to Ch–RGO/GO composites by anchoring Au@NLf on it. The so-prepared composites showed stable luminescence in the presence of various metal ions in the solid state. Another study that employs electrostatic interactions was conducted by Choi et al. where the residual carboxylic acid groups on graphene and amino-groups on polystyrene chains were used to form a composite material.38
Electrostatic interactions were also used to prepare a novel hybrid material of negative-charged sulfonated graphene and positive-charged poly(3,4-ethyldioxythiophene), which showed excellent transparency, electrical conductivity, and good flexibility, together with high thermal stability and ease of processing in both water and organic solvents. Kim and coworkers39 have also used electrostatic attraction to prepare a graphene–peptide hybrid by assembly into core–shell nanowires with a peptide core and a graphene shell, which exhibited electroconductivity through their continuous graphene shell. The thermal calcinations of peptide cores led to the formation of highly entangled networks of the hollow graphene shell, whose remarkable performance as a super-capacitor electrode has been demonstrated.


3.1.3 Hydrogen bonding. 
Hydrogen bonding is ubiquitous in the biological world. An individual hydrogen bond is not very strong (2–8 kcal mol−1); however, multiple hydrogen bonds will afford strong interactions as seen in DNA hybridization. Liang et al. prepared poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) nanocomposites with graphene by dispersing graphene into PVA at molecular level.40 The hydrogen bonding interactions between the residual oxygen-containing groups of graphene sheets and hydroxyl groups of the PVA chains endow the composite with increased tensile strength and Young's modulus. Graphene polymer composites with other hydrophilic polymers, epoxy, poly(acrylonitrile) and polyaniline exhibited extraordinary high increase in modulus or glass transition temperature, attributed to hydrogen bonding interactions.41–43


3.1.4 Coordination bonds. 
Oxygen mediated coordination, particularly with the transition metals, is a well-studied chemical process.44 Sutter et al. demonstrated that the interaction between graphene and a metal can be significantly enhanced via the controlled modification of a macroscopic graphene–metal interface using oxygen intercalation. When the solid ruthenium surface beneath graphene was selectively oxidized, the metal–carbon coupling was boosted and the characteristic Dirac cones of isolated single layer graphene were correspondingly restored.45


3.1.5 π–π stacking interaction. 
π–π stacking interactions usually occur between two relatively large non-polar aromatic rings having overlapping π orbitals. They can be comparable to covalent attachment in strength and hence provide more stable alternatives to the weaker hydrogen bonding, electrostatic bonding and coordination bonding strategies discussed above. Furthermore, π–π stacking modification does not disrupt the conjugation of the graphene sheets, and hence preserves the electronic properties of graphene. Hence, such a modification strategy is envisaged to have enormous potential. Pyrene is a π-orbital-rich group that easily forms strong π–π stacking interactions with other polyaromatic materials. Pyrene-tethered precursors have been successfully prepared46–48 and attached onto aromatic macromolecules such as carbon nanotubes,49–53 graphene oxide,54,55 and fullerene.56 A number of small π-orbital-rich aromatic molecules such as pentacene,57 benzopyrene,58 1-pyrenebutyrate,59 a camptothecin analogue (SN38),54 doxorubicin,55 and dopamine60 have also been attached previously onto graphene sheets using the π–π stacking approach.
In order to modify graphene with polymer via π–π stacking, one strategy is for the polymer chains to be synthesized with pyrene moieties as the termini of the polymer chains. Reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization can be a useful tool to achieve this aim. The RAFT process is a controlled living radical polymerization technique that was invented by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) in Australia61 and has become established as a versatile method for making well-defined polymers with well-controlled architectures.62–64 In addition, the RAFT approach has been widely exploited for controlling the end-group functionality of polymers, by either modification of the extant RAFT agent functionality65–70 or using pre-functionalized RAFT agents.44,71 Pyrene-terminated polymers were prepared to fabricate vesicular nanostructures via self-assembly or to modify graphene for preparation of graphene–polymer composites. Polymers with pyrene end-groups have been made using RAFT mechanism in several recent papers.72–80
In recent studies, Liu et al. synthesized thermoresponsive graphene–polymer nanocomposites. They first synthesized a well-defined thermoresponsive pyrene terminated poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm) using RAFT polymerization, followed by attachment onto the basal plane of graphene sheets via π–π stacking interactions (Fig. 3a).80 The lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of pyrene-terminated PNIPAAm was measured to be 33 °C. However, when the pyrene-functional polymer was attached to graphene the resultant graphene composites were also thermoresponsive in aqueous solutions, but with a lower LCST of 24 °C (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) A schematic depicting the synthesis of pyrene-terminated PNIPAAm using a pyrene-functional RAFT agent and the subsequent attachment of the polymer to graphene and (b) thermal turbidity testing of the graphene–PNIPAAm composite in H2O. (Reproduced with permission from Wiley Periodicals, Inc.) 
As an extension of this work, thermal responsive random copolymers of oligoethylene glycol acrylate (OEG-A) and diethylene glycol ethyl ether acrylate (DEG-A) with controllable LCST from 31 to 82 °C were also synthesized using the RAFT method.80 These thermo-responsive copolymers were further utilized to modify graphene via π–π stacking interaction to afford graphene–polymer composites with controllable but reduced LCSTs from 22 to 72 °C compared to the random polymers alone (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) Scheme depicting the preparation of graphene–polymer nanocomposites via π–π stacking. (b) LCSTs of copolymers and graphene–copolymer nanocomposites. (Reproduced with permission from CSIRO Publishing.) 
Using π–π stacking interaction Liu et al. also prepared pH sensitive graphene–polymer composites by modification of graphene with a pyrene-terminated positive charged polymer, poly(2-N,N′-(dimethyl amino ethyl acrylate)) (PDMAEA), and a negatively charged polymer, polyacrylic acid (PAA).79 The pyrene-terminated PDMAEA and PAA were synthesized using a pyrene-terminated RAFT agent. These charged graphene–polymer composites were found to demonstrate phase transfer behavior between aqueous and organic media at different pH values. These two oppositely charged graphene–polymer composites can, via self-assembly, give layer-by-layer (LbL) structures as evidenced by high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) monitoring (Fig. 5). In addition to RAFT mechanism, atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) has also been utilized to synthesize π-orbital rich polymers for modification of reduced graphene oxide to afford the fluorescent and water-soluble graphene composites via π–π stacking interactions.81
 Fig. 5  Synthesis of pH sensitive pyrene–polymer composites via π–π stacking interactions for the self-assembly of functionalized graphene into layered structures. (Reprinted from ref. 79. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.) 

3.2 Covalent modification of graphene
Covalent modification of graphene is desirable from the point that stronger bonds are usually formed between the graphene and the modifier. However, it is usually difficult to realize because ideal graphene lacks functional groups that can be conjugated with. In some cases, when the graphene sheets were prepared from graphene oxide, incomplete reduction process leaves traces of oxygen-containing functionalities that are then available for further modifications. Other covalent modification strategies typically involve further disruption of the conjugation of the graphene sheets. Although covalent modification of graphene will compromise some of its natural conductivity, this method is still valuable in some cases when graphene's other properties are desirable. More details of graphene modification via covalent bonds will be discussed below.

3.2.1 Modifications via direct doping of atoms into the graphene lattice. 
Doping is a common approach to tailor the electronic properties of the semiconductor materials. Carbon nanotubes have been doped with N or B atoms to make n-type or p-type materials, respectively.82,83 Theoretical studies show that the band structure of graphene can be modulated by doping.84,85 Liu and coworkers13 also experimentally verified the theoretical prediction. They directly doped N atoms into the graphene 2-D lattice to generate N-doped graphene by a chemical vapor deposition method, which exhibited n-type behavior.


3.2.2 Modifications via residual functionalities. 
Many examples of the covalent modification of graphene involve the modification of graphene oxide (GO) as GO retains significant quantity of functionalities available for covalent reactions. The Dai group has successfully modified graphene oxide for the delivery of water-insoluble cancer drugs using amine-functionalized six-armed polyethylene glycol (PEG) star molecules coupled to the edge of graphene sheets via condensation reactions by amide linkages.54,86 Xu et al. also covalently modified graphene oxide with porphyrins to afford a hybrid whose photophysical and optical-limiting properties were studied.86
It has been well reported that it is hard to remove all the oxygen-containing functionalities when graphene was prepared via reduction of GO.38,87 These residual functionalities were utilized by Hisao et al. for further modification with amine and carboxylic acid terminated polymer precursors. They also modified graphene sheets using free radical covalent attachment which allows an organic functionality to be attached to the conjugated faces of graphene sheets with the concomitant disruption of the conjugated system. The comparison of these two covalent methods revealed that graphene modified via the residual functional groups exhibited greater thermal stability over that via free radical grafting methods.88 The enhanced thermal stability of the modified graphene, through its residual functionalities, could be attributed to the protection of the conjugated structure of graphene. Similarly, Veca et al. have covalently attached poly(vinyl alcohol) at the graphene edge via ester linkages to afford water-soluble polymer–carbon nanosheet composites.89
As graphene oxide (GO) retains more functional groups for covalent bonding, an alternative method for covalent modification was also developed, that is, covalently modifying GO first to realize the modification, and then carrying out the reduction process to remove the excess oxygenated functionalities. By using this protocol, chemically converted graphene sheets were covalent functionalized with silane addends.90 It is noteworthy that the natural properties of graphene were compromised to some extent due to the incomplete recovery of the conjugation. Few-layer graphene materials produced by dispersion and exfoliation of graphite in N-methylpyrrolidone medium were also successfully functionalized using the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides.91


3.2.3 Modifications via destruction of conjugated structure. 
Aryl diazonium salt molecules with varied functionalities have been successfully employed to modify carbon materials (e.g. single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs),92 graphite and glass carbon) and even metal substrates via either C–C or C–metal covalent couplings.93–96 The attachment of aryl diazonium salts can be conducted under mild conditions by either simple agitation or electrochemical reduction adsorption, and it usually proceeds accompanied by the loss of N2. Tour and coworkers pioneered the use of aryl diazonium salt functionalization chemistry for the modification of nano-carbon materials.92,97,98 In a recent paper they reported the modification of chemically converted graphene from graphene oxide using aryl diazonium salt molecules tethering different addends, affording the functionalized nanosheets that can disperse readily in polar aprotic solvents, allowing alternative avenues for simple incorporation into different polymer matrices96 (Fig. 6). Haddon and coworkers99 also prepared a nine-layered ultra-thin graphene film with the top layer being modified by a 4-nitrophenyl diazonium salt molecule via a spontaneous grafting method. Reduced electrical conductivity was observed with the modified graphene film. However, another group arrived at a completely different conclusion with the graphene sheet modified with the same 4-nitrophenyl diazonium salt molecule. They claimed that the modified graphene was more conductive than the pristine graphene as a result of the charge transfer effect of nitrophenyl groups.100
 Fig. 6  Starting with sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS)-wrapped GO, reduction and functionalization of intermediate SDBS-wrapped CCG with diazonium salts. (Reprinted from ref. 97. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.) 
Functionalization of graphene using aryl diazonium salt molecules through electrochemistry offers several advantages for the modification of carbon-based nanostructures, as has been demonstrated by the attachment of organic functional groups101 or metallic nanoparticles102 to carbon nanotubes. Sundaram et al. modified the individual chemically derived graphene layers by electrodeposition of palladium nanoparticles in a controlled mode. Palladium electrodeposition was then performed by reduction of Na2PdCl4 with LiClO4 as the supporting electrolyte. These palladium nanoparticle modified graphene sheets exhibited enhanced hydrogen sensitivity and electronic properties comparing with the pristine ones.103

In situ one-pot free radical polymerization was also used by Ye and coworkers to modify graphene covalently with an amphiphilic random copolymer, affording the graphene–polymer composites that are well-dispersed in both polar and non-polar media.104 Chain transfer agents (CTAs), such as those for RAFT polymerization and atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), can be attached onto the graphene surface to initiate controlled living radical polymerizations directly off the graphene sheet. This process is usually called “graft from” and can be employed to create dense and controlled polymer matrices on particle surfaces.105,106 Graphene can also be modified with the well-defined functional polymers already synthesized using CTAs, a process called “graft to” methodology.81,88

4. Properties of chemically modified graphene
The properties of modified graphene will be highly dependent on the modifier and the methods adopted. For example, the radical modification of the sp2 lattice structure of graphene, via either hetero-atom doping or double bond destruction, will lead to altered conductivity. In contrast, non-covalent surface modification not only enables the graphene to retain good conductivity, but may also confer the new properties on the modified graphene. The properties of composites may not just be a combination of both graphene and the modifier but the synergistic effects between the modifier and the graphene may also come into play.
4.1 Solubility and stability
As discussed above, one issue with graphene is its hydrophobicity that can cause it to restack irreversibly back to graphite. Such an event can naturally greatly hinder its production, storage and processing. A number of studies have shown that when the graphene was modified with hydrophilic precursors, the as-generated composites will be dispersible in polar media, forming stable suspensions23,24,79,80,107 and hydrophobic modifiers allow the generation of more hydrophobic composites.38,96,104 Polymeric properties can be imparted to the graphene–polymer composites via polymer modifications. Thermosensitive graphene composites with controlled LCST, and pH sensitive graphene composites, that can undergo self-assembly have been prepared via π–π stacking modifications.79,80,108
4.2 Mechanical and thermal properties
An elegant study carried out by Lee et al.109 using the atomic force microscope (AFM) technique revealed that when single-layered a graphene sheet was one of the strongest materials ever measured, and that atomically perfect nanoscale materials could be mechanically tested for deformations well beyond the linear regime. Young's modulus was found to be E = 1.0 terapascals and third-order elastic stiffness of D = −2.0 terapascals was observed. In light of graphene's outstanding mechanical properties, it is often utilized as a filler to improve the mechanical properties of a polymer. A small percentage of graphene filler may exhibit significant enhancement of the glass transition temperature of graphene composite with poly(acrylonitrile).42
Koratkar and coworkers41 systematically studied the influence of graphene, single-walled carbon nanotubes, and multi-walled carbon nanotube additives on the Young's modulus, ultimate tensile strength, fracture toughness, fracture energy, and material's resistance to fatigue crack propagation at a constant weight fraction of 0.1 ± 0.002% for polymer composites. It was concluded that the graphene platelets exhibited an overwhelming enhancement effect on the mechanical properties of all these polymers compared with single-walled carbon nanotubes, and multi-walled carbon nanotubes. The thermal stability of covalently functionalized graphene has also been studied by Margine et al.110 They explored the kinetic factors governing the diffusion and desorption of covalently grafted phenyl and dichlorocarbene radicals on graphene at room temperature, and concluded that the controlled desorption may be an efficient way to monitor the number of radicals on the graphene surface for an optimal balance between conductance and reactivity.
Yun et al. studied the reinforcing effect of adding alkylated graphene oxide (AGO) covalently modified with a linear alkyl chain via a bimolecular nucleophilic substitution reaction to a nonpolar polypropylene (PP) matrix, and compared these effects with carbon nanotubes.111 They found that the thermal degradation temperatures, re-crystallization temperatures and Young's modulus of PP were increased gradually with increasing content of AGO. Meanwhile, reinforcing effects of AGO were different from those of the one-dimensional alkylated CNTs. These superior reinforcing effects were attributed to the two-dimensional structure of AGO, as well as good interfacial adhesion between the AGO and PP matrix. Song et al. extended this research by developing an eco-friendly strategy to fabricate polymer nanocomposites with well-dispersed graphene sheets in the polymer matrix via first coating graphene using PP latex and then melt-blending the coated graphene with a PP matrix.112 An approximately 75% increase in yield strength and 74% enhancement in the Young's modulus of PP was achieved by addition of only 0.42 vol% of graphene due to the effective external load transfer. Similarly, the glass transition temperature of PP was raised by 2.5 °C via incorporating only 0.041 vol% graphene. Liang et al. obtained a similar result by dispersing graphene into poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) at the molecular level.40 They claimed that it was the strong hydrogen-bonding interactions between oxygen-containing groups of graphene sheets and the hydroxyl groups of the PVA chains that made the load transfer effective (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) Glass-transition temperature measurement of pure PVA and the graphene–PVA nanocomposite with 0.7 wt% GO loading. The Tg of the graphene–PVA nanocomposite with 0.7 wt% GO loading was 3.3 °C higher than that of the pure PVA matrix. Tg was obtained by DSC measurement. (b) Melting peaks of pure PVA and graphene–PVA nanocomposites with GO loadings of 0.3, 0.5, and 0.7 wt%. DSC was used to measure the melting enthalpy of the samples and the melt peaks were in the range of 160–220 °C. (Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley Periodicals, Inc.) 
A graphene–polystyrene (PS) composite prepared via “graft from” methodology controlled by an ATRP chain transfer agent that was pre-bound on a graphene surface by aryl diazonium addition as described above afforded a grafting content as high as 82 wt% and a 15 °C enhancement in glass transition temperature.106 With the addition of only 0.9 wt% graphene sheets, the resulted PS composite film exhibited a prominent reinforcement effect, 57.2% and 69.5% increases in Young's modulus and tensile strength. This method broadens the potential applications in graphene based nanocomposites, while the challenge for the future research remains in the functionalization of large-area graphene sheets, which provides dispersion and interface control in polymers.
Making use of the condensation between the Si–OH group of the hydroxylated octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) and the C–OH group on the graphene oxide (GO) surface, Ou et al. grafted OTS onto the GO-based dual-layer film, which was composed of a GO outerlayer and a (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) self-assembled underlayer on a silicon substrate, preparing a hydrophobic trilayer film named APTES–GO–OTS successfully.113 The effect on the tribological performance showed that the as-prepared trilayer film exhibited low adhesion and greatly reduced the friction force in both the micro- and macroscale. Such a trilayer film is suitable for applications in the lubrication and protection of nano/microelectromechanical systems (NEMS). A freestanding membrane composed of a nanofiber network of a graphene–polymer nanocomposite was fabricated by electrospinning and applied as an optical element in fiber lasers. The functionalization of graphene with conjugated organic molecules provides a handle for improving mechanical and thermal properties as well as tuning the optical properties.114
Thermoplastic polyurethane nanocomposites were also employed to enhance the mechanical properties.115 These nanocomposite actuators with 1 wt% loading of sulfonated functionalized graphene sheets (sulfonated graphene) exhibit repeatable infrared triggered actuation performance which can strikingly contract and lift a 21.6 g weight 3.1 cm with 0.21 N of force on exposure to infrared light and demonstrate estimated energy densities of over 0.33 J g−1. More interesting phenomena were observed with reduced graphene sheets in co-polymer matrices [polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and methacrylic acid (MAA)]. These sheets can be scrolled and folded into three-dimensional structures by manipulating phase transition behaviour.116
4.3 Electrical and photoelectrical properties
Graphene is a good conductor due to its highly conjugated structure. However, when graphene films were prepared with different numbers of graphene layers by Chhowalla and coworkers117 their opto-electronic properties can be tuned over several orders of magnitude, making them potentially useful for flexible and transparent semiconductors or semi-metals. The thinnest films exhibit graphene-like ambipolar transistor characteristics, whereas thicker films behave as graphite-like semi-metals. A consequence of the good conductivity of graphene is that there is considerable interest in pursuing tunable conductivity and better optoelectronic characteristics of graphene based composites obtained by chemical or physical methods. As ideal graphene is a fully conjugated two-dimensional aromatic structure, its conductivity is highly anisotropic. It can be expected that graphene composites will also exhibit anisotropic electrical conductivity.118 This was shown in a study by Cardinali et al. where graphene modified with pyrene derivatives led to anisotropic electrical conductivity. The conductivity measured parallel to the graphene composite film was about 3 times more than that perpendicular to the substrate. When the graphene–polymer composite films were prepared with thicknesses of tens of nm, conductivities of the order of 0.2 S cm−1 and light transmittance greater than 80% in the 400–1800 nm wavelength range were observed.119
Stankovich et al. presented a general approach for the preparation of graphene–polymer composites via complete exfoliation of graphite and molecular-level dispersion of individual, chemically modified graphene sheets within polymer hosts.5 It was noted that electrically conductive graphene–polymer nanocomposites could be prepared by solution-phase mixing of the exfoliated phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide sheets with polystyrene, followed by chemical reduction. As shown in Fig. 2 the individual graphene sheets were well dispersed throughout the polymer matrix in these composites, which exhibited a percolation threshold of ∼0.1 volume percent for room-temperature electrical conductivity. This is the lowest reported value for any carbon-based composite except for those involving carbon nanotubes; at only 1 volume percent, the composite had a conductivity of 0.1 S m−1, sufficient for many electrical applications5 (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Electrical conductivity of the polystyrene–graphene composites as a function of filler volume fraction. The main figure above shows composite conductivity, σc, plotted against filler volume fraction, Φ. Right inset: log σc plotted against log(σ − σc), where σc is the percolation threshold. Solid lines in both graphs are calculated conductivities based on the fitting (inset, log–log plot) of the experimental data to the effective conductivity equation. Left inset: top and middle diagrams show the four-probe setup for in-plane and transverse measurements, respectively; bottom diagram, one of the computed distributions of the current density (contour lines) with local directions and magnitude (shown by arrows) in a specimen for the following conditions—the sample thickness is twice the electrode width and the gap between them, and the in-plane resistivity is 10 times lower than the transverse resistivity. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.) 
Probably inspired by Stankovich and coworkers, graphene sheets have been extensively employed as conductive fillers to yield conducting nanocomposites with very low percolation concentrations.5,27 The graphene–polymer composites are expected to have reduced electrical conductivity, provided the polymer components are non-conductive. The electrical percolation thresholds of these versatile composites have been reviewed by Macosko and Verdejo's groups.28,120 The reported percolation thresholds were in a large range from less than 0.1 to above 4%, depending on the polymer species and graphene properties and a broad range of EC values have been reported from 10−14 to 104 S cm−1.5,29,107,121,122 In addition to synthetic polymers,114 many other natural polymers,25 relatively small organic or inorganic molecules,59,91,107,118,123 quantum dots,86,124 and even its family member-carbon nanotubes could also be incorporated in the graphene composites to achieve better electrical and photoelectrical properties.
As for the optical properties, we take the work by Liu et al. as an example.125 They synthesized an organic solution-processable functionalized graphene (SPFGraphene) hybrid material with oligothiophene (6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene), whose structure is illustrated in Fig. 9a. Ultraviolet-visible absorption and fluorescence emission data showed that the attachment of the electron-acceptor group (graphene oxide sheet) onto the oligothiophene molecules resulted in an improved absorption compared with the parent compound over the entire spectral region and an efficient quenching of photoluminescence (Fig. 9b). Because of this unique donor–acceptor structure, as well as the electronic properties, this kind of functionalized graphene material could be useful in light harvesting and solar energy conversion materials for optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Structure of 6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene. (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra of graphene oxide (5.9 mg L−1) in aqueous solution, 6THIOP (3.0 mg L−1) and 6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene (3.8 mg L−1) in ODCB (left). Fluorescence spectra of 6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene (kex = 411 nm) and 6THIOP (kex = 411 nm) in ODCB with the same absorbance value (Abs = 0.21) (right). (Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Elsevier.) 
4.4 Biological and catalytical properties
Currently, the focus of research into the biological properties of graphene lies in antibacterial materials, sensing and delivery of drugs and genes. Graphene has an enormous surface area, 2-D structure and good conductivity; these properties make graphene an appropriate arena for the biological applications via surface modifications. Pyrene–graphene mediated π–π stacking interaction is a useful tool. As pyrene precursors can be freely synthesized with a range of functional side chains, the strategy of using functional pyrene derivatives is commonly employed when interfacing graphene with biological systems. By functionalizing graphene with different chemical compounds, it can be endowed with the desired properties. For example, as silver nanoparticles possess bactericidal properties,126 the conjugation of Ag nanoparticles to a graphene sheet gives the as-prepared Ag–graphene composites the ability to kill bacteria.37,126–128 Polyacrylamide (PAM) is well-known for its hydrophilicity, permanent biocompatibility, good stability and resistance to degradation. Though it has many useful properties, it is not stimuli-responsive. However the graphene–PAM complex formed via noncovalent interaction turned out to be pH-responsive where the graphene sheets in polyacrylamide solution were individually exfoliated and could be reversibly switched between dispersed and aggregated states as the pH value of the solution changed.129 Such a property has potential utility for intelligent sensors, biology, medicine and nanoelectronics. Park et al. also prepared a biocompatible, robust free-standing paper composed of graphene and polyoxyethylene sorbitan laurate, which is noncytotoxic to three different mammalian cell lines and exhibited inhibition effects to the non-specific binding of bacterial cells.130
There is also a trend in preparing sensors utilizing fluorescence quenching by graphene.131–133 Chang et al. developed a highly sensitive and specific Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) apta-sensor for thrombin detection basing on dye labeled aptamer assembled graphene.131 The overall process and the mechanism are illustrated in Fig. 10. Use as a drug and gene carrier is another important application for modified graphene. When graphene oxide was functionalized by polyethylene glycol (PEG), a branched, biocompatible composite with high aqueous solubility and stability in physiological solutions including serum was obtained and utilized to attach and deliver the water-insoluble drugs.54 Extension of this work by the same group demonstrated the controlled loading and targeted delivery of drugs in a similar way.134
 Fig. 10  Schematic demonstration of a graphene based biosensor for the detection of thrombin which relies on Förster resonance energy transfer to transduce the binding of thrombin to graphene modified with an aptamer selective for thrombin. (Reprinted from ref. 132. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) 
Although graphene itself has little catalytic activity, its functionalized derivatives are widely used in catalysis. Dai and coworkers reported a hybrid material consisting of Co3O4 nanocrystals grown on reduced graphene oxide as a high-performance bi-functional catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER).135 Likewise, by attaching specific metal or semiconducting nanoparticles, composites with certain catalytic activities could be generated. Li et al. synthesized perylene-coated graphene sheets decorated with Au nanoparticles and described their electrocatalysis towards oxygen reduction.136 Palladium nanoparticle–graphene hybrids were prepared as active catalysts for Suzuki reaction under aqueous and aerobic conditions.137 Kamat described that graphene based two-dimensional carbon nanostructures could be used as supports to anchor semiconducting nanoparticles. Such a designing strategy would enable the development of multifunctional catalyst materials.138 The more complicated graphene hybrids incorporating CdSe quantum dots and gold nanoparticles were also fabricated with high electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) intensity, good electronic conductivity, fast response, and satisfactory stability, all of which hold great promise for the fabrication of ECL biosensors with improved sensitivity.139
4.5 Other properties
Electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding has wide applications in commercial, military and scientific electronic devices and communication instruments. The EMI shielding effectiveness (SE) of a composite material mainly depends on the intrinsic conductivity, dielectric constant and aspect ratio of the filler. Thus, it is expected that the use of atom thick graphene with large aspect ratio and high conductivity would provide a high EMI SE. Composites based on graphene have been fabricated by Liang et al.121via incorporating solution-processable functionalized graphene into an epoxy matrix. The composites show a low percolation threshold of 0.52 vol%. EMI shielding effectiveness was tested over a frequency range of 8.2–12.4 GHz (X-band), and a 21 dB shielding efficiency was obtained for 15 wt% (8.8 vol%) loading. When the graphene oxide composite was prepared with poly(vinyl alcohol) strong and ductile composites were achieved.140 The Young's modulus and tensile yield strength of the composite film containing 3 wt% GO were measured to be 4.8 GPa and 110 ± 7 MPa, respectively. Furthermore, it is flexible and exhibits a large elongation at break (36 ± 4%). In addition to the electrical conductivity, Kim et al. also found that the polyurethane modified graphene composite also exhibited improved gas barrier effectiveness.29,122
5. Applications of modified graphene
The use of graphene or modified graphene materials usually exploits properties such as the large surface area or high electrical conductivity. Currently, many applications of functionalized graphene are focused on clean energy devices and electronic devices, which will be described in more detail, as well as on sensors, medical devices and catalysis.
5.1 Optoelectronic devices
As graphene is a zero-bandgap semiconductor, opening up a bandgap in graphene holds a crucial significance in the realization of graphene-based electronics. Chen et al. doped pyrene organic molecules in a periodic fashion onto both sides of graphene to achieve a bandgap of about 10 meV, thus altering the electronic properties of graphene.141 This is important for one of the major trends for the application of graphene which is to employ it as nanocomposite materials for solar cells.119,142
Xu et al. for the first time prepared a graphene hybrid with covalently attached porphyrins, where porphyrin acts as a photo-excitative electron donor and graphene as the electron acceptor, and explored the photophysical properties.86 Their results showed that this donor–acceptor hybrid material offered a competitive strategy for light harvesting and solar-energy conversion for optoelectronic devices. Large, continuous graphene sheets, produced by CVD and further modified via pyrene butanoic acid succinimidyl ester through π–π stacking, have been used by Wang et al. as anodes in organic photovoltaic devices. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) was 1.71%. This value corresponds to ∼55.2% of the PCE of a control device based on indium tin oxide (ITO). This finding paves the way for the substitution of indium tin oxide (ITO) in photovoltaic and electroluminescent devices with low cost transparent graphene films.143 A similar methodology was adopted to prepare a graphene- and pyrene-based organic semiconductor.144 Likewise, another π-orbital rich organic molecule, pentacene, could form strong π–π stacking interactions, which was utilized to fabricate organic field effect transistors.57
Liu et al. prepared a novel composite which could be used as the active layer in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer photovoltaic cells by blending a soluble graphene with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).145 Another article by the same group presented the first fabrication and performance studies of photovoltaic devices with BHJ structure using an organic solution-processable functionalized graphene (SPFGraphene) material as an electron acceptor and poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3OT) and P3HT as a donor as illustrated in Fig. 11.146
 Fig. 11  (a) The idealized chemical structures of graphene and P3OT. (b) Schematic of the device with a P3OT/graphene thin film as the active layer and the structure. (c) Energy level diagram of P3OT and SPFGraphene. (d) Schematic representation of the reaction of phenyl isocyanate with graphene oxide to form SPFGraphene. (Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley Periodicals Inc.) 
In an elegant study by Müllen and coworkers, a large aromatic donor, pyrene-1-sulfonic acid sodium salt (PyS), and an acceptor molecule, 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide bis-benzenesulfonic acid (PDI), were used to noncovalently functionalize reduced graphene sheet (ReG), affording a novel class of graphene composites with tunable electronic properties (Fig. 12). The graphene composite film prepared with PyS exhibited improved power efficiency over that prepared with PDI when they were used as electrodes in heterojunction solar cells.107
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration and images of aqueous dispersions of graphene sheets and composites on the surface: (a) ReG aqueous dispersion, black precipitate after reduction; (b) ReG–PDI aqueous dispersion, without precipitate after centrifugation; and (c) ReG–PyS aqueous dispersion, without precipitate after centrifugation. (Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Wiley Periodicals Inc.) 
In addition, a stable self-assembled monolayer of an alkylsilane on the surface of both graphite and graphene which can induce strong surface doping with a high density of mobile holes (n > 1013 cm−2) was also prepared.147 The ability to tune electronic properties of graphene via stable molecular self-assembly, including selective doping of steps, edges, and other defects, may have important implications in future graphene electronics. While most researchers utilized vacuum filtration or spincoating methods to prepare graphene films for varied applications, electrophoretic deposition (EPD), another economical and versatile processing technique, has also been applied to prepare single-layered graphene films. These films display good field-emission properties with low turn-on electric and threshold field, large field-enhancement factor, and good emission stability and uniformity. These performance characteristics are much better than those of their graphene-powder counterpart and well comparable or even better than those of CNTs.148
5.2 Electrode materials
As the pyrene–graphene interaction is via π–π stacking, pyrene can be packed on both sides of graphene. Using this property layer-by-layer assembly of graphene was fabricated using pyrene as an assembling inter-layer spacer. The spacers work like glue, intimately bonding graphene sheets together. The so-fabricated graphene assembly has been successfully used as an electronic transducer for bioanalysis.149
Chang et al.150 synthesized and prepared a new type of graphene composite material suitable for spin-coating into conductive, transparent and flexible thin film electrodes under ambient conditions. Solution processable graphene, with size up to 50 μm, was synthesized by surfactant-assisted exfoliation of graphite oxide followed by in situ reduction. Spin-coating the mixing solution of surfactant-functionalized graphene and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) yielded the graphene composite electrode (GCE), without the need for high temperature annealing or any additional transfer-printing process. The conductivity and transparency of GCEs are comparable with those of an indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode. Therefore, the organic light-emitting diodes based on a GCE anode are fit for replacing OLEDs made with an ITO anode.
A surfactant-free method was also developed to prepare a nanocomposite comprised of chemically prepared graphene mixed with carbon nanotubes to preserve the intrinsic electronic and mechanical properties of both components.151 This method was facile, inexpensive, scalable, and compatible with flexible substrates, though an annealing step at 150 °C was needed. This material may be an appropriate candidate for transparent electrode of future optical electronics.
A one-pot method for the preparation of graphene composites with conducting polymers was performed by Jo et al.152via the direct reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of a conducting polymer, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) and negative charged poly(styrene sulfonate) and hydrazine. The as-prepared composite film exhibited a high conductivity of 2.3 kΩ sq−1 with a transmittance of 80%; its conductivity was enhanced by one order of magnitude upon treatment with SOCl2. There are also a large number of studies seeking to incorporate conducting polymers and metallic oxides into the graphene matrix, resulting in various electrode materials for lithium ion batteries.152,153
5.3 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, which are also called ultracapacitors or electrochemical capacitors, store electrical charges on high-surface-area conducting materials. Traditional supercapacitors are limited by their low energy storage density and relatively high effective series resistance. The surface area of a single graphene sheet is 2630 m2 g−1, higher than values derived from Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area measurements of activated carbons used in traditional electrochemical double layer capacitors, which are in the range of 1000 to 2000 m2 g−1.154 Stoller et al. first pointed out the exciting potential for high performance, electrical energy storage devices based on graphene due to its excellent electrical conductivity and large surface area.155 Likewise, poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI)-modified graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid films fabricated through self-assembly were also developed as supercapacitors.156 Conductive graphene–SnO2 (GS) nanocomposites were also prepared using a one-step reduction of graphite oxides by SnCl2 to graphene sheets in the presence of HCl and urea and utilized for the fabrication of electrochemical supercapacitors.157 The GS nanocomposites could also be promisingly applied in other fields such as nanoelectronics, sensors, nanocomposites, batteries and gas storage.
Recently, Ruoff and coworkers delivered an in-depth study on developing a carbon-based supercapacitor produced by chemical activation of graphene.154 A porous carbon with a BET surface area of up to 3100 m2 g−1 was achieved, with a high electrical conductivity, and a low oxygen and hydrogen content. Another advance in the supercapacitor field has been made by Jang and coworkers who fabricated a graphene-based supercapacitor with an ultrahigh energy density of 85.6 W h kg−1 at room temperature and shorter charged or discharged time of only seconds or minutes. They achieved this by using curved graphene sheets obtained in a forced convention oven as an electrode.158 Graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid films, fabricated via ionic static interactions of a positive charged graphene–polymer composite and negative charged acid-oxidized multiwalled carbon nanotubes, were developed by Dai and coworkers to fabricate a supercapacitor electrode with an average specific capacitance of 120 F g−1.156
5.4 Sensors
When graphene is modified with recognition species it can be used to prepare sensors. For example, an amperometric sensor was fabricated by attaching picket-fence porphyrin onto graphene to sense chlorite ions.159 Another example is the immobilization of Prussian blue (PB) nanoparticles onto a graphene modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) as a sensor for both the reduction of hydrogen peroxide and the oxidation of hydrazine, which was attributed to a synergistic effect between graphene and PB.160
It is well-known that pyrene is a fluorophore whose fluorescence can be quenched when it is attached onto graphene due to photoinduced electron transfer.161 Although π–π stacking is strong, and may be comparable to covalent bonding, in some situation this process can be reversed. Chen et al. have utilized this reversible process to homogeneously detect the lectin concanavalin A.162 In their work, they modified graphene with maltose-grafted-aminopyrene via π–π stacking interaction, which will cause the quenching of pyrene fluorescence, followed by the binding of the lectin concanavalin A (Con A) via specific affinity with maltose. The binding of Con A caused a reversing of the π–π stacking, dissociation of the pyrene derivative from the graphene and hence the recovery of the pyrene fluorescence. The concentration of Con A could be ascertained via the gain in fluorescence. A highly sensitive ultraviolet sensor was also developed based on a ZnO nanorod/graphene heterostructure prepared by a facile in situ solution-grown method.163
5.5 Biomedical applications
Graphene has also been the subject of many studies nominally with applications related to biomedicine. For example, Chen et al. synthesized a hydrophilic and carboxyl group functionalized graphene–Au nanoparticle hybrid in situ.164 Subsequently glucose oxidase (GOD) was bounded to the surface of the hybrid through a condensation reaction between the amino groups on the lysine residues of GOD and carboxylic acid groups on the Au nanoparticles. The hybrid provided a suitable microenvironment for GOD to retain its biological activity. After that, direct electron transfer between the GOD and electrode was observed. The blood sugar concentration in human serum samples was tested by this novel glucose biosensor, and the results were consistent with measurements performed in a hospital. Non-covalent chemical modification between functionalized pyrene and graphene was also adopted to achieve patterned arrays of GOD for potential applications in glucose sensors, cell sensors and tissue engineering.118 In research by Zeng et al., pyrene tethered polyacrylic acid (PAA) was prepared and used to modify graphene to achieve a negative charged graphene nanocomposite for layer-by-layer assembly with positive charged poly(ethyleneimine) and then negative charged GOD or glucoamylase to form graphene multilayer films for enzyme-based glucose and maltose biosensors.165
The planar structure and superb conductivity of graphene also provide an appropriate platform for novel electrochemical sensors. When graphene was modified with virus-specific antibodies, the so-generated graphene electrode could be used for the detection of pathogenic virus through antibody–antigen interaction.166 Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are novel electrochemical devices that directly convert microbial metabolic power into electricity using electrochemical technology. Graphene with a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of 264 m2 g−1 has been used as an anodic catalyst in microbial fuel cells based on Escherichia coli, delivering a very high power density of 2668 mW m−2.167 A metal-free electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) was achieved with graphene sheets modified with an electron acceptor, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride). The resultant positively charged graphene composite was demonstrated to show remarkable electrocatalytic activity toward ORR with better fuel selectivity, tolerance to CO poisoning, and long-term stability than that of the commercially available Pt/C electrode.168
5.6 Catalytical applications
Graphene has found application in catalysis due to not only the stable structure, but because the electrical and thermo-conductivities can influence the electronic properties of a surface bound metal catalyst, this providing an opportunity to tune catalyst properties. One challenge though is to immobilize the metal catalysts on graphene. Graphene usually has defects, where the oxygen-containing functionalities, hydroxyl, carboxylic acid and epoxy groups, are located. These defects can act as the active centers to control the nanoparticle growth.169 Palladium nanoparticles on graphite oxide and functionalized graphene derivatives were prepared and used as highly active catalysts for the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. In contrast to the conventional Pd/carbon catalyst, graphite oxide and graphene-based catalysts gave much higher activities with turnover frequencies exceeding 39000 h−1, accompanied by very low palladium leaching of less than 1 ppm.170 Likewise, Pt cluster electrocatalysts, supported on graphene, also revealed an unusually high activity for methanol oxidation reaction compared to the Pt/carbon black catalyst.171 Positively charged gold nanoparticles (GNPs) with diameters of 2–6 nm were self-assembled onto the surfaces of 1-pyrene butyric acid functionalized graphene (PFG) sheets simply by mixing their aqueous dispersions. Glassy carbon (GC) electrodes modified with the self-assembled composite of GNPs and PFG (GNP–PFG composite) showed strong electrocatalytic activity of uric acid and high electrochemical stability.172
In addition to palladium and platinum nanoparticles, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) were also employed to decorate graphene nanosheets as nanocomposites for the enzymeless hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) detection.173 The as-prepared AgNPs–graphene nanocomposite exhibited good catalytic activity towards the reduction of H2O2, which led to an enzymeless sensor with a fast amperometric response time of less than 2 s. Similar research was also conducted by Shen et al. to make AgNP modified graphene for achieving surface-enhanced Raman scattering activity and antibacterial activity by the surface-bound AgNPs.126
The production of clean and renewable hydrogen through water splitting using photocatalysts has received considerable interest due to the increasing energy demand. The graphene-based materials have been explored for the potential applications in the field of energy conversion. Li et al.174 have achieved a high efficiency of the photocatalytic H2 production by using graphene nanosheets decorated with CdS clusters as visible-light-driven photocatalysts. Likewise, Amal and coworkers175 have demonstrated that photoreduced graphene oxide prepared using BiVO4 can be used as a solid state electron mediator for a Z-scheme photo-catalytic water splitting system. Unlike hydrazine-reduced GO and GO photo-catalytically reduced by Ru/SrTiO3:Rh, which exhibit significant hydrophobicity, the GO photoreduced by BiVO4 was miscible in water and provided a great improvement in the activity for water splitting by efficiently transferring photoexcited electrons from the O2 photocatalyst to the H2 photocatalyst.
5.7 Other applications
In addition to the applications we have discussed above, graphene was found to have other applications, one of them called “graphene inks”, which were prepared from graphene sheets modified with hydrophilic precursors, such as ionic liquid, polyaniline or polyelectrolyte.176 With further surface modification, graphene inks can be tuned to have many properties suitable for specific applications, thereby further carrying the applications in composite materials, emissive displays, micromechanical resonators, field effect transistors and ultrasensitive chemical detectors forwards. At the same time, it paves the way for surface energy engineering of graphene modified by different functional groups.
Graphene nanosheets modified with decylpyrene have been used to grow gold nanostructures with a high content of nanorods.177 Magnetic, flexible and electrically conductive graphene/Fe3O4 paper was also prepared and applied for magnetically controlled switches.178 Other applications were also pursued by Cao et al.179 They prepared graphene oxide sheets noncovalently functionalized with rare-earth complexes. The as-prepared luminescent hybrids can be easily exfoliated into single-layer sheets in some common solvents, yielding strongly fluorescent graphene oxide dispersions. The hybrids and their dispersions could emit bright red luminescence, which made them useful in many practical fields, such as biological labeling and anti-counterfeiting.
The large surface areas of graphene and GO make them appropriate precursors for the fabrication of metal–organic frameworks as excellent absorption materials. Bandosz and coworkers have conducted a series of works in this field. For example, they directly used GO as an ammonia absorbent either through the intercalation in the interlayer space of GO or through the covalent reaction with the GO bound functional groups.180 They also prepared mesoporous composites of metal–organic framework–GO and explored their ammonia adsorption capacity.181 Furthermore, they have successfully prepared the composites of zinc(oxy)hydroxide–graphite oxide and of zinc(oxy)hydroxide–graphene and used them as adsorbents for hydrogen sulfide under ambient conditions.182
6. Summary and challenges
6.1 Summary
Since its debut in 2004, major advances have been achieved using graphene for applications in electronics, quantum physics, novel materials and chemistry.11 Graphene can be prepared via various techniques, among which mechanical exfoliation,11 thermal deposition,12 oxidation of graphite14 and liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite1,4,15,16,21 are employed most commonly. Each of these preparation methods has some drawbacks, but also some advantages for given applications. The exfoliation of graphene sheets directly prepared from graphite has attracted more attention as it enables graphene synthesis in large scale and high quality. Though graphene is a 2-D carbon allotrope, it can be viewed as the building block for other graphitic carbon allotropes of different dimensionalities, for instance, 0-D fullerene and 1-D carbon nanotubes.120,183 It can also form 3-D layered structures via either restacking or self-assembly processes.44
Chemical modifications of graphene would help tackle the problems regarding its production, storage, handling and processing as the modified graphene composites can have synergistic properties resulting from both graphene and the modifiers. Graphene composites can be tailored to have desired solubility and stability, tunable electric, thermal and mechanical properties, and enhanced catalytic and biological properties. These properties make them desired materials for the fabrication of intelligent sensors, green energy devices, etc. Chemical modifications of graphene can be achieved via either covalent or non-covalent methodologies. The former can be used to form graphene composites with strong affinity, while the latter will maximally protect graphene's intrinsic properties. π–π stacking, hydrogen-bonding, van der Waals force, and coordination are the main interactions for non-covalent modifications and the graphene composites modified via these methods, particularly generated via the π–π stacking process, offered good arenas for versatile applications.
6.2 Challenges and perspectives
Driven by practical application and commercialization, large-scale, good quality, low-cost and eco-friendly synthetic techniques for producing and handling graphene are required. The controllable synthesis of graphene sheets with tunable size from nano- to micro- to centimetre and with thickness from single- to double- to multi-layer has been demonstrated. Based on the advances researchers have achieved so far, we expect that a few issues will be addressed in the near future.

6.2.1 How to develop eco-friendly production methodologies?. 
Nowadays, the prevalent technique for the synthesis of graphene in large scale is the Hummers method,184 which involves an oxidation–reduction process. A few drawbacks might result from this method. Firstly, the oxidation process consumes a large quantity of strong acids and oxidants and produces large amount of acidic wastes, requiring high cost after treatment. The reductants, usually hydrazine, are carcinogenic and quite hazardous to the environment. Secondly, the strong oxidation process may give rise to unwanted defects in graphene, which will significantly compromise graphene's superior properties. Thirdly, the Hummers method cannot produce graphene sheets with controlled size and desired geometrical shapes. Therefore, exploration of other methodologies to tackle the issues above is extremely urgent. We expect that the utilization of a milder exfoliation process, with the assistance of additional species, like multi-pyrene tethered amphiphiles,24 may represent the future synthetic direction, as it will produce graphene sheets with large size and integral conjugated structure.


6.2.2 How to enhance the electrical conductivity of graphene composites?. 
As summarized above, graphene's conductive behavior has been studied the most. One radical method to manipulate graphene's conductivity is hetero-atom doping, which has proved to be very successful in preparation of n-type or p-type materials. In addition, the manipulation of the electrical conductivity of graphene–polymer composites is usually realized by controlling the ratio of graphene to the corresponding polymers. This method is successful in manipulating the composite conductivity. However, as graphene and the fillers are usually bound together via non-covalent interactions, the as-prepared composites are relative unstable. Furthermore, when single-layer graphene is required to have controllable conductivity, these methods will be ineffective. As graphene's superior conductivity originates from its highly conjugated structure, this challenge can be tackled by controlled covalent destruction of graphene's conjugation system.


6.2.3 How to improve the mechanical properties of graphene composites?. 
It is well-known that a single graphene sheet has superior mechanical properties; however, the mechanical properties of pure collective graphene products or graphene composites are usually significantly compromised by the weak inter-sheet interactions. Therefore, at present there remains a major challenge regarding how to strengthen the interactions between the adjacent graphene sheets or the interaction between the graphene sheet and its modifiers. As graphene can be modified via either covalent or non-covalent binding e.g. π–π stacking, hydrogen bonding, etc., we envisioned that the inter-graphene “welding” using either bi- or multi-functional molecules or metallic nanoparticles might be a good alternative to improve the inter-layer electrical communications.

Acknowledgements
JL acknowledges the NSFC fund (51173087), the NSF fund (ZR2011EMM001) and the Taishan Scholar fund from Shandong Province for financial support. JT acknowledges Fundamental Research Program of Qingdao (10-3-4-3-8-jch), Shandong Province Project: Tackle Key Problem in Key Technology (2010GGX10327) and International Collaborative Program (10-1-4-97-hz). JJG thanks the Australian Research Council's Discovery Projects Funding Scheme (DP1094564) and the University of New South Wales for funding.
References
H. Chen, M. B. Muller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. W. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, S. G. Yin, X. Y. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, K. R. Ratinac, S. P. Ringer, P. Thordarson, J. J. Gooding and F. Braet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2114–2138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Jang, M. S. Kim, H. M. Jeong and C. M. Shin, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
W.-P. Wang and C.-Y. Pan, Polymer, 2004, 45, 3987–3995 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and C. W. Macosko, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3317–3327 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang, E. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872–876 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Diankov and H. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Cui, C.-a. Tao, Y. Wu, Z. Li, L. Ma, Y. Wen and G. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5864–5868 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Q. Chen, N. Q. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jang, D. Rangappa, Y.-U. Kwon and I. Honma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3462–3466 RSC .
F. Liu, J. Y. Choi and T. S. Seo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2844–2846 RSC .
D.-W. Lee, T. Kim and M. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8259–8261 RSC .
Q. Yang, X. Pan, F. Huang and K. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3811–3816 CAS .
W. Yuan, B. Li and L. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 10183–10187 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Raghu, Y. R. Lee, H. M. Jeong and C. M. Shin, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 2487–2493 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verdejo, M. M. Bernal, L. J. Romasanta and M. A. Lopez-Manchado, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3301–3310 RSC .
H. Kim, Y. Miura and C. W. Macosko, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3441–3450 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. Kobayashi, M. A. AbdurRahim, M. L. J. Zhang, A. Khusainova, M. A. Hillmyer, A. A. Abdala and C. W. Macosko, Polymer, 2011, 52, 1837–1846 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barroso-Bujans, S. Cerveny, R. Verdejo, J. J. del Val, J. M. Alberdi, A. Alegra and J. Colmenero, Carbon, 2009, 48, 1079–1087 CrossRef .
T. Wei, G. Luo, Z. Fan, C. Zheng, J. Yan, C. Yao, W. Li and C. Zhang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2296–2299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Steenackers, A. M. Gigler, N. Zhang, F. Deubel, M. Seifert, L. H. Hess, C. H. Y. X. Lim, K. P. Loh, J. A. Garrido, R. Jordan, M. Stutzmann and I. D. Sharp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10490–10498 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verdejo, F. J. Tapiador, L. Helfen, M. M. Bernal, N. Bitinis and M. A. Lopez-Manchado, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10860–10866 RSC .
Z. Ounaies, C. Park, K. E. Wise, E. J. Siochi and J. S. Harrison, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 1637–1646 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 132, 260–267 CrossRef .
T. S. Sreeprasad, M. S. Maliyekkal, K. Deepti, K. Chaudhari, P. L. Xavier and T. Pradeep, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2643–2654 CAS .
E.-Y. Choi, T. H. Han, J. Hong, J. E. Kim, S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim and S. O. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1907–1912 RSC .
T. H. Han, W. J. Lee, D. H. Lee, J. E. Kim, E.-Y. Choi and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2060–2064 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, T. Guo and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2297–2302 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Rafiee, J. Rafiee, Z. Wang, H. Song, Z.-Z. Yu and N. Koratkar, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3884–3890 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herrera-Alonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'homme and L. C. Brinson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Hao, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 2, 821–828 Search PubMed .
J. Q. Liu, W. R. Yang, H. M. Zareie, J. J. Gooding and T. P. Davis, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2931–2939 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sutter, J. T. Sadowski and E. A. Sutter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8175–8179 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Gacal, B. Koz, B. Gacal, B. Kiskan, M. Erdogan and Y. Yagci, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 1317–1326 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Pei, Y. Q. Xia, W. M. Liu, B. Yu and J. C. Hao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 7225–7237 CrossRef .
W. Z. Yuan, J. Y. Yuan, M. Zhou and C. Y. Pan, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 2788–2798 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. M. Sun, N. Nakayama-Ratchford and H. J. Dai, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marquis, C. Greco, I. Sadokierska, S. Lebedkin, M. M. Kappes, T. Michel, L. Alvarez, J. L. Sauvajol, S. Meunier and C. Mioskowski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1830–1835 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, W. Z. Yuan, J. Mei, L. Tang, X. Q. Liu, M. Yan, X. Y. Shen, J. Z. Sun, A. J. Qin and Z. Tang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 4995–5005 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Mayo, S. Behal and A. Adronov, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 450–458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liu, Z. H. Nie, Y. Gao, A. Adronov and H. M. Li, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 7187–7199 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. Sun and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876–10877 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yang, X. Y. Zhang, Z. F. Liu, Y. F. Ma, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17554–17558 CAS .
A. Sygula, F. R. Fronczek, R. Sygula, P. W. Rabideau and M. M. Olmstead, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3842–3843 CrossRef CAS .
C.-A. Di, D. Wei, G. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Guo and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3289–3293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wagner, K. Yu, C. Kvarnström and A. Ivaska, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3443–3446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. M. Li, L. H. Tang, J. Lu and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .

          T. P. Le, G. Moad, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, International Patent PCT WO 9801478,  1998.
C. Boyer, V. Bulmus, T. P. Davis, V. Ladmiral, J. Liu and S. Perrier, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5402–5436 CrossRef CAS .
L. Barner, T. P. Davis, M. H. Stenzel and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 539–559 CrossRef CAS .
C. Barner-Kowollik and S. Perrier, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 5715–5723 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boyer, V. Bulmus, P. Priyanto, W. Y. Teoh, R. Amal and T. P. Davis, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 111–123 RSC .
C. Boyer, V. Bulmus and T. P. Davis, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boyer, A. Granville, T. P. Davis and V. Bulmus, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 3773–3794 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Inglis, S. Sinnwell, T. P. Davis, C. Barner-Kowollik and M. H. Stenzel, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 4120–4126 CrossRef CAS .
A. Postma, T. P. Davis, R. A. Evans, G. X. Li, G. Moad and M. S. O'Shea, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5293–5306 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boyer, J. Liu, V. Bulmus and T. P. Davis, Aust. J. Chem., 2009, 62, 830–847 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, V. Bulmus, C. Barner-Kowollik, M. H. Stenzel and T. P. Davis, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Duan, Y. Miura, A. Narumi, X. Shen, S. Sato, T. Satoh and T. Kakuchi, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 1117–1124 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Scales, A. J. Convertine and C. L. McCormick, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 1389–1392 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhou, L. Lu, J. Zhu, X. Yang, X. Wang, X. Zhu and Z. Zhang, Polymer, 2007, 48, 1255–1260 CrossRef CAS .
F. Segui, X. P. Qiu and F. M. Winnik, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 314–326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meuer, L. Braun and R. Zentel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3166–3168 RSC .
S. Meuer, L. Braun, T. Schilling and R. Zentel, Polymer, 2009, 50, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Tao, C. Boyer, A. B. Lowe and T. P. Davis, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 299–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Tao, W. Yang, D. Li, C. Boyer, R. Wuhrer, F. Braet and T. P. Davis, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10068–10075 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, W. Yang, L. Tao, D. Li, C. Boyer and T. P. Davis, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 425–433 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Xu, L. Wang, B. Zhang, C. H. Lim, Y. Chen, K.-G. Neoh, E.-T. Kang and G. D. Fu, Polymer, 2011, 52, 2376–2383 CrossRef CAS .
R. Czerw, M. Terrones, J. C. Charlier, X. Blase, B. Foley, R. Kamalakaran, N. Grobert, H. Terrones, D. Tekleab, P. M. Ajayan, W. Blau, M. Rühle and D. L. Carroll, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
H. Terrones, M. Terrones, E. Hernandez, N. Grobert, J. C. Charlier and P. M. Ajayan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 1716–1719 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deifallah, P. F. McMillan and F. Cora, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5447–5453 CAS .
T. B. Martins, R. H. Miwa, A. J. R. da Silva and A. Fazzio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 196803 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Tian, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Boukhvalov and M. I. Katsnelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10697–10701 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hsiao, S. H. Liao, M. Y. Yen, P. I. Liu, N. W. Pu, C. A. Wang and C. C. M. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3092–3099 CAS .
L. M. Veca, F. S. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. Cao, P. Y. Zhang, G. Qi, L. W. Qu, M. Shrestha and Y. P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2565–2567 RSC .
H. Yang, F. Li, C. Shan, D. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Niu and A. Ivaska, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4632–4638 RSC .
M. Quintana, K. Spyrou, M. Grzelczak, W. R. Browne, P. Rudolf and M. Prato, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3527–3533 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bahr, J. P. Yang, D. V. Kosynkin, M. J. Bronikowski, R. E. Smalley and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6536–6542 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Q. T. Nguyen, E. Chow, T. Böcking, D. B. Hibbert and J. J. Gooding, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 1141–1151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adenier, E. Cabet-Deliry, A. Chausse, S. Griveau, F. Mercier, J. Pinson and C. Vautrin-Ul, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 491–501 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Liu, J. Q. Liu, T. P. Davis and J. J. Gooding, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3660–3665 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lomeda, C. D. Doyle, D. V. Kosynkin, W. F. Hwang and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16201–16206 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bahr and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3823–3824 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mitchell, J. L. Bahr, S. Arepalli, J. M. Tour and R. Krishnamoorti, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8825–8830 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, P. Ramesh, C. Berger, M. Sprinkle, W. A. de Heer and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1336–1337 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, H. Zhu, L. Jing, Y. Zhao and X. Gao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7945–7949 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Kooi, U. Schlecht, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1353–1355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubeen, T. Zhang, B. Yoo, M. A. Deshusses and N. V. Myung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6321–6327 CAS .
R. S. Sundaram, C. Gómez-Navarro, K. Balasubramanian, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3050–3053 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, Y. H. Hu, C. Li, C. Qin and M. X. Ye, Small, 2009, 5, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Etmimi, M. P. Tonge and R. D. Sanderson, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 1621–1632 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, K. Wang, H. Lu, Y. Yang and S. Nutt, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7098 RSC .
Q. Su, S. Pang, V. Alijani, C. Li, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3191–3195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 1414 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Margine, M. L. Bocquet and X. Blase, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3315–3319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Yun, Y. H. Bae, D. H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, I.-J. Chin and H.-J. Jin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3553–3559 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, Z. Cao, Y. Cai, L. Zhao, Z. Fang and S. Fu, Polymer, 2011, 52, 4001–4010 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ou, Y. Wang, J. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Li and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10080–10086 CAS .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang, J. Yang, S. Wang, D. Y. Tang, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 782–791 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, F. Li, T. Guo and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921–9927 CAS .
Q. Li, Z. J. Li, M. R. Chen and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2129–2132 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cardinali, L. Valentini and J. M. Kenny, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16652–16656 CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 343–348 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, A. A. Abdala and C. W. Macosko, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6515–6530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, Z. Liu, J. Cai, C. Zhang, H. Gao and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2009, 47, 922–925 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and C. W. Macosko, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3797–3809 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hou, S. Su, M. L. Kasner, P. Shah, K. Patel and C. J. Madarang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 501, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, L. Niu, Z. Xing, R. Song, G. Liu, M. Sun, G. Cheng, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, L. Sun, H. Xu, L. Lu and L. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 22, 638–642 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Zhou, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Wan, J. Tian, T. Wang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3113–3121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, M. Shi, N. Li, B. Yan, H. Ma, Y. Hu and M. Ye, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 339–349 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bao, D. Zhang and P. Qi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 360, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, X. Liu and X. Wang, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2011, 105, 1181–1186 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ren, T. Liu, J. Guo, S. Guo, X. Wang and W. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 335701 CrossRef .
S. Park, N. Mohanty, J. W. Suk, A. Nagaraja, J. An, R. D. Piner, W. Cai, D. R. Dreyer, V. Berry and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1–5 CrossRef .
H. Chang, L. Tang, Y. Wang, J. Jiang and J. Li, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 2341–2346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, W. Gao, F. Yan, H. Ji and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5511–5517 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhao, R.-M. Kong, X.-B. Zhang, H.-M. Meng, W.-N. Liu, W. Tan, G.-L. Shen and R.-Q. Yu, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5062–5066 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Xia, Q. Zhao, L. Liu and Z. Zhang, Small, 2009, 6, 537–544 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, H. Yang, C. Shan, Q. Zhang, D. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4022 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Fan, J. Qi, J. Ji, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 429–437 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Li, K.-P. Liu, G.-H. Yang, C.-M. Wang, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 21, 869–878 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, W. Hong, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Chen, P. M. Shenai and Y. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1515–1520 RSC .
Z. Yang, X. Shi, J. Yuan, H. Pu and Y. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063302 CrossRef .
S. B. Bon, L. Valentini, R. M. Moustafa, F. M. Jradi, B. R. Kaafarani, R. Verdejo, M. A. Lopez-Manchado and J. M. Kenny, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11252–11257 CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894–904 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, Y. Chen, F. Duerr, D. Mastrogiovanni, E. Garfunkel, E. Y. Andrei and V. Podzorov, Nano Lett., 2011, 10, 2427–2432 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Pei, W. Ren, D. Tang, L. Gao, B. Liu, F. Li, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1756–1760 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Cheng, P. Yu, J. Ye and L. Mao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11180–11186 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, G. Wang, A. Yang, X. Tao, X. Liu, Y. Shen and Z. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2893–2902 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jo, T. Lee, H. J. Choi, J. H. Park, D. J. Lee, D. W. Lee and B.-S. Kim, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2014–2018 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, J. Y. Xiang, Y. Q. Qiao, D. Zhang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 2306–2311 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. Song, H. Yang, S. Gan, Q. Zhang, D. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2011, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef .
W. Tu, J. Lei, S. Zhang and H. Ju, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 10771–10777 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, C. Shan, S. Hua, Q. Zhang, X. Bai, L. Dan and L. Niu, Talanta, 2011, 85, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, K. S. Subrahmanyam, K. Venkata Rao, S. J. George and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 506, 260–264 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, W. Wei and J.-M. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4497–4502 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, Z. Sun, K. Y.-F. Ho, X. Tao, F. Yan, W.-M. Kwok and Z. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2010, 3, 258–264 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Li, D. Sun, D. Tian, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7604 RSC .
G. Zeng, Y. Xing, J. Gao, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 15022–15026 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, K. Choi, T. Park, S. Lee and T. Seo, BioChip J., 2011, 5, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, G. Q. Mo, X. W. Li, W. D. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang, J. S. Ye, X. D. Huang and C. Z. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5402–5407 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, D. S. Yu, L. M. Dai, D. W. Chang and J. B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6202–6209 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CAS .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, H. Bai, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, Z. Gu and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1822–1826 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang, H. Li, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10078–10083 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, H. Li, D. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Niu, H. Yang, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhanen, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245702 CrossRef .
Y.-K. Kim, H.-K. Na and D.-H. Min, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13065–13070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, D. Sui, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, F. Li and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 114, 17465–17471 Search PubMed .
Y. Cao, T. Yang, J. Feng and P. Wu, Carbon, 2010, 49, 1502–1504 CrossRef .
C. Petit, M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9176–9185 RSC .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2108–2117 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seredych, O. Mabayoje and T. J. Bandosz, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Jingquan Liu	Professor Jingquan Liu received his bachelor's degree from Shandong University in 1989. His master's and PhD degrees were obtained from the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 1999 and 2004, respectively, where his PhD was undertaken under the guidance of Prof. Justin Gooding. In 2004 he worked as a CSIRO-UTS post-doctoral fellow prior to returning to UNSW and working with Prof. Tom Davis as a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow in 2006. In 2010 he took up a professorship at Qingdao University. He has co-authored over 50 peer-reviewed research papers. His research interests focus on the synthesis of various bio- and nano-hybrids of versatile polymeric architectures.
Jianguo Tang	Professor Jianguo Tang earned his PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2000, after which he worked with Prof. Dr Hans-Werner Schmidt at University Bayreuth (Germany) as Visiting Professor (2001), followed by two years as Research Fellow at Colorado State University with Prof. Dr L. A. Belfiore (2002–2003). His research interest lies in hybrid functional materials of polymers with metal ions, metallic nanoparticles, and nanocarbon materials, especially concerns about the interface interaction and modifications. He has published 105 journal papers including 45 peer-reviewed ones.
Justin Gooding	Professor Justin Gooding is an ARC Australian Professorial Fellow. He graduated with a BSc (Hons) from Melbourne University in 1988 and a DPhil from Oxford University. Subsequently he undertook a post-doctoral appointment at the Institute of Biotechnology in Cambridge University. He accepted a lectureship at UNSW in 1999 and was promoted to full professor in 2006. He was a recipient of the 2007 Royal Australian Chemical Institute Lloyd Smythe Medal for Analytical Chemistry, the 2009 Eureka Prize for Scientific Research, the 2011 RACI H.G. Smith Medal for Chemistry and the 2012 RACI R.H. Stokes Medal for Electrochemistry. His research interests are in surface modification using self-assembled mono-layers for sensing, molecular electronics and biomaterials applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of amphiphile 1. (b) Photograph of graphene (A) and SWNT (B) in aqueous solution of 1. (c) Schematic representation of graphene dispersion. (Reproduced by permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Process of graphene–polymer composite fabrication: (a) SEM and image (inset) of natural graphite. (b) A typical AFM non-contact mode image of graphite oxide sheets deposited onto a mica substrate from an aqueous dispersion (inset) with superimposed cross-section measurements taken along the red line indicating a sheet thickness of ∼1 nm. (c) AFM image of phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide sheets on mica and a profile plot showing ∼1 nm thickness. (d) Suspension of phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide (1 mg mL−1) and dissolved polystyrene in DMF before (left) and after (right) reduction by N,N-dimethylhydrazine. (e) Composite powder obtained after coagulation in methanol. (f) Hot-pressed composite (0.12 vol% of graphene) and pure polystyrene of the same 0.4 mm thickness and processed in the same way. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A schematic depicting the synthesis of pyrene-terminated PNIPAAm using a pyrene-functional RAFT agent and the subsequent attachment of the polymer to graphene and (b) thermal turbidity testing of the graphene–PNIPAAm composite in H2O. (Reproduced with permission from Wiley Periodicals, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scheme depicting the preparation of graphene–polymer nanocomposites via π–π stacking. (b) LCSTs of copolymers and graphene–copolymer nanocomposites. (Reproduced with permission from CSIRO Publishing.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis of pH sensitive pyrene–polymer composites via π–π stacking interactions for the self-assembly of functionalized graphene into layered structures. (Reprinted from ref. 79. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Starting with sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS)-wrapped GO, reduction and functionalization of intermediate SDBS-wrapped CCG with diazonium salts. (Reprinted from ref. 97. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Glass-transition temperature measurement of pure PVA and the graphene–PVA nanocomposite with 0.7 wt% GO loading. The Tg of the graphene–PVA nanocomposite with 0.7 wt% GO loading was 3.3 °C higher than that of the pure PVA matrix. Tg was obtained by DSC measurement. (b) Melting peaks of pure PVA and graphene–PVA nanocomposites with GO loadings of 0.3, 0.5, and 0.7 wt%. DSC was used to measure the melting enthalpy of the samples and the melt peaks were in the range of 160–220 °C. (Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley Periodicals, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrical conductivity of the polystyrene–graphene composites as a function of filler volume fraction. The main figure above shows composite conductivity, σc, plotted against filler volume fraction, Φ. Right inset: log σc plotted against log(σ − σc), where σc is the percolation threshold. Solid lines in both graphs are calculated conductivities based on the fitting (inset, log–log plot) of the experimental data to the effective conductivity equation. Left inset: top and middle diagrams show the four-probe setup for in-plane and transverse measurements, respectively; bottom diagram, one of the computed distributions of the current density (contour lines) with local directions and magnitude (shown by arrows) in a specimen for the following conditions—the sample thickness is twice the electrode width and the gap between them, and the in-plane resistivity is 10 times lower than the transverse resistivity. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structure of 6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene. (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra of graphene oxide (5.9 mg L−1) in aqueous solution, 6THIOP (3.0 mg L−1) and 6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene (3.8 mg L−1) in ODCB (left). Fluorescence spectra of 6THIOP–NH–SPFGraphene (kex = 411 nm) and 6THIOP (kex = 411 nm) in ODCB with the same absorbance value (Abs = 0.21) (right). (Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic demonstration of a graphene based biosensor for the detection of thrombin which relies on Förster resonance energy transfer to transduce the binding of thrombin to graphene modified with an aptamer selective for thrombin. (Reprinted from ref. 132. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The idealized chemical structures of graphene and P3OT. (b) Schematic of the device with a P3OT/graphene thin film as the active layer and the structure. (c) Energy level diagram of P3OT and SPFGraphene. (d) Schematic representation of the reaction of phenyl isocyanate with graphene oxide to form SPFGraphene. (Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Wiley Periodicals Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration and images of aqueous dispersions of graphene sheets and composites on the surface: (a) ReG aqueous dispersion, black precipitate after reduction; (b) ReG–PDI aqueous dispersion, without precipitate after centrifugation; and (c) ReG–PyS aqueous dispersion, without precipitate after centrifugation. (Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Wiley Periodicals Inc.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
