Aluminum-incorporated p-CuO/n-ZnO photocathode coated with nanocrystal-engineered TiO 2 protective layer for photoelectrochemical water splitting and  ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA03027H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA03027H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11951-11965Aluminum-incorporated p-CuO/n-ZnO photocathode coated with nanocrystal-engineered TiO2 protective layer for photoelectrochemical water splitting and hydrogen generation†

        
          
            Saeid 
            Masudy-Panah
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Y.-J. Kong 
            Eugene
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Negar Dasineh 
            Khiavi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Reza 
            Katal
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Xiao 
            Gong
          
        
      *ab
aElectrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119260. E-mail: elegong@nus.edu.sg
bLow Energy Electronic Systems (LEES), Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) Centre, Singapore
cFaculty of Biosciences & Medical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi, Malaysia
dDepartment of Civil & Environmental Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119260
Received 
      2nd April 2018
    , Accepted 31st May 2018First published on 6th June 2018AbstractThe poor photocorrosion stability and low photovoltage of cupric oxide (CuO) are the main limiting factors of CuO-based photocathodes for solar-driven photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting and hydrogen evolution. In this paper, we demonstrate a highly efficient CuO-based photocathode fabricated on a glass substrate coated with fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). Incorporating aluminum (Al) into the thin CuO film (CuO:Al) and inserting a thin CuO interfacial layer between the CuO:Al film and the FTO-coated glass substrate is shown to improve the photocorrosion stability of the CuO and increase the photocurrent without increasing the dark current. We also demonstrate that depositing a layer of ZnO to form a buried p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al heterojunction and controlling the carrier concentration and conductivity of the ZnO through the incorporation of Al can significantly improve the photovoltage and PEC activity of the photocathode, leading to a record-high photovoltage of ∼0.53 VRHE. By capping the photocathode with a crystal-engineered TiO2 protective layer, we are able to significantly stabilize the photocathode against photocorrosion and further improve the PEC activity of the final p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode, resulting in record-high photocurrent density of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 and photocorrosion stability of ∼87% after 5 hours.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has emerged as a potential technology for converting solar energy into storable hydrogen fuel with low environmental impact.1–10 Copper oxide is a promising photocathode material for PEC water splitting applications because of its high optical absorption, favorable band alignment for water reduction, inherently p-type character, low fabrication cost, and abundance in the Earth's crust.10–21 Cuprous oxide (Cu2O) and cupric oxide (CuO) are the two most common forms of copper oxide. Cu2O has an optical bandgap of around 2.2 eV and a theoretically predicted photocurrent of 14.7 mA cm−2 under standard air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) irradiation.22 CuO, on the other hand, has an optical bandgap of around 1.5 eV that is ideal for solar energy harvesting and a theoretically predicted photocurrent density of 35 mA cm−2 under standard illumination of AM 1.5 G.22,23 These characteristics make CuO an excellent candidate for water splitting driven by visible light. However, only a handful of reports in the literature have investigated and developed CuO photocathodes for PEC water splitting applications and hydrogen evolution.24–31
One of the main limiting factors for using CuO in a PEC water splitting system is the poor photocorrosion stability of CuO photocathodes in aqueous solution. To practically use CuO-based photocathodes for commercial applications, the issue of long-term photocorrosion stability has to be resolved. An efficient method to improve the photocorrosion stability of photoelectrodes in electrolyte solution is to cover them with a protective layer.32–38 An example of such a layer for large-scale deployment is sputter-deposited titanium dioxide (TiO2).35,36 However, while a TiO2 protective layer improves photocorrosion stability over a short duration of less than one hour, it has so far performed poorly in long-term photocorrosion stability tests of several hours.8,17 Therefore, for practical applications, there is a need to engineer the TiO2 protective layer to suppress photocorrosion over a much longer duration.
It is also of great interest to alter the material properties of CuO itself to stabilize it against photocorrosion. Recently, we have shown that the photocatalytic activity of a CuO-based photocathode can be improved by crystal engineering and tuning the chemical composition of the thin CuO film.39–41 However, these methods have limited impact on the long-term photocorrosion stability of CuO-based photocathodes. Therefore, there is a need for further development to improve the material properties of CuO for higher photocurrent and better photocorrosion stability.
Another major limiting factor of CuO photocathodes is the relatively low photovoltage, which necessitates a large external bias to carry out water splitting and therefore restricts the energy conversion efficiency and hydrogen generation when such photocathodes are used in a PEC cell. The main reason for a photocathode's low photovoltage is an interface energetic mismatch between the semiconductor and the electrolyte.42,43 Forming a buried junction by incorporating an ohmic-like semiconductor has emerged as a promising approach to decouple the photovoltage from the electrolyte redox potential and generate the photovoltage from an internal junction, thereby improving the onset potential for hydrogen evaluation reaction (HER).44–46 Most recently, Septina et al.28 demonstrated that inserting a thin layer of cadmium sulfide (CdS) semiconductor between the CuO and the TiO2 protective layer can increase the photovoltage to 0.45 V, although their method improved the photocorrosion stability only marginally. Kargar et al.26 have also shown that the insertion of a thin semi-insulating film of n-type zinc oxide (ZnO) between CuO and TiO2 can improve the H2 generation. However, this method does not improve the photovoltage. Therefore, to enhance the photovoltage and improve the PEC activity of CuO photocathodes, a highly conductive buried n-type semiconductor needs to be incorporated and optimized.
In this paper, we demonstrate that incorporating Al into a thin CuO film can significantly improve its photocorrosion stability. Al-incorporated CuO (CuO:Al) photocathode is prepared by co-sputtering CuO and Al onto a glass substrate coated with fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). By controlling the amount of Al incorporated into the thin CuO film and inserting a thin CuO interfacial layer between the FTO-coated substrate and the CuO:Al, photocorrosion stability of 92% over 1 hour is achieved, along with a short-circuit current Jsc of 3.7 mA cm−2, which are among the highest reported values for plain CuO photocathodes without co-catalyst and protective layer. We also show that a highly conductive thin film of n-type Al-incorporated ZnO (ZnO:Al) on top of the thin CuO:Al film, forming a buried heterojunction with p-(CuO/CuO:Al) on one side and ohmic-like contact with the electrolyte on the other side, results in significant enhancement of the photovoltage and photocurrent, with the photovoltage reaching a record-high value of ∼0.53 V vs. RHE (VRHE). Furthermore, we demonstrate that nanocrystal engineering of the TiO2 protective layer through control of the fabrication parameters is an effective method to improve its protective efficacy. By covering the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathode with this nanocrystal-engineered TiO2 protective layer and depositing Au–Pd nanoparticles, record-high photocurrent density of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 and photocorrosion stability of ∼87% over 5 hours were achieved.
Results and discussion
Al-incorporated CuO (CuO:Al) photocathode
Cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of CuO and CuO:Al films are shown in Fig. S1,† with the CuO film (without Al) exhibiting columnar growth. The amount of Al incorporated into the thin CuO film, which is controlled by the Al sputtering power, is an important factor for tuning the PEC activity of CuO:Al photocathodes. The bulk and surface elemental compositions of the CuO:Al films were obtained using EDS (energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) and XPS, and the extracted values are listed in Tables S1 and S2, respectively, of the ESI† to provide more information about the chemical composition of the sputter-deposited thin CuO:Al films.

Fig. 1(a) plots the photocurrent density (Jphoto) and dark current density (Jdark) vs. voltage for CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. The photovoltage increases slightly for higher Al sputtering power, reaching ∼0.41 VRHE for Al sputtered at 12 W. Although the photocurrent improves with increasing Al incorporation, the dark current also worsens due to an increase in recombination centers. To determine the optimum trade-off between Jphoto and Jdark of the CuO:Al photocathodes, (Jphoto–Jdark) is plotted in Fig. 1(b). As the Al sputtering power increases from 0 W to 12 W, the value of (Jphoto–Jdark) increases and reaches a maximum magnitude of 2.85 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. Thereafter, (Jphoto–Jdark) decreases at higher Al sputtering power. The initial improvement in PEC performance of CuO:Al photocathodes with increasing Al sputtering power is mainly due to enhancement of optical absorption (see Fig. S2 of ESI†), while the subsequent performance degradation at Al sputtering power above 12 W is likely caused by an increase in recombination rate and a reduction in electron generation.
 Fig. 1  (a) Current density and (b) (Jphoto–Jdark) vs. potential for CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. Although the photocurrent improves with increasing Al incorporation, the dark current also worsens. 
A high dark current in CuO:Al photocathodes could also be due to the occurrence of direct contact between Al nanoparticles and the conductive FTO electrode, shunting the photocathode and increasing charge carrier recombination. To investigate this hypothesis and overcome the problem, a thin CuO interfacial layer was inserted between the FTO-coated glass substrate and the CuO:Al film. Fig. S3 in the ESI† shows a cross-sectional high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) image of a fabricated p-(CuO/CuO:Al) photocathode with the CuO interfacial layer having a thickness of ∼30 nm. Fig. 2 shows that the CuO interfacial layer in a p-(CuO/CuO:Al) photocathode does not appear to affect the photocurrent, but reduces the dark current significantly. This highlights the importance of the CuO interfacial layer in reducing the interfacial recombination losses.
 Fig. 2  
J
photo, Jdark, and (Jphoto–Jdark) vs. potential for CuO:Al and CuO/CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated at Al sputtering power of 12 W. Inserting a CuO interfacial layer reduces the dark current significantly without affecting the photocurrent. 
To investigate the photocorrosion stability of p-CuO/CuO:Al photocathodes prepared using Al sputtering power of 1–20 W, the current density of the photocathodes was measured under continuous illumination for two hours. The long-term photocurrent measurements in Fig. 3 show that the incorporation of Al significantly improves the photocorrosion stability of the photocathodes. p-CuO/CuO:Al photocathodes prepared using Al sputtering power of 1, 6, 12, and 20 W retained 85%, 89%, 92%, and 91% of their initial Jphoto at 0 VRHE, respectively, after 1 hour. On the other hand, the control photocathode (CuO without Al) achieved only 77% photocorrosion stability over the same duration. The best-performing p-CuO/CuO:Al photocathode (Al sputtering power of 12 W) shows a photocorrosion stability of 78% after 2 hours of continuous illumination, which is around 1.6 times that of the control photocathode (49%). As the Fermi level of CuO is not energetic enough to rapidly transfer the photogenerated electrons to the electrolyte solution, the accumulation of electrons at the surface causes the CuO to be reduced to Cu2O, resulting in photocorrosion of the CuO photocathode. This reduction of CuO to Cu2O decreases optical absorption in the visible light regime, leading to inferior photocathode performance. With the incorporation of Al in CuO, the reduction of CuO to Cu2O is suppressed by the facilitated transfer of photogenerated electrons from the surface of the photocathode to the electrolyte, thereby improving the photocorrosion stability.
 Fig. 3  Photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al) photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. Photocathodes prepared using Al sputtering power of 0, 1, 6, 12, and 20 W retained 49%, 61%, 63%, 78%, and 76% of their initial Jphoto at 0 VRHE, respectively, after 2 hours. This indicates the effectiveness of Al incorporation in improving the photocorrosion stability. 
To further study the photocorrosion stability of the CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses were carried out on the same photocathodes before and after the photocorrosion stability test. It can be seen from Fig. 4(a) that the XPS spectra of the CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes before the stability test show two main peaks at binding energies of 933.8 and 954 eV, which correspond to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks of Cu2+, respectively, indicating that CuO is the dominant phase.47,48 Satellite peaks at higher binding energies of around 940.8, 943.8, and 962.5 eV further confirm CuO as the dominant phase.49 The XPS spectra of the photocathodes after the photocorrosion stability test are shown in Fig. 4(b), revealing the emergence of small peaks at binding energies of 932.7 and 952.8 eV for both CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes. These are the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks of Cu+, respectively, and are characteristic of Cu2O.50,51 The presence of the Cu+ peaks is confirmed by deconvolution of the XPS spectra. Fig. 5(a) and (b) show, respectively, the deconvoluted Cu 2p3/2 peaks of the control sample (CuO) and the CuO:Al photocathode with Al sputter power of 12 W. The ratio of the areas under the Cu+ and Cu2+ 2p3/2 peaks (ACu+/ACu2+) is calculated for each of the photocathodes and shown in Fig. 5(c). This ratio is significantly lower for the CuO:Al photocathode with Al sputtered at 12 W (ACu+/ACu2+ = 0.122) than for the control CuO photocathode (ACu+/ACu2+ = 0.485), indicating that the incorporation of Al in CuO curbs the reduction of CuO and helps to improve its photocorrosion stability.
 Fig. 4  Cu 2p XPS spectra of CuO:Al photocathodes (a) before and (b) after photocorrosion stability test. Small peaks at binding energies of 932.7 and 952.8 eV, which are characteristic of Cu2O, appear for both CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes after photocorrosion stability test, but these peaks are weaker in the CuO:Al photocathodes. 
 Fig. 5  Experimentally measured Cu 2p3/2 XPS spectra (circles) and fitted curves (lines) for the (a) CuO and (b) CuO:Al photocathodes after photocorrosion stability test. The Cu+ peak of Cu2O is weaker in the CuO:Al photocathode. The ratio of the area of the Cu+ peak to the area of the Cu2+ peak (ACu+/ACu2+) is significantly influenced by Al concentration in the CuO, as shown in (c). 
The XRD spectra of CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes before and after the photocorrosion stability test are shown in Fig. S4.† The XRD spectrum corresponding to the FTO was removed to clearly illustrate the XRD spectra of the CuO and CuO:Al films. Before the stability test, all samples show XRD peaks at 2θ of 35.482 and 38.764 degrees, which are ascribed to the (002) and (111) planes of CuO (JCPDS# 05-0661), respectively. An additional XRD peak at 2θ of 36.45 degrees, attributed to the (111) plane of Cu2O (JCPDS# 05-0667), is observed for all samples after the stability test. It can be seen that the intensity of the Cu2O XRD peaks is significantly reduced by increasing the Al content of CuO:Al, indicating less reduction of CuO to Cu2O in CuO:Al photocathodes compared to the control CuO photocathode.
SEM images of the CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes (Fig. S5†) show the formation of small islands on the surface of the samples after the photocorrosion stability test, which is mainly caused by the reduction of CuO to Cu2O.52 The distribution of the islands is significantly influenced by Al incorporation during the deposition of CuO:Al. Compared to the control CuO sample, the formation of islands is reduced for CuO:Al photocathodes, providing further evidence of the improvement in photocorrosion stability with the incorporation of Al in CuO.
The PEC activity of the CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes is analyzed using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to determine the charge transfer rate at the CuO/electrolyte interface and obtain the flat-band voltage and majority carrier density in the CuO. As shown in Fig. 6(a), the Nyquist plot for the photocathodes at a potential of 0 VRHE under illumination exhibits semicircle characteristics at low frequencies, which indicates a charge transfer process at the interface between the semiconductor and the electrolyte.53 Charge transfer resistance (Rct) is represented by the semicircle radius. It can be seen from Fig. 6(a) that Rct is significantly reduced when Al is incorporated in the CuO, with Rct decreasing with increasing Al sputtering power up to 12 W. This variation of Rct with Al sputtering power is in good agreement with the photocurrent density. Thus, the incorporation of an optimum amount of Al in the CuO facilitates the transfer of photo-induced electrons across the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and results in better PEC performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Nyquist plot, (b) Mott–Schottky plot, (c) hole carrier density, and (d) flat band voltage of CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. Charge transfer resistance is significantly reduced while hole carrier density and flat band potential are considerably increased with Al incorporation. 

Fig. 6(b) shows the linear part of the Mott–Schottky (M–S) plot for the photocathodes, with a negative slope that is indicative of the p-type nature of the thin CuO and CuO:Al films. This linear part can be fitted using the following M–S equation, which provides a qualitative comparison for samples with similar device geometry and material composition:54 (1)where C is the space charge capacitance in the semiconductor, NA is the hole carrier density, e is the elemental charge, ε is the relative permittivity of the semiconductor (10.26 for CuO), ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, VS is the potential applied to the photocathode, VFB is the flat-band voltage, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The values of NA and VFB are thus estimated from the slope and the x-intercept, respectively, of the extrapolated linear part of the M–S curve. Fig. 6(c) and (d) plot the extracted values of NA and VFB. The variation of NA and VFB with Al sputtering power also agrees well with the photocurrent. The CuO:Al with Al sputtered at 12 W has NA of 7.5 × 1021 cm−3, which is ∼1 order of magnitude higher than that of the control CuO film, signifying faster charge transfer and hence improved photocatalytic activity. The VFB values of the CuO:Al photocathodes are higher than that of the control CuO sample, providing a larger space charge region potential and therefore a larger driving force to separate the photo-induced electron–hole pairs in the space charge region, which in turn also results in improved PEC performance.
p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathode
Although the photovoltage of the CuO:Al photocathodes is slightly enhanced by the incorporation of Al into the thin CuO film, it is still far from the maximum achievable photovoltage (MAP). The low photovoltage of the CuO:Al photocathodes is mainly attributed to the poor interface between the CuO:Al and the electrolyte.42,43 The MAP is determined by the degree of band bending,44 so to increase the photovoltage, it is necessary to shift the positions of the band edges. Forming a buried junction is an efficient method for this purpose.45 A metal with a suitable work function or a thin film of heavily doped n-type semiconductor with sufficiently negative conduction and valence band edge energies is required to form a buried junction and increase the band bending in p-type CuO:Al. A suitable candidate is Al-incorporated ZnO (ZnO:Al), which has a conduction band minimum at −4.6 eV and valence band maximum at −8.07 eV.55,56 In addition, one advantage of ZnO over the CdS used by Septina et al.28 is that Zn is more abundant than Cd.
p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes were fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–30 W used for ZnO:Al deposition. Fig. S6† shows a cross-sectional TEM image of one such photocathode with Al sputtered at 20 W during ZnO:Al deposition, as well as an HR-TEM image zoomed in on the ZnO:Al layer. The Al sputtering power determines the Al content in the thin ZnO:Al film, which is a key factor influencing the doping concentration and conductivity of the ZnO:Al and can therefore affect the PEC performance of the photocathodes. From Fig. 7(a) and (b), it can be seen that the insertion of the thin ZnO:Al film between the electrolyte and the CuO:Al semiconductor improves the photovoltage and the photocurrent, achieving a record-high photovoltage ∼0.53 VRHE for the photocathode with Al sputtered at 20 W during ZnO deposition. This is mainly attributed to the reduction of the CuO:Al/electrolyte interface energetics mismatch and alleviation of the voltage requirement from the photoanode, resulting in improved water splitting efficiency. Fig. 7(c) shows that the photocorrosion stability of the photocathodes is also significantly improved by the ZnO:Al layer, as the electrostatic field at the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al heterojunction improves the extraction of photogenerated carriers. For both photocurrent and photocorrosion stability, higher Al sputtering power up to 20 W during ZnO:Al deposition gives better performance, while further increasing the Al content reduces the PEC activity of the photocathode.
 Fig. 7  (a) Current density, (b) zoomed-out portion of the photocurrent, and (c) photocorrosion stability of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes. Both plots share the same legend. Insertion of a thin ZnO:Al film between the electrolyte and the CuO:Al semiconductor improves the photovoltage, photocurrent, and photocorrosion stability. The photocathode with Al sputtered at 20 W during ZnO deposition achieved a record-high photovoltage of ∼0.53 VRHE and retained 85% of its initial Jphoto at 0 VRHE after 2 hours. 
To investigate the origin of the effects of ZnO Al concentration on the PEC activity of p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes, EIS measurements were performed under illumination. Fig. 8(a) shows the resulting Nyquist plot. The semicircle radius is reduced with increasing Al content in the thin ZnO:Al film, indicating more efficient separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and smaller resistance for interfacial charge transfer. However, increasing the Al sputtering power above 20 W during ZnO:Al deposition increases the charge transfer resistance Rct (larger semicircle radius). This trend shows good correlation with the measured PEC activity in Fig. 7(a). The exchange current density and kinetic energy required to overcome the energy barrier in a faradaic reaction are the two key factors that impact the charge transfer resistance.57 Therefore, the smaller charge transfer resistance of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes compared to that of the control p-(CuO/CuO:Al) photocathode implies promotion of the water-splitting reaction, leading to faster reduction of H+ to H2 and improving the hydrogen evolution reaction.
 Fig. 8  (a) Nyquist and (b) Mott–Schottky plots of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes. Both plots share the same legend. Charge transfer resistance and hole carrier concentration are significantly improved with the insertion of a thin ZnO:Al film between the electrolyte and the CuO:Al semiconductor. 
The conduction band edge of ZnO:Al is lower than that of CuO:Al, allowing photogenerated electrons to flow easily from the CuO:Al to the ZnO:Al. Therefore, this conducive band alignment of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al heterojunction supports the efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and improves the harvesting of light. To gain more insights into the effect of the ZnO:Al layer on the band bending in the CuO:Al, M–S measurements were carried out on the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes under illumination. From the M–S plot in Fig. 8(b), the variation in VFB (x-intercept) with the Al content of ZnO:Al shows that the ZnO:Al film with Al sputtered at 20 W has the highest impact on VFB. The downward band bending in the semiconductor (VB) is given by VB = −(VS − VFB). Since the potential VS applied to the photocathode is negative, a more positive value of VFB through incorporation of an optimized layer of ZnO:Al increases VB. More band bending in the photocathode at the interface with the electrolyte reduces the charge transfer resistance, facilitates charge separation, and suppresses charge recombination, leading to enhancements in photovoltage and photocurrent as seen in Fig. 7(a).
Hall measurements were also performed on a series of thin ZnO:Al films deposited on glass substrate using Al sputtering power of 1–30 W. The electrical resistivity and hall mobility of these ZnO:Al films on glass substrate are shown in Fig. S7 of the ESI.† It can be seen that by increasing the Al sputtering power from 1 W to 20 W, the electrical resistivity of the ZnO:Al reduces and its hall mobility increases. This improvement in electrical characteristics of the thin ZnO:Al film at higher Al content is mainly attributed to an increase in Al interstitials and enhancement of substitutional Al3+ ions. However, when the Al sputtering power is increased further to 30 W, the electrical resistivity of the ZnO:Al film increases due to segregation of electrically inactive dopants into the grain boundaries.58 The electrical characteristics of the ZnO directly affect Rct, and are thus correlated with the PEC activity of the photocathodes.
(p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al)/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode
Little research has been conducted to study the impact of the material properties of a TiO2 protective layer on the long-term photocorrosion stability of photocathodes. Nanocrystal engineering by controlling the fabrication parameters is a possible method to tune the crystal quality and material properties of thin metal oxide films. A 20 nm-thick film of TiO2 was thus deposited on p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes by sputtering at various RF powers ranging from 50 to 200 W. The sputtering power of the TiO2 significantly influences the thickness of the deposited TiO2 thin film. To keep the thickness of the sputtered TiO2 constant, we tuned the deposition time. Fig. 9 shows a cross-sectional TEM image of a p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2 photocathode with TiO2 sputtered at 200 W.
 Fig. 9  Cross-sectional TEM image of a p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2 photocathode with TiO2 sputtered at 200 W. The thickness of the TiO2 protective layer is ∼20 nm. 
Au–Pd nanoparticles were deposited on top of the TiO2 by sputtering from a Au–Pd (60:40) target using the same conditions as in our recent work,39 where these nanoparticles were demonstrated to be efficient co-catalysts for improving the PEC activity of CuO photocathodes. The size and distribution of the Au–Pd nanoparticles play an important role in the PEC activity of CuO-based photocathodes. An optimal distribution of Au–Pd nanoparticles was obtained using the method presented in our earlier work.39 The SEM image in Fig. S8 of the ESI† shows Au–Pd nanoparticles randomly and uniformly distributed on the TiO2 protective layer.

Fig. 10(a) shows the effect of TiO2 sputtering power on the long-term photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes. Increasing the TiO2 sputtering power from 50 W to 200 W significantly improves the photocorrosion stability, which can be attributed to an improvement in the crystallinity of the TiO2 layer. Even after 5 hours of illumination, the photocathode with TiO2 sputtered at 200 W maintained a photocorrosion stability of ∼87%.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes fabricated with TiO2 sputtering power from 50 W to 200 W. After 5 hours of illumination, the photocathode with TiO2 sputtered at 200 W maintained a photocorrosion stability of ∼87%. (b) Comparison of the photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al), p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al, and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes. 
The photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al), p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al, and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes are compared in Fig. 10(b). After 2 hours of illumination, the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode (TiO2 sputtered at 200 W) shows significantly enhanced photocorrosion stability of 97% compared with the p-(CuO/CuO:Al) and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes, which achieved photocorrosion stability of 78% and 85% respectively. This demonstrates the protective role of the TiO2 layer. The small but still-present decrease in photocurrent of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode with increasing illumination time could be because the TiO2 layer deposited at 200 W is still slightly amorphous.17
The influence of the TiO2 sputtering power on the crystal quality of the thin TiO2 film was investigated using XRD. Fig. 11(a) shows the XRD spectrum for each of the TiO2 films deposited at the various sputtering powers. All the TiO2 films show XRD peaks at 2θ of 25.28 and 37.8 degrees, which are associated with the anatase TiO2(101) and TiO2(004), respectively (JCPDS 84-1286). Fig. 11(b) plots the full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the main TiO2(101) peak vs. TiO2 sputtering power. By increasing the TiO2 sputtering power, the intensity of the XRD peaks is increased and the FWHM of the main TiO2(101) peak is significantly reduced, indicating an improvement in the crystallinity of the thin TiO2 film.
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD spectrum for each of the TiO2 films deposited at the various sputtering powers and (b) FWHM of the main TiO2(101) peak vs. TiO2 sputtering power. Higher TiO2 sputtering power gives better crystallinity. 
High-resolution XPS was used to study how the crystallinity of the TiO2 film affects its surface chemical composition before and after the 5 hour photocorrosion stability test. Fig. 12(a) and (b) show the Ti 2p core-level XPS spectra of the TiO2 protective layer before and after the stability test. The main peaks at 458.58 and 464.2 eV correspond to Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2, respectively. The Ti 2p3/2 peaks were deconvoluted into their Ti4+ and Ti3+ components at respective binding energies of 458.6 and 457.1 eV, and the ratio of the area under the Ti3+ peak to the area under the Ti4+ peak (ATi3+/ATi4+) for each TiO2 sputtering power is determined from the fitted XPS spectra and presented in Fig. 12(c). It can be seen that the ATi3+/ATi4+ ratio before the stability test is only marginally influenced by TiO2 sputtering power, indicating that the TiO2 sputtering power does not affect the formation of Ti3+ trap states in as-deposited TiO2. However, the ATi3+/ATi4+ ratio after the stability test is considerably reduced from 0.383 to 0.264 as the TiO2 sputtering power increases from 50 W to 200 W. Therefore, the improved crystallinity of the TiO2 protective layer at higher sputtering power (as seen from XRD) significantly suppresses the formation of Ti3+ states under illumination, thereby improving the photocorrosion stability.
 Fig. 12  High-resolution Ti 2p core-level XPS spectra of the TiO2 protective layer (a) before and (b) after the 5 hour photocorrosion stability test. (c) The ratio of the area under the Ti3+ peak to the area under the Ti4+ peak (ATi3+/ATi4+) for each TiO2 sputtering power before and after the photocorrosion stability test. Increasing the sputtering power significantly suppresses the formation of Ti3+ states under illumination. 
Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) is an indication of the light-harvesting capacity of the prepared photocathodes over the measured wavelength range. To further investigate the performance of the fabricated samples, the IPCE spectra of the prepared photocathodes at 0 V versus RHE under standard solar spectrum (AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2) are compared in Fig. 13. The IPCE spectra for the p-(CuO/CuO:Al), p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al, and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes show that all photocathodes were able to absorb light and separate the resulting exciton to generate a photocurrent over a wide range of wavelengths. The p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode shows higher IPCE than the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al and p-(CuO/CuO:Al) photocathodes over a broad range of wavelengths due to coupling of the narrow-bandgap CuO:Al with the wide-bandgap ZnO and TiO2. The IPCE of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode at 0 VRHE is above 20% in the 400–650 nm wavelength range. A maximum IPCE value of ∼50% was achieved at ∼550 nm wavelength, gradually reducing to zero at ∼750 nm.
 Fig. 13  IPCE spectra for the p-(CuO/CuO:Al), p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al, and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes. Record-high Jsc of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE was achieved for the photocathode with TiO2 sputtering power of 200 W. The IPCE of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode at 0 VRHE is above 20% in the 400–650 nm wavelength range. 
The J–V, hydrogen evolution, Nyquist, and M–S plots of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes are shown in Fig. 14. As the conduction band edge of TiO2 is lower than that of ZnO:Al, the band alignment of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2 layer structure remains conducive for the separation of electron–hole pairs photogenerated in the CuO:Al. Improving the crystallinity of the TiO2 protective layer facilitates the transfer of accumulated photogenerated electrons from the surface of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode to the electrolyte, resulting in significant improvement in PEC activity and hydrogen generation. Record-high Jsc of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE is achieved for the photocathode with TiO2 sputtering power of 200 W. A summary of the photocurrent and photovoltage of reported CuO photocathodes for PEC water splitting applications is presented in Table 2.
 Fig. 14  (a) J–V, (b) hydrogen evolution, (c) Nyquist, and (d) M–S plots of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes fabricated with TiO2 sputtering power from 50 W to 200 W. Record-high Jsc of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE was achieved for the photocathode with TiO2 sputtering power of 200 W. 
The faradaic efficiency of the water-splitting reaction can be determined from the amount of hydrogen gas evolved in a given amount of time a given photocurrent, using the following equation:59,60 Faradaic efficiency = (nH2)/(Q/ZF)(2)where nH2 is the number of electrons transferred per hydrogen molecule (2 in this case), Q is the total amount of charge passed through the cell, Z is the number of moles of obtained hydrogen gas, and F is the Faraday's constant (96485C mol−1). The hydrogen evolution at an average photocurrent of 0.16 mA after 6 hours of illumination is ∼60 μmol for the best-performing photocathode (TiO2 sputtered at 200 W), giving a faradaic efficiency of ∼98%.
Conclusions
In summary, we have shown that incorporating Al into CuO is an effective way to improve its photocorrosion stability. An optimum amount of Al in CuO:Al has the added benefit of enhancing the optical absorption without significantly increasing the charge recombination. We have also shown that by inserting a thin layer of CuO at the CuO:Al/FTO interface, we can prevent direct contact between the FTO and the Al nanoparticles in the CuO:Al, significantly reducing the dark current. Furthermore, the deposition of a highly conductive ZnO:Al layer on top of the CuO:Al to form a buried p-CuO:Al/n-ZnO:Al heterojunction can substantially improve the photocurrent and achieve a record-high photovoltage of ∼0.53 VRHE. Finally, we have demonstrated that covering the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathode with a nanocrystal-engineered TiO2 protective layer facilitates charge transfer from the photocathode to the electrolyte and further improves the PEC activity and photocorrosion stability of the photocathode, resulting in record-high Jsc of ∼5.4 mA cm−2, photocorrosion stability of ∼87% over 5 hours, and H2 evolution of ∼60 μmol in 6 hours at an average photocurrent of 0.16 mA.
Methods
FTO-coated borosilicate float glass was used as the substrate. All substrates were sequentially cleaned by ultrasonicating in isopropyl alcohol and deionized water for ∼5 minutes. The substrates were then loaded into a magnetron sputtering chamber to deposit CuO and CuO:Al. Rapid thermal annealing was performed at 550 °C for 1 minute before depositing ZnO:Al and TiO2.
Stoichiometric sputter targets were used for the deposition of CuO, ZnO, and TiO2, while the incorporation of Al in CuO and ZnO (to form CuO:Al and ZnO:Al, respectively) was done by co-sputtering an Al target with 99.99% purity. Radio frequency (RF) power was employed for the sputtering of all metal oxides (CuO, ZnO, and TiO2), while direct current (DC) power was used to sputter Al. The thicknesses and sputtering powers used for the various layers are listed in Table 1 unless otherwise stated in the text. The thickness of CuO:Al was chosen to be 500 nm as this is the optimum thickness of CuO for photocatalytic applications.20,33,34 A low sputtering power of 25 W was used to deposit the CuO interfacial layer in order to reduce interfacial damage.
Table 1 Default processing conditions




Layer
Thickness (nm)
Sputtering power (W)


Metal oxide
Al




CuO
30
25
—


CuO:Al
500
300
12


ZnO:Al
20
300
20


TiO2
20
200
—




Table 2 Photocurrent and photovoltage of reported CuO photocathodes for PEC water splitting




No.
Photocurrent
Photovoltage
Ref.




1
−0.55 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.35 VRHE

25



2
−1.3 mA cm−2@0 0 VRHE
∼0.35 VRHE

26



3
−1.8 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.42 VRHE

27



4
−1.35 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.45 VRHE

28



5
−3.5 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.4 VRHE

39



6
−1.8 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.35 VRHE

40



7
−2.3 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.3 VRHE

41



8
−0.23 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.15 VRHE

61



9
−0.0045 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.42 VRHE

62



10
−1.5 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.45 VRHE

63



11
−1.1 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.45 VRHE

64



12
−2.5 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.2 VRHE

65



13
−2.3 mA cm−2@0 VRHE
∼0.25 VRHE

66




14


−5.4 mA cm

−2

@0 V

RHE



∼0.53 V

RHE



This work





For all measurements, a 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution with a pH value of 5.84, an Autolab 302N galvanostat/potentiostat with Pt counter electrode and Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and an illumination source of AM 1.5 G and 100 mW cm−2 were used.
Chronoamperometry (CA) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements were performed to measure the photocurrent, dark current, and photocorrosion stability of the photocathodes. The scan rate and potential were set to 50 mV s−1 and 0 VRHE, respectively, for both CA and LSV measurements. For photocorrosion stability tests, the photocurrent was measured at 0 VRHE under continuous illumination. Nyquist and M–S plots were derived from EIS measurements, with Nyquist plots obtained by applying a 10 mV AC signal over a frequency range of 1 mHz to 100 kHz in the open-circuit potential condition, and M–S plots obtained at a fixed frequency of 5 kHz. Because the existence of dissolved O2 would result in the reduction of oxygen rather than the production of H2 as the dominant cathodic reaction, argon (Ar) gas was bubbled for 1 hour through the system before all PEC measurements.
The following equation was used to convert the measured potential with respect to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (VAg/AgCl) to the potential on the reversible hydrogen electrode scale (VRHE):20 VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197 + 0.059 × pH(3)
Optical transmittance, reflectance, and absorption of the fabricated samples were measured by a double-beam Shimadzu UV-3101 UV-vis-NIR scanning spectrophotometer. A high-resolution Philips CM300 TEM system was used to investigate the microstructural and interface properties of the fabricated samples, while a VG ESCALAB 220i-XL XPS system with a monochromatic AlKα source (1486.6 eV) was used to analyze their surface chemical composition. XPS data fitting for peak deconvolution was carried out using Gaussian and Lorentzian line shapes with Shirley background subtraction. XRD was performed using a Bruker AXS General Area Detector Diffraction System (GADDS) in θ–2θ scan with CuKα (λ = 0.15418 nm) radiation.
Conflicts of interest
We do not have any conflict of interest.
References
A. Martínez-García, V. K. Vendra, S. Sunkara, P. Haldankar, J. Jasinski and M. K. Sunkara, Tungsten oxide-coated copper oxide nanowire arrays for enhanced activity and durability with photoelectrochemical water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15235–15241 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, B. Ma, S. Xu, D. Li, S. He, Y. Zhao, J. Han, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Visible-light-driven overall water splitting with a largely-enhanced efficiency over a Cu2O@ZnCr-layered double hydroxide photocatalyst, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 463–469 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, Engineering heterogeneous semiconductors for solar water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 Search PubMed .
I. Concina, Z. H. Ibupoto and A. Vomiero, Semiconducting metal oxide nanostructures for water splitting and photovoltaics, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700706 CrossRef .
J. Gu, J. A. Aguiar, S. Ferrere, K. X. Steirer, Y. Yan, C. Xiao, J. L. Young, M. Al-Jassim, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, A graded catalytic–protective layer for an efficient and stable water-splitting photocathode, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16192 CrossRef .
M. Crespo-Quesada, L. M. Pazos-Outón, J. Warnan, M. F. Kuehnel, R. H. Friend and E. Reisner, Metal-encapsulated organolead halide perovskite photocathode for solar-driven hydrogen evolution in water, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12555 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kuang, P. Han, Q. Wang, J. Li and G. Zheng, CuCo Hybrid Oxides as Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Efficient Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8555 CrossRef .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Visible-light driven heterojunction photocatalysts for water splitting – a critical review, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731 Search PubMed .
R. S. Moakhar, S. Masudy-Panah, M. Jalalia, G. K. L. Goh, A. Dolati and M. Ghorbani, Screen-printed surface nanostructured TiO2 decorated with plasmonic Au nanoparticles for high-performance visible-light driven photoelectrochemical water splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 386–393 CrossRef .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Cu2O Nanowire Photocathodes for Efficient and Durable Solar Water Splitting, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Dias, M. Schreier, S. D. Tilley, J. Luo, J. Azevedo, L. Andrade, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Transparent cuprous oxide photocathode enabling a stacked tandem cell for unbiased water splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501537 CrossRef .
J. Luo, S. D. Tilley, L. Steier, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Solution transformation of Cu2O into CuInS2 for solar water splitting, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1395 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Ruthenium oxide hydrogen evolution catalysis on composite cuprous oxide water-splitting photocathodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303 CrossRef .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Hydrogen evolution from a copper(I) oxide photocathode coated with an amorphous molybdenum sulphide catalyst, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azevedo, L. Steier, P. Dias, M. Stefik, C. T. Sousa, J. P. Araujo, A. Mendes, M. Graetzel and S. D. Tilley, On the stability enhancement of cuprous oxide water splitting photocathodes by low temperature steam annealing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4044 Search PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Ultrathin films on copper(I) oxide water splitting photocathodes: a study on performance and stability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673 Search PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Highly active oxide photocathode for photoelectrochemical water reduction, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Masudy-Panah, S. Zhuk, H. R. Tan, X. Gong and G. K. Dalapati, Palladium nanostructure incorporated cupric oxide thin film with strong optical absorption, compatible charge collection and low recombination loss for low cost solar cell applications, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 158–167 CrossRef .
T. K. S. Wong, S. Zhuk, S. Masudy-Panah and G. K. Dalapati, Current Status and Future Prospects of Copper Oxide Heterojunction Solar Cells, Materials, 2016, 9(4), 271 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Masudy-Panah, G. K. Dalapati, K. Radhakrishnan, A. Kumar, H. R. Tan, E. N. Kumar, C. Vijila, C. C. Tan and D. Chi, p-CuO/n-Si heterojunction solar cells with high open circuit voltage and photocurrent through interfacial engineering, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 637–645 CrossRef .
S. Masudy-Panah, M. Kakran, Y.-F. Lim, C. S. Chua, H. R. Tan and G. K. Dalapati, Graphene incorporated CuO thin film for solar cell application, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2016, 8, 043507 CrossRef .
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Materials availability expands the opportunity for large-scale photovoltaics deployment, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, N. P. Dasgupta and P. Yang, Semiconductor Nanowires for Artificial Photosynthesis, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 415 CrossRef .
A. C. Cardiel, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Electrochemical growth of copper Hydroxy double salt films and their conversion to nanostructured p-Type CuO photocathodes, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9262 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Lim, C. S. Chua, C. J. J. Lee and D. Chi, Sol-gel deposited Cu2O and CuO thin films for photocatalytic water splitting, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25928 RSC .
A. Kargar, Y. Jing, S. J. Kim, C. T. Riley, X. Pan and D. Wang, ZnO/CuO heterojunction branched nanowires for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11112 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Chiang, J. Epstein, A. Brown, J. N. Munday, J. N. Culver and S. Ehrman, Biological templates for antireflective current collectors for photoelectrochemical cell applications, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6005 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Septina, R. R. Prabhakar, R. Wick, T. Moehl and S. D. Tilley, Stabilized solar hydrogen production with CuO/CdS heterojunction thin film photocathodes, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1735 CrossRef .
A. Mahmood, F. Tezcan and G. Kardaş, Photoelectrochemical characteristics of CuO films with different electrodeposition time, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 23268 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, P. Wang, Z. Yan and N. Ren, Ag nanoparticles decorated CuO nanowire arrays for efficient plasmon enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 609, 59 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chiang, Y. Shin, K. Aroh and S. Ehrman, Copper oxide photocathodes prepared by a solution based process, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8232 CrossRef .
M. Kulmas, L. Paterson, K. Höflich, M. Y. Bashouti, Y. Wu, M. Göbelt, J. Ristein, J. Bachmann, B. Meyer and S. Christiansen, Highly sensitive and selective biosensors based on organic transistors functionalized with Cucurbit[6]uril derivatives, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4882 CrossRef .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Water reduction by a p-GaInP2 photoelectrode stabilized by an amorphous TiO2 coating and a molecular cobalt catalyst, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 456 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Enhanced photoelectrochemical water-splitting performance of semiconductors by surface passivation layers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504 Search PubMed .
L. Steier, I. Herraiz-Cardona, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Understanding the role of underlayers and overlayers in thin film hematite photoanodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7681 CrossRef .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Amorphous TiO₂ coatings stabilize Si, GaAs, and GaP photoanodes for efficient water oxidation, Science, 2014, 344, 1005 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Mei, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, D. Bae, R. Frydendal, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, Crystalline TiO2: A generic and effective electron-conducting protection layer for photoanodes and -cathodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15019 Search PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Using TiO2 as a conductive protective layer for photocathodic H2 evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. Siavash Moakhar, C. S. Chua, A. Kushwaha and G. K. Dalapati, Stable and efficient CuO based photocathode through oxygen-rich composition and Au–Pd nanostructure incorporation for solar-hydrogen production, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27596 Search PubMed .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. S. Moakhar, C. S. Chua, A. Kushwaha, T. I. Wong and G. K. Dalapati, Rapid thermal annealing assisted stability and efficiency enhancement in a sputter deposited CuO photocathode, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 29383 RSC .
S. Masudy-Panah, R. Siavash Moakhar, C. S. Chua, H. R. Tan, T. I. Wong, D. Chi and G. K. Dalapati, Nanocrystal engineering of sputter-grown CuO photocathode for visible-light-driven electrochemical water splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1206 Search PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Cui, R. H. J. Vervuurt, D. van Dam, R. P. J. van Veldhoven, J. P. Hofmann, A. A. Bol, J. E. M. Haverkort, P. H. L. Notten, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and E. J. M. Hensen, High-efficiency InP-based photocathode for hydrogen production by interface energetics design and photon management, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 679 CrossRef .
L. Shen, C. He, J. Qiu, S.-M. Lee, A. Kalita, S. B. Cronin, M. P. Stoykovich and J. Yoon, Nanostructured silicon photocathodes for solar water splitting patterned by the self-assembly of lamellar block copolymers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26043 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Amorphous Si thin film based photocathodes with high photovoltage for efficient hydrogen production, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Dai, W. Li, J. Xie, Y. He, J. Thorne, G. McMahon, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Catalytic asymmetric 1,6-conjugate addition of para-Quinone methides: formation of all-carbon quaternary stereocenters, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 13711 CrossRef .
I. A. Digdaya, L. Han, T. W. F. Buijs, M. Zeman, B. Dam, A. H. M. Smets and W. A. Smith, Extracting large photovoltages from a-SiC photocathodes with an amorphous TiO2 front surface field layer for solar hydrogen evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1585 Search PubMed .
R. P. Vasquez, CuO by XPS, Surf. Sci. Spectra, 1998, 5, 262 CrossRef .
S. Masudy-Panah, G. K. Dalapati, A. Kumar, K. Radhakrishnan and H. R. Tan, Reduction of thin Cu-rich interfacial layer and improvement of bulk CuO property through two step sputtering for p-CuO/n-Si heterojunction solar cell, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 074501 CrossRef .
S. Masudy-Panah, K. Radhakrishnan, H. R. Tan, R. Yi, T. I. Wong and G. K. Dalapati, Titanium doped cupric oxide for photovoltaic application, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 266–274 CrossRef .
R. P. Vasquez, Cu2O by XPS, Surf. Sci. Spectra, 1998, 5, 257 CrossRef .
S. Masudy-Panah, K. Radhakrishnan, A. Kumar, T. I. Wong, R. Yi and G. K. Dalapati, Phase transformation and optical bandgap widening of nitrogen doped cupric oxide, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 225301 CrossRef .
M. J. Siegfried and K. S. Choi, Electrochemical crystallization of cuprous oxide with systematic shape evolution, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1743 CrossRef .
A. Kargar, K. Sun, Y. Jing, C. Choi, H. Jeong, Y. Zhou, K. Madsen, P. Naughton, S. Jin, G. Y. Jung and D. Wang, Tailoring n-ZnO/p-Si branched nanowire heterostructures for selective photoelectrochemical water oxidation or reduction, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3017 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang and P. Wang, Highly stable copper oxide composite as an effective photocathode for water splitting via a facile electrochemical synthesis strategy, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2456 RSC .
H. Lahmar, A. Azizi, G. Schmerber and A. Dinia, Effect of the thickness of the ZnO buffer layer on the properties of electrodeposited p-Cu2O/n-ZnO/n-AZO heterojunctions, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 68663 RSC .
S. S. Wilson, J. P. Bosco, Y. Tolstova, D. O. Scanlon, G. W. Watson and H. A. Atwater, Interface stoichiometry control to improve device voltage and modify band alignment in ZnO/Cu2O heterojunction solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3606 Search PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, Benchmarking hydrogen evolving reaction and oxygen evolving reaction electrocatalysts for solar water splitting devices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mandal, H. Mullick, S. Majumdar, A. Dhar and S. K. Ray, Effect of Al concentration in grain and grain boundary region of Al-doped ZnO films: a dielectric approach, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 025307 CrossRef .
C. S. Chua, D. Ansovini, C. J. J. Lee, Y. T. Teng, L. T. Ong, D. Chi, T. S. A. Hor, R. Raja and Y.-F. Lim, The effect of crystallinity on photocatalytic performance of Co3O4 water-splitting cocatalysts, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5172 RSC .
J. Azevedo, L. Steier, P. Dias, M. Stefik, C. T. Sousa, J. P. Araujo, A. Mendes, M. Graetzel and S. D. Tilley, On the stability enhancement of cuprous oxide water splitting photocathodes by low temperature steam annealing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4044 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, S. Shet, H. Tang, H. Wang, T. Deutsch, Y. Yan, J. Turner and M. Al-Jassim, Electrochemical deposition of copper oxide nanowires for photoelectrochemical applications, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6962–6967 RSC .
H. Tang, M. A. Matin, H. Wang, S. Sudhakar, L. Chen, M. M. AL-Jassim and Y. Yan, Enhancing the Stability of CuO Thin-Film Photoelectrodes by Ti Alloying, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 3062–3067 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chiang, Y. Shin and S. Ehrman, Li Doped CuO Film Electrodes for Photoelectrochemical Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159(2), B227–B231 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chiang, K. Aroh, N. Franson, V. R. Satsangi, S. Dass and S. Ehrman, Copper oxide nanoparticle made by flame spray pyrolysis for photoelectrochemical water splitting e Part II. Photoelectrochemical study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15519–15526 CrossRef .
M.-W. Kim, H. Yoon, T. Y. Ohm, H. S. Jo, S. An, S. K. Choi, H. Park, S. S. Al-Deyab and B. K. Min, Nanotextured cupric oxide nanofibers coated with atomic layer deposited ZnO-TiO2 as highly efficient photocathodes, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 479–485 CrossRef .
J. G. Lee, D.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Lee, M.-W. Kim, S. An, H. S. Jo, C. Nervi, S. S. A-Deyab, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, Scalable Binder-Free Supersonic Cold Spraying of Nanotextured Cupric Oxide (CuO) Films as Efficient Photocathodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15406–15414 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta03027hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Current density and (b) (Jphoto–Jdark) vs. potential for CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. Although the photocurrent improves with increasing Al incorporation, the dark current also worsens.	 

 	Fig. 2  
J
photo, Jdark, and (Jphoto–Jdark) vs. potential for CuO:Al and CuO/CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated at Al sputtering power of 12 W. Inserting a CuO interfacial layer reduces the dark current significantly without affecting the photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al) photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. Photocathodes prepared using Al sputtering power of 0, 1, 6, 12, and 20 W retained 49%, 61%, 63%, 78%, and 76% of their initial Jphoto at 0 VRHE, respectively, after 2 hours. This indicates the effectiveness of Al incorporation in improving the photocorrosion stability.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cu 2p XPS spectra of CuO:Al photocathodes (a) before and (b) after photocorrosion stability test. Small peaks at binding energies of 932.7 and 952.8 eV, which are characteristic of Cu2O, appear for both CuO and CuO:Al photocathodes after photocorrosion stability test, but these peaks are weaker in the CuO:Al photocathodes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Experimentally measured Cu 2p3/2 XPS spectra (circles) and fitted curves (lines) for the (a) CuO and (b) CuO:Al photocathodes after photocorrosion stability test. The Cu+ peak of Cu2O is weaker in the CuO:Al photocathode. The ratio of the area of the Cu+ peak to the area of the Cu2+ peak (ACu+/ACu2+) is significantly influenced by Al concentration in the CuO, as shown in (c).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Nyquist plot, (b) Mott–Schottky plot, (c) hole carrier density, and (d) flat band voltage of CuO:Al photocathodes fabricated with Al sputtering power of 0–20 W. Charge transfer resistance is significantly reduced while hole carrier density and flat band potential are considerably increased with Al incorporation.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Current density, (b) zoomed-out portion of the photocurrent, and (c) photocorrosion stability of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes. Both plots share the same legend. Insertion of a thin ZnO:Al film between the electrolyte and the CuO:Al semiconductor improves the photovoltage, photocurrent, and photocorrosion stability. The photocathode with Al sputtered at 20 W during ZnO deposition achieved a record-high photovoltage of ∼0.53 VRHE and retained 85% of its initial Jphoto at 0 VRHE after 2 hours.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Nyquist and (b) Mott–Schottky plots of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al photocathodes. Both plots share the same legend. Charge transfer resistance and hole carrier concentration are significantly improved with the insertion of a thin ZnO:Al film between the electrolyte and the CuO:Al semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cross-sectional TEM image of a p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2 photocathode with TiO2 sputtered at 200 W. The thickness of the TiO2 protective layer is ∼20 nm.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes fabricated with TiO2 sputtering power from 50 W to 200 W. After 5 hours of illumination, the photocathode with TiO2 sputtered at 200 W maintained a photocorrosion stability of ∼87%. (b) Comparison of the photocorrosion stability of p-(CuO/CuO:Al), p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al, and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD spectrum for each of the TiO2 films deposited at the various sputtering powers and (b) FWHM of the main TiO2(101) peak vs. TiO2 sputtering power. Higher TiO2 sputtering power gives better crystallinity.	 

 	Fig. 12  High-resolution Ti 2p core-level XPS spectra of the TiO2 protective layer (a) before and (b) after the 5 hour photocorrosion stability test. (c) The ratio of the area under the Ti3+ peak to the area under the Ti4+ peak (ATi3+/ATi4+) for each TiO2 sputtering power before and after the photocorrosion stability test. Increasing the sputtering power significantly suppresses the formation of Ti3+ states under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 13  IPCE spectra for the p-(CuO/CuO:Al), p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al, and p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes. Record-high Jsc of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE was achieved for the photocathode with TiO2 sputtering power of 200 W. The IPCE of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathode at 0 VRHE is above 20% in the 400–650 nm wavelength range.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) J–V, (b) hydrogen evolution, (c) Nyquist, and (d) M–S plots of the p-(CuO/CuO:Al)/n-ZnO:Al/TiO2/Au–Pd photocathodes fabricated with TiO2 sputtering power from 50 W to 200 W. Record-high Jsc of ∼5.4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE was achieved for the photocathode with TiO2 sputtering power of 200 W.	 
Faradaic efficiency = (nH2)/(Q/ZF)	(2)


CuO	30	25	—
CuO:Al	500	300	12
ZnO:Al	20	300	20
TiO2	20	200	—

1	−0.55 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.35 VRHE	
25

2	−1.3 mA cm−2@0 0 VRHE	∼0.35 VRHE	
26

3	−1.8 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.42 VRHE	
27

4	−1.35 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.45 VRHE	
28

5	−3.5 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.4 VRHE	
39

6	−1.8 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.35 VRHE	
40

7	−2.3 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.3 VRHE	
41

8	−0.23 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.15 VRHE	
61

9	−0.0045 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.42 VRHE	
62

10	−1.5 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.45 VRHE	
63

11	−1.1 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.45 VRHE	
64

12	−2.5 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.2 VRHE	
65

13	−2.3 mA cm−2@0 VRHE	∼0.25 VRHE	
66


14
	
−5.4 mA cm

−2

@0 V

RHE

	
∼0.53 V

RHE

	
This work

VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197 + 0.059 × pH	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta03027h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
