Design, synthesis and applications of core–shell, hollow core, and nanorattle multifunctional nanostructures  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR07004J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR07004J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2510-2531Design, synthesis and applications of core–shell, hollow core, and nanorattle multifunctional nanostructures

        
          
            Ahmed Mohamed 
            El-Toni
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Mohamed A. 
            Habila
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Joselito Puzon 
            Labis
          
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Zeid A. 
            ALOthman
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mansour 
            Alhoshan
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed A. 
            Elzatahry
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Fan 
            Zhang
          
        
      g
aKing Abdullah Institute for Nanotechnology, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: aamohammad@ksu.edu.sa; ahmedtoni@yahoo.com
bCentral Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, CMRDI, Helwan 11421, Cairo, Egypt
cAdvanced Materials Research Chair, Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
dMath-Physics Dept., Mindanao State University, Fatima, General Santos City 9500, Philippines
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering and King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
fMaterials Science and Technology Program, College of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, P. O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar
gDepartment of Chemistry, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Catalysis and Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China
Received 
      9th October 2015
    , Accepted 22nd December 2015First published on 14th January 2016AbstractWith the evolution of nanoscience and nanotechnology, studies have been focused on manipulating nanoparticle properties through the control of their size, composition, and morphology. As nanomaterial research has progressed, the foremost focus has gradually shifted from synthesis, morphology control, and characterization of properties to the investigation of function and the utility of integrating these materials and chemical sciences with the physical, biological, and medical fields, which therefore necessitates the development of novel materials that are capable of performing multiple tasks and functions. The construction of multifunctional nanomaterials that integrate two or more functions into a single geometry has been achieved through the surface-coating technique, which created a new class of substances designated as core–shell nanoparticles. Core–shell materials have growing and expanding applications due to the multifunctionality that is achieved through the formation of multiple shells as well as the manipulation of core/shell materials. Moreover, core removal from core–shell-based structures offers excellent opportunities to construct multifunctional hollow core architectures that possess huge storage capacities, low densities, and tunable optical properties. Furthermore, the fabrication of nanomaterials that have the combined properties of a core–shell structure with that of a hollow one has resulted in the creation of a new and important class of substances, known as the rattle core–shell nanoparticles, or nanorattles. The design strategies of these new multifunctional nanostructures (core–shell, hollow core, and nanorattle) are discussed in the first part of this review. In the second part, different synthesis and fabrication approaches for multifunctional core–shell, hollow core–shell and rattle core–shell architectures are highlighted. Finally, in the last part of the article, the versatile and diverse applications of these nanoarchitectures in catalysis, energy storage, sensing, and biomedicine are presented.Ahmed Mohamed El-ToniAhmed Mohamed El-Toni received his Ph.D. in 2006 from the Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku University (Japan). In 2007, he joined the Functional Assembly Technology group, the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Nagoya (Japan) as a research fellow. Then by 2008, he joined King Abdullah Institute for Nanotechnology (KAIN), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Currently, he holds the position of an associate professor in KAIN and his research interests include the synthesis of novel core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials and their application into drug delivery, enzyme immobilization and water treatment.Mohamed A. HabilaMohamed Habila has received his Ph.D. in 2015 from the chemistry department, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Currently he is an assistant professor in the advanced materials research chair, chemistry department, King Saud University. His research interests include fabrication of multifunctional core–shell nanomaterials for separation and pre-concentration techniques, wastewater treatment as well as carbon based materials for hydrogen storage applications.Joselito Puzon LabisJoselito Puzon Labis received his Ph.D. from the Division of Quantum Materials Physics, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Japan in 2002. Then, he joined as a research fellow at the Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center, Hiroshima University, Japan. In 2010, he was appointed as an assistant professor at the King Abdullah Institute for Nanotechnology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. His current research focuses on the nanostructures of III–V materials and ZnO for solar cells and other applications.
1. Introduction
Recently, nanoparticles have increasingly gained attention because of their remarkable properties that result from their nano-dimensions. Continuous development in nanoparticle research has been motivated by the search for new applications, performance improvement, and combined nanomaterial functions (i.e., developing multifunctional nanomaterials). One method to accomplish these objectives is through the coating of nanoparticles with one or more layers of other materials that have interesting properties. The surrounding layer is called the shell, and the original nanoparticle is named as the core. It has been discovered that the constructed layer, or shell, can change the function and properties of the original core. In other words, the core can exhibit new chemical or catalytic reactivity with shell formation. In addition, thermal stability or dispersibility can be improved by growing such shells. In fact, novel optical, magnetic and electronic characteristics can be imparted to the core nanoparticle through the formation of a core–shell structure. Therefore, such modified structures could provide the combined functionality of both the core and the shell with novel properties rather than the mono-functionality of nanoparticles alone. This core–shell concept presents two materials with two functions in one structure, as shown in Fig. 1a. By increasing the number of shells and/or the number of materials, the functions of the newly formed structure can consequently be increased, which then offers unlimited possibilities and extensive applications in many fields. For example, a magnetic core can be covered with a porous silica shell that can be loaded with drugs and provide biocompatibility, while the core can simultaneously be used for targeted delivery to a specific organ.1 Adding an extra shell, or layer, also provides for further functions. For example, an Fe3O4 nano-core coated with both a dye-doped mesoporous silica shell and a poly(ethylene glycol) layer can possess tri-functional properties that can be used in magnetic resonance, fluorescence imaging, and drug delivery, thus making it a novel candidate for simultaneous drug delivery and cancer diagnosis.2
 Fig. 1  Multifunctional nanomaterials including (a) core–shell, (b) hollow core–shell, and (c) rattle core–shell nanostructures. 
However, core–shell structures offer limited storage capacity, and researchers have been seeking more advanced design and geometry modifications to attain more flexibility. The suitable design and geometry of the core–shell structure allows the formation of other novel architectures, such as hollow core–shell structures (as shown in Fig. 1b) through removal of the core. The large fraction of empty space in the hollow structures has been used as a system for the loading and controlled release of special materials, such as drugs, genes, peptides, and biological molecules.3 The hollow cavity within the sphere can be used as a nanoreactor with catalytically active species loaded for catalytic reactions,4 or to tune the refractive index, decrease density, improve particle resistance toward continuous volume change, or to provide imaging markers designed for cancer detection.5,6 Furthermore, the hollow cavity is characterized by having a high surface area and pore volume as well as the capability of capturing hazardous materials within their interior void.7
Despite the outstanding storage space provided by hollow core structures, one of their main drawbacks is the lack of an internal core. A novel approach to combine the high storage capacity of hollow spheres with the advantages of the core–shell structure is to create one or more cavities between the outer shell and the inner solid core, producing a structure known as the rattle-type or yolk–shell. In other words, the yolk or rattle core–shell architecture (Fig. 1c) could be described as having a core@void@shell configuration.8 The rattle structure possesses the combined properties of the solid cores, such as magnetic, metal, or quantum dot nanoparticles, together with those of the void in-between the core and the shell, which can be used for extra storage. Rattle core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials have gained considerable attention in recent years and have shown promising applications as nanoreactors, drug/gene delivery agents and lithium-ion batteries.9–14
In this review, a comprehensive overview of the multifunctional core–shell, hollow core, and nanorattle nanoarchitectures is presented. Further highlights are focused on the emerging trends of their prospective designs, synthesis approaches, and applications. This article is organized as follows. In the first section, different design strategies for the core–shell, hollow core, and nanorattle multifunctional nanostructures are discussed. In the second section, the key synthesis approaches for constructing each of these nanostructures are summarized. In the third section, a range of potential applications of core–shell, hollow core, and nanorattle multifunctional nanostructures, including nanocatalysis, biomedical applications, lithium-ion batteries and sensing fields, is reviewed.
2. Design of multifunctional nanomaterials
2.1. Core–shell
Nanoparticles have received more research attention than bulk materials due to their superior properties; however, from the beginning of the 1980s, studies have been concentrated on composite nanomaterials that include more than one particle because they exhibited new and improved properties.15–17 By the end of the 1990s, multilayer composite nanoparticles had been developed and showed significantly improved performance due to their structure.18–20 By this time, the term core–shell nanoparticles had become more common, and many investigations and studies had been directed toward to this novel branch of materials.
The core–shell structures are composite materials that contain an inner core coated with one or more layers (shells) of different materials. The materials of the core–shell structures can exist in different combinations,21 such as core and shell materials that are organic or inorganic. Furthermore, organic cores can be coated with inorganic shells and vice versa.21 The physical and chemical properties of core–shell nanoparticles are mainly associated with the materials and structure of the core and shell, but they are also associated with the interface. This structure dependence provides huge opportunities and possibilities for manipulating properties by controlling the chemical compositions and relative sizes of the core and shell.22,23
The selection of the core and shell material is related to the type of targeted application. Therefore, design of multifunctional core–shell nanoparticles usually depends on the final application. For drug delivery, the core material could possess magnetic characteristics, and the outer shell could be a polymer or porous silica.24 Similarly, for separable nanocatalysts, the core material can be Fe3O4 or Fe2O3, while the shell could be a metal nanocluster.25 For stable nanocatalysts,26 Pt metal nanoparticles can be stabilized from growing in size, by the effect of high temperature, through coating them with a porous silica shell that allows the diffusion of the reactants and products through the shell. In this architecture, the morphology, size and stability of metal cores can be maintained regardless the working temperature. For designing a system capable of performing photothermal/chemotherapy and multimodal imaging of cancer,27 the magnetic core, which is responsible for multimodal imaging capability, can be coated with a porous silica layer in which chemotherapy drug molecules can be encapsulated. Finally, gold nanorods can be formed as a second shell around the mesoporous silica shell, and these can function as photothermal therapeutic agents.
In fact, core–shell structure design can also be affected by the core type and size. For a multifunctional, multimodal imaging core–shell system, upconversion nanoparticles can be used as the shell material, while Fe3O4 nanoparticles can be used as the core for magnetic resonance imaging applications. The selection of a suitable core size is crucial to design an efficient core–shell system; the appropriate magnetic core size for drug delivery applications is between 50 and 300 nm. Nanoparticles larger than 300 nm will be trapped in the lungs and liver, while nanoparticles smaller than 50 nm will possess magnetic forces too weak for drug delivery.28 Functionalization of the core surface with organic functionalities can be considered as an important step for constructing/designing the outer shell. To fabricate a gold shell around the magnetic/silica cores, the core surface should contain thiol groups as functional moieties that can be attached to gold nanoclusters for shell formation.29
These design concepts can also be extended to the tuning of core and shell physical characteristics, i.e., from dense to porous, by using surfactant molecules.30 Various spherical core/shell nanoarchitectures can be constructed based on the nature of the core and shell materials; cores can be dense (solid) or porous (Fig. 2a). Moreover, different types of shells are possible, such as continuous/discontinuous dense shells, continuous porous shells (Fig. 2a), and multiple shells (Fig. 2b).31 In addition, other designs can be created by choosing core materials of different shapes. In addition to the usual spherical morphology of core–shell nanoparticles, there are many other possible shapes of core/shell nanoarchitectures, depending on the various core morphologies that are available, including nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires, nanorings and nanostars.21,32–36
 Fig. 2  Designs to produce different core–shell architectures with (a) different porous core and shell characters, (b) different core–multiple shell structures. (Reprinted with permission from the Faculty of Technology, University of Novi Sad.)31 
2.2. Hollow core–shell
Over the past few decades, interest in monodisperse hollow spheres has grown considerably in response to their unique properties, such as uniform size, well-defined morphology, large surface area, low density, and wide range of potential applications. Such applications make use of the large empty cavity in these hollow structures, which can be used for the loading and controlled release of specific molecules, such as drugs, peptides and genes.3,5 In addition, hollow core spheres are used as refractive index modulators; other usages include increasing the active catalysis area and hence its adsorption, lowering the particle density, expanding the array of imaging markers that can be used in early cancer detection, and improving particle tolerance to cyclical volume changes.6,37 Due to their special optical, thermal, catalytic, electro-chemical, photo-electrochemical and mechanical properties, inorganic hollow spheres could comprise a more diverse and richer class of materials than organic hollow core spheres.38
The hollow sphere concept arose when there was a need for lowering the nanoparticle density or constructing nanoparticles with huge storage capacities together with enhanced capture capabilities. The design of the hollow core spheres was first initiated by the concept of core removal, or the hard templating approach.3 This process involved the removal of different types of core materials, such as metals,39 metal oxides,40 and polymer nanoparticles.41 Designing hollow core–shell nanostructures also includes tuning their size and shape. Size tuning can be performed by the precise selection of the core size prior to the core removal step.
Shape tuning has been conducted by selecting core templates of different morphologies to obtain hollow spheres,42 hollow nanocubes,43 hollow fibers,44 and hollow nanoplates.45 Furthermore, variation of the hollow nanoparticle composition has been performed by choosing suitable shell materials, which can include metals,46 metal oxides,47 and polymers.48 Moreover, the shells of hollow nanoparticles can be solid with a dense character, similar to most polymer and metal shells,49 or they can be made porous by the addition of surfactant molecules during shell formation, as is the case with many metal oxide shells.50 In addition, controlling the number of shells (single,51 double,52 or multiple53) can be another tool for designing hollow core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials.
The template method, in particular, is the most common method for producing hollow core–shell structures. In this method, there are usually at least two steps that are indispensable. First, the templates must be modified such that they will have the ability to attract inorganic precursors (salts or alkoxides) onto the surface of the template core. Next, after the decoration of the inorganic shell, the templates are eliminated, which results in the hollow core–shell formation (Fig. 3).3,9
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of a conventional hard templating process for hollow sphere synthesis. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)9 
Generally, we can categorize the templates as hard or soft. When using hard templates, such as SiO2,54 carbon,55 polymers,56,57 and metals,58 the resulting hollow product will have a structure similar to that of the template and will exhibit a well-defined and monodisperse morphology. However, removing the templates by thermal (sintering) or chemical (etching) means can be a very complicated and energy-consuming procedure. Soft templates, such as bacteria,59 droplets,60 and vesicles,61 are easier to remove; however, both the morphology and the monodispersity of the resulting hollow nanoparticles are usually poor due to the deformability of the soft template. Nevertheless, although the drawbacks of these templating approaches may seem inherent and insurmountable, novel emerging techniques, e.g., sacrificial templates and modified soft templates, may have the potential to overcome these disadvantages.3
2.3. Rattle core–shell structure
The demand for combining the functional properties of the core–shell structure with the huge storage capacity of the hollow core–shell structure has led to the construction of a novel rattle core–shell system, which exhibits the merits of both architectures. Nanorattles represent a new and novel class of special core/shell structures with a characteristic core@void@shell configuration (Fig. 4a).62 Among complex multifunctional nanoarchitectures, the rattle core–shell nanomaterials (also known as “yolk/shell” structures, where the nanoparticle core is contained by one or more hollow shells) have attracted a great deal of attention due to their appealing structures, tunable physical and chemical properties. The tailor-ability and functionality of both the cores and hollow shells also make nanorattles promising for a range of remarkable applications, such as catalysis, biosensors and surface-enhanced Raman scattering.9–14
 Fig. 4  Designs to produce the different nanorattle architectures of (a) core–shell, (b) multiple-core and (c) multiple-shell. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)62 
Over the last two decades, research on these functionalized nanorattle materials has been geared towards the design and fabrication of different morphologies for desirable properties.9,10 Recently, catalytically active systems designed using nanorattle architectures with metal cores such as Au, Ag, Pt, and Ni showed outstanding performance for various catalytic reactions.14,63,64 The nanorattle catalysts provide high activities that are attributed to the freely moving core within the protective shell (Fig. 1). This configuration offers a homogeneous environment for heterogeneous catalytic activities.11–14,65,66–68 Since Au@polymer nanorattles were first reported by Xia et al., a number of nanorattles with different core–shell configurations and compositions with different sizes and shapes have been developed.8–13,69–71
Furthermore, nanorattles have been engineered and designed over a wide range of chemical compositions, including metal@polymer,65 metal oxide@silica,66 metal@carbon,67 metal@silica,68 polymer@polymer,69 silica@metal oxide,70 metal@metal oxide,71 and metal silica@carbon.72 In addition, multiple–core nanorattles (Fig. 4b) and multiple–shell nanorattles (Fig. 4c) have also been recently designed and studied. Driven by the interesting compositions and tailored properties, novel fabrication methods have been developed to functionalize these unique nanorattles. As a result, nanorattles can be produced by many techniques, such as the selective-etching, galvanic replacement, soft-templating, Ostwald ripening and ship-in-bottle approaches.
For example, the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticle@silica nanorattle catalysts is significantly enhanced by their unique design, where each metal nanoparticle core is prevented from aggregating by the outer protective shell. Moreover, these cores are movable, which allows them to possess more exposed active sites.12–14,67 Additionally, the diffusion rates of the reactants are controlled by manipulating the structure of the core and the porosity of the shell, and consequently the confined reaction environment becomes quite similar to that of homogeneous catalysis.72–74
Furthermore, rattle core–shell nanoparticles present a new and novel platform for investigating the cooperative effects of the two catalysts in a rattle structure.75 It is worth mentioning that the large hollow space between the core and the shell in nanorattles can be designed to accommodate fluorophores or drug molecules. They can then function as promising delivery vehicles for targeted drug/gene delivery research.76–78 In addition, the voids in the rattle-core/shell structure can be engineered to be exploited as a buffering space for the electroactive core materials in a lithium insertion–deinsertion process to improve the cycling performance of electrode materials. Therefore, nanorattles are very promising materials for lithium-ion battery research.1,79,80
3. Routes for fabrication of different multifunctional nanomaterials
3.1. Core–shell nanomaterial fabrication

3.1.1. Core materials. 
Attaining the final applications and targeted properties of core–shell nanoparticles is mostly dependent on careful selection of both the core and shell materials. The core can be composed of various metals, metal oxides, quantum dots, and polymer materials. Many investigations have been directed toward constructing core–shell systems based on metal oxides,81,82 noble Au83,84 and Ag,85,86 non-noble Ni,87 Co,88 and Fe,89 and polymer nanocores.90,91
Metal oxide nanoparticles have been used as core materials for photocatalytic, drug control release and drug delivery applications. Additionally, noble metal nanocores have been used for nanocatalysis as well as photothermal cancer therapy. Quantum dots have been used as cores for bio-imaging and diagnostic applications. Iron, nickel, cobalt, manganese, chromium and gadolinium92 nanocores have gained attention because they play important roles in magnetic resonance imaging as well as separation technology.93 Moreover, iron oxide nanoparticles have also been a promising multifunctional nanosystem for imaging and therapy; they have unique properties, such as biocompatibility, an intrinsic ability to enhance magnetic resonance contrast, and facile surface modification, and therefore they are excellent theranostic agent candidates.93,94


3.1.2. Shell fabrication. 
Several approaches have been established to construct a protective layer or shell around different types of nanoparticle cores. In all of these methods, the cores are formed first, and then shell formation takes place. The core surfaces provide nucleation sites (seeds) for the shell atoms to nucleate and grow through sol–gel or chemical precipitation approaches. In other word, the core acts as a substrate for shell deposition. Different types of shell materials require different coating or shell formation strategies.
3.1.2.1. Metal oxide shell. 
Metal oxide is a class of materials that possess a wide spectrum of properties. Upon depositing a metal oxide layer on another type of nanoparticle, a combination of properties can be obtained. For example, metal oxide coatings can endow iron oxide nanoparticles with interesting semiconducting and magneto–optical properties. For instance, iron oxide nanoparticles can be utilized for the selective enrichment of phosphopeptides by coating them with Al2O3,95 ZrO2,96 TiO2,97 and Ta2O598 metal oxide shells.
However, despite the various types of metal oxides being used as a coating layer, SiO2 is still most common for shell formation. The well-established synthesis route used to prepare nanoparticle@SiO2 core–shell nanostructures is the sol–gel approach, which involves hydrolysis and condensation of the silica precursor (tetraethyl orthosilicate). The sol–gel approach has been implemented for the coating of noble metal nanocores with silica shells, such as Au@SiO2,99 Ag@SiO2100 (Fig. 5a), and Pd@SiO2.101 The silica coating is so commonly used because of its amorphous character and facile shell formation process.
 Fig. 5  Scheme of the proposed formation process and TEM images of (a) a SiO2 shell around a Ag nanocore, (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)100 and (b) a TiO2 shell around an Au nanocore. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)107 
However, upon growing other crystalline metal oxide shells such as TiO2 on the surface of nanoparticle cores, especially metallic cores, self-nucleation and uncontrollable growth takes place due to large interfacial stress between the shell and metallic nanocores. Nevertheless, this issue can be resolved by the addition of surfactant molecules to prompt nucleation and growth of the metal oxide shell around the metal nanocore. Using this concept, TiO2 shells have been coated around Au nanoparticles102 through the addition of hydroxypropyl cellulose to modify citrate-stabilized Au nanoparticles. Thereafter, the less reactive sol–gel precursor titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) can be used to create TiO2 shells around Au nanocores. However, titanium tetrabutoxide showed much lower hydrolysis compared with titanium diisopropoxide, which indicates that butoxide is a more suitable precursor for homogeneous TiO2 shell formation. Fornasiero et al. constructed Pd@CeO2 core–shell nanostructures by utilizing the self-assembly between the functionalized Pd nanoparticles and cerium alkoxides.103,104
Another method that can be used for fabrication of metal oxide shells instead of the sol–gel technique is the hydrothermal process. The hydrothermal process has many advantages, such as being non-toxic and environmentally friendly and having low cost, solubility with a broad range of materials, and polar affinity, which facilitates the controlled growth of metal oxide shells.105
Generally, the hydrothermal method is conducted within a sealed vessel, where the water creates pressure upon heating and helps to improve the crystallinity of the prepared nanoparticles. Zhang et al. have used the hydrothermal method to grow CeO2 shells around Pt cores. In this work, CeCl3 and citrate-stabilized Pt were mixed in the presence of urea (at desired concentrations) and heated in an autoclave at 90 °C for desired times.106
In comparison with the sol–gel process, the hydrothermal process does not require the use of surfactants to facilitate metal oxide shell formation. Moreover, the simplicity and environmental friendliness of the hydrothermal method support its expansion as a shell construction method. However, a deeper understanding of the process is required for controlling the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of metal oxides on metal nanocores rather than forming metal oxide nanoparticles (Fig. 5b).107
3.1.2.2. Metal shells. 
Coating nanoparticle cores with noble metal shells has become an attractive research topic because it is expected to provide novel characteristics and versatile applications. One of the most important methods for constructing noble metal shells is the reverse micelle approach, which serves as a nanoreactor for shell growth by adjusting the ratio of the metal salt to the reducing agent. This method has been implemented to grow metal shells around Co and Fe nanoparticles.85,108–111
Another method that has been extensively utilized for the synthesis of metal shells is the thermal decomposition method for organometallic precursors.111,112 For coating a Pd shell around a Ni Core, Ni(acac)2 and Pd(acac)2 were added to oleylamine at an elevated temperature.112 Knowing that the Ni–TOP complex tended to decompose faster at a lower temperature than the Pd–TOP complex, while the Pd–TOP complex tended to decompose more easily at higher temperatures than the Ni–TOP complex; then by performing the thermal decomposition reaction at a lower temperature (205 °C) Ni cores can be formed easily, while the Pd–TOP complex maintains its stability. By elevating the reaction temperature to 235 °C, the Pd–TOP complex begins to decompose and form a Pd shell around the previously formed Ni cores.112
To fabricate metal shells on magnetic nanoparticles, thermal decomposition methods have also been utilized. However, Fe3O4 nanoparticles were first synthesized by the decomposition of iron(III) oleate into a mixture of oleic acid and oleylamine. Thereafter, an Au shell was introduced to the Fe3O4 surface by HAuCl4 reduction in the oleylamine and chloroform mixture. The Au–Fe3O4 core–shell nanoparticles could then be transferred to the water solution by adsorbing cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and sodium citrate to make them more hydrophilic for facile mixing with water. Thereafter, the Au shells surrounding the Fe3O4 cores could be grown thicker by dispersing the hydrophilic Fe3O4–Au into water with the addition of HAuCl4 and a reducing agent. Furthermore, a second Ag shell also could be constructed around the Fe3O4@Au core–shell nanoparticles by adding AgNO3 with the reducing agent. It is worth mentioning that the plasmonic properties of the core–shell nanoparticles can be tuned towards blue shift (approximately 501 nm) or red shift around (560 nm) (Fig. 6). Fe3O4@Au core–shell nanoparticles offer not only the double functionality of the magnetic character and plasmonic properties but also long-term for core and shell material stability. It is expected that Fe3O4@Au core–shell can possess great opportunities for therapeutic and diagnostic applications.113
 Fig. 6  Scheme diagram for tuning the plasmonic properties of the magnetic core–metal shell nanoparticles by controlling the shell type and thickness. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)113 
3.1.2.3. Dense shells. 
Most of the shells formed around different types of cores are dense, or solid. The dense shell implies that no pores exist in its structure. The dense shell is usually a metal oxide such as alumina or silica, and can also be a non-metal such as carbon. The shell material types determine the final character of core–shell nanoparticles. When silica or alumina is selected as a shell material, the final core–shell will show a hydrophilic character; however, when carbon is used as an outer shell, the final core–shell nanoparticles will show a hydrophobic character. Silica and carbon are the most common dense shell materials that have been used for insulating/protecting magnetic nanoparticles from oxidation/dissolution.
The magnetic core–dense shell structure can be utilized with biological samples through chemical bonding or physical adsorption. Dense silica shells have been coated onto different types of cores using the Stöber method. In this process, the silica precursor (TEOS) is hydrolyzed under alkaline conditions to form silica nuclei that can be seeded on the surface of the nanoparticle cores in a heterogeneous nucleation step. Thereafter, in the growth step, the newly formed silica nuclei begin to bond to the previously formed silica seeds to produce a homogeneous shell. The nucleation and growth steps can be controlled by manipulating the TEOS and alkali (NaOH, NH4OH) concentrations. The shell thickness can be controlled by increasing the TEOS concentration or prolonging the reaction time.
A similar strategy can be extended to alumina or titania shells. It is worth mentioning that silica shells will not be affected by heat treatment due to their amorphous character. However, titania and other crystalline shells will undergo grain growth due to a phase change from amorphous to crystalline, which may result in a loss of the dense shell character. The carbon shell can be grown on the surface of core nanoparticles by high temperature processes such as the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. Wet processes such as the hydrothermal and solvothermal methods can be used to carbonize glucose material to form protective carbon shells. However, in recent years, polymer shells that can be coated more homogeneously around the core nanoparticles have been found to be more suitable candidates for forming carbon shells through a carbonization step.3,9
3.1.2.4. Mesoporous shells. 
As mentioned before, dense shells have been constructed with the aims of protecting, insulating and providing multi-functionality. However, turning a dense shell into a mesoporous one can provide new opportunities because such shells can accommodate molecules and allow the diffusion of materials into and out of the core. A mesoporous shell is a shell exhibiting pores with diameters ranging from 2 to 15 nm, depending on the type of the pore forming agent (surfactant) used. In addition, the mesoporous shell has advantages over the dense shell due to its chemical composition and textural properties associated with their high shell pore volumes.
The mesoporous silica shell was first reported by Büchel et al. in 1998; their process of n-octadecyltrimethoxysilane (C18TMS) hydrolysis did not use a surfactant and resulted in the formation of non-ordered mesoporous shells.114 Zhao et al. have used a cationic surfactant (Cetyl trimethylammonium bromide) to form ordered, perpendicularly aligned mesoporous SiO2 shells around magnetic nanoparticles cores, as shown in Fig. 7.115 Thereafter, many studies have implemented cationic surfactants as tools for the construction of ordered mesoporous silica shells around different types of cores. In addition, El-Toni et al. have reported amino-functionalized mesoporous shell fabrication around silica cores,116 and magnetic117 nanoparticles using anionic surfactants. Mesoporous silica shells with large pore sizes (7 nm) have also been formed by using a copolymer (Plunoric P123) surfactant.118 The selective-etching method has also been used to covert dense silica shells into non-ordered mesoporous shells, as reported by Ge et al.119 In this method, silica shells were stabilized by the adsorption of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) molecules, and an alkaline etchant was then introduced to form pores within the shells.
 Fig. 7  The formation and a typical TEM image of Fe3O4–nSiO2@mSiO2 microspheres. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)115 

3.2. Hollow structure fabrication

3.2.1. Hollow core–shell nanomaterial fabrication. 
Hollow core–shell nanostructures are usually fabricated by first synthesizing the core nanoparticle and then coating the shell materials onto the cores. Thereafter, removal of the core materials results in hollow core–shell structure formation. This process is usually designated as hard templating and can include polymers, metals, and metal oxide cores as hard templates. However, the other common process for hollow core–shell structure fabrication is the soft templating process that is based on utilizing shell material precursors together with surfactant molecules under special conditions to form hollow core–shell structures. The following sections will discuss both the approaches.


3.2.2. Hard template strategy. 
Different types of templates, including polymers, metals and metal oxides, have been implemented for the fabrication of hollow core structures. The final size of hollow core nanoparticles can be controlled by adjusting the size of the template.
3.2.2.1. Polymer template-based methods. 
Polymer nanoparticles can be considered as the most commonly used hard template for producing hollow spheres. The polymer templating method can be classified into two main categories. The first category includes methods based on the usage of polymer beads, such as polystyrene nanoparticles and their derivatives, to construct hollow spheres of SnO2,120 SiO2,121 Fe3O4, Co3O4 and Ni(OH)2.122 The shells are formed on the polystyrene nanoparticles either by surface reaction based on the functional groups present on the core surface or by controlled precipitation of inorganic metal salt molecules. To obtain the hollow structures, polystyrene nanoparticles are removed by either calcination processes in air or by selective dissolution using a suitable solvent. Hollow silica spheres have been prepared by synthesis with polystyrene nanoparticles.124 The silica shell was coated on the polystyrene cores via condensation between silanol groups on the core surface and the silica precursor (TEOS) through the alkaline catalyzed sol–gel method. By calcination at 600 °C, the polystyrene cores were decomposed, and hollow core silica spheres were formed.123
Hollow TiO2 spheres have also been synthesized using sulfonated polystyrene nanoparticles. The existence of sulfonate groups improves the hydrophilic character of polystyrene nanoparticles and allows interaction with shell precursors such as titanium butoxide, producing hollow titania spheres. Upon addition of titanium butoxide to the solution of sulfonate functionalized polystyrene nanoparticles, hydrolysis begins to form the TiO2 shells. Finally, by the solvent dissolution of the polystyrene cores, hollow titania spheres can be obtained.124
The second category includes methods of layer-by-layer self-assembly.125,126 The layer-by-layer technique is based on the electrostatic attraction of oppositely charged species that have been alternately deposited on polymer nanoparticles. In this approach, multilayered shells are formed on the polystyrene nanoparticles through the adsorption of the polyelectrolyte and oppositely charged nanoparticles. Uniform hollow spheres of different types of inorganic materials, including Mn2O3,127 SiO2,125 and TiO2,128 have been produced by performing the calcinations of the formed core–shells to remove the polystyrene cores as well as the polyelectrolyte (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of procedures for preparing inorganic and hybrid hollow spheres using the layer-by-layer (LBL) technique based on PS colloidal templates. (Reprinted with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science.)126 
It is worth mentioning that this method is conducive for controlling the hollow sphere diameter and shell thickness by allowing the adjustment of polystyrene nanoparticle size and inorganic precursor concentration, respectively.
The advantages of polymer-based templating methods include the ability to produce hollow spheres of metals, metal oxides and non-metal nanoparticles with variable cavity diameters, shell thicknesses, and surface functionalities. However, the time and energy consumption required for this method are disadvantageous. The time consumption is due to the need for multiple steps to obtain the hollow sphere structure, such as the preparation of the core nanoparticles, the coating process, the adsorption of polyelectrolyte, and the multiple separation and washing steps. Moreover, energy consumption comes from the calcination processes that require elevated temperature conditions.3
3.2.2.2. Inorganic non-metallic template-based methods. 
Carbon and silica have been used as non-metallic templates for the synthesis of hollow core nanoparticles.3 Easy removal of carbon nanoparticles as well as their multiple and numerous reactive groups support their suitability for the templating process. Various metal oxide hollow spheres, including MnO2, Ga2O3 and NiO,129–131 have been fabricated through the carbon templating process using carbonaceous polysaccharide spheres.3 Upon hydrothermal treatment of carbonaceous polysaccharide, carbon spheres are formed that are hydrophilic in nature due to the presence of hydroxyl groups. These groups can bind metal cations easily during the shell formation step through electrostatic attraction or coordination. By performing calcinations, the metal salts forming the shell are condensed and cross-linked together to form a metal oxide layer, while the carbon cores are thermally decomposed to produce hollow structures. Based on the carbon templating method, Liu et al. have prepared 300 nm hollow Gd2O3: Ln (Ln = Eu3+, Sm3+) microspheres,130 where glucose under hydrothermal conditions forms carbon spheres containing hydroxyl groups. During the coating step, Gd3+ and Ln3+ precipitate in the presence of urea onto the carbon spheres, and by calcinations at 300 °C, the hollow spheres are formed. Co3O4, CeO2, Fe2O3, Ni2O3 and CuO hollow core spheres132 have also been formed by a one-pot hydrothermal method by mixing carbohydrates and metal salts and then heating them in an autoclave at 180 °C. Using such methods, a wide range of metal oxide hollow spheres that were not accessible via the sol–gel approach have been synthesized. The surface area and thickness of the shells can be tuned by controlling the carbohydrate:metal-salt ratio.131


3.2.3. Soft template-based strategies. 
The soft templating method represents an attractive research track for synthesizing hollow structures because the templates can be removed in a simple and easy way.132–136 However, the main disadvantages of soft templating methods are the poor monodispersity and lack of control over particle morphology, which can be attributed to soft template deformation. Therefore, the most challenging aspect is the fabrication of uniform and monodisperse hollow spheres. In this regard, 11–30 nm La(OH)3 hollow spheres have been reported by Leidinger et al.137 through construction of W/O microemulsion using n-dodecane as the nonpolar oil phase, Cetyl trimethylammonium bromide as a surfactant and 1-hexanol as a co-surfactant. Monodisperse micrometer-sized SiO2 hollow spheres have been fabricated, where the outer and inner diameters of the hollow spheres could be controlled by adjusting the water to the surfactant ratio of the underlying micellar system, which, in turn, affected the size of the relevant micelles and influenced the outer diameter and cavity size. Multi-shelled Cu2O hollow spheres with a single-crystalline shell wall have been prepared using a soft templating method as shown in Fig. 9.135 Furthermore, 50 nm silver spheres having wall thicknesses of 3–5 nm and 10–15 nm diameter inner cavities were also obtained by implementing a soft templating approach.138 In addition, further complex hollow cage-like silica spheres loaded with iron oxide nanoparticles in their porous shells have been fabricated using the oil-in-diethylene-glycol microemulsion approach.139 Zoldesi et al. have prepared monodisperse SiO2 hollow spheres using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) silicone O/W emulsion templating.140
 Fig. 9  The formation of different Cu2O hollow structures in the presence of a CTAB template: (a) micelle, (b) single-lamellar vesicle, (c) multi-lamellar vesicle. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)135 

3.3. Rattle core–shell nanomaterial fabrication
Rattle core–shell nanostructures can be fabricated using five main approaches: selective-etching, soft templating assembly, ship-in-bottle, Ostwald ripening, and galvanic replacement. Furthermore, in some cases, combinations of these approaches have been used to construct rattle core–shell nanostructures with high degrees of functionality and complexity.

3.3.1. Selective-etching or dissolution methods. 
Recently, the selective-etching approach has been considered an important tool for fabricating rattle core–shell nanoparticles. In this process, the core nanoparticles are coated with double shells of two different materials. Thereafter, the intermediate shell is selectively etched by a suitable solvent or by calcination steps to construct the rattle structure (Fig. 10). In some cases, the cores are coated with one shell, and then either the inner part of the shell or the outer part of the core is dissolved to produce the targeted structure. The selective-etching approach has been implemented to fabricate rattle core–shell nanostructures with a spherical morphology as well as non-spherical rattle nanostructures such as ellipsoids and ‘sword-in-sheath’ architectures.72,141–143
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of etching strategies for preparing rattle core–shell nanoparticles. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)62 
3.3.1.1. Partial removal of the core or the shell. 
This method is based on the selective removal of the outer part of the core, the inner part of the shell, or the intermediate shell at the core–shell or core–double shell structure through using a suitable solvent or calcination step (Fig. 10).62 Based on this approach, a three-layered ‘sandwich’ structure of organic–inorganic hybrid solid silica spheres has been synthesized, first by the hydrolysis of TEOS and N-3-(trimethoxysilyl)propylethylenediamine, producing silica spheres containing an organosilica layer.144 Thereafter, the rattle nanostructure was obtained by selectively etching the middle organosilica layer using specific amounts of hydrofluoric acid.
Fe3O4@SiO2 rattle core–shell nanostructures with inner cavities have been fabricated by forming carbon spheres around the magnetic nanoparticles in a one-pot hydrothermal method using carbon and iron precursors. Thereafter, silica shells were formed around the carbon-coated magnetic nanoparticles. Fe3O4–SiO2 rattle nanostructures were finally obtained through carbon removal by a calcination process.145 Using cross-linked polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) as a middle or intermediate layer between two different types of inorganic materials, such as TiO2@SiO2, with subsequent sample calcination, corresponding rattle nanostructures have been formed.141
Shi et al. have recently reported a new strategy for producing mesoporous silica-based rattle core–shell nanostructures, called the “controllable structural difference-based selective-etching strategy”.4 This method depends on the differences in the material structure rather than the composition, and consequently, due to large amounts of condensed Si–O–Si networks, mesoporous silica shells will be less vulnerable to etching than the silica core, which is made of less condensed Si–OH bonds; this composition results in shell stability in the presence of sodium carbonate solution, while the cores dissolve to produce rattle structures. Implementing this method, Au–meso–SiO2 and Fe3O4@meso–SiO2 rattle core–shell nanoparticles have been obtained.4 Similarly, Zhao et al. have reported the selective etching of dense silica using alkaline solution while simultaneously maintaining mesoporous silica shell stability through condensation with the cationic surfactant, Cetyl trimethylammonium bromide molecules.146,147
3.3.1.2. Surface-protected etching. 
This method was developed by Yin et al.119,148,149 and is based on a two step-process. The first step involves the adsorption of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) polymer molecules onto the outer surface of silica spheres to stabilize this layer with hydrogen bonding between the polymer carbonyl groups and the hydroxyl groups of the silica surface. In the second step, a suitable etchant, such as NaBH4 or NaOH, can be used to attack and dissolve the silica layer beneath the outer stabilized surface, which leads to the formation of rattle core–shell silica spheres.


3.3.2. Soft template assembly. 
The lack of control over size, morphology and composition of rattle structures prepared by the selective-etching process as well as the multiple tedious steps involved represent the main limitations of this approach. Soft templating methods have been effectively utilized to prepare rattle core–shell nanoparticles. (Max) Lu et al.8 have reported a general approach for constructing rattle structures using a fluorocarbon surfactant as a template. The resulting rattle-type spheres exhibited variable sizes, ranging from 200 to 700 nm, with different cores, including silica, gold, and Fe3O4 nanoparticles. In addition, Liu et al. have also shown that the shell thickness can be controlled and tuned to range from 10 to 50 nm.62 Soft templating methods have also been used to construct nanoreactors composed of Au rattle cores coated with ordered mesoporous organosilica (PMO) shells.150 Similarly, magnetic rattle cores have been encapsulated by mesoporous PMO shells151 with the capability of tuning the rattle nanoparticle shell thickness and the magnetic character. The synthesized magnetic–PMO structures demonstrate many merits in addition to the magnetic character, including high surface area, large pore volume, and low density.
Another method of rattle core–shell nanoparticle fabrication is mixing two different types of surfactants, namely, sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate (SDBS) and lauryl sulfonate betaine (LSB), as soft templates.152 Upon dispersion of nanoparticles into the surfactant mixture, rattle-type silica shells that have encapsulated the movable nanoparticles will be obtained.


3.3.3. The ship-in-bottle method. 
This method has been used previously to prepare loaded catalysts.153 Using this method, large particle size cores can be formed within hollow particle structures154–156 through either chemical reaction or self-assembly. Qiao et al.154 have fabricated multiple polymer dots encapsulated within hollow silica spheres through the ship-in-bottle method. Based on this approach, a single Au nanoparticle was encapsulated within a porous polymer shell to construct a rattle structure.154 In an alternative strategy, Ding et al. have utilized hydrated molten salts as metal oxide precursors that can diffuse more easily through mesoporous silica shells into the hollow cavities, fabricating the rattle nanostructure.156 By conducting a calcination process, metal salts are converted to the corresponding metal oxides, resulting in a shell on the inner surface of the hollow silica spheres. Therefore, this reaction ends in double-shelled metal oxide–silica rattle nanostructures.
Shi et al.157 have implemented this approach for fabricating Fe2O3@SiO2 and Fe3O4@carbon rattle nanostructures (Fig. 11). By introduction of iron nitrate into the hollow mesoporous silica spheres followed by a calcination step, the iron nitrate will be converted to hematite nanocores, producing Fe2O3@SiO2.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of the synthesis procedure of hollow mesoporous carbon spheres with magnetic cores (HMCSMCs) by the ship-in-bottle approach: (1) introduction of the iron nitrate solution into the hollow core by vacuum nanocasting; (2) calcination into hematite particles of the core; (3) introduction of furfuryl alcohol into the mesoporous channels and polymerization; (4) carbonization of the polyfurfuryl alcohol, and the reduction of hematite particles into magnetic particles; and (5) removal of the silica template. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)157 
Fe3O4@carbon rattle nanostructures have been obtained by addition of furfuryl alcohol to the mesoporous silica shells with subsequent carbonization of the furfuryl alcohol to form carbon spheres. By the reduction of hematite cores, they will be converted to Fe3O4, and by dissolution of the remaining silica template, Fe3O4@carbon nanorattles will form.157


3.3.4. The Ostwald ripening method. 
The Ostwald ripening is a physical method that involves re-crystallization of the materials in the solution phase (Fig. 12A).62 IUPAC has defined the Ostwald ripening method as the “growth of larger crystals from those of smaller size which have a higher solubility than the larger ones”.158 The Ostwald ripening method has received remarkable attention and has been widely used for preparation of many rattle-like nanomaterials.159 Rattle core–shell metal oxide nanostructures including SnO2, BaTiO3, ZnO, Cu3SO4(OH)4 and ZnS have been fabricated by the Ostwald ripening method.158–162 Cu3SO4(OH)4 rattle core–shell nanostructures161 have been fabricated by Ostwald ripening, as shown in Fig. 12.162 The yolk–shell microspheres are formed from 2D nanoplates. The diameter of the yolk–shell spheres was controlled by adjusting the chelating agent concentration (1,3-propanediamine).162
 Fig. 12  Schematic procedure for the preparation of rattle core–shell nanoparticles by the Ostwald ripening approach. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)162 


3.3.5. The galvanic replacement method. 
The galvanic replacement method can be considered a simple and facile tool for constructing metal nanoarchitectures having hollow cavities and porous shells.163–165 The governing step in this method is the replacement of a nanostructured metal template with another that is less active.62 Through galvanic replacement, a broad range of rattle Au nanoparticles having different shapes, such as nanoboxes, nanocages, and nanorings, have been successfully fabricated.62 Moreover, using this method, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-coated spherically clustered porous Au–Ag alloy nanorattles have been prepared by partial inhibition of galvanic replacement.164

4. Applications for multifunctional nanomaterials
Applications of multifunctional core–shell nanomaterials can be versatile and cover many disciplines. The application suitability varies according to the core–shell, hollow core and rattle structure. The application suitability is also associated with the composition of the core and shell, as well as whether they are dense or porous. This section will shed light on the application versatility of each of these nanostructures.
4.1. Application of core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials
Core–shell particles have leading advantages over single particles in the biomedical and electronic fields. The following section will briefly discuss these applications.

4.1.1. Biomedical applications. 
In the field of biomedicine, useful and exciting applications of core–shell nanoparticles have been developed over the past decade. However, in areas of major importance, some main applications are still in their innovative phase.166,167 The key applications of core–shell nanoparticles include drug delivery,168–171 bioimaging techniques168,169,171 and biosensors.172–174
4.1.1.1. Drug delivery and specific targeting. 
Recent studies have shown a tremendous improvement in the performance of drug delivery systems due to the development of controlled drug release, which is much superior to conventionally uncontrolled release. With the advent of nanotechnology, the progress made in these areas has swiftly become faster and more precise. Moreover, “targeted delivery” is the process in which a particular location inside a body or organ can be intentionally and precisely targeted using a very specific drug delivery system. Therefore, a controlled drug delivery system combined with specific targeting capability is a very potent technology to be explored and exploited. For more improvement of the drug delivery system, the essential properties of free drugs, such as solubility, in vivo stability, pharmacokinetics, and bio-distribution, need to be comprehensively studied. The overall effectiveness of a controlled delivery system with specific targeting ability can be significantly enhanced using well-designed drug carrier nanoparticles that can selectively target particular tissues.173
In designing these exceptional nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery, the process first involves the encapsulation of the drug inside the mesoporous nanoparticles with suitable surface coatings for the selective attachment to a specific cell surface. Second, upon reaching the target cell site, these nanocarriers will disintegrate or open up supramolecular gates that are chemically attached to the outlet of the mesopores and release their drug cargo.
The release of the drug cargo from the coated nanoparticle carriers will be triggered either by an external stimulus such as heat or light or by a stimulus of the target cell chemical environment, such as pH or specific ion concentration. By further coating the carrier with fluorescent active material, these core–shell nanoparticles, which can be considered as sensors, can also be tracked to confirm the delivery of the drug to a specific site. Consequently, iron oxides, Fe, Ni, Co, and super paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles are often used as core particles to design and produce magnetic nanoparticles with suitable shell coatings for in vivo drug release and sensor applications.175–179 Currently, magnetic–polymer core–shell nanoparticles are typically utilized for drug delivery, cell labeling and separation,180,181 and tumor delineation.182 Further, owing to their biocompatibility with living cells, magnetic@polymer and magnetic@SiO2 nanoparticles offer more advantages over bare magnetic nanoparticles and are therefore more explored for drug delivery studies.177,179
4.1.1.2. Bioimaging. 
There are different types of molecular bioimaging techniques used for both in vivo and in vitro biological specimens. These include optical imaging (OI), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound imaging. Among these, optical and magnetic resonance techniques have used the inherent luminescent and magnetic nanoparticle properties and are therefore the most suitable among all other techniques. The luminescent nanoprobes used for optical imaging and the magnetic nanoparticles used for magnetic resonance imaging are the two main types of nanoparticles widely used for in vivo imaging. The dual-mode of simultaneous optical and magnetic resonance imaging can be accomplished with core–shell nanostructures.182–184 These nanoprobes used for optical imaging normally utilize quantum dots (QDs) or dye-doped QDs. However, the main concerns of QDs are their high level of toxicity as well as their ease of photo-oxidation. These disadvantages can be minimized by coating them with appropriate materials to form a core–shell structure that can be straightforwardly utilized for in vivo optical imaging.185,186
Another technique that can be explored for tumor cell imaging is the surface plasmon effect of Ag metal, such that a smart-gel polymer-coated Ag nanoparticle can serve as an effective local delivery system to a tumor site.187Fig. 13 shows a Ag@hydrogel core–shell structure imaging technique where a Ag nanoparticle, the delivery system, was accomplished using a pH-sensitive hydrogel to release drugs under different pH conditions. The detection of tumor cells can be made possible by the deposition of core–shell nanoparticles onto tumor cells followed by light exposure up to 500 ms to induce fluorescence emission. Fluorescence and photoluminescence properties can also be used for cell imaging with materials from the lanthanide earth metal group. Lanthanide metal salts have good luminescence properties, and with well-designed biocompatible shell coatings, these materials can be utilized for the imaging and biodetection of cells in living systems. With appropriate doping of lanthanide ions such as Er, Tm, or Yb onto nanoparticles, emission spectra can be shifted to green, red, or blue wavelengths with increased intensity.188–190
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration for integration of tumor cell imaging and pH-triggered drug delivery. (b) TEM image of drug-loaded core–shell hybrid nanogels with the smart-gel shell coated on the Ag nanoparticle core. (c) Scanning confocal images of B16F10 cells incubated with hybrid nanogels. (d) Drug release profiles at different pH levels. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)187 
4.1.1.3. Sensors. 
Sensors are input devices that assess and quantify a physical property and convert it into an analog/digital signal, which can then be interpreted by another instrument. In the detection of DNA, RNA, glucose, and cholesterol, among others, nanoparticles are often used as sensors for in vivo applications. In this regard, magnetic@fluorescence nanoparticles can be utilized as sensors, where the fluorescent dye tracks the location of the particle, and the magnetic shell conducts heat via magnetic excitation.175 These magnetic nanocomposites can be further coated with many other materials, such as metals, silicas, or polymers, that represent bioanalytical sensors.191–193
Similarly, ZnS/Mn@SiO2 nanoparticles have been implemented as sensors for Cu2+ ions.194 Other sensor materials such as the bimetallic core–shell nanoparticles can also be used for in vivo applications. Cancer and tumor cells in the body can both be sensed using Au/Ag core–shell composite nanoparticles.195 However, functionalization of these particles with antibodies for selective binding with analyte molecules has remained an issue and thus limits their potential applications. Magnetic core–shell-based sensors such as Fe/Fe2O3 core–shell nanoparticles are also selectively utilized for the detection of damaged DNA,196 where bioactive proteins, such as cytochrome P450, myoglobin (Mb) and hemoglobin (Hb), are attached to the magnetic particles to mimic in vivo toxicity.197


4.1.2. Catalytic applications. 
The physical properties (e.g., optical, catalytic, electrical, and magnetic) of magnetic materials can be greatly enhanced by coating them with functional materials such as noble metals, semiconductors, or appropriate oxides, especially compared with those of uncoated magnetic materials.198–200 For example, upon coating a transition metal oxide, such as Fe2O3201 and V2O5,202 onto nanosized metal oxides (MgO, Cao), the destructive absorption capacity of the latter toward halogenated hydrocarbons and organophosphorus has increased several-fold. Ding et al. have fabricated separable catalyst Fe3O4@SiO2–Au@m–SiO2 core–double shell particles as highly integrated catalysts for the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol and styrene epoxidation (Fig. 14).25 The catalytic epoxidation of styrene using the multifunctional microspheres showed high conversion and good selectivity without being washed away and disengaged from the support, as in the case of separate gold nanoparticles. In this regard, the core–shell-integrated nanocatalyst was designed to avoid the washing issue.
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image and (b) the conversion of styrene and selectivity of styrene oxide over multifunctional Fe3O4@SiO2–Au@mSiO2 core–double shell nanoparticles as a highly integrated catalyst system. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)25 
Yin et al.199 reported that the efficiency of the catalytic conversion of CO to CO2 by Fe2O3-coated Au nanoparticles supported on SiO2 increased considerably compared with the uncoated Au supported on SiO2.
Furthermore, it has also been reported that, although catalyst pre-heating increases its efficiency, excess heating can also decrease efficiency due to an increase in the percentage of Au metals and crystallinity of the Fe2O3 shell. Similarly, the stability of metal cores (such as Fe, Co, Ni) coated with porous silica shells was also markedly increased, together with enhanced catalytic activity for the production of Cox-free H2 during NH3 decomposition.203 Bimetallic core–shell nanoparticles have shown higher catalytic activity upon comparison with single uncoated metal nanoparticles, which can be attributed to a synergistic effect. Furthermore, catalysts such as bimetallic core–shell nanoparticles,204 such as Au/Pd205–207 and Au/Ag,208,209 have been widely used in a range of catalytic reactions.

4.2. Application of hollow core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials
Hollow-based structures exhibit low density, low refractive indices and low thermal expansion coefficients. These characteristics make them highly important for many applications in different fields, including energy storage, antireflection coatings and catalyst support. The synthesis and modification of hollow structures continue to improve their mechanical, electrical and chemical properties to make them more suitable for drug delivery, therapeutics, fluorescence, and lithium-ion batteries. In this section, applications of hollow core–shell nanostructures in energy storage, catalysis and biomedicine will be presented.

4.2.1. Lithium-ion batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries are the most frequently used power source for electronic devices as well as for electric automobiles due to their low self-discharge rates. In addition, lithium-ion batteries are known to have a high energy density.210 However, current electrode materials may limit their performance due to the low efficiency in charge–discharge rates.211 For example, graphitic carbon is the most used anode electrode, but due to their limited gravimetric capacity, researchers have begun to seek other electrodes with higher capacities at low potentials. For this purpose, many materials have been tested to implement a new strategy instead of the classical Li insertion/deinsertion. The new strategy depends on two reaction processes; the first is Li–metal alloying/de-alloying for metals (Si, Sn/SnO2, Al, Sb);212–214 the second is the reversible formation–decomposition of Li2O nanomaterials for transition metal oxides such as CoO, NiO and FeO.214 The aim of this development is to enhance the cycling life, energy density and charge–discharge rate.
Shen et al. have synthesized uniform NiCo2O4 hollow spheres with complex interior structures for lithium-ion batteries and super-capacitors.132 NiCo2O4 hollow spheres exhibited a core double-shell interior architecture, and the porous shells were formed from tiny nanoparticles. Upon being tested as electrode materials for both lithium-ion batteries and super-capacitors, NiCo2O4 hollow spheres manifested superior electrochemical performance. Additionally, Mo-doped SnO2 mesoporous hollow-structured spheres were synthesized and utilized as anode materials for high-performance lithium-ion batteries.215 Mo-doped SnO2 lithium-ion battery anodes have showed enhanced electrochemical performance with good cycling stability, high specific capacity and high rate capability. Hollow Mo-doped SnO2 nanoparticles showed a specific capacity of 801 mA h g−1 for 60 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, which represents a 1.66-fold improvement over the pure SnO2 hollow nanoparticles. Moreover, even if the current density reached 1600 mA g−1, it still preserves its stability at a specific capacity of 530 mA h g−1, which suggests that it has an extraordinary rate capability.
Wu et al.216 have also fabricated hollow spherical Li1.2Mn0.54Ni0.13Co0.13O2 cathodes by homogeneous precipitation–hydrothermal synthesis. As a lithium-ion battery cathode, it possessed an initial discharge capacity of 286.4 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C between 2.0 and 4.8 V and a discharge capacity of 240.9 mA h g−1 that could be retained after 50 cycles. The hollow spheres were assembled into plate-like nanoparticles, which helped improve the rate performance due to fast transmission of Li+ from the cathode to electrolyte.


4.2.2. Catalysis and photocatalysis. 
The developments of the hollow core–shell nanomaterials have led to significant growth of their use in the catalysis field. For example, Kim et al.217 have used hollow palladium nanospheres as efficient catalysts for Suzuki coupling reactions, which led to an improvement of the catalytic activity even after seven times reuse and the reduction of Pd leaching. In addition, bimetallic hollow PdCo nanospheres have been utilized to improve the yield of Sonogashira reaction catalysis in aqueous media.218 Another example is the usage of the hollow structures of Ni1−xPtx to enhance NH3BH3 reactions to release H2 due to the hollow spheres’ superior catalytic activities, which can be related to the high surface area (Fig. 15).219 Compared to dense spheres of the same size, the hollow structure is more effective as a catalyst because it allows the outer and inner surfaces to interact with the reactants. Zhou et al.220 have synthesized Pd@TiO2 hollow core–shell nanospheres as an efficient and reusable catalyst for the reduction of p-nitrophenol with NaBH4 aqueous solution at room temperature. In addition, this material showed a high recyclability through extensive reuse (eight times) without a pronounced loss of activity.
 Fig. 15  Impact of alloy and hollow structure on hydrogen gas production through NH3BH3 reaction. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)219 
Porous ceria (CeO2) hollow nanospheres decorated with Au nanoparticles have been synthesized by a simple one-step solvothermal reaction. Au/CeO2 hollow core spheres were used as the catalyst for CO oxidation. These results showed that the CO conversion by hollow spheres reached 92% at ambient temperature. Moreover, the CO conversion was maintained at 91% after the catalyst had been continuously used for 20 h.221
Hollow hierarchical Ni/γ–Al2O3 nanocomposites have been prepared by the hydrothermal method for methane dry reforming catalysis. Due to their hollow structure, Ni/γ–Al2O3 nanocomposites have shown coke and sintering resistance in long-term dry reforming of methane at 750 °C.222 Furthermore, the hollow structures have shown remarkable performance as catalysts for electrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications. An advantage of the reported hollow nanostructures is that they can be made with metal/metal oxide particles that are suitable for oxidation of methanol, ethanol and formic acid. The introduction of hollow core–shell Pt structures has resulted in doubling its catalytic activity compared with similarly sized solid Pt nanoparticles.223 In addition, constructing noble metal hollow structures enables significant improvement of their electrocatalytic activities,49,224 which could be attributed to their high electrochemical surface area, in addition to the hollow structure that provides enough space to accommodate large numbers of loaded molecules.9
Wang et al. have recently developed hollow graphitic carbon nitride nanosphere photocatalysts with enhanced photocatalytic activity.225–230 They have successfully synthesized hollow g-C3N4 nanospheres by a hard templating method using silica nanoparticles, where the deformation of hollow g-C3N4 nanospheres was prevented by controlling the shell thickness of the hollow spheres.225 Furthermore, they have enhanced the surface, crystal and textural structures of the hollow g-C3N4 nanospheres by optimizing the post-annealing process.227 The photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of the hollow g-C3N4 nanospheres was boosted by shell engineering,228 doping with CdS quantum dots229 as well as integration with Au and CdS, nanoparticles and quantum dots, respectively.230


4.2.3. Biomedical applications. 
Many nanoparticles have been reported to be used in various biomedical applications, such as drug delivery and bio-imaging.231–233 However, the nanoparticles based on hollow structures are superior for gene delivery, imaging, therapeutic uses and other biomedical applications. Silica represents the most commonly used hollow structure for such purposes due to its non-toxic nature. In addition, hollow silica spheres showed high biocompatibility and facile bio-conjugation through silane chemistry.234–236 Furthermore, the hollow silica spheres have been utilized as drug nanocarriers because the drugs can be released from their hollow structures in a controlled fashion.234,235,237 An extra advantage of hollow silica spheres is the possibility of having additional special properties through surface functionalization. In this regard, Zhu et al. have coated hollow silica spheres with polyelectrolyte multi-layers for constructing stimuli-responsive drug release systems that can be controlled by adjusting the pH values. In this regard, such systems possess the advantages of high drug storage capacity as well as stimuli-responsive behavior (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of two drug delivery systems that give different controlled release patterns and (b) cumulative drug release of the two systems in media of different pH values. ■: pH 1.4 from IBU-HMS, ● pH 1.4 from IBU-HMS@PEM, ▲: pH 8.0 from IBU-HMS, ▼: pH 8.0 from IBU-HMS@PEM. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)5 
Delivering genetic material to cells is another function that can be achieved by hollow nanostructures. For example, preparation of calcium phosphate multi-shell hollow nanostructures for encapsulating DNA has been reported by Sokolova et al.238 These hollow core nanostructures showed better transfection efficiency than the normal DNA-coated calcium phosphate nanoparticles. This may be attributed to the presence of multi-layers that enable the sequential delivery of various agents with more flexibility. Recently, Cai et al. have reported the application of hollow calcium phosphate spheres as drug carriers.239 The loading of the drug molecules onto the hollow core spheres was achieved by encapsulation during synthesis, while the drug release trigger was accomplished using ultrasonic waves.
The hollow gold nanostructures showed excellent optical properties suitable for imaging and diagnostic applications. For example, hollow gold nanocages with porous walls have been used as an optical coherence tomography contrast agent, as reported by Chen et al.240 Additionally, the galvanic replacement reaction between silver templates and chloroauric acid has been used for the preparation of hollow gold nanocages.241 The tuning of the gold nanocage size is reported to make them strongly absorb in the near infra-red region (NIR), which has optimal optical transmission through tissue. A therapeutic effect (i.e., photothermal therapy) on targeted cancer cells has been achieved by targeting cancer cells with gold nanocages and irradiating them with infrared light, which led to local, irreversible ablation that killed the cancer cells.241,242 This new technique is considered to be an effective platform for cancer treatment and is more promising than chemotherapy or surgery approaches.

4.3. Application of rattle core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials
The wide spectrum of unique and interesting properties that rattle core–shell nanostructures possess, e.g., low density, movable core with void space between the core and the shell, and the ready tailor-ability and functionality of both cores and shells, provide for remarkable and diverse applications. In the following section, nanorattle applications such as nanoreactors, photocatalysts, and drug delivery agents will be reviewed.

4.3.1. Catalysis. 
Nanoreactors243 can be defined as ultra-small reaction containers that contain a catalyst inside their boundaries. Their advantages stem from their ability to hold reagents and catalysts for a long period of time and their ability to protect catalysts from environmental influences; these features greatly improve chemical transformation processes. In general, nanoreactors are required to have three main characteristics: provide for rapid diffusion of reactants and products; provide protection for the nanocatalysts; and have long-term stability.62 Rattle core–shell nanostructures exhibit all these characteristics. Rattle shells provide the protection of the catalytic nanocores while simultaneously enabling the rapid diffusion of the reactants and products. The rattle nanocore, as an active catalyst, boosts catalytic activity, while the cavity between the core and the shell creates a homogeneous environment for the reaction to take place.62
Rattle gold nanoreactors have been utilized to reduce p-nitrophenol, 2-nitroaniline, benzimidazole derivative oxidation of aerobic alcohol, and CO oxidation.68,72,74,244–248 Au–SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactors have shown promising catalytic activity for CO oxidation with high stability after long-term recyclability and storage. The CO oxidation reaction was successfully controlled by the corking design using the capillary condensation of water vapor for corking the mesopores within the shell. However, at higher temperatures or lower water vapor pressures, water evaporates, which opens the mesopores and causes the water to promote the CO oxidation reaction. In this regard, both the corking and uncorking mechanism of the Au–SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor is reversible (Fig. 17).248
 Fig. 17  (a) Scheme of corking and uncorking a catalytic activity of an Au–SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor and (b) CO conversion of Au@HSNs_C with GHSV = 360000 mL gcat−1 h−1 (1%CO/6%O2/93%He) under vapor and vapor-free conditions in a temperature range of 0–60 °C. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)248 
Rattle type multi-core Au@poly(styrene-co-methylacrylic acid) (PS-co-PMAA) nanoreactors can be utilized to synthesize acids via aerobic alcohol oxidation.246 Inside the nanoreactors, the reaction will proceed more efficiently and will provide quantitative yield after 30–120 min. Moreover, the turnover frequency (TOF) will be approximately 100 to 400 h−1.246
Encapsulation of other metal or metal oxide nanoparticles into the hollow spheres to form rattle core–shell nanoreactors, such as Ni,249 Cu,250 Pt,106 Pd,251 and Ag,252,253 has also been reported. Li et al. synthesized yolk–satellite–shell structured Ni–yolk@Ni@SiO2 nanoparticles for the CO2 (dry) reforming of methane at different shell thicknesses.249 At a 11.2 nm shell thickness, Ni–yolk@Ni@SiO2 showed near equilibrium conversion for CH4 and CO2 for 90 h at 800 °C, together with very negligible carbon deposition.249
Rattle Pd@mesoporous silica nanoreactors have shown high activity rates for the Suzuki cross-coupling reactions, with reaction completion after 3 min.251 Moreover, Pd leaching was substantially minimized, which confirms stable catalytic performance. In addition, the RGO@Pd@C nanohybrid exhibits superior and stable catalytic performance by converting 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol within only 30 seconds.254


4.3.2. Photocatalysis. 
Rattle core–shell nanostructures can provide remarkable enhancement to photocatalytic activity.255–258 Rattle core–shell titania microspheres have been fabricated using the solvothermal method through mixing glycerol, alcohol, ethyl ether and TiOSO4.256 A phenol degradation test showed 93% conversion due to the rattle core–shell structures. A suitable selection of the core size is believed to permit multiple UV light reflections within the interior cavity, which enhances light usage efficiency and hence improves the photocatalytic activity. Furthermore, on constructing Au@r–GO/TiO2 yolk@shell nanostructures, the evaluation of visible light showed photocatalytic activities in dye decomposition and water-splitting H2 production (Fig. 18).257 In addition, an enhanced photocatalytic activity was obtained using small Fe3O4@TiO2 with a unique yolk–shell structure below 50 nm.258
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic procedure for the preparation of Au@r–GO/TiO2 yolk@shell nanostructures, (b) TEM image of Au@r–GO/TiO2, and the evaluation of visible light photocatalytic activity for (c) RhB dye decomposition and (d) water-splitting H2 production. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)257 


4.3.3. Biomedical applications. 
Due to their tailorable void space, controllable size, and good biocompatibility, the rattle core–shell nanostructures are considered as promising drug delivery nanocarriers. Because of their cavities, rattle core–shell nanostructures have a high loading capacity as well as efficient delivery of drug, protein and nucleic acid molecules. In addition, to obtain a variety of desired properties, nanorattle interiors can be functionalized by encapsulating materials that exhibit the desired functionalities, such as fluorescent molecules and QDs.77,259–263 In this section, some of the biomedical applications for magnetic nanorattle core–shell nanostructures will be addressed.
Du et al. have fabricated polymer-based nanorattle spheres with combined thermo- and pH-responsive capabilities for controlling the release of cancer treatment drugs. Both the yolk and the shell have shown different functions; while pH-induced thermally responsive polymer shells serve as smart “valves” that control the diffusion of the drugs in/out of the polymer nanorattles based on the surrounding environments, the P(MAA-co-EGDMA) yolk improves the loading capacity of cancer drugs such as doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX).262
In another study, radioluminescent yolk–upconverting shell nanoparticles have been obtained by encapsulation of the radioluminescent nanophosphor core nanoparticles within silica shells. Furthermore, by partial etching of nanophosphors in acid media and coating silica shells with a second upconverting shell, yolk–shell structures have been produced. The nanoparticles showed multiple functionalities, such as pH-triggered drug release and radioluminescence, upconversion luminescence, and combined magnetic resonance (MRI) imaging.263
It is known that iron oxide nanoparticles have great potential for nano-biomedical applications, such as magnetic contrast agents, magnetic drug targeting, and hyperthermic tumor treatments.11 Rattle core–shell nanostructures became desirable for their ability to improve the stability and biocompatibility of iron oxides in biomedical applications.260–262 Rattle Fe3O4@NiSiO3 nanostructures have been implemented with a high specificity for histidine protein purification from the mixtures of lysed cells. Fe3O4@NiSiO3 nanorattles have shown high recyclability, where Ni2+ cations within the shell provided docking sites for selective coordination with histidine.260 Furthermore, yolk–shell gold–metal oxide nanoparticles have been used for targeting and eliminating cancer cells by photothermal/chemotherapy strategies.77,78 Zhang et al.77 have proposed yolk–shell gold nanorod@void@mesoporous titania nanoparticles (AuNR@void@m-TiO2 NPs) for combined chemo-photothermal therapy and SERS imaging. The Raman reporters were loaded on AuNRs, and then the doxorubicin (DOX) cancer drug was loaded into the m-TiO2 rattle structure (Fig. 19). The obtained SERS signal was strong and was detected easily in both living cells and mice. The m-TiO2 showed promising drug loading and release performance compared with m-SiO2, yet it was more chemically inert, which provided it with increased structural stability in biological systems. Furthermore, the near infrared (NIR) light absorbing character of the Au nanoparticle yolk was also tested for drug-release regulation and photothermal treatment; this test resulted in superior elimination of MCF-7 cells upon combined treatment with DOX-encapsulated nanoparticles and NIR laser illumination, which can be associated with a synergistic chemo-thermal therapeutic effect.77
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) HR-TEM image of yolk–shell gold nanorod@void@mesoporous titania nanoparticles (AuNR@void@mTiO2 NPs). (c) DOX release profiles from DOX-loaded NPs with and without 785 nm NIR laser in PBS buffer (pH 5.0). (d) Confocal laser scanning microscopy images of MCF-7 cells taken after treatment with DOX-loaded NPs at different incubation times. Hoechst 33342 was used for cell nuclei staining (blue fluorescence). Red fluorescence in the MCF-7 cells originated from DOX. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)77 
Veres et al.264 have fabricated fluorescent Fe3O4@SiO2 nanorattles with Fe3O4/Au dumbbell-like nanocores and mesoporous silica shells that are rich in primary and secondary amine groups, which are important for coupling biomolecules. The fabricated nanorattles have shown various magnetic, plasmonic, and fluorescence properties as well as the ability to accommodate biomolecules.

5. Conclusions and outlook
Nanotechnology has entered a new research era with the primary research goal of constructing a novel class of substances, known as multifunctional nanomaterials, to achieve outstanding performances and accomplish novel applications. Surface-coating techniques have opened ways to achieve nanomaterial multifunctionality by constructing newly designed core–shell nanostructures. Studies have evolved and different design strategies and fabrication approaches to engineer different types of core–shell nanoparticles in diverse core and shell combinations, with materials including metals, metal oxides, and polymers have been continually pursued. The manipulation of shell characteristics (e.g., density) as well as the growth of multiple shells have provided tremendous opportunities for an unlimited number of functionalities. The need for multifunctional nanoparticles with specialized functions, such as superior storage capacity, has also been met through the core removal of core–shell nanostructures. Synthesis approaches, such as hard and soft templating, have been used to construct hollow core–shell nanostructures. Special designs for multiple-shell hollow core nanoparticles with versatile and diverse functions have also been investigated. Furthermore, material scientists have continuously pursued designs for tailoring new architectures based on the core–shell system, which has resulted in rattle core–shell nanoparticles. This newly developed architecture merges the properties and geometries of the solid core systems with those of the hollow systems to provide new structures described as having a core@void@shell configuration. This rattle-type structure possesses characteristics and functions of both systems in a single particle. The number of research papers published annually in the field of multifunctional core–shell, hollow core, and rattle core–shell nanoparticles has increased significantly. The applications of such nanomaterials are being explored in new fields of nanotechnology, while at the same time merging other nanotechnology disciplines. However, one of the many challenging aspects of this novel class of materials is the flexibility of the fabrication approach for the production of homogeneous and uniform nanoparticles. Additionally, scaling-up is the most important issue to be resolved for the future production of multifunctional nanoparticles in commercial-scale quantities.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported through the project funded by the National Plan for Science, Technology and Innovation (MAARIFAH), King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Award Number (12-NAN2544-02).
References
W. Zhao, J. Gu, L. Zhang, H. Chen and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8916 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, H. S. Kim, N. Lee, T. Kim, H. Kim, T. Yu, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8438 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hu, M. Chen, X. Fang and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5472 RSC .
Y. Li and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3176 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Shi, W. Shen, X. Dong, J. Feng, M. Ruan and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5083 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan, K. Laubernds, Q. Zhang and S. L. Suib, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4966 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. El-Toni, M. A. Habila, M. A. Ibrahim, J. P. Labis and Z. A. Al Othman, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 251, 441 CrossRef .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, S. B. Hartono and G. Q. M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4981 CrossRef PubMed .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3621 CrossRef .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, Q. H. Hu and G. Q. M. Lu, Small, 2011, 7, 425 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Park and H. Song, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 33 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, W. S. Wang, J. Goebl and Y. D. Yin, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 494 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cao, R. W. Lu and G. Veser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13499 RSC .
A. Henglein, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spanhel, H. Weller and A. Henglein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6632 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Youn, S. Baral and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 6320 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Hoener, K. A. Allan, A. J. Bard, A. Campion, M. A. Fox, T. E. Malluok, S. E. Webber and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 3812 CrossRef CAS .
I. Honma, T. Sano and H. Komiyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6692 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Zhou, H. Sasahara, I. Honma, H. Komiyama and J. W. Haus, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1534 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Jun, J. Choi and J. W. Cheon, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1203 RSC .
C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4128 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhang, S. Mansouri, L. Clime, H. Q. Ly, L. ‘H. Yahia and T. Veres, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14450 RSC .
Y. Deng, Y. Cai, Z. Sun, J. Liu, C. Liu, J. Wei, W. Li, C. Liu, Y. Wang and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Joo, J. Y. Park, C.- Tsung, Y. Yamada, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, H. Chen, Y. Chen, X. Wang, F. Chen, X. Cui and J. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Barbé, J. Bartlett, L. Kong, K. Finnie, H. Q. Lin, M. Larkin, S. Calleja, A. Bush and G. Calleja, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1959 CrossRef .
H. M. Beigi, S. Yaghmaei, R. Roostaazad and A. Arpanaei, Physica E, 2013, 49, 30 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, Y. Cai, Z. Sun and D. Zhao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 510, 1 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Srdić, B. Mojić, M. Nikolić and S. Ognjanović, Process. Appl. Ceram., 2013, 7, 45 CrossRef .
F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karele, S. W. Gosavi, J. Urban and S. K. Kularni, Curr. Sci., 2006, 91, 1038 Search PubMed .
Y. Piao, A. Burns, J. Kim, U. Wiesner and T. Hyeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3745 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero-Martınez, J. Perez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1182 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Hao, R. Xing, Z. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Gao and S. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. Fang and S. Kaskel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16382 CAS .
J. Liu, F. Liu, J. Wu and D. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6073 RSC .
H. P. Liang, L. J. Wan, C. L. Bai and L. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, D. Wang, J. Qi1, G. Li1, F. Zheng, S. Li, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Small, 2015, 11, 420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Leem, S. Kim, C. Park, E. Kim and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1070 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Li, W. Zhu and P. Fu, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4937 RSC .
J. B. Fei, Y. Cui, X. H. Yan, W. Qi, Y. Yang, K. W. Wang, Q. He and J. B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 452 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Q. Li, S. Jiang, K. Zhang, Y. Lai and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Yang, J. H. Yang, Y. L. Zhong, V. Gariepy, M. L. Trudeau, K. Zaghib and J. Y. Ying, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1618 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, S. Hong, L. Liu, S. K. Kim and S. Park, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, H. Fan, Y. Cai and M. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 2715 RSC .
H. Lv, Q. Lin, K. Zhang, K. Yu, T. Yao, X. Zhang, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 13736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, Q. Cai, C. Liu, R. Wu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, Y. Tang and T. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13738 CAS .
X. Liu, H. Yang, L. Han, W. Liu, C. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 7769 RSC .
B. Wang, G. Wang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 1 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dorfs, H. Henschel, J. Kolny and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23385 Search PubMed .
S. H. Hwang, J. Yun and J. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7619 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liua, G. Hongb, X. Donga and J. Wanga, J. Rare Earths, 2007, 25, 407 CrossRef .
J. Gu, S. Li, M. Ju and E. Wang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 320, 46 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, H. G. You, Y. Song, Y. Huang, M. Yang and H. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Niu, Y. Lu, Z. Hu and C. C. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 115, 1987 CrossRef .
H. Lee, J.-A. Kwak and D.-J. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22792 CAS .
H. Zhang, C. Xu, P. Sheng, Y. Chen, L. Yu and Q. Lia, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 181, 99 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, L. Zheng, X. Bai, N. Li and L. Yu, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 346, 229 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kim, S. A. Dergunov and E. Pinkhassik, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 2561 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, J. S. Chen, X. W. Lou, X. Xing and G. Q. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12578 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Li, J. Qi, J. Wang, R. Luo, J. Shen, X. Sun, W. Han and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13167 CAS .
M. Kim, J. C. Park, A. Kim, K. H. Park and H. Song, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, J. Kaiser, M. Drechsler, M. Ballauff and Y. Lu, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 231 CAS .
J. Liu, H. Q. Yang, F. Kleitz, Z. G. Chen, T. Yang, E. Strounina, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 591 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, J. Xi, T. Sun, S. Xiao, H. Wang, S. Wang and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4053 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, J. C. Park and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Li, Q. Shi, S. J. Yuan, K. G. Neoh, E. T. Kang and X. L. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1309 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, H. T. Chen, X. Chen, L. L. Zheng, J. H. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1853 CrossRef CAS .
P. Valle-Vigó n, M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1587 CrossRef .
L. Kong, G. T. Duan, G. M. Zuo, W. P. Cai and Z. X. Cheng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 421 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhou, L. Polavarapu, Q. Wang and Q.-H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4844 CAS .
Q. H. Yang, D. F. Han, H. Q. Yang and C. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2008, 3, 1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, F. G. Tang, H. Liu, T. Liu, N. Hao, D. Chen, X. Teng and J. He, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Sun, W. Wang and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14514 RSC .
H. Liu, T. Liu, X. Wu, L. Li, L. Tan, D. Chen and F. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, J. H. Um, J. Ahn, S.-H. Yu, Y.-E. Sung and J.-K. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 7954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Zhang, J.-S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Khan, E. Hu and Z. Lai, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 118, 210 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kandula and P. Jeevanandam, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 4260 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yang, H.-J. Wang, J. Whang, J.-S. Huang, L.-M. Lyu, P.-H. Lin, S. Gwo and M. H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4316 RSC .
K. K. Haldar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21946 CAS .
J. Tian, Y. Luo, H. Li, W. Lu, G. Chang, X. Qin and X. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1393 CAS .
W. Jiang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, S. Xuan and X. Gong, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4594 RSC .
N. Rinaldi-Montes, P. Gorria, D. Martínez-Blanco, Z. Amghouz, A. B. Fuertes, L. F. Barquín, I. de Pedro, L. Olivi and J. A. Blanco, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5674 RSC .
L. Zhang, P. Hu, X. Zhao, R. Tian, R. Zou and D. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18279 RSC .
M. Abdul Matin, E. Lee, H. Kim, W.-S. Yoon and Y.-Uk Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17154 Search PubMed .
K. S. Kumar, V. B. Kumar and P. Paik, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6837 RSC .
J. Tian, J. Jin, F. Zheng and H. Zhao, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, F. Wang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13107 RSC .
J. Kim, Y. Piao and T. Hyeon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 372 RSC .
Y. W. Jun, J. H. Lee and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. C. Liu, J. Tang, H. Q. Lin, N. Yao, X. Z. Shen, C. H. Deng, P. Y. Yang and X. M. Zhang, J. Chromatogr. A, 2007, 1172, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. H. Leng, H. Q. Lin, C. H. Deng, X. Q. Xu, N. Yao, P. Y. Yang and X. M. Zhang, J. Proteome Res., 2007, 6, 4498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Q. Xu, D. W. Qi, C. H. Deng, P. Y. Yang and X. M. Zhang, J. Proteome Res., 2008, 7, 2526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Delaportas, P. Svarnas, I. Alexandrou, S. N. Georga, C. A. Krontiras, N. I. Xanthopoulos, A. Siokou and P. R. Chalker, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 2337 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, L. Wu, D. C. Mungra, S. Xia and J. Zhu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 2454 RSC .
Z. Bai, R. Chen, P. Si, Y. Huang, H. Sun and D.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5856 CAS .
Y. Hu, K. Tao, C. Wu, C. Zhou, H. Yin and S. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 11, 7 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, S.-Y. Zhang, K. W. Shah and M.-Y. Han, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6689 RSC .
L. D. Rogatis, M. Cargnello, V. Gombac, B. Lorenzut, T. Montini and P. Fornasiero, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 24 CrossRef PubMed .
N. L. Wieder, M. Cargnello, K. Bakhmutsky, T. Montini, P. Fornasiero and R. J. Gorte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 915 CAS .
Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5492 RSC .
N. Zhang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8152 RSC .
G. Li and Z. Tang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3995 RSC .
J. Lin, W. Zhou, A. Kumbhar, J. Wiemann, J. Fang, E. E. Carpenter and C. J. O'Connor, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 159, 26 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Carpenter, J. A. Sims, J. A. Wienmann, W. L. Zhou and C. J. O'Connor, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 5615 CrossRef CAS .
G. Salazar-Alvarez, M. Mikhailova, M. Toprak, Y. Zhang and M. Muhammed, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2001, 707, 263 CrossRef .
D. A. Fleming, M. Napolitano and M. E. Williams, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2003, 746, 207 CAS .
S. U. Son, Y. Jang, J. Park, H. B. Na, H. M. Park, H. J. Yun, J. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Hou and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Büchel, K. K. Unger, A. Matsumoto and K. Tsutsumi, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1036 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, D. Qi, C. Deng, X. Zhang and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. El-Toni, M. W. Khan, M. A. Ibrahim, M. Abid, M. Al-Hoshan and M. Al-salhi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6482 RSC .
A. M. El-Toni, M. A. Ibrahim, J. P. Labis, A. Khan and M. Alhoshan, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 11496 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qian, J. Du, B. Li, M. Si, Y. Yang, Y. Hu, G. Niu, Y. Zhang, H. Xu, B. Tu, Y. Tang and D. Zhao, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2006 RSC .
J. Ge, Q. Zhang, T. Zhang and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhong, Y. Yin, B. Gates and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, E. T. Kang, K. G. Neoh and A. Greiner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhu and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5231 RSC .
L. Zhen and W. Shu-Bin, J. Inorg. Mater., 2011, 26, 885 CrossRef .
A. Syoufian, Y. Inoue, A. Yada and K. Nakashima, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1572 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Jan, T.-H. Chuang, P.-J. Chen and H. Teng, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1074 RSC .
F. Caruso, X. Shi, R. A. Caruso and A. Susha, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 740 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Gong, X. Ma, X. Zhang, Y. Guo and L. Qu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Yang, W. Wang, H. Donga and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3717 RSC .
M. Titirici, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3808 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, L. Yu, X.-Y. Yu, X. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Pan, Y. Bai and Q. Wang, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 4566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Pan, C. Shen, I. Ivanova, N. Zhou, X. Wang, W. C. Tan, Q.-H. Xu, D. W. Bahnemann and Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14859 CAS .
H. Xu and W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sasidharan and K. Nakashima, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Leidinger, R. Popescu, D. Gerthsen and C. Feldmann, Small, 2010, 6, 1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Liu, G. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2008, 3, 82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, E. S. Choo, X. Tang, J. Ding and J. Xue, Chem. Commun., 2009, 938 RSC .
C. I. Zoldesi, C. A. van Walree and A. Imhof, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Li, D. B. Qin, X. L. Yang and G. Y. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 289 RSC .
H. Zhang and X. L. Yang, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 670 RSC .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Small, 2007, 3, 261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, L. L. Li, F. Q. Tang and S. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3804 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhu, E. Kockrick, T. Ikoma, N. Hanagata and S. Kaskel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Shen, L. Zhou, W. Li, J. Fan, A. M. El-Toni, W.-X. Zhang, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Shen, L. Zhou, W. Li, X. Li, C. Yao, R. Wang, A. M. El-Toni, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3030 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Zhang, J. P. Ge, Y. X. Hu, Q. Zhang, S. Aloni and Y. D. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. P. Ge, J. Goebl, Y. X. Hu, Z. D. Lu and Y. D. Yin, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Popat, S. B. Hartono, F. Stahr, J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao and G. Q. M. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 7, 2801 RSC .
L. Zhang, S. Z. Qiao, Y. G. Jin, Z. G. Chen, H. C. Gu and G. Q. M. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 805 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wu and D. S. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Shmakov, Y. Jia and E. Pinkhassik, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1126 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-A. Qiao, Q. Huo, M. Chi, G. M. Veith, A. J. Binder and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, M. Wang, R. Chen, N. Han and R. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8295 RSC .
S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen, G. G. Qi, X. N. Duan, Z. Y. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Guo, X. Z. Cui, Y. S. Li, Q. J. He, L. X. Zhang, W. B. Bu and J. L. Shi, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Curr. Nanosci., 2007, 3, 177 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Wanga, L. Yanga, K. Wang, X. Lou and B. Cai, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 72 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, J. Li, K. Chen, J. Han and S. Pan, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4927 CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, Small, 2005, 1, 566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, G. Wang, Y. Luan, K. Chaikittikul, X. Zhang, M. Yang, W. Dong and Z. Shi, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 2520 RSC .
S. Xie, M. Jin, J. Tao, Y. Wang, Z. Xie, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 18, 14974 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jang and D.-H. Min, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shi, P. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Xia, D. Wang and X. Tao, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4350 RSC .
L. Zhou, J. Yuan and Y. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2823 RSC .
S. Cheong, P. Ferguson, I. F. Hermans, G. N. L. Jameson, S. Prabakar, D. A. J. Herman and R. D. Tilley, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 135 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sounderya and Y. Zhang, Recent Pat. Biomed. Eng., 2008, 1, 34 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schärtl, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1899 CrossRef .
V. Salgueiri∼no-Maceira and M. Correa-Duarte, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4131 CrossRef .
D. Knopp, D. Tang and R. Niessner, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 647, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. De, P. S. Ghosh and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4225 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schärtl, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 829 RSC .
G. Wang and A. J. Harrison, Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 217, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deng, K. C. Pinagali and D. A. Rockstraw, IEEE Sens. J., 2008, 8, 730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lien and T. M. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 326, 517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Santra, R. Tapec, N. Theodoropoulou, J. Dobson, A. Hebard and W. Tan, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 2900 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Lee, M. G. Kim, J. R. Choi, J.-I. Park, S. J. Ko, S. J. Oh and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chertok, A. E. David and V. C. Yang, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 6317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pathak, Y. K. Jaiswal and M. Vinayak, Biosci. Rep., 2008, 28, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Kircher, U. Mahmood, R. S. King, R. Weissleder and L. Josephson, Cancer Res., 2003, 63, 8122 CAS .
W. Tan, K. Wang, X. He, X. J. Zhao, T. Drake, L. Wang and R. P. Bagwe, Med. Res. Rev., 2004, 24, 621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Schellenberger, D. Sosnovik, R. Weissleder and L. Josephson, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 1062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Daneshvar, J. Nelms, O. Muhammad, H. Jackson, J. Tkach, W. Davros, T. Peterson, M. A. Vogelbaum, M. P. Bruchez and S. A. Toms, Nanomedicine, 2008, 3, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. SalmanOgli and A. J. Rostami, Nanopart. Res., 2010, 13, 1197 CrossRef .
W. Wu, T. Zhou, A. Berliner, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1966 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, M. A. Correa-Duarte, I. Pastoriza-Santos, M. Giersig, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Tu, J. Zhao, Y. Sun, X. Kong and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7164 CAS .
H. S. Qian and Y. Zhang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Stanciu, Y.-H. Won, M. Ganesana and S. Andreescu, Sensors, 2009, 9, 2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Qiu, S. G. Cui, M. Q. Deng and R. P. Liang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2010, 40, 1651 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Qiu, S. G. Cui and R. P. Liang, Microchim. Acta, 2010, 171, 333 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dong, L. Cao, G. Su, W. Liu, H. Qu and D. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 339, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Khlebtsov, V. Bogatyrev, L. Dykman, B. Khlebtsov, S. Staroverov, A. Shirokov, L. Matora, V. Khanadeev, T. Pylaev, N. Tsyganova and G. Terentyuk, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, T. Yang and K. Jiao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Qiu, H. P. Peng, R. P. Liang and X. H. Xia, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, X. L. Dong, H. Huang, B. Lv, X. G. Zhu, J. P. Lei, S. Ma, W. Liu and Z. D. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 454–455, 211 CrossRef .
H. Yin, Z. Ma, M. Chi and S. Dai, Catal. Today, 2011, 160, 87 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xuan, Y. X. J. Wang, J. C. Yu and K. C. F. Leung, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Carnes and K. J. Klabunde, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1806 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Schneider, Adv. Mater., 2001, 3, 529 CrossRef .
L. H. Yao, Y. X. Li, J. Zhao, W. J. Ji and C. T. Au, Catal. Today, 2010, 158, 401 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiong, Z. Li, Y. An, R. Ma and L. Shi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 350, 260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and Y. J. Yamauchi, Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, X. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Wu, R. Ma, Y. An and L. Hi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 331, 104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, G. Gao, P. Huang, K. Wang, X. Wang, T. Luo and C. Zhang, Nano Biomed. Eng., 2010, 2, 258 CAS .
F.-R. Fan, D.-Y. Liu, Y.-F. Wu, S. Duan, Z.-X. Xie, Z.-Y. Jiang and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Ding, Y. Li, L. Peng, H. R. G. Byon, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7968 RSC .
C. Z. Wu, Y. Xie, L. Y. Lei, S. Q. Hu and C. Z. OuYang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1727 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115 RSC .
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novak, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, E. Guo, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3604 RSC .
F. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Su, Y. Guan, Y. Jin, N. Yan, J. Tian, L. Bao and S. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 337 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, M. Kim, W. Y. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li, P. Zhou, Z. H. Dai, Z. X. Hu, P. P. Sun and J. C. Bao, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 832 RSC .
F. Y. Cheng, H. Ma, Y. M. Li and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Zhou, X.-H. Zhu, J.-W. Huang, X.-Z. Li, P.-F. Fu, L.-X. Jiao, H.-F. Huo and R. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33055 RSC .
Y. Jiao, F. Wang, X. Ma, Q. Tang, K. Wang, Y. Guo and L. Yang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 176, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. Wu, P. Zhang, R. Qi, R. Huang, X. Song and L. Gao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51184 RSC .
H. P. Liang, H. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, L. J. Wan and C. L. Bai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Cho, J. E. Kim, J. H. Shim, C. Lee and Y. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11461 RSC .
J. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1139 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, C. Huang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 465 RSC .
D. Zheng, C. Pang, Y. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9706 RSC .
D. Zheng, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 479 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, C. Pang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17467 RSC .
N. T. K. Thanh, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11338 RSC .
Z. P. Xu, T. L. Walker, K.-L. Liu, H. M. Cooper, G. M. Lu and P. F. Bartlett, Int. J. Nanomed., 2007, 2, 163 CAS .
J. Guo, M. J. Armstrong, C. M. O'Driscoll, J. D. Holmes and K. Rahme, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 17862 RSC .
J. F. Chen, H. M. Ding, J. X. Wang and L. Shao, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Li, L. X. Wen, L. Shao and J. F. Chen, J. Controlled Release, 2004, 98, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. E. Botterhuis, Q. Y. Sun, P. C. M. M. Magusin, R. A. van Santen and N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, W. Wu, D. Caruntu, M. H. Yu, A. Martin, J. F. Chen, C. J. O'Connor and W. L. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17473 CAS .
V. V. Sokolova, I. Radtke, R. Heumann and M. Epple, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 3147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Cai, H. H. Pan, X. R. Xu, Q. H. Hu, L. Li and R. K. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, F. Saeki, B. J. Wiley, H. Cang, M. J. Cobb, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, H. Zhang, M. B. Kimmey, X. D. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Skrabalak, J. Chen, L. Au, X. Lu, X. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, D. L. Wang, J. F. Xi, L. Au, A. Siekkinen, A. Warsen, Z. Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. N. Xia and X. D. Li, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Vriezema, M. C. Aragones, J. A. A. W. Elemans, J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. C. Park, J. U. Bang and H. Song, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, A. Zheng, H. Sun, X. Li, S. Liu, P. Zhang and X. Zhang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3404 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, M. C. Zhang, Y. Lan and W. Q. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 1355 RSC .
B. Guan, T. Wang, S. Zeng, X. Wang, D. An, D. Wang, Y. Cao, D. Ma, Y. Liu and Q. Huo, Nano Res., 2013, 7, 246 CrossRef .
C.-H. Lin, X. Liu, S.-H. Wu, K.-H. Liu and C.-Y. Mou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2984 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Mo, Y. Kathiraser and S. Kawi, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, S.-H. Kim and L. Piao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8299 RSC .
Z. Chen, Z. M. Cui, F. Niu, L. Jiang and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6524 RSC .
H. J. Hah, J. I. Um, S. H. Han and S. M. Koo, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1012 RSC .
Y. Xia and L. Xu, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 545 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, J. Xi, T. Sun, S. Xiao, H. Wang, S. Wang and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4053 Search PubMed .
R. J. Dillon, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera, Y. Yin and C. J. Bardeen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1488 RSC .
H. X. Li, Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, Y. N. Huo, H. Li and Y. F. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, J. Han, H. Xiong and R. Guo, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 6220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Su, T. Zhang, L. Li, J. Xing, M. He, Y. Zhong and Z. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8901 RSC .
C.-M. Huang, S.-H. Cheng, U.-S. Jeng, C.-S. Yang and L.-W. Lo, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Yang and R. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19092 CAS .
W. R. Zhao, H. R. Chen, Y. S. Li, L. Li, M. D. Lang and J. L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2780 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du and P. Liu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, B. Qi, T. Moore, F. Wang, D. C. Colvin, L. D. Sanjeewa, J. C. Gore, S.-J. Hwu, O. T. Mefford, F. Alexis and J. N. Anker, Small, 2014, 10, 3364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, L. Clime, H. Q. Ly, M. Trudeau and T. Veres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18313 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Ahmed Mohamed El-Toni	Ahmed Mohamed El-Toni received his Ph.D. in 2006 from the Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku University (Japan). In 2007, he joined the Functional Assembly Technology group, the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Nagoya (Japan) as a research fellow. Then by 2008, he joined King Abdullah Institute for Nanotechnology (KAIN), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Currently, he holds the position of an associate professor in KAIN and his research interests include the synthesis of novel core–shell multifunctional nanomaterials and their application into drug delivery, enzyme immobilization and water treatment.
Mohamed A. Habila	Mohamed Habila has received his Ph.D. in 2015 from the chemistry department, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Currently he is an assistant professor in the advanced materials research chair, chemistry department, King Saud University. His research interests include fabrication of multifunctional core–shell nanomaterials for separation and pre-concentration techniques, wastewater treatment as well as carbon based materials for hydrogen storage applications.
Joselito Puzon Labis	Joselito Puzon Labis received his Ph.D. from the Division of Quantum Materials Physics, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Japan in 2002. Then, he joined as a research fellow at the Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center, Hiroshima University, Japan. In 2010, he was appointed as an assistant professor at the King Abdullah Institute for Nanotechnology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. His current research focuses on the nanostructures of III–V materials and ZnO for solar cells and other applications.

 	Fig. 1  Multifunctional nanomaterials including (a) core–shell, (b) hollow core–shell, and (c) rattle core–shell nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Designs to produce different core–shell architectures with (a) different porous core and shell characters, (b) different core–multiple shell structures. (Reprinted with permission from the Faculty of Technology, University of Novi Sad.)31	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of a conventional hard templating process for hollow sphere synthesis. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)9	 

 	Fig. 4  Designs to produce the different nanorattle architectures of (a) core–shell, (b) multiple-core and (c) multiple-shell. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)62	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of the proposed formation process and TEM images of (a) a SiO2 shell around a Ag nanocore, (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)100 and (b) a TiO2 shell around an Au nanocore. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)107	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme diagram for tuning the plasmonic properties of the magnetic core–metal shell nanoparticles by controlling the shell type and thickness. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)113	 

 	Fig. 7  The formation and a typical TEM image of Fe3O4–nSiO2@mSiO2 microspheres. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)115	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of procedures for preparing inorganic and hybrid hollow spheres using the layer-by-layer (LBL) technique based on PS colloidal templates. (Reprinted with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science.)126	 

 	Fig. 9  The formation of different Cu2O hollow structures in the presence of a CTAB template: (a) micelle, (b) single-lamellar vesicle, (c) multi-lamellar vesicle. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)135	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of etching strategies for preparing rattle core–shell nanoparticles. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)62	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of the synthesis procedure of hollow mesoporous carbon spheres with magnetic cores (HMCSMCs) by the ship-in-bottle approach: (1) introduction of the iron nitrate solution into the hollow core by vacuum nanocasting; (2) calcination into hematite particles of the core; (3) introduction of furfuryl alcohol into the mesoporous channels and polymerization; (4) carbonization of the polyfurfuryl alcohol, and the reduction of hematite particles into magnetic particles; and (5) removal of the silica template. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)157	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic procedure for the preparation of rattle core–shell nanoparticles by the Ostwald ripening approach. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)162	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration for integration of tumor cell imaging and pH-triggered drug delivery. (b) TEM image of drug-loaded core–shell hybrid nanogels with the smart-gel shell coated on the Ag nanoparticle core. (c) Scanning confocal images of B16F10 cells incubated with hybrid nanogels. (d) Drug release profiles at different pH levels. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)187	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image and (b) the conversion of styrene and selectivity of styrene oxide over multifunctional Fe3O4@SiO2–Au@mSiO2 core–double shell nanoparticles as a highly integrated catalyst system. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)25	 

 	Fig. 15  Impact of alloy and hollow structure on hydrogen gas production through NH3BH3 reaction. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)219	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of two drug delivery systems that give different controlled release patterns and (b) cumulative drug release of the two systems in media of different pH values. ■: pH 1.4 from IBU-HMS, ● pH 1.4 from IBU-HMS@PEM, ▲: pH 8.0 from IBU-HMS, ▼: pH 8.0 from IBU-HMS@PEM. (Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.)5	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Scheme of corking and uncorking a catalytic activity of an Au–SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor and (b) CO conversion of Au@HSNs_C with GHSV = 360000 mL gcat−1 h−1 (1%CO/6%O2/93%He) under vapor and vapor-free conditions in a temperature range of 0–60 °C. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)248	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic procedure for the preparation of Au@r–GO/TiO2 yolk@shell nanostructures, (b) TEM image of Au@r–GO/TiO2, and the evaluation of visible light photocatalytic activity for (c) RhB dye decomposition and (d) water-splitting H2 production. (Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society.)257	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) HR-TEM image of yolk–shell gold nanorod@void@mesoporous titania nanoparticles (AuNR@void@mTiO2 NPs). (c) DOX release profiles from DOX-loaded NPs with and without 785 nm NIR laser in PBS buffer (pH 5.0). (d) Confocal laser scanning microscopy images of MCF-7 cells taken after treatment with DOX-loaded NPs at different incubation times. Hoechst 33342 was used for cell nuclei staining (blue fluorescence). Red fluorescence in the MCF-7 cells originated from DOX. (Reprinted with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.)77	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
