Tailored nanocellulose-grafted polymer brush applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA03264J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA03264J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17173-17188Tailored nanocellulose-grafted polymer brush applications

        
          
            Lauren 
            Geurds
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Lauko
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alan E. 
            Rowan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Nasim 
            Amiralian
          
          
        
      *
      Australian Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, 4072 St Lucia, Queensland, Australia. E-mail: n.amiralian@uq.edu.au
Received 
      19th April 2021
    , Accepted 9th July 2021First published on 20th July 2021AbstractNanocellulose (NC) is the main building block of plants, considered one of the most abundant and sustainable materials with excellent mechanical properties and unique morphology. This nanomaterial serves as a high performance and renewable additive for a range of different applications, including nanocomposites, biomedical technologies, energy storage, and packaging. Due to its high surface area, NC has tendency to aggregate, limiting the ultimate properties of products. Another challenge in using NC is its hydrophilic nature and moisture absorption, which cause issues in being uniformly dispersed in hydrophobic solvents and non-polar matrices. The most promising solution to these challenges is chemical modification, such as introducing polymeric brushes to the surface of NC. This technique has been demonstrated to successfully improve the colloidal suspension stability of NC, to change its hydrophilicity, as well as to introduce different functionalities such as stimuli-responsiveness and carrier ability. Numerous functionalisation approaches are described in the literature implementing various techniques, polymers, and compositions. However, translational approaches to the targeted applications are limited. This review summarises the current procedures described in the literature used to create NC-grafted polymer brushes, their advantages and shortcomings, with a focus on their applications in high value-added materials.Lauren GeurdsLauren Geurds graduated with a BSc in chemistry from the HAN University of Applied Sciences, The Netherlands, in 2018. In 2019, she received a second BSc with Honours class I in the field of biochemistry from the University of Queensland, Australia. Currently, she is undertaking her PhD studies under the supervision of Dr Nasim Amiralian at the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), the University of Queensland. Her research interests are in the area of nanocellulose-based conductive polymer brush systems for flexible electronic applications.Jan LaukoDr Jan Lauko holds a PhD in Science from Radboud University in Nijmegen, the Netherlands. After completing his PhD he joined the Dutch startup company NovioSense BV as Chief technology officer to oversee the technical development of a non-invasive glucose sensor. In 2016 Jan joined the newly-established lab of Prof Rowan in the role of Group operations manager. When he is not too busy with managing the group, he still enjoys working in the lab, working on polymeric hydrogels for applications in wound healing and tissue engineering.Alan E. RowanProfessor Alan Rowan is currently an ARC Laureate Fellow, a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science, and Senior Group Leader and Director of Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology. His group is performing research at the interface of chemistry and biology with seminal and pioneering work on processive catalysis and functional self-assembly. His latest scientific achievement has been the development of the first truly biomimetic hydrogel, which mimics the mechanic and functional properties of the extracellular membrane.Nasim AmiralianDr Nasim Amiralian, is currently Group Leader and Advance Queensland Research Fellow at the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland (UQ). She is also the leader of the spinifex nanocellulose pilot plant facility at UQ. Her group is interested in using materials observed in nature and applying them in multidisciplinary areas of engineering and science to develop versatile and reliable approaches towards new types of products with desirable properties. In doing so, they work on the translation of fundamental science into practical and widely adopted technologies through collaboration with industry.
1. Introduction
Cellulose is the most abundant polymer available worldwide with an estimated annual natural production of 1.5 × 1012 tons and considered as an almost inexhaustible source of raw materials which has been used for about 150 years.1,2 Cellulose is the main constituent of the cell wall in lignocellulosic plants, with its content, composition, and organisation depending on the plant species, growing environment, position, growth, and maturity. The term nanocellulose (NC) generally refers to cellulosic materials having at least one dimension in the nanometer range. The concept of breaking down cellulose fibres into structural components and micro and nanofibrils has recently become a topic of intense academic and industrial interest (Fig. 1). The abundance and biocompatibility of NC, its excellent mechanical properties, high surface area, and unique morphology predetermine NC as an ideal material for a range of industrial applications in polymer and plastic products, and rheology modifiers in paint and coatings.3–7 NC can be classified into different subcategories based on their dimensions and surface functionality, mainly depending on the cellulosic source and processing conditions:8–13 (i) cellulose nanocrystals (CNC, Fig. 2A), also called cellulose whiskers, classified as rod-shaped rigid particles with high crystallinity which are commonly produced by chemical hydrolysis of the amorphous regions in cellulose fibres, e.g., using sulphuric acid, phosphoric acid and hydrochloric acid treatment of cellulose pulp;14–16 and (ii) cellulose nanofibers (CNFs, Fig. 2B) commonly also called nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) or microfibrillated cellulose (MFC), composed of alternating crystalline and amorphous cellulose regions isolated through the mechanical treatment of pulp. CNF is known for its high aspect ratio (the ratio between length to width), flexibility, and high surface area;8,9,14,16,17 and (iii) bacterial cellulose (BC, Fig. 2C), an exopolysaccharide produced by bacteria with web-like entangled macro/nanofibers and high crystallinity.16,18,19,20
 Fig. 1  The number of publications on nanocellulose (NC) and its relevant topics. Data sourced from Scopus on the 13th of April 2021. Each category includes a few related words, and the publication counted if one appears in the title, abstract, or keywords: CNC (nanocrystalline cellulose, cellulose nanocrystal, cellulose whisker); CNF (cellulose nanofiber, nanofiber cellulose); BC (bacterial nanocellulose); composites; surface modification; polymer brush (CNC, CNF, BC polymer brush). 
 Fig. 2  Overview of nanocellulose subcategories based on their morphology: (A) CNC (TEM, wood), (B) CNF (TEM, sugarcane), and (C) BC-hemicellulose (SEM), copied from ref. 19. 
Recent research demonstrates the application of NC in more advanced materials such as supporting agents for heterogeneous catalysis21 and nanoparticles in sensors and imaging devices,22–25 scaffolds for wound dressing,26 and stabilisers in Pickering emulsions.27 The high degree of hydroxyl groups along the polymer chain can be used for surface chemical modifications to improve the dispersity of NC in non-polar solvents and hydrophobic polymer matrices, as well as providing a template for the attachment of small molecules (such as drugs, fatty acids, and fluorescent agents),28–30 particles (e.g., metal nanoparticles or quantum dots),21,31,32 and polymers to create hybrid materials.10,11,13,16,17,33–37 Frequently used NC surface modification strategies include esterification, silylation, click chemistry, and polymer grafts, otherwise known as polymer brushes.17,30,38
In particular, the surface functionalisation of NC with polymer brushes has shown a growing interest in the past five years.15,30,33,36,37,39–41 Polymer brushes represent an effective way of controlling surface functionality by introducing unique architectural features on the surface of NC, suitable for a vast range of applications.42,43 The polymer chains are grafted or adsorbed onto the surface of NC through an initiating group or interaction/affinity bonding. Therefore, it is possible to tune the grafting density (density of polymer chains per surface area) and the brush thickness (controlled via the polymer chain length and grafting density) to meet specific application needs. The type of monomer used to form brushes, implementing different surface chemistries, will allow tuning the interfacial properties of products, such as hydrophilicity, colloidal stability, adhesive behaviour, stimuli-responsiveness, and rheological and tribological behaviour.28,42–51
To the best of our knowledge, the available review articles about NC-polymer brushes mainly focus on the polymerisation techniques and characteristics of NC-grafted polymer brushes.11,14,15,30,33,36,40,41,52–54 However, a clear gap can be identified in using NC-polymer brushes as the building block for advanced material applications. To this date, only a few articles and review papers highlight the application of these materials for the production of extracellular matrices,55 drug delivery systems,54 catalysts,56 fluorescent probes,28,57,58 flexible electronics such as conductive films and energy storage systems,59–61 and water purification systems.62 In our review, we will describe and discuss the developments of NC-grafted polymer brushes regarding polymer composition and the opportunities to use these nanoparticles for a range of different applications, including biomedical, energy, catalysis, filters, and nanofillers, followed by the future outlook of NC-grafted polymer brush systems.
2. Alteration of the nanocellulose surface by polymer brushes
There are two main approaches for introducing polymer brushes on the surface of NC (Fig. 3): (i) “grafting-to” method, including both covalent and non-covalent interactions (frequently described as the adsorption approach) and (ii) “grafting-from” approach.15,63 Amongst the two main approaches for synthesising NC-polymer brushes, covalent and non-covalent surface modifications, the covalent grafting approach, which provides better control and stability to the system, is more commonly applied in the literature, with detailed reports of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic polymers grafted on NC substrates.17
 Fig. 3  A schematic overview of the two main approaches for introducing polymer brushes on the surface of NC substrates: “grafting-to” method and “grafting-from” approach. 
In the “grafting from” approach the polymerisation is initiated from the NC surface, making it possible to achieve a high-density grafting of brushes. Additionally, this polymerisation technique also enables control over the grafted polymer length (polymer brush). Typically, this method requires a multiple-step procedure, starting with surface modification of NC with initiator groups that enable the “growth” of the polymeric-brushes from the surface, followed by polymerisation. The characterisation (molecular weight, polydispersity) of the grafted polymer can be challenging due to the covalent conjugation of polymers to NC.64 As a solution, some studies have successfully demonstrated the decoupling of polymer brushes from the cellulose surface through acid hydrolysis.65 Others characterised the grafted polymers based on the free volume theory66 (where the individual polymer chains may sufficiently separate, creating “holes” of the monomeric volumes size), or the addition of a non-bounded initiator for “free” polymerisation.41
The “grafting to” approach has the advantage of introducing a well-defined polymer before conjugation on the NC through peptide coupling, epoxy ring-opening, click chemistry or adsorption approaches to form (non-)ionic or electrostatic interactions between the NC surface and polymers.15,17,63,64,67–71 However, the grafting density is influenced by steric hindrance or entanglement between the polymer brushes, which is difficult to control. Furthermore, specifically for the adsorption approach, the ability to form interaction in water, simple processing and scalability options are the main advantages of this process. However, there is limited control over the surface modification quality and bonding with other materials.68,69 The binding efficiency and stability between the NC surface and polymers are controlled by the charge density of polymers and environmental factors such as the addition of salts, therefore resulting in a difference in the characteristics and properties of brushes compared to covalent-grafted polymers,63 explaining the limited use of this approach.
The “grafting from” approach is a more straightforward and widely used technique due to the explained limitations of the “grafting to” approach. However, it is vital to consider the effect of introducing polymeric brushes on the morphology and thermal and mechanical properties of NC when grafting techniques are used.28,41,72–74 Morits et al. reported that a higher grafting density (degree of substitution (DS) = 0.43) on the CNF led to noticeable degradation of the CNF structure where the excessive strain on NC caused by the polymeric chains resulted in destruction of the crystalline regions.72 Notably, the NC degradation due to the degree of surface modification has not been reported by other studies or for other types of NC such as CNC and BC.28,46,49,59,60,62,75–77
Numerous polymerisation techniques have been described in the literature to synthesise polymeric brushes, classified into three main categories: free radical polymerisation,78–80 ring-opening polymerisation (ROP),81–83 and controlled radical polymerisation (CRP).7,57 The CRP technique is a collective name for several polymerisations, including reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer polymerisation (RAFT),84–87 and single-electron transfer living radical polymerisation (SET-LRP),88–90 as well as the most common technique to date, atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP).41,60,72,77,84,87,91–93Table 1 presents an overview of the functionalisation techniques that have been recently applied to generate polymer brushes on the NC surface, along with their advantages and disadvantages. For more details, readers are referred to specific reviews and articles focusing on the surface modification of cellulose substrates (CNC and CNF).15,17,30,33,41,66,94
Table 1 An overview of the functionalisation techniques used to create nanocellulose grafted polymeric brushes, including polymerisation approaches and their advantages and disadvantages




Functionalisation techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Free radical polymerisation (FRP)
• The reaction can be carried out in water
• Less control over polymer length, dispersity, and grafting density

15



• No surface initiator modification is required
• Creating residual polymers


Ring-opening polymerisation (ROP)
• Synthesis of biodegradable polymers
• Low moisture tolerance

15



• No chemical pre-treatment is required
• Non-uniform surface modification


Atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP)
• Controlled polymer chain length, architecture, and polymer composition
• The high concentration of catalyst (mainly copper)

15, 33, 41, 60, 72, 77, 87 and 93


• A low polydispersity
• The issue with the removal of copper (catalyst) which is time consuming or expensive


• Possible chain-end modification
• Difficult to scale up


• Very sensitive to oxygen


Single-electron transfer living radical polymerisation (SET-LRP)
• Less sensitive to water (in comparison to ATRP)
• Sensitive to temperature, ligand, and solvent composition sensitive (disproportionation of Cu(I))

89, 90 and 108


• The reaction can happen under noninert conditions


• Ability to synthesise high molecular weight polymers with low polydispersity


Activator re-generated by electron transfer ATRP (ARGET-ATRP)
• A reduced amount of catalyst
• Low surface initiator efficiency

41



• Less air sensitive than normal ATRP


• Well-controlled polymerisation


Reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer polymerisation (RAFT)
• Wide range of monomers
• Multiple-step synthesis and purification

15, 86 and 87


• Variety of experimental conditions (solvents, temperature)
• Limited stability for RAFT agents


• Good control


Non-covalent grafting
• Formation of interactions in water
• Steric hindrance or entanglement

68 and 69


• Simple processing
• Potential bonding with other materials.


• Scalability options
• Concerns related to the binding efficiency and stability between the NC surface and polymers


Click chemistry
• Bioconjugation
• Sensitive reaction conditions

17 and 109


• High yield
• Copper presence and purification


• High reaction efficiency
• Alkyne homocoupling


• Orthogonal
• Steric hindrance or entanglement




3. Applications of nanocellulose-templated brush polymers
NC surrounded by a polymer brush layer is often referred to as hairy/patchy NC.51,72,95 More advanced shapes such as vesicle structure formation (micelle or core–shell nanorod) can be achieved by significantly increasing the grafting density, and introducing functional end groups,5 as well as di-block45,49,57,71,83,96–99 or tri-block copolymers100–102 on NC.5,96,101 Moreover, for di-block or tri-block polymer brush systems, the inner or outer brushes can operate as a template or carrier for synthesising metal nanoparticles,103,104 ions,96 silica nanoparticles,5 drugs,103,105 and fluorescent molecules101 (Fig. 4). Additional functionalities can be introduced by grafting stimuli-responsive polymers on the surface, allowing the design of NC-based systems triggered by environmental factors such as UV, pH, temperature, and gas triggers which find useful applications for sensing,28 catalysis, and purification applications.27,62
 Fig. 4  Applications of NC in: (A) nanocomposite reinforcement (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) (TEMPO)-CNF grafted polyethylene glycol (PEG) in the polylactic acid (PLA) matrix for transparent films for potential optical applications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (B) CNF-grafted block copolymers methyl acrylate and acrylic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (poly(MA-block-NAS)) brush labelled with a luminescent dye as a biomarker for alimentary canal tissues. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (C) Encapsulation, growth, and release of cancer spheroids from a thermo-responsive CNC-grafted poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAM) hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. (D) Drug delivery system by CNC-grafted poly(dimethyl aminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA), reprinted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (E) Oil–water separation systems by grafting PDMAEMA from CNF, reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (F) Flexible all-solid-state polymer electrolyte through cellulose grafted poly(poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate) (PPEGMA), reprinted with permission from ref. 60 Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. (G) Schematic illustration of the proposed assembly of p-PNIPAM-g-CNC and b-PNIPAM-g-CNC because of the LCST of PNIPAM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. (H) Bioactive material recognition by PDMAEMA-b-poly(oligo ethylene glycol) methacrylate (POEGMA) grafted TEMPO-CNF, reprinted with permission from ref. 129 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (I) Interpolyelectrolyte complex (IPEC) formation between CNC-g-poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) and poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl trimethylammoniumiodide]-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (PMETAI82-b-PEO114), reprinted with permission from ref. 100 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
A wide range of techniques are applied to create NC-grafted polymer brushes with controlled dimensions, composition, surface chemistry, and architecture,11,14,15,30,33,36,40,41,52 all based on the desired application of the NC brushes. Fig. 4 shows some NC-based polymer brush nanomaterials explored for applications such as nanofillers,106 drug delivery systems,107 filters62 and flexible electrolytes.60 Herein, we review some common applications of these materials in the biomedical, electronic, catalytic, purification, and nanocomposite industries.
3.1 Cell culture and biomedical applications
The high-aspect-ratio of NC, specifically CNF and BC, allows the formation of a fibrillar network through nanofiber entanglement or chemical crosslinking at low concentrations, creating hydrogel systems suitable for applications in the biomedical field.10,54,57,58,98,104,110–117 The self-assembly originates from the associations between the nanoparticles (side-by-side and end-to-end interactions) controlled by the surface properties of NC such as surface charge, hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity, and environmental factors like pH, ionic strength, or temperature.112 The implementation of NC-polymer brush systems as an additive or scaffold for 3D cell culture, tissue engineering and drug delivery systems promises a multitude of possibilities, such as controlled encapsulation and release due to stimuli-responsive behaviour introduced by the polymer brush.10 Mimicking the extracellular matrix (ECM) has become a prominent bioengineering focus to create an in vitro model for more representative cell studies.118 Previously reported challenges for biological (collagen and fibrin) or synthetic polymer-based (polyethylene glycol (PEG) and polylactic acid (PLA)) hydrogels were mostly related to the batch to batch variation, cost- and labour-intensive procedures, and harmful cell-release techniques for characterisation, as well as an incomplete mimic capability.55,98,119 Nanofibrillar hydrogels derived from NC display a similar configuration to the ECM and enable functionalities in the hydrogel through surface grafting (stimuli-responsive polymers, cell-adhesive ligands, and growth factors).10,112 The NC-hydrogel based systems derived from either bacteria or plants have further shown application in wound dressing, cartilage repair, diagnostics and targeted drug delivery. This is because NC promotes cell regeneration while maintaining the demanded mechanical properties. In addition, functionalisation of the surface with proteins and other biomolecules can enhance interactions between the molecules or trigger an encapsulation or release mechanism.
Thérien-Aubin et al. reported the design of CNC temperature-responsive hydrogels for encapsulation and 3D culture of fibroblasts and T cells.98 CNC was functionalised with random copolymers of N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAM) and dimethyl aminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA) through RAFT polymerisation. The thermo-responsive property enabled a gel formation at 37 °C for cell culture and an on-demand release of cells when reducing the temperature below its lower critical solution temperature (LCST). A similar approach was used for the growth and on-demand release of multicellular cancer spheroids (CSs) in CNC-grafted PNIPAM.55 Single breast cancer cells were grown into multicellular CSs without loss of cell viability and spheroid integrity upon release. Other studies indicated that the NC-polymer brushes require cell adhesive proteins or groups for 3D cell culturing, to increase cellular interactions between the matrix and cells influencing the cell fate. Therefore, anionic polymer poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfate) (PSSNa) was grafted through ATRP onto the CNF to demonstrate a novel CNF-based 3D scaffold inspired by colloidal flocculation (Fig. 5A).120 These anionic polymer brushes enhanced the non-specific protein adsorption of hepatocyte cells (liver) by introducing a charge on the cell surface to produce flocculation and interference with unwanted cell clustering. By tuning the polymer brush density, flocculation size and shapes can be controlled which leads to better substance transportation between cells. Besides the hepatocyte cells, fibroblasts also demonstrated self-assembly with the NC-polymer brush, indicating the diverse possibilities with other cell types of this novel 3D cell culture scaffold for various biomedical applications, such as cell therapy and tissue engineering.120
 Fig. 5  NC-polymer brush systems in biomedical application: (A) schematic overview of CNF-grafted anionic polymers as a 3D scaffold for cell culture. Cross-sectional confocal laser microscopy images of the hepatocyte cells with CNF-poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfate) (PSSNa) creating hollow flocs of cells, cultured for 1, 4, and 7 days; scale bar = 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic overview of the synthesis of the PAA-BCM followed by p-rhOPN immobilisation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright (2020) Elsevier. (C) Confocal microscopy images of MCF-7 breast cancer cells after incubation with poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate) (pHEA)-g-TOCNs for 2 h, localised in the lysosomes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. (D) Structure of the fluorescent PEG-modified TOCNC with confocal microscopy images of labelled HeLa cells with TOCNC-1,8-naphthalimide (NANI) (a–c) and TOCNC-NANI-PEG (d–f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
In addition to plant-derived nanocellulose, bacterial cellulose membranes (BCMs) are well established in wound dressing121,122 and tissue engineering applications, such as cartilage repairing,123–126 but exhibit insufficient cellular interaction compared to natural alternative membranes (e.g. collagen or hyaluronic acid).126,127 Several methodologies have been used to increase the number of active sites on the BC surface, mainly focusing on its modification with bioactive materials. BCM grafted poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) brushes were investigated for cell culture application, where PAA provides stability and available sites for protein immobilisation, Fig. 5B.126 The rich content of carboxyl groups in PAA forms an active anchoring point for extracellular glycosylated phosphoproteins (such as osteopontin (OPN)), present at the interface between tissue and bone. The BCM grafted PAA-plant-derived rhOPN (p-rhOPN) inducted biological functions, resulting in osteogenic differentiation of human periodontal ligament stem cells, suggesting its potential to promote bone tissue regeneration.
Additionally, NC-grafted polymer brushes have shown to be potential candidates for drug and gene delivery.54,128 For example, a series of redox-responsive CNC composites produced by grafting PDMAEMA disulphide linked brushes (Fig. 4D).107 The PDMAEMA brushes can effectively trap DNA, and due to the bio-cleavable disulphide-bond (intracellular reducing agents, for example, glutathione), the NC-polymer brush particles decompose under reducing conditions, followed by the release of DNA. The CNC-g-PDMAEMA loaded with suicide gene (pCMV-CD) complexes demonstrated good activity in suppressing the growth of cancer cells and tumours in in vitro and in vivo studies. Drug loading through electrostatic interactions with NC is another approach for delivery, where the polymer brushes stabilise and guide the drug release. Poly(ethyl ethylene phosphate) (PEEP) grafted brushes on CNC were shown to enable the release of anti-tumour drug doxorubicin (DOX) upon degradation under hydrolytic or enzymatic conditions.114 The positively charged DOX binds to the negatively charged CNC until the composite degrades and releases the drug due to enzymatic degradation. Khine et al., functionalised TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) oxidised CNF, containing carboxylic acid groups, with self-fluorescent poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate) (pHEA-g-TOCNs) via tetrazole-acid click chemistry.128 Drug (DOX) was loaded on the carboxylic groups of the TOCNs through electrostatic interactions, and the cellular uptake of these nanoparticles by MCF-7 breast cancer cells was monitored by the fluorescent polymer, Fig. 5C.
Some studies looked at how NC can be used as a simple, cost-effective, and disposable optical/electrical analytical device for biosensing and imaging applications.22 It was shown that NC-grafted polymer brushes enhance polymeric composite stability in physiological environments and function as anchoring sites to implement specific peptide or cell targeting units. CNF was grafted with block copolymers methyl acrylate (MA) and acrylic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester, through surface-initiated polymerisation, with the active NHS ester-groups enabling convenient attachment of functional groups, such as dyes.57 The CNF-polymer brush labelled with Lucifer Yellow, a luminescent dye, proved to be an applicable biomarker with uptake and distribution in alimentary canal tissues. In another study, a fluorescent nanoprobe was produced by coupling a fluorescent 1,8-naphthalimide dye (NANI) to CNC grafted PEG, Fig. 5D.58 Characterisation of the fluorescent probe showed successful HeLa cell membrane penetration with a uniform dispersibility due to the polymer brushes, which prevented aggregation of the fluorescent dye.
NC-based polymer brushes also have been used to monitor molecular interactions through immobilisation and recognition of enzymes/proteins.129 The potential of CNF as a template for the development of functional biomolecules, such as CNF functionalised avidin and antihuman immunoglobulin G (anti-hIgG), to detect biotinylated anti-hIgG or hIgG antibodies was investigated.115 It has been shown that the biomolecules lose their bioactivity when directly introduced on the NC-surface, however, when peptides were conjugated onto CNF-grafted polymers, the polymer brushes function as spacers (i.e. an extension piece used to increase the accessibility) to immobilise biomolecules and to maintain their activity.115
Despite various promising achievements in the application of NC-based polymeric brushes in the biomedical field, further fundamental investigations about the long-term biocompatibility, toxicology, and performance of these advanced materials, as well as their biomedical application validation based on currently available standards, are needed.
3.2 Flexible electronics
In the search for sustainable materials and new green technologies, NC evolves as a rapidly growing, renewable, and affordable source for applications such as fuel cells18 and elements of energy storage systems.35,130–132 The incorporation of NC into energy storage materials has been found to improve electrochemical performance (rate capability, energy/power densities), safety, flexibility, and morphology.35 Recent studies indicate the potential of cellulose-polymer brushes as a supercapacitor for lithium-ion batteries and flexible electrically conductive films for displays and sensor application.59,60 An all-solid-state microcrystalline cellulose-grafted poly(poly (ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate) (PPEGMA) electrolyte is synthesised for use in lithium-ion batteries.60 The nature of cellulose favoured an aligned morphology, resulting in effective ion channel formation by polymer brushes for ion transport. This efficient system is flexible with a stretchability < 150% and has a long-term stability (over 450 cycles), which is a significant issue with the commercially available solid-state electrolytes. Another popular energy storage system is phase-change materials (PCM) for storing and managing renewable energy. Due to the abundance of surface functional groups (providing the essential surface functional modification) and excellent thermal conductivity, NC has also considered a promising building block material to control thermal energy for phase-change systems. Fan et al.61 functionalised CNC with PEG to create an NC-based PCM system that displayed excellent heat storage regulation and shape stability at temperatures of 15 to 30 °C, indicating the potential for thermal energy storage applications.
Recently, the potential use of NC as a flexible and conductive film has gained interest. Standard techniques for producing cellulose-based conductive films are blending, coating, or doping conductive material (e.g., conductive polymers, carbon nanotubes, or inorganic nanoparticles) with NC to create biocompatible substrates for electronic devices such as batteries and fuel cells as well as electrically stimulated scaffolds for tissue engineering and biosensing applications.59,130 While some promising results have been reported,133,134 these techniques demonstrated several limitations regarding the stability, uniform dispersion of conductive materials on NC, aggregation of NC and conductive nanoparticles, and reproducibility of the film. The favourable conductive properties of films also decreased, especially at a higher threshold concentration of conductive materials due to the aggregation of nanoparticles, which results in the production of heterogeneous materials. To address these issues, recent studies have shown the use of NC as a carrier or template for the synthesis of conductive materials such as inorganic nanoparticles, which assist in reducing the aggregation of nanoparticles and subsequently improve the conductivity and mechanical properties of the film.135 Using CNF for flexible electronic films, 3-methyl thiophene was oxidatively polymerised onto the surface of the CNF to create a conductive film.59 The conductive polymer showed a very negligible effect on the thermal and mechanical stability of CNF; thus, electrically conductive flexible films with high strength were obtained for potential flexible electronic applications as displays or solar cells. Overall, the conductive NC-based materials have been gaining more attention as a promising approach for the future renewable flexible electronics and energy storage devices such as display devices,136 scaffolds for tissue engineering,137,138 biosensors,139 and catalysis.21,56,140 Due to the specific properties of NC (flexibility, biodegradability, and network formation) combined with the electroconductivity of polymers, carbon nanotubes, carbon dots, graphene or metal particles, advanced NC-based electronic materials can be developed that exhibit molecule transport, biocatalytic activity and mechanical energy conversion.135,136
3.3 Catalysis
Catalytic processes play a crucial role in realising fast and efficient production of products or the decomposition of molecules, and have become an indispensable resource in various applications, such as fuel cells and self-cleaning coatings. The function of a catalyst can be defined as a component that accelerates the rate of reaction without being used in the reaction. Catalysts are categorised into three types: homogeneous catalysts (same phase as the reactants), heterogeneous catalysts (different phase than the reactants), and biocatalysts (predominantly enzymes). Metal and metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) have been investigated in the field of catalysis as they combine the efficiency and selectivity of homogeneous catalysis and the easy separation, recyclability, and affordability of heterogeneous catalysis. However, most NPs are not stable on their own and are prone to aggregation, which negatively affects their outstanding catalytic property.21,49,56 Various stabilising agents such as NC,21,56,140 carbon nanotubes,141,142 and silicon nanoparticles143 have been used to enhance the stability, and possibly enable new properties in the catalytic system. NC templated with several different metals and metal oxide NP-materials21 such as silver,144,145 iron oxide31 and gold NPs146,147 has been used as a base material of catalytic systems.21,49,56 Li et al. introduced stimuli-responsive copolymers on the CNF surface to enable an electronic interaction with gold NPs to stabilise the metal and created a temperature-sensitive catalytic system for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP).49 4-NP is commonly used in the production of drugs and dyes, however, inhalation or ingestion of the compound causes headaches, drowsiness and nausea. The sponge CNF-based catalytic system (Fig. 6A) showed homogeneous dispersed NPs with high catalytic efficiency to reduce 4-NP throughout 22 catalytic reaction cycles. The temperature-responsive polymer enabled control over the catalytic activity by adjusting the reaction temperature below the lower critical solution temperature (LCST). Below the LCST, the stretched hydrated polymers on the NC collapse to a dehydrated state, disrupting reactant transport, and consequently decreasing the catalytic efficiency.
 Fig. 6  NC-polymer brush systems as catalytic systems: (A) schematic illustration of the CNF grafted temperature responsive PNIPAM-co-poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGM) sponge system. Catalytic performance measured at different temperatures for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) concentration in the absence (1) and presence (2) of PNIPAM-co-PGM. Adapted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the development of gold templated poly(4-vinyl pyridine) (P4VP)-g-CNC. The reduction of 4-NP catalysed by the nanocatalyst (Au@P4VP-g-CNC), (1) comparison with pristine Au and Au@CNC and (2) recyclability. Adapted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
Another approach is a pH-responsive catalyst system, using poly(4-vinyl pyridine) (P4VP) which exhibits pH-responsive characteristics in water and has a good affinity with metals (ligand), creating a coordinated CNC-based catalyst for the reduction of 4-NP.56 The efficiency of polymer brushes is evaluated by comparing the catalytic activity and recyclability of gold stabilised CNC-grafted polymer brushes, unfunctionalised CNC, and pure gold NPs (Fig. 6B). Compared to the gold NPs on their own, both systems contain CNC showing a significantly higher catalytic activity, where the CNC-grafted polymer system was almost 15 times higher than CNC on its own. This catalytic activity results from the lower average diameter of the gold NPs, which is controlled by the presence of grafted P4VP brushes, preventing aggregation of the Au NPs. The catalytic activity is size-dependent, as a smaller size results in higher coordination for catalysis. Due to the pH-responsive quality of polymeric brushes, recovery of the system is possible, as deprotonation of polymer causes spontaneous flocculation. The recovery process results in some loss of catalytic activity; nonetheless, the performance is still relatively high compared to pure gold NPs. Through the use of metal coordinated groups (for example, pyridines, peroxides, carboxylic acids) as a part of the polymer brushes on the NC surface, recyclable and stimuli-responsive metal NP catalyst systems can be developed with great potential for a wide range of catalytic reactions, as shown by Zhang et al.56
In summary, the use of NC as a stabilising agent for metal nanoparticles in catalysis increases catalytic activity and alleviates previous concerns on environmental impacts and sustainable development of catalysis and catalytic agents.
3.4 Filters
Removal of impurities such as organic compounds, heavy metals or oil from water is another field where NC is an appealing resource. NC is commonly used in the form of membranes and filters to purify water through ion exchange, phase separation, membrane filtration, and adsorption techniques.148,149 The high surface area to volume ratio of NC results in high adsorbent efficiencies and spontaneous removal of the pollution in comparison to other systems.148,149 Furthermore, NC can even be obtained from plant waste sources in comparison to current purification treatment approaches and devices, adding value to recycling options and current environmental pollution.148
Several studies have demonstrated the efficiency of NC, chemically modified NC and polymer grafted NC substrates in the removal of a range of different organic pollutants (e.g. textile dyes, pesticides, and oils) and heavy metal ions (e.g. Ag(I), Cu(II), and Fe(III)) from water.27,96,149–157
As an example, TEMPO-mediated oxidised CNF (TOCNF) grafted styrene composites are used for the efficient removal of chlorinated organic compounds and metal ions (chromium(III) and copper(II)) from water.155 Approximately 91% of the chlorinated organic compounds were removed from the water after only two hours, through the π–π and hydrophobic interactions between the pollutant, the polymer chains and CNF surface. In this system, the introduction of carboxylate groups on the NC surface increased the adsorption capacity/efficiency dramatically, by approximately 1.5–2.0 times, due to ion exchange or binding to chelating sites. The same study also tested the efficiency of negatively charged TOCNF, which contains carboxylic acid functional groups (without grafted styrene), to remove chlorinated organic compounds and metal particles. A weaker purification efficiency of about 30% after two hours was observed for chlorinated compounds. Interestingly, TOCNF demonstrated a higher adsorption capacity (400 mg g−1) for the removal of metal ions compared to the styrene brush grafted CNF (300 mg g−1). These results demonstrate that an NC-polymer brush system will occasionally not benefit the system capacity for pollutant removal. Anirudhan et al. designed multiple CNC-grafted polymer systems that incorporate nano-bentonite or magnetised with iron oxide nanoparticles for the removal of pollutants (cobalt(II), cadmium(II), uranium(VI), and mercury(II) ions).150–152,157 Poly(itaconic acid/methacrylic acid)-grafted-CNC/nano-bentonite (P(IA/MAA)-g-CNC/BC) composites were used for the absorbance of cobalt(II) and uranium(VI) from aqueous solutions, and resulted in efficient removal of over 90% of the pollutant.150,157 Adsorption and release of these metal ions were attributed to the functional carboxylate groups (ligands) on the grafted polymers, which lead to a higher capacity in removing the metal ions. Desorption experiments proved that the system performed for six repeating cycles without significant loss in performance, Fig. 7A and B. Similar trends were observed for the removal of mercury(II) and cadmium(II) by poly(2-mercaptobenzamide modified itaconic acid)-grafted-magnetite NC (P(MB-IA)-g-MNCC) composite, Fig. 7C and D.151,152 The successful application of pure NC-based filtration materials towards pollutant removal already exists due to their large surface area and the high number of hydroxyl groups on the surface. Moreover, these surface groups can be easily modified and significantly increase the affinity towards these pollutants, as shown by all the above-proposed NC-based brushed systems. However, the performance of these systems depends on the pollutants, indicating the importance of structural design for efficiency and the demand for more research.
 Fig. 7  Six cycles of adsorption–desorption of (A) Co(II),150 (B) U(VI)157 with poly(itaconic acid/methacrylic acid)-grafted-CNC/nano-bentonite (P(IA/MAA)-g-CNC/BC), (C) Cd(II)151 and (D) Hg(II)152 with poly(2-mercaptobenzamide modified itaconic acid)-grafted-magnetite NC (P(MB-IA)-g-MNCC), with 0.1 M HCl as the desorbing agent. Adapted from ref. 150–152 and 157 Copyright (2015, 2016), with permission from Elsevier. (E) Schematic illustration of the pH-responsive behaviour of CNC-POEGMA-poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) to form stabilised Pickering emulsions. Reprinted with permission form ref. 27 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Oil–water separation through Pickering emulsions is another area where NC-grafted polymers can be used. Pickering emulsions are extremely stable particle emulsions, where solid particles are used to stabilise the emulation instead of traditional surfactants, through their adsorption onto the interface between the two phases. By grafting stimuli-responsive polymers on the NC, the stability of the cellulose interface is controlled by environmental factors such as temperature and pH, leading to environmentally regulated emulsification/demulsification. This reversible process of emulsification–demulsification has been demonstrated for CNC-grafted binary polymer brushes, poly(oligo ethylene glycol) methacrylate (POEGMA) and poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA).27 The physical properties of the polymer brushes (pH sensitivity) result in CNC-stabilised oil droplets at pH around 7.5. Due to the strong hydrogen bonding between the grafted polymers at lower pH (pH 5.5), the droplets coalescence and oil–water phase separation occurs, Fig. 7E. The successful stabilisation–destabilisation of oil–water solutions without any loss in efficiency has been demonstrated over five cycles by adjusting the pH. The controlled on–off switching of the oil–water mixture was also observed for CO2-sensitive CNF grafted PDMAEMA polymer brushes.62 CNF-grafted PDMAEMA creates a hydrophobic surface; however, in the presence of CO2, the surface gradually becomes hydrophilic due to the protonation of the tertiary amine groups. The CO2-responsiveness of PDMAEMA brushes allows the on–off switching of the oil–water mixture separation process, creating a recyclable and attractive system. NC-based Pickering emulsions offer possible applications in various industries, including food, biomedicine, cosmetics, sensing, pharmaceuticals, oil recovery, emulsion polymerisation, heterogeneous catalysis, etc. Current research demonstrates promising outcomes, however, these systems need further development with regard to functionality and stimuli-responsive triggers.
3.5 Nanocomposites
In addition to the above applications, NC is widely explored as an environment-friendly additive in nanocomposites owing to their excellent mechanical and barrier properties, accompanied by the high specific surface area and aspect ratio.46,77,106,158–160 However, the hydrophilic nature of NC represents a limitation concerning the incorporation of non-polar solvents and hydrophobic polymer matrices, together with the tendency of aggregation at higher concentrations and their degradation at high temperatures.161,162 Recently, surface modification of NC through grafting polymer brushes has been demonstrated as a solution to introduce hydrophobicity into NC and improve its dispersity and stability in non-polar solvents and hydrophobic polymers.86,163 Several researchers have shown the production of CNC-grafted hydrophobic polymers incorporated in PLA,82,159,164,165 and more specifically poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA),78,83,166,167 improving the mechanical and barrier properties of the bio-nanocomposite for the packaging field. Free-radical grafting of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) on CNC provided a dispersible nanofiller in the PLLA matrix, leading to higher thermal stability, reduced CNC aggregation, uniform dispersion in the matrix, and enhanced elastic moduli.78 The nanocomposite also showed an improved oxygen permeability and resistance against deformation at high temperatures (>130 °C), and could potentially be used in the fuel cell, chemical processing, and analytical instrumentation industries. Muiruri et al.83 grafted a mixture of D-lactide (DLA) and ε-caprolactone (CL) monomers on CNC, which exhibited rubber characteristics such as toughness and flexibility, followed by further polymerisation of D-lactide to obtain CNC-g-rubber-g-poly(D-lactide) (CNC-rD-PDLA), broadening the possible industrial use for coating or packaging applications. The CNC-rD-PDLA filler incorporated into the PLLA matrix showed improved tensile toughness, which is a significant challenge with biodegradable polymers. Furthermore, a dopamine-induced functionalisation of CNC with PEG filler improved the overall strength and oxygen permeability of the PLLA matrix through an enhancement of the polymer crystallinity, generating a suitable material for food packaging applications.166 Another approach to improve the toughness of the biodegradable PLA for the packaging industry is grafting PLLA on the surface of CNC using surface-initiated ring-opening polymerisation (SI-ROP).82 The CNC-g-PLLA nanocomposite improved the thermal stability and tensile modulus of the PLA matrix. CNC-g-PLLA and CNC-g-poly ε-caprolactone (PCL) incorporated in PLA/PCL (70/30) matrices displayed similar results, including enhancements in elastic modulus, tensile modulus, and improved shape memory performance of the nanocomposite.164 However, the addition of 1 wt% CNC or CNC-g-PCL in the PLA/PCL (70/30) matrix dramatically decreases the flexibility and produced more brittle materials. An alternative approach to increase the use of PLA in the packaging industry was shown by Le Gars et al.77 CNC grafted with poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGMA) in PLA packaging films showed respectively improved tensile strength, thermal stability, reduced water vapour barrier properties, and antioxidant activity. The use of a reactive epoxy-containing polymer creates further modification or crosslinking possibilities, which could lead to further improvement of the bonding with the matrix polymer, and consequently an increase in barrier and mechanical properties.77
As described above, the approach and polymer composition employed for the modification of NC impact the interface properties of NC and the host matrix and, thereby, the nanocomposite's overall performance. Boujemaoui et al.76 showed that surface-modification of CNC via covalent grafting of the synthetic non-biodegradable poly(n-butyl methacrylate) (PBMA), used as a reinforcing agent in PCL films, not only enhances the thermal and mechanical properties but also results in higher transparency. Furthermore, similar results were described by Geng et al.,106 noting that using PEG-grafted TEMPO-CNF showed improved dispersibility in the PLA matrix as well as higher strength, toughness, transparency, and unique optical behaviour (anisotropic light scattering) (Fig. 5A).
PLLA grafted CNC nanocomposites incorporated into biodegradable polyurethanes (PUs) are another kind of interesting material for use in medical, food packaging, and coating applications. The CNC-PLLA filler improved mechanical properties such as tensile stress and Youngs modulus, as well as the barrier (oxygen transmission) properties of the nanocomposite.165 Another attractive aspect from an industrial point of view is the adaptability of CNC as a reinforcing material in several polymers for different applications, which can be tuned by grafting stimuli-responsive polymers.46 For example, by grafting CO2− responsive polymers such as PDMAEMA and poly(diethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDEAEMA) on the CNC surface, the nanofiller operates in both hydrophilic (polymer protonation under CO2-conditions) and hydrophobic (deprotonation under N2-conditions) solvents and matrices. By varying the polymer ratio and the degree of protonation, CNC fillers can be tailored for specific applications. However, the performance of the nanofiller was not tested in this study.46 The literature indicates that by introducing various polymers on the NC surface, not only mechanical and barrier properties of nanocomposites are controlled, but new functionalities that are suitable for coatings or packaging applications can be introduced.
4. Conclusion and outlook
The growing demand for sustainable and renewable materials has turned considerable attention to nanocellulose (NC) and its possible applications across different fields. NC is a bio-based, sustainable, and high-performance material with the potential to replace some of the petroleum-based plastics and some other synthetic nanofiller materials. However, most of the required application-specific properties are not inherent to NC itself, and therefore it is not possible to develop novel high-performance biomaterials exclusively made of pure NC. The main challenge in this area has been developing sustainable methodologies and protocols for using NC as a template to produce advanced materials. To this date, numerous NC modifications have been shown to improve its performance and expand its application while addressing the environmental demands to produce sustainable and renewable materials. The process of how the NC hydroxyl groups are modified with various functional groups, for example, polymer initiator groups, peptide coupling agents, and click reactive groups, is well established.
Moreover, conjugation and polymerisation techniques on the NC surface are widely explored to implement new or improved properties. However, only recently, the investigation of the NC surface modified with polymer brushes has gained significant attention as it can act as a sustainable source of materials in targeted applications. Therefore, this review aimed to highlight the applications of NC-based polymer brushes across various emerging fields, from water purification to drug delivery systems, and to stimulate further research in the use of these tailored nanoparticles for a new range of applications. Research shows that the introduction of polymeric brushes not only improved the compatibility and stability of NC, but in some cases, created a secondary template or anchoring point for metal nanoparticles, ions, fluorescent dyes, and biomolecules without losing its structural integrity. The variety in design possibilities and the introduction of multiple functional end-groups make NC a platform that could be considered an emerging technology to fabricate efficient, simple, cost-effective, and disposable materials for various industries. However, there are still some challenges in using NC as a template to synthesise polymer brushes. Choosing a suitable class of NC for a specific application is crucial as it influences the properties, morphology, and performance of products. For example, CNF is a preferable type of NC for tissue engineering due to its ability to form fibre networks and its high surface area. On the other hand, the high aspect ratio of CNF makes it prone to agglomeration, making the synthesis of polymer brushes on their surface very challenging. Another challenge is the ability to maintain the morphology of NC after the modification process. This crucial step in CNF functionalisation needs more fine-tuning to enhance NC-based system efficiency for specific applications while retaining the crystalline structure and morphology. In terms of scaling up NC-based polymeric brushes, further research needs to be conducted to transition lab-scale results into real-world commercial applications successfully. Despite several challenges left to overcome, we envision that NC grafted polymer brushes will receive significant attention in the coming years, being the core material of the next generation of sustainable and high-performance materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
L. G. acknowledges the funding support received from the University of Queensland (UQ) Research Training Stipend (RTS) Scholarship. A. E. R. acknowledges the financial support from Australian Research Council (ARC Laureate Fellowship FL160100139).
Notes and references
Y. Cao, J. Wu, J. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Zhang and J. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 147, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klemm, B. Heublein, H.-P. Fink and A. Bohn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3358–3393 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hubbe, P. Tayeb, M. Joyce, P. Tyagi, M. Kehoe, K. Dimic-Misic and L. Pal, BioResources, 2017, 12, 9556–9661 CAS .
C. C. Piras, S. Fernández-Prieto and W. M. De Borggraeve, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 1988–1992 RSC .
M. Morits, V. Hynninen, Nonappa, A. Niederberger, O. Ikkala, A. H. Gröschel and M. Müllner, Polymer Chemistry, 2018, 9, 1650–1657 RSC .
Y. Sui, X. Li, W. Chang, H. Wan, W. Li, F. Yang and Z.-Z. Yu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 232, 115778 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Lee, D. Park, S. K. Choi, M. Kim, H. S. Baek, J. Nam, C. B. Chung, C. O. Osuji and J. W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31095–31101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiang, T. Li, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Gong, J. Dai, E. Hitz, W. Luo and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703453 CrossRef .
L. Alves, E. Ferraz and J. A. F. Gamelas, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 272, 101994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Curvello, V. S. Raghuwanshi and G. Garnier, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 267, 47–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sharma, M. Thakur, M. Bhattacharya, T. Mandal and S. Goswami, Biotechnol. Rep., 2019, 21 CAS .
H. P. S. Abdul Khalil, Y. Davoudpour, M. N. Islam, A. Mustapha, K. Sudesh, R. Dungani and M. Jawaid, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 99, 649–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondal, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 163, 301–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kargarzadeh, J. Huang, N. Lin, I. Ahmad, M. Mariano, A. Dufresne, S. Thomas and A. Gałęski, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 87, 197–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kedzior, J. O. Zoppe, R. M. Berry and E. D. Cranston, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2019, 23, 74–91 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, R. Cha, K. Mou, X. Zhao, K. Long, H. Luo, F. Zhou and X. Jiang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800334 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Rol, M. N. Belgacem, A. Gandini and J. Bras, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 88, 241–264 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vilela, A. J. D. Silvestre, F. M. L. Figueiredo and C. S. R. Freire, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20045–20074 RSC .
J. Berglund, D. Mikkelsen, B. M. Flanagan, S. Dhital, S. Gaunitz, G. Henriksson, M. E. Lindström, G. E. Yakubov, M. J. Gidley and F. Vilaplana, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4692 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abol-Fotouh, M. A. Hassan, H. Shokry, A. Roig, M. S. Azab and A. E.-H. B. Kashyout, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kaushik and A. Moores, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 622–637 RSC .
H. Golmohammadi, E. Morales-Narváez, T. Naghdi and A. Merkoçi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5426–5446 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, J. Wang, W. Kang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2022–2027 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, Y. Wang, X. Zou, Z. Chen, H. Liu and Y. Ni, Small, 2020, 16, 1906567 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Nguyen, S. Naficy, R. Chandrawati and F. Dehghani, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900424 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, L. Chen and F. F. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 3382–3392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, R. M. Berry and K. C. Tam, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 1748–1756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, F. Huang, S. Pan, W. Mu, X. Meng, H. Yang, Z. Xu, A. J. Ragauskas and Y. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1995–2005 RSC .
L. Wei, U. P. Agarwal, K. C. Hirth, L. M. Matuana, R. C. Sabo and N. M. Stark, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 169, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Habibi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1519–1542 RSC .
N. Amiralian, M. Mustapic, M. S. A. Hossain, C. Wang, M. Konarova, J. Tang, J. Na, A. Khan and A. Rowan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 394, 122571 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xiong, S. Yu, M. J. Smith, J. Zhou, M. Krecker, L. Zhang, D. Nepal, T. J. Bunning and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9074–9081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Joubert, O. M. Musa, D. R. W. Hodgson and N. R. Cameron, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7217–7235 RSC .
R. S. Varma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6458–6470 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, D. Lee, Y. H. Lee, W. Chen and S. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31 Search PubMed .
E. Kontturi, P. Laaksonen, M. B. Linder, Nonappa, A. H. Gröschel, O. J. Rojas and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703779 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Abouzeid, R. Khiari, N. El-Wakil and A. Dufresne, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 573–597 CrossRef CAS .
K. Heise, G. Delepierre, A. W. T. King, M. A. Kostiainen, J. Zoppe, C. Weder and E. Kontturi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 66–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ansari and L. A. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2341–2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nasseri, C. P. Deutschman, L. Han, M. A. Pope and K. C. Tam, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 5, 100055 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, X. Wang, K. C. Tam and G. Sèbe, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 205, 322–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krishnamoorthy, S. Hakobyan, M. Ramstedt and J. E. Gautrot, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10976–11026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Feng and X. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 2314–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Chen, D. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Liu and S. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12988–12999 CrossRef CAS .
N. Grishkewich, S. P. Akhlaghi, Y. Zhaoling, R. Berry and K. C. Tam, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 144, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Arredondo, P. G. Jessop, P. Champagne, J. Bouchard and M. F. Cunningham, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4141–4152 RSC .
J. Zhang, Q. Wu, M.-C. Li, K. Song, X. Sun, S.-Y. Lee and T. Lei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7439–7447 CrossRef CAS .
L. Valencia, S. Kumar, B. Jalvo, A. Mautner, G. Salazar-Alvarez and A. P. Mathew, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16361–16370 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Zhu, B. Wang, Z. Mao, H. Xu, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang and X. Sui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27831–27839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, B. Chen, M. Li, J. He, Z. Yin and B. Guo, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21(5), 1841–1852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Risteen, G. Delepierre, M. Srinivasarao, C. Weder, P. Russo, E. Reichmanis and J. Zoppe, Small, 2018, 14, 1802060 CrossRef .
D. M. Nascimento, Y. L. Nunes, M. C. B. Figueirêdo, H. M. C. De Azeredo, F. A. Aouada, J. P. A. Feitosa, M. F. Rosa and A. Dufresne, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 2428–2448 RSC .
M. Barsbay and O. Güven, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2019, 160, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Khine and M. H. Stenzel, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1727–1758 RSC .
Y. Li, N. Khuu, A. Gevorkian, S. Sarjinsky, H. Therien-Aubin, Y. Wang, S. Cho and E. Kumacheva, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6083–6087 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, G. Sèbe, X. Wang and K. C. Tam, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 182, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Navarro, S. Wennmalm, J. Godfrey, M. Breitholtz and U. Edlund, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 1101–1109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chu, R. Song, L. Zhang, H. Dai and W. Wu, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 153, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. T. Dias, S. Konar, A. L. Leão and M. Sain, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 220, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Zeng, X. Liu, W.-Y. Lai and L. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3200–3207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Guan, Y. Li, H.-Y. Yu, J. Marek, D. Wang, J. Militky, Z.-Y. Zou and J. Yao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1741–1748 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Li, L. Q. Zhu, N. Grishkewich, K. C. Tam, J. Y. Yuan, Z. P. Mao and X. F. Sui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9367–9373 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gicquel, C. Martin, L. Heux, B. Jean and J. Bras, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 210, 100–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ingverud, E. Larsson, G. Hemmer, R. Rojas, M. Malkoch and A. Carlmark, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 3415–3424 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rosilo, J. R. McKee, E. Kontturi, T. Koho, V. P. Hytönen, O. Ikkala and M. A. Kostiainen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11871–11881 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. C. Tam, G. Sèbe and X. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 199, 603–609 CrossRef CAS .
F. Azzam, L. Heux, J.-L. Putaux and B. Jean, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 3652–3659 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vuoriluoto, H. Orelma, L.-S. Johansson, B. Zhu, M. Poutanen, A. Walther, J. Laine and O. J. Rojas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 15275–15286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Hatton, E. Malmström and A. Carlmark, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 65, 325–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Reid, M. Villalobos and E. D. Cranston, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 29, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gicquel, C. Martin, Q. Gauthier, J. Engstrom, C. Abbattista, A. Carlmark, E. D. Cranston, B. Jean and J. Bras, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 2545–2556 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morits, J. R. McKee, J. Majoinen, J.-M. Malho, N. Houbenov, J. Seitsonen, J. Laine, A. H. Gröschel and O. Ikkala, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7642–7650 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, P. Chen, D. Ye, J. Wang, G. Song, J. Liu, Z. Chen, L. Chen, Q. Zhou, C. Chang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11022–11031 RSC .
S. Wohlhauser, G. Delepierre, M. Labet, G. Morandi, W. Thielemans, C. Weder and J. O. Zoppe, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6157–6189 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boujemaoui, F. Ansari and L. A. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 598–607 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boujemaoui, C. Cobo Sanchez, J. Engström, C. Bruce, L. Fogelström, A. Carlmark and E. Malmström, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35305–35318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Le Gars, J. Bras, H. Salmi-Mani, M. Ji, D. Dragoe, H. Faraj, S. Domenek, N. Belgacem and P. Roger, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 234, 115899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Spinella, C. d. Samuel, J.-M. Raquez, S. A. McCallum, R. Gross and P. Dubois, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2517–2527 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kedzior, L. Graham, C. Moorlag, B. M. Dooley and E. D. Cranston, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 94, 811–822 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Meng, G. Tong and Y. Deng, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 415–425 CrossRef CAS .
H. Leuchs, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1906, 39, 857–861 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lizundia, E. Fortunati, F. Dominici, J. L. Vilas, L. M. León, I. Armentano, L. Torre and J. M. Kenny, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 142, 105–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Muiruri, S. Liu, W. S. Teo, J. Kong and C. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3929–3937 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kato, M. Kamigaito, M. Sawamoto and T. Higashimura, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 1721–1723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chiefari, Y. Chong, F. Ercole, J. Krstina, J. Jeffery, T. P. Le, R. T. Mayadunne, G. F. Meijs, C. L. Moad and G. Moad, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5559–5562 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boujemaoui, S. Mazieres, E. Malmström, M. Destarac and A. Carlmark, Polymer, 2016, 99, 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, H. Ji, G. Li, S. Chen and L. Lv, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 2020, 1–11,  DOI:10.1080/10601325.2020.1722691 .
V. Percec, T. Guliashvili, J. S. Ladislaw, A. Wistrand, A. Stjerndahl, M. J. Sienkowska, M. J. Monteiro and S. Sahoo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14156–14165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Wang, R. D. Roeder, R. A. Whitney, P. Champagne and M. F. Cunningham, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 2800–2808 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. G. Navarro, J. Rostami, A. Ahlinder, J. B. Mietner, D. Bernin, B. Saake and U. Edlund, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21(5), 1952–1961 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Wang and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 5614–5615 CrossRef CAS .
M. Georges, R. Veregin, P. Kazmaier and G. Hamer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 5614 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, M. Wang, M. Wu, Q. Wu, J. Liu, J. Yang and J. Zhang, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 469–480 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chakrabarty and Y. Teramoto, Polymers, 2018, 10, 517 CrossRef .
F. Lin, F. Cousin, J.-L. Putaux and B. Jean, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Abousalman-Rezvani, P. Eskandari, H. Roghani-Mamaqani and M. Salami-Kalajahi, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 225, 115247 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Garcia-Valdez, T. Brescacin, J. Arredondo, J. Bouchard, P. G. Jessop, P. Champagne and M. F. Cunningham, Polymer Chemistry, 2017, 8, 4124–4131 RSC .
H. Thérien-Aubin, Y. Wang, K. Nothdurft, E. Prince, S. Cho and E. Kumacheva, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 3244–3251 CrossRef .
R. D. Roeder, O. Garcia-Valdez, R. A. Whitney, P. Champagne and M. F. Cunningham, Polymer Chemistry, 2016, 7, 6383–6390 RSC .
J.-M. Malho, M. Morits, T. I. Löbling, Nonappa, J. Majoinen, F. H. Schacher, O. Ikkala and A. H. Gröschel, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 1185–1190 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pang, Y. He, J. Jung and Z. Lin, Science, 2016, 353, 1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xia, Y. Huang, P. Lan, L. Lan and N. Lin, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 4457–4465 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, X.-J. Hou, X.-C. Wang, J.-J. Nie, Q. Cai and F.-J. Xu, Polymer Chemistry, 2016, 7, 3107–3116 RSC .
M. Guo, S. Her, R. Keunen, S. Zhang, C. Allen and M. A. Winnik, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 93–107 CrossRef CAS .
J.-R. Deng, C.-L. Zhao and Y.-X. Wu, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 38, 704–714 CrossRef CAS .
S. Geng, K. Yao, Q. Zhou and K. Oksman, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 4075–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, W. Yuan, F.-S. Liu, G. Cheng, F.-J. Xu and J. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8942–8951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Zoppe, Y. Habibi, O. J. Rojas, R. A. Venditti, L.-S. Johansson, K. Efimenko, M. Osterberg and J. Laine, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 2683–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pahimanolis, U. Hippi, L.-S. Johansson, T. Saarinen, N. Houbenov, J. Ruokolainen and J. Seppälä, Cellulose, 2011, 18, 1201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cascone and G. Lamberti, Int. J. Pharm., 2020, 573, 118803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, K. Hou, Q. Ren, G. Chen, P. Wei and M. Zhu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800337 CrossRef .
E. Prince and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 99–115 CrossRef .
A. B. Seabra, J. S. Bernardes, W. J. Fávaro, A. J. Paula and N. Durán, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 181, 514–527 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. He, M. Zhang, K. C. Tam and P. Ni, Polymer Chemistry, 2015, 6, 4206–4209 RSC .
Y. Zhang, R. G. Carbonell and O. J. Rojas, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 4161–4168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Orelma, I. Filpponen, L. S. Johansson, M. Osterberg, O. J. Rojas and J. Laine, Biointerphases, 2012, 7, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Heise, E. Kontturi, Y. Allahverdiyeva, T. Tammelin, M. B. Linder, Nonappa and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004349 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Das, V. Gocheva, R. Hammink, O. F. Zouani and A. E. Rowan, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 318–325 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alemany-Ribes and C. E. Semino, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2014, 79–80, 40–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yoshikawa, T. Hoshiba, K. Sakakibara and Y. Tsujii, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1450–1455 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, S. M. Briffa, S. Swingler, H. Gibson, V. Kannappan, G. Adamus, M. Kowalczuk, C. Martin and I. Radecka, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 1802–1811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ahmed, M. Gultekinoglu and M. Edirisinghe, Biotechnol. Adv., 2020, 41, 107549 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, T. Li, X. Song, X. Yang, S. Li, L. Chen, P. Liu, X. Gong, C. Chen and L. Sun, Regener. Biomater., 2019, 7, 195–202 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Q. Ma, Y.-M. Zhang, G.-T. Han, C.-X. Qu and S.-D. Wang, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 1845–1852 CrossRef CAS .
N. Halib, I. Ahmad, M. Grassi and G. Grassi, Int. J. Pharm., 2019, 566, 631–640 CrossRef CAS .
N. Klinthoopthamrong, D. Chaikiawkeaw, W. Phoolcharoen, K. Rattanapisit, P. Kaewpungsup, P. Pavasant and V. P. Hoven, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 149, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, Y. M. Lim, S. I. Jeong, S. J. An, S. S. Kang, C. M. Jeong and J. B. Huh, J. Adv. Prosthodont, 2015, 7, 484–495 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Khine, R. Batchelor, R. Raveendran and M. H. Stenzel, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2020, 41, 1900499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vuoriluoto, H. Orelma, B. Zhu, L.-S. Johansson and O. J. Rojas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5668–5678 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, Z. Zhang, W. Liu and Y. L. Deng, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 299–320 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Yao, F. Wang and Z. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1702240 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, M. Li, S. Ren, T. Lei, S. Y. Lee, S. Lee and Q. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 454, 227878 CrossRef .
X. Wu, J. Tang, Y. Duan, A. Yu, R. M. Berry and K. C. Tam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19268–19274 RSC .
G. Nyström, A. Marais, E. Karabulut, L. Wågberg, Y. Cui and M. M. Hamedi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7259 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Shi, G. O. Phillips and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3194–3201 RSC .
A. C. Chang, S. Chen and K. R. Carter, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 5731–5738 CrossRef CAS .
J. Thunberg, T. Kalogeropoulos, V. Kuzmenko, D. Hägg, S. Johannesson, G. Westman and P. Gatenholm, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 1459–1467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, G. Zuo, F. Yu, Y. Huang, K. Ren and H. Luo, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2011, 205, 2938–2946 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Wu and C. Lu, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 845–852 RSC .
A. A. Oun, S. Shankar and J. W. Rhim, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2020, 60, 435–460 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perman, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Gu, L. Song, L. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Zhang and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10810–10815 RSC .
K. Tsutsumi, F. Uchikawa, K. Sakai and K. Tabata, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4394–4398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Goswami, D. Baruah and A. M. Das, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 10868–10878 RSC .
M. Kaushik, A. Y. Li, R. Hudson, M. Masnadi, C.-J. Li and A. Moores, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 129–133 RSC .
L. Chen, W. Cao, P. J. Quinlan, R. M. Berry and K. C. Tam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 978–985 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo and S. Fu, BioResources, 2019, 14, 3057–3068 CAS .
A. Mautner, Polym. Int., 2020, 69, 741–751 CrossRef CAS .

          D. A. Gopakumar, V. Arumughan, D. Pasquini, S.-Y. Leu, H. P. S. A. Khalil and S. Thomas, in Nanoscale Materials in Water Purification, ed. S. Thomas, D. Pasquini, S.-Y. Leu and D. A. Gopakumar, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 59–85 Search PubMed .
T. S. Anirudhan, J. R. Deepa and J. Christa, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 467, 307–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Anirudhan and F. Shainy, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 456, 22–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Anirudhan and F. Shainy, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 32, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Sanchez-Salvador, A. Balea, M. C. Monte, A. Blanco and C. Negro, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 883 CrossRef .
Z. Abousalman-Rezvani, P. Eskandari, H. Roghani-Mamaqani, H. Mardani and M. Salami-Kalajahi, Polymer, 2019, 182, 121830 CrossRef .
C. F. Huang, J. K. Chen, T. Y. Tsai, Y. A. Hsieh and K. Y. A. Lin, Polymer, 2015, 72, 395–405 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Huang, Q. Wu and S. Wang, Polymers, 2020, 12, 333 CrossRef CAS .
T. Anirudhan and J. Deepa, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 273, 390–400 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kedzior, M. Kiriakou, E. Niinivaara, M. A. Dubé, C. Fraschini, R. M. Berry and E. D. Cranston, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 990–996 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pal, S. Banerjee, P. Roy and K. Pal, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 109956 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Reid, J. Erlandsson and L. Wågberg, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 1334–1340 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, H. He, M.-C. Li, S. Huang, C. Mei and Q. Wu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 189, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
X. You, Q. Hu, X. Hu, H. Chen, W. Yang and X. Zhang, Polymers, 2019, 11, 963 CrossRef .
C. Tian, S. Fu, Q. Meng and L. A. Lucia, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 2457–2473 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sessini, I. Navarro-Baena, M. P. Arrieta, F. Dominici, D. López, L. Torre, J. M. Kenny, P. Dubois, J.-M. Raquez and L. Peponi, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2018, 152, 126–138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, X. Chen, S. Wang, S. Cheng and Y. Ding, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 9751–9764 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, R.-Y. Bao, T. Gao, Z.-Y. Liu, B.-H. Xie, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 203, 275–284 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Lu, R. Tusiime, Y. Yang, F. Fan, H. Zhang and B. Ma, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 156, 314–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Lauren Geurds	Lauren Geurds graduated with a BSc in chemistry from the HAN University of Applied Sciences, The Netherlands, in 2018. In 2019, she received a second BSc with Honours class I in the field of biochemistry from the University of Queensland, Australia. Currently, she is undertaking her PhD studies under the supervision of Dr Nasim Amiralian at the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), the University of Queensland. Her research interests are in the area of nanocellulose-based conductive polymer brush systems for flexible electronic applications.
Jan Lauko	Dr Jan Lauko holds a PhD in Science from Radboud University in Nijmegen, the Netherlands. After completing his PhD he joined the Dutch startup company NovioSense BV as Chief technology officer to oversee the technical development of a non-invasive glucose sensor. In 2016 Jan joined the newly-established lab of Prof Rowan in the role of Group operations manager. When he is not too busy with managing the group, he still enjoys working in the lab, working on polymeric hydrogels for applications in wound healing and tissue engineering.
Alan E. Rowan	Professor Alan Rowan is currently an ARC Laureate Fellow, a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science, and Senior Group Leader and Director of Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology. His group is performing research at the interface of chemistry and biology with seminal and pioneering work on processive catalysis and functional self-assembly. His latest scientific achievement has been the development of the first truly biomimetic hydrogel, which mimics the mechanic and functional properties of the extracellular membrane.
Nasim Amiralian	Dr Nasim Amiralian, is currently Group Leader and Advance Queensland Research Fellow at the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland (UQ). She is also the leader of the spinifex nanocellulose pilot plant facility at UQ. Her group is interested in using materials observed in nature and applying them in multidisciplinary areas of engineering and science to develop versatile and reliable approaches towards new types of products with desirable properties. In doing so, they work on the translation of fundamental science into practical and widely adopted technologies through collaboration with industry.

 	Fig. 1  The number of publications on nanocellulose (NC) and its relevant topics. Data sourced from Scopus on the 13th of April 2021. Each category includes a few related words, and the publication counted if one appears in the title, abstract, or keywords: CNC (nanocrystalline cellulose, cellulose nanocrystal, cellulose whisker); CNF (cellulose nanofiber, nanofiber cellulose); BC (bacterial nanocellulose); composites; surface modification; polymer brush (CNC, CNF, BC polymer brush).	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of nanocellulose subcategories based on their morphology: (A) CNC (TEM, wood), (B) CNF (TEM, sugarcane), and (C) BC-hemicellulose (SEM), copied from ref. 19.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic overview of the two main approaches for introducing polymer brushes on the surface of NC substrates: “grafting-to” method and “grafting-from” approach.	 

Free radical polymerisation (FRP)	• The reaction can be carried out in water	• Less control over polymer length, dispersity, and grafting density	
15

• No surface initiator modification is required	• Creating residual polymers
Ring-opening polymerisation (ROP)	• Synthesis of biodegradable polymers	• Low moisture tolerance	
15

• No chemical pre-treatment is required	• Non-uniform surface modification
Atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP)	• Controlled polymer chain length, architecture, and polymer composition	• The high concentration of catalyst (mainly copper)	
15, 33, 41, 60, 72, 77, 87 and 93
• A low polydispersity	• The issue with the removal of copper (catalyst) which is time consuming or expensive
• Possible chain-end modification	• Difficult to scale up
• Very sensitive to oxygen
Single-electron transfer living radical polymerisation (SET-LRP)	• Less sensitive to water (in comparison to ATRP)	• Sensitive to temperature, ligand, and solvent composition sensitive (disproportionation of Cu(I))	
89, 90 and 108
• The reaction can happen under noninert conditions
• Ability to synthesise high molecular weight polymers with low polydispersity
Activator re-generated by electron transfer ATRP (ARGET-ATRP)	• A reduced amount of catalyst	• Low surface initiator efficiency	
41

• Less air sensitive than normal ATRP
• Well-controlled polymerisation
Reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer polymerisation (RAFT)	• Wide range of monomers	• Multiple-step synthesis and purification	
15, 86 and 87
• Variety of experimental conditions (solvents, temperature)	• Limited stability for RAFT agents
• Good control
Non-covalent grafting	• Formation of interactions in water	• Steric hindrance or entanglement	
68 and 69
• Simple processing	• Potential bonding with other materials.
• Scalability options	• Concerns related to the binding efficiency and stability between the NC surface and polymers
Click chemistry	• Bioconjugation	• Sensitive reaction conditions	
17 and 109
• High yield	• Copper presence and purification
• High reaction efficiency	• Alkyne homocoupling
• Orthogonal	• Steric hindrance or entanglement

 	Fig. 4  Applications of NC in: (A) nanocomposite reinforcement (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) (TEMPO)-CNF grafted polyethylene glycol (PEG) in the polylactic acid (PLA) matrix for transparent films for potential optical applications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (B) CNF-grafted block copolymers methyl acrylate and acrylic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (poly(MA-block-NAS)) brush labelled with a luminescent dye as a biomarker for alimentary canal tissues. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (C) Encapsulation, growth, and release of cancer spheroids from a thermo-responsive CNC-grafted poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAM) hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. (D) Drug delivery system by CNC-grafted poly(dimethyl aminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA), reprinted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (E) Oil–water separation systems by grafting PDMAEMA from CNF, reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (F) Flexible all-solid-state polymer electrolyte through cellulose grafted poly(poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate) (PPEGMA), reprinted with permission from ref. 60 Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. (G) Schematic illustration of the proposed assembly of p-PNIPAM-g-CNC and b-PNIPAM-g-CNC because of the LCST of PNIPAM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. (H) Bioactive material recognition by PDMAEMA-b-poly(oligo ethylene glycol) methacrylate (POEGMA) grafted TEMPO-CNF, reprinted with permission from ref. 129 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (I) Interpolyelectrolyte complex (IPEC) formation between CNC-g-poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) and poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl trimethylammoniumiodide]-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (PMETAI82-b-PEO114), reprinted with permission from ref. 100 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  NC-polymer brush systems in biomedical application: (A) schematic overview of CNF-grafted anionic polymers as a 3D scaffold for cell culture. Cross-sectional confocal laser microscopy images of the hepatocyte cells with CNF-poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfate) (PSSNa) creating hollow flocs of cells, cultured for 1, 4, and 7 days; scale bar = 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic overview of the synthesis of the PAA-BCM followed by p-rhOPN immobilisation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright (2020) Elsevier. (C) Confocal microscopy images of MCF-7 breast cancer cells after incubation with poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate) (pHEA)-g-TOCNs for 2 h, localised in the lysosomes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. (D) Structure of the fluorescent PEG-modified TOCNC with confocal microscopy images of labelled HeLa cells with TOCNC-1,8-naphthalimide (NANI) (a–c) and TOCNC-NANI-PEG (d–f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  NC-polymer brush systems as catalytic systems: (A) schematic illustration of the CNF grafted temperature responsive PNIPAM-co-poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGM) sponge system. Catalytic performance measured at different temperatures for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) concentration in the absence (1) and presence (2) of PNIPAM-co-PGM. Adapted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the development of gold templated poly(4-vinyl pyridine) (P4VP)-g-CNC. The reduction of 4-NP catalysed by the nanocatalyst (Au@P4VP-g-CNC), (1) comparison with pristine Au and Au@CNC and (2) recyclability. Adapted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Six cycles of adsorption–desorption of (A) Co(II),150 (B) U(VI)157 with poly(itaconic acid/methacrylic acid)-grafted-CNC/nano-bentonite (P(IA/MAA)-g-CNC/BC), (C) Cd(II)151 and (D) Hg(II)152 with poly(2-mercaptobenzamide modified itaconic acid)-grafted-magnetite NC (P(MB-IA)-g-MNCC), with 0.1 M HCl as the desorbing agent. Adapted from ref. 150–152 and 157 Copyright (2015, 2016), with permission from Elsevier. (E) Schematic illustration of the pH-responsive behaviour of CNC-POEGMA-poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) to form stabilised Pickering emulsions. Reprinted with permission form ref. 27 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
