An overview of biopolymer-based nanocomposites for optics and electronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC00607J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00607J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 5578-5593An overview of biopolymer-based nanocomposites for optics and electronics

        
          
            Elena 
            Colusso
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Alessandro 
            Martucci
          
        
      *
      Dipartimento di Ingegneria Industriale and INSTM, Università di Padova, Via Marzolo, 9, 35131 Padova, Italy. E-mail: elena.colusso@unipd.it; alex.martucci@unipd.it
Received 
      7th February 2021
    , Accepted 17th March 2021First published on 19th March 2021AbstractBiopolymer-based nanocomposites are materials composed mainly of biopolymer matrices in which nanofillers are dispersed. Biopolymers are polymers obtained from some living organisms; therefore they are biodegradable and biocompatible; moreover, they have a variety of functional groups allowing the control of the interface with nanofillers and the multiscale assembly. They have been employed in numerous applications also because of their flexibility under processing conditions and competitive cost of their end products. Most of the published work is focused on their electronic and biomedical applications. In this review we focus our attention on biopolymer-based composites with inorganic nanofillers like metal, metal oxides, semiconductor nanoparticles and carbon-based nanoparticles, for application in optics and electronics. Special attention is paid to synthesis strategies for integrating nanofillers in biopolymer matrices.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in nanotechnology and the growing demand for eco-sustainable products have led to the study of a new class of materials commonly referred to as “bionanocomposites” (bioNCs). These hybrid materials involve biopolymers (often naturally derived) in combination with synthetic components having at least one dimension in the nanoscale.1,2
Biopolymers include natural proteins such as silk, cellulose, chitosan and other polysaccharides, and polymers synthesized from natural molecules such as polylactic acid or polyhydroxyalkanoates. Compared to common petroleum-derived plastics, biopolymers are biodegradable and biocompatible and they have a variety of functional groups allowing the control of the interface with nanofillers and the multiscale assembly.
A rational design of the multi-scale assembly is fundamental to guaranteeing the use of bioNCs for fabrication of robust macroscale devices. Nature is a source of inspiration for scientists: in natural composites multifunctionality is reached by using a limited set of building block materials, thanks to the control of the self-assembly of the structure. Nacre, bone and exoskeleton of some insects are examples of biological composites that combine soft components like proteins or polysaccharides with hard mineralized parts, as calcium carbonate or silicon dioxide.3,4
Currently, the main effort is on the improvement of the mechanical properties of biopolymer-based materials, taking inspiration from biomimetic approaches or by employing new manufacturing techniques that allow the control of the structure. Examples are layer-by-layer deposition, freeze casting, field-assisted assembly and 3D printing.5–7 However, in the last 20 years, growing interest has emerged for high-tech applications such as electronics and photonics. Several nanomaterials have been combined with biopolymers to add new functionalities to meet the needs of emerging new technologies that require the combination of mechanical, optical and electronic properties, along with sustainability and environmentally friendly processes.
Carbon-based nanomaterials, mainly 1D (nanodiamonds, carbon quantum dots) and 2D (graphene, graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes), are widely investigated as nanofillers.8–11 Even at low loadings, they can provide a significant enhancement of the mechanical properties, and thermal and electrical conductivity. Thanks to their high surface area and the possibility of tuning the surface chemistry, interactions at the interface with biopolymers can be controlled for improved properties. For instance, combination of 2D carbon materials with proteins depends on hydrophobic–hydrophobic and π–π interactions, hydrogen bonding and charge interaction.12 Controlling these interactions can help in the design of ordered NCs and govern the distribution inside the polymer matrix.
Besides mechanical strength and electrical conductivity, other functionalities are important for high tech application. In this regard, metallic nanoparticles (NPs) can endow a biopolymer matrix with not only electrical conductivity, but also catalytic and plasmonic properties.13,14 The main challenge is related to the distribution of the NPs inside the matrix, avoiding aggregation phenomena that led to the degradation of their specific properties. Appropriate functionalization of the particles’ surfaces with ligands facilitates interaction with the matrix.6 Alternatively, metallic NPs can direct growth in situ starting from salt precursors due to the use of biopolymers that are both stabilizing and reducing agents.15,16
Metal oxides and mineral NPs have also been incorporated in biopolymer matrices mainly to tune their optical properties, in particular their refractive index, optical transparency and scattering.17,18 Several photoluminescent bioNCs were fabricated by incorporation of quantum dots (QDs) such as CdSe and ZnSe.19,20 Compared to other synthetic NPs, they show inherent toxicity that limits their use in most of the biomedical applications. Appropriate surface functionalization and other environment friendly fillers are now investigated to overcome this issue.21
Considering the several types of NPs and biopolymers mentioned above, the state of the art research on bioNCs is extensive. Review articles on different biopolymer-based composites dealing with the fabrication techniques and particle–matrix interactions have been published.5,22–24 However, most of the studies are focused on two biopolymer matrices, silk fibroin (SF) and cellulose, or they are limited to electronic or biomedical applications. Liu et al.22 proposed a comprehensive review of the biopolymers in electronics. They pointed out the role of structural modification in tuning the device performance and summarized the main fabrication techniques. In another recent review, Pradhan and coauthors24 covered the recent advances in biodevices made wholly or in part with naturally derived materials. They proposed an interesting insight into the prospective use of these materials in terms of sustainability, degradability and processability. In this review we focus our attention on the biopolymer–NP composites developed in the last ten years for application in optics and electronics. Compared to the above mentioned studies, we consider only the literature involving composite materials, and not, in general, biopolymers. We try to underline, in terms of synthetic strategies, how the nanofillers were integrated into the matrix. The dispersion of the nanoparticles and their interactions with the matrix are two of the main aspects that govern the properties of composite materials and consequently affect their optical and electronic properties. We systematically summarize the different bioNC systems on the basis of biopolymer matrices, underlining the main results in terms of new or enhanced optical properties and electrical conductivity and highlighting their practical application in the fields of optics and electronics.
2. Protein based nanocomposites
Proteins are macromolecules characterized by a precise sequence of amino acids that organize themselves into hierarchical structures through secondary bonds. These structures govern the physical, chemical, and mechanical characteristics of materials, such as their biocompatibility, stiffness, elasticity, and stability. According to their tertiary structure, proteins are divided into four groups, globular, membrane, fibrous, and disorder proteins. Fibrous proteins are the basis of many natural composites due to their mechanical properties, which combine elasticity and toughness. Among fibrous proteins, we distinguish between elastin, keratins, silks, and collagen. Thanks to their mechanical properties and biocompatibility, these materials are widely used in the biomedical field and in the manufacture of structural composites for tissue applications.6,23,25,26 Recently, they have also been investigated in the field of soft actuators and as substrates for electronics.27,28
As far as the field of bioNCs for optics and electronics is concerned, there is wide literature regarding silk-based nanocomposites (NCs), starting from the pioneering work of Prof. Omenetto's group, while research related to collagen and its derivatives started more recently. These two groups of composites will be discussed in the following paragraphs.
Besides naturally derived proteins, we should mention the recent work proposed by Prof. Demirel's group on the biosynthesis of polypeptide chains with controlled repetitive units inspired by squid proteins.29 A brief literature review concerning the fabrication of composites with tandem proteins and 2D materials will be the subject of the last part of this section.
2.1. Silk
Silks are a class of biopolymer fibrous materials produced by a number of animals (best known as arthropods), such as spiders, worms and butterflies. These proteins are characterized by a complex nanoarchitecture that provides them with unique properties, such as stiffness, strength, and toughness. In the last decade, Bombyx mori silk fibers, regenerated SF and recombinant spider silk have attracted attention in the fields of biomedicine and high-tech materials. They show biocompatibility and biodegradability, superior mechanical properties (comparable with synthetic polymers), and processability in a wide range of forms and shapes from the macro- to the nanoscale.30 Thanks to their transparency, flexibility, and easy surface-patterning, silk materials are founding a new path in the fields of optics, photonics, and flexible electronics.28,31
One of the main advantages in the use of silk is the easy functionalization of the material with organic and inorganic dopants through simple macroscopic mixing of water-based solutions or by a controlled mesoscopic assembly.30,32,33 Several fabrication techniques have been used to make NC films and fibers, including spin casting and layer-by-layer assembly,34–36 electrospinning,37,38 solution casting,18,39 and vacuum filtration.40
Recently, another unconventional method has been proposed to functionalize silks by adding dyes (including Rhodamine B and Nile blue) or NPs (TiO2, carbon nanotubes, semiconductor QDs) in the diet of domestic silkworms41–45 and spiders.46 The feeding strategy could be an alternative and scalable approach to the production of intrinsically functionalized fibers. However, there are still several fundamental questions to answer: for example, the safety limit of NPs in the diet of worms and spiders, and the mechanism of the metabolic process of NPs in silkworm larvae.
A wide range of silk-based NCs have been proposed by doping silk with gold NPs,47 QDs,45,48 2D nanoclay,49,50 oxide NPs51–53 and carbon based nanomaterials.54,55

2.1.1. Fluorescent nanocomposites. 
Fluorescent silk NCs have been fabricated by doping silk with luminescent QDs such as CdTe or CdSe nanocrystals.56,57 Silk bioNCs with efficient fluorescent emission have great potential in the areas of bioimaging, optical data storage, lasing and photodynamic therapy.58 A key point in the synthesis of the NCs is the ability to introduce QDs inside the matrix without losing the emission properties of the NPs. Lin et al.59 demonstrated the possibility of engineering the emission of silk NCs by controlling the material assembly thanks to the hydrogen-bonding recognition between QDs and SF. CdTe QDs were coated with carboxyl groups by using mercaptopropionic acid and mixed with a silk solution. During the evaporation-induced assembly of films, the occurrence of hydrogen-bonding interactions between the NH groups of the SF and the carboxylic groups (COO–) of the QDs promoted uniform dispersion of the QDs inside the silk matrix. The films showed linear transmittance in the visible region up to 90% (at 800 nm), tunable photoluminescence ranging from green to dark red under UV light illumination and two-photon fluorescence. The emission spectra of the NCs were found to be similar to those of the corresponding CdTe QD solution in terms of intensity and full width at half maximum, with a slight blue-shifting of the peak due to the interaction of the QDs with the protein matrix.
Silk–CdTe QD composite films have also been demonstrated to be a suitable platform for optical sensing of hydrogen peroxide. The photoluminescence intensity decreases when the concentration of H2O2 is above 0.2 mM and reaches a plateau at 2 mM, indicating that all the exposed QDs have been quenched.48
The same molecularly recognized assembly approach has been used to generate white-light-emitting silk films by combining two kinds of QDs, ZnSe and CdSe, showing, respectively, blue and yellow emission when excited at 330 nm. It is possible to control the emission of the material by tuning the ratio between the two QDs. The best chromaticity was observed when the feed ratio of ZnSe to CdTe QDs was 30:1. Such NCs have potential application in full-color display devices and biodegradable capsule endoscopes.20
Unfortunately, semiconductor QDs present inherent toxicity that limits their use in the case of in vivo applications such as drug-delivery, bioimaging, and biosensing. To overcome this issue, other emitting silk-based NCs have been proposed. Biocompatible emitting NC silk films have been developed by using nanodiamonds (NDs).60 These NPs are characterized by a negatively charged nitrogen vacancy (NV−) center that shows red fluorescence when excited with a green laser. The ND-silk films were determined to be highly transparent in the visible to near infrared wavelength range. When covered with silk, the emission centers of the NDs showed an enhanced emission rate in the range of 1.6–3.8 times, due to the different refractive index of silk compared to air, as confirmed by theoretical predictions. Besides, the in vivo toxicity test revealed a non-inflammatory response of the material.
Metal nanoclusters, such as gold nanoclusters, represent another alternative thanks to their photoluminescence properties, low toxicity, high biocompatibility and easy synthesis.61,62 Silk–Au nanocluster composite scaffolds were prepared by mesoscopic assembly through freeze-drying of solutions. Au nanoclusters were previously functionalized with bovine serum albumin molecules, which act as effective vehicles to promote the dispersion of the Au nanoclusters inside silks thanks to protein–protein interactions. No localized surface plasmon resonance bands induced by NP formation or nanocluster aggregation were observed in the UV-vis spectra, and the Au nanoclusters’ luminescence under UV light was maintained.63 More recently, up-conversion-functionalized silk scaffolds were proposed by the same group through functionalization of silk with lanthanide-doped up-conversion NPs coated with silica or polyethylene glycol shells to promote their dispersion in water based solution. Compared to the previous composites, this material can be excited using near infrared (NIR) light located in the second transparent biological window, allowing deep penetration of light into tissue for in vivo application.33


2.1.2. Refractive index and light scattering. 
From an optical point of view, the behavior of silk based optical devices such as waveguides,64,65 reflectors, and inverse opals66,67 is strictly correlated with the refractive index contrast between silk and the environment. Recently the optical properties of silks produced by different species of silkworms68 have been characterized, showing dependences on the source, crystallinity and water content. Regenerated silk obtained from domestic Bombyx mori shows a refractive index of 1.54 at 633 nm,68 which is quite high for a polymer. However, a higher refractive index can improve the performance of silk as a material for photonics.
A strategy is to fabricate NC materials by combining silk with high refractive index NPs.
One of the main limitations in the fabrication of optical NCs is related to the dimensions and dispersion of the NPs inside the matrix. The presence of aggregates or big particles can introduce points of light scattering that can usually critically affect the performance of high-end optical systems.
Titanate nanosheets (TNSs), a 2D layer material of sub-stoichiometric titania, emerged as an ideal candidate thanks to their small dimensions (one-unit cell thick and 3–5 nm wide), high refractive index and water dispersibility. TNS–silk NCs with tunable refractive indices (up to 1.97 at 500 nm) were fabricated without loss of silk processability, transparency, and flexibility (see Fig. 1a and b). The new material was reshaped into different forms by using several fabrication techniques such as UV-lithography, e-beam lithography, and inkjet-printing (see Fig. 1c).18 Furthermore, thanks to the ion exchange properties of the TNSs, new functionalities were introduced in the material like silver NPs and luminescent ions (see Fig. 1d).69 These properties make TNS–silk NCs ideal candidates for fabrication of optical sensing platforms, for example Bragg reflectors. In this regard, a bioinspired multilayer optical structure was fabricated with the new NC, showing a stimulus-responsive behavior, which results in a reversible change of structural coloration in response to the surrounding environment.36
 Fig. 1  (a) Photographs of SF–TNS transparent composite unsupported films and (b) refractive indices of the NCs film at 500 nm for the different concentrations of the TNSs and for the different treatments. (c) Examples of nano- and microfabrication of SF–TNS composite films: e-beam lithography, UV-lithography and inkjet printing. [Adapted from ref. 18, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.] (d) Schematic illustration of the cation exchange process in SF–TNS composites and examples of functionalization. [Adapted from ref. 69, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.] 
In other applications, light scattering was exploited to enhance the optical signal. Da Silva et al.70 reported the fabrication of a distributed feedback laser made from a silk film incorporating Rhodamine 6G and silica or silver NPs. The presence of scattering NPs randomly distributed was found to enhance the laser intensity and reduce the linewidth.


2.1.3. Composites with plasmonic nanoparticles. 
Metal NPs can be conjugated to many proteins by simple mixing of the protein solution with a water-based metal colloidal solution and the protein typically bonds to the metal surface through the amine or thiol groups. Alternatively, metal NPs can be grown inside the protein matrix by reducing the precursors using appropriate reducing agents or UV irradiation. SF has already been combined with metal NPs, in particular silver and gold.26
Au NPs have been extensively studied for biomedical and sensing applications because of their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) properties and low cytotoxicity. Au NPs were grown on silk fibers via an in situ redox reaction between the tyrosine residues on the silk protein and the gold ions.71,72 Naturally spun spider silk fibers were coated with gold NPs via incubation in an aqueous solution of chloroauric acid.73 Recently, silk–gold NP composites were easily synthesized by simply mixing silk/trifluoroacetic acid solution and Au NP solution and used as a substrate for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) application.74 In their work Guo et al. demonstrated a good dispersion of the NPs inside the films without aggregation and with a small net effect on the structure of the silk proteins. However, the enhancement factor observed in the SERS application was not very high; the authors attributed the results to the monodispersity of the gold NPs in the films.
One of the interesting phenomena related to LSPR is the photothermal effect. When a metal NP is irradiated with a light source matching the LSPR absorption, the optical energy can efficiently be converted to local heat through the plasmonic optical energy, rapidly increasing the temperature of the surrounding medium.75 This light-induced temperature increase can activate biological processes,76 induce phase changes of the surrounding matrices,77 or change the shape/morphology of the NPs.78 This photothermal process has been studied in medicine for the treatment of bacterial infection, photodynamic therapy, and cancer therapy.79–86
In this regard, a silk-based AuNP composite was proposed for focal infection treatment using laser-mediated heating by Kojic et al.87 Gold NPs were embedded in an injectable and degradable silk hydrogel. The bactericidal effect of the nano-heater was then studied in vivo and in vitro by using a green laser source (532 nm) at a laser power comparable to the power provided by a laser pointer, reaching a maximum temperature of 60 °C. Silk-AuNP films could be potentially used as a light-activated heating element for wireless powering of implanted microdevices, as demonstrated in a proof-of-concept experiment by Tao et al.47 Silk is an ideal biopolymer matrix for photodynamic application, because of its thermal stability (the glass transition temperature is ∼180 °C88,89), which limits heating losses due to the phase changes of the polymer. Further developments in this field could involve the combination of silk with NPs having LSPR in the NIR region (for example, Au nanorods can have absorption peak in the 700–1000 nm range), also known as biological window because light can penetrate biological tissue with relatively low light attenuation and low tissue damage.82
The photothermal behavior of silk–AuNP composites was also investigated for the fabrication of an ultrahigh broadband absorbance layer for photo-thermo-electronic application. The optimized composite film exhibited an ultrahigh absorbance (95%) of light in the entire visible range, not only at the LSPR wavelength, attributed to the intrinsic extinction of the metal component. The optical energy could be converted to local heat with a temperature increase of up to 100 °C when illuminated with a light-emitting diode or halogen lamp, with linear light-to-heat responses as well as photothermal stability. Finally, Tsao et al. integrated this absorptive material as a layer in an Al/Si Schottky diode and demonstrated the generation of a linear and stable photo-thermo-electronic effect in response to variation in light intensity (see Fig. 2).90
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication of a hybrid Au NP/SF thin film broadband absorbance layer upon an Al/Si Schottky diode. Inset: Cross-sectional TEM image of the Au NP/SF thin film. (b) Typical thermal images of an Au NP/SF thin film before (left) and after (right) exposure to white LED light. (c) Temperature plotted with respect to time for an AuNP/SF film (Au = 25 wt%) for 10 cycles of LED exposure. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 90, copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.] 
Negative photoconductivity was instead observed in silk/gold hydrogels when illuminated with UV light.91 This phenomenon was attributed to the photo-oxidation of amino acids in the silk polymer chains around the Au NPs, followed by charge trapping in the NPs under illumination at 325 nm.


2.1.4. Conductive nanocomposites. 
Silk is a natural insulator in the net state, with a relatively high dielectric constant (∼7),92 and an electrical conductivity of only 10−15 S cm−1. Silk films were used as gate dielectric materials of organic field-effect transistors, because they present several advantageous features, such as solution-processability, flexibility, optical transparency (ca. >90%), and excellent resistance to organic solvents.28,93
Conductive substrates were fabricated by embedding silver nanowires (AgNWs) in silk films. The film was obtained by casting a silk solution on a prepatterned AgNW network deposited on a silicon substrate and peeled off after drying. The silk-AgNW film exhibited an optical transparency of about 80% transmission and a surface resistivity of 15.0 Ohms square−1. The film was used as an electrode for a light-emitting diode (LED) chip94 or to fabricate a radio-frequency antenna for the detection of food spoilage.95
However, the conductivity was limited to the surface of the composite film. Conductive silk composites were obtained using carbon-based electrical nanostructured materials as fillers, such as graphene nanosheets and carbon nanotubes (CNTs).
NC scaffolds were fabricated by co-electrospinning of SF and CNTs (1% w/w), reaching a conductivity of 0.114 S cm−1.96 SF–CNT composite electrodes were realized by the infiltration of pre-existing pellet electrodes or by air-drying a mixture of silk solution and CNTs on a polydimethylsiloxane substrate.55 A minimum resistivity of 10−4 Ω m−1 was achieved at a high CNT filling factor (75%). Their chemical stability was observed in a wide range of solvents, and their viability as electrodes for biobatteries was explored.
Single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) were integrated into a silk matrix for the fabrication of nanostructured conductive substrates through a template-assisted method.97 The bio-composite was fabricated by using a sacrificial template method. First SWCNTs were assembled into periodic structures by using polystyrene beads, which acted as both carriers and a sacrificial template, by a vertical deposition method. Then the template was infiltrated with SF solution and dried. Finally, the sacrificial polystyrene template was removed, resulting in nanostructured films of SWCNTs completely embedded in the SF. According to the authors, the NC exhibited a conductivity just one order of magnitude lower than that of the bare SWCNTs, confirming that the addition of silk did not destroy the SWCNT network. In addition, the composite enabled growth of primary rat Dorsal Root Ganglion neurons and could find potential application in neuro-regenerative medicine.97
A different approach is the direct growth of silk nanofibers on the surface of the carbon-based material. The hydrophobic and pure sp2-hybridized carbon surface of graphene is an ideal interface for the regulation of self-assembly of proteins. Ling et al. demonstrated the formation of SF nanofibrils on graphene sheets in a one-step incubation process with a beta-sheet structure similar to amyloid fibrils. SF solution was added to a hydrophilic graphene oxide solution, reduced to graphene by addition of hydrazine (see Fig. 3a).50 Through a vacuum-assisted method, hybrid NC films with high flexibility, a tensile modulus 4 times higher than that of SF films, and a well-organized layered structure were finally obtained. The NC showed a tunable in-plane conductivity in the range of 1.4 × 10−3 to 1.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 depending on the silk content.50
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic for fabrication of silk nanofibril/graphene composite solution. An AFM image of silk nanofibrils on a graphene sheet and photographs of flexible composites fabricated through vacuum-filtration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Examples of the versatile processability of graphene/SF/HFIP and graphene/SF/FA/Ca2+ suspensions: flexible and conductive cast films, wet spun fibers and direct writing coatings. [Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.] 
In another study, graphene/silk composite electrodes were fabricated by vacuum-filtration of a graphene oxide and silk fiber suspension followed by chemical reduction.98 The free-standing film showed a double-faced structure with a porous top layer and a continuous, flexible and electrically conductive bottom layer. The sheet resistance measured from the top side was 650 Ω sq−1 and 90 Ω sq−1 from the bottom side. The conductivity is directly related to the thickness of the graphene layer deposited on the silk fibers. For example, fibers coated two times showed a resistance of 2.2 MΩ cm−1 (conductivity of 57.9 S m−1), a significant improvement compared to other silk-based composites.
More recently, silk–graphene composites were obtained by direct stabilization of graphene nanosheets in suspension with silk.99 Organic solvents, hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) and CaCl2/formic acid, were added to improve the dissolution of silk fibers, considering the hydrophobicity of graphene. Solution casting, wet spinning, and direct writing were used to generate films, fibers, and coatings (see Fig. 3b). The composite films preserved the conductivity of graphene and greatly enhanced the flexibility of silk. A conductivity of about 0.21 S m−1 was achieved for graphene/SF/Ca2+ (40% graphene), while in the case of the graphene/SF composite film (75 wt% graphene) from the HFIP suspension, the maximum value was 67 S m−1.99
Conductive silk–carbon based composites are suitable for the fabrication of wearable electronics and sensors,100,101 since the electrical resistance of the materials was found to be sensitive to variations in humidity, deformations, body movement, and changes in the environment.99 For example, a chemoresistive sensor for nitroaromatic vapor was developed with a silk/carbon NP biocomposite.102 Electrochemical detection of hydrogen peroxide and glucose was achieved by the addition of Pt NPs to a silk/graphene composite electrode.98
However, the use of carbon-based materials usually leads to loss of transparency. This could be a limit for the use of silk in optoelectronics. In this regard, an alternative approach can be the fabrication of transparent flexible ionic conductors, as recently demonstrated by Kadamudi et al.103 They developed a flexible and stretchable motion-sensing device by combining SF with LAPONITE®. The composite material showed transparency close to that required for displays (85%) and an electrical conductivity of up to 4.6 × 10−3 S cm−1.

2.2. Collagen and gelatin
Collagens are fibrous proteins with typical triple helix structures and represent the main component of skin and bones. They can be extracted from almost every living organism; however, the most used (Collagen I) is obtained from porcine and bovine skins. Thanks to its biocompatibility and biodegradability, collagen finds its primary application in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.104 Collagen based NCs are commonly produced in combination with hydroxyapatite to improve mechanical properties and favor osteoconduction in tissue engineering application.105–107 Compared to silks, applications of collagen outside biomedicine are relatively recent and only a few studies have reported the fabrication of functional composites for electronic based applications.
Conductive bioNCs were fabricated by combining copper NPs with collagen waste from the leather industry.108 The addition of 10% Cu NPs to collagen increased the conductivity up to 1 × 10−3 S cm−1, offering the opportunity to use the NC in electronic applications. For example, a simple electrical circuit connected to a LED was developed, using two NC films as conductive elements.
CNTs and boron-doped CNTs were added to a blend of collagen and guar gum (10 wt%) for the production of conductive biocomposite free-standing films. The measured conductivity reached the values of 4.8 × 10−4 S cm−1 and 3.0 × 10−1 S cm−1, respectively, for collagen/CNTs and collagen/boron-doped CNTs (2 wt% of NPs). The transparency and flexibility of the developed hybrid films decreased significantly for a high concentration of CNTs, as well as the mechanical resistance because of their bad dispersibility.109
In recent work, Ding and co-workers investigated the effects of the aspect ratio of multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) on regenerated collagen composite fibers. They observed an improvement in the mechanical properties and thermal stability of the composite compared to pure collagen fibers, due to the formation of an aligned fibril structure induced by molecular interaction with MWCNTs. However, no information about conductivity was reported.110
One major limitation in the use of collagen is related to its processability and pure water solubility. Partial hydrolysis of collagen by treating it with an acid or alkali results in the formation of gelatin. Gelatin is a water-soluble protein that shows interesting properties such as biocompatibility, biodegradability, gelling and ion-exchange behavior, but worse mechanical properties.1
Gelatin presented optical transparency and a refractive index of 1.536 at 633 nm,111 which is comparable with those of silk protein and borosilicate glass. While bare gelatin has been used in holograms,112 microlenses113 and optical waveguides,111 the development of gelatin-based NCs for photonics and optics has not been widely investigated.
Functional bioNCs with improved mechanical properties were developed by the addition of a dye-modified clay mineral. The transparent photochromic biocomposite films showed pH-sensing properties that allow the use of the material as an active component in optical devices.114
Silver NPs were embedded in a gelatin matrix, providing new optical properties to the NC in terms of refractive index, dielectric constant and color, thanks to the presence of LSPR typical of metal NPs.115 The composite could be used as a sensing material for colorimetric detection of metal ions.116
More recently, gelatin was used as a matrix for conductive materials in combination with graphene or reduced-graphene oxide (rGO). Lian et al. fabricated a graphene-based nacre structure using gelatin as a bioadhesive.117 This structure exhibited an ultimate strength of about 902.1 MPa after bending-induced “mechanical annealing” and an electrical conductivity of about 44780 S m−1, which is 8.5 times higher compared to previous work on polymer-crosslinked graphene nacre. In another study, Zhou et al. reported a rGO–gelatin flexible film showing positive photoconductance in the terahertz region.118 The maximum performance of the composite was reached with 2% rGO; a decrease in the transmittance in the terahertz region was observed for higher amounts.
In general, the combination of conductivity and optical transparency in a composite material is difficult to achieve. To overcome this problem, Le Ferrand et al. proposed a new fabrication method based on a controlled alignment of rGO NPs to obtain a percolation network with a minimum filler fraction.119 Using an external magnetic field, magnetized rGO NPs were assembled into predefined patterns in a gelatin matrix. By locally concentrating the dark flakes into a continuous network, transparent and conducting graphene-based composites were obtained with a minimum rGO volume fraction between 0.45% and 0.75% (see Fig. 4). The conductivity is lower (∼10−3 S cm−1) than the value reported for the abovementioned rGO–gelatin composite films. However, the method proposed offers unique advantages such as its scalability, the possibility of creating complex shapes, and its applicability to other matrices or magnetic NPs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Spatial control of magnetic rGO flakes within a gelatin matrix using a patterned magnetic stripe. (b) Transparency of a 30 μm thick magnetic rGO film as a function of the coverage area of the template. (c) Demonstration of the improved optical transparency by controlling the spatial distribution of magnetic rGO flakes within rGO–gelatin composite films using a metallic template. [Reproduced from ref. 119.] 
2.3. Squid-inspired tandem repeat proteins
Squid ring teeth proteins are natural polypeptides characterized by a copolymer structure with nanoconfined β-sheets in an amorphous matrix. These proteins present a tandem repetition in the polypeptide sequence that generates a network morphology, which results in unique mechanical and physicochemical properties, among them thermoplasticity. Inspired by these natural copolymers, researchers have developed tandem proteins (TP) composed of identical repetitive blocks, biosynthetically produced through expression in bacteria.29 The definition of the polypeptide sequence determines monodisperse and precise molecular weight protein, allowing the control of the nanoscale morphology.
Thanks to these characteristics, TP are particularly suitable for the fabrication of intercalated NCs with 2D materials, for example GO and MXenes (which consist of few-atom-thick layers of transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbonitrides). TP self-assemble through hydrogen bonding with GO, resulting in the formation of molecular composites, where the ultimate structure is controlled by the molecular weight of the proteins.120 The interlayer distance between GO sheets is tuned by changing the molecular weight of the protein, resulting in control of the material properties, such as thermal actuation, flexibility, and the energy efficiency of actuation.
Following the same approach, conductive protein–Ti3C2Tx MXene composites were developed, suitable for the fabrication of printed electrodes121 or flexible conductive films.122 By changing the interlayer distance of MXene sheets through the control of the tandem repeat units, it was possible to regulate the in-plane and out-of-plane conductivities of the composite material.
3. Polysaccharide based nanocomposites
Polysaccharides are biopolymers belonging to the family of carbohydrates. They consist of chains of monosaccharide or disaccharide units joined by glycosidic bonds with different numbers of C. With regard to their chemical composition, polysaccharides can be divided into two main groups, homo-polysaccharides, which are made of a single type of monosaccharide (cellulose, chitin), and heteropolysaccharides, which are made up of more than one type of monosaccharide (agar, algin, glycoproteins). Polysaccharides exist in several natural sources, including plants (cellulose), algae (alginate), and sea-animal shells (chitin and chitosan).123,124 Due to their biocompatibility and biodegradability, polysaccharide-based materials have found principal application in the areas of medicine, drug delivery, tissue engineering, electronics and food packaging.125–127 Among the different polysaccharide-based NCs, we will focus our attention on cellulose, chitosan and alginate matrix composites.
3.1. Cellulose based nanocomposites
Cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer available worldwide. It is a homopolymer of glucose, composed of repeating β-D-glucopyranose units that have been linked together by β(1–4) glycosidic bonds. It is generally produced by plants, wood and algae, but it can also be synthesized by some bacteria and tunicates. Cellulose chains are arranged together through van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonds into basic structures called fibrils. Fibrils are bundled together to form larger structures, microfibrils (5–50 nm in diameter and several microns in length); they are organized into a three dimensional network called nanofibrous/microfibrous cellulose.128,129 Materials based on cellulose have been used for years in several applications such as food, papers, and pharmaceuticals. More recently, researchers have focused their attention on the isolation, purification and application of a new form of cellulose, nanocellulose.130 In general, nanocellulose can be categorized into three main groups depending on the morphology and preparation method: cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), nanofibrillated celluloses (NFCs) and bacterial nanocelluloses (BNCs). CNCs are rod-like or whisker shaped cellulose crystalline NPs usually isolated from cellulose fibers through the removal of the amorphous phase by acid hydrolysis. The physical and chemical properties of CNCs depend on the origin of the cellulose fibers and the extraction method. NFCs are finer cellulose fibrils generally obtained through mechanical disintegration such as delamination of wood-based fibers. NFCs have high aspect ratios and contain both amorphous and crystalline regions. BNCs consist of microporous 3D-network structures of ribbon shaped nanofibrils usually produced as hydrogels or nanofilms through biosynthesis by bacteria cultivated in a medium with a carbon and nitrogen source.128,130,131
Nanocellulose can be processed into different shapes, including fibers, transparent or iridescent papers, films, and aerogels. Fibers are usually prepared by electrospinning or wet spinning techniques. Different kinds of functional NPs can be integrated in nanocellulose dispersion to produce composite fibers. Nanopapers are fabricated through vacuum-assisted filtration or solution casting. Interestingly, CNC suspensions are able to self-assemble into a chiral nematic liquid crystalline phase when the concentration is above a critical value. This organized structure interacts with light, leading to optical phenomena such as iridescence. It is possible to preserve the liquid crystalline organization in a solid film by controlling the drying process.132,133 Hydrogels can be prepared by chemical or physical crosslinking starting from nanocellulose dispersion, or directly produced from low molecular weight glucose from bacteria. Aerogels are prepared from hydrogels through supercritical drying or freeze drying. Addition of NPs in cellulose suspension, for example GO, does not affect the formation of composite aerogels with a three-dimensional porous structure.134
CNCs and CNFs are frequently used as nanofillers in polymer NCs to improve barrier and mechanical properties.135,136 Recently, CNCs were also investigated as fillers in optical bioNCs. For example, reconfigurable microlenses were fabricated by combining CNCs in poly(diethylene glycol adipate),137 while photonic films with humidity response actuation were reported by embedding a polyethylene glycol diacrylate layer between two CNC films in a sandwich structure.138
Besides the use of nanocellulose particles as fillers, cellulose based materials have been investigated as matrices to produce functional NCs and hybrid films by combination with inorganic NPs. For example, flexible laminates of BNC films with optical, magnetic and antibacterial functionalities were fabricated by in situ decoration of BNC films with metal (Ag, Au) and semiconductor (TiO2 and Fe2O3) NPs.139
Diverse nanomaterials including noble metals, bimetals, metal oxides, QDs, mineral clays, and carbon nanostructures have been incorporated in cellulose to obtain functional “papers” with applications including sensing, biosensing, electronics, energy, wastewater, and drug delivery.129,134,140–146 In this section we summarize the recent advances in optical and electronic applications.

3.1.1. Optics, photonics and plasmonics. 
Several examples of transparent and luminescent nano-papers have been reported, based on the incorporation of QDs, and lanthanide and phosphorus particles inside nanocellulose. Water-soluble ZnSe QDs stabilized with mercaptopropionic acid were incorporated in nanocellulose through a vacuum-filtration method. Transparency was achieved by coating the QD-nanocellulose with an acrylic layer.19 More recently, luminescent phosphorus/nanocellulose films were produced by vacuum filtration thanks to the modification of the particles with a silica nanocoating.147 Zhao et al. grafted rare-earth up-converting NPs onto NFC by a pressure controlled extrusion paper-making process.148 The same fabrication method was used to graft lanthanide complexes onto 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinooxy mediated oxidized NFC. Compared to other processes such as suspension-casting, water evaporation, and hot pressing, extrusion is much fast and avoids the use of vacuum systems.149 Finally, the work of Merkoc and co-workers is worth mentioning. They created a photoluminescence-based sensor by covalently attaching photoluminescent NPs (QDs and up-conversion NPs) on BNC.150 In all the cited studies, luminescence and transparency were achieved by controlling the grafting of the NPs onto NFC or BNC matrices. By using CNCs as a cellulose matrix, photonic properties can be imparted to the luminescent paper thanks to the chiral nematic behavior of the CNC dispersions. The big challenge to address is the conservation of the photonic properties during the co-assembly of CNCs with the luminescent NPs. MacLachlan's group demonstrated the fabrication of NIR-sensitive upconverting photonic films with chiral nematic order by co-assembly of CNCs with NaYF4:Yb,Er hexagonal NRs (see Fig. 5a). As for the abovementioned studies, the key point is the modification of the NPs with an appropriate stabilizer (polyvinyl alcohol) to ensure the water dispersibility into the nanocellulose dispersion.151
 Fig. 5  (a) NIR-sensitive upconverting photonic cellulose composite films with chiral nematic order, obtained by co-assembly of CNCs with polyvinyl alcohol stabilized NaYF4:Yb,Er NRs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (b) Au NR/bacterial nanocellulose composite hydrogel fabricated through filtration. [Adapted from ref. 155, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.] (c) Examples of composite nanopapers obtained by grafting of luminescent NPs or the in situ formation of plasmonic NPs on BNC for colorimetric sensing. [Reprinted from ref. 150, copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.] 
Besides luminescent NPs, Au NPs and Au NRs were also combined with CNCs to fabricate plasmonic/photonic hybrid films.152,153 The results demonstrated that the plasmonic–photonic coupling in the CNC composites can influence the angle-dependent LSPR shifting values of the Au NPs.153 Plasmonic/nanocellulose-based optical components can be used as substrates for SERS. Both plasmonic hydrogels and aerogels were developed for SERS application, by adsorption of Au NRs on BNC matrices (see Fig. 5b).154,155 Alternatively, Au NR/CNF membranes were produced by vacuum-assisted filtration.156 Plasmonic nanostructures for SERS can be fabricated by in situ synthesis of plasmonic NPs. The formation of Au NPs was achieved by boiling BNC impregnated with HAuCl4 in a sodium citrate solution. Au NPs were retained in the NBC matrix and were not subject to uncontrolled aggregation and flocculation at acidic pH.157 The highly porous morphology of such systems plays an important role in the enhancement of Raman signals.
Moreover, the formation of plasmonic NPs on nanocellulose membranes can be exploited for the fabrication of colorimetric sensors (see Fig. 5c). For instance, Ag and Au NPs have been in situ synthesized on BNC by reduction of metal salts. Compared to standard paper substrates, nanocellulose offers an enhancement of the signal intensity of Au NPs correlated with the optical transparency of BNC.150


3.1.2. Batteries, capacitors and flexible electronics. 
As recently reviewed by Xing et al.,134 several nanocellulose–graphene composites have been developed as flexible substrates for supercapacitors. The authors reviewed the different assembly methods developed to achieve mechanical flexibility, specific capacitance, electrochemical performance, cycling stability, and the biodegradability of cellulose. Besides graphene, other 2D nanomaterials have been embedded in cellulose for conductive capacitors. For instance, MXene (Ti3C2Tx)/CNF films were fabricated through vacuum-filtration. Mechanical strength, a high electronic conductivity of 2.95 × 104 S m−1 and a gravimetric capacitance of ≈298 F g−1 were achieved. These values are higher than previously reported values for structural supercapacitor electrodes. In addition, the authors demonstrated that MXene/CNF hybrid dispersions can be used as inks to print flexible micro-supercapacitors.158 More recently, oxide NPs, such as BaTiO3 and Co/ZnO, were embedded in cellulose for dielectric capacitor and solid state battery applications.159,160
Regarding flexible electronics, transparent conductive AgNW/CNF paper was fabricated by a hot-pressing method. The electrical conductivity achieved was comparable to that of ITO and suitable for the fabrication of organic solar cells.161 Cataldi et al. developed a cellulose/graphene flexible biocomposite with low sheet resistance, water-proof resistance and mechanical strength for biomedical sensors.162 In their work a cellulose acetate/graphene nanoplate dispersion was coated on a commercial cellulose network, even if no transparency was obtained. In this regard, different approaches involving the combination of graphene with nanocellulose have been proposed to achieve transparency, for example CNC/rGO composites.163,164

3.2. Chitosan based nanocomposites
Chitosan is a linear chain polysaccharide comprising glucosamine and N-acetyl glucosamine residues joined together by β-1,4-glycosidic bonds. It is derived as an acid-soluble material by deacetylation of chitin, which is commonly found in the outer skeletons of crustaceans and in the cell walls of fungi. In a recent review paper A. B. da Silva et al.165 described the different methods for developing chitosan gold NP-based composites, highlighting the main strategies for the formation of NPs inside the polymer matrix. Most of the reported applications of such composites are in the field of bio-medicine; among them, the use of chitosan gold nanorod films as efficient NIR laser activatable bioadhesives for advanced tissue repair and wound dressing applications166 and for drug release167 is worth mentioning.
Chitosan based NCs have been used also in the area of food packaging and preservation.168 Incorporation of nanomaterials into chitosan-based food-packaging systems can prevent the growth of spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms, improve food quality and safety, and extend the shelf-life of food. It has been reported that applications of chitosan-based films have resulted in the shelf life extension of fresh produce, meat products, bread, and dairy products.
Regarding applications in electronics, the work of the N. Kotov group169 on patterned SWNT and gold NP NCs assembled with chitosan is worth mentioning. Microscale NC patterns were obtained using the fusion of two highly versatile techniques: direct-write maskless UV patterning and layer-by-layer assembly. Prototypical patterns such as concentric helices and bus-line-and-stimulation-pads used in flexible antennas and neuroprosthetic devices were obtained with a spatial resolution of at least 1 μm. The resistivity of the patterned composites was 6.45 × 10−5 Ω m and 3.80 × 10−6 Ω m at 20 °C for nanotube and nanoparticle composites, demonstrating their potential application in Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems.
Commercial carbon NPs were homogeneously dispersed in a chitosan matrix to obtain transparent films. The films were deposited by a layer-by-layer spraying process and used as sensitive materials for conductometric vapor (H2O, methanol, toluene) sensors.170 WO3 NPs dispersed in a chitosan matrix were used as a sensitive H2S conductometric sensor.171 The sensor operated at 40 °C with a detection limit of 15 ppm.
Flexible conductive transparent films were obtained by combining chitosan with AgNWs.172 A transparent conductive AgNW network was obtained by spray coating onto a Petri dish. After spraying, the chitosan solution was cast onto the Petri dish and kept in a drying oven at 60 °C for 12 hours. Finally, the conductive chitosan/AgNW NC film was obtained by peeling off the film from the Petri dish. The composite film showed excellent oxidation resistance, a smooth surface with an RMS roughness of ∼6.3 nm and a very low sheet resistance of 6.8 Ω sq−1 at 82.26% optical transmittance.
3.3. Alginate based nanocomposites
Alginate is a component of the cell walls of brown algae and an exopolysaccharide of some bacteria and commercially it is produced using different types of algae.173,174 As reported in a recent review paper,175 alginate-based NCs can be synthetized in different ways: by the controlled gelification using Ca2+ ions, the formation of polyionic complexes through ionotropic gelation via intermolecular interactions, spray drying followed by crosslinking, self-assembly, electrospinning or electrospraying for the production of NC fibrous scaffolds or NPs.
Most of the applications are in the fields of drug delivery, tissue engineering, environmental remediation, disinfectants and gene therapy. Among the applications in optics and electronics, the use of free-standing alginate–Ti3C2Tx MXene NC films for electromagnetic interference shielding is worth mentioning.176 An aqueous Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution was mixed with sodium alginate solution, yielding a series of aqueous solutions with different initial Ti3C2Tx contents (90, 80, 60, 50, 30, 10 wt%). Freestanding films were prepared via vacuum-assisted filtration. The NC film showed exceptionally high electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness.
The potential application of NCs of calcium alginate–polyvinyl alcohol matrix containing V2O3 NPs as a cathode material for Li-ion batteries was recently demonstrated.177 The V2O3 NPs were obtained by impregnating the calcium alginate–polyvinyl alcohol matrix with vanadium pentoxide.
4. Polylactic acid and other biodegradable polyester-derived nanocomposites
Among the different classes of biopolymers, polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) and polylactic acid (PLA) are worth mentioning. They are widely used as substitutes for traditional plastics, due to their thermoplasticity and commercial availability.
PHA are polyesters of biological origin, synthesized from different classes of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. They are produced by fermentation of sugars, lipids, alkanes, alkenes, and alkanoic acids.178,179
PLA is a polyester obtained by the polymerization of lactic acid, one of the most common carboxylic acids in nature. This monomer can be chemically synthesized or obtained through the fermentation of carbohydrates. High molecular weight PLA is obtained either by polycondensation of the monomer or by ring-opening polymerization.180
PHA and PLA are the most common biopolymers and are widely used in the packaging, medical and pharmaceutical fields. The literature on functional biocomposites for optics and electronics is indeed limited.
Gold NP/PLA NC films were fabricated through a layer-by-layer assembly of PLA NPs. The Au NPs were grown within the PLA coatings by chemical or UV reduction of tetrachloroauric acid. The formation of the particles was confirmed by the appearance of a characteristic band at 550 nm in the UV-vis spectrum, which corresponds to the surface plasmon resonance of gold. The optical functionality was used as a real-time tool for monitoring the enzymatic degradation of the biodegradable film.181
Fluorescent PLA–QD composites films are also reported in the literature. The films were obtained by solution casting, through the dispersion of CdSe or ZnS QDs inside the polymer solution.182 Wang et al. modified the surfaces of CdS QDs through covalent grafting of lactic acid.183 This synthesis route results in a reduction of NP aggregation inside PLA matrix and an increase in the transparency of the film. However, no practical applications of the composites were demonstrated.
More recently, phosphors were embedded in PLA filaments for commercial 3D printing. Nevertheless, no functional application in the field of opto-electronics of such NCs were demonstrated, besides the fabrication of artwork.184
Various processing techniques were employed to incorporate conductive nanomaterials into the PLA matrix. MWCNT and PLA composites were prepared in forms of fibrous membranes by solution blow spinning,185 or as conductive films through layer-by-layer deposition via spray coatings.186 Extrusion was also reported for the fabrication of CNT/PLA NCs.187 The conductivity is affected by the amount of CNTs/MWCNTs in terms of percolation network and NPs aggregation. Besides, PLA molecules can easily bond with the –OH and –COOH groups on the CNT surfaces, inducing the formation of nucleating centers that promote crystallization.
Exfoliated particles, such as graphite nanoplatelets,188 graphene189 and rGO nanosheets,190 were also investigated as alternative fillers. Thanks to their higher surface area and their in-plane conductivity, it was possible to reduce the percolation threshold. Melt compounding, compression molding, and more recently 3D printing were employed to fabricate conductive electrodes.188–190 The control of particle dispersion and crystallinity of the matrix during the processing is fundamental to obtaining the desired conductivity without limiting the performances of the material in practical application, such as resistive sensors, biosensors and supercapacitors.186,189,191 In this regard, Dhar et al.192 proposed a magnetic CNC/PLA composite with anisotropic thermal, conductive and mechanical properties. By decorating the CNCs with iron oxide NPs, they were able to control the alignment of the NPs inside the PLA matrix, thereby defining the final properties of the material.
Finally, PLA/Ag NW composite films were fabricated by doctor blading with a minimum percolation threshold of 0.13 vol%.193
5. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, we highlighted the recent advances in the fabrication of bioNCs in the fields of optics and electronics. Considering the growing interest in the fabrication of sustainable materials with multifunctionality, several NCs have been developed in the last few decades thanks to the possibility of interfacing biopolymers with different types of NPs. The presence of abundant functional groups and the possibility of controlling the supramolecular organization of the biopolymers facilitate the fabrication of materials with new functionalities and tunable properties. Examples are the formation of molecular composites through self-assembly of proteins and 2D materials,120 or the fabrication of plasmonic/photonic films by controlling the co-assembly of AuNPs and CNCs.151 However, the knowledge of the assembly mechanism and the control of physical/chemical interactions at the matrix/filler interface is still limited. In this regard, computational approaches could be integrated with experimental studies to open a clear pathway for the fabrication of materials with targeted design.
Regarding applications in electronics, the literature on bioNCs is continuously growing. The combination of carbon-based materials (e.g. graphene) with biopolymers could overcome the limitations of conventional materials. A new class of electronic devices can be fabricated which are biodegradable and flexible, and can easily be interfaced with human tissues.
Concerning optical functionalities, the major interest has been in the development of materials with fluorescence or plasmonic properties for biosensors, SERS, and implantable devices. In most cases the biopolymer matrix plays a passive role as a support for the NPs, providing biocompatibility characteristics to the NC. However, some biopolymers have intrinsic optical functionalities (e.g. the iridescence of CNC films), which can be coupled with fillers to enhance their properties or introduce new functionalities. Moreover, biopolymers often show a stimuli-responsive behavior. For example, the refractive index or transparency of silk can be modulated by controlling crystallinity and water content. These aspects may pave the way for the development of active optical components.
List of abbreviations

AgNWsSilver nanowires
bioNCsBionanocomposites
BNCBacterial nanocellulose
CNCsCellulose nanocrystals
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
GOGraphene oxide
HFIPHexafluoroisopropanol
LEDLight-emitting diode
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
MWCNTsMulti-walled CNTs
NCsNanocomposites
NDsNanodiamonds
NFCNanofibrillated cellulose
NIRNear infrared
NPsNanoparticles
PHAPolyhydroxyalkanoates
PLAPolylactic acid
QDsQuantum dots
rGOReduced-graphene oxide
SERSSurface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
SFSilk fibroin
SWCNTsSingle-walled carbon nanotubes
TNSsTitanate nanosheets
TPTandem proteins

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Fondazione Cariparo Excellence Grant SYNERGY.
References
Y. Shchipunov, Pure Appl. Chem., 2012, 84, 2579–2607 CAS .
M. Darder, P. Aranda and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1309–1319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eder, S. Amini and P. Fratzl, Science, 2018, 362, 543–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Begley, D. S. Gianola and T. R. Ray, Science, 2019, 364(6447), eaav4299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Suarato, R. Bertorelli and A. Athanassiou, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2018, 6, 137 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, L. Shi, M. Yang and L. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 95, 302–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Gu, I. Su, S. Sharma, J. L. Voros, Z. Qin and M. J. Buehler, J. Biomech. Eng., 2016, 138, 021006 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cha, S. R. Shin, N. Annabi, M. R. Dokmeci and A. Khademhosseini, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2891–2897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Gong, Q. Zhang, P. Ming, S. Wan, J. Peng, L. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2378–2395 RSC .
F. Perrozzi, S. Prezioso and L. Ottaviano, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27(1), 013002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Demirel, M. Vural and M. Terrones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704990 CrossRef .
P. Xu, X. Han, B. Zhang, Y. Du and H.-L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1349–1360 RSC .
N. G. Khlebtsov and L. A. Dykman, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2010, 111, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fei, M. Jia, X. Du, Y. Yang, R. Zhang, Z. Shao, X. Zhao and X. Chen, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 4483–4488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pandey, G. K. Goswami and K. K. Nanda, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 94, 229–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nelson and Y. Deng, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 975–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Perotto, M. Cittadini, H. Tao, S. Kim, M. Yang, D. L. Kaplan, A. Martucci and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6728–6732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, F. Song, X. Yin, X. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10076–10079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lin, F. Hu, Y. Sun, C. Wu, H. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5284–5290 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. B. Pinto, L. D. Carlos, P. A. A. P. Marques, A. J. D. Silvestre and C. S. R. Freire, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131(22), 41169 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. Ding, X. Li, H. Yang, S. Liu, X. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Sun, X. Liu and J. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125499 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xiong, A. M. Grant, R. Ma, S. Zhang and V. V. Tsukruk, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 125, 1–41 CrossRef .
S. Pradhan, A. K. Brooks and V. K. Yadavalli, Mater. Today Bio, 2020, 7, 100065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, P. Cebe, A. S. Weiss, F. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Hardy and T. R. Scheibel, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1093–1115 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cataldi, O. Condurache, D. Spirito, R. Krahne, I. S. Bayer, A. Athanassiou and G. Perotto, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12544–12551 CAS .
L.-D. Koh, J. Yeo, Y. Y. Lee, Q. Ong, M. Han and B. C.-K. Tee, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 86, 151–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pena-Francesch and M. C. Demirel, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Cao, B. Marelli, X. Xia and T. H. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1706983 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ling, C. Li, F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 6486–6504 Search PubMed .
N. C. Tansil, L. D. Koh and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1388–1397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, Z. Lin, L. Kong, Y. Xing, N. Lin, Z. Zhang, B.-H. Chen and X.-Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700628 CrossRef .
L. Huang, C. Li, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3780 RSC .
K. Hu, M. K. Gupta, D. D. Kulkarni and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2301–2307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Colusso, G. Perotto, Y. Wang, M. Sturaro, F. Omenetto and A. Martucci, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3924–3931 RSC .
S. D. Wang, Q. Ma, K. Wang and H. W. Chen, ACS Omega, 2017, 3, 406–413 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wei, J. H. Xia, B. S. Kim and I. S. Kim, J. Polym. Res., 2011, 18, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
T. Posati, V. Benfenati, A. Sagnella, A. Pistone, M. Nocchetti, A. Donnadio, G. Ruani, R. Zamboni and M. Muccini, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 158–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ling, Z. Qin, W. Huang, S. Cao, D. L. Kaplan and M. J. Buehler, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601939 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sagnella, C. Chieco, V. Benfenati, N. Di Virgilio, S. Toffanin, S. Cavallini, T. Posati, A. Pistone, G. Varchi, G. Ruani, M. Muccini, F. Rossi and R. Zamboni, Composites, Part B, 2015, 68, 281–287 CrossRef .
N. C. Tansil, Y. Li, C. P. Teng, S. Zhang, K. Y. Win, X. Chen, X. Y. Liu and M.-Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1463–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cai, H. Shao, X. Hu and Y. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2551–2557 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, C. Wang, M. Zhang, M. Jian and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6695–6700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, H. Zhao, H. Huang, B. Li, R. K. Y. Li, X. Q. Feng and F. Dai, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 9945–9957 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lepore, F. Bosia, F. Bonaccorso, M. Bruna, S. Taioli, G. Garberoglio, A. C. Ferrari and N. M. Pugno, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 031013 CrossRef .
H. Tao, S. M. Siebert, M. A. Brenckle, R. D. Averitt, M. Cronin-Golomb, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 123702 CrossRef .
D. Lu, Z. Zheng, S. Guo, C. Wang, D. L. Kaplan and X. Wang, J. Sens., 2015, 2015, 819373 Search PubMed .
E. Kharlampieva, V. Kozlovskaya, R. Gunawidjaja, V. V. Shevchenko, R. Vaia, R. R. Naik, D. L. Kaplan and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 840–846 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ling, C. Li, J. Adamcik, S. Wang, Z. Shao, X. Chen and R. Mezzenga, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 146–152,  DOI:10.1021/mz400639y .
Y. Xia, G. Gao and Y. Li, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2009, 90B, 653–658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Wang, A. Chen, A. Naidu, B. S. Napier, W. Li, C. L. Rodriguez, S. A. Crooker and F. G. Omenetto, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 201805832 Search PubMed .
H. Pan, Y. Zhang, H. Shao, X. Hu, X. Li, F. Tian and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1408 RSC .
F. Wang, S. S. Jyothirmayee Aravind, H. Wu, J. Forys, V. Venkataraman, K. Ramanujachary and X. Hu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 79, 728–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tseng, G. Perotto, B. Napier, P. Riahi, W. Li, E. Shirman, D. L. Kaplan, I. V. Zenyuk and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600190 CrossRef .
M. Chu and G. Liu, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2008, 7, 308–315 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Marelli, M. A. Brenckle, A. N. Mitropoulos, E. S. Gil, K. Tsioris, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. J. Lee, M. T. Sultan, H. Hong, Y. J. Lee, J. S. Lee, H. Lee, S. H. Kim and C. H. Park, Front. Mater., 2020, 7, 50 CrossRef .
N. Lin, Z. Meng, G. W. Toh, Y. Zhen, Y. Diao, H. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 1205–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khalid, R. Lodin, P. Domachuk, H. Tao, J. E. Moreau, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, B. C. Gibson and S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2014, 5, 596–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, X. He, K. Wang, C. Xie, B. Zhou and Z. Qing, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2244–2249 RSC .
Q. Yu, P. Gao, K. Y. Zhang, X. Tong, H. Yang, S. Liu, J. Du, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e17107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lin, L. Cao, Q. Huang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zhou and X.-Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8885–8902 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Parker, P. Domachuk, J. Amsden, J. Bressner, J. A. Lewis, D. L. Kaplan and F. C. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2411–2415 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Applegate, G. Perotto, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2015, 6, 4221–4227 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, A. N. Mitropoulos, J. D. Spitzberg, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 818–823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Li, E. Colusso, W. Li and F. G. F. Omenetto, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 1800066, 1–7 Search PubMed .
G. Perotto, Y. Zhang, D. Naskar, N. Patel, D. L. Kaplan, S. C. Kundu and F. G. Omenetto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 103702 CrossRef .
E. Colusso, D. Vitiello, G. Perotto, G. Valotto, E. Cattaruzza and A. Martucci, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 1800992 Search PubMed .
R. R. da Silva, C. T. Dominguez, M. V. dos Santos, R. Barbosa-Silva, M. Cavicchioli, L. M. Christovan, L. S. A. de Melo, A. S. L. Gomes, C. B. de Araújo and S. J. L. Ribeiro, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7181 RSC .
H. Yin, S. Ai, W. Shi and L. Zhu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, W. Chen, H. Itoh, K. Naka, Q. Ni, H. Yamane and Y. Chujo, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2518–2519 RSC .
E. L. Mayes, F. Vollrath and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 801–805 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, G. N. Hall, J. B. Addison and J. L. Yarger, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1937–1942 RSC .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Plasmonics, 2007, 2, 107–118 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yun and S. J. J. Kwok, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zijlstra, J. W. M. Chon and M. Gu, Opt. Express, 2007, 15(19), 12151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Taylor, A. M. Siddiquee and J. W. M. Chon, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12071–12079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gobin, E. M. Watkins, E. Quevedo, V. L. Colvin and J. L. West, Small, 2010, 6, 745–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Peng, U. Tisch, O. Adams, M. Hakim, N. Shehada, Y. Y. Broza, S. Billan, R. Abdah-Bortnyak, A. Kuten and H. Haick, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 669–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-E. Park, M. Kim, J.-H. Hwang and J.-M. Nam, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1600032 CrossRef .
L. E. Strong and J. L. West, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2011, 3, 307–317 CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Wang and C. Chen, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 223–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Frazier, R. Robinson, A. Ray and H. Ghandehari, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2015, 12, 1605–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Dreaden, A. M. Alkilany, X. Huang, C. J. Murphy and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2740–2779 RSC .
N. Kojic, E. M. Pritchard, H. Tao, M. A. Brenckle, J. P. Mondia, B. Panilaitis, F. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3793–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Magoshi and S. Nakamura, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1975, 19, 1013–1015 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, Y. Wang, B. Mortimer, C. Holland, Z. Shao, D. Porter and F. Vollrath, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 5926–5936 RSC .
S. H. Tsao, D. Wan, Y. S. Lai, H. M. Chang, C. C. Yu, K. Te Lin and H. L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12045–12059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gogurla, A. K. Sinha, D. Naskar, S. C. Kundu and S. K. Ray, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7695–7703 RSC .
J. Veres, S. Ogier, G. Lloyd and D. De Leeuw, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4543–4555 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, H. Wang, W. R. Leow, Y. Cai, X. J. Loh, M.-Y. Han and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4250–4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Qi, B. Zhao, S.-D. Wang, S. S. Al-Deyab and K.-Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 50878–50882 RSC .
K. Min, M. Umar, H. Seo, J. H. Yim, D. G. Kam, H. Jeon, S. Lee and S. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 574–580 RSC .
M. Gandhi, H. Yang, L. Shor and F. Ko, Polymer, 2009, 50, 1918–1924 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dionigi, T. Posati, V. Benfenati, A. Sagnella, A. Pistone, S. Bonetti, G. Ruani, F. Dinelli, G. Padeletti, R. Zamboni and M. Muccini, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1424 RSC .
B. Liang, L. Fang, Y. Hu, G. Yang, Q. Zhu and X. Ye, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4264–4274 RSC .
S. Ling, Q. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Mu, D. L. Kaplan and M. J. Buehler, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705291 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tan, Y. Wang, W. Du and T. Mu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 321–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Yan, G. Han, X. Li, R. You, Q. Zhang, M. Li and D. L. Kaplan, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 187, 107950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakravarty, N. Bhardwaj, B. B. Mandal and N. Sen Sarma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8920–8929 RSC .
F. B. Kadumudi, M. Jahanshahi, M. Mehrali, T.-G. Zsurzsan, N. Taebnia, M. Hasany, S. Mohanty, A. Knott, B. Godau, M. Akbari and A. Dolatshahi-Pirouz, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801241 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Parenteau-Bareil, R. Gauvin, F. Berthod, R. Parenteau-Bareil, R. Gauvin and F. Berthod, Materials, 2010, 3, 1863–1887 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Sun, Y. J. Zhu and F. Chen, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 26218–26229 RSC .
M. C. Chang and J. Tanaka, Biomaterials, 2002, 23, 4811–4818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Takallu, E. Mirzaei, A. Azadi, A. Karimizade and S. Tavakol, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2019, 107, 1920–1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cheirmadurai, S. Biswas, R. Murali and P. Thanikaivelan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 19507 RSC .
A. Meiyazhagan, S. Thangavel, H. Daniel P., A. Pulickel M. and T. Palanisamy, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 157, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, J. Du, Y. Cao, C. Yue and B. Cheng, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 126, 595–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Manocchi, P. Domachuk, F. G. Omenetto and H. Yi, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 103, 725–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Chang, Opt. Eng., 1980, 19, 195642 CrossRef .
B. Murić, D. Pantelić, D. Vasiljević, B. Panić and B. Jelenković, Appl. Opt., 2009, 48, 3854 CrossRef PubMed .
F. M. Fernandes, A. I. Ruiz, M. Darder, P. Aranda and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 221–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Mahmoud and M. Abbo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2013, 116, 610–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Muthivhi, S. Parani, B. May and O. S. Oluwafemi, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2018, 13, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lian, J. Fan, Z. Shi, S. Zhang, H. Li and J. Yin, Carbon, 2015, 89, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qi, Y. Zhou, Y. Huang, L. Zhu, X. Xu, Z. Ren and J. Bai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 637–646 RSC .
H. Le Ferrand, S. Bolisetty, A. F. Demirörs, R. Libanori, A. R. Studart and R. Mezzenga, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12078 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vural, Y. Lei, A. Pena-Francesch, H. Jung, B. Allen, M. Terrones and M. C. Demirel, Carbon, 2017, 118, 404–412 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vural, A. Pena-Francesch, J. Bars-Pomes, H. Jung, H. Gudapati, C. B. Hatter, B. D. Allen, B. Anasori, I. T. Ozbolat, Y. Gogotsi and M. C. Demirel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801972 CrossRef .
M. Vural, H. Zhu, A. Pena-Francesch, H. Jung, B. D. Allen and M. C. Demirel, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6956–6967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Willför and C. Xu, Bioact. Carbohydr. Diet. Fibre, 2015, 5, 31–61 CrossRef CAS .

          H. S. El Khadem, Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology, Elsevier,  2003, pp. 369–416 Search PubMed .
R. Zafar, K. M. Zia, S. Tabasum, F. Jabeen, A. Noreen and M. Zuber, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 92, 1012–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nechita and M. R. Iana-Roman, Coatings, 2020, 10, 566 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gopinath, S. Saravanan, A. R. Al-Maleki, M. Ramesh and J. Vadivelu, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2018, 107, 96–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Moon, A. Martini, J. Nairn, J. Simonsen and J. Youngblood, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3941 RSC .
H. Golmohammadi, E. Morales-Narváez, T. Naghdi and A. Merkoçi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5426–5446 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kargarzadeh, M. Mariano, D. Gopakumar, I. Ahmad, S. Thomas, A. Dufresne, J. Huang and N. Lin, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 2151–2189 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Jozala, L. C. de Lencastre-Novaes, A. M. Lopes, V. de Carvalho Santos-Ebinuma, P. G. Mazzola, A. Pessoa-Jr, D. Grotto, M. Gerenutti and M. V. Chaud, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2016, 100, 2063–2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Parker, G. Guidetti, C. A. Williams, T. Zhao, A. Narkevicius, S. Vignolini and B. Frka-Petesic, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(19), 1704477 CrossRef PubMed .
V. F. Korolovych, V. Cherpak, D. Nepal, A. Ng, N. R. Shaikh, A. Grant, R. Xiong, T. J. Bunning and V. V. Tsukruk, Polymer, 2018, 145, 334–347 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xing, P. Tao, Z. Wu, C. Xing, X. Liao and S. Nie, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 207, 447–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dufresne, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2018, 376, 20170040 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, Y. Aitomäki, L. A. Berglund, K. Oksman and A. Bismarck, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 105, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sadasivuni, D. Ponnamma, H. U. Ko, L. Zhai, H. C. Kim and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 4699–4705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, J. Li, J. Li, S. Ye, J. Wei and J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9687–9696 RSC .
S. Roig-Sanchez, E. Jungstedt, I. Anton-Sales, D. C. Malaspina, J. Faraudo, L. A. Berglund, A. Laromaine and A. Roig, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 634–641 RSC .
S. Ge, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Lan, M. Yan and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4366–4382 RSC .
Y. Liu, S.-H. Yu and L. Bergström, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703277 CrossRef .
E. Lizundia, U. Goikuria, J. L. Vilas, F. Cristofaro, G. Bruni, E. Fortunati, I. Armentano, L. Visai and L. Torre, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2618–2628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Yao, F. Wang and Z. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1702240 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Oprea and S. I. Voicu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 247, 116683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, Z. Zhang, W. Liu and Y. Deng, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 299–320 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lizundia, D. Puglia, T. D. Nguyen and I. Armentano, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 112, 100668 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Lyu, Z. Chen and S. Wang, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 352 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Wei, X. Feng, M. Miao, L. Sun, S. Cao, L. Shi and J. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14945–14951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miao, J. Zhao, X. Feng, Y. Cao, S. Cao, Y. Zhao, X. Ge, L. Sun, L. Shi and J. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2511–2517 RSC .
E. Morales-Narváez, H. Golmohammadi, T. Naghdi, H. Yousefi, U. Kostiv, D. Horák, N. Pourreza and A. Merkoçi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7296–7305 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-D. Nguyen, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600514 CrossRef .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, B. Kopera, K. S. Prado, A. Klinkova, M. Methot, G. Chauve, J. Bouchard, A. S. Helmy and E. Kumacheva, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10377–10385 CrossRef .
G. Chu, X. Wang, H. Yin, Y. Shi, H. Jiang, T. Chen, J. Gao, D. Qu, Y. Xu and D. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21797–21806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, J. Luan, K.-K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 609–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, Q. Jiang, K.-K. Liu, J. Luan, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600214 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, R. Xiong, M. A. Mahmoud, E. N. Quigley, H. Chang, M. El-Sayed and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18380–18389 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei and P. J. Vikesland, Sci. Rep., 2016, 5, 18131 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tian, A. VahidMohammadi, M. S. Reid, Z. Wang, L. Ouyang, J. Erlandsson, T. Pettersson, L. Wågberg, M. Beidaghi and M. M. Hamedi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902977 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Yin, Q. Yang, Z. Shi, G. H. Hu and C. Xiong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10641–10648 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Abutalib and A. Rajeh, Polym. Test., 2020, 91, 106803 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nogi, M. Karakawa, N. Komoda, H. Yagyu and T. T. Nge, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cataldi, F. Bonaccorso, A. Esau del Rio Castillo, V. Pellegrini, Z. Jiang, L. Liu, N. Boccardo, M. Canepa, R. Cingolani, A. Athanassiou and I. S. Bayer, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600245 CrossRef .
K. K. Sadasivuni, A. Kafy, L. Zhai, H.-U. Ko, S. Mun and J. Kim, Small, 2015, 11, 994–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiong, K. Hu, A. M. Grant, R. Ma, W. Xu, C. Lu, X. Zhang and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1501–1509 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. da Silva, K. B. Rufato, A. C. de Oliveira, P. R. Souza, E. P. da Silva, E. C. Muniz, B. H. Vilsinski and A. F. Martins, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 161, 977–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Matteini, F. Ratto, F. Rossi, S. Centi, L. Dei and R. Pini, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4313–4316 CrossRef CAS .
P. Matteini, F. Tatini, L. Luconi, F. Ratto, F. Rossi, G. Giambastiani and R. Pini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5956–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. Mukherjee and J. Dutta, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2020, 97, 196–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, S. Ho and N. A. Kotov, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4393–4398 RSC .
A. Bouvree, J. F. Feller, M. Castro, Y. Grohens and M. Rinaudo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138, 138–147 CrossRef CAS .
F. I. M. Ali, F. Awwad, Y. E. Greish, A. F. S. Abu-Hani and S. T. Mahmoud, Org. Electron., 2020, 76, 105486 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nengduo, Y. Xuesong and G. Hao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 47552–47561 RSC .
B. H. A. Rehm and S. Valla, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1997, 48, 281–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. I. Draget, O. Smidsrød and G. Skjåk-Bræk, in Biopolymers Online, ed. E. J. Vandamme, S. De Baets and A. Steinbüchel, Wiley,  2005 Search PubMed .
I. P. S. Fernando, W. W. Lee, E. J. Han and G. Ahn, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123823 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Bajpai, A. Goswami, J. Bajpai and B. K. Sinha, Macromol. Res., 2018, 26, 305–316 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Raza, S. Abid and I. M. Banat, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2018, 126, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Philip, T. Keshavarz and I. Roy, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2007, 82, 233–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sinha Ray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1710–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. H. Orozco, V. Kozlovskaya, E. Kharlampieva, B. L. López and V. V. Tsukruk, Polymer, 2010, 51, 4127–4139 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, L. Pan, C. Y. Tang, L. Chen, Z. Hao, W. C. Law, X. Wang, C. P. Tsui and C. Wu, Composites, Part B, 2014, 66, 494–499 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Wang, H. Y. Xie, Y. P. Cheng, L. Chen, M. Z. Hu and S. Chen, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2011, 289, 395–400 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, J. Hong, X. Li, J. Shi, P. A. Tanner, K. Wong and M. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 2000523 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Oliveira, V. Zucolotto, L. H. C. Mattoso and E. S. Medeiros, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 2733–2741 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, M. Castro and J. F. Feller, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 621–628 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Qiu, E. Sakai and X. Wei, Composites, Part A, 2016, 89, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sullivan, Y. J. Oh, R. A. Gerhardt, B. Wang and K. Kalaitzidou, J. Polym. Res., 2014, 21, 1–9 CAS .
A. M. López Marzo, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez and M. Pumera, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 151, 111980 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shen, T. Jing, W. Ren, J. Zhang, Z. G. Jiang, Z. Z. Yu and A. Dasari, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 1430–1435 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Wang, P. Du, J. Liu, D. Liu and P. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 312–324 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dhar, A. Kumar and V. Katiyar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18393–18409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Doganay, S. Coskun, C. Kaynak and H. E. Unalan, Composites, Part B, 2016, 99, 288–296 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Photographs of SF–TNS transparent composite unsupported films and (b) refractive indices of the NCs film at 500 nm for the different concentrations of the TNSs and for the different treatments. (c) Examples of nano- and microfabrication of SF–TNS composite films: e-beam lithography, UV-lithography and inkjet printing. [Adapted from ref. 18, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.] (d) Schematic illustration of the cation exchange process in SF–TNS composites and examples of functionalization. [Adapted from ref. 69, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.]	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication of a hybrid Au NP/SF thin film broadband absorbance layer upon an Al/Si Schottky diode. Inset: Cross-sectional TEM image of the Au NP/SF thin film. (b) Typical thermal images of an Au NP/SF thin film before (left) and after (right) exposure to white LED light. (c) Temperature plotted with respect to time for an AuNP/SF film (Au = 25 wt%) for 10 cycles of LED exposure. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 90, copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic for fabrication of silk nanofibril/graphene composite solution. An AFM image of silk nanofibrils on a graphene sheet and photographs of flexible composites fabricated through vacuum-filtration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Examples of the versatile processability of graphene/SF/HFIP and graphene/SF/FA/Ca2+ suspensions: flexible and conductive cast films, wet spun fibers and direct writing coatings. [Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.]	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Spatial control of magnetic rGO flakes within a gelatin matrix using a patterned magnetic stripe. (b) Transparency of a 30 μm thick magnetic rGO film as a function of the coverage area of the template. (c) Demonstration of the improved optical transparency by controlling the spatial distribution of magnetic rGO flakes within rGO–gelatin composite films using a metallic template. [Reproduced from ref. 119.]	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) NIR-sensitive upconverting photonic cellulose composite films with chiral nematic order, obtained by co-assembly of CNCs with polyvinyl alcohol stabilized NaYF4:Yb,Er NRs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (b) Au NR/bacterial nanocellulose composite hydrogel fabricated through filtration. [Adapted from ref. 155, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.] (c) Examples of composite nanopapers obtained by grafting of luminescent NPs or the in situ formation of plasmonic NPs on BNC for colorimetric sensing. [Reprinted from ref. 150, copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.]	 
AgNWs	Silver nanowires
bioNCs	Bionanocomposites
BNC	Bacterial nanocellulose
CNCs	Cellulose nanocrystals
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
GO	Graphene oxide
HFIP	Hexafluoroisopropanol
LED	Light-emitting diode
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
MWCNTs	Multi-walled CNTs
NCs	Nanocomposites
NDs	Nanodiamonds
NFC	Nanofibrillated cellulose
NIR	Near infrared
NPs	Nanoparticles
PHA	Polyhydroxyalkanoates
PLA	Polylactic acid
QDs	Quantum dots
rGO	Reduced-graphene oxide
SERS	Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
SF	Silk fibroin
SWCNTs	Single-walled carbon nanotubes
TNSs	Titanate nanosheets
TP	Tandem proteins

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
