Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysis  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JA90077G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JA90077G
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2013, 28, 177-216Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysisOwen T. Butler*a, Warren R. L. Cairnsb, Jennifer M. Cookc and Christine M. DavidsondaHealth and Safety Laboratory, Harpur Hill, Buxton, UK SK17 9JN. E-mail: owen.butler@hsl.gov.ukbCNR-IDPA, Universita Ca' Foscari, 30123 Venezia, ItalycBritish Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GGdUniversity of Strathclyde, Cathedral Street, Glasgow, UK G1 1XLReceived 3rd December 2012, Accepted 3rd December 2012First published on 2nd January 2013Contents1 Air analysis1.1 Review papers1.2 Sampling techniques1.3 Reference materials1.4 Sample preparation1.5 Instrumental analysis1.6 Data analysis and quality2 Water analysis2.1 Sample preparation2.2 Sample preconcentration and extraction2.3 Speciation2.4 Instrumental analysis2.5 Data quality3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materials3.1 Reference materials3.2 Sample preparation3.3 Instrumental analysis3.4 Speciation4 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Reference materials4.2 Solid sample introduction4.3 Sample preparation4.4 Instrumental analysis5 Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis is the 28th annual review published in JAAS on the application of atomic spectrometry to the chemical analysis of environmental samples. This Update refers to papers published approximately between September 2011 and August 2012 and continues the series of Atomic Spectrometry Updates (ASUs) in Environmental Analysis1 that should be read in conjunction with other related ASUs in the series, namely: clinical and biological materials, foods and beverages2; advances in atomic spectrometry and related techniques3; elemental speciation4; X-ray spectrometry5 and industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials.6 In the field of air analysis there is ongoing interest in measuring atmospheric Hg species and evaluating procedures for the determination of the carbonaceous content of airborne particulate matter. Other noteworthy areas of interest include: development of LIBS and MS systems for in situ measurement; and the use of synchrotron-based X-ray techniques for the solid-state speciation of airborne particles. In the field of water analysis, as in previous years, the main areas of activity are the development, some may say redevelopment, of preconcentration and extraction procedures and elemental speciation protocols for elements such as As, Cr and Sb. There is increasing interest in developing portable instrumentation for field use using AES or XRF techniques. In the field of soil and plant analysis, noteworthy developments this year include the emergence of nanoSIMS as a tool for trace element imaging, and greater use of techniques such as LIBS and PXRF with chemometric data processing to provide overall identification or classification of samples, rather than accurate quantification of specific analytes. Of concern, however, is the publication of several articles ‘reinventing the wheel’. For example, one study compared the analysis of dust by PIXE with results obtained by ICP-AES following HNO3 digestion according to USEPA Method 3050B, and another compared XRF data for soil samples with data from ICP-MS analysis of aqua regia soil digests. Unsurprisingly, both concluded that the X-ray technique produced higher concentrations for some elements than pseudo-total digestion! This suggests that there is a need for greater engagement between analytical and environmental geochemists to ensure that users of atomic spectrometry—and perhaps also some journal editors—are aware of the established scope of different analytical techniques and methods. Developments in geochemical analysis include: production and certification of new geological RMs with well-constrained isotopic contents or the recertification of existing RMs to include such isotopic data; optimisation of LA-ICP-MS and TIMS techniques and the reported use of a new ICP-MS instrument equipped with a Mattauch-Herzog type array detector to deliver improved isotopic measurement capabilities. Feedback on this review is most welcome and the lead author can be contacted using the email address provided.1 Air analysis1.1 Review papersReviews of measurement methodologies for specific elements addressed: arsenic speciation in air (46 references);9 PGEs in environmental and biological matrices (245 references);10 and, uniquely, analytical methods for the determination of osmium tetroxide (41 references).11 Of particular interest in a review on biological aerosol particles was the application of chemical tracers combined with the use of optical and MS techniques in studying the origins, pathways and fate of such particles (564 references).12 Review papers discussing specific instrument developments are discussed in the relevant sections below.1.2 Sampling techniquesWhilst monitoring workers' exposure to airborne particles through the use of personal air samplers is a common and mature activity in many countries, some unknowns remain and ongoing work seeks to complete missing information gaps. Following previous work,13 Sleeth and Vincent14 assessed, for the first time, the performance of commonly used inhalable aerosol samplers at windspeeds below 0.2 m s−1 in a controlled laboratory setting. Such windspeeds are often encountered in many workplaces. The inhalable aerosol samplers tested included the commonly used IOM, Button and GSP designs as well as the closed-faced cassette sampler. Although the samplers tested met the inhalability criterion relatively well, there was a significant effect of wind speed on sampling efficiency, with lower wind speeds clearly associated with an increase in sampling efficiency. The output from NIOSH has been notable this year. In a laboratory-based study,15 quartz in coal dust was sampled using high volume air samplers (4–10 L min−1) to increase the sensitivity of the underlying FTIR and/or XRD measurement techniques. Sampling at higher volumes allowed more sample mass per unit time to be collected compared to lower flow rate samplers (ca. 2 L min−1) currently used. It would be interesting to see how well such samplers work in the field given that, being bulkier and heavier, wearability of such samplers could be an issue. Conclusions, reported in previous ASU reviews,16 that losses of sampled particles to the walls of an air sampler, compared to masses collected on a filter, can be substantial, have been confirmed.17 This ratio is clearly dependent, however, upon workplace activities and the size distributions of particles emitted from processes. An assessment was made of sampling efficiencies of three inhalable fraction samplers for solid and liquid particles (droplets) facing the wind.18 Button and IOM samplers as well as a new prototype high volume sampler—the RASCAL—were evaluated. Large droplets had low penetration efficiencies through screened inlets and particle bounce, for solid particles, was an important determinant of aspiration and sampling efficiencies for samplers with screened inlets. In trials19 of the Button, GSP and IOM samplers to collect welding fume under real world conditions, the range of fume concentrations was 2–5 mg m−3 and the sampled fume particle size distribution was characterised by a bimodal log-normal distribution, with MMADs of 0.7 μm and 8.2 μm. Based upon gravimetric analysis of fume-loaded filters, the Button and GSP samplers showed comparable performance but filters samples collected with the IOM sampler had fume masses typically 10% lower than those collected with the other two sampler designs.Workers' potential exposure to engineered nanoparticles, which are often metallic in nature, is a field that is attracting increased attention. The sampling of nanoparticles can, however, be challenging. A low-pressure drop preselector was designed and validated for the elimination of co-sampled particles larger than 450 nm in diameter.20 The latter can cause measurement artifacts in the determination of concentration and size of nanoparticles. A prototype portable thermophoretic precipitator sampler21 for the collection of nanosized particles, in the range 1–300 nm, subsequently characterised by EM techniques, had a collection efficiency of 14–99% when challenged to polydisperse submicron NaCl test aerosols. Analysis of TEM images of samples collected confirmed that the size distributions of collected particles were in good agreement with those determined using FMPS. Discussions at the first international scientific workshop on the harmonisation of strategies to measure and analyse exposure to manufactured nano-objects in workplace air have been summarised.22 This complemented an article on a strategy for assessing workplace exposures to nanomaterials published by US-based researchers.23Sampling and measurement of trace levels of gaseous Hg species in ambient air remains a challenge. Brown et al.24 examined the short and long term memory effects associated with measurements of Hg0 in air collected on gold-coated silica adsorption tubes. Studies were undertaken to quantify the extent of such effects and their dependence upon relevant measurement parameters, such as the number of heating cycles used for each analysis, age of adsorption tube, mass of Hg on adsorption tubes and tube storage times between sampling events. Long-term memory effects were due to adsorption of Hg within the bulk gold in the sorbent tube so sufficient time was needed for this Hg to diffuse to the gold surface and subsequently be liberated during a heating cycle. Recommendations made included: conditioning of new adsorption tubes prior to use in the field; deploying adsorption tubes to field locations where they are likely to sample similar masses of Hg during successive sampling periods; and logging of sorbent tube usage for audit purposes. A cost-effective passive sampling system for the collection of Hg0 incorporated a polycarbonate external shield designed to reduce turbulence and exposure to precipitation and dust and a diffusive housing made from expanded PTFE tubing.25 Of the two collection surfaces investigated, gold sputter-coated quartz plates and silver wires, the gold surface exhibited the better performance although gradual passivation could limit reuse. The system was considered to hold promise although further evaluations of collection surfaces were required.The performance of new ambient air sampling systems continues to attract attention. A novel multi-filter sampler enabled the simultaneous collection of four PM10 and four PM2.5 samples.26 By using optimised critical orifices behind each filter assembly, a uniform airflow through each filter was achieved by using just one mass flow controller for each of the PM10 or PM2.5 sampling lines. In contrast, existing multi-filter sampling systems typically require the use of multiple (and costly) mass flow controllers to ensure consistent flow through filters. An impressive portable modular multipollutant sampling system for measuring emissions from stationary and/or mobile sources could be broken down into modules for ease of transportation.27 A sample of air was collected in the first module, diluted with filtered air, and transported to two measurement modules for both real time gas and particle analysis. For gases, various sensors could be employed and for particles, particle size distribution, particle number and mass concentration, and black carbon measurements could be performed. Further samples could also be collected on various media for subsequent laboratory analysis. A Ford Transit van was customised as a mobile aerosol research laboratory for effective stationary and mobile field measurements.28 It contained a range of sampling and measurement systems so both gaseous and particulate measurements could be undertaken. The attention to detail, as with the modular system described above, was impressive as exemplified by the system designed to vent exhaust emissions from the van's engine at least 25 m downwind, to minimise contamination.Development of samplers to enable the collection of elemental data at high temporal resolution is a goal shared by a number of research groups. Watson and his group29 developed an off-line method for the retrospective compositional analysis of filter tape samples retrieved from a β-attenuation monitor, a sampling device widely used in air monitoring networks to provide high resolution aerosol mass data. Sample filter punches could be analysed for elemental and morphological composition by XRF and SEM-EDS, respectively. Their study demonstrated the feasibility of analysing filter tape deposits for source attribution studies, especially for short duration fugitive dust events. Pancras and Landis,30 building on previous work,31 evaluated the performance of their semi-continuous elements-in-aerosol (PM2.5) sampler (SEAS-III). The system was designed to sample particles continuously and to deposit them, at 30 minute time intervals, into vials containing water. Following acidification, the dilute-acid-extractable content of airborne particles was analysed using HR-ICP-MS. Over a period of four weeks of sampling, the up-time for two samplers was 90 and 84%. Agreement between the results for the two samplers, based upon subsequent elemental analysis, was typically better than 25%. Although measurements correlated well with elemental data derived from the analysis of filters samples obtained using a co-located PM2.5 FRM sampler, the recoveries for Al, Fe, Pb, Sb and Sn were low because of their low solubilities in the collection medium.Health-based assessments of exposure to particulate matter are leading researchers to investigate both the physical–chemical and toxicological makeup of particles. A comparison of the chemical and oxidative characteristics of particulate matter collected by different sampling systems—filters, impactors (nano-MOUDI) and biosamplers—showed good agreement overall for particulate matter collection efficiency and chemical composition.32 Differences found in the results for the biosampler method, when compared with those for the filter and impactor approaches, could be explained by the different sample pretreatments used in the laboratory. A microwave digestion was used to dissolve the particulate residues for both filter and impactor samples but particles collected using the biosampler, as a slurry suspension, were simply acidified and analysed by SF-ICP-MS inferring incomplete extraction. Similarly, whilst the measured redox activities of water extract from filter and impactor derived samples were comparable, that derived from the analysis of the biosampler slurry was substantially higher. If such slurries were filtered however, all results became comparable suggesting that the contribution of insoluble particles to the redox activity of particulate matter should be considered in future evaluations of health impacts of exposure to particulate matter. A system consisting of a Dekati gravimetric impactor and a porous tube diluter was developed for the chemical and toxicological characterisation of particles.33 Claimed advantages over previously used high volume sampling methods were compactness for field use, straightforward preparation of sample collection substrates and high extraction efficiencies.1.3 Reference materialsA new reference material, NMIJ CRM 7308-a (Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Toxic Elements in Tunnel Dust), was certified for Cd, Cr, Mn, Ni and Pb concentrations.34 A review article35 (92 references) on the current state of the availability and practicability of soot (carbon) particle SRMs resulted from a workshop held by a group of 50 internationally acclaimed experts in June 2011. Whilst no suitable SRMs met all criteria established by internationally recognised organisations that set protocols for the production of RMs, a number of potential candidates have been proposed and it is hoped that momentum from this workshop can drive developments forward. Although solution nebulisation is commonly used to produce test aerosols from liquid solutions, it can be difficult to produce physically and chemically pure nanoparticles from a particle solution in deionised water due to impurities in the water. An international collaboration between researchers in South Korea and the USA36 demonstrated that it is possible to reduce the production of residual particles eleven-fold in deionised water by using a reverse osmosis membrane filtration procedure under high pressure (900 psi). The authors concluded that this commonly used and inexpensive approach, historically used to produce larger particles, could now be used to produce purer nanoparticles.1.4 Sample preparationProcedures and recommendations for the handling and processing of nanoparticle samples are highly topical. A Swiss group37 reviewed (62 references) the critical aspects of sample handling for direct nanoparticle analysis and the analytical challenges faced when using A4F-ICP-MS techniques to provide size and compositional data. Sample dilution, changes in pH or ionic strength had significant impact on nanoparticle properties such as changes in size distribution or chemical transformation, e.g. dissolution. It was recommended that a fast screening test such as dynamic light scattering should be initially employed to test the extent of such transformations prior to analysis for size-classified, chemical analysis using single particle ICP-MS or A4F-ICP-MS. The charge on nanoparticles could also influence the separation efficiency and recovery rate. Shifts in retention times in A4F resulting from the charge interactions between particles and the membrane materials could be more pronounced for particles <10 nm diameter. The authors concluded that such interactions should be studied in more detail. An ICP-AES method38 was used to investigate the efficiency of coating metal nanoparticles with inert silica to reduce their biotoxicity. An HNO3–HF acid digestion was used to derive a total elemental content whilst a less aggressive aqua regia leach procedure dissolved metallic particles not encapsulated in the silica coating. The coating of welding fume particles with silica derived from the tetramethylsilane precursor added to the shield weld gas had an efficiency of between 14 and 39%. It was suggested that this approach could be used for other coating efficiency studies.Re-examination of established dissolution procedures has its merits. A hybrid method,39 involving both acid digestion and slurry nebulisation, has been developed for the determination of crustal (Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Si) and trace (Ba, Cu, K, Mn, Na, Sr, Ti and Zn) elements in airborne particulate matter. Initially, a warm HNO3–H2O2 mixture was used to dissolve the soluble fraction and the sampling filter substrate and the remaining insoluble fraction homogenised. The insoluble fraction was then analysed by slurry nebulisation ICP-AES. The analytical precision for bulk crustal elements were 3.3–6.8 % and for trace elements 3.5–9.1%. The LODs (3σ of the signal derived from the analysis of blank filters) ranged from 1 ng m−3 (Sr) to 71 ng m−3 (Ca). Results were comparable with those obtained using a high-performance closed-vessel microwave-assisted digestion procedure.Valuable paleoclimatic information can be derived from the analysis of ice cores. Typically, ICP-MS analyses are performed on melted and acidified ice core samples, which contain particulate matter usually enriched in trace elements. Consequently, it is important to ascertain the effect of acidification on such particles and to assess, if any, the contribution of dust leaching to the trace element budget of ice cores. A systematic study40 over several weeks of the leaching characteristics in dilute HNO3 of powdered rock standards from various lithologies demonstrated that acidification of ice core samples that contain mineral dust results in time- and mineral-dependent leaching of trace elements. Ideally, core samples would require full digestion or filtering to eliminate error induced by partial leaching of trapped dust particles. The authors acknowledged that this would however be time-consuming and impractical for large numbers of samples, so recommended acidifying samples for as long as is practical in order to reach a maximum leachable concentration (equilibrium).1.5 Instrumental analysis1.5.1 Atomic absorption and atomic fluorescence spectrometry. Two papers advocated the use of HR-CS-ETAAS for the direct solid sample analysis of trace elements in airborne particulate matter collected on glass fiber filter media. The filter media and the collected particles could be ground ready for direct analysis. The reported41 characteristic mass Mo for Hg was 22 pg when measured at the main absorption line of 253.652 nm. The LOD (3σ of the signal derived from ten atomisations of a ground blank filter) was 40 ng g−1 equating to 0.12 ng m−3 in air for a sample air volume of 1440 m3. The measurement repeatability was better than 17% (n = 5). The LODs for all three elements (Cu, Mo and Sb) determined in particulate matter42 were ca. 40 ng m−3 for a sample air volume of 1440 m3. The measurement repeatabilities were 3–9% (n = 5). The results obtained on air samples were comparable with those obtained using either a microwave-assisted leach or an ultrasonic-assisted extraction with aqua regia. The authors suggested that this direct measurement offered considerable time savings as sample preparation time was reduced.Concerns about the health implications of As-containing species in airborne particles led researchers to undertake speciation analysis using HPLC-HG-AFS. Whereas AsV was the dominant species in particulate samples collected around a nearby copper smelter,43 the more toxic AsIII species was nevertheless found at significant concentrations and represented 5–10% of the total As content. The AsIII species tended to concentrate preferentially in the finer PM2.5 fraction, thus posing a potentially enhanced inhalation risk to the local population. The dominant species in TSP samples of Beijing air44 was AsV, accounting for 81–99% of the extractable As.1.5.2 Emission spectroscopy. Hahn and co-workers,45 reviewed (31 references) the use of LIBS for analysis of micro and nanoparticles and concluded that although the technique offered immense potential for near-real-time multi-elemetal analysis of aerosol samples, several challenges remained, including poor measurement sensitivity. In contrast to the use of preconcentration techniques such as filter sampling or aerosol focusing systems used previously, they advocated a new approach combining an electrostatic charging and collection step for sampling and preconcentration of aerosol nanoparticles onto a micro-needle. These sample spots were then analysed using LIBS. A more detailed report46 of this approach using test aerosols under laboratory conditions gave mass LODs (3σ) of 0.018–5 ng for Cd, Cr, Cu, Mn, Na and Ti. These equated to LODs of 18–670 ng m−3 for a nominal 7.5 L air sample (1.5 L min−1 for 5 minutes). Instrumental precisions of better than 10% were achievable with >20 ng mass loadings of each element. These LODs were superior to those obtained in previous LIBS-based studies and the system is amenable to the miniaturisation essential for field-portable instrumentation. For readers who wish to learn more about LIBS, a comprehensive overview of the technique was published in two parts. The first47 focused on the fundamental and diagnostics aspects (280 references) and the second48 (719 references) discussed the vast panorama of practical applications of the technique.Whilst using the same sample sampling and preconcentration system, these same authors49 also experimented with a spark-based excitation source system in place of LIBS. The LODs (3σ) were in the range 0.011–0.8 ng for the elements studied (Cr, Na, Pb and Ti). These figures equated to LODs of 0.44–70 ng m−3 for a nominal 25 L air sample (5 L min−1 for 5 minutes). Under the test conditions employed, the instrumental precisions were in the range 2–15%. The authors concluded that these figures of merit were superior to those reported with other micro-plasma based systems and that the simplicity and robustness of a spark-based system were appealing for implementation in any future portable system.1.5.3 Mass spectrometry. 1.5.3.1 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. As ICP-MS is commonly employed for the routine determination of trace levels of metals captured on air filter samples, this section focuses on the use of ICP-MS as a single particle detector or as part of hyphenated systems for isotopic and speciation analysis.Chinese researchers, in a continuation of work reviewed here last year, used50 on-line ICP-MS in the determination of particles in aerosol samples. In particular they were interested in determining whether Pu-containing particles can penetrate HEPA filter systems employed in nuclear safety systems. Previously, in filter breakthrough studies they used ICP-MS in an off-line mode to determine whether 239Pu-containing particles could penetrate such filters. The proposed new approach used an evacuated cylinder to collect air samples downstream from a challenged HEPA filter. The cylinder was subsequently coupled to a plasma torch for analysis. Calibration was achieved using a 242Pu calibrant solution presented to the plasma as dried particles using a high efficiency desolvating nebuliser. Injection of air samples into the plasma however, be they from the sample collection cylinder or the calibration system, was limited to a 15 mL min−1 flow rate to minimise the reduction in instrument sensitivities and to maintain a stable plasma. Single collector- and MC-HR-ICP-MS systems gave 242Pu LODs of 5.0 × 10−3 and 5.5 × 10−4 Bq m−3, respectively. The 242Pu concentrations in air downwind of HEPA filters were ca. 10−2 Bq m−3 indicating that some Pu-containing nanoparticles indeed penetrated the tested filters. These particles had not previously been detectable using the off-line approach. Future development work will focus on the optimisation of an ambient-aerosol-concentration enrichment device for coupling to ICP-MS to provide a more sensitive particle detection system. Injection of single particles into argon plasmas is a growing topic of both theoretical and practical interest. Readers therefore may be interested in a paper by Olesik and Gray51 entitled “consideration for measurement of individual nanoparticles or microparticles by ICP-MS: determination of the number of particles and the analyte mass of each particle” and a paper by Gunther and co-workers52 entitled “visualisation, velocimetry and mass spectrometric analysis of engineered and laser produced particles passing through inductively coupled plasma sources”.The use of hyphenated ICP-MS for isotopic or speciation measurements included the coupling of GC to MC-ICP-MS for the determination of methyl bromide, an important natural bromine contributor to stratospheric ozone depletion, in air samples.53 The 81Br–79Br ratios were measured with a short-term precision of 0.1‰ (1σ, n = 3) and a long-term precision of better than 0.4‰ (1σ, n = 36, over 3 months) for sample masses in excess of 40 ng. This new system was three orders of magnitude more sensitive than previously reported IRMS approaches. It was intended to use this new method to undertake source apportionment studies to investigate the transport and fate of methyl bromide in the atmosphere. The impact of deliquescence and pH on Cr speciation in ambient air particulate matter samples collected on filters was studied using HPLC-ICP-MS.54 At basic pH values, deliquescence influenced the loss of CrVI whereas precipitation controlled the CrIII solution chemistry. Under highly acidic atmospheric conditions, pH became very important for the interconversion of CrVI and CrIII species but the effects of deliquescence were minimal. It was suggested that control of humidity to avoid deliquescence should be a design criterion for CrVI sampling systems of the future.Iron is an element of interest due to its role in the oceanic sequestration and regulation of atmospheric CO2. Its behaviour in the environment is strongly dependent upon its oxidation states given that FeII is more soluble than FeIII and therefore more readily available for phytoplankton update and growth. To look to the future, environmental scientists, often look to the past. A novel analytical method for the speciation of Fe in ice core samples55 used FIA-CRC-ICP-MS and a chelating resin, Ni-NTA Superflow, which retains FeIII but not FeII at pH 2. The eluted FeII was oxidised to FeIII using H2O2 and the FeII concentration calculated as the difference between the two measurements. Preliminary results indicated that concentrations of FeII were elevated during glacial periods compared to levels found in interglacial periods. This suggested that more FeII was available for phytoplankton growth during the last Glacial Maximum than would have been expected for measurements previously undertaken using proxies such as deposited total Fe or dust masses.1.5.3.2 Other mass spectrometry techniques. Useful reviews of mass spectrometric techniques applied to the analysis of gas and particle samples covered: current instrumentation for aerosol MS56 (53 references); the status of ambient MS57,58 (185 and 31 references, respectively); developments since 2006 in ion mobility spectrometry59 (343 references) and SIMS for the interrogation of nano-scaled objects and particles60 (233 references).A novel application for the measurement of atmospheric trace gases in real-time used a TOF aerosol mass spectrometer.61 Such systems have historically been used for the measurement of particles rather than gases because the aerodynamic particle focus inlet typically used drastically reduces sensitivities for gaseous species. Artificially generated particles were injected into the sampled gas stream in order to trap gaseous molecules onto the particles for subsequent analysis. Trace levels of atmospheric molecular I2 were measured by using α-cyclodextrin particles as selective sampling probes to transfer I2 into the aTOF-MS instrument. Detection limits were in the sub–ppb range. Work on a new particle trap laser desorption mass spectrometer62 for the on-line measurement of aerosol composition focused on the development and performance testing of the particle trap because particle bounce on collection targets employed in conventional mass spectrometers causes uncertainties in quantitative measurements. This new advanced particle trap consisted of a multi-layer mesh that allowed particles to lose their KE prior to being trapped in the mesh. Quantitative trapping of test KNO3 particles was achievable in the laboratory but further system optimisation was required for the reliable measurement of ambient aerosols in the field. A new instrument,63 the soot particle aerosol mass spectrometer, for characterising and quantifying ambient refractory black carbon particles combined a commercially available HR-aTOF-MS instrument and the single particle soot photometer. The sensitivity was better than 140 carbon ions per pg of refractory black carbon, equating to a LOD (3σ) of <100 ng m−3.The earth's atmosphere is used as a standard reference gas for mass spectrometric determinations of Ar isotopes in geochronological studies. New high precision measurements of Ar isotope ratios in five different sources of air were made using a high sensitivity MC noble gas mass spectrometer.64 The determined isotope ratios, corrected only for backgrounds, resided on an inverse square-root mass law fractionation line that passed through the air value proposed by another research group but different from other reported compositions. It was suggested that revised values should be employed in future. A new reference gas was developed for Ar isotopic measurements using a MC noble gas MS instrument.65 Gases derived from neutron-irradiated sanidine were mixed with an enriched 38Ar spike to produce a gas with known proportions of 38Ar/39Ar/40Ar. By combining atmospheric Ar with these synthetic gases in different proportions, isotopic ratio correction factors were measured over a wide span of ratios.1.5.4 X-ray spectrometry. Characterisation of airborne particulate matter using X-ray techniques continues to be a fertile area for research. In an evaluation of EDXRF for the determination of trace elements on PM10 loaded filters,66 filter samples were collected from seven European locations with airborne concentrations ranging from low (background) to high (industrial sites). Samples were collected on commonly used filters such as pallflex™ (Teflon coated glass fibre), Teflon and quartz filters to study any potential measurement artifacts due to the filter substrates. Two calibration approaches were compared: an external calibration approach using commonly employed Micromatter™ standards and a standardless calibration strategy using a FP approach. Teflon filters were generally preferable for XRF analysis as impurity levels were lower and particles sat on the filter surface rather than in the filter thus minimising depth effects. The standardless calibration approach was better than the external calibration approach. Particular attention was paid to the four elements regulated by the European air quality directives. Standardless EDXRF analysis was suitable for measurement of Pb in PM10. Whereas the LOD was sufficient to measure Ni, the measurement uncertainty did not meet the data quality objective set out in the air quality directive. The method was unsuitable for the determination of As and Cd because the LODs were higher than the quality directive's limit values if typical sampling volumes of 25–50 m3 were used. Advantages of a new TXRF instrument67 for the direct determination of airborne particulate matter included: the ability to determine the nature of the sample using X-ray standing wave in conjunction with TXRF; the selection of the total reflection angle; and the ability to switch the X-ray source in order that both light and heavy elements could be measured with increased accuracy.Solid-state speciation analysis of airborne particles using XAS is a powerful tool and is increasingly being used to increase our knowledge of the origins, transformations and fate of particles in the atmosphere to meet growing concerns about the effect of inhalation of such particles and human health. In order to characterise Mn speciation68 in airborne particulate matter for the first time, PM samples were collected from five locations across the USA. The fine fraction (PM2.5) was analysed for total Mn concentration using ICP-MS and for oxidation state and species by XAS. Both MnII acetate and MnII oxide were present in all samples collected. Regional variations in Mn compositions indicated variation in sources and localised chemical atmospheric transformations. Because soluble Fe in atmospheric particles has been identified as a public health concern through its ability to participate in chemical reactions that can generate reactive oxygen species, XAS was used to characterise Fe in both urban and rural particles.69 Both FeII and FeIII were present in single particles, with the FeII content ranging between 5 and 35% (mean ca. 25%). The use of μ-XRF indicated that a majority (74%) of Fe-containing particles were best characterised as Al-substituted Fe-oxides with a Fe–Al molar ratio of 4.9. The next abundant group of particles (12%) were Fe-aluminosilicates with a Si–Al molar ratio of 1.4. The dominant V species70 emitted in the exhaust from a diesel vehicle equipped with a prototype V-based selective catalytic reductor was V2O5.The determination of CrVIin ambient particulate matter remains a challenge because of Cr species interconversion. An air quality guideline value of 0.2 ng CrVI m−3 in PM10 has been proposed in Europe thereby presenting a challenge to measurement scientists. Filters spiked with CrVI and CrIII were analysed by XAS to study the potential for species interconversion.71 Two 0.12 M NaHCO3 impregnated ashless cellulose filters were spiked with a CrIII solution and analysed directly after spiking. One filter was then mounted in a sampler and had ambient air drawn through it for 16 hours. The second filter was kept for the 16 hours under argon in a dessicator. Both filters were then reanalysed. No oxidation to CrVI was observed. When the experiment was repeated using CrVI instead of CrIII, only minimal reduction to CrIII occurred. However, prolonged exposure to X-rays in repeated analysis did result in reduction to CrIII, a phenomenon also historically noted in this reviewer's laboratory when exposing CrVI-containing welding fume filter samples to prolonged X-rays in a WDXRF instrument. In contrast, an average CrVI spike reduction of 25% occurred in samples collected from around a steel plant and analysed using the well-established alkaline extraction procedure and spectrophotometric detection. The results demonstrated the inherent difficulties in replicating real-world conditions. Other matrix components in sampled air, such as Fe, contribute to Cr conversion processes during sampling or indeed the extraction step. In summary these studies demonstrated that solid-state techniques such as XAS are essential in elucidating species interconversion. Readers are directed to our companion Update for further information on developments and applications in X-ray spectrometry.51.5.5 Combustion—and spectrometric-based techniques. It is recognized that the carbonaceous content of anthropogenic aerosols can impact greatly upon both climate and human health and there is much ongoing work in measuring the carbon content in airborne particles. Alas a single definition does not exist to describe this carbonaceous content. One approach is to define the black carbon component as an optical (measurement) property commonly used to denote the extent of light-absorption of an aerosol sample. It is however not a direct measure of the carbon content. In many urban environments, black carbon, produced by incomplete combustion of fuels, often dominates particulate light absorption. An alternative approach is to define the EC component, which also is an operationally (measurement) defined concept representing thermally refractory carbon with a graphitic structure. This is measured by combustion to CO2, which can be subsequently quantified. Emissions from diesel-powered engines are a dominant source of elemental carbon in urban environments. In summary, black and elemental carbon are not measures of the same properties of carbonaceous particulate matter but are often well correlated especially in urban environments. Many measurement difficulties and knowledge gaps remain however as indicated by work reported in the following paragraph and in Sections 1.3 (Reference materials) and 1.6 (Data analysis and quality).Several studies have investigated differences in combustion conditions cited in various standardised operating protocols and differences in the two commonly used instrument designs (the Sunset analyser and the DRI analyser) to explain variations in elemental carbon measurements by the thermal-optical approach. In fact, despite differences in their designs, the two instruments produced similar results when following the same analysis (combustion) protocol.72 Alas, as found previously, different analysis protocols produced different EC values on split filters samples. These differences were sample matrix dependent. An investigation of three different analytical protocols for measuring elemental carbon:organic carbon ratios in various aerosol samples concluded73 that not one protocol can be considered applicable for all types of carbonaceous aerosols. It was recommended74 that, in order to minimise the influence of dust particles on the quantitative measurement of elemental carbon:organic carbon ratios in carbonaceous particles trapped in ice and snow samples, ultrasonication of melted samples should be performed to disaggregate dust-carbon particles. Dust particles should then be allowed to settle prior to filtering the supernatant through an analytical filter subsequently taken for combustion. Three combustion-based protocols (EUSAAR_2 and RT QUARTZ-700 and 840 protocols) were considered75 for the determination of the naturally occurring CC content in aerosols in the presence of organic and elemental carbon through the careful optimisation of heating rates. All protocols could be used but it was suggested that CC values obtained using the RT-QUARTZ protocols should be checked using split samples using an alternative analytical approach. One such approach is to initially remove the CC from filters via acidification, measurement of the resultant liberated CO2, prior to subsequent organic:elemental carbon analysis.Worker exposure to silica can lead to silicosis, a potentially fatal lung disease. Two new portable IR instruments were evaluated76 for the quantification of silica collected on filters through use of test filters loaded with either silica or silica-bearing coal dust (10–200 μg per filter). A correction for the presence of kaolin, an interferent within the IR spectrum and present in certain mine air dusts, was required. Measurements were also made on the same filters using an established laboratory based FTIR procedure. The correlations between results for one of the portable FTIR instruments and those for the laboratory FTIR instrument were linear with slopes of 0.90–0.97. The correlation between results obtained on the second portable instrument, a variable filter array spectrometer, and those obtained with the laboratory instrument were not so well correlated, due mainly to the poorer wavelength resolution of the portable system. These new instruments appear to hold promise for the analysis in the field of end-of-shift samples. This reviewer looks forward to seeing field trials in real workplace settings.1.6 Data analysis and qualityAlthough in situ analysis can provide air quality data at high temporal resolution in a timely fashion, a major challenge lies in dealing with the magnitude of data thus generated. It is encouraging that data reduction techniques being developed preserve the integrity of the original data set. An advantage in making black carbon measurements is that they can be performed in near real-time with portable instrumentation such as the commercially available and widely used aethalometer™ instrument. However, negative values which can occur when measuring low airborne carbonaceous concentrations at high temporal resolution, need to be handled. An optimised noise-reduction averaging algorithm77 reduced the occurrence of such negative values to virtually zero while preserving the significant dynamic trends in the time series. Interpretation of the plethora of data derived from the measurement of single-particle ambient aerosols using aTOF-MS can be immensely labour intensive due to the high cyclic rate of such instruments. Several data analysis methods78 were used to cluster and scale single particle data, which in turn were used to evaluate data derived from other monitoring instrumentation. Such procedures provided a valuable insight into the origins and fate of particles sampled in the atmosphere above the Great Lakes region of North America.A research consortium79 explored the variations between black carbon and elemental carbon measurements undertaken at a number of geographical locations. Good correlations were obtained if a fixed mass absorption coefficient of 9.7 m2 g−1 was used in the optical measurement equation for black carbon determinations. The presence of black carbon derived from sources such as wood smoke particles, which have lower light absorptivity than traffic generated particles, resulted in poorer correlations. Continuity in environmental monitoring datasets is important. Heal and Quincey,80 in a continuation of previous work,81,82 developed a revised equation to describe the relationship between current black carbon data and black smoke data, the historical measure of ambient particle darkness.Researchers at DRI,83 drawing upon many years of experience in this measurement field, documented quality assurance and quality control protocols that should be implemented to ensure consistency of organic and elemental carbon determinations by the thermal–optical technique. They recommended filter selection and handling procedures as well as methods to ensure that instruments operate satisfactorily. Participation in laboratory accreditation programmes and other external system audits and, if possible, in suitable interlaboratory comparisons was also recommended. Significant advances in the measurement of trace atmospheric Hg species have been made in the last 10 or so years yet limited QC protocols have been published in the literature. A comparison of the data ratification protocols84 employed by two established atmospheric Hg monitoring networks, the Environment Canada monitoring network and the National Atmospheric Deposition Network, concluded that the two protocols produced comparable data and that either of the two protocols could be used as a QC template for other atmospheric Hg monitoring networks.Deriving measurement uncertainty budgets is not for the faint-hearted chemist so it is most welcome to see worked examples published especially in the field of air analysis where such publications are relatively scarce compared to worked examples in other analytical measurement arenas. Coincidentally three papers described approaches used in calculating MU budgets associated with the sampling and measurement of water-soluble ionic species collected on filter samples and subsequently analysed by IC techniques. In one paper, a bottom–up approach examined variables associated with both sampling and analytical steps.85 Using procedures advocated in ISO GUM, the relative expanded uncertainty was calculated to be ca. 20% for both the cationic (K+ and Li+) and anionic species (NO32− and SO42−) studied. The biggest factor contributing to the MU was determined to be the IC instrumental repeatability. In another paper, an expanded uncertainty of 15–30% was obtained for the anionic species Cl−, NO32− and SO42− when only the analytical steps were considered.86 However in the third paper,87 the expanded uncertainty for the measurement step for the anionic species (Cl−, NO32−, PO43− and SO42−) was only 3.7–6.4%. In summary, and to repeat, undertaking MU exercises is not facile and such papers are most informative, particularly so if the mode of MU calculation is fully described.2 Water analysis2.1 Sample preparationThe preservation of mercury in solution is a problem. For waters, the problem has largely been resolved by the collection of the sample in a glass or a fluorinated polymer container, with the addition of oxidising agents such as bromine chloride, potassium dichromate or gold nitrate. These solutions, however, are far from ideal for multi-elemental ICP-MS analysis of waters on a routine basis, when Hg is included in a suite of elements to be analysed. Louie et al.88 demonstrated that the addition of 0.01% (v/v) HCl to a sample already stabilised with 1–2% (v/v) HNO3 was enough to stabilise Hg in solution at sub μg L−1 concentrations for up to 50 days even in HDPE sample bottles. There was minimal addition to the chloride polyatomic related blank.2.2 Sample preconcentration and extractionThe need for more selective preconcentration of analytes and matrix elimination to reach ever more stringent environmental control levels is still a great driving force in water analysis. This, coupled with the need for methods for use with less sensitive instrumentation, has resulted in a bewildering array of methods that are often more complicated than those reported previously. Methods where the analyst has to spend a day synthesising chelating agents and functionalising solid supports for them before carrying out an analysis are impractical in the routine laboratory. The most notable methods for the analysis of waters in this Update period are summarised in Tables 1–3.
Table 1 Preconcentration methods using solid phase extraction for the analysis of water

AnalytesMatrixSubstrate coating or modifying agentColumn substrateDetectorNotesCRMs (or other validation)Ref.REEsSeawater EDTA and iminodiacetic acid resinICP-MSExternal (2σ) precision <23%, LODs: Tb 1 pg L−1 to La 36 pg L−1Comparison with ID-ICP-MS results131AgI, CdII, CoIII, CrIII, CuII, FeIII, MnII, NiII, PbII and ZnIIWater HyperSep™ SCX strong cation exchange resinICP-AESLODs ranging from 0.05–0.2 μg L−1, sampling frequency 24 samples h−1 132Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and ZnSeawater Nobias-chelate PA1 resinSF-ICP-MSLODs: Mn 0.002 to Ni 0.085 nmol kg−1, and Co 0.13 to Cd 0.86 pmol kg−1Laboratory intercomparison of a surface and deep-water sample133Cd, Co, Cr, Mn, Ni, Pb, ZnSeawater and water1,5-Bis (2-pyridyl)-3-sulphophenyl methylene thiocarbonohydrazide resinControlled pore glassICP-MSPreconcentration factors of between 2.2 and 6.8, LODs: Co 0.002 μg L−1 to Zn 0.260 μg L−1NRCC SLEW 3 (estuarine water), LGC 6016 (estuarine water) and NRCC CASS-5 (near shore seawater), NRCC SLRS-5 (river water) and NWRI TMDA-54.4 (fortified lake water)134CuII, FeIII, and PbIIWaterPhenyl-iminodiacetic acidMWCNTICP-OESPreconcentration factors of up to 100, LODs Cu 0.15 to Fe 0.26 ng mL−1 135AgIWaste waterComplex with 2-mercaptobenzothiazoleMWCNTFAASPreconcentration factor of 160, LOD of 0.21 μg L−1 136PbWaterComplex with dithizoneGrapheneFAASLOD of 0.61 μg L−1, at 20 μg L−1 an RSD of 3.56% (n = 10) was foundSpike recovery 95–100%137CrIIIWaterComplex with 8-hydroxyquinolineGrapheneFAASPreconcentration factor of 125, LOD of 0.5 μg L−1, 4.3% RSD n = 10 at a concentration of 20.0 μg L−1 138CrIII, CuII, PbII and ZnIIWaterDithizoneModified silica coated Fe2O3 nanoparticlesICP-AESLODs ranged from 8 ng L−1 for ZnII to 62 ng L−1 for PbIIIERM GSBZ 50009-88 (environmental water)139GeIVWater TiO2 nano colloidETAASLOD 43 ng L−1, RSD 3.6% (n = 6) at a concentration of 0.4 μg L−1Comparison with ICP-MS results140AuIII, PdII, PtII and PtIVWaterL-CysteineSilica gelICP-AESLODs Au 0.006 to Pd 0.02 μg L−1, RSD 5–9 % at 0.1 μg L−1 141BiIII, CdII, CuII, GaIII, NiII and PbIISeawaterCetyltrimethylammonium chlorideSilica particles floated with sodium dodecyl sulfateICP-MSLODs Ga 0.00007 μg L−1 to Ni 0.004 μg L−1NRCC CASS-4 (nearshore seawater) and NRCC NASS-5 (seawater)142AsVWater Ion imprinted 1-vinylimidazole, 4-vinylpyridine and styrene polymerICP-MSLOD 0.025 μg L−1, RSD 1.9% at 0.5 μg L−1 (n = 3). 143Hg2+ and MeHgOxic water3-MercaptopropylSilica gelICP-MSLODs MeHg 0.1 ng L−1 and Hg2+ 0.7 ng L−1 144Cd and PbWater2-(6-Methyl-2-benzothiazolylazo)-orcinolPolyurethaneFAASPreconcentration factors Cd 38.6 and Pb 30.0, LODs Cd 0.08 μg L−1 and Pb 0.51 μg L−1, RSDs of <6.34% at nominal 5 μg L−1 (n = 7)NIST SRM 1643d (trace elements in natural water)145
Table 2 Preconcentration methods using liquid phase extraction for the analysis of water

AnalytesMatrixMethodReagentsDetectorNotesCRMs (or other validation approach)Ref.NiSeawater and waterLLEDDTC complex, MIBKMIP-MSLOD 1.3 ng L−1, preconcentration factor 50, RSD < 4%NRCC NASS-5 (seawater), NRCC SLRS-3 (river water) and NRCC SLRS-4 (river water)146PbWaterCPEDithizone, Triton X-114®FAASPreconcentration factor 39, LOD 4.3 μg L−1NRCCRM GBW(E) 080393 (simulated water)147BiWaterCPEDithizone, Triton X-100®FAASPreconcentration factor 43, LOD 4.0 μg L−1NRCCRM GBW(E) 080135 (water)148SbIII, SbtotalWaterLPMEDithiocarbamate complex, xyleneETAASPreconcentration factor 400, LOD of 2 μg L−1NRCC SLRS-5 (river water)149Bi3+WaterDLLME2-(5-Bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-(diethyl amino) phenol, dichlorobenzeneFAASLOD 3.0 ng mL−1 RSD 1.5% (n = 7) at a concentration of 0.4 μg L−1 150UVISeawater, ground waterDLLMEComplex with APDC in the presence of cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, chloroformICP-AES or FI-ICP-MSPreconcentration factors of 11 (ICP-AES) and 25 (FI-ICP-MS), LODs of 2.0 μg L−1 (ICP-AES) and 30 ng L−1 (ICP-MS)Spike recovery and cross validation with laser fluorimetry151CrVI and CrtotalWaterDLLMEAPDC complexes, 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imideETAASPreconcentration factor 300, LOD of 2 ng L−1, RSD of 8% (n = 10) at a concentration of 0.05 μg L−1Spike recoveries are between 95 and –104%152
Table 3 Alternate preconcentration methods for the analysis of water

AnalytesMatrixMethodReagentsDetectorNotesCRMs (or other validation)Ref.Co, Cr Mn, Y and REESeawaterIn situ coprecipitationMg(OH)2 precipitate after addition of 20–22% m/v NH4OHSF-ICP-MSLODs 1.03 (Cr) to 0.001 ng kg−1 (Lu), RSD < 11% (n = 20)NRCC NASS-5 (seawater) and CASS-4 (nearshore seawater)153Cr, Fe, Mn, Pb and ZnSeawaterIn situ coprecipitationMg(OH)2 precipitate after addition NH4OHICP-MS with DRCLODs from Pb 0.002 to Zn 0.19 nM, RSD < 16% (n = 6) for all elementsNRCC NASS-5 (seawater) and NRCC CASS-4 (nearshore seawater)154MeHgSeawaterPurge and trapEthylating agentGC-cold vapour-AFSLOD 2 fM for a 2 L sample 155In a critical review (63 references) of on-line SPE for ICP-based techniques, Das et al.89 pointed out that its success was due to a number of factors: simplicity of operation, high preconcentration factors, rapid phase separation, reduced extraction time and ease of automation. They concluded that many reports focus on only one or a few elements and therefore do not make full use of the multi-elemental capabilities of modern ICP instrumentation. In addition, there was a lack of sorbents for the selective extraction of all the REEs.2.3 SpeciationThe occurrence of antimony species containing sulfur in geothermal waters has been proven using AEC-ICP-MS and XAS.90 Two thioantimony species detected by AEC-ICP-MS in synthetic antimonite–sulfide oxic solutions were assigned as tri and tetrathioantimonate based on their S:Sb ratios and XAS spectra. As XAS confirmed, under anoxic conditions antimonite formed trithioantimonite in the presence of a 10-fold excess of sulfide but under oxic conditions this rapidly transformed into tetrathioantimonate. In an automated, low-pressure, dual-column FI-ICP-MS method91 for the determination of SbIII and SbV in aqueous samples (pH 8.4), first SbIII was trapped on a controlled pore glass functionalised with the chelating resin [1,5-bis(2-pyridyl)-3-sulfophenyl methylene]thiocarbonohydrazide, and then SbV was collected on the anion-exchanger Amberlite™ IRA-910. The analytes were eluted sequentially with 0.04% m/v thiourea in 5% v/v HNO3. The method LODs were 0.013 μg L−1 for SbIII and 0.021 μg L−1 for SbV. Accuracy was checked against two CRMs NRCC CRM SLRS-5 (river water) and NWRI TMDA-54.4 (fortified lake water).A review92 (145 references) of arsenic speciation in environmental samples using HG-ETAAS as the detection technique noted that species pre-reduction with L-cysteine was more advantageous than the use of KI. The preferred chromatographic technique was ion pair RP chromatography, but a combination of anion and cation-exchange chromatography appeared to be promising. The speciation of chromium was considered in a 197 reference review.93 In a kinetic study using IC-ICP-MS94 on the reduction of CrVI in natural water, spiking of CRM NRCC SLRS-2 (river water) with 20 μL−1 CrVI showed that reduction of this species followed a pseudo first order reaction with a rate constant of 2.119 × 10−4 s−1 at pH 1.3 and 20 °C. The reduction rate increased with decreasing pH and increasing temperature, confirming why it is common practice to determine CrVI under more alkaline conditions. In a multiple-column FI-ICP-MS method95 for the determination of CrIII and CrVI in natural waters, adjusted to pH 5.5, CrVI was completely retained on the first two columns containing Amberlite™ IRA 910, and CrIII was retained on a third column containing a silica gel chelating resin functionalised with 1-(di-2-pyridyl) methylene thiocarbonohydrazide. Both species were eluted with 2% v/v HNO3. The LODs were 0.03 μg L−1 for CrIII and 0.009 μg L−1 for CrVI.A review (242 references)96 on iodine speciation in environmental, biological and nutritional samples covered sample pretreatment and analytical techniques for the determination of total I, as well as the use of various detection techniques for speciation analysis. A multimode size-exclusion HPLC column (AsahiPak GS-220) was used with a mobile phase of 50 mM malonic acid, and 37 mM TMAH (pH 6.9) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min−1 to separate iodate and iodide.97 The SF-ICP-MS LODs were 20 ng L−1 for iodate and 30 ng L−1 for iodide measured in 1 + 9 diluted seawater. Vertical profiles of total iodine, iodate, iodide, total inorganic iodine (I + IO3−) and dissolved organic iodine (total iodine − total inorganic iodine) were reported for Pacific Ocean water.The FI-ICP-MS determination of iron species in Antarctic ice55 involved retention of Fe3+ on a Ni-NTA Superflow chelating resin at pH 2, and oxidation of the remaining Fe with H2O2 to give the Fe2+ concentration by difference. The LOD of 0.01 ng g−1 for both species was sufficient to determine the species in ice from glacial and interglacial periods. Preliminary results showed that more Fe2+ was available during glacial periods, more so than indicated from proxy measurements, such as of dust mass or total Fe.In a fast method98for the trace speciation analysis of mercury in seawater by HPLC-ICP-MS, a short C-18 analytical column was used and the HPLC sample loop was replaced with an IonPac® CG5A cation-exchange guard column. The large capacity of the preconcentration column gave an enrichment factor of 1250 for a 30 mL sample, resulting in very low LODs of 0.042 ng L−1 for Hg2+, 0.016 ng L−1 for MeHg+ and 0.008 ng L−1 for EtHg+.Since the Update on elemental speciation4 does not specifically deal with operationally defined speciation, such protocols for water analysis are included here. The total, labile and metal-humic acid complexes of Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in freshwater were determined using a FI system coupled with ICP-MS.99 The labile fraction was trapped on a microcolumn packed with unfunctionalised poly(methyl methacrylate). To break down the humic acid–metal complexes, a photocatalyst-assisted reactor, consisting of a pyrex glass tube coated with a TiO2 film together with a UV-A lamp with a maximum emission at 365 nm, was placed in-line before the microcolumn. The total metal content was determined by ICP-MS. In some lake samples over 80% of the elemental concentration was in the humic acid complexes. A commercially available DGT device was used to monitor the labile fractions of Al, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn in both the river water and potable water produced in a water treatment plant.100 The amount of most elements adsorbed on the device did not increase after 24 h of deployment. The metals were subsequently desorbed for 24 h in 1 M HNO3 prior to detection by ICP-AES with a USN. The LOQs were 1.5 (Cd) to 28.3 μg L−1 (Zn).Development of elemental speciation protocols continues to attract attention. Up to 13 selenium species in flue gas desulfurisation waters from a coal fired power plant were separated on an IonPac® AS 16 column fitted with an AG 16 guard column.101 Using a suitable suppressor unit, a mobile phase of 100 mM NaOH allowed direct ICP-MS detection of the eluted species. The most frequently observed species were SeIV, SeVI and SeSO32−; SeCN− was also identified for the first time in such samples. An additional nine unidentified species were detected. Thallium species in water samples were separated by ion-exchange SPE followed by DLLME using ILs.102 The Tl3+ was retained on Dowex® anion-exchange resin as the tetrachlorothallate(III) anionic complex. The remaining Tl+ was complexed with I− and the IL CYPHOS® IL 101 was added as an ion pairing agent. Another IL, 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate dispersed in ethanol, was used as the extracting solvent. After centrifugation the aqueous phase was removed by pipette and the sedimented phase was dissolved in methanol and analysed for Tl+ by ETAAS. The Tl LOD was 3.3 ng L−1.Multi-elemental speciation remains difficult and limited to a few elements. An on-line anion exchange membrane separation system, coupled with ICP-MS, was used103 to determine both the total and reduced species of Cr and V; the concentrations of the oxidised species were calculated by difference. The accuracy of the method was tested against the CRMs IERM GSBZ-50029-94 (environmental water) and NRCCRM GBW 08608 (riverine water). The LODs were 0.02 μg L−1 (VIV) and 0.06 μg L−1 (CrIII) and precision (n = 10) <3.7% RSD for a 10 μg L−1 standard. The derivatisation agents sodium tetrapropylborate (NaBPr4) and sodium tetraphenylborate (NaBPh4), were compared104 for the determination of organolead and organomanganese compounds by GC-AES in seawater after SPME preconcentration. Propylation with sodium tetrapropylborate gave better results with LODs ranging from 0.04 ng L−1 for cyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl to 0.10 ng L−1 for trimethyllead compared to 0.1 to 24.5 ng L−1 for the same compounds after phenylation.2.4 Instrumental analysis2.4.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. The best results for the ETAAS determination of Mn in waters produced by petroleum exploitation were obtained105 by pyrolysis with a permanent modifier of Ir–W at 1000 °C and atomisation at 2300 °C. The LODs were 0.24 μg L−1 in purified water and 0.34 μg L−1 in medium salinity (23%) waters. In an investigation106 of suitable chemical modifiers for the ETAAS determination of V in natural waters matrix interferences were effectively eliminated using either ascorbic acid or ammonium nitrate. Accuracy was checked by analysing NIST SRM 1643e (trace elements in water) and spike recoveries from tap, mineral, riverine and seawaters. The LOD was 1.56 μg L−1. Spike recoveries varied between 98 and 105% and precision was always <5% RSD.Factorial experimental design was used to optimise the determination of Pb by HG-AAS with a quartz atom trap using an instrument equipped with a high resolution continuum source.107 The optimal reagent conditions were a carrier of 0.1 M HNO3 with 1.0% (m/v) NaBH4 and 1.0% (m/v) K3Fe(CN)6 for the production of plumbane gas. The method was validated by the analysis of the NIST SRM 1643d (trace elements in water) and results for real samples compared with ICP-MS measurements. The LOD was 0.13 μg L−1 and the analytical precision was 6.36% RSD for a 10 μg L−1 standard.2.4.2 Atomic emission and fluorescence spectrometry. Progress is being made in the development of field instruments capable of detecting trace elements in water. One such instrument, a liquid electrode plasma atomic emission spectrometer,108 could achieve LODs of 0.52 μg L−1 for Cd and 19.0 μg L−1 for Pb. Liquid–liquid microextraction techniques were compatible with the plasma cell and gave an enrichment factor of 100 prior to sample introduction109(in Japanese). Other low power instruments based on liquid film dielectric barrier discharge with AES110 or AFS111 detection were used for the determination of Cd, Cu, K, Na, and Zn (AES detection) or Hg (AFS). The LODs were 7 μg L−1 (Na) to 79 μg L−1 (Zn), and 0.02 μg L−1 for Hg. Trace levels of Hg were also detected using electrolyte cathode discharge with AES detection.112 The addition of acetic acid to the sample enhanced sensitivity by 500 times, resulting in a LOD of 2 ng mL−1.Depoi et al.113 have investigated hydride generation and micronebulisation/desolvation as potential ICP-AES sample introduction methods for the alcohol-surfactant rich phase obtained at the end of the CPE process. Pneumatic nebulisation was used as the reference method and the analytes investigated were As, Bi, Cd and Pb. For As, HG was the best approach resulting in a LOD of 0.055 μg L−1. For Bi, both HG and micronebulisation approaches generated similar LODs (0.057 and 0.063 μg L−1) as the surfactant phase had to be diluted to prevent foaming thus reducing the potential HG enrichment factor from 18 to 7. For Cd and Pb, pneumatic nebulisation gave the best results with LODs of 0.047 and 0.28 μg L−1,respectively. Although the micronebulisation approach was potentially more sensitive, it had poorer measurement repeatability.2.4.3 Vapour generation techniques. A novel on-line preconcentration chemical vapour generation method involved trapping Sc at pH 7 on a microcolumn filled with activated carbon.114 The analyte was eluted with 10% (v/v) HCl and merged with a 1.0 (m/v) NaBH4 solution to generate volatile Sc. With detection by ICP-AES, an LOD of 4.0 μg L−1 was achieved for a sample volume of 25 mL. The precision (n = 10) for a concentration of 100 μg L−1 was 4.0% RSD.In a multi-element method for the determination of As, Sb and Se in water samples, the need for compromise flow conditions was avoided115 by carrying out the vapour generation in reaction vessels connected to a fast sequential AAS instrument. The LODs for 10 mL samples were 0.05, 0.03 and 0.06 ng mL−1 for As, Sb and Se, respectively.Total Hg in Antarctic surface snow was determined116 in 147 samples taken along a transect, from sea level to nearly 4000 m altitude, during the International Trans Antarctic Scientific Expedition. Frozen snow samples were melted in the laboratory and stabilised with AuCl3 or BrCl. The Hg levels varied from <LOD (0.4 pg g−1) for coastal samples to 10 pg g−1 at the high altitude stations. The samples with higher results were often associated with higher uncertainties, which can be explained by the inhomogeneous distribution of particles in the snow. From this it is was assumed that a significant fraction of the Hg was particle bound, and would not have be oxidised by BrCl prior to cold vapour-AFS analysis and hence would have remained undetected. This could explain discrepancies between cold-vapour AFS and ICP-MS measurements given that particulate bound Hg could potentially be nebulised into a plasma.2.4.4 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. A portable TXRF instrument was modified117 with a diamond-like carbon-coated quartz glass sample holder for the determination of Cr in river water. Use of this target material, more hydrophobic than the traditional sample holder, resulted in less sample droplet dispersion, thereby allowing an absolute LOD of 28 pg of Cr to be achieved.The EDXRF determination of phosphate in surface waters involved118 suspended drop microextraction and measurement of the phosphomolybdenum blue complex using the Mo K-α line. An enrichment factor of 56.8 gave an LOD of 2.8 ng mL−1 for a 1.5 mL sample.In a multielement method combining DLLME and XRF,119 the analytes (Co, Fe, Ga, Pb, Se and Zn) were extracted as complexes with APDC in a 20–30 μL drop. This drop was subsequently dried onto a solid substrate (a membrane filter or Mylar foil) for analysis. The LODs achieved ranged from 1.6 (Co) to 4.1 (Pb) ng mL−1 for a 5 mL sample with a preconcentration factor of 250.An evaluation120 of three EDXRF systems for the determination of Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in aqueous samples, following preconcentration of 1 L samples on 47 mm diameter 3 M Empore chelating filter disks concluded, rather unsurprisingly, that high energy polarised beam EDXRF instrument gave the best LODs. Hand held or bench tops instruments were only suitable when the concentrations were above 20 μg L−1.2.4.5 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. One of the more interesting papers121 described the use of cryocell LA-ICP-MS for detecting Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Mn in sections from the North Greenland ice core project. Ice strips 50 mm long, 13 mm wide and 12 mm thick were cut from the ice core and the surface was subjected to limited mechanical cleaning. To complete decontamination, laser pre-cleaning of the surface was carried out three times using a spot size of 500 μm at a repetition rate of 30 Hz. The sample was then analysed using a spot size of 280 μm at a repetition rate of 20 Hz. The method offered a much higher temporal resolution than methods required cutting and melting of the core, and requires minimal manual sample decontamination. The method appeared promising but remains uncalibrated due to difficulties in producing homogeneous ice standards.A SF-ICP-MS procedure122 for the determination of total I in seawater involved dilution (1 + 99) with 0.5% (v/v) TMAH prior to analysis. The LOD of 0.23 ng mL−1 allowed the determination of I concentrations in coastal seawaters from 14 estuaries.A modified ICP-MS sample introduction system included123 an in-line ETV unit used simultaneously with pneumatic nebulisation. Under wet plasma conditions LODs were up to 65 times better than those for conventional nebulisation. For elements without major polyatomic interferences, the LODs for the new hybrid unit were similar to those reported for ETV-ICP-MS under dry plasma conditions. The advantage of this system was that the analyst could switch between sample introduction modes without extinguishing the plasma.Analysis of very small liquid samples (1 μL) was achieved124 by use of dried drop LA-ICP-MS. Methylene blue was added to the sample to make it visible and then the sample was dried on a PTFE filter. Using a 213 nm laser with a 110 μm spot size, As, Cd, Co, Cu, Li, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, Sb, Tl, V and Zn were quantified with LODs of 0.05 μg L−1 (Li) to 0.81 μg L−1 (Ni and Cu).Ultra-sensitive methods are required for the determination of Cd in natural waters if the maximum values allowed under European legislation (0.08 to 0.25 μg L−1) are to be monitored. In an ID-ICP-MS procedure, an enrichment factor of 10 was achieved125 by preconcentration of 50 g samples on a minicolumn pack with TiO2 nanoparticles. Procedural blanks were 5.3 ± 2.8 ng kg−1 with a combined uncertainty of 3–4% (k = 2 coverage factor) for a Cd content of 100 ng kg−1. Results for CRMs IRMM ERM-CA615 (groundwater) and IRMM BCR-713 (effluent wastewater) agreed with certified values within error.High resolution measurements of sulfur isotopes in sediment porewaters involved126 capture of the dissolved sulfide as solid Ag2S in DGT polyacrylamide gels and interrogation at a spatial resolution of 100 pm using LA-ICP-MS. The improved spatial resolution achieved could be essential for improving our understanding of S cycling in modern sediments. Analyses revealed microniches where the δ34S shifted by up to 20‰ compared to local background measurements.2.4.6 Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. The sensitivity of LIBS for the determination of B and Li in aqueous solutions was improved by use of a dual-pulse instrument.127 Sequential pulses from two Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers with a wavelength of 532 nm were employed. The first pulse generated a laser-induced water jet, and the second induced the plasma. The optimum time delay between the pulses was <3 μs for B and approximately 10 μs for Li. Under these conditions, the LODs were 0.8 mg L−1 for B and 0.8 μg L−1 for Li, two orders of magnitude better than currently reported literature values. The method was considered suitable for the analysis of boric acid and lithium hydroxide in coolant waters of pressurised water nuclear reactors where they are used as a neutron absorber and pH controller, respectively. Double-pulse LIBS has also been used to determine Au, Fe and Pb in aqueous solutions.128 In this procedure, the first pulse (266 nm) was used to generate a plasma at the surface of the liquid and the second pulse (1064 nm) reheated the plasma to enhance excitation. A 10-fold improvement in sensitivity compared to use of single pulse LIBS gave LODs of 13.5 (Au), 8.0 (Fe) and 6.0 (Pb) mg L−1.2.5 Data qualityAn interlaboratory comparison of methods for the analysis of seawater was carried out under the GEOTRACES sampling program. For the determination of total Hg there was substantial disagreement between the results from 12 laboratories, which was attributed to bottle cleanliness and the preservation procedures used.129 The sampling system and filtration medium used had little affect on the results. A recommended workflow for the shipboard processing of samples for the determination of elemental, dimethyl, monomethyl and total mercury was subsequently proposed. As part of the GEOTRACES project, a wider overview of method developments and laboratory intercalibrations for the determination of trace elements and their isotopes in seawater has been published.1303 Analysis of soils, plants and related materials3.1 Reference materialsIn a review (121 references) of the suitability of available CRMs for Hg speciation analysis, researchers from Barcelona156 concluded that there is still a paucity of materials covering an adequate range of certified values and matrix compositions.New reference materials for the analysis of tea included: NMIJ CRM 7505-a (tea leaves powder),157 developed alongside a proficiency test158 involving 41 laboratories; and NIST SRMs 3254 (green tea leaves), 3255 (green tea extract) and 3256 (green tea, containing solid dosage form).159 Zuliani et al.160 characterised a laboratory QC material for TBT and DBT in sewage sludge. Huang et al.161 assessed uncertainties when analysing different sized test portions (hundreds of mg down to tenths of ng) of a candidate stream sediment CRM, and dos Santos et al.162 carried out homogeneity and stability tests on a candidate laboratory RM of soy leaves. Unfortunately it was not stated when the latter materials might be commercially available.3.2 Sample preparation3.2.1 Sample dissolution and extraction. Several research groups compared sample digestion methods for particular applications, though some with rather predictable outcomes. For example, when USEPA Method 3050B (HNO3/H2O2 digestion) and ISO 14869-1:2001 (HNO3/HF/HClO4) were applied to sediments from Havana Bay,163 the mean average extraction efficiency for Co, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn using Method 3050B was 86% of the value obtained with total digestion. Another study164 showed that Method 3050B was less efficient than ashing followed by treatment with HCl/HNO3/HF/HClO4 in releasing elements such as Li and Ti from moss. More interesting was a comparison between Method 3050B and ISO 11466-3:1995 (aqua regia digestion) for the extraction of Cu, Ni and Pb from sediment samples.165 Similar amounts of Cu were recovered with both methods, but the USEPA method generally extracted more Ni and the ISO method more Pb. Application of XRF and SEM-EDS after extraction suggested that residual Cu was bound to the silicate phase, hence unlikely to be released by either procedure. The Ni that was not released by the ISO method was associated with Fe(O)OH, which was not completely dissolved by aqua regia, whilst the presence of HCl favoured dissolution of PbS. In the comparison166 of seven microwave-assisted and hotplate digestion methods, treatment of 0.1 g of plant, rock or soil with 2 mL 40% (v/v) HF + 0.5 mL HNO3 on a hotplate gave the best performance overall for measurement of Pb, Sc, Th and Y by ICP-MS, as assessed by analysis of USGS BCR-1 (basalt), USGS G-2 (granite), NIST SRM 2711 (montana soil) and NIST SRM 1515 (apple leaves). Use of a graphite digestion block gave better recovery than microwave digestion for As species from plants using 0.3 M o-phosphoric acid.167 An optimised sample digestion procedure168 for the measurement of S in mine tailings by ICP-AES involved treatment of 0.1 g sample with 4 mL aqua regia in a hot block. Digesting plant leaves and grain169 in closed, single-use polypropylene tubes was proposed as a cost-effective alternative to open-tube or microwave-assisted digestion, yielding recoveries of 94–113% for measurement of 18 elements in six RMs by ICP-AES.The accurate measurement of Si in plants using a microwave-assisted HF digestion followed by ICP-AES such as sugarcane170 is becoming more important because of potential risk to human health associated with exposure to crystalline silica formed during combustion of biofuels. Although certified values were unavailable, results were similar to previous literature values for NIST SRMs 1515 (apple leaves) and 1547 (peach leaves) and for NRCCRM CRM GBW07602 (bush branches and leaves). Researchers in Oregon171 found that concentrations of Al, Ba, Ca, Mg and Sr measured by ICP-AES in some HF sediment digests increased and stabilised over a period of 8–29 days, as poorly soluble fluorides formed in the digestion process re-dissolved. The waiting time could be reduced to 6 days if the digests were heated to ca. 60 °C for 24 h.Keen interest in the determination of Hg, perhaps prompted by the forthcoming UNEP Global Legal Binding Instrument on Mercury (http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/MercuryNot/MercuryNegotiations/tabid/3320/language/en-US/Default.aspx), is reflected in the publication of a number of sample digestion procedures. These included a pyrolysis chamber method172 for plant tissue, a microwave-induced combustion procedure173 applicable to soil, and a 30% HNO3 + 0.02% thiourea extraction174 for sediments, performed in disposable vessels in a domestic microwave oven.A two-level full factorial design175 was used to optimise the ultrasound-assisted extraction of Co and Sb from inorganic environmental matrices, including soil, sludge and sediments, in closed Eppendorf vials prior to analysis by ETAAS. Using NIST SRM 2702 (Marine Sediment) as the test substrate, best results were obtained when 5 mg samples were sonicated for 20 min in 1 mL of 20% (v/v) HF + 20% (v/v) HNO3. Method LODs were 0.06 μg g−1 for Co and 0.20 μg g−1 for Sb with RSDs <10% for both analytes (n = 3).New variants of methods for the chromatographic separation of radionuclides from environmental materials continue to be reported. One procedure176 successfully separated Am, Np, Pu, Th and U with good recoveries (94–100%) using TEVA® and DGA resins. Another procedure177 coupled a lab-on-valve, multisyringe FI system and UTEVA® column to an ICP-MS instrument to create a fully automated system for measurement of Th and U. An important feature of both systems was that the resins could be regenerated and re-used. Jeandel et al.178 minimised the cost of their method in a different way, by selecting Dowex® AG1-X8 over TRU resin for the separation of Nd, Pa, Ra, Th and U. A novel method for the determination of 99Tc by ICP-MS179 also used TEVA® resin, in this case for removal of isobaric interferences from molybdenum and ruthenium that occurred during analysis of seaweed and soil digests.The ‘labile’ or ‘reactive’ pool of a trace element in soil can be estimated by stable isotope exchange methods. Atkinson et al.180 equilibrated contaminated soils with 204Pb by shaking for three days in 5 × 10−4 M EDTA. Suspensions were filtered and isotopically exchangeable Pb measured by ICP-MS. The non-labile Pb fraction determined by isotopic exchange did not correlate well with the residual Pb fraction determined by a 5-step extraction, confirming that the sum of the non-residual stages of a sequential extraction is not a good estimate of the available analyte pool. A French team181 demonstrated that a multi-element spike solution containing 62Ni, 65Cu, 67Zn, 106Cd and 204Pb could be used to determine isotopically exchangeable concentrations (E values) in fluvisols without inter-element competition. Laborda et al.182 noted that extracts recovered in isotope exchange experiments may contain not only true solution species but also non-exchangeable metals bound to small colloid particles. This could lead to significant overestimation of the exchangeable fraction. Aqueous phases of compost suspensions previously spiked with 65Cu and 206Pb were analysed by coupling A4F with ICP-MS. No enhancement of E values were found, but the methodology developed is worthy of application elsewhere.A simple phosphoric acid extraction183 produced results similar to a two-stage physiologically based extraction procedure for bioaccessible concentrations of Se, selenite and selenate in RTC soil CRMs 023-0505 and 025-0505 and in two Californian soils. Total Se was measured by HG-AFS and ICP-MS; Se species in PBET extracts by HPLC-ICP-MS and a HPLC-HG-AFS method in which the column eluate passed through a UV reactor prior to the hydride generation unit; and Se species in 1 M o-phosphoric acid also by HPLC-HG-AFS. An improved mode of column packing184 for on-line leaching and determination of the bioaccessible As content in rice by ICP-MS, and for speciation of As in the bioaccessible fraction, has been reported. Tongesayi et al.185 replaced glycine in the established SBET method with cysteine, which has a stronger affinity for some metals.Rotating coiled columns are gaining in popularity as an alternative to sequential extraction for fractionation of trace elements in soils and sediment. Their utility has been reviewed (57 references) by Fedotov186 who, together with Savonina and Wennrich, also compared microcolumns and RCCs for partitioning of Se in soil and sediment,187 and of As and Sb in soil and sludge188 with detection by ICP-AES.3.2.2 Sample preconcentration. Analyte preconcentration procedures remain a focus of interest. Methods for the analysis of soils, plants or related materials are summarised in Tables 4–6, together with procedures designed for other sample matrices that were applied to soil or plant CRMs during development.
Table 4 Preconcentration methods involving liquid-phase extraction used in the analysis of soils, plants and related materials

Analyte(s)MatrixMethodReagent(s)DetectorNotesCRMs (or other validation)Ref.As, Bi, Cd, PbFertiliser, urine, river water, wineCPETriton X-114®, o,o-diethyldithiophosphate chelatorICP-AESPreconcentration factor 10–18; LODs 0.05–0.06 μg L−1, except Pb 0.28 μg L−1NIST SRM 1643e (enriched water), NIST SRM 1566b (oyster tissue), INCT CTA-OTL-1 (oriental tobacco leaves), NRCCRM GBW 07602 (bush branches and leaves)113BiSoil, seawater, tap water, waste waterLPMES-methyl-3-salicylidene dithiocarbazate in chloroformETAASPreconcentration factor 100; LOD 19 pg mL−1 259Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, ZnFood, hair, waterIPE2-(4-Methoxybenzoyl)-N′-benzylidene-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-oxo-N-phenyl-propono hydrazideFAASLODs 0.33–0.90 μg L−1LGC CRM 6019 (river water), RTC CRM 044 (soil)260Cd, Hg, PbSedimentSFEBis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)monothiophosphinic acid, CO2ICP-MS NACIS NCS DC 73372 (lake sediment)261Cd, PbSoilCPEOctyl polyethylene glycol phenol ether, ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamateFAASPreconcentration factors Cd 49, Pb 62; LODs Cd 0.29 ng mL−1, Pb 2.1 ng mL−1Spike recovery262Cu, FeFood, waterCPETriton X-114®, eriochrome cyanine RFAASPreconcentration factors Cu 99, Fe 141; LODs Cu 0.57 ng mL−1, Fe 0.33 ng mL−1NCS DC 73349 (bush branches and leaves), NWRI TM 23.2 (fortified water)263Fe, ZnFood, hair, waterSEMethyl-2-(4-methoxybenzoyl)-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-oxopropanoyl carbamate in MIBKFAASPreconcentration factor 100; LODs Fe 0.26 μg L−1, Zn 0.32 μg L−1Spike recovery264MnTea leaves, tea infusion, waterCPETriton X-100®, 8-hydroxyquinolineFAASPreconcentration factor 10–20; LOD 1.9 μg L−1IRMM BCR 278R (mussel tissue)265TeSoil, waterSFODME1-Undecanol solvent, ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate complexing agentETAASPreconcentration factor 342, LOD 0.003 ng mL−1NIST SRM 1643e (trace elements in water)266rBlood, plantsCPETriton X-114®, 2-methyl-8-hydroxyquinoline or 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphtholFAASPreconcentration factor 30 and 26, LODs 1.4 and 1.5 μg L−1IRMM BCR 101 (spruce needles)267
Table 5 Preconcentration methods involving precipitation used in the analysis of soils, plants and related materials

Analyte(s)MatrixCarrierDetectorNotesCRMsRef.Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb, ZnCabbage, potatoLa-2,2′-bipyridyl and rose BengalFAAS, ICP-AESPreconcentration factor 40; LODs 0.71–5.8 μg L−1 (FAAS), 0.36–3.3 μg L−1 (ICP-AES)NACIS NCS ZC 85006 (tomato)268CrSoil, wastewaterYtterbium(III) hydroxideFAASPreconcentration factor 30, LOD 1.1 μg L−1NWRI TMDA 54.4 (fortified lake water), NIST SRM 2710 (montana soil)269Cu, NiBaby food, waterMo(VI)/di-tert-butyl{methylene-bis-270-diyl}bis-carbamateFAASPreconcentration factor Cu 40, Ni 100; LODs Cu 0.43 μg L−1, Ni 0.70 μg L−1NWRI TM-25.3 (fortified lake water), HPS CRM-SA-C (sandy soil C)270
Table 6 Preconcentration methods involving solid phase extraction used in the analysis of soils, plants and related materials

Analyte(s)MatrixSubstrate coating or modifying agentColumn substrateDetectorNotesCRMs (or other validation)Ref.AuOre, soil and water Granular activated carbonETAASPreconcentration factor 50; LODs 0.9 ng g−1 in soil, 7 ng L−1 waterMINTEK SARM-7B (platinum Oore), NIST SRM 330 (copper ore mill heads)271Au, Pd, PtOre, soil, waterCysteineSilica gelETAAS (Au), ICP-AES (Pd, Pt)LODs Au: 0.002 μg g−1 ore, 0.005 μg L−1 water; Pd: 0.006 μg g−1 ore, 003 μg L−1 water; Pt: 0.002 μg g−1 soil, 0.06 μg L−1 waterCopper ore 327-98, spike recovery141CdTobaccoSodium diethyldithiocarbamateAmberlite XAD-2FAASPreconcentration factor 100; LOD 0.03 mg mL−1INCT CTA-OTL-1 (oriental Tobacco leaves)272Cd, Co, CuTea leaves, water ZrO2–B2O3 nanohybrid materialFAASPreconcentration factor 10–15, LODs 3.1–3.8 μg L−1NRCCRM GBW07605 (tea leaves)273Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb, ZnPharmaceutical samples, water8-HydroxyquinolineMultiwalled carbon nanotube disc LODs 1.0–5.2 μg L−1NIST SRM 1577b (bovine liver), IAEA-336 (lichen), IAEA HR-1 (humber river sediment)274Cd, CuFish, sediment, waterDiphenylcarbazideSBA-15 nanoporous silicaFAASPreconcentration factor 290; LODs Cd 0.15 ng mL−1, Cu 0.45 ng mL−1NACIS NCS DC 73323 (soil), OREAS BG 326 (polymetallic ore)275Cd, Cu, PbSediment, urine, water Mixed cellulose ester membraneFAASLODs Cd 0.2 μg L−1, Cu 2.0 μg L−1, Pb 3.0 μg L−1NIST SRM 8704 (buffalo river sediment), spike recovery276Co, Cu, PbSoil, tea leaves, water Nanoalumina-single walled carbon nanotube hybridFAASLODs Co 0.9 μg L−1, Cu 1.1 μg L−1, Pb 2.1 μg L−1IRMM BCR 150 (skim milk powder, CMI 7003 (silty clay)277CuTobacco leavesAlizarin fluorine blueSisal fibreFAASPreconcentration factor 75; LOD 0.018 μg L−1NIST SRM 1570a (spinach leaves)278CuMussel, water Functionalised multiwalled carbon nanotubeFAASPreconcentration factor 100; LOD 0.27 μg L−1IRMM BCR 320R (channel sediment)279CuFood, soil, water1-Phenyl-1,2-propanedione-2-oxime thiosemicarbazoneChloromethylated polystyreneFAASPreconcentration factor 41; LOD 0.56 μg L−1Spike recovery280Cu, Ni, Pb, ZnSoilTrans-1,2-diaminocyclohexane-N,N,N′,N′-Tetraacetic acidNobias Chelate-PA1ESI-MSLODs 1.9–5.0 ng g−1JSAC-0401 (brown forest soil)281Fe, PbPlant, water Bucky tubes discFAASLODs Fe 1.6 μg L−1, Pb 4.9 μg L−1NWRI TMDA 51.3 (fortified water)282HgWaterS-benzyldithiocarbazateModified activated carbonICP-AESPreconcentration factor 80; LOD 0.09 ng mL−1NRCCRM GBW08301 (river sediment)283HgSediment Triisobutylphosphine sulphide, CYANEX-471X®Cold vapour AASPreconcentration factor 32; LOD 24 ng L−1NIST SRM 2709 (san joaquin soil), NRCCRM GSD-9 and GSD-11 (sewage sediment)284Ho, La, Tb  TiO2–grapheme compositeMPT-AESPreconcentration factor 10–17; LODs 1.6–2.8 μg L−1NRCCRM GBW 07313 (marine sediment)285Ni, PbSediment, sludge CNT, oxidised CNT, L-alanine immobilised on CNTETAASLODs Ni 30 μg L−1, Pb 10 μg L−1QC municipal sludge, TRAP-LRM lake sediment286PbParenteral solutions, urine, water Ion-imprinted polyvinylimidazol-silica hybrid copolymerTS-FF-AASPreconcentration factor 128; LOD 0.75 μg L−1NRCC ORM-3 (fish protein), NRCC MESS-3 (marine sediment), NRCC PACS-2 (marine sediment)287TlCement, soil, zinc Chromosorb 105ETAASLODs 0.05 μg L−1 (total Tl), 0.034 μg L−1 (TlIII)NIST SRM 2710 (montana soil), NRCCRM GBW 07402 (soil), NRCCRM GBW 07309 and NRCCRM GBW 07310 (stream sediments)2883.3 Instrumental analysis3.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. Studies on flame atomic absorption spectrometry included the optimisation of an ultrasound-assisted slurry sampling procedure189 for the determination of Fe in cassava leaves. Comparison of two background correction systems190 showed that high-speed self-reversal was superior to use of a D2 continuum source in compensating for spectral interferences in the determination of low concentrations of Zn in Fe-rich soils. A slotted quartz tube atom trap191 provided a 400-fold increase in sensitivity for the determination of In compared to conventional FAAS analysis. Analyte was accumulated on the inner wall of the trap in the form of In2O3, and then re-atomised by introduction of 10 μL of MIBK. The LOD was 2.6 ng mL−1 and the result obtained for NIST SRM 2710 (montana soil) was 5.14 ± 0.06 mg kg−1 (cf. indicative value 5.10 mg kg−1).In investigations of Ir–Nd and Ir–W mixtures as permanent modifiers in slurry sampling ETAAS, 30 μg Ir + 40 μg Nb was optimal for the determination of Sb in soil and sediment with platform atomisation192 whereas 2 μg Ir + 10 μg Nb was preferred for the determination of Cr in plants with wall atomisation.193 An iridium permanent modifier did not stabilise Cd in its determination in fertilisers by HR-CS-ETAAS.194 Better results were obtained when 10 μL of a 10 μg Pd + 6 μg Mg solution was added to the graphite tube. A similar mixture (10 μg Pb + 10 μg Mg) was successfully used to determine Zn in slurries of marine and lacustrine sediment CRMs.195The use of an electrothermal atomiser crucible with separated zones for solid sample analysis was revisited by Oreshhkin and Tsizin.196 In their latest device, sample vapour was able to pass through the heated porous wall of a graphite tube into the analytical zone, whereas particles and aerosols were excluded, thereby reducing matrix interference effects. Spike recovery experiments for Ag, Cd and Pb added to sediments appeared to give promising results.Use of sedimentation FFF with cold vapour-ETAAS confirmed the potential importance of soil colloids in the environmental transport of Hg.197 The <1 μm size fractions of three highly contaminated soils were injected into the FFF apparatus and their particle size distribution determined. Aliquots of the eluate were collected every 3.5 min, acidified with HNO3 and analysed. Both particle size distributions and Hg concentrations peaked in the 0.4–0.7 μm range for all three samples.3.3.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. Electrolyte cathode discharge atomic emission spectrometry was proposed as a low-cost alternative to ICP-AES for the determination of Hg112. A stable plasma discharge was created between a tungsten pin anode and a liquid cathode (the sample solution in contact with a grounded Pt ring). Optimal conditions were 1 mm inter-electrode gap, 0.76 kV potential and 1 mL min−1 solution flow rate. The addition of 5% of 0.2 M acetic acid to the FI manifold gave a 5-fold signal enhancement, with a LOD of 2 ng mL−1. The result obtained for IRMM BCR 060 (aquatic plant) was within 6% of the certified value.Interest in use of tungsten coil atomisers has continued. Hanna and Jones198 described a unique ETV-FAES device in which analyte vaporised from a tungsten filament taken from projector light bulb was carried by a stream of 10% H2 + 90% Ar into the flame of a standard metal-cutting torch. The LODs for 19 elements were below 0.2 ng mL−1. Recoveries of Ag, Cu, Mn, Pb and Tl from NIST SRM 2711 (montana soil) were in the range 90–112%. Tungsten coil-AES was used for the determination of Sr in soil.199 Buffering the analyte solution to pH 5.5 with ammonium carbonate, followed by filtration through a 0.45 μm pore size syringe filter removed interference due to Al.A novel means for removal of the reagent matrix200 prior to analysis of soil extracts by ICP-AES involved use of a cross flow FFF system, coupled between a CF sequential extraction unit and an ICP, and polyethyleneimine (molecular weight 25000 Da) to complex the analyte elements. Matrix removal efficiency was 84% for a 0.1 M solution of Mg(NO3)2. The approach may prove useful in analysis of high-matrix samples, not only by ICP-AES but with other types of atomic spectrometry where matrix removal is desirable.Some specific errors and pitfalls in the application of ICP-AES by unwary users have been highlighted in the past year. Falandysz201 was strongly critical of authors who had reported data obtained at 196.0 nm for Se in mushrooms without allowing for previously reported matrix interference effects202 due to Br, C, P and S that can cause significant signal enhancement. McBride203 cautioned researchers who attempted to quantify low levels of Cd in soil at 226.5 nm and also highlighted a spectral interference at 228.8 nm that could affect the determination of Cd in As-rich soil.3.3.3 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. Gao and Liu204 optimised a method for the determination of MeHg and EtHg species by HPLC-cold vapour-AFS in sewage sludge, following a 30 min, ultrasound-assisted extraction with TMAH and copper powder at 70 °C. No matrix-matched CRM was available but the result for MeHg in IAEA-405 (estuarine sediment) agreed with the certified value. A method for Hg speciation in sediments205 involved extraction into 0.1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol followed by injection into a HPLC-VG-AFS system. Inorganic mercury (Hg2+), MeHg+ and EtHg+, baseline separated using a C-18 column, had LODs of 0.48, 0.58 and 1.1 ng g−1, respectively.Two articles described non-chromatographic speciation of As by HG-AFS. One206 used different concentrations of HCl and NaBH4 selectively to generate AsIII or AsV hydrides from soil. The other method,207 for the analysis of garlic, was a minor modification of an earlier method208 and based on the different efficiencies of HG with and without a pre-reduction step and use of proportional equations.3.3.4 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Mesko et al.209 reviewed (157 references) in detail the different sample preparation strategies for the ICP-MS analysis of biological matrices. They highlighted trends in the past 15 years, including increased use of enzymes, ASE, ultrasound- and microwave-assisted extraction. They concluded that preserving analyte and, especially, species integrity during sample preparation remained challenging.The application of dynamic reaction cell technology to overcome atomic and polyatomic interferences in the determination of As, Cr, Sr and V in polymers, biological and environmental samples was reviewed210 (76 references) with particular emphasis on the selection of reagent gas. Several authors have used O2 in DRCs, either reacting it with the interferent(s) to convert them to higher mass polyatomic species, or with the analyte, which was then quantified as an oxide. Guo et al.211 recommended addition of 2.4 mL min−1 O2 to minimise interferences from Mo, Nb, Y and Zr oxides and hydroxide in the determination of Ag in soil and sediment: 93Nb16O+, 92Zr16OH+ and 92Mo16OH+ were rapidly converted to oxides of higher mass, allowing quantification at 109Ag, but interferences from 89Y18O+ and 91Zr16O+ on 107Ag remained. Fujiwara et al.212 found that 0.6 mL min−1 O2 minimised interference from 129Xe+ in the determination of 129I in soil extracts. A further interference in this analysis, from 127IH2+, was removed by eliminating H2 and H2O from the reagent gas and carefully tuning the axial field of the cell. Addition of ca. 0.5 mL min−1 O2 to a DRC allowed quantification of As in aqua regia digests of soil213 as the 75As16O+ ion, whereas a flow rate of 0.35 mL min O2 was preferred for quantification of V as VO+ in lake sediment digests.214In the measurement of Se in plants,215 use of 0.8 mL min−1 ammonia and quantification based on78Se+ was preferred to the use of methane and 80Se+ because this better suppressed interference from doubly charged lanthanide ions and thus gave better accuracy for the analysis of seven plant CRMs (recovery range 87–114% cf. 84–145%). Quantifying the analyte at m/z = 78 also avoided interference from 1H79Br+ that can occur when analysing Br-rich samples such as NIST SRM 1573a (tomato leaves).Cizdziel et al.216 used several CRMs as calibrants in the LA-ICP-MS analysis of binder-free pressed pellets of desert plants for Ba, Ca, Cd, Cu, Mg, Mn and Sr. The need for matrix matching was highlighted by a study217 in which targets were prepared by treating mixtures of a CRM and zinc oxide with 2-methoxy-4-(2-propenyl)phenol. When NIST SRM 8704 (buffalo river sediment) was used as the calibrant in the determination of Co, Mn and Pb in CRMs IRMM BCR143R (sewage sludge amended soil) and IRMM BCR144R (sewage sludge from domestic origin), excellent agreement with certified values was found for the soil, which is chemically similar to sediment, but not for the sludge, which has a different matrix composition. Another approach218 was first to use CRMs NIST SRM 1515 (apple leaves) and IRMM BCR 100 (beech leaves) to validate a method for the determination of Pb by solution ICP-MS, and then to use this as a reference method in the development of a LA-ICP-MS approach for the analysis of Antarctic lichen, as pressed pellets using 13C as internal standard.Use of palladium nanoparticles as a modifier for slurry sampling ETV-ICP-MS increased signal intensity for As, Cd, Hg, Pb, Sb and Zn up to 3-fold relative to that obtained when the same amount of Pd was supplied in solution.219 No thermal treatment between injection of modifier and sample was needed. The particles were easy to produce in a one-step reduction. External calibration with aqueous standards was not possible, but results obtained by either standard additions or ID agreed with certified values for NIST SRMs 1568a (rice flour) and 1573a (tomato leaves).Several methods for evaluating the redox speciation of trace elements by HPLC-ICP-MS have been reported. Thallium(I) and TlIII were separated in plant extracts by anion-exchange HPLC220 using a Hamilton PRP-X100 column and 100 mM ammonium acetate + 5 mM DTPA mobile phase, and by RP-HPLC221 using a C-8 column and 1 mM tetrabutylammonium phosphate + 2 mM DTPA in 1% (v/v) methanol mobile phase. To assess potential risk to human health from inhalation of particulate matter associated with wildfires in California, a method previously used for the speciation of Cr has been adapted222 for simultaneous measurement of AsIII, AsV, CrIII, CrVI, SeIV and SeVI in deionised water and simulated lung fluid extracts of soil and ash. A detailed investigation of potential interspecies conversion revealed that extracts should be stored at 10 °C, without the addition of preservatives, and analysed within 4 hours. The window of stability for Se species in 0.016 M KH2PO4 extracts of soils was even shorter (<1 h).223 A multi-national group of researchers224 were so concerned about potential changes in Se speciation due to the difference in pH between their volcanic soil extracts in simulated acid rain (pH 2.2–4.4) and typical HPLC mobile phases (pH 4.8 or higher), that they developed a dedicated chromatographic method involving an anion-exchange column and low pH eluent (20 mM ammonium citrate at pH 3).Methods for the determination of metal complexes included HPLC-ICP-MS procedures for quantification of Ni and V tetrapyrroles in oil-contaminated sediments,225 for the measurement of methylmercury in 5% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol extracts of sediments (also applicable to fish),226 and for the determination of organotins227,228 (in Chinese with English abstract). The complementary use of HPLC-ICP-MS with ESI-MS for identification and quantification of thiol peptides and their metal complexes in plants and fungi was discussed briefly in a broad review229 of LC-MS techniques (87 references). Although strictly in the domain of molecular MS, a novel extractive ESI-MS method230 was noteworthy because values obtained for 235U–238U isotope ratios in acid digests of five soils were within 5% of ICP-MS results.3.3.5 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. A 101-reference review231 of the application of LIBS covered a myriad of sample types, including clinical materials, fruit, vegetables, medicinal plants and industrial waste.Laser ablation fast pulse discharge plasma spectroscopy, an alternative to dual pulse LIBS for signal enhancement, was applied to the measurement of Mg, Pb and Sn in soil.232 Calibrants, prepared by mixing CRMs NRCCRM GBW07406, 07419 and 07429 (soils), gave a linear response over the concentration range studied for Mg, after normalisation of the analyte emission to that of Si at 288.16 nm. In contrast, Pb and Sn calibrations were non-linear at higher concentrations due to self-absorption. The LODs based on the linear portions of the calibration graphs were 34, 1.5 and 0.16 μg g−1 for Mg, Pb and Sn, respectively. It was later reported233 that even greater sensitivity enhancement could be obtained if the μs-pulse discharge was replaced with a ns discharge.Calibration strategy in the application of LIBS to soil is still an active topic of research, with different research groups advocating different approaches. Jantzi and Almirall234 simply used sand spiked with different concentrations of analytes. He et al.235 recommended Fe as an internal standard for the measurement of Al, Ca, Cr, K, Mg, Mn, Si and Ti, although results obtained for Cr, Mn and Ti differed by 10–20% from reference data obtained by other techniques. Ferreira et al.236 investigated the usefulness of multilayer perceptron (a type of ANN based on supervised learning) for determination of Ba, Co, Cu, Mn, Ni, V and Zn. A set of 19 soils was used to build the calibration model, which was then applied to determine the analyte concentrations in a validation set of nine soils. Data obtained with the ANN agreed more closely with those obtained by ICP-AES following total digestion than with conventional LIBS linear calibration.Procedures for the comminution of plant leaves for LIBS analysis used sugarcane, orange tree and soy as test samples.237 Both planetary ball milling and cryogenic grinding produced particles of <75 μm diameter, suitable for pressing into sample pellets without binder. Reproducible craters were formed on exposure to the 1064 nm laser and the site-to-site variation in emission intensity was 5–20% (n = 30). The time required for comminution depended on the fibre and cellulose content of the plant species.Although challenges remain, there is evidence that multivariate analysis of LIBS trace element profiles is beginning to emerge as a useful tool for chemical fingerprinting. An assessment234 of the capability of LIBS analysis at 266 nm followed by PCA to determine the provenance of soil samples in a forensic context showed that it was possible to discriminate between samples from different sites, and to associate samples from the same site, with few misclassifications. Use of LIBS with PCA or PLS regression238 proved capable of differentiating between species of bacteria isolated from Jamaican bauxite soils.3.3.6 X-ray spectrometry. A useful and informative review (159 references)239 of trends in the application of μXRF to environmental samples, including soils and plants, covered the 2008–2012 period. Recent advances in synchrotron XRF,240 such as the ability to carry out analysis in vivo in hydrated tissues, have contributed to the study of plant physiology (91 references). Revenko241 discussed the important contributions to XRF made by Russian authors between 1991 and 2010 (281 references). The review242 (195 references) of approaches for imaging elemental distribution and speciation in plants included X-ray techniques, nanoSIMS and LA-ICP-MS. Similarly the review243 on ways of studying biogeochemical interfaces in soil (157 references) considered X-ray techniques, nanoSIMS and AFM.A novel method244 proposed for the determination of soil quality involved the application of multivariate chemometric techniques to both fluorescence and scatter regions of the X-ray spectrum, as opposed to analysis based on specific fluorescent peaks as is normally the case in EDXRF. The approach was tested using kaolin spiked with Cu, H2PO4−, Fe, NO3−, SO42 and Zn; CRMs IAEA soil-1 and soil-7; and two Kenyan soils. Soils could be readily distinguished based on the PCA of their EDXRF and scatter spectra. Both PLS and ANN could be used to predict analyte concentrations, although with variable accuracy. Further development and application of the approach to a wider series of Kenyan soils245 showed that both PLS and ANN provided a reasonable estimate of C, N and Na content, whilst ANN performed better for the determination of Mg and P. Although semi-quantitative, the method could be a useful tool for rapid screening of large sample sets.Shaltout et al.246 studied a series of Nile sediments to assess the effect of grain size on results of standardless quantitative WDXRF. The fluorescence intensity increased with grain size for some elements, e.g. K, but decreased for others, e.g. Si. They developed a cubic spline interpolation algorithm relating intensity, grain size and atomic number, applicable to K lines with Z < 30.Progress in the applications of a portable XRF unit included the development of a genetic algorithm for rapid, automated, analysis of XRF spectra to guide adaptive sampling of seabed sediments on an autonomous underwater vehicle.247 Differences in elemental concentrations, measured under field or laboratory conditions, enhanced visual differentiation between pedons within a soil profile.248 An unusual but commendable article by Higueras et al.249 described an attempt to simulate field analysis in a remote region affected by mining waste. The potential applicability, impact and benefit of portable XRF units in environmental monitoring and protection in developing countries were assessed. They commented critically on international aid strategies that donate complex analytical facilities to regions where insufficient infrastructure is available to sustain them, and suggested that simpler robust instruments such as portable XRF units are more fit-for-purpose.A Canadian group250 contributed to the discussion concerning the recent detection of a hexa-coordinate AsV-glycerol species by XANES analysis. This compound was unstable in the presence of a large excess of water, and could have been created as an artefact during drying. However, its detection in fresh samples of carnivorous sundew plant suggested that it may also be more prevalent in environmental samples than previously thought because it remains undetectable by speciation techniques used to analyse aqueous samples.3.3.7 Secondary ion mass spectrometry. Secondary ion mass spectrometry shows promise as a complementary technique to synchrotron XRF for element detection and imaging in both plants and soils. The higher spatial resolution of SIMS allows features to be discriminated at <100 nm scales. The ability to measure stable isotopes presents opportunities for tracer studies. Challenges include differences in ion yield between analytes, matrix effects and maintaining the integrity of biological samples during preparation. The fundamental principles of nanoSIMS and its application to plants were reviewed251 (85 references) and its capabilities compared with those of other techniques.242,243 NanoSIMS was used to identify and show associations between major soil components.252 A new internal calibration method253 improved the accuracy of C–N and 15N–14N ratio measurement in soil organic matter.3.4 SpeciationA detailed critique of the speciation literature can be found in our sister Update.4Review articles of note covered: as speciation in environmental samples involving voltammetry, chromatography (both HPLC and GC) and HG (86 references);254 As speciation with HG-AAS and ETAAS detection (145 references);92 chromatographic methods for organotins (70 references);255 trace element speciation in food with particular reference to As, Hg, and Sn (68 references);256 the speciation and spatial distribution of As and Se in rice (63 references);257 and quantification of phytochelatin species produced by plants as a means to detoxify metal(loid)s (55 references).2584 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Reference materialsSince the production of the first geological reference materials in 1951, USGS G1 (granite) and W1 (diabase), there has always been a demand for a wider range of better characterised RMs to keep pace with developments in analytical instrumentation and geological research. Meisel and Kane289 discussed current challenges, including the production of RMs for isotope ratio and microanalytical measurements, and ways in which these issues may be addressed.Some of the glass RMs most frequently used in the microanalysis of geological materials by techniques such as LA-ICP-MS and SIMS are the NIST SRM 610-617 series (Trace Elements in Glass). Because these glasses were not designed for microanalysis and were not originally certified for many elements, most practitioners rely on consensus values derived from compilations of published data, e.g. Pearce et al.290 Since then, many new high precision data have been published, inhomogeneities evaluated and protocols for the calculation of uncertainty budgets revised. For these reasons, the new reference values for SRMs 610–617 published by Jochum et al.291 are a notable advance and will be widely welcomed by the geoanalytical community. The values were reported with a high degree of confidence as they were obtained by following ISO guidelines and the IAG protocol for certification of RMs, using a number of different analytical techniques. Test portions of 1.0, 0.1 and 0.02 μg were used to assess element inhomogeneities, and uncertainties at the 95% confidence level were reported for bulk and microanalytical applications. Although the new reference values agreed with the NIST certified values (with the exception of Mn in SRM 610), they differed typically by as much as 10% from the Pearce et al. compilation. The new dataset represents state-of-the-art values for interlaboratory comparisons and their use in microanalytical calibrations should lead to improvements in data quality.Several new geological RMs for elemental analysis are available. Two new PGE RMs from IGGE, MCPt-1 and MCPt-2, cobalt-rich seamount crusts collected from the western and central Pacific Ocean, were characterised for 68 elements including all six PGEs.292 These ultra-fine RMs have an average particle size of 1.8 and 1.5 μm respectively, and the minimum sampling mass for the determination of the PGEs was calculated to be 1 g. Donohue et al.293 proposed the use of ilmenite (FeTiO3) megacrystals collected from the Solomon Islands as secondary RMs in the microanalysis of similar materials by LA-ICP-MS. Although these megacrystals are not suitable for consideration as a CRM, accurate elemental abundances in ilmenite at high resolution were obtained using Ti as the internal standard and NIST SRM 610 glass as the external calibrant.As identified by Meisel and Kane,289 there is great demand for RMs with well-constrained isotopic contents. Fisher et al.294 prepared synthetic zircon crystals doped with Hf and REEs for use as a potential RM for Lu–Hf isotopic measurements in zircon by LA-MC-ICP-MS. The crystals were doped to produce a large range of REEs–Hf ratios so that the 176Yb and 176Lu isobaric interferences on the low abundance 176Hf in natural zircons, as well as potential REE oxide interferences, could be monitored and corrected. The synthetic zircon crystals were homogeneous both within and between grains for Hf isotope measurements. Conclusive evidence that zircon crystals doped with various amount of REEs and Hf were more reliable than Yb-doped Hf solutions for the accurate measurement of the Yb mass bias correction was obtained. Metal standards NIST SRM 976 (Cu) and Johnson Matthey JMC 3-0749 (Zn) used to be commonly used for Cu and Zn isotope measurements but are no longer available. To fill this gap, the IRMM produced new CRMs: ERM-AE633 and ERM-AE647 (Cu) and IRMM-3702 (Zn), which are elemental solutions in 1 M HNO3, certified for isotope ratios. These new RMs have now been cross-calibrated against the old RMs to provide continuous comparability of published Cu and Zn isotope data with future measurements.295 In addition, δ65Cu and δ66Zn data for five USGS RMs, BCR-2, BHVO-2, BIR-1 and G-2 (basalts) and AGV-1 (andesite) measured against the new CRMs, were presented as a reference dataset for future inter-laboratory comparisons. A set of two B isotope RMs and three offset δ11B RMs were produced and certified.296 The B isotope RMs ERM-AE102a and ERM-AE104a were designed for correcting mass bias in ICP-MS, whereas the three δ11B RMs were intended to be used for QC and validation of procedures for the determination of δB11 in geological and environmental samples. The isotopic composition of all the materials was adjusted by mixing, under full gravimetric control, B parent solutions enriched in 10B or 11B. The materials were stable and homogeneous and covered about three quarters of the known natural variation in B isotopes. Using a protocol for the synthesis of halite crystals containing water inclusions with known values of δD and δ18O, Rigaudier et al.297 produced several hundreds of grams of halite RM within two days at low cost. The crystals were stable in a vacuum desiccator at ambient temperature for at least several months.An alternative to creating new RMs is to supply reference values for the isotope content of geological RMs currently available. For example, reference values for the δ7Li content of GSJ RM JP-1 (peridotite) and USGS RM DTS-2 (dunite) were measured298 using a method developed to separate Li from ultramafic rocks, which normally have low Li contents. Prytulak et al.299 presented some of the first measurements of V stable isotopes in six USGS RMs. The best attainable long-term reproducibility for 51V–50V isotope measurements in these complex matrices was 0.15‰ (2s), similar to that achievable with standard solutions. Although different analytical techniques and mass bias corrections were employed in an inter-laboratory comparison300 to determine the Ge isotope composition of selected geological RMs, all methods provided relatively similar precisions of about 0.1‰ (2s) for δ74Ge values. However, a double spike method was preferred as it corrected for potential Ge isotope fractionation during sample dissolution and purification. The Ge isotope composition of NIST SRM 312a (Ge reference solution) was calibrated relative to internal isotopic standard solutions used in previous studies and its use proposed to provide consistent measurements in the development of Ge isotopes as a geochemical tracer.4.2 Solid sample introduction4.2.1 Laser ablation. Although LA is a routine method of sampling geological materials prior to analysis by a range of ICP techniques, research continues to be directed at improving performance characteristics of the ablation. An ablation cell301 capable of holding large objects (up to 230 mm long × 34 mm wide × 16 mm deep) was tested using NIST SRM 610 (Trace Elements in Glass) and JK CRM 2D (carbon steel). The washout of the new cell was 70% faster than that of a standard cylindrical ablation cell and provided washout times within 2.6 s for 99.9% of the signal. Its size allowed both analysis of a batch of samples without opening the cell between samples and fast switching between standards and samples. A study302 of the performance of a commercial fs laser system, operating at its fundamental wavelength of 800 nm for the ablation of transparent minerals such as quartz, confirmed the reliability of IR fs LA of transparent materials and its potential for the analysis of fluid inclusions in quartz. Ablation craters up to 1300 μm in depth were created without the ablation rate being influenced by the sample's crystalline orientation.Other studies have considered the characteristics of the plasma and mass spectrometer in LA-ICP-MS. Addition of carbon to the central channel of the ICP, either as methane or a methane–water mixture, enhanced the ion signals during ablation of NIST SRM 610 (Trace Elements in Glass).303 Up to 20-fold enhancements for elements such as As, I, Se and Te were explained by a combination of carbon charge transfer, increase in plasma temperature and change of the plasma shape in the central channel. Because in situ determination of PGEs by LA-ICP-MS is hampered by argide interferences, Guillong et al.304 sought to develop a better understanding of the controls on the formation of argides in quadrupole ICP mass spectrometers. Argide levels could vary by as much as 30 times between common makes of instruments, whereas other polyatomic ions, like oxides, varied by <3 times. The key parameter was the pressure between the skimmer and extraction lenses; instrument designs resulting in a relatively high pressure produced more collisions in this region, resulting in disruption of weak argide bonds. A prototype miniature LA mass spectrometer, based on Mattauch Herzog geometry, was designed to undertake elemental and isotopic measurements of the surface of extraterrestrial bodies.305 For measurements in minerals such as microcline, lepidolite and anorthoclase, an LOD of 0.4% and precisions of 0.077 ± 0.004 for 41K/39K and 0.052 ± 0.006 for 29Si/28Si were obtained.Laser ablation ICP-MS is capable of providing spatial distributions of trace element and isotopic information but its widespread application has been hindered by the lack of appropriate processing software. In a novel approach, a module called CellSpace was developed to create spatially registered LA images for use with the freely distributed software package Iolite.306 This module created images by synchronising the state of the laser, i.e., whether it was firing or not, and its position on the sample and these were recorded concurrently with data from the mass spectrometer. It was possible to overlay LA data onto other images, such as those produced by SEM, allowing the analyst to view the LA data in context. The code had the advantages of averaging the data spatially rather than just with time and presenting the data as a laser spot rather than a simple rectangular pixel. An alternative software package (LAICPMS) for 2D mapping of LA-ICP-MS trace element distributions,307 based on the R language for statistical computing, determined many input parameters automatically and used empirical cumulative density function for optimised colour coding of the maps rather than linear or logarithmic scale. Major and trace element distribution maps of natural calcite samples demonstrated the utility of the package.The characteristics of LA-ICP-MS make it a particularly attractive method for the analysis of silicate minerals. Pearce et al.308 provided an excellent overview of many aspects of this technique in their description of the analysis of individual glass shards from tephra deposits using a 193 nm excimer laser coupled to SF-ICP-MS. They illustrated how improvements in laser and spectrometer hardware have enabled analysis using crater diameters of 20 μm and 10 μm to become essentially routine. Problems with the characterisation of single, sub-10 μm glass shards were highlighted. A major study309,310 of ocean floor basaltic glasses reported data for over 60 elements in 616 samples obtained by LA-ICP-MS and complemented by EPMA data. Interferences and choice of isotopes were discussed together with the optimised analytical routine based on a 193 mn wavelength excimer laser coupled to quadrupole ICP-MS. Yuan et al.311 used a 213 nm Nd:YAG laser coupled to SF-ICP-MS to evaluate matrix effects for 49 elements in 17 glass RMs plus 10 elements in 10 silicate mineral RMs developed for EPMA use. They confirmed that the differences in behaviour between glass RMs and natural silicate minerals were insignificant and that calcium was a suitable internal standard for the analysis of silicate minerals. An analytical protocol for screening chert microbands in a banded iron formation was based on LA-ICP-MS.312 Although solution ICP-MS was required to obtain high quality data for Cr, Ni and REEs because of the very low trace element contents of cherts, the selection of suitable areas for sub-sampling ensured that the chemistry of the individual microbands was truly representative and not influenced by inclusions of carbonate or iron oxide minerals.Laser ablation ICP-MS has been used in many contexts for elemental fingerprinting. Recent examples included the geographical classification of gem corundum samples of different colours313 and of coltan, the African trade name for columbite-tantalite, a tantalum ore.314 Coltan is one of several raw materials that finance the civil wars in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, so in 2008 a procedure was developed to verify the origin of coltan based on mineralogical and geochemical parameters. An improved, more rapid, procedure, based on mineral liberation analysis and LA-SF-ICP-MS, provided quantification of all major and many trace elements in the same analytical step without the need for the measurement of an internal standard element by an independent analytical method. The U–Pb age estimates had sufficient precision to discriminate age provinces of Nb–Ta in Africa.The production of XRF glass bead and pressed powder pellets is well-tested for preparing geological samples for bulk LA analysis. The main prerequisite is that the elements of interest are distributed uniformly in the sub-sample presented for analysis. Matrix effects315 observed during the measurement of 232Th by LA-ICP-MS in rock pressed powders, even when the sample grain size was relatively small (<10 μm), were attributed to incomplete vaporisation of the particles in the plasma. Kon et al.316 devised a protocol for ablating XRF glass beads, made from 0.1 g sample and 1.0 g of lithium tetraborate, using a fs laser for minimal elemental fractionation. A novel design of ablation cell to enhance the transport efficiency of the sample aerosol, plus new software to control the laser, sample stage movement and firing of the laser, reduced the analysis time to 100 s per sample and gave precisions of better than 10% for many elements. A similar strategy317 of preparing standards and samples as borate glasses for the multielemental analysis of silicate rocks by LA-ICP-MS confirmed that if the fusion was carried out at moderate temperatures in the presence of meta-tetra borate, loss of volatile elements was minimised and conferred flexibility to include an internal standard of choice.Ways of improving the quality of data obtained from the ablation of fire assay beads have been investigated by a number of research groups. A combination of ID (for Ag, Pd and Pt) and single standard addition and internal standardisation (for Au and Rh) was evaluated as a calibration method for the determination of such metals in lead buttons.318 As no significant difference was observed between the concentrations obtained via these approaches and external calibration with matrix-matched lead standards, it was concluded that ID LA-ICP-MS offered no advantages for the routine analysis of lead buttons, although it could be deployed for obtaining reference values. An alternative approach319 for the determination of Pd, Pt and Rh in lead buttons used a LA system with a large beam size (780 μm diameter) to compensate for the lower sensitivity of ICP-AES. Spectral interferences were avoided by careful selection of the emission wavelengths monitored. The method precision was typically better than 5% RSD. The LODs of 2.5–12 μg g−1 in the Pb button were considered sufficient for the analysis of automotive exhaust catalysts but not ore materials. The potential of a new type of commercially available Mattauch-Herzog type ICP-MS instrument equipped with an array detector with 4800 independent channels was evaluated for the determination of Au and the PGEs in NiS buttons produced from platiniferous ores.320 Because of its geometry, this instrument is capable of truly simultaneous monitoring of the entire elemental mass spectrum between m/z 5 and 240, including 40Ar+, which is particularly advantageous when handling transient signals from sample introduction techniques such as LA. Buttons prepared from 40–75 g of sample were ground to a powder and pelletised using polyethylene wax as a binder. Using in-house matrix-matched standards for calibration, excellent precisions of 2–3% RSD for the most abundant analytes, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru, and 6–11% RSD for Au and Ir, were obtained. These figures of merit were attributed to the simultaneous acquisitions plus the extended linear range, giving an improved performance of the 61Ni internal standard. In addition, low LODs, in the region of 10 ng g−1, were made possible by the low level of argide-based interferences compared to some quadrupole-based ICP-MS instruments, and the ability to monitor elements affected by ArNi+ and ArCu+ overlaps.Finding suitable matrix-matched calibration standards for the analysis of sulfide minerals by LA-ICP-MS presents its own challenges. The homogeneity321 of a sulfur-based chalcogenide glass standard (designated IMER-1), synthesised by incorporating four minor and 34 trace elements into a chalcogenide glass matrix containing Ge, S and Sb, was confirmed by analysis using a range of techniques. This standard is complementary to other available standards because it contains a wider range of elements and is suitable for determining sub–ppm levels of elements in sulfides. Ke et al.322 demonstrated the varying behaviour of five different sulfide minerals when ablated with a 193 nm excimer LA system and concluded that the most suitable laser parameters for accurate analysis were a large spot size, low repetition rate and low laser energy. A novel strategy for the analysis of sulfide minerals by LA-ICP-MS, using glass RMs with matrix normalisation and sulfur internal standardisation, overcame the lack of matrix-matched standards.323An excellent article324 (195 references) reviewed recent developments in the analysis of individual fluid inclusions by LA-ICP-MS and LA-MC-ICP-MS. It contained a comprehensive account of the factors involved in producing reliable data for the elemental and isotopic composition of fluid inclusions and is obligatory reading for anyone new to this field of analysis. All the data cited were produced using a GeoLas pulsed 193 nm ArF excimer laser. The optical setup of this, and most other, laser systems limits the depth of accessible inclusions to within about 100 μm of the sample surface, depending on the size of the inclusion. Guillong and Pettke325 assessed the capabilities of a new, commercially available, laser system (Resonetics M50) for the analysis of fluid inclusions between depths of 20 and 500 μm. There was a marked change in element ratios in shallow inclusions compared with those in deep inclusions (by up to a factor of 2.5) with Cl–Na and Pb–Na ratios being affected the most. Such marked fractionation of Cl was thought to be due to condensation–deposition and remobilisation effects within the LA crater, and is significant because this element is sometimes used as an internal standard for quantification of solute in fluid inclusions. The specific difficulties of determining S in fluid inclusions by LA-ICP-MS was addressed in a substantial review (112 references) of analytical methods for the determination of S in glasses, rocks and minerals.326As noted in last year's Environmental Update,1 the widespread availability of LA-MC-ICP-MS has opened the door to a wide range of new applications in the Earth sciences based on the interpretation of isotopic ratios. Issues pertinent to the measurement of Pb isotopes in olivine-hosted melt inclusions327 included the need to remove surface contamination by ultrasonicating the sample in dilute HNO3, as cleaning with ethanol was not effective. The figures of merit for a protocol328 adopted for the determination of Pb isotope ratios in volcanic glass shards compared well with results obtained by other workers using various techniques. A novel combination126 of LA-MC-ICP-MS with DGT, for studying 2D S isotope variations in sediment pore waters at a spatial resolution of ca. 100 μm, provided information relevant to microbiological processes and the formation of individual iron sulfide grains in surface sediments.An improved understanding of LA fundamentals has allowed application of U–Pb dating by LA-ICP-MS to many different accessory phases including apatite,329 rutile,330 xenotime331 and allanite.332 However, every laboratory set-up tends to be different so that LA and MS parameters need to be evaluated carefully for each application. Methods of data reduction also vary. Kooijman et al.333 developed a robust method for U–Pb dating of zircon and provided a systematic approach for optimising instrumental parameters. This method should be applicable to any LA-ICP-MS system. Using a 193 nm excimer laser coupled to SF-ICP-MS, laser cell design, signal intensity, ablation parameters, data reduction software, isobaric interferences from Hg and elemental fractionation were investigated. Their method was shown to be robust for zircons with a range of ages and U content; optimal results were usually obtained with a spot size of 25 μm. Of the different data reduction methods334 assessed for the calculation of zircon U–Pb ages—ratio of the means, mean of the ratios and intercept methods—a procedure based on the ratio of the mean intensities, combined with low sampling rates, was the most mathematically accurate for treating data produced by LA-SF-ICP-MS.Historically, protocols devised to determine U–Pb ages and Hf isotope compositions from the same growth zone of complicated zircons, have had varying degrees of success. Recently, a quasi-simultaneous method335 was developed using a 193 nm excimer laser coupled to a MC-ICP-MS instrument equipped with a unique fixed-collector-array and a series of variable-zoom lenses to change the dispersion of the analyte and bring ion beams into the collectors coincidentally. This feature allowed rapid switching between U–Pb and Hf collector configurations. A spot size of 40 μm and a laser repetition rate of 5 Hz were chosen. Results for three zircon RMs demonstrated that this relatively simple instrument configuration was capable of measuring zircon U–Pb age and Hf isotope composition accurately on one single spot. In contrast, Tollstrup et al.336 opted for a much more complicated instrumental setup to acquire truly simultaneous measurements. This involved coupling an excimer LA system, equipped with a dual-volume sample cell, to both a single collector SF ICP mass spectrometer and a MC ICP mass spectrometer and splitting the sample aerosol as it left the sample cell. The relative proportion of sample aerosol reaching each mass spectrometer needed to be carefully controlled to ensure sufficient signal for precise measurements. Measurements of a suite of zircon standards provided U–Pb ages within 0.3–2.5% (2s) of the nominal value, with internal errors of better than 0.4–0.7%. The Hf isotope ratios were within one epsilon unit of those from solution analyses and internal errors were typically <0.008%.4.2.2 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy is used in a wide variety of applications including the provenancing of archaeological artifacts,337 quality control in the mining industry338 and identification of geological samples in the field.339 However, there is still much debate over the selection of the most appropriate chemometric method for processing LIBS data, depending on the application. For the determination of Fe in iron ore,340 particular emphasis was placed on how spectral data from two separate spectrometers covering UV and visible wavelengths were combined. Standard PLS regression and PCR produced similar accuracies, whereas those for multi-block PLS and serial partial PLS were inferior. Optimisation of an ANN algorithm, advocated341 for the accurate identification of geological samples by LIBS, included the selection of input information and the adoption of various training techniques. The trained network was tested using a variety of natural rocks (silicates, carbonates, sulfide and oxides). Despite differences in the surface texture and minor variations in chemical composition, the technique was able to identify 88% of the samples correctly using 10-shot averaged spectra. In contrast, PLS without spectral averaging performed best for the LIBS instrument on the Mars Science Laboratory (see below).342 In general, the ANN-based methods did not provide any improvement over the PLS methods, suggesting that the LIBS spectra had no significant non-linearities.Because LIBS is able to probe remote targets without any sample preparation, it has become a technique of choice in space exploration. On board the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover that landed on Mars in August 2012 is the ChemCam instrument suite consisting of a LIBS instrument and a remote micro-imager to supply contextual images of the LIBS analysis spots. The primary objective is to investigate Martian geochemistry, using a 1067 nm laser with a spot size of ∼490 μm to ablate targets within 7 m of the rover. As ChemCam will be the first LIBS experiment on another planet, a wealth of information has been published on the operation of this equipment, including papers on: the choice of onboard calibration standards;343 a reference database of LIBS lines taking account of the effects of the Martian atmosphere;344 assessment of the most appropriate multivariate technique for quantitative analysis;342,345 and calibrations to derive the elemental composition and degrees of hydration of various hydrous sulfates.346 Plans to probe Jupiter's icy moon Europa in a mission to be launched in 2020 are focussed on confirming its potential to sustain life. To this end, a miniaturised LIBS system was developed and preliminary tests on analogue materials under simulated Europan conditions carried out.347 Mezzacappa et al.348 reviewed the capability and advantage of LIBS to analyse the moon's surface at 1.5 m distance from a lunar rover and its potential for detecting the water content of lunar soils.4.3 Sample preparation4.3.1 Sample dissolution. Complete dissolution of geological materials requires the use of HF acid to breakdown the bonds in silicate matrices. Apart from the hazards associated with handling this acid, there is the potential for the formation of relatively insoluble fluoride complexes. Muratli et al.171 observed that insoluble fluorides formed during microwave-assisted digestion of marine sediments dissolved slowly over time at room temperature in 12.5% (v/v) HNO3, with the least soluble fluorides of Al and Mg taking up to four weeks to dissolve. However, this time was reduced to 6 days if the samples were heated at 60 °C for 24 h; no reprecipitation of the fluorides after heating was evident. The formation of insoluble AlF3, a major obstacle in a new dissolution procedure349 in which rock powders were reacted in a high pressure asher with a mixture of HF and HNO3, was overcome by using an appropriate digestion temperature and adding magnesium to the samples before digestion. The high pressure ashing procedure was particularly well suited for the determination of trace elements in samples containing resistant minerals; 41 trace elements were determined by ICP-MS equipped with a collision cell. The measurement bias for eight RMs was generally better than ±5% RSD.An alternative350 to the Carius tube method of digesting geological samples for the measurement of the PGEs involved addition of an enriched isotope spike solution to 2–5 g of powdered sample and digestion in HF in a custom-made 120 mL PTFE beaker on a hot plate. The dried residue was further digested with HF and HNO3 at 190 °C for 48 h after sealing the beaker in a stainless steel pressure bomb. Although only HF and HNO3 were used at a relatively low temperature, ultramafic rocks containing refractory minerals were effectively decomposed, as confirmed by results for the CANMET RMs measured. The method gave LODs and precision nearly the same as those obtained by the Carius tube technique but had the advantages of being relatively simple, low cost and applicable to mafic and ultramafic rocks and Ni–Cu sulfides. Osmium was not retained in solution by this method.Measurement of Sm–Nd isotopes can be used to date ores such as scheelite, CaWO4, a common accessory mineral in hydrothermal gold or tungsten ore deposits and one of the few minerals characterised by high Sm–Nd ratios. However, it is difficult to dissolve scheelite completely in mineral acids because of the protective coating of tungstic acid that forms on its surface. In both low temperature and Teflon bomb acid dissolution351 for the determination of Sm–Nd isotopes by MC-ICP-MS, a large amount of tungstic acid remained after the addition of 2.5 M HCl prior to cation-exchange separation, although less than 10% of the Nd and Sm resided in the precipitate. On the addition of a 149Sm–150Nd spike for quantification by ID, spike-sample isotopic equilibration was only completely achieved in the Teflon bomb method, making it the procedure of choice for this application.4.3.2 Sample separation and preconcentration. Automation of the processes involved in complex chemical separations has always appeared attractive but robots capable of tolerating corrosive acid vapours can be elusive. A fully automated column-separation system,352 called COLUMNSPIDER, for the determination of Nd, Pb and Sr isotope ratios consisted of a micropipetting robot that dispensed reagents and sample solutions into an open-column resin bed for elemental separation. Up to ten samples could be handled in parallel in a single automated run. When multiple column separations with different resins were required, e.g., for the separation of Nd–Pb–Sr isotopes, COLUMNSPIDER completed these separations using multiple runs. Total procedural blanks and isotopic compositions determined for basalt RMs JB-2 and JB-3 (JSP) and BCR-2 (USGS) were comparable to those obtained by careful manual operation by skilled operators. This system could be customised for a range of potential applications and is commercially available.Many of the separation and preconcentration techniques reported recently are concerned with the determination of precious metals by ICP techniques. Chicken eggshell membrane packed into a microcolumn was used for solid phase extraction of trace amounts of Ag and Au from geological samples prior to FAAS353 or ICP-MS detection,354 respectively. The membrane was prepared from eggshells provided by the university catering facilities and represented a low cost and environmentally friendly approach that might be ripe for commercial exploitation. A new sorbent based on cysteine-modified silica gel was highly selective for column solid-phase extraction and determination of low levels of Au, Pd and Pt in geological samples.141 Recoveries of 93–97% from acidic media containing 0.1 to 2 M HCl were achieved. The analytes retained on the sorbent were eluted with 0.1 M thiourea in 0.1 M HCl and measured by ETAAS or ICP-AES. The LODs for Au in copper ore and copper concentrate were 0.002 and 0.006 μg g−1 using ETAAS and ICP-AES detection, respectively. The LOD for Pd by ICP-AES was also 0.006 μg g−1. Silica modified with ethylenediamine, prepared using the sol–gel technique, was also employed to preconcentrate Au and Pd from a platinum ore RM.355 A procedure for the separation of Pt from ferrous matrices was based on the sorption of Pt as chloride complexes on polyurethane foam, prior to determination by ICP-AES.356 Measurement LODs in solution were 66 μm L−1 and the precision 1.2% RSD (n = 10). A simple method,271 based on the sorption of Au on granular activated carbon in acidic medium and then placing the dried activated carbon directly into a graphite tube atomiser for measurement by ETAAS, was applied successfully to the determination of Au in copper and platinum ores. Activated carbon modified with 2,6-diaminopyridine selectively extracted Au, Pd and Pt from several ore and rock RMs prior to measurement by ICP-AES.357Separation and preconcentration of REEs are often required when the natural levels in the samples are very low, the detection technique is not particularly sensitive or potential interferents need to be removed. A method358 to determine REEs at sub-ng g−1 levels in rocks used ion-exchange chromatographic separation on AG50W-X8 cation resin and analysis by quadrupole ICP-MS. Samples were dissolved in a mixture of HF and HClO4 acids maintained at 140 °C for 5 days in Parr bombs to achieve complete dissolution. When concentrated HNO3 and H2O2 were added to the samples after chemical separation to destroy organic molecules from the resin and Tm was added as internal spike, the reproducibility of the data improved from 5% to about 1% RSD (n = 5). Cation exchange chromatography is commonly used to separate lanthanide elements from geological materials prior to measurement by ICP-AES. Alternative procedures based on co-precipitation of REEs and Th with oxalate in the presence of calcium359 and the use of copper DDTC to co-precipitate REEs and Y360 have been evaluated.4.4 Instrumental analysis4.4.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry and atomic emission spectrometry. Developments pertinent to the application of AAS and ICP-AES to the analysis of geological materials are covered in Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 of this Update. Advances in fundamental aspects of these techniques are described in the recent Update on atomic spectrometry.34.4.2 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. This year the distinction has been made between elemental determinations (bulk analysis) and the measurement of isotope ratios irrespective of the mass spectrometer in use.4.4.2.1 Bulk analysis. The use of collision/reaction cells to reduce polyatomic interferences in quadrupole ICP-MS continues to be highlighted. D’Ilio et al.210 reviewed (76 references) the analytical challenges when determining As, Cr, Se and V by DRC-ICP-MS. They illustrated the approaches and mechanisms involved in the analysis of a range of complex matrices, including rocks and soils. A method for determining Au concentrations361 directly in aqua regia solutions of rocks containing high levels of hafnium and tantalum without separation used an ICP-MS instrument fitted with a hexapole collision cell. Interferences from isobaric 181Ta16O+ and 180Hf16O1H+ were eliminated by adding oxygen as a reaction gas thereby converting them to TaO2+ and HfO2H+, respectively, without significant loss of Au+. The method employed hot plasma conditions, a metal screen between the torch and the load coil to enhance the Au signal intensity by 50%, and helium as collision gas. The method LOD was 3.06 pg g−1 but recoveries of Au from spiked samples were relatively high (131–141%). Other developments in bulk analysis by ICP-MS were mainly concerned with methods to preconcentrate the elements of interest. A fully automated system, consisting of a miniaturised LOV connected to a multisyringe flow injection outlet for sample introduction to ICP-MS, was designed for the determination of Th and U in environmental samples, including a phophogypsum and channel sediment.177 On-line separation and preconcentration of the analytes was achieved by means of UTEVA® resin in a microcolumn located on one of the LOV channels and the resin was regenerated automatically on-line. Other advantages of the system included LODs of 2.8 ng L−1 for Th and 0.4 ng L−1 for U, a precision of 1.7% RSD (n = 5), a wide working range and an injection frequency of up to 9 per hour. The paucity of reliable data for Se and Te in rocks prompted König et al.362 to develop a method to measure these elements, often present at the low ppb and sub-ppb level, simultaneously in the same sample split. They employed ID with 77Se and 125Te, separation on thiol cotton fibre and HG-ICP-MS, using a home-made hydride generator. Analysis of a range of rock RMs containing 30–350 ppb Se and 0.7–12 ppb Te gave precisions of 3–8% for Se and 0.4–11% for Te (2 RSD, n = 3).There have been several studies of the measurement of elemental concentrations by MC-ICP-MS. A novel procedure363 for the analysis of the REEs, Sc and Y involved lithium metaborate fusion of the rock samples followed by extraction chromatography with TODGA resin as the preferred medium. This resin was also used to purify the lithium metaborate flux before use to provide low procedural blanks. Nine Faraday cups and a dynamic collector on a MC-ICP-MS instrument were employed in five configurations to measure the concentrations of 14 REEs, Sc and Y by the standard-sample bracketing technique. The use of zoom optics was essential to minimise peak overlaps for 14 lanthanide isotopes. With matrix removal and judicious isotope selection, polyatomic interferences from oxide species were negligible and no corrections were required. The accuracy of the proposed procedure was verified using a range of USGS rock RMs and the average reproducibility was ca. 2% RSD (n = 5). A new sequential extraction procedure178 produced five distinct fractions of Nd, Pa, Ra, Th and U from the same initial sample using a single 4 mm internal diameter chromatographic column packed with Dowex AG1X-8, following dissolution and the addition of Pa, Ra, Th and U spikes for ID calculations. No further purification of the Th and U fractions was required for MC-ICP-MS analysis, whereas the Nd, Pa and Ra fractions required additional steps. Recoveries were generally greater than 95% for all elements, with negligible blanks. The fractions obtained were used to obtain Nd and U isotope ratios as well as Pa, Ra, Th and U concentration data.4.4.2.2 Isotope ratio measurements. It is evident that the application of new isotope data to the geosciences continues to be a major growth area of research, covering a wide range of stable and radioactive isotopic systems. For simplicity, analytical developments in this section will be covered in order of mass number as far as possible.Schemes for separating and measuring Mg isotope ratios often incorporate a step to determine Al isotopes as well. Methods for determining 27Al–24Mg ratios have seen little improvement over the last decade so a novel method364 for measuring this ratio in unpurified sample solution by MC-ICP-MS is welcome. A mixed spike solution, containing isotopically enriched 25Mg and natural 27Al in a known ratio, was added to the samples which were analysed without the separation required in conventional ID schemes. To determine the spike to sample ratio for monoisotopic Al, measurements of spiked aliquots were bracketed by unspiked aliquots to minimise the impact of elemental bias. Repeat measurements of USGS rock standards, as well as a gravimetrically prepared Al–Mg reference solution, indicated that the method was accurate and reproducible to 0.2%. This represented a 4- to 10-fold improvement in precision over that of previously used methods. A new estimate of the 27Al–24Mg ratio for the Ivuna CI chondrite of 0.09781 ± 0.00029 was proposed. A modified procedure365 for separating Al and Mg from meteorites and terrestrial silicate rocks on a single ion-exchange column filled with AG50W-X12 resin involved elution of Mg and Al with 1 M and 4 M HNO3, respectively. This procedure removed all matrix elements with the exception of Co, Cu and Ni. The >99% recovery for Mg was important for limiting mass-dependent fractionation to <0.05‰. No matrix effects were detected and the total procedural blank was <2 ng Mg. Figures of merit obtained on ca. 50 mg of sample indicated the method was suitable for the chronological study of the early solar system. The Mg isotopic composition of some terrestrial rocks was identical within experimental error to that of three chrondrites analysed. A procedure366 for measuring Mg stable isotope compositions in marine biogenic aragonite and calcite involved sampling with a microdrill after removing surface layers, dissolution in mineral acids and analysis by MC-ICP-MS using the standard-sample bracketing technique for mass bias correction. Based on measurements of GSJ RM JCp-1 (Coral), the δ26Mg precision (2SD, n = 37) was ±0.22‰. The data were used to evaluate mechanisms for cation isotope fractionation during carbonate precipitation. Pogge von Strandmann et al.367 reported Li and Mg isotope compositions of 33 ultramafic zenoliths from the mantle and compared these with data for 30 meteorites, most of which were chondritic. They too noted that recently published Mg isotopic data for mantle-derived samples were not always consistent, and so made strenuous efforts to assess the accuracy of their data by several different approaches, including standard addition experiments, two different separation chemistries and three different sample introduction systems for MC-ICP-MS. Their estimate of the Mg isotope composition of the primitive mantle was within the error of the average values for the relevant chondrites and compatible with the data of Wang et al.365There have been significant advances in the measurement of stable isotope ratios for so-called ‘non-traditional isotope’ systems. A novel approach to the determination of Ca isotopes in geological materials,368 including the low abundance 46Ca (0.003%) isotope, involved a four-step purification scheme to ensure 99.9% recovery of Ca and excellent separation of Ca from elements that may create isobaric interferences or affect the instrumental mass fractionation during analysis. Samples were analysed by HR-MC-ICP-MS but because intense beams were used to detect the low abundance isotopes, no data were collected for 40Ca. The samples were reanalysed by TIMS to obtain the 40Ca data. In this way all isotopes from 40Ca to 48Ca could be measured with precisions considerably better than previously reported, e.g., the external reproducibilities of the non-mass-dependent abundances of μ43Ca, μ46Ca and μ48Ca (normalised to 42Ca–44Ca) were 1.8, 45 and 12.5 ppm respectively by HR-MC-ICP-MS.The determination of51V–50V ratios requires a separation procedure that provides virtually complete recovery of V and separation from matrix elements, and a measurement strategy that copes with the large isotope ratio of ca. 415. Data for 51V–50V ratios in geological RMs299 were obtained using a protocol369 that involved quantitative chemical separation of V from matrix elements using five separate ion-exchange columns before analysis by HR-MC-ICP-MS on an instrument equipped with a non-standard array of collectors to facilitate simultaneous collection of masses 49 to 54. The 51V Faraday cup was equipped with a 109 Ω resistor to accommodate the intense beam of this isotope. The measurement precision of δ51V in an in-house secondary standard solution was ±0.12‰ (2s, n = 600), an improvement on previous techniques of almost two orders of magnitude.The key step in a new analytical method370 for studying Ti isotope anomalies in meteorites was the separation of Ti using TODGA and AG1-X8 resins before analysis by MC-ICP-MS. The isobaric interferences from Ca, Cr and V could be adequately corrected as long as these elements were present at atomic ratios of Ca–Ti < 20, Cr–Ti < 0.1 and V–Ti < 2. The separation procedure produced ratios several orders of magnitude lower than these, demonstrating the effectiveness of the chemistry employed.In order to identify stable Fe isotope variations in rocks formed in high temperature environments, highly precise measurements are required. In the method developed by Millet et al.,371 chemical separation of Fe was based on its affinity for chloride complexes and their high partition coefficients on anion-exchange resins, such as AG1-X4. The MC-ICP-MS instrument was configured in a pseudo-high resolution mode, by narrowing the source slit to 0.03 mm and closing the alpha slits to correct for beam aberrations. The instrumental mass bias was corrected by adding a 57Fe–58Fe double spike to IRMM-014 Fe isotope standard solution and using the sample-standard bracketing method. The precision (2 SD, n = 51) for δ56Fe was ±0.02‰ for an acquisition time of 15 min. Replicate digestions and measurements of USGS RM BHVO-2 (basalt) demonstrated that this precision was obtainable on natural samples. Theoretical calculations suggested that a greater dynamic range for the Faraday collectors and the addition of the double spike before the chemistry could improve the method precision.A new approach372 to correcting for short-term drift and mass bias effects during Sr isotope measurements by MC-ICP-MS was to measure the 92Zr–90Zr ratio from a high purity Zr spike solution added after column separation on Eichrom Sr Spec resin. A modified empirical external normalisation protocol was used to correct for mass bias, allowing the simultaneous measurement of 87Sr–86Sr, δ87Sr and δ88Sr. Omission of standard-sample bracketing resulted in increased sample throughput. Use of the 92Zr–90Zr ratio gave a 2-fold better precision of δ88Sr measurements than correction with 91Zr–90Zr. The long-term reproducibility (2SD, n = 34) for δ87Sr and δ88Sr was better than ±0.040‰ and ±0.018‰, respectively, using NIST SRM 987 (Strontium Carbonate Powder). Data determined for three USGS igneous rock standards were consistent with literature values.A single collector SF-ICP-MS instrument was preferred373 over MC-ICP-MS for the measurement of Pb isotopes in samples containing ≤0.2 ng amounts of Pb because of its fast electrostatic scanning data acquisition. The long-term precision (2 SD) for a 0.1 ng mL−1 solution of NIST SRM 981 (Natural Lead Isotopes) was 0.11% for 208Pb/206Pb and 207Pb/206Pb, and 0.21–0.23% for the 204Pb ratios. These figures were comparable, for equivalent amounts of total Pb, with precisions reported elsewhere when using a high efficiency sample cone together with ion counter arrays or conventional Faraday collectors. Chemical purification was not required for digests of basaltic and andesitic rocks, as the final solution in 2% HNO3 contained <10 μg mL−1 total cations and <1.5 μg mL−1 of easily ionisable elements. However, the significant matrix effects observed for natural waters required removal of major cations prior to analysis.A simple and rapid method for the determination of Os and Re concentrations and isotope compositions by ID MC-ICP-MS was developed for the analysis of sedimentary rocks.374 The Os isotopes were measured simultaneously using four Channeltron ion counters. Direct introduction of volatile OsO4 molecules into the ICP torch by the sparging method reduced the measurement time significantly. The measured Os isotope ratios were corrected by the sample-standard bracketing method to allow for temporal changes in amplification efficiencies of the ion counters. The measurement of Re isotopes, after separation by anion-exchange chromatography, involved solution nebulisation, an ultrasonic membrane desolvator and eight Faraday cup detectors. Either inverse aqua regia (3 + 1 HNO3:HCl) or Carius tube (CrO3–H2SO4) digestions could be used as both gave the same Os and Re compositions for two sedimentary rock RMs. Although the data were not as precise as methods employed for the determination of Os and Re isotopes in volcanic rocks, it was felt that they were suitable for the reconstruction of the marine Os isotope record.With the advances in MS, analysts are faced with ever larger datasets to manipulate. Iolite,375 a non-commercial freeware package developed to aid the processing of MS data, was different from other data reduction packages in that its focus was the interpolation of data that vary with time by using a variety of user-selectable methods and the reduction of data on the basis of time-slices. It was well suited for generating images from LA rasters, and combining information for up to four separate elemental concentrations. Large datasets such as multi-day ICP-MS measurements were handled rapidly. Iolite is clearly being widely adopted and was used in other work described in this section.Improvements in the precision and accuracy of U–Pb geochronology by ID TIMS have revealed some significant discrepancies among data from different laboratories. One way of resolving these differences would be adoption of a common software platform to standardise the protocols used for data processing. Progress in an on-going collaboration to develop cyber infrastructure for high precision U–Pb geochronology based on analysing accessory minerals by TIMS was reported by Bowring et al.376 This activity is part of the EARTHTIME (http://earth-time.org) initiative and is probably one of the first collaborations of its kind between computer scientists and earth scientists. The backbone of the cyber infrastructure consisted of two open source software programmes: Tripoli and U–Pb_Redux. The first programme allowed the user to review measured isotopic data interactively before exporting them to U–Pb_Redux, which managed the workflows, reduced data, propagated uncertainties and visualised the results. The new set of algorithms embedded in U–Pb_Redux for data reduction and estimating uncertainty of U–Pb ID data was discussed in more detail in a separate paper.3774.4.3 Other mass spectrometric techniques. The fact that dolomite reacts more slowly than calcite with acids was exploited in a semi-automatic on-line method378 for determination of carbon and oxygen stable isotopes in natural mixtures of calcite and dolomite by IRMS. The isotopic composition of the calcite component and the bulk sample were determined using the CO2 liberated by reaction with phosphoric acid, and an isotopic mass balance was used to calculate δ13C and δ18O for the dolomite component. The best results were obtained with a 20 minute digestion at 40 °C for calcite and a 45 minute digestion at 90 °C for complete dissolution, i.e. calcite plus dolomite. This procedure allowed accurate determination of isotope ratios from smaller samples (300 μg of CaCO3) in a shorter time than by published off-line methods, but was heavily dependent on the accurate quantification of the relative amounts of calcite and dolomite in the samples by XRD.Barry et al.379 favoured noble gas mass spectrometry rather than IRMS for high precision measurements of N isotope ratios in ocean basalts because these samples had a low N abundance. A newly designed extraction and purification system was interfaced to a noble gas mass spectrometer configured with two Faraday collectors for masses 28 and 29 and a single axial Daly collector positioned in front of a Faraday cage for mass 30. Mass resolution of ca. 620 on the axial detector was adequate to resolve the N2 and CO species from C2H6. The 15N–15N contribution (typically <2% of the signal), calculated from the measured 14N–14N ratio assuming similar proportions to that in air, was subtracted from the signal at mass 30. The residual value at this mass equated to CO (12C–18O + 13C–17O), which was then used to apply corrections from the corresponding CO contributions at masses 28 and 29, again assuming air-like proportions of the species. These corrections resulted in substantial improvements in reproducibility and the overall accuracy when the contribution of CO was significant. A novel procedure380 for high precision measurements of the halogen content of geological materials by the noble gas method was ideally suited to mg-size aliquots of minerals and glasses containing ppm levels of Cl and ppb levels of Br and I. Samples were irradiated by neutrons to produce the radioactive isotopes 38Cl, 82Br and 128I, which then decayed to the noble gas isotopes 38Ar, 80Kr and 128Xe, respectively. Measurements were made two to twelve months after radiation. Techniques used to extract the noble gases from their fluid inclusion or mineral hosts included LA, in vacuo crushing of fluid inclusions and fusion in a resistance furnace at 1600 °C. The analytical precision for analysis of four scapolite gems was about 2% (2σ). These materials had sufficiently reproducible compositions (Br–Cl 11.2 × 10−3 ± 4.5% and I–Cl of 9.3 × 10−6 ± 10%) to be useful as Br, Cl and I standards. A new reference gas for detector calibration in the MC-MS measurement of 40Ar/39Ar was prepared65 by mixing gasses derived from neutron-irradiated sanidine with an enriched 38Ar spike. By combining atmospheric Ar and reference gas in different ways, correction factors for Ar ratios measured with different detector combinations could be obtained over a wide range of signal size. These correction factors were reproducible to better than ±0.5‰ (2σ standard error). A straightforward way of characterising the non-linearity of individual electron multipliers over a wide dynamic range using 38Ar/39Ar measurements of the reference gas was proposed.4.4.3.1 TIMS. The high ionisation energy of Zn makes it difficult to ionise Zn thermally with the good precision necessary for the measurement of Zn isotope fractionation (δZn) by TIMS. An ID TIMS procedure381 using a mixed 67Zn–70Zn spike required <1 μg of Zn for measurements. The δZn reproducibility (0.039‰ amu−1) achieved was sufficient to determine sub-‰ δZn variations in a range of geological RMs. The finding that the δZn values in two metamorphic samples were similar to those in igneous rocks but different to those in sedimentary rocks was consistent with the understanding that processes involving high temperature and pressures do not affect the isotopic composition of chalcophile elements such as Zn. Chondrite samples could be put382 into two groups based on Zn isotope fractionation, thereby supporting a previous proposal that chondrites are a mixture of materials from two different temperature sources.Although MC-ICP-MS provides a greater sample throughput than TIMS, the latter has better sensitivity and accuracy for the measurement of Nd isotopic ratios in geological samples. Traditionally, two-step column chromatography has been employed, in which REEs are first separated from the matrix elements, and then Nd is purified further to minimise the isobaric interferences from other REEs. To reduce the work involved, Li et al.383 developed a method to measure 143Nd/144Nd directly in the REE fraction. Columns containing cation-exchange resin AG50W-X12 were used to remove the majority of matrix elements and some of the heavy REEs from the elements of interest, with yields of >90% for Nd and Sm. The key to the success of this method was the accurate correction of the isobaric inference of 144Sm on 144Nd. Data for 13 USGS and GSJ geological RMs spanning a wide range of Sm–Nd ratios (0.13 to 0.46) and bulk compositions agreed within 0.004% with previously published TIMS and MC-ICP-MS data after Nd–Sm separation. The same group of researchers384 also developed a single-step separation method based on Eichrom LN Spec resin for the high-purity separation of Nd or Sm. Very small samples (1–3 mg) could be processed in 3–4 h with low procedural blanks of <10 pg. Results for 11 silicate RMs agreed at the 95% confidence limit to within ±0.004% for 143Nd/144Nd and ±2% for Nd–Sm with the recommended values. The proposed protocol was preferred for the analysis of very small samples even though the uncertainty was about three times larger than that achievable with the full two-stage separation, for which much larger amounts of Nd are required.A new method385 for measuring the isotopic abundance of tungsten in silicate samples by TIMS involved a four-step separation of W by ion-exchange chromatography and the NTIMS measurement of WO3−. Data were initially corrected for oxide interferences and mass fractionation by normalisation to 186W/184W or 186W/183W, using an exponential law, and then for a mass-dependent change of oxygen isotope composition in the measured W oxides by normalisation to 183W/184W using a linear law. The long-term reproducibility of ±4.5 ppm (2σ, n = 39) for 182W/184 W measured on about 1.5 μg of W purified from natural samples was a five-fold improvement on the precision of conventional W isotope measurements by MC-ICP-MS.4.4.3.2 SIMS. Graphite is the most common form of elemental carbon in crustal rocks and preserves the carbon isotopic composition achieved at the time of its formation. A SIMS method386 with an improved spatial resolution of 2–3 μm was used to unravel C isotope heterogeneities on a micrometer scale in single graphite crystals precipitated from a partially melted metamorphic rock. Remarkable core-to-rim variations were observed. The 13C/12C measurements, calibrated against a new in-house C isotope standard graphite from Madagascar previously analysed by conventional IRMS, had a precision of 0.3‰ (1σ).The recently developed titanium-in-quartz geothermobarometer, which is based on the pressure and temperature dependence of Ti substitution for tetrahedral silicon in quartz, has the potential to be applied to a wide range of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Behr et al.387 analysed synthetic quartz crystals with Ti concentrations of 18–813 ppm (as determined by EPMA) by SIMS using HR and CEF techniques. In HR mode, the mass spectrometer was operated at a mass resolving power of about 2000 to separate molecular ions from elemental Ti peaks. For analysis by CEF, the instrument detected secondary ions sputtered from the sample with excess KEs of 75 ± 20 eV. Although the Ti ion yield was higher for NIST SRMs 610, 612 and 614 (Trace Elements in Glass) than for the synthetic quartz, the NIST glasses were used to quantify Ti concentrations in quartz with errors of ±3.8% by HR and ±8.2% by CEF, by applying a simple correction factor. Regardless of the technique chosen, it was important to monitor other elements, such as Al and Ca, to ensure that only quartz was being analysed.A high precision SIMS procedure388 for in situ measurements of Fe isotope compositions of different sulfides and oxides with a spatial resolution of 15–20 μm had a mass resolution of about 7000. Secondary 54Fe+ and 56Fe+ ions were measured in multicollection mode using two off-axis Faraday cups, and the 52Cr+ intensity was measured on an electron multiplier. The long-term precision for δ56Fe was typically ±0.2–0.3‰ (2SD, n = 41) for a suite of well-characterised Fe minerals. In comparison, a reproducibility of 0.1‰ (2σ) is typically obtained by LA-MC-ICP-MS with a spatial resolution of 35 μm. The δ56Fe values obtained by SIMS and MC-ICP-MS for three magnetite RMs agreed within experimental error.In situ microanalysis by SIMS is well suited for the determination of oxygen and silicon isotope ratios in sub-mm quartz bands within BIFs. Accurate (±0.3‰) data for δ18O and δ30Si were obtained389 with a spatial resolution of ca. 10 μm for quartz from several well characterised BIFs. The δ18O and δ30Si values of +7.9‰ to +27.5‰ and −3.7‰ to +1.2‰, respectively, provided information on the different sources of Si during the formation of the BIF quartz. The ion microprobe was the technique of choice for providing high precision measurements of oxygen isotope ratios in tiny extraterrestrial particles <100 μm in diameter.390 To address the difficulties of handling these samples, a novel sample holder with multiple holes was designed, into which epoxy disks containing a single unknown sample and a standard grain were cast and polished. Measured oxygen isotope ratios were used to assess the possible origin of a range of chondrules.There are increasing requirements for U–Pb and Pb–Pb geochronology in a variety of minerals at high spatial resolution. The NanoSIMS technique391 was capable of accurate Pb–Pb dating of zircon and baddeleyite with a spatial resolution of <2 μm, and U–Pb dating of zircons at a scale of <5 μm. The ca. 500 pA O− primary beam with a diameter of 1.7 mm was substantially brighter and smaller than those previously reported and improved the lateral resolution and precision for Pb–Pb dating. Samples were measured in scanning mode by rastering 3 × 3 μm2 areas in order to eliminate U–Pb fractionation related to pit depth. Results for four zircon standards were consistent within error with the reported ages determined by ID TIMS and demonstrated that the technique could have important applications for the dating of minerals at high lateral resolution.It has generally been considered that analysis of geological materials by SIMS was not affected by crystal orientation because the high energy beam destroyed the crystal structure at depths of up to 10 μm in the sputtered area. However, high precision U–Pb analysis of rutile by SIMS392 revealed that instrumental bias for isotope ratios and count rates varied with crystal orientation. To overcome this effect, it was recommended that a large number of randomly-orientated standard grains of rutile be analysed to provide an appropriate standard dataset for calibration.Precise U–Pb dating of apatite, particularly in young samples, can be challenging because of the low U abundance and the difficulties in making accurate corrections for the presence of common Pb. Analytical and data reduction protocols for SIMS data393 gave accurate ages (within 2–4%) for apatites containing <3 ppm U and >50% common Pb. Two key considerations were the careful determination of the common Pb composition and choice of a suitable apatite calibration standard.4.4.4 X-ray techniques. For a comprehensive overview of recent developments in XRF techniques and their application to the analysis of geological materials, the Update5 on XRF should be consulted (452 references).Samples are normally presented to XRF spectrometers either as pressed powder pellets or fused glass beads depending on the application. A study of the effect of differences in mineralogy on XRF measurements of major elements in ferromanganese alloy slag394 highlighted the importance of proper assessment of sample particle size and the binder employed in the preparation of pressed powder pellets. A simple method395 for making in-house matrix-matched pressed pellet standards for determining Cu, Mn, Ni, U and V in carbonate lithologies used pure calcium carbonate power (99.999%) spiked with single element standard solutions to give multi-element concentrations in the pellets of between 1 and 100 ppm. The compositions of the in-house carbonate standards were verified by ICP-MS following acid digestion and by XRF using PANalytical's PROTrace XRF trace element standards and calibration routine. The in-house standards, whose homogeneity was confirmed by LA-ICP-MS, were used to refine pre-existing XRF calibrations originally constructed with silicate rock standards. Fused glass beads prepared from only 11 mg of material for the analysis of ancient pottery and igneous rocks396 had a sample to lithium tetraborate flux ratio of 1:300. Their performance was comparable with that for beads prepared with the more usual sample-to-flux ratio of 1:10 for WDXRF analysis. Major elements were determined using calibration curves constructed by measuring synthetic calibration standards prepared from solid chemical reagents.The increased use of portable XRF included applications to mineral exploration. Data from a hand-held XRF instrument were used,397 together with Au assay data, to reveal stratigraphic control on Au mineralisation in a gold deposit in Australia that was not apparent at the macroscopic level. Individual lava flows were identified on the basis of their elemental concentrations (Cr, K, Ti and Zr). In the evaluation of a copper deposit in Chile,398 portable XRF equipment was used to determine Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Pb, Rb, Sr, Ti and Zn in samples collected during a drill-hole survey. When subjected to different statistical pattern-recognition techniques, the data confirmed the rock classes, based on visual inspection, for >70% of the samples. The practicalities of using a portable XRF instrument to undertake low cost geochemical surveys was demonstrated by analysing samples from some abandoned mine sites in a highly polluted Pb–Zn mining district in central Spain for As, Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn under field and laboratory conditions.249 The study concluded that such portable instruments should become equipment of choice for environmental monitoring in developing countries where little or no other supporting facilities were available.Analytical techniques such as synchrotron XRF and PIXE are well suited for non-destructive elemental imaging. Ryan399 reviewed (117 references) developments that have underpinned the growth in geological applications using PIXE and the exciting outlook for PIXE imaging. Use of a system with an external beam rather than the more commonly used in-vacuum nuclear microprobes, which require the sample to be analysed under vacuum, illustrated400 the advances being made in the chemical imaging of rocks by PIXE at the μm scale or less. Synchrotron μ-XRF was used, together with LA-ICP-MS, for studying the migration of Cs in Opalinus clay, which has been proposed as a host rock for high-level radioactive waste.401 Combining the outputs of these two techniques provided a significant enhancement of the imaging capabilities and robustness of the quantification when investigating heterogeneous media.5 Glossary of terms2DTwo-dimensionalA4FTsymmetrical flow field flow fractionationAASAtomic absorption spectrometryAECAnion exchange chromatographyAESAtomic emission spectrometryAFMAtomic force microscopyAFSAtomic fluorescence spectrometryANNArtifical neural networkamuAtomic mass unitAPDCAmmonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamateASEAccelerated solvent extractionASUAtomic Spectrometry UpdateaTOF-MSAerosol time of flight mass spectrometryBIFBanded iron formationBCRCommunity Bureau of Reference (of the European Community) now IRMMCCCarbonate carbonCANMETCanada Centre for Mineral and Energy TechnologyCEFConventional energy filteringCFContinuous flowCNTCarbon nanotubesCPECloud point extractionCRCCollision reaction cellCRMCertified reference materialCSContinuum sourceDBTDibutyltinDDTCDiethyldithiocarbamateDGAN,N,N′N′-Tetraoctyl-1,5-diglycolamide or N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis-2-ethylhexyldiglycolamide based resinsDGTDiffusion gradient in thin filmsDLLMEDispersive liquid liquid microextractionDRCDynamic reaction cellDRIDesert Research Institute (USA)DTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acidECElemental carbonEDSEnergy dispersive spectrometryEDTAEthyldiaminetetraacetic acidEDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescenceEMElectron microscopyEPMAElectron probe microanalyserERMEuropean Reference MaterialESI-MSElectrospray ionisation mass spectrometryETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryETVElectrothermal vaporisationETV-FAESElectrothermal vaporisation flame atomic emission spectrometryETV-ICP-MSElectrothermal vaporisation inductively couple plasma mass spectrometryFAASFlame atomic absorption spectrometryFFFField flow fractionationFIFlow injectionFIAFlow injection analysisFMPSFast mobility particle sizerFPFundamental parameterFRMFederal reference method (USA)FTIRFourier transform infraredGCGas chromatographyGC-AESGas chromatography atomic emission spectrometryGSJGeological Survey of JapanGSPinhalable personal sampler design produced by GSA Messgerätebau (Germany)GUMGuide to Uncertainity in MeasurementHDPEHigh density polyethyleneHEPAHigh efficiency particulate airHGHydride generationHG-AASHydride generation atomic absorption spectrometryHG-AFSHydride generation atomic fluorescence spectrometryHG–ETAASHydride generation electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryHPLCHigh performance liquid chromatographyHPLC-HG-AFSHigh performance hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectrometryHPLC-ICP-MSHigh performance inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryHPLC-VG-AFSHigh performance vapour generation atomic fluorescence spectrometryHPSHigh Purity Standards (USA)HRHigh resolutionHR–ICP-MSHigh resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryHR-CS-ETAASHigh resolution continuum source electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryIAEAInternational Atomic Energy AgencyIAGInternational Association of GeoanalystsICIon chromatographyICPInductively coupled plasmaICP-AESInductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometryICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryIDIsotope dilutionIERMInstitute for Environmental Reference Materials (of Ministry of Environmental Protection, China)IGGEInstitute of Geophysical and Geochemical Exploration (China)ILIonic liquidINCTInstitute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology (Poland)IOMInstitute of Occupational Medicine (UK)IPEIon pair extractionIRInfraredIRMMInstitute for Reference Materials and MeasurementsIRMSIsotope ratio mass spectrometryISOInternational Organisation for StandardizationJKJernkontoret/Corrosion and Metals Research Institute (Sweden)JSACJapan Society for Analyical ChemistryKEKinetic energyLALaser ablationLA-ICP-MSLaser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryLA-MC-ICP-MSLaser ablation multicollector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryLC-MSLiquid chromatography mass spectrometryLDPELiquid drop microextractionLGCLaboratory of the Government Chemist (UK)LIBSLaser induced breakdown spectroscopyLLELiquid liquid extractionLODLimit of detectionLOQLimit of quantificationLOVLab-on-valveMCMulticollectorMC-ICP-MSMulticollector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryMeHgMethyl mercuryMe2HgDiethyl mercuryMIBKMethyl isobutyl ketoneMIP-MSMicrowave induced plasma mass spectrometryMMADMass median aerodynamic diameterMOUDIMicro orifice uniform deposition impactorMPTMicrowave plasma torchMSMass spectrometryMPT-AESMicrowave plasma torch atomic emission spectrometryMWCNTMultiwalled carbon nanotubeMUMeasurement uncertaintym/zMass to charge ratioNACISNational Analysis Centre for Iron and Steel (China)NCSChina National Analysis Centre for Iron and SteelNd: YAGNeodymium doped:yttrium aluminum garnetNIOSHNational Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (USA)NISTNational Institute of Standards and Technology (USA)NMIJNational Metrology Institute of JapanNRCCNational Research Council of CanadaNRCCRMNational Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)NTIMSNegative thermal ionisation mass spectrometryNWRINational Water Research Institute (Canada)OREASOre Research and Exploration Pty Ltd Assay Standards (Australia)PBETPhysiologically based extraction testPCAPrincipal component analysisPCRPrincipal component regressionPGEPlatinum group elementPIXEParticle induced X-ray emissionPLSPartial least squarePMParticulate matterPM2.5Particulate matter (with an aerodynamic diameter of up to 2.5 μm)PM10Particulate matter (with an aerodynamic diameter of up to 10 μm)ppmPart per millionPTFEPoly(tetrafluoroethylene)QCQuality controlRCCRotating coiled columnREERare earth elementRMReference materialRPReverse phaseRP–HPLCReversed phase high performance liquid chromatographyRSDRelative standard deviationRTCResource Techology Corporation (USA)sStandard deviation of sampleSARMSouth African producers of Metallurgical and Geological Certified Reference MaterialsSBETsimplified bioaccessibility extraction testSDStandard deviationSESolvent extractionSEMScanning electron microscopySEM-EDSScanning electron microscopy energy dispersive spectrometrySFSector fieldSFESupercritical fluid extractionSF-ICP-MSSector field inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometrySFODMESolidification of floating organic drop microextractionSIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySPESolid phase extractionSPMESolid phase microextractionSRMStandard reference materialTBTTributyltinTEMTransmission electron microscopyTIMSThermal ionisation mass spectrometryTMAHTetramethylammonium hydroxideTODGAN,N,N,′N′-Tetraoctyl-1,5-diglycolamide based resinTOFTime of flightTRAP-LRMTraining in production and use of laboratory reference materials for use in routine quality control (EC-Growth Programme Contract G6MA-CT-2000-02006)TS-FF-AASThermospray flame furnace atomic absorption spectrometryTSPTotal suspended particlesTXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescenceUNEPUnited Nations Environment ProgrammeUSEPAUnited States Environmental Protection AgencyUSGSUnited States Geological SurveyUSNUltrasonic nebuliserUVUltra violetVGVapour generationWDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescenceXANESX-ray absorption near edge structureXASX-ray absorption spectrometryXRDX-ray diffractionXRFX-ray fluorescenceYAGYttrium aluminium garnetσPopulation standard deviationReferencesO. T. Butler, W. R. L. Cairns, J. M. Cook and C. M. Davidson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(2), 187–221 RSC .A. Taylor, M. P. Day, J. Marshall, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 537–576 RSC .E. Hywel Evans, C. D. Palmer and C. M. M. Smith, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(6), 909–927 RSC .R. Clough, L. R. Drennan-Harris, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(8), 1185–1224 RSC .M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, D. Wegrzynek and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(10), 1603–1644 RSC .S. Carter, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and S. Shore, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(12), 2319–2372 RSC .L. Rojo, M. A. Barnes and T. E. Gill, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(1), 83–102 CrossRef CAS .A. Amorosi and I. Sammartino, Int. J. Environ. Pollut., 2011, 46(3–4), 164–177 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Lewis, K. R. Reid, M. C. Pollock and S. L. Campleman, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2012, 62(1), 2–17 CAS .M. Balcerzak, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2011, 41(3), 214–235 CrossRef CAS .L. Svorc, P. Tomcik, J. Durdiak, M. Rievaj and D. Bustin, Pol. J. Environ. Stud., 2012, 21(1), 7–13 CAS .V. R. Despres, J. A. Huffman, S. M. Burrows, C. Hoose, A. S. Safatov, G. Buryak, J. Frohlich-Nowoisky, W. Elbert, M. O. Andreae, U. Poschl and R. Jaenicke, Tellus, Ser. B,  2012, 64, http://www.tellusb.net/index.php/tellusb/article/view/15598 date accessed: 15th November. 2012 Search PubMed.D. K. Sleeth and J. H. Vincent, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2011, 55(5), 476–484 CrossRef .D. K. Sleeth and J. H. Vincent, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2012, 56(2), 207–220 CrossRef CAS .T. Lee, E. G. Lee, S. W. Kim, W. P. Chisholm, M. Kashon and M. Harper, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2012, 56(4), 413–425 CrossRef .O. T. Butler, W. Cairns, J. M. Cook and C. M. Davidson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(2), 250–286 RSC .W. P. Chisholm, T. Lee, J. E. Slaven, J. Nelson and M. Harper, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2011, 46(4), 411–418 Search PubMed .K. A. Koehler, T. R. Anthony, M. Van Dyke and J. Volckens, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2012, 56(2), 194–206 CrossRef CAS .A. Zugasti, N. Montes, J. M. Rojo and M. Jose Quintana, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(2), 375–382 RSC .C. Asbach, H. Fissan, H. Kaminski, T. A. J. Kuhlbusch, D. Y. H. Pui, H. Shin, H. G. Horn and T. Hase, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2011, 11(5), 487–496 Search PubMed .A. Miller, A. Marinos, C. Wendel, G. King and A. Bugarski, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(8), 897–904 CrossRef CAS .D. Brouwer, M. Berges, M. A. Virji, W. Fransman, D. Bello, L. Hodson, S. Gabriel and E. Tielemans, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2012, 56(1), 1–9 CrossRef .G. Ramachandran, M. Ostraat, D. E. Evans, M. M. Methner, P. O'Shaughnessy, J. D'Arcy, C. L. Geraci, E. Stevenson, A. Maynard and K. Rickabaugh, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2011, 8(11), 673–685 CrossRef .R. J. C. Brown, Y. Kumar, A. S. Brown and K.-H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(18), 7812–7818 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Gustin, S. N. Lyman, P. Kilner and E. Prestbo, Atmos. Environ., 2011, 45(32), 5805–5812 CrossRef CAS .C.-N. Liu, S.-C. Chen and C.-J. Tsai, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(12), 1480–1487 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, J. G. Watson, J. C. Chow, S. Gronstal and S. D. Kohl, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2012, 12(2), 145–160 CAS .F. Drewnick, T. Boettger, S. L. von der Weiden-Reinmueller, S. R. Zorn, T. Klimach, J. Schneider and S. Borrmann, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2012, 5(6), 1443–1457 CrossRef .J. G. Watson, J. C. Chow, L. W. A. Chen, S. D. Kohl, G. S. Casuccio, T. L. Lersch and R. Langston, Atmos. Res., 2012, 106, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Pancras and M. S. Landis, Atmos. Environ., 2011, 45(37), 6751–6759 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Pancras, J. M. Ondov and R. Zeisler, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 538(1–2), 303–312 CrossRef CAS .N. Daher, Z. Ning, A. K. Cho, M. Shafer, J. J. Schauer and C. Sioutas, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(11), 1294–1304 CrossRef CAS .J. Ruusunen, M. Tapanainen, O. Sippula, P. Jalava, H. Lamberg, K. Nuutinen, J. Tissari, M. Ihalainen, K. Kuuspalo, J. Mäki-Paakkanen, P. Hakulinen, A. Pennanen, K. Teinilä, U. Makkonen, R. Salonen, R. Hillamo, M.-R. Hirvonen and J. Jokiniemi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401(10), 3183–3195 CrossRef CAS .N. Itoh, K. Inagaki, T. Narukawa, Y. Aoyagi, I. Narushima, M. Koguchi and M. Numata, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401(9), 2909–2918 CrossRef CAS .D. Baumgardner, O. Popovicheva, J. Allan, V. Bernardoni, J. Cao, F. Cavalli, J. Cozic, E. Diapouli, K. Eleftheriadis, P. J. Genberg, C. Gonzalez, M. Gysel, A. John, T. W. Kirchstetter, T. A. J. Kuhlbusch, M. Laborde, D. Lack, T. Mueller, R. Niessner, A. Petzold, A. Piazzalunga, J. P. Putaud, J. Schwarz, P. Sheridan, R. Subramanian, E. Swietlicki, G. Valli, R. Vecchi and M. Viana, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2012, 5(8), 1869–1887 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Park, P. H. McMurry and K. Park, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(3), 354–360 CrossRef CAS .A. Ulrich, S. Losert, N. Bendixen, A. Al-Kattan, H. Hagendorfer, B. Nowack, C. Adlhart, J. Ebert, M. Lattuada and K. Hungerbuehler, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(7), 1120–1130 RSC .S. A. Wang, J. Diwu, A. Simonetti, C. H. Booth and T. E. Albrecht-Schmiet, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(21), 9457–9463 CrossRef CAS .A. Mukhtar and A. Limbeck, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2012, 92(4), 496–508 CrossRef CAS .R. H. Rhodes, J. A. Baker, M. A. Millet and N. A. N. Bertler, Chem. Geol., 2011, 286(3–4), 207–221 CAS .R. G. O. Araujo, F. Vignola, I. N. B. Castilho, D. L. G. Borges, B. Welz, M. G. R. Vale, P. Smichowski, S. L. C. Ferreira and H. Becker-Ross, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(5), 378–382 CrossRef CAS .I. N. B. Castilho, B. Welz, M. G. R. Vale, J. B. de Andrade, P. Srnichowski, A. A. Shaltout, L. Colares and E. Carasek, Talanta, 2012, 88, 689–695 CrossRef CAS .D. Sanchez-Rodas, A. S. de la Campa, V. Oliveira and J. de la Rosa, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2012, 108, 112–114 CrossRef CAS .G. S. Yang, L. L. Ma, D. D. Xu, J. Li, T. T. He, L. Y. Liu, H. L. Jia, Y. B. Zhang, Y. Chen and Z. F. Chai, Chemosphere, 2012, 87(8), 845–850 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Diwakar, K. H. Loper, A.-M. Matiaske and D. W. Hahn, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(7), 1110–1119 RSC .P. Diwakar, P. Kulkarni and M. E. Birch, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(3), 316–332 CrossRef CAS .D. W. Hahn and N. Omenetto, Appl. Spectrosc., 2010, 64(12), 335–366 CrossRef .D. W. Hahn and N. Omenetto, Appl. Spectrosc., 2012, 66(4), 347–419 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Diwakar and P. Kulkarni, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(7), 1101–1109 RSC .Z.-M. Li, Y.-Y. Su, X.-J. Ren, J. Xu, G.-Q. Zhou, L.-H. Zhai, L.-B. Liu, G.-Y. Wei and N.-B. Huang, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(10), 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Olesik and P. J. Gray, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(7), 1143–1155 RSC .L. Flamigni, J. Koch, H. Wiltsche, R. Brogioli, S. Gschwind and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 619–625 RSC .A. Horst, H. Holmstrand, P. Andersson, A. Andersson, D. Carrizo, B. F. Thornton and O. Gustafsson, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 25(17), 2425–2432 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Torkmahalleh, L. Lin, T. M. Holsen, D. H. Rasmussen and P. K. Hopke, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(6), 690–696 CrossRef CAS .A. Spolaor, P. Vallelonga, J. Gabrieli, G. Cozzi, C. Boutron and C. Barbante, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(2), 310–317 RSC .K. Hartonen, T. Laitinen and M. L. Riekkola, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2011, 30(9), 1486–1496 CrossRef CAS .M. Z. Huang, S. C. Cheng, Y. T. Cho and J. Shiea, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 702(1), 1–15 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Shelley and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(11), 2153–2159 RSC .H. Borsdorf, T. Mayer, M. Zarejousheghani and G. A. Eiceman, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2011, 46(6), 472–521 CrossRef .M. Senoner and W. E. S. Unger, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(7), 1050–1068 RSC .M. Kundel, R. J. Huang, U. R. Thorenz, J. Bosle, M. J. D. Mann, M. Ries and T. Hoffmann, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(3), 1439–1445 CrossRef CAS .N. Takegawa, T. Miyakawa, T. Nakamura, Y. Sameshima, M. Takei, Y. Kondo and N. Hirayama, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(4), 428–443 CrossRef CAS .T. B. Onasch, A. Trimborn, E. C. Fortner, J. T. Jayne, G. L. Kok, L. R. Williams, P. Davidovits and D. R. Worsnop, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(7), 804–817 CrossRef CAS .D. F. Mark, F. M. Stuart and M. de Podesta, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2011, 75(23), 7494–7501 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Coble, M. Grove and A. T. Calvert, Chem. Geol., 2011, 290(1–2), 75–87 CrossRef CAS .S. Yatkin, M. Gerboles and A. Borowiak, Atmos. Environ., 2012, 54, 568–582 CrossRef CAS .L. Borgese, M. Salmistraro, A. Gianoncelli, A. Zacco, R. Lucchini, N. Zimmerman, L. Pisani, G. Siviero, L. E. Depero and E. Bontempi, Talanta, 2012, 89, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .S. Datta, A. M. Rule, J. N. Mihalic, S. N. Chillrud, B. C. Bostick, J. P. Ramos-Bonilla, I. Han, L. M. Polyak, A. S. Geyh and P. N. Breysse, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(6), 3101–3109 CrossRef CAS .M. Oakes, R. J. Weber, B. Lai, A. Russell and E. D. Ingall, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2012, 12(2), 745–756 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Shafer, B. M. Toner, J. T. Oyerdier, J. J. Schauer, S. C. Fakra, S. H. Hu, J. D. Herner and A. Ayala, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(1), 189–195 CrossRef CAS .K. Tirez, G. Silversmit, N. Bleux, E. Adriaensens, E. Roekens, K. Servaes, C. Vanhoof, L. Vincze and P. Berghmans, Atmos. Environ., 2011, 45(30), 5332–5341 CrossRef CAS .C. Wu, W. M. Ng, J. Huang, D. Wu and J. Z. Yu, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(6), 610–621 CrossRef CAS .B. Khan, M. D. Hays, C. Geron and J. Jetter, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(2), 127–137 CrossRef CAS .M. Wang, B. Xu, H. Zhao, J. Cao, D. Joswiak, G. Wu and S. Lin, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(1), 60–69 CrossRef CAS .A. Karanasiou, E. Diapouli, F. Cavalli, K. Eleftheriadis, M. Viana, A. Alastuey, X. Querol and C. Reche, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2011, 4(11), 2409–2419 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Miller, P. L. Drake, N. C. Murphy, J. D. Noll and J. C. Volkwein, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(1), 48–55 RSC .G. S. W. Hagler, T. L. B. Yelverton, R. Vedantham, A. D. A. Hansen and J. R. Turner, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2011, 11(5), 539–546 CAS .P. J. G. Rehbein, C.-H. Jeong, M. L. McGuire and G. J. Evans, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(5), 584–595 CrossRef CAS .G. O. Salako, P. K. Hopke, D. D. Cohen, B. A. Begum, S. K. Biswas, G. G. Pandit, Y.-S. Chung, S. Abd Rahman, M. S. Hamzah, P. Davy, A. Markwitz, D. Shagjjamba, S. Lodoysamba, W. Wimolwattanapun and S. Bunprapob, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2012, 12(1), 1–7 CAS .M. R. Heal and P. Quincey, Atmos. Environ., 2012, 54, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .P. Quincey, D. Butterfield, D. Green and G. W. Fuller, Atmos. Environ., 2011, 45(21), 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS .P. Quincey, Atmos. Environ., 2007, 41(36), 7964–7968 CrossRef CAS .J. Chow, J. Watson, J. Robles, X. Wang, L. W. Chen, D. Trimble, S. Kohl, R. Tropp and K. Fung, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401(10), 3141–3152 CrossRef CAS .A. Steffen, T. Scherz, M. Olson, D. Gay and P. Blanchard, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(3), 752–765 RSC .M. A. . Leiva G, M. C. Araya, A. M. Alvarado and R. J. Seguel, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2012, 17(1), 53–63 CrossRef CAS .R. J. N. Bettencourt da Silva, A. Arias, C. M. R. R. Oliveira and M. F. G. F. C. Camoes, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2012, 17(2), 147–157 CrossRef .M. Trancoso, A. Sousa, F. Mouro, M. C. Freitas, S. Almeida and N. Canha, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2012, 17(2), 199–206 CrossRef CAS .H. Louie, C. Wong, Y. J. Huang and S. Fredrickson, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(2), 522–529 RSC .D. Das, M. Dutta, M. L. Cervera and M. de la Guardia, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2012, 33, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .B. Planer-Friedrich and A. C. Scheinost, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(16), 6855–6863 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Fornieles, A. G. de Torres, E. V. Alonso, M. T. S. Cordero and J. M. C. Pavon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(8), 1619–1626 RSC .H. M. Anawar, Talanta, 2012, 88, 30–42 CrossRef CAS .R. Rakhunde, L. Deshpande and H. D. Juneja, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 42(7), 776–810 CrossRef CAS .L. Y. Xing and D. Beauchemin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 2006–2011 RSC .M. M. L. Guerrero, E. V. Alonso, J. M. C. Pavon, M. T. S. Cordero and A. G. de Torres, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 682–688 RSC .A. Moreda-Pineiro, V. Romaris-Hortas and P. Bermejo-Barrera, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(11), 2107–2152 RSC .J. Zheng, M. Yamada and S. Yoshida, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(9), 1790–1795 RSC .X. Y. Jia, D. R. Gong, Y. Han, C. Wei, T. C. Duan and H. T. Chen, Talanta, 2012, 88, 724–729 CrossRef CAS .T. T. Shih, W. Y. Tseng, K. H. Tsai, W. Y. Chen, M. W. Tsai and Y. C. Sun, Microchem. J., 2011, 99(2), 260–266 CrossRef CAS .A. Diaz, R. Arnedo, R. Cespedes-Sanchez, R. Devesa and J. Martin-Alonso, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2012, 184(1), 539–548 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Petrov, J. W. Charters and D. Wallschlager, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(3), 1716–1723 CrossRef CAS .L. B. Escudero, P. Berton, E. M. Martinis, R. A. Olsina and R. G. Wuilloud, Talanta, 2012, 88, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Jia, D. R. Gong, Y. Han, T. C. Duan and H. T. Chen, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(2), 575–580 RSC .R. Penalver, N. Campillo and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Talanta, 2011, 87, 268–275 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Cassella, L. G. T. dos Reis, R. E. Santelli and E. P. Oliveira, Talanta, 2011, 85(1), 415–419 CrossRef CAS .L. Machackova and M. Zemberyova, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2012, 92(4), 405–416 CrossRef CAS .S. L. C. Ferreira, D. C. Lima, I. T. A. Moreira and O. M. C. de Oliveira, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 2039–2044 RSC .A. Kitano, A. Iiduka, T. Yamamoto, Y. Ukita, E. Tamiya and Y. Takamura, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83(24), 9424–9430 CrossRef CAS .K. Nakayama, T. Yamamoto, N. Hata, S. Taguchi and Y. Takamura, Bunseki Kagaku, 2011, 60(6), 515–520 CrossRef CAS .Q. He, Z. L. Zhu, S. H. Hu, H. T. Zheng and L. L. Jin, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(9), 4179–4184 CrossRef CAS .Z. F. Liu, Z. L. Zhu, Q. J. Wu, S. H. Hu and H. T. Zheng, Analyst, 2011, 136(21), 4539–4544 RSC .R. Shekhar, Talanta, 2012, 93, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .F. D. Depoi, T. C. de Oliveira, D. P. de Moraes and D. Pozebon, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(1), 89–95 RSC .S. Cerutti, L. A. Escudero, J. A. Gasquez, R. A. Olsina and L. D. Martinez, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(12), 2428–2433 RSC .L. Kozak and P. Niedzielski, Anal. Lett., 2011, 44(13), 2312–2320 CrossRef CAS .Y. Han, Y. Huh, S. Hong, S. D. Hur, H. Motoyama, S. Fujita, F. Nakazawa and K. Fukui, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32(12), 4258–4264 CrossRef CAS .S. Kunimura and H. Ohmori, Analyst, 2012, 137(2), 312–314 RSC .K. Pytlakowska and R. Sitko, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(3), 460–465 RSC .R. Sitko, K. Kocot, B. Zawisza, B. Feist and K. Pytlakowska, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 1979–1985 RSC .E. Margui, M. Hidalgo, I. Queralt, K. Van Meel and C. Fontas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 67, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .W. Muller, J. M. G. Shelley and S. O. Rasmussen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(12), 2391–2395 RSC .J. Zheng, H. Takata, K. Tagami, T. Aono, K. Fujita and S. Uchida, Microchem. J., 2012, 100, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .I. J. Arnquist, T. E. Kreschollek and J. A. Holcombe, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(3–4), 255–260 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Do, H. F. Hsieh, W. C. Chang, E. E. Chang and C. F. Wang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(8), 610–618 CrossRef CAS .S. Garcia-Ruiz, I. Petrov, E. Vassileva and C. R. Quetel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401(9), 2785–2792 CrossRef CAS .A. Widerlund, G. M. Nowell, W. Davison and D. G. Pearson, Chem. Geol., 2012, 291, 278–285 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Lee, S. C. Han, T. H. Kim and J. I. Yun, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83(24), 9456–9461 CrossRef CAS .K. Rifai, S. Laville, F. Vidal, M. Sabsabi and M. Chaker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(2), 276–283 RSC .C. H. Lamborg, C. R. Hammerschmidt, G. A. Gill, R. P. Mason and S. Gichuki, Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods, 2012, 10, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sohrin and K. W. Bruland, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2011, 30(8), 1291–1307 CrossRef CAS .E. C. Hathorne, B. Haley, T. Stichel, P. Grasse, M. Zieringer and M. Frank, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2012, 13, 12 CrossRef .A. N. Anthemidis, G. Giakisikli and G. A. Zachariadis, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3(9), 2108–2114 RSC .D. V. Biller and K. W. Bruland, Mar. Chem., 2012, 130, 12–20 CrossRef .I. S. Trujillo, E. V. Alonso, A. G. de Torres and J. M. C. Pavon, Microchem. J., 2012, 101, 87–94 CrossRef .Y. Cui, Z. J. Hu, J. X. Yang and H. W. Gao, Microchim. Acta, 2012, 176(3–4), 359–366 CrossRef CAS .P. Biparva and M. R. Hadjmohammadi, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2011, 39(12), 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS .Y. K. Wang, S. T. Gao, X. H. Zang, J. C. Li and J. J. Ma, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 716, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .Q. Y. Chang, S. J. Song, Y. K. Wang, J. C. Li and J. J. Ma, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(4), 1110–1116 RSC .G. H. Cheng, M. He, H. Y. Peng and B. Hu, Talanta, 2012, 88, 507–515 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Xiang, X. Zhang, M. Lu, S. H. Qian and S. B. Mo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(2), 359–363 RSC .E. Mladenova, I. Dakova, I. Karadjova and M. Karadjov, Microchem. J., 2012, 101, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .H. Matsumiya, K. Kitakata and M. Hiraide, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(5), 1973–1977 CrossRef CAS .Y. K. Tsoi, Y. M. Ho and K. S. Y. Leung, Talanta, 2012, 89, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Hong, E. Rifkin and E. J. Bouwer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(15), 6429–6436 CrossRef CAS .W. N. L. dos Santos, J. V. S. Santos, L. O. B. Silva, A. S. Araujo, V. A. Lemos, M. Miro and S. L. C. Ferreira, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2011, 91(15), 1425–1435 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Bai, H. Minami, H. Sakagami, K. Mantoku, I. Atsuya, N. Takahashi, A. Tanaka, K. Jin and T. Kawai, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2011, 91(9), 811–820 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Wen, Q. W. Deng, S. L. Ji, S. C. Yang and L. Peng, Microchem. J., 2012, 100, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Wen, Y. Zhao, Q. W. Deng, S. L. Ji, X. Zhao and J. Guo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 89, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Serafimovska, S. Arpadjan and T. Stafilov, Microchem. J., 2011, 99(1), 46–50 CrossRef CAS .M. Fayazi, D. Afzali and A. Mostafavi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 2064–2068 RSC .K. Chandrasekaran, D. Karunasagar and J. Arunachalam, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3(9), 2140–2147 RSC .I. Lopez-Garcia, Y. Vicente-Martinez and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(5), 874–880 RSC .N. Freslon, G. Bayon, D. Birot, C. Bollinger and J. A. Barrat, Talanta, 2011, 85(1), 582–587 CrossRef CAS .F. Ardini, E. Magi and M. Grotti, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706(1), 84–88 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Bowman and C. R. Hammerschmidt, Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods, 2011, 9, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .C. Ibanez-Palomino, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and A. Sahuquillo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 720, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Zhu, T. Narukawa, K. Inagaki, T. Kuroiwa and K. Chiba, Anal. Sci., 2011, 27(11), 1149–1155 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu, T. Kuroiwa, T. Narukawa, K. Inagaki and K. Chiba, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2012, 34(0), 152–160 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Sander, M. Bedner, M. C. Tims, J. H. Yen, D. L. Duewer, B. Porter, S. J. Christopher, R. D. Day, S. E. Long, J. L. Molloy, K. E. Murphy, B. E. Lang, R. Lieberman, L. J. Wood, M. J. Payne, M. C. Roman, J. M. Betz, A. NguyenPho, K. E. Sharpless and S. A. Wise, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(1), 473–487 CrossRef CAS .T. Zuliani, R. Milacic and J. Scancar, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 403(3), 857–865 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Huang, C. J. Xiao, B. F. Ni, W. Z. Tian, Y. X. Zhang, P. S. Wang, C. X. Liu, G. Y. Zhang, H. C. Sun, H. Q. Zhang and C. J. Zhao, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2012, 291(2), 573–577 CrossRef CAS .A. M. P. dos Santos, D. C. Lima, R. M. de Jesus and S. L. C. Ferreira, J. AOAC Int., 2011, 94(6), 1906–1910 CrossRef CAS .E. M. G. Navarro, M. E. V. Tagle, M. T. L. Marin and M. S. P. Alfonso, Quim. Nova, 2011, 34(8), 1443–U1342 CrossRef CAS .Z. M. Migaszewski, P. J. Lamothe, J. G. Crock, A. Galuszka and S. Dolegowska, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2011, 9(3), 323–329 CrossRef CAS .M. Pena-Icart, M. E. V. Tagle, C. Alonso-Hernandez, J. R. Hernandez, M. Behar and M. S. P. Alfonso, Mar. Environ. Res., 2011, 72(1–2), 60–66 CrossRef CAS .M. Ferrat, D. J. Weiss and S. Strekopytov, Talanta, 2012, 93, 415–423 CrossRef CAS .R. Larios, R. Fernandez-Martinez, I. LeHecho and I. Rucandio, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 414, 600–607 CrossRef CAS .R. Alam, J. Q. Shang and X. R. Cheng, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2012, 184(5), 3373–3387 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Wheal, T. O. Fowles and L. T. Palmer, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3(12), 2854–2863 RSC .J. S. Le Blond, S. Strekopytov, C. Unsworth and B. J. Williamson, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3(8), 1752–1758 RSC .J. M. Muratli, J. McManus, A. Mix and Z. Chase, Talanta, 2012, 89, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .M. V. B. Krishna, A. C. Sahayam and D. Karunasagar, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(1), 210–216 RSC .R. S. Picoloto, H. Wiltsche, G. Knapp, J. S. Barin and E. M. M. Flores, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(3), 630–636 RSC .M. V. B. Krishna, K. Chandrasekaran and D. Karunasagar, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(5), 1401–1409 RSC .I. De La Calle, N. Cabaleiro, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2011, 91(14), 1401–1411 CrossRef CAS .N. Guerin, R. Calmette, T. Johnson and D. Lariviere, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3(7), 1560–1567 RSC .J. Avivar, L. Ferrer, M. Casas and V. Cerda, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(2), 327–334 RSC .C. Jeandel, C. Venchiarutti, M. Bourquin, C. Pradoux, F. Lacan, P. van Beek and J. Riotte, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(4), 449–459 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Shi, X. L. Hou, P. Roos and W. S. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(4), 2009–2016 CrossRef CAS .N. R. Atkinson, E. H. Bailey, A. M. Tye, N. Breward and S. D. Young, Environ. Chem., 2011, 8(5), 493–500 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sivry, J. Riotte, V. Sappin-Didier, M. Munoz, P. O. Redon, L. Denaix and B. Dupre, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(15), 6247–6253 CrossRef CAS .F. Laborda, S. Ruiz-Begueria, E. Bolea and J. R. Castillo, J. Chromatogr., A, 2011, 1218(27), 4199–4205 CrossRef CAS .V. Funes-Collado, R. Rubio and J. F. Lopez-Sanchez, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2011, 222(1–4), 315–324 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Horner and D. Beauchemin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 717, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .T. Tongesayi, P. Dasilva, K. Dilger, T. Hollingsworth and M. Mooney, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Environ. Sci. Eng. Toxic Hazard. Subst. Control, 2011, 46(10), 1138–1146 CAS .P. S. Fedotov, J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 67(5), 399–413 CrossRef CAS .E. Y. Savonina, P. S. Fedotov and R. Wennrich, Talanta, 2012, 88, 369–374 CrossRef CAS .E. Y. Savonina, P. S. Fedotov and R. Wennrich, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 403(5), 1441–1449 CrossRef CAS .F. D. Dias, L. S. Alves, W. N. L. dos Santos, R. E. Bruns and M. A. Bezerra, Spectrosc. Lett., 2011, 44(6), 388–392 CrossRef CAS .C. Waterlot, A. Pelfrene and F. Douay, J. Anal. Methods Chem., 2012, 10 Search PubMed .Y. Arslan, E. Kenduzler and O. Y. Ataman, Talanta, 2011, 85(4), 1786–1791 CrossRef CAS .R. Dobrowolski, A. Adamczyk, M. Otto and J. Dobrzynska, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(7), 493–499 CrossRef CAS .R. Dobrowolski, I. Pawlowska-Kapusta and J. Dobrzynska, Food Chem., 2012, 132(1), 597–602 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Borges, E. M. Becker, C. Lequeux, M. G. R. Vale, S. L. C. Ferreira and B. Welz, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(7), 529–535 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Bai, T. Nakatani, Y. Sasaki, H. Minami, S. Inoue and N. Takahashi, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2011, 91(9), 856–865 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Oreshkin and G. I. Tsizin, J. Anal. Chem., 2011, 66(10), 951–954 CrossRef CAS .A. Santoro, R. Terzano, L. Medici, M. Beciani, A. Pagnoni and G. Blo, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(1), 138–145 RSC .S. Hanna and B. T. Jones, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(7), 1428–1433 RSC .A. L. Salido and B. T. Jones, Microchem. J., 2012, 101, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .S. Sangsawong, W. Waiyawat, J. Shiowatana and A. Siripinyanond, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(6), 476–482 CrossRef CAS .J. Falandysz, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2012, 88(5), 651–653 CrossRef CAS .J. Machat, V. Otruba and V. Kanicky, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1096–1102 RSC .M. B. McBride, J. Environ. Qual., 2011, 40(6), 1863–1869 CrossRef CAS .E. Gao and J. S. Liu, Anal. Sci., 2011, 27(6), 637–641 CrossRef CAS .G. Leng, L. Feng, S. B. Li, P. Yang and D. Z. Dan, LCGC North Am., 2012, 30(3), 250 CAS .C. Hen, H. Peng, W. Y. Huang, Y. J. Wang and F. Wu, Fresenius Environ. Bull., 2011, 20(4A), 1069–1074 Search PubMed .H. Sousa-Ferreira, M. N. Matos-Reyes, M. L. Cervera, S. L. Costa-Ferreira and M. de la Guardia, Mod. Methods Food Anal., [Pap. Symp.], 2011, 4(4), 447–452 CrossRef .M. N. M. Reyes, M. L. Cervera, R. C. Campos and M. de la Guardia, Talanta, 2008, 75(3), 811–816 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Mesko, C. A. Hartwig, C. A. Bizzi, J. S. F. Pereira, P. A. Mello and E. M. M. Flores, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 307(1–3), 123–136 CAS .S. D'Ilio, N. Violante, C. Majorani and F. Petrucci, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 698(1–2), 6–13 CrossRef CAS .W. Guo, S. H. Hu, J. Y. Zhang and H. F. Zhang, Sci. Total Environ., 2011, 409(15), 2981–2986 CrossRef CAS .H. Fujiwara, K. Kawabata, J. Suzuki and O. Shikino, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(12), 2528–2533 RSC .W. Guo, S. H. Hu, J. Y. Zhang, L. L. Jin, X. J. Wang, Z. L. Zhu and H. F. Zhang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 2076–2080 RSC .Y. Wang and I. D. Brindle, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(7), 1514–1520 RSC .J. Sucharova, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(9), 1756–1762 RSC .J. Cizdziel, K. X. Bu and P. Nowinski, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(2), 564–569 RSC .M. Pakiea, M. Wojciechowski, B. Wagner and E. Bulska, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(7), 1539–1543 RSC .M. B. B. Guerra, D. Amarasiriwardena, C. Schaefer, C. D. Pereira, A. A. Spielmann, J. A. Nobrega and E. R. Pereira, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(11), 2238–2246 RSC .Y. Z. Yi, S. J. Jiang and A. C. Sahayam, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(3), 426–431 RSC .B. Krasnodebska-Ostrega, M. Sadowska and S. Ostrowska, Talanta, 2012, 93, 326–329 CrossRef CAS .Y. L. Chu, R. Y. Wang and S. J. Jiang, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2012, 59(2), 219–225 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Wolf, S. A. Morman, P. L. Hageman, T. M. Hoefen and G. S. Plumlee, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401(9), 2733–2745 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Stroud, S. P. McGrath and F. J. Zhao, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2012, 92(2), 222–236 CrossRef CAS .G. H. Floor, M. Iglesias, G. Roman-Ross, P. F. X. Corvini and M. Lenz, Chemosphere, 2011, 84(11), 1664–1670 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Duyck, T. D. Saint'Pierre, N. Miekeley, T. C. O. da Fonseca and P. Szatmari, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(5), 362–367 CrossRef CAS .R. Jagtap, F. Krikowa, W. Maher, S. Foster and M. Ellwood, Talanta, 2011, 85(1), 49–55 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Yu, J. Zhang and X. R. Wang, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2011, 39(4), 544–547 CAS .X. Li, J. J. Yu, B. Li, J. D. Hu, H. X. Yang, W. Liu and S. B. Hu, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2011, 39(9), 1400–1405 CrossRef CAS .D. Wesenberg, G. J. Krauss and D. Schaumloffel, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 307(1–3), 46–54 CAS .C. X. Liu, B. Hu, J. B. Shi, J. Q. Li, X. L. Zhang and H. W. Chen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 2045–2051 RSC .A. K. Pathak, R. Kumar, V. K. Singh, R. Agrawal, S. Rai and A. K. Rai, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2012, 47(1), 14–40 CrossRef CAS .X. F. Li, W. D. Zhou, K. X. Li, H. G. Qian and Z. J. Ren, Opt. Commun., 2012, 285(1), 54–58 CrossRef CAS .W. D. Zhou, K. X. Li, H. G. Qian, Z. J. Ren and Y. L. Yu, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51(7), B42–B48 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Jantzi and J. R. Almirall, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400(10), 3341–3351 CrossRef CAS .G. C. He, D. X. Sun, M. G. Su and C. Z. Dong, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2011, 55(3), 6 CrossRef .E. C. Ferreira, D. Milori, E. J. Ferreira, L. M. dos Santos, L. Martin-Neto and A. R. D. Nogueira, Talanta, 2011, 85(1), 435–440 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Gomes, D. Santos, L. C. Nunes, G. G. A. de Carvalho, F. D. Leme and F. J. Krug, Talanta, 2011, 85(4), 1744–1750 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Lewis, J. Martinez, C. A. Akpovo, L. Johnson, A. Chauhan and M. D. Edington, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 401(7), 2225–2236 CrossRef CAS .U. E. A. Fittschen and G. Falkenberg, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(8), 567–580 CrossRef CAS .E. Donner, T. Punshon, M. L. Guerinot and E. Lombi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(10), 3287–3298 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Revenko, J. Anal. Chem., 2011, 66(11), 1059–1072 CrossRef CAS .B. Wu and J. S. Becker, Metallomics, 2012, 4(5), 403–416 RSC .T. Rennert, K. U. Totsche, K. Heister, M. Kersten and J. Thieme, J. Soils Sediments, 2012, 12(1), 3–23 CrossRef .M. I. Kaniu, K. H. Angeyo, M. J. Mangala, A. K. Mwala and S. K. Bartilol, X-Ray Spectrom., 2011, 40(6), 432–440 CrossRef CAS .M. I. Kaniu, K. H. Angeyo, A. K. Mwala and M. J. Mangala, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 729, 21–25 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Shaltout, B. Welz and M. A. Ibrahim, Microchem. J., 2011, 99(2), 356–363 CrossRef CAS .J. Breen, P. de Souza, G. P. Timms and R. Ollington, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2011, 269(12), 1341–1345 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Weindorf, Y. D. Zhu, B. Haggard, J. Lofton, S. Chakraborty, N. Bakr, W. T. Zhang, W. C. Weindorf and M. Legoria, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2012, 76(2), 522–531 CrossRef CAS .P. Higueras, R. Oyarzun, J. M. Iraizoz, S. Lorenzo, J. M. Esbri and A. Martinez-Coronado, J. Geochem. Explor., 2012, 113, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .I. Koch, M. Moriarty, J. Sui and K. J. Reimer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(9), 1897–1899 RSC .K. L. Moore, E. Lombi, F. J. Zhao and C. R. M. Grovenor, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(10), 3263–3273 CrossRef CAS .K. Heister, C. Hoschen, G. J. Pronk, C. W. Mueller and I. Kogel-Knabner, J. Soils Sediments, 2012, 12(1), 35–47 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Hatton, L. Remusat, B. Zeller and D. Derrien, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2012, 26(11), 1363–1371 CrossRef CAS .B. Radke, L. Jewell and J. Namiesnik, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2012, 42(2), 162–183 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Alahmadi, Asian J. Chem., 2011, 23(9), 3787–3791 CAS .R. B. Khouzam, J. Szpunar, M. Holeman and R. Lobinski, Pure Appl. Chem., 2012, 84(2), 169–179 CAS .A. M. Carey, E. Lombi, E. Donner, M. D. de Jonge, T. Punshon, B. P. Jackson, M. L. Guerinot, A. H. Price and A. A. Meharg, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(10), 3275–3286 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Wood and J. Feldmann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(10), 3299–3309 CrossRef CAS .M. Chamsaz, M. H. Arbab-Zavar, M. M. Riazi and R. Takjoo, Asian J. Chem., 2011, 23(6), 2441–2444 CAS .S. Sacmaci and S. Kartal, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2011, 39(6), 577–583 CrossRef CAS .E. C. Roa, M. Schultz and M. B. Capangpangan, E-J. Chem., 2011, 8(3), 1114–1119 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Han, Y. Y. Xu and C. Zhang, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2011, 42(14), 1739–1751 CrossRef CAS .I. Durukan, C. A. Sahin, N. Satiroglu and S. Bektas, Microchem. J., 2011, 99(1), 159–163 CrossRef CAS .S. Sacmaci, S. Kartal and M. Sacmaci, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2011, 39(6), 584–590 CrossRef CAS .S. Yalcin, H. Filik and R. Apak, J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 67(1), 47–55 CrossRef CAS .F. Fathirad, D. Afzali, A. Mostafavi and M. Ghanbarian, Talanta, 2012, 88, 759–764 CrossRef CAS .N. F. Kolachi, T. G. Kazi, S. Khan, S. K. Wadhwa, J. A. Baig, H. I. Afridi, A. Q. Shah and F. Shah, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2011, 49(10), 2548–2556 CrossRef CAS .B. Feist, B. Mikula, K. Pytlakowska, B. Puzio and R. Sitko, Talanta, 2012, 88, 391–395 CrossRef CAS .A. Duran, M. Tuzen and M. Soylak, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2011, 49(7), 1633–1637 CrossRef CAS .D. Ozdes, C. Duran, H. Bayrak, V. N. Bulut and M. Tufekci, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2012, 40(2), 211–217 CrossRef CAS .J. Hassan, M. Shamsipur and M. H. Karbasi, Microchem. J., 2011, 99(1), 93–96 CrossRef CAS .S. F. Aygun, B. C. Ustaosman and M. Karacan, Asian J. Chem., 2012, 24(4), 1551–1553 CAS .O. Yalcinkaya, O. M. Kalfa and A. R. Turker, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 195, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .M. Soylak and Y. E. Unsal, J. AOAC Int., 2011, 94(4), 1297–1303 CAS .A. Bagheri, M. Behbahani, M. M. Amini, O. Sadeghi, M. Taghizade, L. Baghayi and M. Salarian, Talanta, 2012, 89, 455–461 CrossRef CAS .H. Shirkhanloo, H. Z. Mousavi and A. Rouhollahi, J. Serb. Chem. Soc., 2011, 76(11), 1583–1595 CrossRef CAS .O. Yalcinkaya, O. M. Kalfa and A. R. Turker, Curr. Anal. Chem., 2011, 7(3), 225–234 CAS .F. D. Dias, J. S. Bonsucesso, L. C. Oliveira and W. N. L. dos Santos, Talanta, 2012, 89, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .D. Bingol and M. Kulcu, Analyst, 2011, 136(19), 4036–4044 RSC .M. A. Chamjangali, G. Bagherian, A. Mokhlesian and B. Bahramian, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 192(3), 1641–1649 CrossRef CAS .H. Hotta, Y. Kogure and K. Tsunoda, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(4), 1160–1162 RSC .M. Soylak and Y. E. Unsal, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2011, 181(1–4), 577–586 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Shi, Z. Hu, X. J. Chang, Q. He, Z. F. Tu, L. N. Zhang and R. Gao, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2011, 91(11), 1024–1034 CrossRef CAS .F. Mercader-Trejo, R. Herrera-Basurto, E. R. de San Miguel and J. de Gyves, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2011, 91(11), 1062–1076 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Zhang, R. M. Cheng, S. S. Tong, X. W. Gu, X. J. Quan, Y. L. Liu, Q. Jia and J. B. Jia, Talanta, 2011, 86, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .M. Savio, B. Parodi, L. D. Martinez, P. Smichowski and R. A. Gil, Talanta, 2011, 85(1), 245–251 CrossRef CAS .C. R. T. Tarley, F. N. Andrade, F. M. de Oliveira, M. Z. Corazza, L. F. M. de Azevedo and M. G. Segatelli, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 703(2), 145–151 CrossRef CAS .A. Karatepe, M. Soylak and L. Elci, Talanta, 2011, 85(4), 1974–1979 CrossRef CAS .T. Meisel and J. S. Kane, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2011, 16(8–9), 407–414 CrossRef CAS .N. J. G. Pearce, W. T. Perkins, J. A. Westgate, M. P. Gorton, S. E. Jackson, C. R. Neal and S. P. Chenery, Geostand. Newsl., 1997, 21(1), 115–144 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Jochum, U. Weis, B. Stroll, D. Kuzmin, Q. C. Yang, I. Raczek, D. E. Jacob, A. Stracke, K. Birbaum, D. A. Frick, D. Gunther and J. Enzweiler, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(4), 397–429 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Wang, X. H. Wang, W. J. Qu, Y. S. Gao, T. X. Gu, X. T. Fan, S. I. Andreev and X. F. Shi, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(3), 341–352 CrossRef CAS .P. H. Donohue, A. Simonetti and C. R. Neal, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(1), 61–73 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Fisher, J. M. Hanchar, S. D. Samson, B. Dhuime, J. Blichert-Toft, J. D. Vervoort and R. Lam, Chem. Geol., 2011, 286(1–2), 32–47 CrossRef CAS .K. Moeller, R. Schoenberg, R.-B. Pedersen, D. Weiss and S. Dong, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(2), 177–199 CrossRef CAS .J. Vogl and M. Rosner, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(2), 161–175 CrossRef CAS .T. Rigaudier, V. Gardien, F. Martineau, G. Reverdy and C. Lecuyer, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(1), 51–59 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Gao and J. F. Casey, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(1), 75–81 CrossRef CAS .J. Prytulak, S. G. Nielsen and A. N. Halliday, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(3), 307–318 CrossRef CAS .R. Escoube, O. J. Rouxel, B. Luais, E. Ponzevera and O. F. X. Donard, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(2), 149–159 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Fricker, D. Kutscher, B. Aeschlimann, J. Frommer, R. Dietiker, J. Bettmer and D. Gunther, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 307(1–3), 39–45 CAS .C. Courtieu, F. X. D'Abzac, J. Chmeleff, D. Guillaume and A. M. Seydoux-Guillaume, Eur. J. Mineral., 2011, 23(3), 391–400 CrossRef CAS .D. Fliegel, C. Frei, G. Fontaine, Z. C. Hu, S. Gao and D. Gunther, Analyst, 2011, 136(23), 4925–4934 RSC .M. Guillong, L. Danyushevsky, M. Walle and M. Raveggi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(7), 1401–1407 RSC .M. P. Sinha, E. L. Neidholdt, J. Hurowitz, W. Sturhahn, B. Beard and M. H. Hecht, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2011, 82(9), 7 CrossRef .B. Paul, C. Paton, A. Norris, J. Woodhead, J. Hellstrom, J. Hergt and A. Greig, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 700–706 RSC .M. Rittner and W. Muller, Comput. Geosci., 2012, 42, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .N. J. G. Pearce, W. T. Perkins, J. A. Westgate and S. C. Wade, Quaternary Int., 2011, 246, 57–81 CrossRef .F. E. Jenner and H. S. O'Neill, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2012, 13, 11 Search PubMed .F. E. Jenner and H. S. O'Neill, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2012, 13, 17 Search PubMed .J. H. Yuan, X. C. Zhan, D. Y. Sun, L. H. Zhao, C. Z. Fan, L. J. Kuai and M. Y. Hu, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2011, 39(10), 1582–1588 CrossRef CAS .G. J. Baldwin, P. C. Thurston and B. S. Kamber, Chem. Geol., 2011, 285(1–4), 133–143 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Pornwilard, R. Hansawek, J. Shiowatana and A. Siripinyanond, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 306(1), 57–62 CrossRef CAS .H. E. Gabler, F. Melcher, T. Graupner, A. Bahr, M. A. Sitnikova, F. Henjes-Kunst, T. Oberthur, H. Bratz and A. Gerdes, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(4), 431–448 CrossRef .K. Ito, N. Hasebe, A. Hasebe and S. Arai, Geochem. J., 2011, 45(5), 375–385 CAS .Y. Kon, H. Murakami, T. Takagi and Y. Watanabe, Geochem. J., 2011, 45(5), 387–416 CAS .T. D. F. Leite, R. Escalfoni, T. C. O. da Fonseca and N. Miekeley, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(5), 314–320 CrossRef CAS .S. Compernolle, D. Wambeke, I. De Raedt and F. Vanhaecke, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 67, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .S. Compernolle, D. Wambeke, I. De Raedt, K. Kimpe and F. Vanhaecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(8), 1679–1684 RSC .M. Resano, K. S. McIntosh and F. Vanhaecke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(1), 165–173 RSC .L. H. Ding, G. Yang, F. Xia, C. E. Lenehan, G. J. Qian, A. McFadden, J. Brugger, X. H. Zhang, G. R. Chen and A. Pring, Mineral. Mag., 2011, 75(2), 279–287 CrossRef CAS .Y. Q. Ke, L. Y. Zhang, X. N. Chai, H. T. Zheng, L. L. Jin and S. H. Hu, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2012, 33(2), 257–262 CAS .J. H. Yuan, X. C. Zhan, C. Z. Fan, L. H. Zhao, D. Y. Sun, Z. R. Jia, M. Y. Hu and L. J. Kuai, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 40(2), 201–206 CAS .T. Pettke, F. Oberli, A. Audetat, M. Guillong, A. C. Simon, J. J. Hanley and L. M. Klemm, Ore Geol. Rev., 2012, 44, 10–38 CrossRef .M. Guillong and T. Pettke, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(3), 505–508 RSC .E. M. Ripley, C. S. Li, C. H. Moore, E. R. Elswick, J. B. Maynard, R. L. Paul, P. Sylvester, J. H. Seo and N. Shimizu, in Sulfur in Magmas and Melts: Its Importance for Natural and Technical Processes, ed. H. Behrens and J. D. Webster, Mineralogical Soc Amer, Chantilly,  2011, vol. 73, pp. 9–39 Search PubMed .B. Paul, J. D. Woodhead, J. Hergt, L. Danyushevsky, T. Kunihiro and E. Nakamura, Chem. Geol., 2011, 289(3–4), 210–223 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Westgate, N. J. G. Pearce, W. T. Perkins, P. A. Shane and S. J. Preece, Quaternary Int., 2011, 246, 82–96 CrossRef .S. N. Thomson, G. E. Gehrels, J. Ruiz and R. Buchwaldt, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2012, 13, 23 CrossRef .T. Zack, D. F. Stockli, G. L. Luvizotto, M. G. Barth, E. Belousova, M. R. Wolfe and R. W. Hinton, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 2011, 162(3), 515–530 CrossRef CAS .Z. C. Liu, F. Y. Wu, C. L. Guo, Z. F. Zhao, J. H. Yang and J. F. Sun, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56(27), 2948–2956 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Darling, C. D. Storey and M. Engi, Chem. Geol., 2012, 292, 103–115 CrossRef .E. Kooijman, J. Berndt and K. Mezger, Eur. J. Mineral., 2012, 24(1), 5–21 CrossRef CAS .A. Ulianov, O. Muntener, U. Schaltegger and F. Bussy, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 663–676 RSC .X. P. Xia, M. Sun, H. Y. Geng, Y. L. Sun, Y. J. Wang and G. C. Zhao, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(9), 1868–1871 RSC .D. L. Tollstrup, L. W. Xie, J. B. Wimpenny, E. Chin, C. T. Lee and Q. Z. Yin, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2012, 13, 14 CrossRef .J. J. Remus, R. S. Harmon, R. R. Hark, G. Haverstock, D. Baron, I. K. Potter, S. K. Bristol and L. J. East, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51(7), B65–B73 CrossRef .R. S. Harmon, K. M. Shughrue, J. J. Remus, M. A. Wise, L. J. East and R. R. Hark, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400(10), 3377–3382 CrossRef CAS .D. M. D. Pace, N. A. Gabriele, M. Garcimuno, C. A. D'Angelo, G. Bertuccelli and D. Bertuccelli, Spectrosc. Lett., 2011, 44(6), 399–411 CrossRef .P. Yaroshchyk, D. L. Death and S. J. Spencer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(1), 92–98 RSC .S. L. Lui and A. Koujelev, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(12), 2419–2427 RSC .R. B. Anderson, R. V. Morris, S. M. Clegg, J. F. Bell, R. C. Wiens, S. D. Humphries, S. A. Mertzman, T. G. Graff and R. McInroy, Icarus, 2011, 215(2), 608–627 CrossRef CAS .C. Fabre, S. Maurice, A. Cousin, R. C. Wiens, O. Forni, V. Sautter and D. Guillaume, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(3–4), 280–289 CrossRef CAS .A. Cousin, A. Forni, S. Maurice, O. Gasnault, C. Fabre, V. Sautter, R. C. Wiens and J. Mazoyer, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2011, 66(11–12), 805–814 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Ollila, J. Lasue, H. E. Newsom, R. A. Multari, R. C. Wiens and S. M. Clegg, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51(7), B130–B142 CrossRef CAS .P. Sobron, A. Wang and F. Sobron, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 68, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Pavlov, E. K. Jessberger, H. W. Hubers, S. Schroder, I. Rauschenbach, S. Florek, J. Neumann, H. Henkel and S. Klinkner, Adv. Space Res., 2011, 48(4), 764–778 CrossRef CAS .J. Lasue, R. C. Wiens, S. M. Clegg, D. T. Vaniman, K. H. Joy, S. Humphries, A. Mezzacappa, N. Melikechi, R. E. McInroy and S. Bender, J. J. Geophys. Res., [Planets], 2012, 117, 18 Search PubMed .A. J. B. Cotta and J. Enzweiler, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(1), 27–50 CrossRef CAS .L. Qi, J. F. Gao, X. W. Huang, J. Hu, M. F. Zhou and H. Zhong, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(9), 1900–1904 RSC .Z. Y. Chu, J. H. Guo, Y. H. Yang, L. Qi, L. Chen, X. C. Li and J. F. Gao, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(3), 509–515 RSC .T. Miyazaki, B. S. Vaglarov, M. Takei, M. Suzuki, H. Suzuki, K. Ohsawa, Q. Chang, T. Takahashi, Y. Hirahara, T. Hanyu, J. I. Kimura and Y. Tatsumi, J. Mineral. Petrol. Sci., 2012, 107(2), 74–86 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Cheng, K. Shao, S. Y. Shen, S. H. Hu and H. O. Qiu, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(4), 461–469 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Cheng, J. Liu, X. L. Yang, H. M. Chen and Y. R. Wang, At. Spectrosc., 2011, 32(5), 175–181 CAS .M. Imamoglu and S. Albayrak, At. Spectrosc., 2012, 33(1), 30–35 CAS .N. M. L. de Araujo, S. L. C. Ferreira, H. C. dos Santos, D. S. de Jesus and M. A. Bezerra, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4(2), 508–512 RSC .D. D. Li, X. J. Chang, Z. Hu, Q. H. Wang, Z. F. Tu and R. J. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2011, 174(1–2), 131–136 CrossRef CAS .M. Ulrich, S. Bureau, C. Chauvel and C. Picard, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(1), 7–20 CrossRef CAS .A. Premadas, At. Spectrosc., 2012, 33(1), 14–23 CAS .M. Krishnakumar and M. Kumar, At. Spectrosc., 2011, 32(6), 223–227 CAS .S. A. Yim, M. S. Choi and J. S. Chae, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2012, 23(1), 171–178 CrossRef CAS .S. König, A. Luguet, J. P. Lorand, F. Wombacher and M. Lissner, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2012, 86, 354–366 CrossRef .A. Pourmand, N. Dauphas and T. J. Ireland, Chem. Geol., 2012, 291, 38–54 CrossRef CAS .C. Paton, M. Schiller, D. Ulfbeck and M. Bizzarro, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 644–652 RSC .G. Q. Wang, Y. T. Lin, X. R. Liang, Y. Liu, L. W. Xie, Y. H. Yang and X. L. Tu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(9), 1878–1886 RSC .F. Wombacher, A. Eisenhauer, F. Bohm, N. Gussone, M. Regenberg, W. C. Dullo and A. Ruggeberg, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2011, 75(19), 5797–5818 CrossRef CAS .P. A. E. Pogge von Strandmann, T. Elliott, H. R. Marschall, C. Coath, Y. J. Lai, A. B. Jeffcoate and D. A. Ionov, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2011, 75(18), 5247–5268 CrossRef CAS .M. Schiller, C. Paton and M. Bizzarro, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(1), 38–49 RSC .S. G. Nielsen, J. Prytulak and A. N. Halliday, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2011, 35(3), 293–306 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Zhang, N. Dauphas, A. M. Davis and A. Pourmand, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(11), 2197–2205 RSC .M. A. Millet, J. A. Baker and C. E. Payne, Chem. Geol., 2012, 304, 18–25 CrossRef .H. C. Liu, C. F. You, K. F. Huang and C. H. Chung, Talanta, 2012, 88, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .K. Newman and R. B. Georg, Chem. Geol., 2012, 304, 151–157 CrossRef .T. Nozaki, K. Suzuki, G. Ravizza, J.-I. Kimura and Q. Chang, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2012, 36(2), 131–148 CrossRef CAS .C. Paton, J. Hellstrom, B. Paul, J. Woodhead and J. Hergt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(12), 2508–2518 RSC .J. F. Bowring, N. M. McLean and S. A. Bowring, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2011, 12, 19 CrossRef .N. M. McLean, J. F. Bowring and S. A. Bowring, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2011, 12, 26 CrossRef .M. Baudrand, G. Aloisi, C. Lecuyer, F. Martineau, F. Fourel, G. Escarguel, M. M. Blanc-Valleron, J. M. Rouchy and V. Grossi, Appl. Geochem., 2012, 27(1), 257–265 CrossRef CAS .P. H. Barry, D. R. Hilton, S. A. Halldorsson, D. Hahm and K. Marti, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst., 2012, 13, 16 CrossRef .M. A. Kendrick, Chem. Geol., 2012, 292, 116–126 CrossRef .O. Y. Ghidan and R. D. Loss, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2012, 309, 79–87 CAS .O. Y. Ghidan and R. D. Loss, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2011, 46(6), 830–842 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Li, X. H. Li, Q. L. Li and J. H. Guo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26(10), 2012–2022 RSC .C. F. Li, X. H. Li, Q. L. Li, J. H. Guo and T. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706(2), 297–304 CrossRef CAS .M. Touboul and R. J. Walker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2012, 309, 109–117 CAS .M. Satish-Kumar, H. Yurimoto, S. Itoh and B. Cesare, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 2011, 162(4), 821–834 CrossRef CAS .W. M. Behr, J. B. Thomas and R. L. Hervig, Am. Mineral., 2011, 96(7), 1100–1106 CrossRef CAS .J. Marin-Carbonne, C. Rollion-Bard and B. Luais, Chem. Geol., 2011, 285(1–4), 50–61 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Heck, J. M. Huberty, N. T. Kita, T. Ushikubo, R. Kozdon and J. W. Valley, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2011, 75(20), 5879–5891 CrossRef CAS .D. Nakashima, T. Ushikubo, R. N. Gowda, N. T. Kita, J. W. Valley and K. Nagao, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2011, 46(6), 857–874 CrossRef CAS .W. Yang, Y. T. Lin, J. C. Zhang, J. L. Hao, W. J. Shen and S. Hu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(3), 479–487 RSC .R. Taylor, C. Clark and S. M. Reddy, Chem. Geol., 2012, 300, 81–87 CrossRef .Q. L. Li, X. H. Li, F. Y. Wu, Q. Z. Yin, H. M. Ye, Y. Liu, G. Q. Tang and C. L. Zhang, Gondwana Res., 2012, 21(4), 745–756 CrossRef CAS .V. Zivanovic, Chem. Ind. Chem. Eng. Q., 2011, 17(2), 231–237 CrossRef CAS .M. G. Sliwinski, K. J. Spaleta, F. J. Meyer, E. M. Hutton, R. J. Newberry, T. P. Trainor, K. P. Severin and M. T. Whalen, Chem. Geol., 2012, 298, 97–115 CrossRef .K. Nakayama, S. Ichikawa and T. Nakamura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(1), 16–21 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Gazley, J. K. Vry, E. du Plessis and M. R. Handler, J. Geochem. Explor., 2011, 110(2), 74–80 CrossRef CAS .J. Figueroa-Cisterna, M. G. Bagur-Gonzalez, S. Morales-Ruano, J. Carrillo-Rosua and F. Martin-Peinado, Talanta, 2011, 85(5), 2307–2315 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Ryan, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2011, 269(20), 2151–2162 CrossRef CAS .T. Calligaro, Y. Coquinot, L. Pichon and B. Moignard, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2011, 269(20), 2364–2372 CrossRef CAS .H. A. O. Wang, D. Grolimund, L. R. Van Loon, K. Barmettler, C. N. Borca, B. Aeschimann and D. Gunther, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83(16), 6259–6266 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

REEs	Seawater	 	EDTA and iminodiacetic acid resin	ICP-MS	External (2σ) precision <23%, LODs: Tb 1 pg L−1 to La 36 pg L−1	Comparison with ID-ICP-MS results	131
AgI, CdII, CoIII, CrIII, CuII, FeIII, MnII, NiII, PbII and ZnII	Water	 	HyperSep™ SCX strong cation exchange resin	ICP-AES	LODs ranging from 0.05–0.2 μg L−1, sampling frequency 24 samples h−1	 	132
Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn	Seawater	 	Nobias-chelate PA1 resin	SF-ICP-MS	LODs: Mn 0.002 to Ni 0.085 nmol kg−1, and Co 0.13 to Cd 0.86 pmol kg−1	Laboratory intercomparison of a surface and deep-water sample	133
Cd, Co, Cr, Mn, Ni, Pb, Zn	Seawater and water	1,5-Bis (2-pyridyl)-3-sulphophenyl methylene thiocarbonohydrazide resin	Controlled pore glass	ICP-MS	Preconcentration factors of between 2.2 and 6.8, LODs: Co 0.002 μg L−1 to Zn 0.260 μg L−1	NRCC SLEW 3 (estuarine water), LGC 6016 (estuarine water) and NRCC CASS-5 (near shore seawater), NRCC SLRS-5 (river water) and NWRI TMDA-54.4 (fortified lake water)	134
CuII, FeIII, and PbII	Water	Phenyl-iminodiacetic acid	MWCNT	ICP-OES	Preconcentration factors of up to 100, LODs Cu 0.15 to Fe 0.26 ng mL−1	 	135
AgI	Waste water	Complex with 2-mercaptobenzothiazole	MWCNT	FAAS	Preconcentration factor of 160, LOD of 0.21 μg L−1	 	136
Pb	Water	Complex with dithizone	Graphene	FAAS	LOD of 0.61 μg L−1, at 20 μg L−1 an RSD of 3.56% (n = 10) was found	Spike recovery 95–100%	137
CrIII	Water	Complex with 8-hydroxyquinoline	Graphene	FAAS	Preconcentration factor of 125, LOD of 0.5 μg L−1, 4.3% RSD n = 10 at a concentration of 20.0 μg L−1	 	138
CrIII, CuII, PbII and ZnII	Water	Dithizone	Modified silica coated Fe2O3 nanoparticles	ICP-AES	LODs ranged from 8 ng L−1 for ZnII to 62 ng L−1 for PbII	IERM GSBZ 50009-88 (environmental water)	139
GeIV	Water	 	TiO2 nano colloid	ETAAS	LOD 43 ng L−1, RSD 3.6% (n = 6) at a concentration of 0.4 μg L−1	Comparison with ICP-MS results	140
AuIII, PdII, PtII and PtIV	Water	L-Cysteine	Silica gel	ICP-AES	LODs Au 0.006 to Pd 0.02 μg L−1, RSD 5–9 % at 0.1 μg L−1	 	141
BiIII, CdII, CuII, GaIII, NiII and PbII	Seawater	Cetyltrimethylammonium chloride	Silica particles floated with sodium dodecyl sulfate	ICP-MS	LODs Ga 0.00007 μg L−1 to Ni 0.004 μg L−1	NRCC CASS-4 (nearshore seawater) and NRCC NASS-5 (seawater)	142
AsV	Water	 	Ion imprinted 1-vinylimidazole, 4-vinylpyridine and styrene polymer	ICP-MS	LOD 0.025 μg L−1, RSD 1.9% at 0.5 μg L−1 (n = 3).	 	143
Hg2+ and MeHg	Oxic water	3-Mercaptopropyl	Silica gel	ICP-MS	LODs MeHg 0.1 ng L−1 and Hg2+ 0.7 ng L−1	 	144
Cd and Pb	Water	2-(6-Methyl-2-benzothiazolylazo)-orcinol	Polyurethane	FAAS	Preconcentration factors Cd 38.6 and Pb 30.0, LODs Cd 0.08 μg L−1 and Pb 0.51 μg L−1, RSDs of <6.34% at nominal 5 μg L−1 (n = 7)	NIST SRM 1643d (trace elements in natural water)	145

Ni	Seawater and water	LLE	DDTC complex, MIBK	MIP-MS	LOD 1.3 ng L−1, preconcentration factor 50, RSD < 4%	NRCC NASS-5 (seawater), NRCC SLRS-3 (river water) and NRCC SLRS-4 (river water)	146
Pb	Water	CPE	Dithizone, Triton X-114®	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 39, LOD 4.3 μg L−1	NRCCRM GBW(E) 080393 (simulated water)	147
Bi	Water	CPE	Dithizone, Triton X-100®	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 43, LOD 4.0 μg L−1	NRCCRM GBW(E) 080135 (water)	148
SbIII, Sbtotal	Water	LPME	Dithiocarbamate complex, xylene	ETAAS	Preconcentration factor 400, LOD of 2 μg L−1	NRCC SLRS-5 (river water)	149
Bi3+	Water	DLLME	2-(5-Bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-(diethyl amino) phenol, dichlorobenzene	FAAS	LOD 3.0 ng mL−1 RSD 1.5% (n = 7) at a concentration of 0.4 μg L−1	 	150
UVI	Seawater, ground water	DLLME	Complex with APDC in the presence of cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, chloroform	ICP-AES or FI-ICP-MS	Preconcentration factors of 11 (ICP-AES) and 25 (FI-ICP-MS), LODs of 2.0 μg L−1 (ICP-AES) and 30 ng L−1 (ICP-MS)	Spike recovery and cross validation with laser fluorimetry	151
CrVI and Crtotal	Water	DLLME	APDC complexes, 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide	ETAAS	Preconcentration factor 300, LOD of 2 ng L−1, RSD of 8% (n = 10) at a concentration of 0.05 μg L−1	Spike recoveries are between 95 and –104%	152

Co, Cr Mn, Y and REE	Seawater	In situ coprecipitation	Mg(OH)2 precipitate after addition of 20–22% m/v NH4OH	SF-ICP-MS	LODs 1.03 (Cr) to 0.001 ng kg−1 (Lu), RSD < 11% (n = 20)	NRCC NASS-5 (seawater) and CASS-4 (nearshore seawater)	153
Cr, Fe, Mn, Pb and Zn	Seawater	In situ coprecipitation	Mg(OH)2 precipitate after addition NH4OH	ICP-MS with DRC	LODs from Pb 0.002 to Zn 0.19 nM, RSD < 16% (n = 6) for all elements	NRCC NASS-5 (seawater) and NRCC CASS-4 (nearshore seawater)	154
MeHg	Seawater	Purge and trap	Ethylating agent	GC-cold vapour-AFS	LOD 2 fM for a 2 L sample	 	155

As, Bi, Cd, Pb	Fertiliser, urine, river water, wine	CPE	Triton X-114®, o,o-diethyldithiophosphate chelator	ICP-AES	Preconcentration factor 10–18; LODs 0.05–0.06 μg L−1, except Pb 0.28 μg L−1	NIST SRM 1643e (enriched water), NIST SRM 1566b (oyster tissue), INCT CTA-OTL-1 (oriental tobacco leaves), NRCCRM GBW 07602 (bush branches and leaves)	113
Bi	Soil, seawater, tap water, waste water	LPME	S-methyl-3-salicylidene dithiocarbazate in chloroform	ETAAS	Preconcentration factor 100; LOD 19 pg mL−1	 	259
Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Zn	Food, hair, water	IPE	2-(4-Methoxybenzoyl)-N′-benzylidene-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-oxo-N-phenyl-propono hydrazide	FAAS	LODs 0.33–0.90 μg L−1	LGC CRM 6019 (river water), RTC CRM 044 (soil)	260
Cd, Hg, Pb	Sediment	SFE	Bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)monothiophosphinic acid, CO2	ICP-MS	 	NACIS NCS DC 73372 (lake sediment)	261
Cd, Pb	Soil	CPE	Octyl polyethylene glycol phenol ether, ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate	FAAS	Preconcentration factors Cd 49, Pb 62; LODs Cd 0.29 ng mL−1, Pb 2.1 ng mL−1	Spike recovery	262
Cu, Fe	Food, water	CPE	Triton X-114®, eriochrome cyanine R	FAAS	Preconcentration factors Cu 99, Fe 141; LODs Cu 0.57 ng mL−1, Fe 0.33 ng mL−1	NCS DC 73349 (bush branches and leaves), NWRI TM 23.2 (fortified water)	263
Fe, Zn	Food, hair, water	SE	Methyl-2-(4-methoxybenzoyl)-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-oxopropanoyl carbamate in MIBK	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 100; LODs Fe 0.26 μg L−1, Zn 0.32 μg L−1	Spike recovery	264
Mn	Tea leaves, tea infusion, water	CPE	Triton X-100®, 8-hydroxyquinoline	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 10–20; LOD 1.9 μg L−1	IRMM BCR 278R (mussel tissue)	265
Te	Soil, water	SFODME	1-Undecanol solvent, ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate complexing agent	ETAAS	Preconcentration factor 342, LOD 0.003 ng mL−1	NIST SRM 1643e (trace elements in water)	266
r	Blood, plants	CPE	Triton X-114®, 2-methyl-8-hydroxyquinoline or 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 30 and 26, LODs 1.4 and 1.5 μg L−1	IRMM BCR 101 (spruce needles)	267

Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn	Cabbage, potato	La-2,2′-bipyridyl and rose Bengal	FAAS, ICP-AES	Preconcentration factor 40; LODs 0.71–5.8 μg L−1 (FAAS), 0.36–3.3 μg L−1 (ICP-AES)	NACIS NCS ZC 85006 (tomato)	268
Cr	Soil, wastewater	Ytterbium(III) hydroxide	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 30, LOD 1.1 μg L−1	NWRI TMDA 54.4 (fortified lake water), NIST SRM 2710 (montana soil)	269
Cu, Ni	Baby food, water	Mo(VI)/di-tert-butyl{methylene-bis-270-diyl}bis-carbamate	FAAS	Preconcentration factor Cu 40, Ni 100; LODs Cu 0.43 μg L−1, Ni 0.70 μg L−1	NWRI TM-25.3 (fortified lake water), HPS CRM-SA-C (sandy soil C)	270

Au	Ore, soil and water	 	Granular activated carbon	ETAAS	Preconcentration factor 50; LODs 0.9 ng g−1 in soil, 7 ng L−1 water	MINTEK SARM-7B (platinum Oore), NIST SRM 330 (copper ore mill heads)	271
Au, Pd, Pt	Ore, soil, water	Cysteine	Silica gel	ETAAS (Au), ICP-AES (Pd, Pt)	LODs Au: 0.002 μg g−1 ore, 0.005 μg L−1 water; Pd: 0.006 μg g−1 ore, 003 μg L−1 water; Pt: 0.002 μg g−1 soil, 0.06 μg L−1 water	Copper ore 327-98, spike recovery	141
Cd	Tobacco	Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate	Amberlite XAD-2	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 100; LOD 0.03 mg mL−1	INCT CTA-OTL-1 (oriental Tobacco leaves)	272
Cd, Co, Cu	Tea leaves, water	 	ZrO2–B2O3 nanohybrid material	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 10–15, LODs 3.1–3.8 μg L−1	NRCCRM GBW07605 (tea leaves)	273
Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb, Zn	Pharmaceutical samples, water	8-Hydroxyquinoline	Multiwalled carbon nanotube disc	 	LODs 1.0–5.2 μg L−1	NIST SRM 1577b (bovine liver), IAEA-336 (lichen), IAEA HR-1 (humber river sediment)	274
Cd, Cu	Fish, sediment, water	Diphenylcarbazide	SBA-15 nanoporous silica	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 290; LODs Cd 0.15 ng mL−1, Cu 0.45 ng mL−1	NACIS NCS DC 73323 (soil), OREAS BG 326 (polymetallic ore)	275
Cd, Cu, Pb	Sediment, urine, water	 	Mixed cellulose ester membrane	FAAS	LODs Cd 0.2 μg L−1, Cu 2.0 μg L−1, Pb 3.0 μg L−1	NIST SRM 8704 (buffalo river sediment), spike recovery	276
Co, Cu, Pb	Soil, tea leaves, water	 	Nanoalumina-single walled carbon nanotube hybrid	FAAS	LODs Co 0.9 μg L−1, Cu 1.1 μg L−1, Pb 2.1 μg L−1	IRMM BCR 150 (skim milk powder, CMI 7003 (silty clay)	277
Cu	Tobacco leaves	Alizarin fluorine blue	Sisal fibre	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 75; LOD 0.018 μg L−1	NIST SRM 1570a (spinach leaves)	278
Cu	Mussel, water	 	Functionalised multiwalled carbon nanotube	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 100; LOD 0.27 μg L−1	IRMM BCR 320R (channel sediment)	279
Cu	Food, soil, water	1-Phenyl-1,2-propanedione-2-oxime thiosemicarbazone	Chloromethylated polystyrene	FAAS	Preconcentration factor 41; LOD 0.56 μg L−1	Spike recovery	280
Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn	Soil	Trans-1,2-diaminocyclohexane-N,N,N′,N′-Tetraacetic acid	Nobias Chelate-PA1	ESI-MS	LODs 1.9–5.0 ng g−1	JSAC-0401 (brown forest soil)	281
Fe, Pb	Plant, water	 	Bucky tubes disc	FAAS	LODs Fe 1.6 μg L−1, Pb 4.9 μg L−1	NWRI TMDA 51.3 (fortified water)	282
Hg	Water	S-benzyldithiocarbazate	Modified activated carbon	ICP-AES	Preconcentration factor 80; LOD 0.09 ng mL−1	NRCCRM GBW08301 (river sediment)	283
Hg	Sediment	 	Triisobutylphosphine sulphide, CYANEX-471X®	Cold vapour AAS	Preconcentration factor 32; LOD 24 ng L−1	NIST SRM 2709 (san joaquin soil), NRCCRM GSD-9 and GSD-11 (sewage sediment)	284
Ho, La, Tb	 	 	TiO2–grapheme composite	MPT-AES	Preconcentration factor 10–17; LODs 1.6–2.8 μg L−1	NRCCRM GBW 07313 (marine sediment)	285
Ni, Pb	Sediment, sludge	 	CNT, oxidised CNT, L-alanine immobilised on CNT	ETAAS	LODs Ni 30 μg L−1, Pb 10 μg L−1	QC municipal sludge, TRAP-LRM lake sediment	286
Pb	Parenteral solutions, urine, water	 	Ion-imprinted polyvinylimidazol-silica hybrid copolymer	TS-FF-AAS	Preconcentration factor 128; LOD 0.75 μg L−1	NRCC ORM-3 (fish protein), NRCC MESS-3 (marine sediment), NRCC PACS-2 (marine sediment)	287
Tl	Cement, soil, zinc	 	Chromosorb 105	ETAAS	LODs 0.05 μg L−1 (total Tl), 0.034 μg L−1 (TlIII)	NIST SRM 2710 (montana soil), NRCCRM GBW 07402 (soil), NRCCRM GBW 07309 and NRCCRM GBW 07310 (stream sediments)	288
2D	Two-dimensional
A4F	Tsymmetrical flow field flow fractionation
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AEC	Anion exchange chromatography
AES	Atomic emission spectrometry
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AFS	Atomic fluorescence spectrometry
ANN	Artifical neural network
amu	Atomic mass unit
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
ASE	Accelerated solvent extraction
ASU	Atomic Spectrometry Update
aTOF-MS	Aerosol time of flight mass spectrometry
BIF	Banded iron formation
BCR	Community Bureau of Reference (of the European Community) now IRMM
CC	Carbonate carbon
CANMET	Canada Centre for Mineral and Energy Technology
CEF	Conventional energy filtering
CF	Continuous flow
CNT	Carbon nanotubes
CPE	Cloud point extraction
CRC	Collision reaction cell
CRM	Certified reference material
CS	Continuum source
DBT	Dibutyltin
DDTC	Diethyldithiocarbamate
DGA	N,N,N′N′-Tetraoctyl-1,5-diglycolamide or N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis-2-ethylhexyldiglycolamide based resins
DGT	Diffusion gradient in thin films
DLLME	Dispersive liquid liquid microextraction
DRC	Dynamic reaction cell
DRI	Desert Research Institute (USA)
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EC	Elemental carbon
EDS	Energy dispersive spectrometry
EDTA	Ethyldiaminetetraacetic acid
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EM	Electron microscopy
EPMA	Electron probe microanalyser
ERM	European Reference Material
ESI-MS	Electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporisation
ETV-FAES	Electrothermal vaporisation flame atomic emission spectrometry
ETV-ICP-MS	Electrothermal vaporisation inductively couple plasma mass spectrometry
FAAS	Flame atomic absorption spectrometry
FFF	Field flow fractionation
FI	Flow injection
FIA	Flow injection analysis
FMPS	Fast mobility particle sizer
FP	Fundamental parameter
FRM	Federal reference method (USA)
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
GC	Gas chromatography
GC-AES	Gas chromatography atomic emission spectrometry
GSJ	Geological Survey of Japan
GSP	inhalable personal sampler design produced by GSA Messgerätebau (Germany)
GUM	Guide to Uncertainity in Measurement
HDPE	High density polyethylene
HEPA	High efficiency particulate air
HG	Hydride generation
HG-AAS	Hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry
HG-AFS	Hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectrometry
HG–ETAAS	Hydride generation electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
HPLC-HG-AFS	High performance hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectrometry
HPLC-ICP-MS	High performance inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
HPLC-VG-AFS	High performance vapour generation atomic fluorescence spectrometry
HPS	High Purity Standards (USA)
HR	High resolution
HR–ICP-MS	High resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
HR-CS-ETAAS	High resolution continuum source electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
IAEA	International Atomic Energy Agency
IAG	International Association of Geoanalysts
IC	Ion chromatography
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
ID	Isotope dilution
IERM	Institute for Environmental Reference Materials (of Ministry of Environmental Protection, China)
IGGE	Institute of Geophysical and Geochemical Exploration (China)
IL	Ionic liquid
INCT	Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology (Poland)
IOM	Institute of Occupational Medicine (UK)
IPE	Ion pair extraction
IR	Infrared
IRMM	Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements
IRMS	Isotope ratio mass spectrometry
ISO	International Organisation for Standardization
JK	Jernkontoret/Corrosion and Metals Research Institute (Sweden)
JSAC	Japan Society for Analyical Chemistry
KE	Kinetic energy
LA	Laser ablation
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
LA-MC-ICP-MS	Laser ablation multicollector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
LC-MS	Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
LDPE	Liquid drop microextraction
LGC	Laboratory of the Government Chemist (UK)
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LLE	Liquid liquid extraction
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantification
LOV	Lab-on-valve
MC	Multicollector
MC-ICP-MS	Multicollector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
MeHg	Methyl mercury
Me2Hg	Diethyl mercury
MIBK	Methyl isobutyl ketone
MIP-MS	Microwave induced plasma mass spectrometry
MMAD	Mass median aerodynamic diameter
MOUDI	Micro orifice uniform deposition impactor
MPT	Microwave plasma torch
MS	Mass spectrometry
MPT-AES	Microwave plasma torch atomic emission spectrometry
MWCNT	Multiwalled carbon nanotube
MU	Measurement uncertainty
m/z	Mass to charge ratio
NACIS	National Analysis Centre for Iron and Steel (China)
NCS	China National Analysis Centre for Iron and Steel
Nd: YAG	Neodymium doped:yttrium aluminum garnet
NIOSH	National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (USA)
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology (USA)
NMIJ	National Metrology Institute of Japan
NRCC	National Research Council of Canada
NRCCRM	National Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)
NTIMS	Negative thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
NWRI	National Water Research Institute (Canada)
OREAS	Ore Research and Exploration Pty Ltd Assay Standards (Australia)
PBET	Physiologically based extraction test
PCA	Principal component analysis
PCR	Principal component regression
PGE	Platinum group element
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PLS	Partial least square
PM	Particulate matter
PM2.5	Particulate matter (with an aerodynamic diameter of up to 2.5 μm)
PM10	Particulate matter (with an aerodynamic diameter of up to 10 μm)
ppm	Part per million
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
QC	Quality control
RCC	Rotating coiled column
REE	Rare earth element
RM	Reference material
RP	Reverse phase
RP–HPLC	Reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography
RSD	Relative standard deviation
RTC	Resource Techology Corporation (USA)
s	Standard deviation of sample
SARM	South African producers of Metallurgical and Geological Certified Reference Materials
SBET	simplified bioaccessibility extraction test
SD	Standard deviation
SE	Solvent extraction
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SEM-EDS	Scanning electron microscopy energy dispersive spectrometry
SF	Sector field
SFE	Supercritical fluid extraction
SF-ICP-MS	Sector field inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
SFODME	Solidification of floating organic drop microextraction
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SPE	Solid phase extraction
SPME	Solid phase microextraction
SRM	Standard reference material
TBT	Tributyltin
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TIMS	Thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
TMAH	Tetramethylammonium hydroxide
TODGA	N,N,N,′N′-Tetraoctyl-1,5-diglycolamide based resin
TOF	Time of flight
TRAP-LRM	Training in production and use of laboratory reference materials for use in routine quality control (EC-Growth Programme Contract G6MA-CT-2000-02006)
TS-FF-AAS	Thermospray flame furnace atomic absorption spectrometry
TSP	Total suspended particles
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
UNEP	United Nations Environment Programme
USEPA	United States Environmental Protection Agency
USGS	United States Geological Survey
USN	Ultrasonic nebuliser
UV	Ultra violet
VG	Vapour generation
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-ray absorption spectrometry
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
YAG	Yttrium aluminium garnet
σ	Population standard deviation

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
