2D materials for renewable energy storage devices: Outlook and challenges  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC05357B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC05357B
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13528-135422D materials for renewable energy storage devices: Outlook and challenges

        
          
            Ramkrishna 
            Sahoo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anjali 
            Pal
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tarasankar 
            Pal
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Indian institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India. E-mail: tpal@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in
bDepartment of Civil Engineering, Indian institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India
Received 
      27th June 2016
    , Accepted 22nd August 2016First published on 22nd August 2016AbstractScientists are looking for cost-effective, clean and durable alternative energy devices. Superior charge storage devices can easily meet the demands of our daily needs. In this respect, a material with suitable dimensions for charge storage devices has been considered to be very important. Improved performance of charge storage devices has been derived from whole-body participation and the best are from 2D materials, which provide a viable and acceptable solution.
Ramkrishna Sahoo
Mr Ramkrishna Sahoo graduated from the University of Calcutta, India in 2009 and then obtained his MSc degree from West Bengal State University, India in 2011. He is currently pursuing his PhD work in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India under the supervision of Prof. Tarasankar Pal and Prof. Anjali Pal. His area of research involves electrochemical energy conversion and storage. The development of novel 2D materials for supercapacitor devices is his main emphasis.
Anjali Pal
Professor Anjali Pal, MSc, PhD graduated from University of Calcutta, India in Chemistry. At present she is an associate professor in the Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. Prof. Pal is actively engaged in teaching and research in the field of environmental engineering and science. She has published more than 150 research papers. Dr Pal has received an International Hall of Fame award (USA), R&D 100 award (USA) and convention award from the Indian Chemical Society. She has visited many countries as a visiting professor. She works in the field of adsolubilization, catalysis and spectroscopy, mainly for environmental remediation.
Tarasankar Pal
Professor Tarasankar Pal, MSc, PhD, DSc graduated in chemistry from the University of Burdwan, India. He is the senior professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He is a fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. He has published little over 350 papers. Recently the ACS has highlighted him amongst 20 Indian authors for high-quality research and Scopus has highlighted him among the top three material scientists of India. His current interest includes electrochemical energy conversion and development of novel 2D materials for their application in charge storage devices. His ‘arsenic detection kit’ and ‘bench marked model reaction’ to test any metal nanoparticle catalyst deserve special mention.
1. Introduction
Energy conversion and energy storage have become a global concern in recent days and hence, the fabrication of an efficient energy or power source device is immensely challenging. Thus, researchers are working hard to construct an energy or power source device which is sustainable as well as environmentally friendly. Based on these requirements, energy conversion and storage via electrochemical pathways has been considered to be one of the best alternatives, as the consumption of energy in these devices is economical, sustainable and also, in particular, very environmentally friendly. Fuel cells, primary/secondary batteries and supercapacitors are three different directions of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.1–4 The main focus of our review is the storage of energy, thus, we will discuss the different aspects of energy storage devices and their behavior. Rechargeable batteries (secondary) and electrochemical capacitors (ECs) are two fundamental varieties of energy storage device studied by researchers where energy is stored by means of transforming chemical energy into electrical energy.1–3 The hybrid supercapacitor battery is a recent addition in this field.5 In batteries, storage of electrical energy is caused by the Faradic redox reactions at the electrodes (cathode and anode). In the cathode, reactions occur at higher potential than the anode which are generally designated as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively.1 An electrochemical capacitor, which is mostly known as a supercapacitor, stores electrical energy via the formation of electrical double layers (EDL).1,5 In some of the cases, redox reactions at electrode materials are also responsible for charge storage (pseudocapacitor).5 In a hybrid supercapacitor battery, both the redox type battery electrode and the EDL type capacitor electrode are necessary to develop a full cell. In the practical field of application, secondary batteries (especially Li-ion batteries) are used in most the cases due to their high specific energy and specific capacity. Nevertheless, there are certain limitations regarding rechargeable batteries such as low production of power, a slow charge–discharge rate, low rate capability and very poor cyclic stability.3 To overcome these constraints, supercapacitors have become the best alternative to batteries. For supercapacitors, the advantages are high power density, extremely fast charge–discharge cycles, high rate capability and good cyclic stability.2 However, a question arises about the specific energy of supercapacitors. For an electrical double layer capacitor (EDLC), energy is stored only through electrostatic ion adsorption, thus the specific energy is low.2–5 In the case of a pseudocapacitor, charge storage occurs via redox reaction on the surface of the electrode materials and, as a matter of fact, the accumulation of charge in the case of a pseudocapacitor is higher compared to an EDLC and it produces a higher specific energy.5 Thus, the pseudocapacitor governs the ability to solve the specific energy and power density issues to a certain extent. Still, the pseudocapacitor has some limitations.5 In recent times, scientists have been working on a new type of storage material which is known as a hybrid supercapacitor (HSC) or a hybrid supercapacitor battery.5–8 It is a special type of asymmetric supercapacitor, where both battery-type and the capacitor-type electrodes are used. Generally, the battery type material is used as the anode and the electrical double layer type material is used as the cathode; organic compounds of Li salt are used as the electrolyte. In this special type of storage material, advantages from both the battery (such as high specific capacity and high specific energy) and supercapacitor (such as fast charge–discharge, high power density, high stability) can be utilized. However, the critical problem regarding HSCs is that in most cases, they exhibit high specific energy at lower current density, but at higher current density, the specific energy value decreases abruptly. This limitation of HSCs comes from the low kinetics of the battery type materials. In the battery type anode material, Li intercalation–deintercalation is not so fast compared to the adsorption–desorption of electrolyte ions at capacitor type cathode materials.2,6 The kinetics of a material in the electrode of a charge storage device depend on the transportation and diffusion of electrolyte ions.9,10 Thus, morphology plays a crucial role to make a material superior for charge storage in all respects. In most cases, nanomaterials have been used as the electrode materials in charge storage devices. Nanomaterials are generally of four types: zero dimensional (0D); one dimensional (1D); two dimensional (2D); and three dimensional (3D).11 Yolk–shell and core–shell structure nanoparticles, and quantum dots etc. belong to the 0D nanomaterials.11–15 These are very close to the spherical particles. 1D nanomaterials are nanopillars, nanowires, nanobelts, nanotubes etc.16–21 The thickness of 2D materials is composed of a few atomic layers and other dimensions are outside the nanometric range.11 Graphene,22–24 metal layered double hydroxides (LDH),25–27 a few transition metal oxides (TMO) or hydroxides (TMHs),28–30 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),31–33 MXenes34–37etc. belong to the 2D nanomaterials. In 3D nanomaterials, all three dimensions are beyond the nanometric range; still they exhibit the advantages of nanomaterials. Spherical porous carbon, graphene aerogels etc. are examples of common 3D nanomaterials.38–41 All these types of nanomaterials have been used as charge storage materials.
In this review, we have tried to summarize recent trends in the fabrication of electrodes using nanomaterials of different morphologies. Special emphasis has been given to 2D materials, and we also point out the demerits of materials other than 2D materials.
2. Definition
Before discussing the mechanism of a charge storage device, a brief discussion is necessary regarding the terms used to fabricate a device.
Open circuit voltage: This is the actual thermodynamic voltage of the system. It is evaluated at the terminal of the cell when there is no flow of external current.
Closed circuit voltage: This is the voltage at the terminal of a cell when current is produced by the cell through the external circuit.
Anode: This is known as the negative electrode, where oxidation of the material occurs. It generates electrons and transfers these to the external circuit.
Cathode: This is noted as the positive electrode where reduction of the chemical occurs. It receives electrons from the external circuit.
Electrolyte: an aqueous or organic solvent which only provides the ionic conductivity between the electrodes in a cell.
Separator: This is a dielectric material. It is employed to restrict the contact between the anode and cathode. A separator has to be inert in the electrochemical environment, but permeable towards the ions.
Active mass: This is part of the total material which participates in the chemical reaction and produces electrical energy.
Charge: This is a process by which the device stores electrical charge using an external source. It is not a thermodynamically spontaneous process.
Discharge: This is a process where the device transports electrical energy to the external load. It is a thermodynamically spontaneous process.
3. Use of 0D, 1D and 3D nanomaterials for charge storage
3.1. 0D nanomaterials for charge storage
Several 0D nanostructures have been used as the electrode materials in both Li-ion batteries and supercapacitor charge storage devices. Activated carbon (AC) has been used as the electrode material by several groups.42,43 ACs have drawn much attention due to their very high specific surface area (3000 m2 g−1). In asymmetric supercapacitors, secondary rechargeable batteries and hybrid supercapacitor batteries, AC is used as the electrode material in all cases.9,19,44–46
Hollow nanomaterials have also been assigned as 0D nanomaterials. Several techniques have been used to synthesize these hollow nanoparticles.11 Hard templating methods are mostly used to synthesize hollow carbon nanoparticles and hollow transitional nanoparticles (e.g. NiO, CoO, MnO2etc.).47–50 Recently, hollow multi-shelled nanomaterials have also been used to enhance the storage properties of the supercapacitor.51,52 G. Cao and his group reported multi-shelled Co3O4 hollow microspheres which were used as supercapacitor electrodes.52 This material exhibited a specific capacitance value of 394.4 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 which shows the low specific capacitance of the material. But, due to the hollow structure, transport of ions was facile, which enhanced the rate capability of the material. 0D solid nanoparticles and their composites were also used as electrode materials for charge storage devices.12,13 Ma et al. published a paper consisting of 0D Fe2O3 nanoarticles embedded on N doped graphene. The specific capacitance value of the composite was 618 F g−1 at a specific current of 0.5 A g−1. The stability of the material was not so high; it was only 56.7% after 5000 cycles.12 A 0D carbon nanoparticle encapsulated in hollow NiO was reported.14 The specific capacitance of the material was quite good, 988.7 F g−1 at a 0.5 A g−1 specific current, but the rate capability and cyclic stability were not up to the mark. After only 1000 cycles the initial capacitance dropped down to 90%. Recently G. R. Li and his group reported a Ni@NiO core–shell nanoparticle. It exhibited a specific capacitance of 949 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1. When the scan rate increased from 5 mV s−1 to 100 mV s−1, the capacitance decreased to 67%. This demonstrates the poor cyclic stability of the electrode material. After only 1000 cycles, the capacitance had decreased to 92%.53
There are several reports where 0D nanoparticles have been used as electrode materials for battery applications.13,15,50,54 Gao et al. published a paper using Co3V2O8 nanoparticles embedded on reduced graphene oxide as the anode material. It exhibited a 1050 mA h g−1 specific capacity at a 50 mA g−1 specific current. This value was stable up to 200 cycles but decreased to 899 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles.13 El-Shinawi et al. published a paper based on the anodic behaviour of FeOx coated SnO2 for Li-ion batteries.53 The material exhibited a stable reversible specific capacity of 480 mA h g−1 up to 150 cycles.
From the above discussions, it is clear that the specific capacitance value, cyclic durability and rate capability of 0D materials are not adequate for practical purposes.
3.2. 1D nanomaterials for charge storage
1D nanomaterials are the most-studied nanomaterials as charge storage electrode materials other than 2D materials.16–21,55–58 Due to their high aspect ratio, transport of both electrons and electrolyte ions becomes more facile.11 Nanorods, nanotubes and nanowires fall in this category.11 Nanowires and nanorods are differentiated by their different aspect ratios. Nanowires have an aspect ratio of more than 10, whereas nanorods have an aspect ratio of less than 10. Nanotubes contain a hollow interior. 1D materials have some advantages and disadvantages when they are used as charge storage devices.
Sun et al. recently reported a new bamboo-like graphitic carbon based flexible supercapacitor.20 The gravimetric capacitance of this supercapacitor was quite high, 236 F g−1 at a 5 A g−1 specific current. The material exhibited better charge–discharge stability. It kept its original specific capacitance up to 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1. The higher electrical conductivity of the 1D carbonaceous materials and better ion transport made the nanostructure cyclically durable. Fu et al. prepared a 1D heterostructure for a high performance supercapacitor.19 They fabricated the supercapacitor electrode using a ZnFe2O4@NixCo2x(OH)6x core/shell nanowire array which exhibited a real capacity of 419.1 μA h cm−2 at 5 mA cm−2. The material kept 81.4% of its capacity up to 2000 charge–discharge cycles at 20 mA cm−2. Tang et al. reported a capsule-like, porous, hollow nickel cobalt sulfide.55 Due to the hollow and porous character, the as-fabricated electrode exhibited a high specific capacity value; 224.4 mA h g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 specific current, but the rate capability and cycling stability was not up to the expected level. A decrease to 55.7% of its initial capacitance was observed after 1000 charge discharge cycles.
1D materials are also used as electrodes for battery applications.16–18,59 A hierarchical graphene nanotube–iron oxide hetero nanostructure was reported, which was used as the anode material in a Li-ion battery.59 The composite exhibited an initial capacity of 3240 mA h g−1 but after 40 cycles the reversible capacity was 1024 mA h g−1, which suggests the lower stability of the composite.59 S. Madhavi and his group published a paper on the anodic behaviour of mesoporous 1D FeC2O4.17 The Fe2C2O4 exhibited a specific capacity of 1326 mA h g−1 at 1C rate. The rate capability and cycling stability of the material were not so high.17 Recently, P. K. Chou and his group reported a 1D N-doped CNT encapsulated with peapod-like Ge nanoparticles for Li-ion battery applications.18 The capacity of the material was 1050 mA h g−1 at a 0.2C rate. The stability and rate of the electrode were also high. From the above discussion it is clear that the rate capability and stability increases for the 1D electrode nonmaterial. This is due to the short charge transfer path length and high electron expressway through the large axial direction in 1D materials,56 but capacity or specific capacitance is still remain an unsolved issue.
3.3. 3D nanomaterials for charge storage
3D nanomaterials have also been used as electrode materials for charge storage applications. Porous 3D materials makes themselves more accessible towards electrolyte ions and exhibit considerable mechanical stability.11 There are several reports where 3D porous nanomaterials have been used as electrode materials for supercapacitor as well as batteries.38–41,60–68 Zhai et al. fabricated a porous rose-like NiCo2O4–MnCo2O4 heterostructure.60 The specific capacitance of the material was 911.3 F g−1 at a specific current of 5 A g−1. This material exhibited a high rate performance and very high cyclic durability. Peng et al. reported a 3D metal sulfide.64 The specific capacitance was 1301 F g−1 at a specific current of 1 A g−1. Though their materials exhibited a high specific capacitance value, the cyclic stability was not so high. Recently, some scientists have been working with carbon based 3D materials for supercapacitors. Wang et al. in one of their papers, reported a 3D graphitic carbon which was microporous in nature. Thus, it could act as an ion-buffering reservoir.65 Due to this microporous nature, the material acted as a superior supercapacitor electrode. Recently, W. Zhang and his group reported an ordered 3D CuO architecture which was used as a superior electrode for supercapacitor devices.40 The hierarchical 3D structure was built up by the 1D and 2D units. The 3D structure exhibited a specific capacitance of 585 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. The rate capability and stability were also good enough. The retention of the specific capacitance was 79% at 20 A g−1 and 83% after 8000 charge–discharge cycles. When an asymmetric cell was built up using this material, the specific energy was 31.47 W h kg−1 at a power density of 892 W kg−1.
3D nanomaterials have also been used as electrode materials in battery applications. Zhu et al. published an article based on the synthesis of a 3D graphene/MnO2 hybrid material for energy storage applications. As mentioned in their paper, it exhibited a specific capacity of 275 mA h g−1. After 50th cycle the value decreased to 58%.41 Wang et al. reported a 3D mesoporous ZnFe2O4 nanostructure, which was used as the anode for the Li-ion battery. This battery material exhibited a specific capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at a specific current of 50 A g−1. The rate capability of the material was also very high. It maintained a reversible capacity of 800 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1. Kang et al. reported a hierarchical 3D tremella-like NiMn2O4/C nanostructure, used as the anode in a Li-ion battery.62 According to their report, the material exhibited very high specific capacity, 1035 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 specific current, with a high rate capability. When the specific current was increased to 5000 mA g−1, the specific capacity was 671 mA h g−1. This is an excellent result as far as the rate capability is concerned.
From the above discussion, it is clear that electrodes which were fabricated by 0D, 1D or 3D nano or microstructures exhibited some limitations, especially in terms of the rate capability and cycling stability. In some cases the specific capacitance values were also very low. Some recent reports have tried to overcome these issues by forming porous, heterostructured nanomaterials.
4. Use of 2D materials
The limitation of the above-mentioned materials is that they cannot utilize their whole structure for active participation in the electrochemical reaction. For different electrolytes, the ion diffusion path lengths are different. For pseudocapacitors, in aqueous electrolyte, ions can diffuse to a maximum ∼20 nm depth inside the active material from the surface.8,39,69,70 So, in general, redox reactions occur mainly on the surface of a pseudocapacitor. Most of the above-mentioned pseudocapacitor materials have a thick wall. For battery materials the wall is also broad and thus the rate of diffusion of the electrolytes ions become less. As a result, electrolyte ions cannot diffuse through the whole body of the material, so participation is partial. In this present scenario, it is extremely crucial to design an electrode material which can participate actively in the electrochemical reaction process through the whole body. Accordingly, scientists have begun fabricating 2D materials.11,71–75 These give an increased rate of diffusion of electrolyte ions through the material for batteries as well as supercapacitors. Till now several reviews have been written on 2D materials and their syntheses and applications etc.,11,71–75 but none of them have summarized the comparative study of different materials with 2D structures and materials other than 2D structures, and their advantages and disadvantages in applications for both supercapacitors and batteries. Apart from their large surface area, there are other benefits of 2D materials. They have a high optical transparency and a high mechanical strength as well as chemical stability, etc.11 All the above-mentioned properties are very crucial for energy storage devices. In the beginning, graphene was used as a 2D material electrode for charge storage devices. Due to its single-atom thickness, crystalline nature, high carrier mobility (∼10000 cm2 V−1 s−1), large specific surface area (2630 m g−1), high optical transparency (∼98%), high mechanical strength (Young's modulus of graphene is ∼1 TPa) and excellent thermal conductivity, graphene was scientists' first choice as a storage material.72–75 There are also several uses of graphene in different fields of application.76,77 After employing the benefits of using graphene as a charge storage material, researchers discovered several 2D materials for charge storage devices, such as 2D graphene composites, 2D transition metal oxides (TMOs), hydroxides (TMHs), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) etc. The latest additions to this group are layered double hydroxides and MXenes. Scheme 1 shows the different 2D materials. Here, we will discuss the different synthetic strategies of 2D sheet materials, the application of different 2D materials and their composites in charge storage devices.
 Scheme 1  Five common 2D materials reported for charge storage application. 
4.1. Synthesis of 2D nanostructure
It is very difficult to cover all the synthetic approaches for the preparation of 2D nanostructures. In this section we have tried to discuss precisely some of the best known synthetic strategies. Most of the synthetic strategies belong to two categories: the top-down approach and the bottom-up approach. In the top-down approach, different forces are applied to exfoliate the layered bulk structure to a single layer or a multi layer (few layers) 2D structure. In the bottom-up approach, 2D nanomaterials are synthesized directly from the precursor salt using a suitable environment. Some common synthetic strategies for 2D nanomaterials’ syntheses are chemical vapour deposition (CVD), wet-chemical synthesis, selective etching and exfoliation, mechanical cleavage, liquid exfoliation, ion-intercalation and exfoliation etc. Among them, CVD and wet-chemical techniques belong to the bottom-up approach and rest are fitted into the top-down approach of synthesis. Scheme 2 displays the different synthetic approaches to prepare 2D nanostructures.
 Scheme 2  Different synthetic approaches for the preparation of 2D materials. 

4.1.1. Top-down method. 
In the top-down method, 2D nanosheets are synthesized from bulk layered crystals.75,78 In these layered crystals, intraplanar covalent bonding is very strong but the interplanar van der Waals force is comparatively very fragile. Thus, in all the top-down methods, various external forces are exerted to break this weak van der Waals force in between the planes in the layered bulk compounds.
Mechanical cleavage is the oldest and most established method to prepare 2D materials from layered bulk materials.79–83 In mechanical cleavage, two Scotch tapes are attached to different crystal faces of the bulk compound and then one of the scotch tapes is separated from the crystal. By repeating this process for a number of times, the as-obtained thin plate is transferred to the target substrate (SiO2/Si) by the use of gentle pressure. Finally, the Scotch tape is unwrapped and the thin nanosheets are attached to the substrate. This method is a conventional method to devolve mono or few layer 2D nanomaterials. In 2004, Novoselov et al. prepared single layer graphene from graphite using this technique.79 Consequently, different scientists also used this method to develop numerous 2D nanosheets.79–83 Problems regarding this approach are: low yield; requirement of the huge amount of bulk material for synthesis; difficulty in controlling the shape, size and thickness of the as-obtained 2D nanosheets; it is applicable only for layered compounds etc.75
The liquid exfoliation technique is used to obtain 2D nanosheets from the bulk layer structure directly in solvents via sonication.84–87N-Methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) and dimethyl formamide (DMF) are used as the solvents. Here, sonication only weakens the interplanar van der Waals forces, not the intraplanar covalent bonding. In this case, water cannot be used as the solvent; only organic solvents are used. Scientists have used this technique to develop quite a lot of different 2D ultrathin nanosheets.84–87 In this process, the yield is also very low and the lateral size of the as-obtained sheet materials are remarkably small.75
Among the top-down methods, the ion-intercalation and exfoliation method has limited use. In ion-intercalation and exfoliation methods, ions are intercalated into the interplanar spacing of the layered bulk materials by the weakening of the van der Waals force under sonication. Here, metal ions are actually intercalated into the interlayer structure of the bulk material.75 Hua Zhang et al. developed an electrochemical method to produce Li+ ion intercalated layered compounds.88–90 By using this method, scientists have developed 2D nanosheets with high yield and thus, overcame the drawback of the top-down method.88–92 Although issues regarding low yield can be solved using this technique, there are still certain other problems associated with this technique. High temperatures and long times are necessary for this technique to work out. On the other hand, intercalated organometallic compounds are highly explosive when they come in contact with air or oxygen.
Recently, attention has been drawn towards MXenes, which are a new type of 2D layered compounds synthesized using selective etching and exfoliation techniques from MAX compounds. Details of MXenes and MAX compounds are discussed below. In graphite or TMDs, van der Waals interaction occurs between the layers, but in MAX compounds, the layers are interconnected via chemical bonds. Thus, only the exfoliation technique can separate the layers.75 Hence, etching and exfoliation techniques are applied to synthesize MXenes from MAX compounds. In this technique, first, the etching agent (e.g. HF) etches A from MAX without deforming the M–X bond. After that, the expanded MX group is sonicated in water to get the 2D layer MXene compound. Several 2D MXenes have been synthesized using this technique.34–36,93–96 There are several MAX phase compounds, but not all of the MAX compounds can be converted into MXenes. Only HF has been used as the etching agent, and this is corrosive in nature. Thus, investigation of new etching materials is supremely important to use this technique effectively.


4.1.2. Bottom-up method. 
Two main techniques are used in the bottom-up approach to synthesize ultrathin 2D nanosheets.
In chemical vapour deposition (CVD), at high temperature and at high vacuum, a precursor reacts and decomposes onto the surface of a substrate and forms the 2D sheet. The benefits of this technique are that, not only are ultrathin 2D sheets of high crystal quality, high yield, and tunable shape, size and thickness obtained, but also exceptional electronic properties can be achieved, which is extremely important. Scientists use this method to prepare long range 2D sheets.97–100 Though there are some advantages of this method, a few limitations are also present. This method cannot be used at low temperature and low vacuum. In the CVD technique the 2D sheet is developed on a specific substrate. After that, it is difficult to move the 2D sheet from the specific substrate to the desired substrate (for other studies and applications). Another challenge associated with this method is to use an arbitrary substrate for the material synthesis.
The most used technique for the preparation of ultrathin 2D sheets is wet chemical synthesis. This synthesis comprises hydro/solvothermal synthesis, template synthesis, and self assembly processes etc.12–15,19,21 Here, the target material is synthesized through a chemical reaction from a suitable precursor in solution. The benefit of using wet chemical synthesis is that, by this method, gram quantities of product can be synthesized for industrial applications, which is highly cost effective. Again, tuning of the shape and size of 2D sheet materials is also very simple for this method. However, this method has a limitation. The synthesis of a single layer 2D sheet is very difficult using this method, which can be attributed to the different parameters (e.g. temperature, time, concentration of solution, solvents etc.) that interfere with the reaction.
There is another method, namely the Hummers' method or modified Hummers' method which is widely used to synthesize graphene oxide (GO). In this method, bulk graphite is used as the precursor, and a mixture of potassium permanganate and concentrated sulfuric acid is used as the oxidizing agent. Finally, sonication is used to transform multilayer graphite oxide into single layer graphene oxide.101–103 It is to be noted here that the physical and chemical properties of CVD-grown graphene and GO (prepared by the Hummers' method or the modified Hummers' method) are not the same.75 GO is not a good alternative for graphene. However, chemically modified graphene (CMG) or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) can compete with graphene in terms of their conductivity.75

4.2. Application in charge storage
In the above we have discussed the charge storage properties of 0, 1 and 3D nanostructures. From this discussion it is clear that the charge storage properties of bare 0, 1 or 3D materials are not good. After modification (e.g. porous structures, composites etc.) they exhibit better electrochemical properties. The fundamental limitation of these materials is that they cannot indulge in whole-body participation during the electrochemical reaction. As a result, their specific capacitance values, rate capabilities and energy densities are not satisfactory. For charge storage applications, especially for supercapacitors, diffusion of ions and accessibility of the active material by the electrolyte are very important. The capacitance of a charge storage device depends on the surface area of the electrode material. Thus, 2D materials become an essential tool for the fabrication of charge storage devices. There are several types of 2D materials which have been used as electrodes for charge storage devices. In the succeeding section we discuss the charge storage properties of these materials.

4.2.1. Graphene and graphene based materials. 
Graphene is the most widely used 2D electrode material for charge storage devices. Carbonaceous materials are highly suitable for charge storage applications, especially for supercapacitor electrodes due to their high cyclic durability.104–110 For this application, porous carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) etc. have been used.104–110 Although porous carbon exhibits very high surface area, its low conductivity is a major concern for researchers. On the other hand, CNTs provide high surface area as well as better conductivity, but their contact resistance with the current collector is high and they are expensive. Keeping these limitations in mind, graphene appears to be the best alternative for supercapacitors among the carbonaceous materials.22–24,109 Stoller et al. used graphene as a supercapacitor electrode for the first time.111 It has been observed that chemically modified graphene (CMG) or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are good alternatives for graphene. Stoller et al. used CMG, which was synthesized from GO using hydrazine hydrate. Their reported material was one atom thick and exhibited a specific surface area of 2630 m2 g−1. The specific capacitance values of their as-fabricated supercapacitor were 135 F g−1 and 99 F g−1 in aqueous electrolyte and organic electrolyte, respectively. Hydrazine hydrate is the most used reagent to modify the GO oxide sheet.111–113 NaBH4 and hydroquinone have also been used as reducing agents to modify GO.114–116 Heating is another technique which can reduce GO to rGO.114 Transformation from GO to rGO has also been done by laser reduction.117,118 Recently, Kim et al. reported the synthesis of graphene nanomeshes (Fig. 1).109
 Fig. 1  Catalytic metal oxide (SnO2) nanoparticles were deposited on the GO surface (partially reduced GO, RGO) at 25 °C with stirring. Next, the composites were subjected to controlled air oxidation via heating in an open-ended tube furnace. Finally, the partially oxidized RGO sheets were refluxed at 80 °C with diluted acid for 4 h to produce GNMs. Scale bars, 10 nm. 
The pore size, pore density distribution and neck size of the mesh were controlled by varying the percentage and size of the metal oxides on the graphene. The as-synthesized nanomesh exhibited a comparatively high specific capacitance value (253 F g−1 at 1 A g−1), excellent rate capability (83% capacitance retention at 100 A g−1) and very high cyclic stability (91% capacitance retention after 500000 charge–discharge cycles). Although, in most cases, graphene is used as the supercapacitor electrode, some scientists used graphene as electrode material for Li-ion batteries as well.22–24 J. Park and his group reported the enhanced Li-ion storage capability of graphene nanosheets.22 Fan et al. also used porous graphene to enhance the performance of Li-ion batteries.24 In recent times, B. Scrosati and his group used graphene as anode for an advanced Li-ion battery.23 They utilized lithium iron phosphate as cathode. The as-synthesized battery exhibited a specific capacity of 165 mA h g−1 with high cycling stability. The specific energy of the battery was also high (190 W h kg−1). To fabricate better Li-ion batteries, M. Agostini et al. used exfoliated graphite/graphene nanosheets as anode materials.108 They fabricated a high voltage Li-ion battery using this material. The battery material exhibited stable charge–discharge cycles up to 150 cycles and a specific energy of 260 W h kg−1.
Graphene not only acts as a supercapacitor electrode, but it can also act as a conductive support to make a hybrid electrode with metal oxide and hydroxide nanomaterials for charge storage devices.119–129 Metal oxide/hydroxide nanoparticles exhibit high energy density and a high specific capacitance value. On the other hand, graphene exhibits a high power density, high cyclic durability and high rate capability. Thus, researchers are fabricating hybrid/hetero nanostructures combining graphene and metal oxide/hydroxide nanoparticles to fabricate a superior electrode for storage devices.
Recently, Zhou et al. prepared a supercapacitor electrode of MoO3 nanocrystal, assembled on the 2D graphene oxide framework.120 This hybrid material exhibited a specific capacitance value of 527 F g−1 at a specific current of 1 A g−1 and 100% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. They fabricated a solid state symmetric supercapacitor device using this material and interestingly, the solid state device also exhibited 100% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. This result suggests the excellent cyclic stability of the material. Liu et al. fabricated an electrochemical capacitor using a heterostructure.121 The heterostructure was constructed by the vertical stacking of hierarchical CuCo2O4/MnCo2O4 on 2D graphite paper. This electrode delivered high specific capacitance value with excellent rate capability (specific capacitance values are 1434 F g−1 and 810 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and 15 A g−1 specific current, respectively). The asymmetric cell (coupled with graphene) stored 42.1 W h kg−1 energy at a power density of 400 W kg−1. Recently, Shen et al. fabricated an asymmetric supercapacitor to get high energy density and long term stability.122 They modeled an asymmetric supercapacitor device in an ionic electrolyte using a RuO2@C composite anchored on 2D graphene as the positive electrode and a polyaniline derived carbon nanorod as the negative electrode. This device delivered a very high specific energy value of 103 W h kg−1 at a potential window of 3.8 V. The cyclic durability of the device was also exceptional (98.5% capacitance preservation up to 100000 charge–discharge cycles). Very recently, Yang et al. prepared Ni–Co sulfide on 2D graphene for supercapacitor applications.123 This hybrid material exhibited a specific capacitance value of 1492 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with a very high rate capability and cyclic stability. When it was coupled with a porous carbon nanosheet as an aqueous asymmetric supercapacitor, it showed very high specific energy as well as power density (44.3 W h kg−1 and 22.1 kW kg−1, respectively).
These graphene–metal oxide/hydroxide 2D composites are also used as the electrode materials for battery applications.130–143 Park et al. published one paper on q sodium-ion battery where they used nickel sulfide–rGO composite as the electrode material.130 The composite exhibited a 449 mA h g−1 specific capacity at 0.3 A g−1. The capacity retention of the 2D composite material was also very good. Wu et al. prepared graphene based Co3O4 nanoparticles for Li-ion battery applications.131 The key points of their work were the high reversible capacity and excellent stability. Compared to graphene and Co3O4, the specific capacity of the composite was less, but the cyclic durability of the composite electrode was far better than the individual graphene and Co3O4. Recently, Adpakpang et al. published a paper where they used 2D graphene as the support material for the preparation of an Mn3O4–graphene nanocomposite and used it as the electrode for an Li-ion battery.132 Interestingly, they incorporated an inorganic exfoliated layered 2D sheet material (MnO2 or RuO2) in the Mn3O4–graphene matrix to get an outstanding enhancement in the Li-ion battery. In this case, the composite exhibited a high rate capability, exceptional cyclic stability and an outstanding specific capacitance value. Though the electrical conductivity of MnO2 or RuO2 is less, the incorporated MnO2/RuO2 made an extraordinary improvement in the composite. Apart from these articles, there are several reports where graphene–nanomaterial composites were used for the fabrication of superior charge storage devices.144–150


4.2.2. 2D transition metal oxides (TMOs)–metal hydroxides (TMHs). 
2D metal oxide–hydroxides are a new type of electrode materials in recent times. It has already been discussed that the specific capacitance and energy density of metal oxides and hydroxides are higher compared to carbonaceous materials when used as electrode materials. However, metal oxide–hydroxides cannot participate with their whole body during the electrochemical reaction. The use of ultrathin 2D oxides and hydroxides in charge storage devices is an excellent approach. In the last few years, a great many works have been conducted on the synthesis of 2D metal oxide–hydroxides by different techniques and their applications in both supercapacitors and batteries have been explored.28–30,150–168 The synthetic strategy for the development of 2D materials has already been discussed in Section 4.1. However, there are some methods which have been used to fabricate hybrid electrodes. These are: electrodeposition; spray deposition; atomic layer deposition; anodization; spin coating; and sputtering.11
MnO2 is the most-used metal oxide for supercapacitor electrodes. Very recently, Yu et al. synthesized ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets for supercapacitor applications.28 It exhibited a very high specific capacitance value, 634.5 F g−1 at 2.5 A g−1 current density and excellent cyclic durability. When it was combined with graphene for an all solid state asymmetric supercapacitor, it exhibited a specific capacitance of 87.1 F g−1 and a specific energy of 27.2 W h kg−1. Wang et al. reported a single layer β-Co(OH)2 nanosheet for pseudocapacitor applications (Fig. 2 and 3).151 First, they prepared a β-Co(OH)2 nanocone via a hydrothermal method. Thereafter, they sonicated it in formamide solution to get the single layer β-Co(OH)2. The thickness of the sheet was only 1.1 nm. The as-synthesized β-Co(OH)2 sheet exhibited a very high specific capacitance value of 3355 F g−1 at a 1 A g−1 current density. The rate capability and cyclic stability were also considerably superior. Although some of the 2D transitional metal oxides and hydroxides exhibit better electrochemical results, there are some disadvantages of these materials, such as: lower electrical conductivity; the presence of strain which may crack the electrode during charge–discharge cycles; difficulty in synthesis of ultrathin layered structures (as most of the transition metal oxides/hydroxides are not layered structures) etc. Thus, researchers have started using mixed transitional oxides/hydroxides, or composites with other materials to overcome these limitations. In our previous paper, we reported comparative electrochemical studies between ultrathin 2D Co3O4 and Co3V2O8.9 Both the oxides were synthesized using a hydrothermal method. Compared to the single metal oxide Co3O4, the mixed metal oxide Co3V2O8 proved to be a better pseudocapacitor in all respects. The specific capacitance value of Co3O4 was 1256 F g−1, whereas that of Co3V2O8 was 4194 F g−1 (Fig. 4 and 5). The rate capability and cyclic stability of the mixed oxide was higher compared to the single metal oxide. Zhang and his group published a paper where they used a 3D graphene network to increase the electrochemical activity of 2D NiCo2O4 nanosheets.29 The composite exhibited an exceptionally high specific capacitance of 2173 F g−1 at 6 A g−1. The rate capability (43% capacitance retention at 200 A g−1) and cyclic durability (94% stability after 14000 cycles) of the composite were also very high. D. Shen recently reported a heterostructured material (α-MnO2 nanowire@δ-MnO2 nanosheet) for aqueous asymmetric supercapacitor applications.152 The asymmetric device exhibited a high specific capacitance value of 230.7 F g−1 at a specific current of 1 A g−1. The rate capability and cycling stability of the material were very high. Here, due to the 1D nature of α-MnO2, the conductivity of the material was higher and furthermore, due to the flat ultrathin 2D structure, ion transportation was facilitated. These dual factors increased the rate capability and cycling stability of the material.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of layered R-Co(OH)2 nanocones during exfoliation at the initial time (a) and after 3 h (b), 6 h (c), and 9 h (d). Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 151. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical properties of the RGO/β-Co(OH)2 NS composite-based electrode. (a) CV curves at different scan rates, (b) charge–discharge curves, (c) specific capacitance at different current densities, and (d) specific capacitance vs. cycle number of the composite at a current density of 10 A g−1 (the inset of panel (d) shows galvanostatic charge–discharge curves with time). Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 151. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) Co3V2O8 and (b) Co3O4 samples, respectively. (c) HRTEM image and (d) AFM image and thickness profile of the C2 sample. 
 Fig. 5  (a) CV curve at 10 mV s−1 scan rate and (b) charge–discharge curve at 1 A g−1 current density for Co3V2O8//AC and Co3O4//AC. 
2D TMOs/TMHs are also used as electrodes for battery applications.163–171 Caruso and his group synthesized a new anode material, 2D n-doped Li4Ti5O12, via hydrothermal treatment.169 This mixed oxide material exhibited excellent rate capability and exceptionally high cyclic stability at high current. Recently, Lee et al. reported a self assembled NiO/Ni(OH)2 2D nanoflake for hybrid rechargeable battery applications.170 They used it for both nickel–zinc and zinc–air battery applications. In the zinc–air battery, it displayed a very high specific energy (980 W h kg−1), as well as power density (volumetric, 14000 W L−1; gravimetric, 2700 W kg−1). It also exhibited a high rate capability. G. Cao and his group reported a 2D ultra-large V2O5 nanosheet as the cathode material for Li-ion batteries.171 The micron sized V2O5 was synthesized via a solvothermal method. Most importantly, they did not use any template for the synthesis. The size of the sheet was above 100 μm, which was very large with respect to the size of the TMO sheet. The thickness was 2–5 nm with 3–8 layers. Due to its structural benefits, it exhibited a specific capacity close to its theoretical value (observed – 141 mA h g−1, theoretical – 147 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1). The stability and rate capability of the material were also very high.


4.2.3. 2D layered double hydroxide (LDH). 
Layered double hydroxides are a recent addition in the field of 2D materials. In LDH, there are two metal centers, one is bivalent and another is trivalent. It has been used in diverse fields of application.74 Here we will discuss its application in the field of charge storage. Several methods have been applied to modify the electrodes of charge storage device using LDHs. These are in situ growth, electrodeposition and layer-by-layer deposition.74 Till now, several combinations of LDH have been applied for supercapacitor applications, such as Co–Ni, Co–Fe, Ni–Al, Ni–Mn, Co–Al, Ni–Mn.25,26,172–182 Recently, Ma et al. fabricated a Co–Fe LDH for supercapacitor applications.174
At a particular Fe/Co ratio, the LDH exhibited a specific capacitance value of 728 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. It displayed a specific energy of 27.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 823.5 W kg−1. Chen et al. reported a Ni–Co layered double hydroxide for supercapacitor applications. It provided very high specific capacitance of 2682 F g−1 at 3 A g−1.25 Interestingly, it exhibited an exceptionally high specific energy of 188 W h kg−1 when it was coupled with rGO to form asymmetric supercapacitor. D. Yuan and his group published a paper where they reported a Ni–Co LDH.179 The LDH was 16 nm thick and it could be synthesized on a large scale. Depending on the percentage of cobalt doping, the specific capacitance can be varied. They also fabricated an asymmetric ultracapacitor using this material which exhibited a specific energy of 33.7 W h kg−1. Very recently, M. Wei and his group prepared a Co–Al LDH using a common hydrothermal technique.180 They used it as the positive electrode for a solid state hybrid supercapacitor. As a supercapacitor device, it exhibited a better rate capability and cyclic stability, and outstanding energy and power output. X. W. Lou and his group reported a hierarchical NiCo2O4, consisting of a mesoporous ultrathin 2D nanosheet.181 The NiCo2O4 nanotube was synthesized from a nickel–cobalt layered double hydroxide nanotube. Due to its high surface area and facile ion transportation, the electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of (1387.9 F g−1 at a specific current of 2 A g−1), a high rate capability (62% of initial capacitance retention at 30 A g−1 specific current) and an exceptionally high cycling durability (10% capacitance loss after 12000 cycles). LDHs have also been used as the electrode material for battery applications. Gong et al. in one of his works, reported a ternary LDH, NiAlCo-LDH (Fig. 6).25 The as-synthesized LDH was used as the cathode for a NiZn battery. Here, Al and Co doping actually stabilized the α phase of Ni(OH)2. As a matter of fact, the stable LDH exhibited an exceptionally high specific capacity of 354 mA h g−1 with an extremely elevated rate (278 mA h g−1 at 66.7 mA h g−1). The cyclic stability of the material was also very high when it was operated at a high current.26 Jian et al. reported a Co–Fe LDH. They used the common hydrothermal technique for the synthesis. The LDH was used as the anode in a Li-ion battery.182 The electrode material exhibited an excellent reversible specific capacity of 1.298 mA h cm−2. It kept its capacity of 0.528 mA h cm−2 after 30 charge–discharge cycles. This gives detailed ideas about the good Li-ion storage properties of Co–Fe LDH.
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical data of an ultrafast NiZn cell made of a NiAlCo LDH/CNT hybrid on Ni foam with Zn deposited on the Cu foam. (a) Schematic representation of the ultrafast NiZn cell. (b) Galvanostatic curves of the NiZn cell (1.0 mg NiAlCo LDH/CNT and 0.67 mg Zn) at various current densities. (c) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of the NiZn cell at a current density of 35.5 A g−1. (d) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of the NiZn cell at a charging current density of 17.7 A g−1 and a discharging current density of 3.5 A g−1. (e) Ragone plot (masses of active materials used for calculations) of a recently reported NiZn cell (1.0 mg NiAlCo LDH/CNT and 0.67 mg Zn), NiZn cell (2.0 mg NiAlCo LDH/CNT and 1.35 mg Zn) and ultrafast NiFe battery (1.1 mg Ni(OH)2/MWNT and 0.7 mg FeOx/graphene). (f) Discharge capacity stability curves (capacity retention vs. cycle number) of the NiZn cells with different loadings at a current density of 14.2 A g−1. During the charge–discharge cycles, the voltage was kept below the plateau at 2.1 V to avoid the overcharging problem and severe dendrite formation. 


4.2.4. 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMHs). 
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) have become an attractive material for researchers who are working on the development of electrodes for charge storage devices.32,33,183–188 According to these reports, its monolayer form can compete with single layer graphene regarding electrochemical activity. Alhough it has widely been used as the electrode for Li-ion battery, there are some reports which have used it as a supercapacitor electrode. Here, we have gathered some literature reports where TMDs have been used as a supercapacitor electrodes. Among TMDs, MoS2 is the most commonly used material as electrode, although WS2 has also been used. There are few reports are where bare 2D MoS2 has been used as the supercapacitor electrode. Chhowalla and his group recently designed a metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheet for supercapacitor applications.183 Here, intercalation of ions inside the electrode is the mechanism behind the charge storage in MoS2. The electrochemical activity was determined in an organic electrolyte within the voltage window of 3.5 V. The as-synthesized electrode exhibited a maximum volumetric capacitance of 650 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, which is exceptionally high. Rate and charge–discharge stability were also very good. Recently, A. Lamberti and his group fabricated an advanced electrode using MoS2-decoration of laser-induced graphene to make a flexible supercapacitor.184 The as-fabricated electrode exhibited excellent electrochemical activity. An advanced 2D VS2 supercapacitor was reported as an in-plane supercapacitor by Feng et al. (Fig. 7).33
It was synthesized by a hydrothermal technique. Thereafter, the unexfoliated layered VS2 was transformed to a few layered material by sonication in ice water. The as-synthesized material was highly conductive and exhibited a high specific capacitance of 4760 μF cm−2 with a considerably good cyclic stability. It did not lose its capacitance for up to 1000 cycles. There was a report where the MoS2/rGO composite was used as a supercapacitor device.32 Recently, a new MoSe2/rGO hybrid 2D nanosheet was reported for supercapacitor applications.185 It was synthesized via a hydrothermal technique. The electrode exhibited a specific capacitance of 211 F g−1 with excellent cycling stability.
 Fig. 7  (A) Planar ion migration pathways for the in-plane supercapacitor. (B) Schematic illustration of the in-plane configuration of the as-fabricated supercapacitor. (C) CV at different scanning rates of 20, 100, and 200 mV s−1. (D) Illustration of galvanostatic cycling behavior and IR drop. (E) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the as-fabricated in-plane supercapacitor. (F) Cycle life investigation of the supercapacitor, showing negligible degradation in the coulombic efficiency and specific capacitance. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 33. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
TMDs have been mostly used as an electrode material for battery applications. There are several reports on this topic. Among them, 2D TMD exhibits a better electrochemical activity.31,189–197 To make the electrode more efficient for Li-ion batteries, MoS2 has been used with graphene as a composite material. It actually enhances the electrochemical activity of the electrode. Chang et al. published an article, where they used a MoS2/graphene composite as the anode for a Li-ion battery.173 The composite was synthesized by a one step pathway using a solution-phase method. It exhibited an initial lithiation capacity of 2200 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 current and that of delithiation was 1300 mA h g−1, which was greater than the individual graphene and MoS2. The composite exhibited excellent cycling stability (1290 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles). In another report, a graphene–WS2 layer was also used as the anode for reversible Li+ storage.30 It exhibited an excellent reversible capacity (905 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles). After increasing the current from 100 mA h g−1 to 5000 mA h g−1, the capacitance decreased by only 20%. This proved that the rate capability of the composite was also very high. Not only graphene, but other carbonaceous materials were also used to accelerate the electrochemical activity of MoS2.190–192 For example, Xiong et al. reported a 2D MoS2/carbon fiber hybrid electrode for an Na-ion battery.192 Recently V. Chen and his group reported a 2D VS2/graphene composite. They synthesized it via a common hydrothermal technique and used it as the electrode for a Li-ion battery (Fig. 8 and 9).193 The electrode material exhibited excellent cyclic stability up to 200 cycles and superior rate capability even at very high current (20C). The electrospinning technique was used to fabricate the electrode. The electrode exhibited a reversible capacity of 381.7 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 current. The rate capability was also appreciable. Interestingly, the electrode was able to deliver a 283.9 mA h g−1 capacity after 600 cycles. H. Y. Yang and his group reported a MoSx–CNT composite for Li-ion battery applications.196 Due to the 1D backbone and 2D surface the composite exhibited an exceptionally high reversible specific capacity of greater than 1000 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 specific current after 50 cycles. The value is much greater than the MoS2 and CNT at the same specific current. The composite also exhibited excellent stability and rate performance.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration for the in situ synthesis of VS2/GNS by a CTAB-assisted method. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 193. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  Electrochemical characterization: (a) rate performance of VS2/GNS nanocomposites and VS2 and (b) galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of VS2/GNS at different current rates. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 193. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 


4.2.5. Transition metal carbides and/or nitrides (MXenes). 
Gogotsi and his group first introduced MXenes as a charge storage material.34,36,96,198,199 These compounds have good electrical conductivity and hydrophilicity. MXenes have the general formula, Mn+1AXn (n = 1, 2, 3), where A stands for a transition metal, A represents Gr IIIA or IVA elements and X symbolizes C and/or N.34 In these cases, intercalation of ions is the reason for the origin of capacitance or capacity. MXenes are synthesized from a special type of compound, the layered MAX family, by selective etching.11,34 These compounds have not been much explored by researchers to date as candidates for electrode materials for charge storage. Here, we summarize a few reports in this regard. Gogotsi and his group first prepared 2D Ti3C2 and used it as a supercapacitor. The electrode exhibited a volumetric capacitance of 340 F cm−3, which is larger than the activated graphene.34 Very recently, Qian and his group reported a 2D Ti3C2–rGO composite for a high performance supercapacitor.34 They prepared Ti3C2 from Ti3AlC2 through selective etching. The composite exhibited a specific capacitance of 154.3 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 current with high cyclic stability.
Y. Gogotsi and his group published one article on an Li-ion battery using a 2D layered Ti2C based material as the anode.198 The material exhibited a capacity of 225 mA h g−1 at 1C. The stability and rate capability of the material was not so high. The same group prepared two new 2D MXene compounds (niobium and vanadium carbide) (Fig. 10 and 11). They used these as the electrode materials for Li-ion batteries.86 The two materials, niobium and vanadium carbide, exhibited reversible capacities of 170 and 260 mA h g−1 with excellent rate capability. More recently, the same group prepared a 2D titanium carbide MXenes which exhibited a better electrochemical activity as a battery material.36 They used it as the cathode material for a hybrid Mg/Li-ion battery. The fabricated battery material exhibited a capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at 0.1C. Due to the facile Li+ and Mg2+ ion intercalation inside the material, the rate capability of the electrode material is very high (it exhibited a capacity of 50 mA h g−1 at 10C). They used Mg as the anode.
 Fig. 10  Electron microscope images of HF treated powders: (a and b) SEM images of Nb2CTx and V2CTx powders, respectively; (c) TEM image of Nb2CTx flake. Inset represents the SAED showing the hexagonal basal plane symmetry, which is identical to that of the parent MAX phase. (d) Cross section TEM image of Nb2CTx and (e) in-plane TEM image of a V2CTx flake. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 86. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical performance of Nb2CTx and V2CTx as electrodes in LIB. (a) Voltage profile of Nb2CTx between 0 and 2.5 V vs. Li/Li+. (b) Voltage profile of V2CTx (produced by HF treatment of V2AlC at RT for 90 h) between 0 and 3 V vs. Li/Li+. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 86. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 

Table 1 demonstrates a comparative study of the activity of the carbon material, MnO2 and Co3O4 with different dimensions. The Table shows that for all three materials, the 2D morphology gives the best electrochemical activity compared to the other morphologies.
Table 1 Summary of various materials with different dimensions and their electrochemical performances




Material
Device
Dimension
Performance
Remark
Ref.




Carbon
AC
0D
Specific capacitance 125 F g−1
Low specific capacitance value

40



Bamboolike graphite carbon
1D
Specific capacitance 236 F g−1 at 5 A g−1, stable up to 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1.
Low specific capacitance value and moderately stable

19



Graphene nanomesh
2D
Specific capacitance 253 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Rate capability 83% at 100 A g−1. 91% capacitance retention after 500000 cycles.
Relatively high specific capacitance value with very high stability

98



Porous carbon
3D
Specific capacitance 165 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, 97.3 after 5000 cycles
Low specific capacitance value and moderately stable

66



 


MnO2
Hollow structure
0D
Specific capacitance 299 F g−1, stability 97.6% after only 1000 cycles
Low specific capacitance value and low stability

45



Nanowire
1D
Specific capacitance 180 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, stability 78% after 2000 cycles
Low specific capacitance value and low stability

57



Nanosheet
2D
Specific capacitance 634.5 F g−1 at 2.5 A g−1, 96 stability after 3000 cycles at very high specific current
High specific capacitance value and high stability

27



Mesoporous silica like structure
3D
Specific capacitance 371.2 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, stability 93% after 2000 cycles
Moderately high specific capacitance value and stability

67



 


Co3O4
Hollow sphere
0D
Specific capacitance 394.4 F g−1. 96% stable only up to 500 cycles
Low specific capacitance value and stability

50



Nanotube
1D
Specific capacitance 1006 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, stability 91% after 1000 cycles.
High specific capacitance value but low stability

58



Nanosheet
2D
Specific capacitance 1256 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, 81% after 10000 cycles
Very high specific capacitance value and stability

8






5. Conclusions
The fabrication of superior electrodes for charge storage devices, like supercapacitors, hybrid supercapacitors or batteries has become a challenge for researchers. Nano- or micro materials with different dimensions have been used as electrodes for charge storage devices. Materials with different dimensions have different and unique properties to enable them to behave as good electrodes. However, certain serious drawbacks exist for materials other than the 2D morphology when used as electrodes. In a charge storage device, the conductivity, surface area and degree of active participation of the material are very important. Ion transportation through the material and the surface accessibility of the electrode by the electrolyte ion are the two prime governing factors for supercapacitors. Using 2D materials as an electrode, these advantages can be achieved. Graphene was the first 2D material to be was used as the electrode for charge storage devices. Several synthetic methods have proven to be important to synthesize 2D carbonaceous materials: transition metal oxides (TMOs)/hydroxides (TMHs); layered double hydroxide (LDHs); transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs); MXenes etc. The most used techniques are the hydrothermal or solvothermal methods. Other than these, some other techniques, like electrodeposition, spray deposition, atomic layer deposition, anodization, spin coating and sputtering are also used to modify the electrode or to make hybrid electrodes. Sometimes, just a 2D morphology is not enough for a material to behave as a superior electrode for a charge storage device. Occasionally, when bare 2D carbonaceous materials are used as the electrode, the specific capacitance value or the specific capacity and specific energy values are not so high, but the stability, rate capability and power density values happen to be magnificent. On the other hand, when only TMOs, TMHs, TMDs and LDHs are used as the electrode, the specific energy and specific capacitance values become high, but the stability and rate capability are sacrificed. Thus, to overcome this constraint, composite materials have been used instead of single materials. Different types of composite materials like: composites with carbonaceous materials TMO or TMH or TMD/rGO or graphene or C; or mixed TMOs or TMHs, hybrid electrode materials etc. have been used in charge storage devices by researchers. MXenes are a new type of materials in the field of charge storage. Due to their layered structure, they exhibit excellent storage properties.
Although several techniques are there to prepare 2D sheet materials, the synthesis of a single layer 2D sheet remains challenging for the researchers to date. Only a few 2D TMDs have been explored as electrode materials. There are several TMDs which could be used as electrode materials for charge storage. There are only a small number of reports where MXenes have been used as the electrodes for charge storage devices. Due to their unique structural advantages, MXenes are highly promising materials for charge storage applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur.
Notes and references
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M Winter and R. J Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Xie, D. Liu, X. Huang, J. Huo and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18652 CAS .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777 RSC .
F. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Yang, L. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1623 CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Xu, Z. Li, K. Cui, J. Ding, A. Kohandehghan, X. Tan, B. Zahiri, B. C. Olsen, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Tang, H. Liu, H. Ji, C. Jiang, J. Zhang, X. Zhang and C. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4691 CAS .
R. Sahoo, A. Roy, S. Dutta, C. Ray, T. Aditya, A. Pal and T. Pal, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15986 RSC .
S. Liang, Y. Hua, Z. Nie, H. Huang, T. Chen, A. Pan and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 58 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702 CAS .
Z. Ma, X. Huang, S. Dou, J. Wu and S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17231 CAS .
G. Gao, S. Lu, B. Dong, Y. Xiang, K. Xi and S. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6264 CAS .
L. Fan, L. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Yao and R. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16376 RSC .
B. Zhao, S. Y. Huang, T. Wang, K. Zhang, M. M. F. Yuen, J. B. Xu, X. Z. Fu, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 83 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Vinayan, N. I. Schwarzburger and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6810 CAS .
W. A. Ang, N. Gupta, R. Prasanth and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 7011 CAS .
K. Huo, L. Wang, C. Peng, X. Peng, Y. Li, Q. Li, Z. Jin and P. K. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7585 CAS .
W. Fu, Y. Wang, W. Han, Z. Zhang, H. Zha and E. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 173 CAS .
Y. Sun, R. B. Sills, X. Hu, Z. W. Seh, X. Xiao, H. Xu, W. Luo, H. Jin, Y. Xin, T. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou, W. Cai, Y. Huang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qiu, Y. Lu, D. Zhang, J. Cheng, H. Yan, J. Xu, X. Liue, J. K. Kim and Y. Luo, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 687 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, F. Bonaccorso, M. Agostini, M. Angelucci, M. G. Betti, R. Cingolani, M. Gemmi, C. Mariani, S. Panero, V. Pellegrini and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, G. Ning, T. Wei, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Carbon, 2013, 60, 558 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, L. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Yan and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Feng, H. Wang, Y. Liang, Z. Fan, J. Liu and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2025 CAS .
M. Jing, H. Hou, C. E. Banks, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22741 CAS .
N. Yu, H. Yin, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Tang and M. Q. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501458 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Y. Huang, X. Cao, B. Ouyang, W. Sun, C. Tan, Y. Zhang, Q. Ma, S. Liang, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7035 RSC .
D. Liang, S. Wu, J. Liu, Z. Tian and C. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10609,  10.1039/C6TA03408J .
D. Chen, G. Ji, B. Ding, Y. Ma, B. Qu, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7890 RSC .
S. K. Balasingam, J. S. Lee and Y. Jun, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 9646 RSC .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Peng, C. Lin, S. Hu, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, Q. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Passerini and X. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15661,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b04767 .
A. Byeon, M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, J. Halim, S. Kota, P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016 DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b04198 .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, J. Deng, J. Zhu, H. Bi, E. Kan and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6957 RSC .
J. Zhang, H. Feng, Q. Qin, G. Zhang, Y. Cui, Z. Chai and W. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6357 CAS .
X. Zhu, P. Zhang, S. Xu, X. Yan and Q. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11665 CAS .
J. Gamby, P. L. Gaberna, P. Simon, J. F. Fauvarque and M. Chesneau, J. Power Sources, 2001, 101, 109 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Ostafiychuk, I. M. Budzulyak, B. I Rachiy, V. M. Vashchynsky, V. I. Mandzyuk, R. P. Lisovsky and L. O. Shyyko, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 65 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nie, C. Xu, W. Zhou, B. Wu, X. Li, T. Liu and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1937 CAS .
A. Jain, V. Aravindan, S. Jayaraman, P. Suresh Kumar, R. Balasubramanian, S. Ramakrishna, S. Madhavi and M. P. Srinivasan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3002 Search PubMed .
X. Tang, Z. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Yang and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 939 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Cao, W. Guo, Z. M. Cui, W. G. Song and W. Cai, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3204 RSC .
W. Yu, X. Jiang, S. Ding and B. Q. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Lyu, F. Zhang, L. Wang, P. Xiao, K. Yuan, M Lai and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6350 CAS .
Z. Yang, F. Xu, W. Zhang, Z. Mei, B. Pei and X. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. Pan, Q. Zhu, Z. Nie, Y. Zhang, Y. Tang, S. Liang and G. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 107 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. L. Liang, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6432 CAS .
H. El-Shinawi, A. S. Schulze, M. Neumeier, T. Leichtwei and J. Janek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8818 CAS .
Y. Tang, S. Chen, S. Mu, T. Chen, Y. Qiao, S. Yu and F. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9721 CAS .
J. L. Xie, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559 CAS .
B. Yin, S. Zhang, Y. Jiao, Y. Liu, F. Qu and X. Wu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9999 RSC .
M. Yao, Z. Hu, Z. Xu and Y. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 644, 721 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, R. Liu, X. Cai, Z. Jiao, M. Wu, X. Ling, B. Lu and Y. Jiang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, H. Mao, P. Liu, X. Ren, L. Xu and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16142 CAS .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, Y. Yan, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3302 CAS .
W. Kang, Y. Tang, W. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, Q. Yang and C. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 225 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Ke, Y. Zhang and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24303 CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, H. Tan, R. Cai, W. Shi, C. Li, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishna and Q. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2155 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhnag, H. Lin, Z. Lin, J. Yin, H. Liu, D. Liu and M. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2114 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lei, Y. Xing, M. Huang, K. L. Li, T. T. Yu, Y. X. Zhang and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7855 Search PubMed .
C. Wei, H. Pang, C. Cheng, J. Zhao, P. Li and Y. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4169–4175 RSC .
C. C. Hu, K. H. Chang, M. C. Lin and Y. T. Wu, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sahoo, A. K. Sasmal, C. Ray, S. Dutta, A. Pal and T. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17987 CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713 RSC .
M Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303 RSC .
M. Shao, R. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15880 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4541 RSC .
Q. Tang and Z. Zhou, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 1244 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Paton, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, X. Huang, G. Lu, J. Yang, X. Lu, Q. Xiong and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Goyal, D. Teweldebrhan and A. A. Balandin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 133117 CrossRef .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1420 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. Mcgovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Khan, P. May, A. O'Neill, A. P. Bell, E. Boussac, A. Martin, J. Semple and J. N. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 581 RSC .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani, E. A. Lewis, S. J. Haigh, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13338 RSC .
Z. Zeng, C. Tan, X. Huang, S. Bao and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 797 CAS .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, T. Sun, J. Zhu, X. Huang, Z. Yin, G. Lu, Z. Fan, Q. Yan, H. H. Hng and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z. S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. Dong, Y. Liu, C. T. Nai, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, B. Liu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 2995 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruof, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. Chang, C. Lin, K. Chang, Y. Yu, J. T. Wang, C. Chang, L. Li and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, L. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hummers Jr. and R. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qie, W. Chen, H. Xu, X. Xiong, Y. Jiang, F. Zou, X. Hu, Y. Xin, Z. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2497 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, C. Wang and S. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24453 CAS .
X. Zheng, W. Lv, Y. Tao, J. Shao, C. Zhang, D. Liu, J. Luo, D. W. Wang and Q. H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6896 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Yun, M. H. Park, S. J. Hong, M. Eui Lee, Y. W. Park and H. J. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3684 CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Yan and Z. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 729 CAS .
H. K. Kim, S. M. Bak, S. W. Lee, M. S. Kim, B. Park, S. C. Lee, Y. J. Choi, S. C. Jun, J. T. Han, K. W. Nam, K. Y. Chung, J. Wang, J. Zhou, X. Q. Yang, K. C. Roh and K. B. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1270 CAS .
L. Hao, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103 CAS .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157 RSC .
Y. Zhu, M. D. Stoller, W. Cai, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner, D. Chen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Agostini, S. Brutti and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10850 CAS .
K. Zhou, W. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Sang, S. Ji, W. Li, J. Lu, L. Li, W. Niu, H. Liu and S. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 510 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, K. S. Hui, K. N. Hui, J. M. Yund and K. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8061 CAS .
B. Shen, X. Zhang, R. Guo, J. Lang, J. Chen and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8180 CAS .
J. Yang, C. Yu, X. Fan, S. Liang, S. Li, H. Huang, Z. Ling, C. Hao and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1299 CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Park, D. Su, C. Wang, H. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15750 RSC .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S. Z. Zu, B. H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, L. Hu, N. Liu, H. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. Zhi, G. Ning, T. Li and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2366 CrossRef CAS .
X. Leng, Y. Shao, L. Wu, S. Wei, Z. Jiang, G. Wang, Q. Jiang and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10304,  10.1039/c6ta03429b .
G. D. Park, J. S. Cho and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16781 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Adpakpang, X. Jin, S. Lee, S. M. Oh, N. S. Lee and S. J. Hwang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13360 CAS .
H. Kim, D. H. Seo, S. W. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 326 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, D. W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z. S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, X. Song, X. Ma and G. Ning, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7189 CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Huang, D. Jia, W. K. Pang, Z. Guo, Y. Du, X. Tang and Y. Cao, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 11799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, F. Pan, E. S. G. Choo, Y. Lv, Y. Chen and J. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6972 CAS .
Y. Sun, C. Wang, Y. Xue, Q. Zhang, R. G. Mendes, L. Chen, T. Zhang, T. Gemming, M. H. Rümmeli, X. Ai and L. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9185 CAS .
L. Su, J. Jiang, L. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Ren, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ren, M. Yang, W. Liu, M. Li, L. Su, C. Qiao, X. Wu and H. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 194, 219 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, X. Wu, L. Zheng, T. Zheng, J. Hei, L. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Ren, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016 DOI:10.1002/ppsc.201600053 .
M. Zheng, L. Su, Z. Yuan, L. Liu and Z. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13696 RSC .
L. Su, X. Wu, J. Hei, L. Wang and Y. Wang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 721 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, X. Sun, S. M. George, C. Zhou, J. Lian and Y. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27735 CAS .
X. Zhou, W. Liu, X. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, S. Klankowski, Y. Yang, J. E. Brown and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7434 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, G. Zhou, L. C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Fan, D. Gong, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang and B. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1104 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11528 RSC .
S. Wun, R. Ge, M. Lu, R. Xu and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 379 CrossRef .
Y. B. Tan and J. M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14814 CAS .
L. Wang, C. Lin, F. Zhang and J. Jin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, G. Shao, Y. Fan, G. Wang, J. Song and D. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9050,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.5b11300 .
S. Gao, Y. Sun, F. Lei, L. Liang, J. Liu, W. Bi, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, J. Wen, T. Chen, L. Xiong, J. Wang and G. Fang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 145401 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hou, X. Y. Lang, Z. Wen, Y. F. Zhu, M. Zhao, J. C. Li, W. T. Zheng, J. S. Lian and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23412 CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. Ding, Y. Huang, H. Gu, Y. E. Miao and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22669 CAS .
Q. Yang, Z. Liu, X. Sun and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3537 Search PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Zhang, X. Qi, X. Ren, G. Xu, P. Wan, X. Sun and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13273,  10.1039/C6NR04020A .
D. R. Kumar, T. T. Nguyen, C. Lamiel and J. J. Shim, Mater. Lett., 2016, 165, 257 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Lang, Y. Liu, Z. Lin and X. Yan, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, C. Cao, S. Tao, W. Chu, Z. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. Xu, C. Cherry, Y. Zhu, R. Huang, R. Qi, P. Yang, L. Wang and P. K. Chu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 149, 18 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mao, H. Guo, D. Tian, D. Zhao, X. Yang, S. Wang and J. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 1518 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, H. Song, M. Wu and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 205, 153 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, G. Yang, H. Song, H Cui and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24932 CAS .
S. Lee, X. Jin, I. Y. Kim, T. H. Gu, J. W. Choi, S. Nahm and S. J. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11786 CAS .
S. Deng, L. Wang, T. Hou and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28783 CAS .
E. F. Rodriguez, F. Xia, D. Chen, A. F. Hollenkamp and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7772 CAS .
D. U. Lee, J. Fu, M. G. Park, H. Liu, A. G. Kashkooli and Z. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Jeong, H. M. Lee, C. K. Kim, Y. Piao, J. H. Lee, J. H. Kim and S. W. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51619 RSC .
L. Wang, D. Wang, X. Y. Dong, Z. J. Zhang, X. F. Pei, X. J. Chen, B. Chen and J. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3556 RSC .
G. Abellán, J. A. Carrasco, E. Coronado, J. Romero and M. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3723 RSC .
K. Y. Ma, J. P. Cheng, J. Zhang, M. Li, F. Liu and X. B. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 198, 231 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Warsi, I. Shakir, M. Shahid, M. Sarfraz, M. Nadeem and Z. A. Gilani, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 513 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17066 CAS .
M. Li, J. P. Cheng, J. H. Fang, Y. Yang, F. Liu and X. B. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 134, 309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Xu, M. Shao, Q. Zhang, F. Wei, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2938 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Z. Hu, X. Shao, P. Cheng, S. Li, W. Yu, W. Lin and D. Yuan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, A. Zhou, T. Pan, Y. Dou, M. Shao, J. Han and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8421 CAS .
F. X. Ma, L. Yu, C. Y. Xu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 862 CAS .
J. Jiang, J. Zhu, R. Ding, Y. Li, F. Wu, J. Liu and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15969 RSC .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Clerici, M. Fontana, S. Bianco, M. Serrapede, F. Perrucci, S. Ferrero, E. Tresso and A. Lamberti, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10459 CAS .
S. K. Balasingam, J. S. Lee and Y. Jun, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 15491 RSC .
K. J. Huang, L. Wang, Y. J. Liu, Y. M. Liu, H. B. Wang, T. Gan and L. L. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14027 CrossRef CAS .
N. Savjani, E. A. Lewis, M. A. Bissett, J. R. Brent, R. A. W. Dryfe, S. J. Haigh and P. O'Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 657 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Muller, J. B. Cook, H. S. Kim, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4252 RSC .
H. Jiang, D. Ren, H. Wang, Y. Hu, S. Guo, H. Yuan, P. Hu, L. Zhang and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, X. Mu, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiong, W. Luo, X. Hu, C. Chen, L. Qie, D. Hou and Y. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fang, H. Zhao, Y. Xie, J. Fang, J. Xu and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13044 CAS .
C. Wang, W. Wan, Y. Huang, J. Chen, H. H. Zhou and X. X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5351 CAS .
D. Kong, H. He, Q. Song, B. Wang, W. Lv, Q. H. Yang and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3320 CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, A. Y. S. Tan, C. L. Hsu, L. J. Li, Y. C. Lu and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2169 Search PubMed .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Come, B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 61 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dall'Agnese, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2305 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Ramkrishna Sahoo
	Mr Ramkrishna Sahoo graduated from the University of Calcutta, India in 2009 and then obtained his MSc degree from West Bengal State University, India in 2011. He is currently pursuing his PhD work in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India under the supervision of Prof. Tarasankar Pal and Prof. Anjali Pal. His area of research involves electrochemical energy conversion and storage. The development of novel 2D materials for supercapacitor devices is his main emphasis.

Anjali Pal
	Professor Anjali Pal, MSc, PhD graduated from University of Calcutta, India in Chemistry. At present she is an associate professor in the Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. Prof. Pal is actively engaged in teaching and research in the field of environmental engineering and science. She has published more than 150 research papers. Dr Pal has received an International Hall of Fame award (USA), R&D 100 award (USA) and convention award from the Indian Chemical Society. She has visited many countries as a visiting professor. She works in the field of adsolubilization, catalysis and spectroscopy, mainly for environmental remediation.

Tarasankar Pal
	Professor Tarasankar Pal, MSc, PhD, DSc graduated in chemistry from the University of Burdwan, India. He is the senior professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He is a fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. He has published little over 350 papers. Recently the ACS has highlighted him amongst 20 Indian authors for high-quality research and Scopus has highlighted him among the top three material scientists of India. His current interest includes electrochemical energy conversion and development of novel 2D materials for their application in charge storage devices. His ‘arsenic detection kit’ and ‘bench marked model reaction’ to test any metal nanoparticle catalyst deserve special mention.

 	Scheme 1  Five common 2D materials reported for charge storage application.	 

 	Scheme 2  Different synthetic approaches for the preparation of 2D materials.	 

 	Fig. 1  Catalytic metal oxide (SnO2) nanoparticles were deposited on the GO surface (partially reduced GO, RGO) at 25 °C with stirring. Next, the composites were subjected to controlled air oxidation via heating in an open-ended tube furnace. Finally, the partially oxidized RGO sheets were refluxed at 80 °C with diluted acid for 4 h to produce GNMs. Scale bars, 10 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of layered R-Co(OH)2 nanocones during exfoliation at the initial time (a) and after 3 h (b), 6 h (c), and 9 h (d). Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 151. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical properties of the RGO/β-Co(OH)2 NS composite-based electrode. (a) CV curves at different scan rates, (b) charge–discharge curves, (c) specific capacitance at different current densities, and (d) specific capacitance vs. cycle number of the composite at a current density of 10 A g−1 (the inset of panel (d) shows galvanostatic charge–discharge curves with time). Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 151. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of (a) Co3V2O8 and (b) Co3O4 samples, respectively. (c) HRTEM image and (d) AFM image and thickness profile of the C2 sample.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) CV curve at 10 mV s−1 scan rate and (b) charge–discharge curve at 1 A g−1 current density for Co3V2O8//AC and Co3O4//AC.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical data of an ultrafast NiZn cell made of a NiAlCo LDH/CNT hybrid on Ni foam with Zn deposited on the Cu foam. (a) Schematic representation of the ultrafast NiZn cell. (b) Galvanostatic curves of the NiZn cell (1.0 mg NiAlCo LDH/CNT and 0.67 mg Zn) at various current densities. (c) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of the NiZn cell at a current density of 35.5 A g−1. (d) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of the NiZn cell at a charging current density of 17.7 A g−1 and a discharging current density of 3.5 A g−1. (e) Ragone plot (masses of active materials used for calculations) of a recently reported NiZn cell (1.0 mg NiAlCo LDH/CNT and 0.67 mg Zn), NiZn cell (2.0 mg NiAlCo LDH/CNT and 1.35 mg Zn) and ultrafast NiFe battery (1.1 mg Ni(OH)2/MWNT and 0.7 mg FeOx/graphene). (f) Discharge capacity stability curves (capacity retention vs. cycle number) of the NiZn cells with different loadings at a current density of 14.2 A g−1. During the charge–discharge cycles, the voltage was kept below the plateau at 2.1 V to avoid the overcharging problem and severe dendrite formation.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Planar ion migration pathways for the in-plane supercapacitor. (B) Schematic illustration of the in-plane configuration of the as-fabricated supercapacitor. (C) CV at different scanning rates of 20, 100, and 200 mV s−1. (D) Illustration of galvanostatic cycling behavior and IR drop. (E) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the as-fabricated in-plane supercapacitor. (F) Cycle life investigation of the supercapacitor, showing negligible degradation in the coulombic efficiency and specific capacitance. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 33. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration for the in situ synthesis of VS2/GNS by a CTAB-assisted method. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 193. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electrochemical characterization: (a) rate performance of VS2/GNS nanocomposites and VS2 and (b) galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of VS2/GNS at different current rates. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 193. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electron microscope images of HF treated powders: (a and b) SEM images of Nb2CTx and V2CTx powders, respectively; (c) TEM image of Nb2CTx flake. Inset represents the SAED showing the hexagonal basal plane symmetry, which is identical to that of the parent MAX phase. (d) Cross section TEM image of Nb2CTx and (e) in-plane TEM image of a V2CTx flake. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 86. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical performance of Nb2CTx and V2CTx as electrodes in LIB. (a) Voltage profile of Nb2CTx between 0 and 2.5 V vs. Li/Li+. (b) Voltage profile of V2CTx (produced by HF treatment of V2AlC at RT for 90 h) between 0 and 3 V vs. Li/Li+. Reproduced with permission from the publisher of ref. 86. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

Carbon	AC	0D	Specific capacitance 125 F g−1	Low specific capacitance value	
40

Bamboolike graphite carbon	1D	Specific capacitance 236 F g−1 at 5 A g−1, stable up to 5000 cycles at 10 A g−1.	Low specific capacitance value and moderately stable	
19

Graphene nanomesh	2D	Specific capacitance 253 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. Rate capability 83% at 100 A g−1. 91% capacitance retention after 500000 cycles.	Relatively high specific capacitance value with very high stability	
98

Porous carbon	3D	Specific capacitance 165 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, 97.3 after 5000 cycles	Low specific capacitance value and moderately stable	
66

 
MnO2	Hollow structure	0D	Specific capacitance 299 F g−1, stability 97.6% after only 1000 cycles	Low specific capacitance value and low stability	
45

Nanowire	1D	Specific capacitance 180 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, stability 78% after 2000 cycles	Low specific capacitance value and low stability	
57

Nanosheet	2D	Specific capacitance 634.5 F g−1 at 2.5 A g−1, 96 stability after 3000 cycles at very high specific current	High specific capacitance value and high stability	
27

Mesoporous silica like structure	3D	Specific capacitance 371.2 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, stability 93% after 2000 cycles	Moderately high specific capacitance value and stability	
67

 
Co3O4	Hollow sphere	0D	Specific capacitance 394.4 F g−1. 96% stable only up to 500 cycles	Low specific capacitance value and stability	
50

Nanotube	1D	Specific capacitance 1006 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, stability 91% after 1000 cycles.	High specific capacitance value but low stability	
58

Nanosheet	2D	Specific capacitance 1256 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, 81% after 10000 cycles	Very high specific capacitance value and stability	
8


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
