Hydrogel smart windows  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA00849D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA00849D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10007-10025Hydrogel smart windows

        
          
            Yang 
            Zhou†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoxiao 
            Dong†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Mi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Quan 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Zhao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shancheng 
            Wang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Long
          
          
        
      *cde
aState Key Laboratory of Petroleum Resources and Prospecting, Beijing Key Laboratory of Biogas Upgrading Utilization, College of New Energy and Materials Science, China University of Petroleum (Beijing), Beijing 102249, China. E-mail: xuquan@cup.edu.cn
bCollege of Mechanical and Transportation Engineering, China University of Petroleum (Beijing), Beijing 102249, China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: longyi@ntu.edu.sg
dSino-Singapore International Joint Research Institute (SSIJRI), Guangzhou 510000, China
eSingapore-HUJ Alliance for Research and Enterprise (SHARE), Nanomaterials for Energy and Energy Water Nexus (NEW), Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE), 1 Create Way, Singapore 138602, Singapore
Received 
      21st January 2020
    , Accepted 3rd March 2020First published on 3rd March 2020AbstractSmart windows are a promising way to modulate solar light transmittance, which is crucial for energy saving buildings. Current challenges focus on designing hydrogel materials that have multi-functionality, low cost, a fabrication process suitable for mass production, and durability. Here in this review, we provide an overview of the recent progress in hydrogel-based smart windows in different categories (thermo-, electro- and humidity-stimuli), focusing on the functional hydrogel material selectivity, working mechanisms and device design. The challenges and opportunities of hydrogel smart windows are discussed in the perspective section.Yang ZhouYang Zhou is now an Assistant Professor in the College of New Energy and Materials Science, China University of Petroleum, Beijing (CUPB), China. He obtained his Ph.D., Master and Bachelor degrees from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include hydrogel based functional materials and stimuli-responsive materials, and their application in energy saving engineering and petroleum engineering fields.Xiaoxiao DongXiaoxiao Dong obtained her Bachelor degree from Liaoning Shihua University, China, in 2017. Currently, she is in her second year as a Ph.D. candidate at CUPB, under the guidance of Professor. Hong Zhao. Her research interests include smart windows and repair of bionic functional surfaces.Quan XuQuan Xu is a full professor at the College of New Energy and Materials Science, CUPB. He obtained his Ph.D. degree at the Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of North Texas, US, in 2013 and joined the CUPB afterwards. His research interests focus on understanding the basic principles that control the mechanical properties and behaviors of materials and their applications in petroleum engineering and biomedical engineering fields.Yi LongYi Long is a senior lecturer at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological University, China. She obtained her PhD from the University of Cambridge, UK. Her research focuses on nanostructured functional materials for different applications. She has successfully implemented technology transfer from lab to industry for a hard-disk company in her early career. Her recent research is about developing various functional materials by manipulation of the structure at the nanoscale to achieve unusual properties.
1. Introduction
In recent years, with the development of industrialization and a growing population, world-wide energy consumption has increased rapidly.1,2 The use of building energy accounts for up to 40% of total energy consumption in developed countries, higher than the consumption of industry and transportation sectors. Building services including heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) are major components of building energy consumption, and account for nearly 50% of total building energy consumption.3–6 It is predicted that both building and HVAC energy consumption will continue to increase in the next two decades.7–9 Therefore, increasing energy efficiency and reducing energy consumption has become increasingly important.10–12 Windows are considered to be one of the least energy-efficient parts in buildings, as the heat transfer of windows are in the opposite direction to that desired.13–15 Smart windows provide a promising solution to reduce HVAC energy usage by tuning the solar transmission in a smart and favored way, which can regulate indoor solar irradiation dynamically and reversibly under an external stimulus.16–19
The large potential commercial market has led to great interest in smart window research in academia and industry. Theoretically, predictions estimate that smart window technology could save more than 1.055 × 1015 kJ in the US (over 1% of the US total energy consumption), which is suggested to reduce the total building energy usage by approximately 10% .20–22 The size of the global market of smart windows was valued at $2.8 billion in 2016 and is estimated to reach more than $8 billion in 2023.23 With such huge demand and potential energy conservation, enterprises and scientists have paid more attention to the research of smart windows in recent years.13,24,25 Apart from building energy efficiency, smart hydrogels have been generating interest as functional devices in a wide range of areas such as coloration,26,27 self-cleaning,28–30 self-power31–33 and moisture scavenging.34,35
Smart windows are categorized based on different stimuli, including, heat,36,37 electricity,38 light39 and humidity.40 Among the different response types, the thermochromic (TC) smart window refers to windows in which the optical properties can be tuned by ambient temperature changes.41 The electrochromic (EC) smart window is able to change light transmission by applying voltage, realizing the dynamic regulation of indoor brightness.27 The photochromic (PC) smart window is commonly based on photo-responsive solid glazing, which can intelligently change color according to the intensity of the incident light.42 Humidity-chromic (HC) smart windows respond to humidity changes, which can control luminous transmission and infrared light transmission by a hydration and dehydration transition of the hydrogels.35,43
Hydrogels are networks of hydrophilic polymer chains with an aqueous-rich environment which have been applied in multiple areas, including biomimetic engineering,44,45 biological implants46,47 and drug delivery systems, in recent years.48,49 Hydrogels, due to their broadly tunable chemical and physical properties, are suitable for smart windows using different mechanisms. The useful properties of hydrogel materials are endowed with the inherent dynamic and reversible nature of their noncovalent interactions, which has improved the performance of the whole smart window system.
In this review, all categories of hydrogel-based smart windows are summarized and discussed, including thermochromic, electrochromic and humidity-chromic hydrogel smart windows (Fig. 1). Firstly, the categories and the strategies of performance improvement for all three types of hydrogel-based smart windows were outlined. Subsequently, the integration of hydrogels into devices toward multifunctionality are discussed. Finally, prospects for future development and applications are summarized in the last section.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of thermochromic, electrochromic and humidity-chromic smart windows. 
2. Thermochromic hydrogel smart windows
Thermochromic hydrogels have been widely applied in different areas including tissue engineering,50,51 drug delivery,52–55 sensors,56 and devices.57–59 Recently, thermochromic hydrogels have attracted considerable attention in the smart windows field due to their high performance transparency changes. The transparency of the hydrogel can be reduced by scattering incident light upon changes in the surrounding temperature.60,61 Thermochromic hydrogel smart windows allow solar light to pass through into a building at room temperature, while blocking solar light at higher temperatures. The mechanism of the thermochromic smart window is considered to be a passive way for light modulation, as no extra input energy is required.13,41 For ideal thermochromic smart windows, a series of parameters should be considered, including high luminous transmittance (Tlum, 380–780 nm), high solar energy modulation ability (ΔTsol), and suitable color change temperature. Hydrogel based thermochromic smart windows easily match these requirements.81
In this chapter, the thermochromic mechanism for thermal responsive hydrogels is reviewed. Moreover, the composition of thermochromic hydrogels to achieve multifunctionality is introduced. Several hydrogels have been successfully applied for smart windows applications, such as poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm),21,62 hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC),11,63 polyampholyte hydrogel (PAH),64N-vinylcaprolactam (PNVCL)36 and ethylene glycol-modified pillar[5]arene (EGP5).65 These hydrogels, individually or as part of the composite, have various mechanisms to change the transmittance. Moreover, thermochromic hydrogels with other functionalities have attracted more attention in recent years, such as electrothermal-based active control, energy conversion, or electro-mechanic-chromic, leading to better optical modulation and energy utilization.
2.1 Pure hydrogel for thermochromic smart windows
The thermochromic hydrogel is an excellent material for smart window applications: most thermochromic hydrogels undergo reversible hydrophilic/hydrophobic phase transitions around the lower critical solution temperature (LCST).66 When the temperature goes above the LCST, the hydrogen bonds are broken, then the polymer chains increase and hydrophobic associations begin to take effect. However, once the temperature goes below the LCST, intermolecular hydrogen bonds become dominant and could prevail between the polymer chains and surrounding water molecules. Thermochromic hydrogels allow incident light to pass through at low temperature, while strongly scattering the incident light at higher temperatures due to the formation of scattering centers of the aggregated polymer microparticles.67

2.1.1 PNIPAm. 
Early work about thermochromic smart windows via sandwiching a poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm) hydrogel thin film between two pieces of glass substance (Fig. 2a) were proposed by Long and co-workers in 2014, which was the first hydrogel-based thermochromic smart window.62 For the PNIPAm hydrogel thermochromic smart window, when the surrounding temperature changes, the aggregation morphology of the thermochromic hydrogels transform reversibly, resulting in changes in their optical transmittance, which is shown in Fig. 2b. The PNIPAm based thermochromic smart windows show different optical transmission spectra with thicknesses change. As shown in Fig. 2c, both Tlum and TIR of the PNIPAm smart window decreased with thickness increasing from 26 to 78 μm at 40 °C, while the change of Tlum and TIR at 20 °C is negligible. The average Tlum decreased with increasing thickness from 84.4–52.8% (Fig. 2d), while the ΔTsol increased from 6.5–49.6%.
 Fig. 2  (a) Above: Solar light transmitted at temperatures lower than transition temperature (left) and solar light partially blocked at temperatures higher than transition temperature (right). Below: Smart hydrogel thin film at room temperature (left) and in sunshine at 35 °C (right) with thickness of 200 mm. (b) Diagram of the reactive polymer chain behavior below and above LCST. The image above shows polymer chains at relatively low temperatures around water molecules, and the image below shows the loss of water molecules and the collapse of polymer chains to form polymer clusters as temperatures rise above the LCST. (c) Optical transmission spectra of the three samples of different thickness at 20 °C and 40 °C. (d) Change trend of ΔTsol, ΔTlum, ΔTIR and Tlum for different sample thicknesses at 40 °C. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014.62 (e) (A) Schematic diagram of transmittance modulation based on the tunable hydrogel particles scattering behavior. (B1–B3) Light manipulation by virtue of the following phase transitions of (B1) PNIPAm particles synthesized by a one-pot method; (B2) PNIPAm particles produced by a continuous feeding method; (B3) PNIPAm-AEMA co-polymerized microparticles. The red and blue arrows represent IR and visible light, respectively. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.21 (f) (i) Picture of HPC at 20 and 70 °C; (ii) transmission spectra of HPC/NaCl samples with different concentrations at 20 and 45 °C. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.63 (g) Mechanism schematic diagram between HPC, water, and glycerol. (h) Freezing resistance of HPC in glycerol (Gly) mixtures at 0%, 20%, and 33% concentrations at −10 °C. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.68 (i) Optical microscopy images of PNVCL solution (1 wt%) in the process of heating and cooling. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.36 
More researchers focused on thick hydrogel smart windows, which sacrifice Tlum at high temperatures and enhanced the ΔTsol. Li et al. reported a thick hydrogel smart window (240 μm) based on the tunable scattering behaviors of temperature-responsive PNIPAm-AEMA hydrogel particles (Fig. 2e).21 The co-polymerized PNIPAm-AEMA hydrogel film provides an excellent ΔTIR of 75.6% and a high luminous transmittance of 87.2% at 25 °C.


2.1.2 Hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC). 
Yang et al., for the first time, reported an HPC hydrogel-based thermochromic material, where the LCST can be easily controlled by adding sodium chloride (NaCl), which makes the HPC hydrogel-based smart window suitable for different environmental temperatures. Upon increasing the NaCl from 0.5 to 5 wt%, the LCST was reduced from 42 to 30 °C as shown in Fig. 2f.63 Wu and co-workers developed a suitable reflective thermotropic layer made of varying HPC concentrations (2, 4, and 6 wt%), and measured the properties. The results show that both incident solar radiation and outdoor ambient temperature play an essential role in the transmissivity and reflectivity of the glazing unit.11
Recently, Chiaki Nakamura et al. produced a thermo-responsive smart window with freezing resistance made from HPC with a 33 wt% glycerol mixture, which can be used in various geographical regions.68 The glycerol promoted the release of water from the HPC fibers even at low temperatures because of the strong hydrogen bonding between glycerol and water (Fig. 2g). The glycerol was able to prevent the mixture of gel from freezing at −10 °C for 180 min (Fig. 2h).


2.1.3 PNVCL. 
Compared to other materials, by changing the chemical composition of N-vinylcaprolactam (PNVCL), the LCST of PNVCL can be shifted to lower or higher temperatures. This makes the PNVCL suitable for several environmental temperatures.
Recently, Sala et al. presented an innovative application using PNVCL as the active material in the smart window.36 During heating and cooling processes, a sequence of micrographs taken from the same area of the sample show the PNVCL morphological changes over time, Fig. 2i. During heating, the polymer chains begin to self-aggregate into small polydispersed microparticles. With continued heating and extension of the LCST, those microparticles grow by combining with neighboring microparticles. Because of this fascinating property, PNVCL microparticles have a promising application prospect in the construction of high-performing temperature-sensitive smart windows.

2.2 Hybrid hydrogel with composite functions for thermochromic smart windows
Although the single hydrogel smart window can adjust the transmission of sunlight, their single function cannot meet the demand for multi-functions. Compared to a single hydrogel system, the fabrication of hydrogel-based composites can achieve the desired multi-functionalities or improve performances, such as regulating the solar spectrum waveband separately,13,62,63 improving mechanical properties and increasing the color changing speed.69,70

2.2.1 Enhancing the regulation of solar modulation. 
Pure thermochromic hydrogel smart windows are able to regulate visible light transmission effectively, while VO2 based smart windows are more effective at regulating IR light.63,71,72 In order to enhance ΔTsol, Zhou et al. reported a straight forward strategy, by embedding VO2 nanoparticles into a PNIPAm hydrogel matrix to fabricate a hybrid hydrogel smart window, where VO2 is able to regulate IR light, which displayed excellent performance in Tlum and ΔTsol (Fig. 3a). Compared with pure hydrogel, the ΔTsol of the hybrid material improved significantly, especially a ΔTIR of 22.2% was observed in the NIR region.62
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-Vis-NIR transmittance spectra of pure PNIPAm hydrogel, VO2 nanoparticles, and VO2-PNIPAm hybrids when the temperature is 20 and 80 °C. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014.62 (b) Diagram of the preparation process of VO2@SiO2/PNIPAm hybrids and schematic diagram of TEM characterization of the samples. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.73 (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of CsxWO3/PAM-PNIPAm windows. (d) The UV-Vis-NIR absorption and transmission of CsxWO3/PAM-PNIPAm windows at 22 and 36 °C. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.74 (e) Shape changes of pure PNIPAm films and 5HATO films before and after 1 h heating. (f) Indoor temperature changes with time when different windows are illuminated. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.75 (g) Schematic diagram of the 3D printing process (top), room temperature and 35 °C hydrogel print (bottom). (h) During heating, the weight loss of both pure PNIPAm hydrogel and PASHH. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.69 (i) Photographs and schemes of PNIPAm/BOMA-16 hybrid hydrogel above (left) and below (right) LCST. (j) Percentage transmittance of the solution of PNIPAM nanogel solution, BOMA-16 solution, and their mixtures at various concentrations. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014.76 
In a further study, Wang et al. prepared pure VO2(M)@SiO2 nanoparticles through suspension polymerization for the first time (Fig. 3b).73 The VO2@SiO2 nanoparticles in the thermochromic hydrogel matrix exhibited improved resistance to oxidation. Compared with the best reported VO2 films, their material demonstrated a 164% increase in the ΔTsol at a relatively high average Tlum (38.4%). Their work is a great advance towards the practical application of inorganic–organic hybrid nano thermochromic materials.
Wu et al. produced a spectrally selective smart window by judiciously combining a near-infrared (NIR)-based photothermal material and thermoresponsive hydrogel, which can be facilely fabricated, exhibits long-term operational stability and can be made to be flexible (Fig. 3c).74 The smart window is capable of shielding ∼96.2% of the NIR solar irradiation from 800 to 2500 nm (Fig. 3d). Under sunlight irradiation with different light intensities, the smart window is able to maintain a room temperature below 25 °C effectively. This work provides new sight into developing a multifunctional and highly energy-efficient smart window.


2.2.2 Achieving mechanical stability by forming composites. 
In essence, many synthetic hydrogels, including PNIPAm, are fragile, and they will lose their mechanical properties over time. This makes the durability and service life of hydrogel smart windows questionable. Therefore, the development of rigid hydrogels with excellent toughness, tensile strength, tear-resistance and self-healing is required. Adding particles with strength and toughness into a hydrogel matrix render effectively enhances the stability and mechanical properties of hydrogel-based smart windows, which increases the sensitivity of the hydrogel smart window response to temperature, pH and light irradiation.43,69
Wang and co-workers prepared a sunlight-induced photo-thermochromic supramolecular nanocomposite hydrogel film named EGP5, which is combined with well-dispersed inorganic nanoparticles, and a host–guest interaction-based hydrogel system is formed. Compared to hydrogels based on PNIPAm, the 5HATO film exhibited excellent stability. We can see that when it is heated to 40 °C for 1 h, the shape of the 5HATO film hardly changed (in Fig. 3e). The obtained film exhibits an outstanding photo-thermochromic effect, which results in excellent sunlight-induced ΔTsol (56.1%) and initial Tlum (77.2%), Fig. 3f. At the same time, the film has high reusability and durability based on the dynamic and reversible EGP5-based host–guest interaction.75
To enhance the stability, durability and mechanical properties of hydrogel-based thermochromic smart windows, Long and co-workers fabricated a PASHH hybrid hydrogel by adding PNIPAm microgels into a water-rich silica-alumina-based gel matrix.69,75 The newly fabricated PASHH hybrid hydrogel can be printed into a complex structure through a 3D printer, which has the benefit of suitable viscosity (Fig. 3g). At the same time, the improved water retention ability enhanced the durability of the PASHH hydrogel effectively. When temperature increases up to 60 °C, only 31% total weight loss is observed for the hybrid gel, while the weight of pure PNIPAm loses 90% at 60 °C (Fig. 3h).
Owusu-Nkwanta-bisah et al. have produced a self-healing PNIPAm composite hydrogel, which incorporates noncovalently a small fraction of PNIPAm nanogels (not more than 0.18 wt%) into a benzyl methacrylate-co-octadecyl acid (BOMA-16) polymer matrix.76 The composite hydrogel exhibits a low LCST with considerable opacity at room temperature (Fig. 3i), this is because BOMA-16, with strong hydrophobicity, promotes hydrophilic and hydrophobic phase transition and clustering of the PNIPAm nanogel. Compared to the pure PNIPAm hydrogel at the same concentration, the visible light modulation (ΔTvis) of the composite hydrogel is up to 95% (Fig. 3j). At the same time, the composite hydrogel increased the modulus of the bulk composite hydrogel up to 2.7 times without losing self-healing ability due to reinforcing PNIPAm nanogels.


2.2.3 Photo-thermochromic materials for responsive color change. 
To overcome the limitation of delayed responsiveness for thermochromic materials, photo-thermochromic materials including graphene oxide (GO), antimony-doped tin oxide (ATO), gold nanoparticles and tungsten bronze nanorods were added to energy-saving smart windows.30,70,75,77,78 It is worth mentioning that the color changing mechanism for photo-thermochromic materials and photochromic materials is different. The photochromic smart window changes color when exposed to certain wavelengths of light, which is a reversible process. Upon light irradiation, the material undergoes a photo-induced structure transition between two chemical structures with different absorption spectra. While for photo-thermochromic smart windows, the thermochromic materials respond to the optical stimulus through the absorption-induced heating effect (photothermal effect). The speed of the color-change can be increased, and such materials can reduce the limits from delayed responsiveness, and thus increase the effectiveness of solar energy converted into thermal energy.
Hu et al. reported a novel fully autonomous photothermotropic system, in which the material was a PNIPAm hydrogel with well-dispersed ATO.30 (Fig. 4a). Due to its near-infrared (NIR) absorption, ATO acts as a nano heater, and so optical switching of the PNIPAm hydrogel was induced. It is found that such a system can be photothermally activated with excellent response speed and solar modulation ability, which can be used as the next generation of autonomous passive smart windows for climate-adaptable solar modulation.
 Fig. 4  (a) UV-Vis-NIR optical spectra of PATO film (80 μm, coating 5 mg ml−1 ATO). The plot shows the solar spectral irradiance at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.30 (b) Schematic illustration of the transparent-opaque transition mechanism of the PTCSWs prototype and the digital photographs of the PTCSWs prototype, and (c) pure HPMC in blistering sun during the summer (left), soft sunlight from a summer’s day (middle), and a cloudy day (right). Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2017.70 (d) Time-varying curves of the indoor temperature following sunlight irradiation of a model house with: control glass, and PNIPAm glass and GO/PNIPAm glass. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.80 
Cheng et al. proposed a convenient method to construct reversible color/transparency switching materials by integrating photothermal Au nanocrystals with reversible thermochromic hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) hydrogel (Fig. 4b and c).70 The switching behavior of the thermochromic material is triggered by laser/sunlight irradiation. The switching temperature and colors of the film can be controlled by adjusting the concentration of AuNCs and the types of thermochromic compounds.79
Chou et al. developed a smart glass which is comprised of graphene oxide (GO) inside a PNIPAm hydrogel, which responds to irradiation as well as temperature.80 The GO/PNIPAm hydrogel glass with switchable and reversible properties can absorb the colored organic solvent, which provides the smart glass with an arbitrary color (Fig. 4d).


2.2.4 Thermochromism and warm/cool tone switchability. 
Another kind of hydrogel-based smart window, which could change color through thermochromism, has been developed to adjust indoor visibility for comfort.10,81 Wang and co-workers have developed multi-responsive materials by introducing pillararene-based host–guest interactions for energy-saving smart windows.81 They provide a new strategy of an orthogonally integrated thermochromic hydrogel matrix combined with the properties of pillararene and ferrocene. This new strategy can feature materials with both thermochromism and cool/warm tone switchability functions. Thus such smart windows can not only regulate the input of solar energy but also provide a more comfortable color tone for people working indoors. This orthogonal integration strategy of different properties based on host–guest interactions may lead to a new direction in developing multifunctional smart windows.

2.3 Actively controlled thermochromic hydrogel devices
To extend the application of smart windows in the functional device field, hydrogels which stimuli to temperature and solar light were added onto electro-thermal heaters, thus giving a passive thermochromic smart window with active control.82,83
Zhou and co-workers present a new approach to activate light transmission regulation properties of thermochromic hydrogels via electrical heating. They fabricated the transparent electrode in their grid or honeycomb structure (Fig. 5a). They chose PNIPAm hydrogels due to its thermochromic properties and the ability to regulate light in the visible range. The solar energy regulation ability of the electro-thermochromic device is 58.2%, and the PNIPAm hydrogel films used enable the fabrication of devices with up to 75% contrast (Fig. 5b).41 As shown in Fig. 5c, the device based on realizing both heat and electrical response, provided a reduced response time, as well as the transmittance, with increasing voltage. In Fig. 5d, they demonstrated that the device could achieve the fastest response time with the lowest applied voltage.69
 Fig. 5  (a and c) Microscopic images of the square grid obtained at a magnification of 5 and 10 times. (b and d) Microscopic images of the honeycomb at a magnification of 5 and 10 times. (b) Solar light transmittance of regular and honeycomb electro-thermochromic films. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016.41 (c) FETD response time under different currents and embedded images (the embedded images show FETD in the transparent state ≈0 amp, translucent state ≈0.6 amp and opaque state ≈1.8 amp). (d) ETDs response time and applied voltage. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.69 (e) Smart window transmittance (%) at λ = 500 nm and external voltage PNVCL (5 wt%). The error line represents the variability of the data in triplicate. (f) The light transmission spectra of smart windows are filled with PNVCL 1 or 5 wt% at room temperature (0.0 V, when no bias is applied) and when heated by 2.0 V. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.36 (g) The schematic diagram of the proposed smart window illustrates its working principle. (h) The variation of the reflectance under spectra of 600 nm of the selected wt% of HPCs under different temperature. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.84 
Sala et al.36 proposed using the polymer, poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) (PNVCL), and a facile assembly of the components (FTO layers and polymer) to fabricate the device, which shows a fast reversible response (less than 60 s) in Fig. 5e. As shown in Fig. 5f the solar light transmittance spectra of smart windows filled with PNVCL 1 or 5 wt% at room temperature demonstrate a high transmission modulation ability over 50 repeated cycles, as well as reversible opaque-transparent transitions by applying 2.0 V or turning it off, without any significant variation.
Wu and co-workers developed a reliable reflection thermotropic layer for smart concentration of photovoltaic systems, and further developed HPC based hydrogel membrane samples with good thermotropic activity used as a solar cell (Fig. 5g). By increasing the HPC from 1 to 6 wt%, reflectance at 600 nm was increased as in Fig. 5h. This is because the higher the HPC concentration, the more the HPC chain aggregates and precipitates outside the solution, so the greater the amount of light reflected by the HPC (Fig. 5h).84 Then more light is collected by the solar cell.
2.4 Brief conclusion
Recent strategies of the fabrication of thermochromic hydrogel smart windows, including their name, function, thermochromic properties and characteristics are summarized in Table 1. Noncovalent interactions responding to temperature, such as precise intermolecular hydrogen bonding control between polymer chains and water molecules, could optimize the performance of hydrogel smart windows. The pure hydrogel smart windows system is easy to fabricate with excellent solar modulating ability. With the addition of IR regulating/blocking materials, the solar modulating ability of thermochromic hydrogel smart windows was further enhanced. By adding photothermal nanoparticles (ATO, GO, Au), the response speed of smart windows was further improved. At the same time, thermochromic host–guest interactions of hybrid hydrogels were fabricated to improve the mechanical stability. Furthermore, the combination of thermochromic hydrogels and transparent electric heaters or solar cells can provide passive thermochromic smart windows with active control or energy harvesting ability.
Table 1 Thermochromic performance of various hydrogel smart windowsa




Category
Materials

T
lum (%)
ΔTsol (%)

τ
c (°C)
Characteristic
Ref.





a “–” means data not available.





Single function hydrogel
PNIPAm
70.7
25.5
32
Conventional thermochromic hydrogel with excellent Tlum, ΔTsol and suitable τc
Zhou et al.,62 2014


87.2
81.3
32
Li et al.,21 2018


HPC
90
—
40
Hydrogel in liquid state with easy to control τc, which is applicable to a wide range of environmental conditions
Allen et al.,11 2016


67.4
25.7
38
Yang et al.,63 2016


80
—
30
Nakamura et al.,68 2019


PNVCL
88
—
34
Sala et al.,36 2018


Regular the solar modulation ability
PNIPAm-VO2
62.6
34.7
—
By enhancing the IR regulating ability, the ΔTsol was increased
Zhou et al.,71 2015


PNIPAm/VO2@SiO2
38.4
62.7
40
Wang et al.,13 2018


HPC-VO2
67.4
25.7
38
Yang et al.,63 2016


CSxWO3/PAM-PNIPAm
45.3
32.9
—
Wu et al.,74 2018


Mechanical properties
EGP5
77.2
56.1
32.1
Fabricated host–guest interaction-based hybrid hydrogels to avoid shrinkage and increase the durability
Xu et al.,75 2018


Si-Al-PNIPAm
73.5
80.1
32.5
Zhou et al.,69 2017


PNIPAm/BOMA-16
—
—
32
Owusu-Nkwantabisah et al.,76


Photo-thermochromic
ATO/PNIPAm
62.7
35.7
—
High absorbance materials were added to increase the response speed of thermochromic hydrogels
Lee et al.,30 2017


HPMC/AuNCs
50.5
25.5
35
Cao et al.,70 2017


GO/PNIPAm
—
58.2
—
Chou et al.,80 2017


Adjusting colors
EGP6
64.0
66.9
—
Materials with both thermochromism and cool/warm tone switchability functions
Wang et al.,81 2017


Devices
PNIPAm/Ag grid
74.6
58.2
32
Thermochromic hydrogels were attached to a transparent electro-thermal heater to fabricated devices, which are able to change color by adding electricity
Zhou et al.,41 2016


Si-Al-PNIPAm/Ag grid
73.5
80.1
32.5
Zhou et al.,69 2017


PNVCL/FTO layer
88
—
34
Sala et al.,36 2018


HPC/Si solar cell
95.0
—
40
Material that achieves both the energy (electricity) conservation and generation functionality
Connelly et al.,84 2017




3. Electrochromic hydrogel smart windows
Electrochromic materials attracted a lot of attention in recent years due to their unique ability to change color in response to external bias.85–87 The reversible color change phenomenon offers great potential in the smart windows field,88,89 where the optical transmission, absorption and reflectance of the smart window can be altered as a result of the application of a voltage. Compared with other display technologies, electrochromic devices have many advantages, such as no backlight required, high contrast, and low driving voltage. Electrochromic materials commonly used in the smart window include inorganic electrochromic metal oxides,90–93 organic electrochromic polymers31,94,95 and inorganic–organic hybrid polymers.22,28,96,97
The hydrogel acts as a semi-solid material to form a film on the substrate while still maintaining the same high charge transfer capacity as the liquid electrolyte. Some hydrogels have thermochromic properties that make the hydrogel act as an electrolyte in the smart window and also achieve thermoelectric dual response effects. These advantages allow hydrogels to be used in a variety of ways in the field of electrochromic smart windows to improve their performance.
The typical electrochromic smart window contains at least five layers, which includes two transparent electrodes, an inner electrochromic layer, an electrolyte layer, and ion storage layers.9,98 The use of hydrogel-based electrolytes in electrochromic hydrogel smart windows could simplify configuration, which usually consists of three-layer structures (electrochromic layer, hydrogel, transparent electrode).38
Meanwhile, employing a thermochromic hydrogel in the electrolyte can obtain thermoelectric dual response hydrogel smart windows, which are able to provide better privacy.99 Therefore, the electrochromic hydrogel smart window decreases the number of interfaces in the electrochromic device and broadens their application in private buildings. Here, we mainly summarize the design mechanism of smart windows based-on electrochromic hydrogels and the research status of electrothermal double-sensitive hydrogel smart windows.
3.1 Hydrogel-based electrolytes
Electrochromic devices with liquid electrolytes risk solution leakage and layer peel-off. Solid inorganic electrolytes usually have lower ionic conductivity and suffer from current leakage.100 Ionized hydrogels are a semi-solid material, making leaking difficult, and it has better ion transfer capacity than the solid electrolyte. It is considered to be an excellent transparent electrode material.101
Barile et al. reported a 25 cm2 dynamic window based on the reversible electrodeposition of Cu–Pb or Cu–Ag that switches uniformly between transparent (∼80% transmission) and opaque states (<5% transmission) in less than 3 min.102 Water is an ideal solvent due to its ability to dissolve many metal salts at high concentrations and to dissociate cations and anions in metal salts. The temperature range of the solvent could be extended through the use of a cross-linked gel. The non-toxic hydrogel electrolyte smart window is made by reversible electrodeposition and can be cycled at least 5500 times, and the uniformity and optical contrast are not reduced. A schematic representation and photographs of the 25 cm2 dynamic window are shown in Fig. 6a and b. The devices consist of an ITO working electrode modified with Pt nanoparticles and a Cu metal counter-electrode frame with a glass backside. This water-based electrolyte contains hydroxyethylcellulose to increase solution viscosity.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a 25 cm2 two-electrode dynamic window containing a Cu–Ag gel electrolyte with an ITO-on-glass working electrode modified with a SAM of Pt nanoparticles (inset). (b) Photographs of the dynamic window during switching outside (top) and inside with a white background (bottom) after 0, 15, and 30 s of metal electrodeposition at −0.6 V. (c) Transmission of a 25 cm2 dynamic window with a Cu–Ag gel electrolyte during metal deposition at −0.6 V and stripping at +0.8 V. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.102 (d) The transmittance of a device, as photographed in (e), which shows photographs of the device in a bleached state and colored state, scale bar is 1 cm. (f) The working mechanism of the three-layered electrochromic device in the coloring process and bleaching process. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.38 
When −0.6 V was applied, the initial 81% transmittance of the device at 600 nm dropped to <20% after 30 s and decreased to <5% after 180 s. Switching the window voltage to +0.8 V restores the initial transparency of the device within 70 seconds (Fig. 6c). Hydrogel, as the electrolyte of the smart window, can also simplify the structure of the smart window. The transparent electrode, ion storage layer, and electrolyte of a conventional electrochromic smart window can be replaced by the ionic hydrogel to form a three layer structure, which has been reported by Fang’s group. Fang et al. reported a novel electrochromic device with a much-simplified configuration by introducing the multifunctional polyacrylamide hydrogel containing lithium chloride (PAAm-LiCl hydrogel).38
The working mechanism of the device is the change in oxidation states of WO3−x under bias (Fig. 6d). When a negative bias is applied on the FTO substrate, the electrons on the FTO layer and the Li+ in the hydrogel will be injected into the WO3−x film. According to the reversible reaction WO3−x + αM+ + αe− = MαWO3−x, LiαWO3−x is generated, and the average valence of tungsten in the host decreases. The films became dark blue in this process. When a positive bias was applied on the FTO substrate, both electrons and Li+ cations were extracted from the LiαWO3−x host. This bleached the film to the transparent state, owing to the reduction of the polaron absorption. The transmittance spectra of the device is shown in Fig. 6e. The transmittance of the simplified electrochromic smart window is about 80% after applying 1.2 V. This value is almost the same as that of a bare commercial FTO substrate (i.e., 80%), indicating that both the WO3−x films and hydrogel electrodes have high transparency. Fig. 6f shows the performance of the device before and after applying bias. The logo of the paper behind the device is visible in the bleached state. With an applied voltage of −0.8 V, the colored device turns a dark blue with uniform color and its transmittance decreases dramatically. The device can effectively block unwanted sunlight when a voltage is applied to the smart window.
3.2 Thermo- and electro-dual response
To broaden the application of electrochromic smart windows to both public and private buildings, both thermo- and electro-dual responsive smart windows have attracted researcher’s attention. Under temperature and electrical stimulation, thermal response and electrical response behavior can occur simultaneously, achieving both active and passive dual control of the smart window. Chen et al. designed a thermo- and electro-dual responsive electrolyte based smart windows system, which exhibits tunable transparency due to the thermo-sensitive properties of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and the electrochromic properties of viologen moieties.25 The electro-responsive color of electrochromic devices could be adjusted via changing the chemical structure of viologen. Fig. 7a shows the chemical structure of P(NIPAMx-BVImy-DACV) gel. As shown in Fig. 7b, the LCST of the co-polymer gel is positively related to the number of BVIm segments. The transmittance change (ΔT) of the fabricated thermochromic and electrochromic devices were observed to be greater than 50% at a wavelength of 580 nm (Fig. 7c). To achieve an absolutely private environment, Mi et al. employed poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm) hydrogel as a temperature stimulus with the LiClO4 electrolyte to design an innovative concept for an electrochromic device.99Fig. 7d shows the structure of the electrochromic device. Electrochromic materials (WO3 and PEDOT) and electrolyte-containing hydrogels are added between two FTO substrates. The electrochromic layer of the resulting device is controlled by an electrical field to produce different colors, while the electrolyte produces the highly scattered zero-transparent private state controlled by temperature. Moreover, the four different states it can achieve (bleached state, colored state, white private state, colored private state) are shown in Fig. 7e. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) characteristics of the WO3 films in 0.5 M LiClO4 aqueous electrolyte with 25 g L−1 PNIPAm and without PNIPAm hydrogel were measured at 20 °C (Fig. 7f). The result shows almost the same current values and very similar redox profile in the electrolyte with and without PNIPAm hydrogel. This phenomenon indicates that the electrochemical properties of the WO3 film are not influenced by the hydrogel in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of P(NIPAMx-BVImy-DACV) gels; (b) temperature dependence of the transmittance of P(NIPAMx-BVImy-DAV) gel based TEDs; (c) dynamic transmittance curves of P(NIPAM0.8-BVIm0.2-DAV) gel based TEDs collected at 580 nm under the 20 cycle switching test. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.25 (d) The structure of the electrochromic device with the electrolyte containing PNIPAm hydrogel. (e) The four distinct states achieved in the electrochromic device within the area of 3 × 3 cm2 under different conditions (left pictures: +1 V, bleached states; right pictures: −1 V, colored states). (f) CV traces of WO3 films in a potential range of −1 V to +1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl); supporting electrolyte: aqueous 0.5 M LiClO4 with 25 g L−1 PNIPAm (red lines) and without PNIPAm hydrogel (blue lines), at 20 °C. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.99 
3.3 Brief conclusion
Here hydrogel-based electrochromic smart windows are summarized, and the electrical performance of the windows are listed in Table 2. Hydrogels as electrochromic materials, further simplifies the structure of electrochromic smart windows, enriches the discoloration mechanism of the smart window, and improves the intelligent light-adjusting effect. At the same time, it does not affect the performance of electrochromic materials. By applying a voltage, the color and light transmittance of the smart window are actively adjusted. Combined with thermochromic hydrogel, a thermoelectric dual response smart window is formed, which expands the application of electrochromic smart windows in private buildings.
Table 2 Electrochromic performance of various hydrogel smart windowsa




Hydrogel
ΔT% (@ nm)
Switching speed (s)
CE (cm2 C−1)
Cycling
Ref.





a “–” means data not available.





Butyl rubber edge seal surrounding gel electrolyte/Cu counter electrode/glass back side
60
Minute-order
90
5500
J. Barile et al.,102 2017


FTO/WO3−x/hydrogel
70 (660 nm)
5
118
210
Fang et al.,38 2018


P(NIPAM0.8-BVIm0.2-DAV)
>50% (580)
—
—
100
Chen et al.,25 2016


FTO/electrochromic materials/electrolyte with PINPAm hydrogel
—
10
—
200
Wang et al.,99 2019




4. Humidity triggered smart windows
Humidity-responsive hydrogels have physical properties that uniquely respond to ambient humidity, which can be broadly applied to smart window and color tunable applications.103–107 They can be used to convert ambient humidity into different kinds of signals, which extends the applications of the hydrogel in the smart window field.35 The water adsorption/desorption of this environmentally friendly material is achieved entirely through environmental energy without any external energy supply, which is of great research significance.108
When the relative humidity of the air contact with the hydrogel material is different, the scattering efficiency and transmittance of the light will also change, resulting in the transformation of transparent and opaque states. Some hydrogels are transparent due to the high degree of light scattering when the relative humidity is low (Fig. 8a), while other hydrogels are opaque.109 Moreover, advanced materials that can actively change the luminous flux are of great significance for the dynamic control of energy radiation flux or privacy protection.108,110
 Fig. 8  (a) A conceptual working principle of a hygroscopic transmittance switch material. (a) Schematic of dry/scattering and wet/emission states. (b) Schematic diagram of dry and wet pores, indicating the difference of refractive index n in dry air and the n matching between matrix and pores in humid air. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.109 (b) (a and b) Top and side views of the film with CaCl2 (unwashed) show the large holes inside. (c and d) Top and side views of the membrane without CaCl2 (extracted salt by washing). (c) The visible spectrum of a humidity driven optical device operating in dry and humid air. Reproduced with permission from Springer, Copyright 2018.112 (d) Coloring process (wetting process). Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.109 (e) PVP-Ir-glass film produced reflection spectrum of different colors (θ = 0°). Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.113 (f) FT-IR spectra of hydrogel films with different relative humidity. Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Copyright 2017.114 (g) (a) Digital photographs of the gel in H state. (b) Digital photographs of the gel in DH state. (h) The figure shows the magnitude of the voltage and current in the electrochemical cell as the gel absorbs water. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.35 
4.1 Single response hydrogel
The single response of a hydrogel to humidity stimulation is mainly reflected in the change of transparency and color. When exposed to air with different relative humidity (RH), the hydrogel can change its transparency to adjust the light flux or produce different interference colors.111 Castellón et al. developed the concept of a new optical material based on a highly porous matrix with hygroscopic and desorption properties, which allows rapid switching between transparent and opaque states.112 In their work, thin films were prepared by the sol–gel technique, and calcium chloride was used as a deliquescence substance to embed the silica-titania dioxide hybrid matrix (Fig. 8b). In dry air, due to the high dispersion of the film, the optical transmittance of the sample is about 6% (at 633 nm), while in moist air (51% RH), the transmittance will increase to >65% (Fig. 8c).108
Cai et al. developed a porous PDMS film that dynamically passes through trace amounts of water (5 g−2) or other solvents. A porous PDMS film with a thickness of about 0.4 mm exhibits significant optical modulation (about 75–80%) in the visible and near-infrared region. The coloring process of porous PDMS only needs to adsorb water to turn into the transparent state, while the bleaching process needs to desorb water under environmental conditions to turn into the opaque state, and the coloring speed is less than 9 min (Fig. 8d).109
Banisadr et al. report a new strategy for manufacturing transparent stimulation-responsive interference coloration (RIC) systems that are scalable and reasonably priced. By coating polymer films (such as PVP, PDMS, and PC) on metal-coated glass substrates, a variety of bright interference colors can be produced (Fig. 8e). PVP-Ir-glass sensors display different colors in response to humidity changes, ranging from purple at 20% RH, blue at 40% RH, green at 50% RH, yellow at 70% RH, and red at 80% RH, without an external power supply. The RIC sensor’s selectivity to specific stimuli can also be adjusted by selecting a polymer material with the desired structure and properties.113
Lv et al. reported the humidity response of hydrogel films prepared by photopolymerization of polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEG-DA) monomers and studied the effects of exposure time and the number average molecular weight of PEG-DA monomers on humidity response sensitivity during preparation. Under different relative humidity, the film showed various degrees of pink and a different intensity of fluorescence. From the Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrum, when the PEG-DA film is exposed to different humidity conditions, v the (OH) band at ≈3500 cm−1 increased with the expansion and redshift of the absorption band (Fig. 8f).114
The gel developed by Nandakumar et al. contains non-stoichiometric zinc oxide, which is driven by ambient humidity to change the hydrogel from a dehydrated state (DH)/transparent state to a hydrated (H)/opaque state (Fig. 8g). The absorbent gel blocks an average of about 46% infrared (IR) radiation, resulting in a temperature difference of 7.2 °C compared with the sample without the gel coating. Moreover, exposure to atmospheric moisture also stimulated changes in the electrical and electrochemical properties of the gel. The voltage generated in the electrochemical system using gels as the electrolyte increased by 30%, indicating the improvement of ionic conductivity in the process of water absorption (Fig. 8h).35 These changes allow the gel to be used in a variety of electronic and electrical applications.
4.2 Double response hydrogel
The dual-responsive hydrogel material mainly includes humidity and temperature sensitivity, or humidity and pH sensitivity. With the increase of relative humidity, the temperature sensitivity of the humidity and temperature dual responsive materials is enhanced. By combining the anisotropy and molecular order of liquid crystals, and the responsive isotropic properties of hydrogels, humidity and pH dual responsive materials can be produced.
Heeswijk et al. successfully manufactured a humidity-gated temperature-responsive coating using an easy-to-process stick coating technology (Fig. 9a). At 75% relative humidity, cooling or heating of the coating results in a redshift or blue shift of the maximum 420 nm Ch-LC reflection band, respectively. This change in temperature responsiveness is caused by the absorption of water vapor from the air into the coating at lower temperatures, thereby expanding the photonic layer. Fig. 9b shows the transmission spectra at various temperatures from 70 to −2 °C at 75% RH. By reducing the temperature of the coating from 30 °C to −2 °C, a reversible redshift of 400 nm from 1150 nm to 1550 nm was obtained. This humidity-gated response behavior indicates that the temperature response is higher than 45% RH. The increase of air humidity results in the rise of the maximum shift of the reflective band and the temperature window of the coating response (Fig. 9c). These coatings are potential candidates for heat-regulating windows in climates, where humidity is higher than 60%, such as tropical environments and greenhouses (Fig. 9d).110 The scanning electron microscope (SEM) of the cross-section of the coating (Fig. 9e) shows a pitch gradient. In addition to the cholesteric lines with few defects, the misaligned layer between the aligned LCN and the substrate was also observed, which is likely to cause the haze of the coating. Haze limits the application of these coatings in office buildings for smart windows but is conducive to application in greenhouses.
 Fig. 9  (a) Preparation of reactive Ch-LC coatings. First the substrate is pretreated with primer BP solution, and coated with an easy-to-process rod coating technique. Then the Ch-LC mixture is rod coated, followed by photopolymerization. Finally, the cured coating is alkali-treated to form a hygroscopic Ch-LC coating. (b) Transmission spectra of hygroscopic coatings prepared by Ch-LC mixture I were measured at various coating temperatures and 75% constant ambient RH and 21 °C temperature. The spectrum was measured after the coating was held at the set temperature for 5 min. (c) The central wavelength of the Ch-LC coating reflective band measured at different relative humidity and temperature. (d) A photo of the coating and substrate in front of the window shows the haze effect. (e) SEM image of the cross section of the coating. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.110 (f) The UV-Vis spectra of the IPN polymer salt film at pH 3 and 9 have reflection bands at 563 nm and 730 nm, respectively. (g) Schematic diagram of the working mechanism of polystyrene–poly(acrylic acid) responsive IPN polymer film. (h) Optical photomicrographs of patterned IPN coatings at (a) a relative humidity of 15% and 85%, and (b) pH 3 and 9. (d) Optical photomicrographs of patterned IPN polymer films at pH 3 and 9. The scale represents 250 microns. (i) The surface topography of the humidity-sensitive IPN coating was observed by interferometry under the conditions of RH = 15%, 50% and 80% (T = 20 °C). Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015.40 
Stumpel et al. prepared a novel stimulation-responsive interpenetrating polymer network (IPN) coating material by combining cross-linked hydrogels with pH and humidity sensitive LC polymer networks. The IPN network is placed alternately in buffer solutions with different pH values to detect the pH response. At pH 9, the IPN polymer film turned red (λmax = 730 nm) and green again at pH 3 (λmax = 563 nm). After several cycles, the response of the coating remains stable (Fig. 9f). When the IPN polymer salt film was placed in deionized water, its color changed from green (530 nm) to near-infrared (750 nm) due to the expansion of the coating, similar to the pH-reaction behavior. When the relative humidity (RH) was low (6%), the reflection band was at 497 nm, and a reflection band of 650 nm was observed at high humidity (85%). There was a linear relationship between relative humidity and reflected color between 25% and 70% relative humidity. At higher relative humidity, the overall transparency of the coating may decrease, which may be the result of condensation of water on top of the coating. In addition, patterned IPN coatings containing two different ions were prepared to produce a dual-response coating, which can change its shape and color (Fig. 9g–i). Such characteristic presents several opportunities to control, enhance and combine the functional and responsive performance of smart materials.40
4.3 Brief conclusion
In conclusion, humidity response smart windows could change light transmittance through the process of water absorption/desorption, which is of great significance to the energy conservation of buildings. Such humidity response smart windows would lead to a zero-energy consuming system design as it does not require any additional power supply and relies solely on changes in ambient humidity. The humidity response smart window can easily change its transparency with humidity variation and leads to an electrical energy saving, which can be further expended to temperature and pH stimuli (Table 3).
Table 3 Humidity response of various hydrogel smart windowsa




Category
Materials

T
lum,max (%)
RH

T
lum,min (%)
RH
Character
Ref.





a “–” means data not available.





Single response hydrogel
PDMS
79.8
Dry
1
Wet
Transparent ↔ opaque
Cai et al.,109 2018


PVP-Ir-glass
—
40%
—
70%
Blue ↔ yellow
Banisadr et al.,113 2019


PEG-DA
90
20%
—
100%
Colorless-pink
Lv et al.,114 2017


Oxide of zinc
99.4
dry
57.8
70%
Transparent ↔ opaque with energy conservation and harvesting
Nandakumar et al.,35 2018


Double response hydrogel
LEXAN 8040T PC/XPC films
87.5
75%
—
—
Humidity and temperature double response
Heeswijk et al.,110 2019


CLC-poly (acrylic acid) hydrogel
96.7
6%
6.2
80%
Humidity and pH double response
Stumpel et al.,40 2015




5. Conclusions and perspective
In this review, an overview of different categories of hydrogel smart windows from thermo-, electro-, and humidity has been elucidated. The design mechanisms, material selectivity, fabrication methods and their derived device functionality were summarized, and a brief discussion and outline of future challenges in this area has been made.
The brief comparison between these three categories of hydrogel smart window is present in Table 4. The electro- is classified as an active method, while thermal- and humidity, that respectively respond to the surrounding temperature and water vapor, are usually recognized as passive methods. As electro-hydrogel smart windows require electric and usually employ a sandwich structure with several different material layers, the electro-windows are believed to be more complex. The transition speed of all three categories of hydrogel smart window is able to achieve the optical switch in less than a few minutes, which is considered to meet the requirements of hydrogel smart windows.
Table 4 The brief comparison of thermo-, electro-, and humidity hydrogel smart windows






Thermochromics
Electrochromics
Humidity




Actuation
Passive
Active
Passive


Stimuli
Temperature
Electricity
Water vapor


Device complexity
Low, simple coating or encapsulation
High, multilayered structure
Low, simple coating or encapsulation


For energy-saving windows
Suitable
Suitable, with one-time low energy input
Suitable, with water vapor environment


Optional transition speed
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable




As for thermochromic smart windows, hydrogel materials have the characteristics of low LCST and easy fabrication. At low temperature, they are usually colorless and transparent, with high ΔTsol. The thermochromic hydrogel smart windows also have the characteristics of energy-saving and high efficiency. In order to expand the applications of hydrogel smart windows, various particles were added to the system to achieve the desired multi-functionalities and also improve the performance of regulating the modulated solar spectrum. To make hydrogel smart windows as devices, the combination of thermochromic hydrogels and transparent electric heaters or solar cells enables passive thermochromic smart windows with active control or energy harvesting. However, the low response speed and short lifetime still limit the improvement of thermochromic hydrogel smart windows. Adding photo-thermal particles such as graphene oxide and gold nanoparticles into hydrogel can rapidly heat the window under light and effectively increase the response speed, while the visible transmittance might be sacrificed. Compared with normal thermochromic hydrogels, the mechanical stability and lifetime of the host–guest interaction-based thermochromic hydrogels are significantly improved, self-healing ability might further increase the lifetime of the thermochromic hydrogel. At the same time, enhancing the tightness of windows with thermochromic hydrogels is another method to increase the lifetime of the thermochromic smart window.
As for the electrochromic smart window, the hydrogel acts as a semi-solid electrolyte, which simplifies the smart window into a three-layer structure while maintaining good electron transfer capability in the electrolyte. The electro- and thermal-dual-response smart window made by combining the thermochromic hydrogels, points to a new method for the design of electrochromic structures. It broadens the application of smart windows in buildings.
As for humidity triggered smart windows, the response to humidity stimulation includes not only changes in light transmission but also changes in color and the generation of electrical energy. Moreover, the response speed of humidity triggered smart windows is fast with wide applications, as humidity exists in the environment all the time with no limiting conditions. A hydrogel’s humidity response, combined with temperature response and pH response, also allow for a double-response hydrogel smart window.
Even though smart windows have been successfully applied in some demonstration projects or buildings and have shown promising applications in those fields, challenges in their commercial use are still present. Firstly, the cost of the smart window is high. The estimated payback period can be up to 20 years for both commercial and residential buildings, regardless of the maintenance, repair or replacement fee during these periods. Thus it is of urgent demand to invent cost-effective technology to replace broken smart windows. The second is that smart windows can only be applied in limited conditions. For those areas with large temperature differences between day and night, the thermo smart windows would have the major market. For those high humidity areas, the humidity windows could dominate the market. Besides, self-cleaning surfaces are also a very important property that should be considered by designers, which can maximize applications of smart windows in high dust areas. The third challenge of the smart windows is energy-saving maximization. With the development of a 5G society and artificial intelligence, the analysis and transmission of data is at our fingertips. Thus smart windows can even grow a smart brain for self-evolution to build the most effective model of collecting and transmitting solar energy based on the collected data. Moreover, it can also have greatly promising applications in outer space, deep sea, toxic environments and extreme environments.
In the future society, everything will be connected through network. Smart windows are an exciting and highly interdisciplinary research area, and with the discrepancies that exist between experiment and theory, further simulation technology and experimental case studies are strongly required to determine the optimized properties of such smart windows. Smart windows can also be more intelligent with new functions such as entertainment, sensing, and local environment data collection. With development, smart windows will have more joint functions and become even smarter with a foreseeable impact in the very near future (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Perspective uses of hydrogel smart windows. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Science Foundation of China University of Petroleum, Beijing (No. 2462019BJRC007, 2462019QNXZ02, 2462018BJC004); the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51875577); the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore, under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme; the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund Tier one RG103/19 and the Sino-Singapore International Joint Research Institute.
References
L. Gao and B. A. Bryan, Nature, 2017, 544, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Omer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 2117–2139 CrossRef .
N. Deforest, A. Shehabi, J. O’Donnell, G. Garcia, J. Greenblatt, E. S. Lee, S. Selkowitz and D. J. Milliron, Build. Sci., 2015, 89, 107–117 Search PubMed .
D. M. Kammen and D. A. Sunter, Science, 2016, 352, 922–928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Isaac and D. P. V. Vuuren, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 507–521 CrossRef .
Y. Ke, J. Chen, G. Lin, S. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Yin, P. S. Lee and Y. Long, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902066 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pérez-Lombard, J. Ortiz and C. Pout, Energy and Buildings, 2008, 40, 394–398 CrossRef .
C. Y. Jim, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 49–59 CrossRef .
Y. Alesanco, A. Viñuales, J. Rodriguez and R. Tena-Zaera, Materials, 2018, 11, 414 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Gao, X. Y. Hu, Y. Z. Shen and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4137–4149 RSC .
K. Allen, K. Connelly, P. Rutherford and Y. Wu, Energy and Buildings, 2017, 139, 535–546 CrossRef .

          M. A. Wasi, Energy and visual comfort performance of smart windows in office buildings in hot humid climate masters thesis, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals,  2013, The subject is Architectural Engineering .
Y. Ke, C. Zhou, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, S. H. Chan and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800113 CrossRef .

          C. M. Larnpert, Chromogenic switchable glazing: towards the development of the smart window,  1995 Search PubMed .
M. Cannistraro, M. E. Castelluccio and D. Germanò, J. Build. Eng., 2018, 19, 295–301 CrossRef .
B. A. Korgel, Nature, 2013, 500, 278–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Nunes, S. M. Saraiva, R. F. P. Pereira, S. Pereira and V. D. Z. Bermudez, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1951–1960 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pierucci, A. Cannavale, F. Martellotta and F. Fiorito, Energy and Buildings, 2018, 165, 160–171 CrossRef .
J. M. Dussault, L. Gosselin and T. Galstian, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 3405–3416 CrossRef .
M. Casini, Renewable Energy, 2018, 119, 923–934 CrossRef .
X.-H. Li, C. Liu, S.-P. Feng and N. X. Fang, Joule, 2019, 3, 290–302 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
T. S. Rodrigues, H.-J. Butt and E. Bonaccurso, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 354, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, F. Martellotta, P. Cossari, G. Gigli and U. Ayr, Appl. Energy, 2018, 225, 975–985 CrossRef .
F. Chen, Y. Ren, J. Guo and F. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 53, 1595–1598 RSC .
S. M. Wang, L. Liu, W. L. Chen and E. B. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 240–247 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kai, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8384–8389 RSC .
L. Yao, Z. Qu, Z. Pang, J. Li and L. Feng, Small, 2018, 14, 1801661 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang, Z. Li, W. Meng, Z. Cheng, S. Wei, B. Dong, Z. Xu, W. Li and S. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 694, 124–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Lee, Y. Cai, S. Bi, Y. N. Liang, Y. Song and X. M. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6054–6063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Kerszulis, C. M. Amb, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 5462–5469 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pattathil, R. Giannuzzi and M. Manca, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chia-Ching, L. Jian-Chiun and D. Chien-Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12625–12628 RSC .
C. Erick, C. Max, D. L. Víctor, Z. Marcos and L. David, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4846–4850 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Nandakumar, S. K. Ravi, Y. Zhang, N. Guo, C. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2179–2187 RSC .
R. L. Sala, R. H. Gonçalves, E. R. Camargo and E. R. Leite, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 186, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, K. A. Owusu, L. Mai, Y. Ke, Y. Zhou, P. Hu, S. Magdassi and Y. Long, Appl. Energy, 2018, 211, 200–217 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, P. Zheng, R. Ma, C. Xu, G. Yang, Q. Wang and H. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1000–1007 RSC .
P. Rosario, Z. Marcos and L. David, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 672–687 RSC .
J. E. Stumpel, E. R. Gil, A. B. Spoelstra, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3314–3320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Layani, F. Y. C. Boey, I. Sokolov, S. Magdassi and Y. Long, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600069 CrossRef .
L. Y. L. Wu, Q. Zhao, H. Huang and R. J. Lim, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2017, 320, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Haq, Y. Su and D. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 70, 842–855 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Y. Lee and D. J. Mooney, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1869–1879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sekine, Y. Moritani, T. Ikeda-Fukazawa, Y. Sasaki and K. Akiyoshi, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2012, 1, 722–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Ravin, K. C. Olbrich, L. S. Levin, A. L. Usala and B. Klitzman, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2015, 58, 313–318 CrossRef .
D. Moreau, A. Villain, M. Bachy, H. Proudhon, D. N. Ku, D. Hannouche, H. Petite and L. Corté, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2017, 28, 114 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ge, E. Lee, L. Yang, Y. Cho, M. Li, D. S. Gianola and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2489–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Ashley, H. Jeff, R. Ralph and D. V. Santi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2013, 110, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takezawa, M. Yamazaki, Y. Mori, T. Yonaha and K. Yoshizato, J. Cell Sci., 1992, 101(3), 495–501 CAS .
H.-H. Lin and Y.-L. Cheng, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 3710–3715 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okano, Y. H. Bae, H. Jacobs and S. W. Kim, J. Controlled Release, 1990, 11, 255–265 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Schmaljohann, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2006, 58, 1655–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bertrand, G. F. Jackie, M. W. Kishor and L. Jean-Christophe, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2598–2605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Zhu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2428–2433 RSC .
M. Xiong, B. Gu, J.-D. Zhang, J.-J. Xu, H.-Y. Chen and H. Zhong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 50, 229–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Li, H. Jiang and K. Haraguchi, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 529–539 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, G. Zhang, B. Xu, X. Feng, Q. Bai, G. Yang and H. Li, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 6650–6657 RSC .
Y. Lei, G. Zhang and H. Li, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 274, 012115 CrossRef .
U. Gulyuz and O. Okay, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6889–6899 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Babulanam, T. S. Eriksson, G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater., 1987, 16, 347–363 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Cai, X. Hu and Y. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13550–13555 RSC .
Y.-S. Yang, Y. Zhou, F. B. Yin Chiang and Y. Long, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 61449–61453 RSC .
T. G. La, X. Li, A. Kumar, Y. Fu, S. Yang and H. J. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33100–33106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Chen, J. Chen, M. Han, J. Hu, H. Jiong, H. Huang, Y. Lai, D. Liu, Q. Liu, T. Liu, M. Jiang, H. Ren, Y. Song, Z. Sun, C. Wang, J. Wang, D. Wu, K. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Xu, K. Liu and X. Huang, Cancer Lett., 2018, 438, 63–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xin, Q. Lu, B. Liu, S. Yuan, R. Zhang, Y. Wu and Y. Yu, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 99, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deshmukh, D. A. Mooney, T. McDermott, S. Kulkarnib and J. M. D. Macelroy, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1514–1521 RSC .
C. Nakamura, T. Yamamoto, K. Manabe, T. Nakamura, Y. Einaga and S. Shiratori, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 6424–6428 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Layani, S. Wang, P. Hu, Y. Ke, S. Magdassi and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705365 CrossRef .
D. Cao, C. Xu, W. Lu, C. Qin and S. Cheng, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700219 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Cai, X. Hu and Y. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1121–1126 RSC .
M. M. Seyfouri and R. Binions, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 52–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Fang, J. Wang, A. R. Khan, Y. Shi, Z. Chen, K. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Gao and X. Guo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 12801–12808 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, Y. Shi, R. Li and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39819–39827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, S. Wang, X.-Y. Hu, J. Jiang, X. Sun and L. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800204 CrossRef .
S. Owusu-Nkwantabisah, J. Gillmor, S. Switalski, M. R. Mis, G. Bennett, R. Moody, B. Antalek, R. Gutierrez and G. Slater, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 3671–3679 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, E. Lee, H. S. Lee and J. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Guo, M. Chen, S. Guo, L. Zhang, F. Li, S. Guo and H. Yang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 319–325 RSC .
S. Kiruthika and G. U. Kulkarni, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 163, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
H.-T. Chou, Y.-C. Chen, C.-Y. Lee, H.-Y. Chang and N.-H. Tai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Xu, T. Wang, T. Xiao, X.-Y. Hu, Y.-Z. Shen and L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1737 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ke, I. Balin, N. Wang, Q. Lu, A. I. Y. Tok, T. J. White, S. Magdassi, I. Abdulhalim and Y. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33112–33120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sabry, P. C. Eames, H. Singh and Y. Wu, Sol. Energy, 2014, 103, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
K. Connelly, Y. Wu, J. Chen and Y. Lei, Appl. Energy, 2016, 182, 331–339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, E. L. Runnerstrom and D. J. Milliron, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2016, 7, 283–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. J. Mortimer, D. R. Rosseinsky and P. M. S. Monk, Electrochromic Materials and Devices,  2015 Search PubMed .
G. Cai, J. Wang and P. S. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1469–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, L. S. Eh, J. Lin and P. S. Lee, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700074 CrossRef .
A. L.-S. Eh, A. W. M. Tan, X. Cheng, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 33–45 CrossRef .
G. Cai, M. Cui, V. Kumar, P. Darmawan and P. S. Lee, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1373–1382 RSC .
W. Cheng, J. He, K. E. Dettelbach, N. J. J. Johnson, R. S. Sherbo and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem, 2018, 4, 821–832 CAS .
M. Arvizu, C. Granqvist and G. Niklasson, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2016, 764, 012009 CrossRef .
H.-Y. Qu, D. Primetzhofer, M. A. Arvizu, Z. Qiu, U. Cindemir, C. G. Granqvist and G. A. Niklasson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42420–42424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Sterholm, S. D. Eric, J. A. Kerszulis, R. H. Bulloch, K. Michael, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1413–1421 CrossRef PubMed .
L. R. Savagian, A. M. Österholm, J. F. Ponder Jr, K. J. Barth, J. Rivnay and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804647 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chakraborty, R. K. Pandey, U. Rana, M. Kanao, S. Moriyama and M. Higuchi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9428–9437 RSC .
C. Chanchal, B. Manas Kumar, R. Utpal and M. Sudip, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13123–13126 RSC .
S. N. Alamri and A. A. Joraid, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2010, 663–665, 743–750 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, X. Xing, I. F. Perepichka, Y. H. Shi, D. Y. Zhou, P. H. Wu and H. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900433 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, G. Dong, X. Yu, F. Gao, W. Mei, W. Qi, S. Wang, H. Zuo and X. Diao, Mater. Lett., 2015, 142, 232–234 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Yang, S. Zhou, S. Shian, D. R. Clarke and Z. G. Suo, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 1102–1109 RSC .
C. J. Barile, D. J. Slotcavage, J. Hou, M. T. Strand, T. S. Hernandez and M. D. McGehee, Joule, 2017, 1, 133–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, D. Cao, Y. Guan and D. Yan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 55, 125–132 CrossRef .
J. Xu and Z. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 406, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dan, Z. Wei, A. Qi, L. Weina, L. Xuesong, Y. Haowei, Y. Jinxiang and L. Guangtao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3494–3496 RSC .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Xie, C. Li, Y. Li, S. Liang, Z. Tian, T. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Li, W. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3784–3790 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, J. H. Zhang, J. Xie, Z. Y. Wang, Y. S. Yin, J. X. Li, Y. F. Li, S. Liang, L. Zhang, L. Y. Cui, H. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7887–7893 RSC .
E. Castellón, M. Zayat and D. Levy, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2018, 89, 56–61 CrossRef .
G. Cai, J. Wang, A. L. Eh, J. Chen, K. Qian, J. Xiong, G. Thangavel and P. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37685–37693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. A. van Heeswijk, J. J. H. Kloos, N. Grossiord and A. P. H. J. Schenning, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6113–6119 RSC .
L. Yang, L. Wang, Z. Min, D. Tu and Y. Liao, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2007, 19, 880–882 Search PubMed .
E. Castellón, M. Zayat and D. Levy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1704717 CrossRef .
S. Banisadr, A. Oyefusi and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7415–7422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, H. Xia, Q. Shi, G. Wang, Y.-S. Wang, Q.-D. Chen, Y.-L. Zhang, L.-Q. Liu and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601002 CrossRef .

Footnote† These two authors contribute equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yang Zhou	Yang Zhou is now an Assistant Professor in the College of New Energy and Materials Science, China University of Petroleum, Beijing (CUPB), China. He obtained his Ph.D., Master and Bachelor degrees from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include hydrogel based functional materials and stimuli-responsive materials, and their application in energy saving engineering and petroleum engineering fields.
Xiaoxiao Dong	Xiaoxiao Dong obtained her Bachelor degree from Liaoning Shihua University, China, in 2017. Currently, she is in her second year as a Ph.D. candidate at CUPB, under the guidance of Professor. Hong Zhao. Her research interests include smart windows and repair of bionic functional surfaces.
Quan Xu	Quan Xu is a full professor at the College of New Energy and Materials Science, CUPB. He obtained his Ph.D. degree at the Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of North Texas, US, in 2013 and joined the CUPB afterwards. His research interests focus on understanding the basic principles that control the mechanical properties and behaviors of materials and their applications in petroleum engineering and biomedical engineering fields.
Yi Long	Yi Long is a senior lecturer at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological University, China. She obtained her PhD from the University of Cambridge, UK. Her research focuses on nanostructured functional materials for different applications. She has successfully implemented technology transfer from lab to industry for a hard-disk company in her early career. Her recent research is about developing various functional materials by manipulation of the structure at the nanoscale to achieve unusual properties.

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of thermochromic, electrochromic and humidity-chromic smart windows.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Above: Solar light transmitted at temperatures lower than transition temperature (left) and solar light partially blocked at temperatures higher than transition temperature (right). Below: Smart hydrogel thin film at room temperature (left) and in sunshine at 35 °C (right) with thickness of 200 mm. (b) Diagram of the reactive polymer chain behavior below and above LCST. The image above shows polymer chains at relatively low temperatures around water molecules, and the image below shows the loss of water molecules and the collapse of polymer chains to form polymer clusters as temperatures rise above the LCST. (c) Optical transmission spectra of the three samples of different thickness at 20 °C and 40 °C. (d) Change trend of ΔTsol, ΔTlum, ΔTIR and Tlum for different sample thicknesses at 40 °C. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014.62 (e) (A) Schematic diagram of transmittance modulation based on the tunable hydrogel particles scattering behavior. (B1–B3) Light manipulation by virtue of the following phase transitions of (B1) PNIPAm particles synthesized by a one-pot method; (B2) PNIPAm particles produced by a continuous feeding method; (B3) PNIPAm-AEMA co-polymerized microparticles. The red and blue arrows represent IR and visible light, respectively. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.21 (f) (i) Picture of HPC at 20 and 70 °C; (ii) transmission spectra of HPC/NaCl samples with different concentrations at 20 and 45 °C. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.63 (g) Mechanism schematic diagram between HPC, water, and glycerol. (h) Freezing resistance of HPC in glycerol (Gly) mixtures at 0%, 20%, and 33% concentrations at −10 °C. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.68 (i) Optical microscopy images of PNVCL solution (1 wt%) in the process of heating and cooling. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.36	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-Vis-NIR transmittance spectra of pure PNIPAm hydrogel, VO2 nanoparticles, and VO2-PNIPAm hybrids when the temperature is 20 and 80 °C. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014.62 (b) Diagram of the preparation process of VO2@SiO2/PNIPAm hybrids and schematic diagram of TEM characterization of the samples. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.73 (c) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of CsxWO3/PAM-PNIPAm windows. (d) The UV-Vis-NIR absorption and transmission of CsxWO3/PAM-PNIPAm windows at 22 and 36 °C. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.74 (e) Shape changes of pure PNIPAm films and 5HATO films before and after 1 h heating. (f) Indoor temperature changes with time when different windows are illuminated. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.75 (g) Schematic diagram of the 3D printing process (top), room temperature and 35 °C hydrogel print (bottom). (h) During heating, the weight loss of both pure PNIPAm hydrogel and PASHH. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.69 (i) Photographs and schemes of PNIPAm/BOMA-16 hybrid hydrogel above (left) and below (right) LCST. (j) Percentage transmittance of the solution of PNIPAM nanogel solution, BOMA-16 solution, and their mixtures at various concentrations. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014.76	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) UV-Vis-NIR optical spectra of PATO film (80 μm, coating 5 mg ml−1 ATO). The plot shows the solar spectral irradiance at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.30 (b) Schematic illustration of the transparent-opaque transition mechanism of the PTCSWs prototype and the digital photographs of the PTCSWs prototype, and (c) pure HPMC in blistering sun during the summer (left), soft sunlight from a summer’s day (middle), and a cloudy day (right). Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, Copyright 2017.70 (d) Time-varying curves of the indoor temperature following sunlight irradiation of a model house with: control glass, and PNIPAm glass and GO/PNIPAm glass. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.80	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and c) Microscopic images of the square grid obtained at a magnification of 5 and 10 times. (b and d) Microscopic images of the honeycomb at a magnification of 5 and 10 times. (b) Solar light transmittance of regular and honeycomb electro-thermochromic films. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016.41 (c) FETD response time under different currents and embedded images (the embedded images show FETD in the transparent state ≈0 amp, translucent state ≈0.6 amp and opaque state ≈1.8 amp). (d) ETDs response time and applied voltage. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.69 (e) Smart window transmittance (%) at λ = 500 nm and external voltage PNVCL (5 wt%). The error line represents the variability of the data in triplicate. (f) The light transmission spectra of smart windows are filled with PNVCL 1 or 5 wt% at room temperature (0.0 V, when no bias is applied) and when heated by 2.0 V. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.36 (g) The schematic diagram of the proposed smart window illustrates its working principle. (h) The variation of the reflectance under spectra of 600 nm of the selected wt% of HPCs under different temperature. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.84	 


Single function hydrogel	PNIPAm	70.7	25.5	32	Conventional thermochromic hydrogel with excellent Tlum, ΔTsol and suitable τc	Zhou et al.,62 2014
87.2	81.3	32	Li et al.,21 2018
HPC	90	—	40	Hydrogel in liquid state with easy to control τc, which is applicable to a wide range of environmental conditions	Allen et al.,11 2016
67.4	25.7	38	Yang et al.,63 2016
80	—	30	Nakamura et al.,68 2019
PNVCL	88	—	34	Sala et al.,36 2018
Regular the solar modulation ability	PNIPAm-VO2	62.6	34.7	—	By enhancing the IR regulating ability, the ΔTsol was increased	Zhou et al.,71 2015
PNIPAm/VO2@SiO2	38.4	62.7	40	Wang et al.,13 2018
HPC-VO2	67.4	25.7	38	Yang et al.,63 2016
CSxWO3/PAM-PNIPAm	45.3	32.9	—	Wu et al.,74 2018
Mechanical properties	EGP5	77.2	56.1	32.1	Fabricated host–guest interaction-based hybrid hydrogels to avoid shrinkage and increase the durability	Xu et al.,75 2018
Si-Al-PNIPAm	73.5	80.1	32.5	Zhou et al.,69 2017
PNIPAm/BOMA-16	—	—	32	Owusu-Nkwantabisah et al.,76
Photo-thermochromic	ATO/PNIPAm	62.7	35.7	—	High absorbance materials were added to increase the response speed of thermochromic hydrogels	Lee et al.,30 2017
HPMC/AuNCs	50.5	25.5	35	Cao et al.,70 2017
GO/PNIPAm	—	58.2	—	Chou et al.,80 2017
Adjusting colors	EGP6	64.0	66.9	—	Materials with both thermochromism and cool/warm tone switchability functions	Wang et al.,81 2017
Devices	PNIPAm/Ag grid	74.6	58.2	32	Thermochromic hydrogels were attached to a transparent electro-thermal heater to fabricated devices, which are able to change color by adding electricity	Zhou et al.,41 2016
Si-Al-PNIPAm/Ag grid	73.5	80.1	32.5	Zhou et al.,69 2017
PNVCL/FTO layer	88	—	34	Sala et al.,36 2018
HPC/Si solar cell	95.0	—	40	Material that achieves both the energy (electricity) conservation and generation functionality	Connelly et al.,84 2017

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a 25 cm2 two-electrode dynamic window containing a Cu–Ag gel electrolyte with an ITO-on-glass working electrode modified with a SAM of Pt nanoparticles (inset). (b) Photographs of the dynamic window during switching outside (top) and inside with a white background (bottom) after 0, 15, and 30 s of metal electrodeposition at −0.6 V. (c) Transmission of a 25 cm2 dynamic window with a Cu–Ag gel electrolyte during metal deposition at −0.6 V and stripping at +0.8 V. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.102 (d) The transmittance of a device, as photographed in (e), which shows photographs of the device in a bleached state and colored state, scale bar is 1 cm. (f) The working mechanism of the three-layered electrochromic device in the coloring process and bleaching process. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.38	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of P(NIPAMx-BVImy-DACV) gels; (b) temperature dependence of the transmittance of P(NIPAMx-BVImy-DAV) gel based TEDs; (c) dynamic transmittance curves of P(NIPAM0.8-BVIm0.2-DAV) gel based TEDs collected at 580 nm under the 20 cycle switching test. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.25 (d) The structure of the electrochromic device with the electrolyte containing PNIPAm hydrogel. (e) The four distinct states achieved in the electrochromic device within the area of 3 × 3 cm2 under different conditions (left pictures: +1 V, bleached states; right pictures: −1 V, colored states). (f) CV traces of WO3 films in a potential range of −1 V to +1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl); supporting electrolyte: aqueous 0.5 M LiClO4 with 25 g L−1 PNIPAm (red lines) and without PNIPAm hydrogel (blue lines), at 20 °C. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.99	 


Butyl rubber edge seal surrounding gel electrolyte/Cu counter electrode/glass back side	60	Minute-order	90	5500	J. Barile et al.,102 2017
FTO/WO3−x/hydrogel	70 (660 nm)	5	118	210	Fang et al.,38 2018
P(NIPAM0.8-BVIm0.2-DAV)	>50% (580)	—	—	100	Chen et al.,25 2016
FTO/electrochromic materials/electrolyte with PINPAm hydrogel	—	10	—	200	Wang et al.,99 2019

 	Fig. 8  (a) A conceptual working principle of a hygroscopic transmittance switch material. (a) Schematic of dry/scattering and wet/emission states. (b) Schematic diagram of dry and wet pores, indicating the difference of refractive index n in dry air and the n matching between matrix and pores in humid air. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.109 (b) (a and b) Top and side views of the film with CaCl2 (unwashed) show the large holes inside. (c and d) Top and side views of the membrane without CaCl2 (extracted salt by washing). (c) The visible spectrum of a humidity driven optical device operating in dry and humid air. Reproduced with permission from Springer, Copyright 2018.112 (d) Coloring process (wetting process). Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.109 (e) PVP-Ir-glass film produced reflection spectrum of different colors (θ = 0°). Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.113 (f) FT-IR spectra of hydrogel films with different relative humidity. Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Copyright 2017.114 (g) (a) Digital photographs of the gel in H state. (b) Digital photographs of the gel in DH state. (h) The figure shows the magnitude of the voltage and current in the electrochemical cell as the gel absorbs water. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.35	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Preparation of reactive Ch-LC coatings. First the substrate is pretreated with primer BP solution, and coated with an easy-to-process rod coating technique. Then the Ch-LC mixture is rod coated, followed by photopolymerization. Finally, the cured coating is alkali-treated to form a hygroscopic Ch-LC coating. (b) Transmission spectra of hygroscopic coatings prepared by Ch-LC mixture I were measured at various coating temperatures and 75% constant ambient RH and 21 °C temperature. The spectrum was measured after the coating was held at the set temperature for 5 min. (c) The central wavelength of the Ch-LC coating reflective band measured at different relative humidity and temperature. (d) A photo of the coating and substrate in front of the window shows the haze effect. (e) SEM image of the cross section of the coating. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.110 (f) The UV-Vis spectra of the IPN polymer salt film at pH 3 and 9 have reflection bands at 563 nm and 730 nm, respectively. (g) Schematic diagram of the working mechanism of polystyrene–poly(acrylic acid) responsive IPN polymer film. (h) Optical photomicrographs of patterned IPN coatings at (a) a relative humidity of 15% and 85%, and (b) pH 3 and 9. (d) Optical photomicrographs of patterned IPN polymer films at pH 3 and 9. The scale represents 250 microns. (i) The surface topography of the humidity-sensitive IPN coating was observed by interferometry under the conditions of RH = 15%, 50% and 80% (T = 20 °C). Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015.40	 


Single response hydrogel	PDMS	79.8	Dry	1	Wet	Transparent ↔ opaque	Cai et al.,109 2018
PVP-Ir-glass	—	40%	—	70%	Blue ↔ yellow	Banisadr et al.,113 2019
PEG-DA	90	20%	—	100%	Colorless-pink	Lv et al.,114 2017
Oxide of zinc	99.4	dry	57.8	70%	Transparent ↔ opaque with energy conservation and harvesting	Nandakumar et al.,35 2018
Double response hydrogel	LEXAN 8040T PC/XPC films	87.5	75%	—	—	Humidity and temperature double response	Heeswijk et al.,110 2019
CLC-poly (acrylic acid) hydrogel	96.7	6%	6.2	80%	Humidity and pH double response	Stumpel et al.,40 2015

Actuation	Passive	Active	Passive
Stimuli	Temperature	Electricity	Water vapor
Device complexity	Low, simple coating or encapsulation	High, multilayered structure	Low, simple coating or encapsulation
For energy-saving windows	Suitable	Suitable, with one-time low energy input	Suitable, with water vapor environment
Optional transition speed	Acceptable	Acceptable	Acceptable

 	Fig. 10  Perspective uses of hydrogel smart windows.	 
Footnote
† These two authors contribute equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
