Three dimensional macroporous architectures and aerogels built of carbon nanotubes and/or graphene: synthesis and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35353A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35353A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794-830Three dimensional macroporous architectures and aerogels built of carbon nanotubes and/or graphene: synthesis and applicationsStefania Nardecchia, Daniel Carriazo, M. Luisa Ferrer, María C. Gutiérrez and Francisco del Monte*Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Cantoblanco 28049, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: delmonte@icmm.csic.es;  Fax: +34 913720623;   Tel: +34 913349033Received 24th August 2012First published on 16th November 2012AbstractCarbon nanotubes and graphene are some of the most intensively explored carbon allotropes in materials science. This interest mainly resides in their unique properties with electrical conductivities as high as 104 S cm−1, thermal conductivities as high as 5000 W m−1 K and superior mechanical properties with elastic moduli on the order of 1 TPa for both of them. The possibility to translate the individual properties of these monodimensional (e.g. carbon nanotubes) and bidimensional (e.g. graphene) building units into two-dimensional free-standing thick and thin films has paved the way for using these allotropes in a number of applications (including photocatalysis, electrochemistry, electronics and optoelectronics, among others) as well as for the preparation of biological and chemical sensors. More recently and while recognizing the tremendous interest of these two-dimensional structures, researchers are noticing that the performance of certain devices can experience a significant enhancement by the use of three-dimensional architectures and/or aerogels because of the increase of active material per projected area. This is obviously the case as long as the nanometre-sized building units remain accessible so that the concept of hierarchical three-dimensional organization is critical to guarantee the mass transport and, as consequence, performance enhancement. Thus, this review aims to describe the different synthetic processes used for preparation of these three-dimensional architectures and/or aerogels containing either any or both allotropes, and the different fields of application in which the particular structure of these materials provided a significant enhancement in the efficacy as compared to their two-dimensional analogues or even opened the path to novel applications. The unprecedented compilation of information from both CNT- and graphene-based three-dimensional architectures and/or aerogels in a single revision is also of interest because it allows a straightforward comparison between the particular features provided by each allotrope.Stefania Nardecchia, Francisco del Monte, M. Luisa Ferrer, Daniel Carriazo and María C. GutiérrezStefania Nardecchia graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 2005 at the University of Roma, obtained her PhD from the University of Madrid in 2012. In 2008 she joined the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the Institute of Materials Science of Madrid (ICMM-CSIC) where she is currently working. Her research interests focused on materials for drug release and biomaterials for bone and neural tissue regeneration.Daniel Carriazo obtained his PhD from the University of Salamanca in 2008 on the synthesis of layered double hydroxides and porous oxides for catalytic applications. In 2009 he joined the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the Institute of Materials Science of Madrid (ICMM-CSIC) where he is currently working. During 2011 he spent eight months working in the group headed by Prof. Niederberger at the ETH-Zürich on the synthesis of nano-materials by non-aqueous routes. His present scientific interest is focused on the synthesis of carbonaceous materials with hierarchical porosity for energy storage and environmental applications.María Luisa Ferrer is a tenured scientist at the Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM-CSIC). After an MSc degree in Polymer Science (1992), she completed her PhD in chemistry at the University Autonoma of Madrid (1995). She was a postdoctoral fellow over the next three years, first at the University of Patras (Greece) and, after that, at UCLA (USA). After that, she got a teaching appointment at the UMH (Spain). She joined the ICMM-CSIC in 2000 to work on the preparation of hierarchical materials with applications in both energy and biomaterials.María C. Gutiérrez obtained her PhD in Organic Chemistry at the University of Granada in 2001. From 2001 to 2003, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Furstoss in Biocatalysis and Fine Chemistry at the Université de la Méditerranée (France), and participated in European projects from IV and V Framework Programmes. In 2004, she joined the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the ICMM-CSIC in Spain and became a tenured scientist in 2009. Her research interest is the development of New Routes for Preparation of Hierarchical and Multifunctional Materials for Applications in Biotechnology and Biomedicine.Francisco del Monte is a Scientist at the Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM-CSIC) in Spain. He received a BSc degree in organic chemistry in 1991, an MSc degree in polymer science in 1992, and a PhD in chemistry in 1996. He then spent two years as a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Los Angeles, California. Since 2004, he leads the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the ICMM-CSIC. His current scientific interest is the use of biomimetic chemistry and deep eutectic solvents for the preparation of hierarchically organized materials.Nanoparticles (NPs) and nanocomposites benefiting from the synergy between inorganic and organic compounds are indeed playing a major role in the development of advanced functional materials for a number of emerging applications (e.g., catalysis, storage and controlled release systems, smart fillers, and biotechnologies).1 Within this context, assembling NPs into structurally macroscopic structures is of special relevance for the realistic development of any of the above-cited applications because the resulting materials would offer a desirable combination of high internal reactive surface area and straightforward molecular transport through broad “highways” leading to such a surface.2 These morphologies are also obtained in monoliths exhibiting hierarchical structures that combine micro-, meso-, and macropores—so that the micro and mesoporosity provide high surface areas while the macroporosity guaranties accessibility to this surface. Besides morphology, it is obvious that the chemical nature of the monolith also plays a role and will ultimately determine the particular application of these materials. For instance, the use of monolithic aerogels based on silica as columns in high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) is quite extended3–5 whereas the electrically conductive framework of monolithic carbon aerogels has determined their preferred application as electrodes in electrochemical devices (supercapacitors, fuel cells, batteries, etc.).6–8 Interestingly, sol–gel chemistry is one of the most common synthetic processes used for preparation of both silica and carbon hierarchical monoliths. Thus, Tanaka and coworkers first described the preparation of silica columns for HPLC in 19969 using a sol–gel process based on the hydrolysis and polycondensation of tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) in the presence of polyethylene oxide (PEO) as a template.10,11 Meanwhile and inspired by the seminal work on silica aerogels by Kistler in 1931,12 Pekala et al.13 first reported on the use of sol–gel chemistry for the achievement of highly cross-linked organic gels that, after supercritical drying and subsequent thermal treatment in an inert atmosphere, resulted in carbon monoliths. The main features that determined the popularization of the sol–gel process are the capability to produce materials in a variety of forms that includes thin films and three-dimensional (3D) architectures, the textural and chemical characteristics of which can be easily tuned for the achievement of co-continuous structures with well defined hierarchical structures for bare silica- or carbon-based materials as well as hybrids and composites.14–18 While recognizing the tremendous relevance of silica, hybrid-silica and carbon monoliths, the focus of this review will not be on these particular materials because there are already excellent reviews and books that cover most of the recent advances in this area.19–25Less revised has been however the preparation and application of composite-based monolithic aerogels and, in particular, of those containing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and/or graphene. CNTs and graphene are both allotropes of carbon. CNTs exhibit a cylindrical hollow nanostructure with the walls formed by one-atom-thick sheets of carbon that are rolled at specific and discrete angles, which ultimately determine whether the individual nanotube shell is a metal or a semiconductor. CNTs are categorized as single-, double- or multi-walled CNTs (SWCNTs, DWCNTs or MWCNTs, respectively) depending on the number of the rolled walls. Meanwhile, graphene is a planar monolayer of carbon atoms arranged into a two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice with a C–C bond length of 0.142 nm. These two well-known allotropes of carbon have attracted much attention from the scientific community because they exhibit unique properties (electrical conductivities as high as 104 S cm−1, thermal conductivities as high as 5000 W m−1 K and superior mechanical properties with elastic moduli on the order of 1 TPa, for both of them)26–31 that, eventually, can be translated into any architecture built up with any of them. In this review, we will summarize the use of CNTs and graphene oxide (GO) as, respectively, monodimensional (1D) and 2D building units in the synthesis of 3D macroporous architectures and aerogels. We will also describe the great potential of the resulting hydrogels and aerogels in the field of actuators, supercapacitors and polymer composites.1. CNT-based 3D architectures and aerogelsSince their discovery in 1991,32 CNTs have been the subject of numerous research works given their unique properties, for example, extremely high electrical conductivities, very high thermal conductivities, and outstanding mechanical properties. However, the processing of CNT-based materials into engineered 3D macroporous structures is still in its infancy and most of the arrays prepared to date with controlled areas and nanotube lengths are 2D-type; e.g. well vertically aligned CNT architectures,33,34 self-assembled CNT sheets35 or textiles containing nanotube-fiber capacitors woven in orthogonal directions,36 among others.37 Eventually, 3D sieve architectures have also been constructed,38 although the length of the third dimension of the regular patterned cavities is typically limited to that of some few CNTs,39,40 except for those composites where the CNT fraction is minor.41 The valuable contribution of these works to different applications has been highlighted in recent reviews42–48 and, for this reason, will not be the subject of this review either.Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques have been recently used to prepare 3D structures composed of freestanding films of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes.49 Considering the valuable contribution of these 3D structures to different applications,50 it is our belief that “true” 3D architectures—in which the third dimension is within the range of the other two—produced by chemical routes could exhibit interesting properties (e.g. in terms of both electrical conductivity and mechanical properties) for industrial applications. This belief is actually corroborated by the increased number of works dealing with CNT-based 3D architectures published within the last two years; i.e. ca. 65% of the works revised herein correspond to the 2011–2012 period. The main reason behind this tremendous activity is that, as a general trend for any catalytic application, the performance of any device based on CNTs can experience a significant enhancement by the use of 3D architectures rather than 2D ones because of the obvious increase of active material in the former case. Hydrogels, organogels, and aerogels based on silica or carbon and consisting of micro-, meso- and even macroporous networks forming a hierarchical structure that guaranties molecular transport throughout the entire 3D architecture to gain access to the internal reactive surface are illustrative examples of 3D macroscopic assemblies corroborating this issue.19–25 Thus, the aim of this review with regard to CNTs will be to summarize those self-assembling processes described to date that have been capable of building “true” 3D hierarchical macrostructures and have explored those applications where silica and carbon monoliths have already proved efficient (e.g. membranes and columns for water treatment and chromatographic separations, electrodes for supercapacitors, fuel cells and batteries, and catalytic substrates, among others).1.1 Organogels and aerogels from CNT suspensionsThe organic functionalization of either SWCNTs or MWCNTs with an organogelator can result in the formation of freestanding CNT organogels. For instance, SWCNTs functionalized by ferrocene-grafted poly(p-phenyleneethynylene) can gelate common organic solvents such as chloroform to form robust 3D nanotube networks that cannot be re-dispersed in any organic solvent.51 Thermally annealed CNT aerogels were mechanically stable and stiff (Fig. 1), highly porous (99%), and exhibited excellent electrical conductivity (ca. 1–2 S cm−1) and large specific surface area (590–680 m2 g−1).52 Moreover, Fmoc-protected-amino-acid-based (Fmoc-Phe-OH, where Fmoc stands for N-fluorenyl-9-methoxycarbonyl and Phe for Phenylalanine) hydrogels have also been used to incorporate and disperse SWCNT within the gel phase at physiological pH and temperature.53 The resulting hydrogels exhibited an intriguing 1D alignment of SWCNTs on the surface of the gel nanofibers that enhanced the elastic properties as well as the thermal stability, and provided a notorious electrical conductivity of 3.1 S cm−1 to the resulting hydrogels. Meanwhile, the presence of functional groups on MWCNTs that remained available after gelation allowed the conjugation of the properties of gels and nanostructured carbon materials.54 The benefits of using organogelators were therefore multiple considering that, besides inducing gelation and conferring additional properties to the resulting gels, functionalization helps for CNT dispersion at the solution stage and hence, to the achievement of a homogeneous distribution of CNT throughout the resulting gel. Fig. 1  Picture of SWCNT aerogels weighing 17.4 mg (density: 9.8 mg mL−1) before (a), during (b) and after (c) application of a 20 g weight. Monoliths were obtained from SWCNTs functionalized with ferrocene-grafted poly(p-phenyleneethynylene). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright (2011) Elsevier Publishing Group). Within the context of monomers and polymers, Zhang et al. demonstrated that embedding either MWCNTs or acid-treated MWCNTs into a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT–PSS) aerogel matrix can significantly enhance the specific surface areas (280–400 m2 g−1) of the resulting composite aerogels while maintaining good thermal stability and electrical conductivities (1.2–6.9 × 10−2 S cm−1).55 Poly (3-(trimethoxysilyl) propylmethacrylate) (PTMSPMA) can also be used to disperse and functionalize MWCNTs. In this case, strong and permanent chemical bonding between percolated MWCNTs in the resulting free-standing monolithic aerogel was obtained upon the hydrolysis and condensation of PTMSPMA. The entangled MWCNTs generated mesoporous structures on the honeycomb walls, creating aerogels with a surface area of 580 m2 g−1 (nearly 2-fold the surface area of pristine MWCNTs), remarkable elastic properties and good electrical conductivity (e.g. up to 0.67 S cm−1). All these features determined the exceptional pressure and chemical vapor sensing capabilities of these aerogels.56Surfactants have also been used for dispersion of CNT and subsequent formation of aerogels. For instance, Ostojic solubilized SWCNTs in 1% w/v sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) aqueous solution. Streptavidin phosphate and DNA complexes were thereafter used for SDS replacement and so induce SWCNT gelation. Ethanol and ethanol–water solvent exchange and subsequent critical-point-drying resulted in the formation of SWCNT aerogels exhibiting a previously unobserved peak at 1.3 eV in the photoluminescence spectrum that corresponds to a phonon-assisted recombination of photoexcited charges.57 In another interesting example, Yodh and coworkers suspended different concentrations of as-received CNTs (e.g. weight fractions ranging from 5 to 13 mg mL−1) in water with sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate.58 The suspensions were left overnight to set into elastic gels that were subsequently soaked at 90 °C in aqueous solutions of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) for structural reinforcement. Reinforced and non-reinforced gels were thereafter submitted to either freeze- or critical-point-drying processes for the achievement of the aerogel structure. PVA-reinforced aerogels exhibited outstanding mechanical properties (for instance, they were able to hold 8000 times their weight, Fig. 2) whereas much better conductivities were found for non-reinforced ones (e.g. 0.6 S cm−1 for non-reinforced versus ca. 10−5 S cm−1 for reinforced ones). More recently, Islam and coworkers, using a similar approach in which they substituted PVA by polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), produced transparent (ca. 93% of transmittance for a 3 μm-thick aerogel) and stretchable conductors, the electrical conductivity of which (ranging 0.7–1.1 S cm−1) remained basically the same under high bending strain.59 Transparent SWCNT aerogels can also be obtained using silica as binder (Fig. 3a). In this case, SWCNTs were dispersed in water using SDS or sodium deoxycholate and then reacted with a silica precursor like TMOS either by a chemical vapor-into-liquid sol–gel process—in which the low boiling point of TMOS allows vapours diffusion through the SWCNT aqueous suspension—or by a regular liquid-phase sol–gel process—in which small aliquots of TMOS are added into the SWCNT aqueous suspension.60 After CO2 supercritical drying, the resulting solution-free and surfactant-free SWCNT-silica aerogels provided access to new photophysical properties of SWCNT and hence, converted this solid-state nanomaterial into not only an ideal system for making fundamental optical measurements, but also a novel and suitable platform for the development of applications in sensing, photonics, and optoelectronics in the near future (Fig. 3b–d). Fig. 2  (a) Picture of SWCNT aerogels (density: 7.5 mg mL−1) non-reinforced (left, black coloured) and reinforced (right, gray coloured) with 1 wt% PVA. (b) Three PVA-reinforced aerogel monoliths (total mass = 13.0 mg) supporting 100 g (ca. 8000 times their weight). (c) SEM micrograph revealing the macroporus architecture of PVA-reinforced aerogel (0.5 wt% PVA, 10 mg mL−1 CNT content). (d) TEM micrograph of non-reinforced CNT aerogel. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright (2007) Wiley-VCH).  Fig. 3  (a) Picture of aerogels without (blank) and with SWCNTs. (b) PL spectrum of aerogels exposed to CO2, THF, and ether vapors. The PL spectrum of non-exposed (e.g. in vacuum) is also included for comparison. (c) Shift in PL emission wavelength relative to the signal collected under vacuum as a function of SWCNT diameter after exposure of SWNT-aerogels to air (green square), CO2 (red dots), THF (blue triangle), and ether (yellow star). (d) Emission wavelength shifts for SWCNTs with different diameter after alternating exposure to ether and vacuum: (9,5) light blue squares; (7,6) red dots; (7,5) green triangle; and (8,3) blue triangle. (Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society). Within the context of dispersing CNTs in aqueous solutions that also contain a certain molecular precursor in charge of building up the 3D architecture where the CNT will be finally immobilized, the sol–gel polymerization of resorcinol and formaldehyde offers interesting perspectives. For instance, Baumann and coworkers have recently performed a quite extensive and stimulating work on SWCNTs and DWCNTs 3D architectures synthesized by resorcinol–formaldehyde polycondensation. By introducing low concentrations of the sol–gel precursors to a suspension of highly purified SWCNTs, the polymerization was primarily induced on the walls of the CNT bundles and, more importantly, at the junctions between adjacent bundles to form an organic binder. The resulting assembly was dried and subsequently pyrolyzed to convert the organic binder into carbon.61 The aerogels could be also prepared with varying SWCNT loading (0–55 wt%).62 At nanotube loadings of 55 wt%, shrinkage of the aerogel monoliths during carbonization and drying was almost completely eliminated and the electrical conductivities improved by an order of magnitude as compared to those of foams without SWCNTs. Particularly interesting in terms of conductivity (up to 8 S cm−1) and surface area (above 500 m2 g−1) were those composites based on DWCNTs.63 Interestingly, the porous network of these architectures can be surface decorated with oxide coatings (Fig. 4).64 In this case, sol–gel deposition of SiO2, SnO2 or TiO2 produced a conformal overlayer on the primary ligament structure of the SWCNT-based support, thus preserving open porosity within the monolithic part. The resulting aerogels (SWCNT-CA) exhibited good electrical conductivity (up to 1 S cm−1) and an enhancement in the mechanical properties relative to the uncoated SWCNT-CA support that should prove advantageous for a number of applications, such as battery electrodes, sensing devices, and catalysts. More recently, Gutiérrez et al. have studied the polycondensation of not only resorcinol and formaldehyde65 but also furfuryl alcohol66 in deep eutectic solvents (DES) because of their capability to homogeneously disperse high amounts of CNTs. In the furfuryl alcohol case, the presence of DES induced the formation of monolithic carbons with a bimodal porosity that comprises from micro- up to macropores. The morphology of the resulting carbons (CFA, without CNTs) consisted of a bicontinuous porous network built of highly cross-linked clusters that aggregated and assembled into a stiff, interconnected structure (Fig. 5). This sort of morphology is typical of carbons obtained via spinodal decomposition processes where the formation of a rich-polymer phase by polycondensation is accompanied by the segregation of the non-condensed matter (creating first a poor-polymer phase that, ultimately, becomes a depleted-polymer phase), the elimination of which (either before carbonization by washing or during carbonization by thermal decomposition) results in the formation of the above-mentioned bicontinuous porous structure.67 In this particular case, furfuryl alcohol condensated on the walls of the MWCNTs so that the resulting bicontinuous porous network resembled a skeleton network composed of interconnected MWCNTs “glued” by the carbon resulting from the furfuryl alcohol condensation and pyrolysis (CFACNT). The presence of a carbon shell that coated every MWCNT and formed strong junctions between them was reflected in both the electrical conductivity (up to 4.8 S cm−1, as measured by the four-probe method) and the elastic character (Young's modulus, 11 MPa) of the monoliths having the largest MWCNT content. The combination of high electrical conductivity, hierarchical structure and pseudo elastic properties contributed to retain 75% of the initial capacitance at current densities of up to 765 mA cm−2 (29 A g−1) when two of these monoliths (each monolith was 1.2 cm in diameter and 1.1 mm in height, and weighed 17 mg) were assembled into a supercapacitor cell. Fig. 4  SEM images of (a and b) as-synthesized and (c and d) annealed at 320 °C TiO2/SWCNT-CA composites at low and high magnifications. TEM images of annealed (e and f) TiO2–SWCNT-CA composites at low and high magnifications. Inset in (f) is the electron diffraction pattern of the annealed TiO2/SWCNT-CA. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society).  Fig. 5  SEM micrographs of CFA (a, b and c), CFACNT1 (d) and CFACNT5 (f, h and i). TEM micrographs of colloidal carbon corresponding to CFA and CFACNT1 (c), and fibrillar carbon corresponding to CFACNT1 and CFACNT5 (e and g). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2011) Wiley-VCH). It is also worth noting those works using polymers that can play an “all-in-one” role as both dispersing agents helping to the achievement of homogeneous aqueous suspensions of CNT and structural binders holding the 3D architecture formed after any sort of processing (e.g. freeze-drying, electrospun, etc.). For instance, Tasis and coworkers used PVA as a dispersing-aid agent of KMnO4-treated MWCNTs in water. The application of flash freezing to the MWCNT/PVA aqueous suspension (e.g. in liquid nitrogen) and subsequent freeze-drying resulted in MWCNT aerogels that exhibited interesting thermal and catalytic properties as well as absorption capacity of polynuclear aromatic substances.68 This “all-in-one” approach can be further extended upon the use of different polymers. For instance, del Monte and coworkers used chitosan for dispersing HNO3-treated MWCNTs (up to 8 wt%) in water.69 MWCNT aerogels were obtained upon the application of the ISISA (ice segregation induced self-assembly) process that basically consists of a unidirectional freezing of the sample (e.g. by dipping it into a nitrogen liquid bath at a constant rate) followed by freeze-drying.70 In this case, unidirectional freezing allowed the achievement of macroporous structures with well-aligned microchannels in the freezing direction and a well-patterned morphology between channels (e.g. lamellar and microhoneycomb, respectively) (Fig. 6). These ultralightweight aerogels (specific gravity ranging from 4.9 × 10−2 to 9.4 × 10−2 along with the MWCNT content) exhibited remarkable electrical conductivities of up to 2.5 S cm−1 for those aerogels composed of 89 wt% MWCNTs and 11 wt% CHI. Interestingly, the aerogel structure could be reinforced upon exposure to glutaraldehyde vapors without detrimental effects on either the morphology or the electrical conductivity.71 These features allowed the use of these aerogels as high-perfomance 3D electrodes in both direct methanol and microbial fuel cells (DMFCs and MFCs, respectively).69,72 Particularly interesting was the microchanneled structure in this latter case, allowing the possibility to work in the “flow-through” mode so that bacteria could colonize the entire internal structure of cylindrical aerogels of ca. 4 mm in diameter and 12 mm in height (Fig. 7) that, otherwise (e.g. in static conditions), was not possible.73 The validity of these aerogels to work as high-perfomance 3D electrodes under “flow-through” conditions was not only demonstrated in MFCs, but also for electrodeposition of a layer of calcium–phosphate salts homogenously distributed throughout the entire internal surface of the aerogels. Interestingly, the crystal habit of the deposited mineral was easily controlled by the electrodeposition conditions (Fig. 8).74 It is worth noting that, as in the previous case, homogeneous coatings were not attained upon chemical mineralization carried out under non-flow conditions.71 More recently, the same group has explored the capability of different polysaccharides (e.g. chondroitin sulphate) and protein-like polymers (e.g. gelatin) for the preparation of analogue MWCNT aerogels.75 The authors have also explored the potential application of these MWCNT aerogels as scaffolds for tissue engineering purposes.71,74–76 Fig. 6  SEM micrographs of MWCNT scaffolds: (a) cross-section view, (b) longitudinal view according to plane 1 and (c) longitudinal view according to plane 2. Bars are 200 μm in every case. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH).  Fig. 7  SEM images (a–c) of biofilm at different magnifications taken from the inner part of the 3D scaffold. (Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry).  Fig. 8  SEM micrographs of MWCNT scaffolds after mineralization under flow-through conditions that reveal the homogeneity of the mineral coating irrespective of the experimental conditions used for electrodeposition; 30 °C–30 min–1.4 V for (a) and (b), 60 °C–30 min–1.8 V for (c) and 60 °C–30 min–2.1 V for (d). Bars are 5 μm in (b) and 20 μm in (a), (c) and (d). (Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH) 1.2. CNT-surface modified aerogelsCNT functionalization of the internal surface of preformed aerogels has recently gained increased interest because it offers a tremendous versatility considering the existing palette of 3D architectures that may be suitable for this purpose. For instance, Petrov and coworkers reported on the ice-mediated deposition of individual CNTs onto the inner surface of a pre-formed macroporous polymer cryogel.77 The method is quite promising in economical terms because it provided aerogels that with a minimum amount of SWCNT (0.12–0.15 wt% with respect to the polymer) exhibited a high electrical conductivity (ca. 1 S cm−1). Moreover, any performed aerogel (with whatever chemical nature and morphology) could eventually be suitable for CNT surface modification considering that the process (just based on freezing and freeze-drying) does not require any particular property from the substrate. Polyacrylamide, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM), and 2-hydroxyethylcellulose were explored in this work, but many others (e.g. either new ones or simple combinations of these)78 could be used. Moreover, surface coating treatments with MWCNTs can be applied to 3D collagen scaffolds and the resulting materials be used for bone tissue engineering.79 The versatility in the type of substrate that can be used is by no means trivial because the CNT incorporation as surface-modifiers—rather than embedded within the polymer matrix—may help to preserve the intrinsic properties of the original aerogel. Finally, Cui and coworkers have used aqueous SWCNT inks—prepared by dispersing the CNTs with the aid of sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate as a surfactant—for impregnation of either textiles or polyurethane sponges (Fig. 9).80,81 In both cases, the 3D scaffold provided an open macroporous structure that, besides electrically-conductive, was favorable for microbial colonization and hence, useful as electrode in MFCs. More recently, the same authors have prepared MnO2-CNT-sponge supercapacitors by, first, dipping and drying impregnation of a sponge-block of cellulose with MWCNTs and after that, electrodeposition of MnO2 onto the conductive CNT-sponge skeleton.82,83 The MnO2-CNT-sponge supercapacitor cell—composed of two pieces of MnO2-CNT-sponge electrodes assembled into a coin cell—exhibited high specific capacitance, ultrafast charge-discharge rate, excellent cycling stability, and good energy and power density, making it a promising electrode for future energy storage systems. In view of these interesting examples, one can thus envisage the use of aerogels exhibiting outstanding mechanical or optical properties that, after surface modification, will be also electrically conductive. Fig. 9  Schematic of CNT-sponge showing the macroporous structure and continuous three-dimensional (3D) CNT coating (a). Picture of the sponge before (white) and after (black) application of the CNT coating (b). SEM image of the CNT-sponge before (c) and after (d and e) microbial colonization. A single microorganism lying on the CNT surface (f), illustrating the strong interaction between the microbial nanowires and CNTs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry). Besides these interesting applications, macroporous monoliths could potentially be used as a catalyst support for many different reactions. For this purpose, Liu and coworkers synthesized series of CNT–alumina composite monoliths with meso-macroporous structures by imbibing macroporous monolithic polystyrene foams with carbon nanotube-alumina hydrosols.84 These composite monoliths possessed interconnected spherical macropores that mainly ranged from 10–40 μm and adjustable mesopores of several nanometers. The catalysts were prepared by wet co-impregnation with aqueous solutions of Pt(NH3)2(NO3)2 and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, freeze-drying and calcination at 1300 °C. The resulting Pt–Ni/CNT–Al2O3 monoliths exhibited high activity and selectivity for the preferential oxidation of CO even with small Pt loading of 0.75 wt%.1.3 Growth of CNT 3D architectures by chemical vapor depositionThe CVD growth of ultra long vertical CNT arrays for the achievement of 3D architectures has been a challenge since the seminal work published in 2004 by Hata et al.49 describing the formation of SWCNT forests with millimetre scale height (Fig. 10). Ajayan and coworkers, who extended the application of CVD to MWCNTs for the production of vertically aligned MWCNT-arrays, further corroborated the interest of 3D architectures of CNTs.85 In this case, freestanding films of ca. 1 mm in height exhibited super-compressible foam-like behaviour (i.e. under compression, the MWCNTs collectively form zigzag buckles that can fully unfold to their original length upon load release, see Fig. 11). These authors also overcame the typical substrate limitation for nanotube growth by CVD using a metallic alloy—Inconel 600—as catalyst. Thus, the aligned MWCNT arrays grew on the metallic substrate and exhibited an excellent electrical contact between them.86 Interestingly, the infiltration of any of these forest structures with PDMS provided extremely flexible conducting hybrid 3D architectures with unique electromechanical properties thanks to the conformal filling within the dense nanotube network.87 Fig. 10  (A) Picture of a 2.5 mm-tall SWCNT forest growth with water-assisted CVD on a 7 mm by 7 mm silicon wafer. A matchstick on the left and a ruler with millimeter markings on the right is for size reference. (B) SEM micrograph of the same SWCNT forest. Scale bar is 1 mm. (C) SEM image of the SWCNT forest ledge. Scale bar is 1 μm. (D) Low-resolution TEM image of the nanotubes. Scale bar is 100 nm. (E) High-resolution TEM image of the SWCNTs. Scale bar is 5 nm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright (2004) American Association for the Advancement of Science).  Fig. 11  (A) SEM micrograph of an original freestanding film (left, top) (thickness 0.86 mm) and a compressed film (left, bottom) (ε = 85%, 1000 cycles), with a reduced thickness of 0.72 mm, showing horizontal lines (wavelike buckles) uniformly distributed across the film section. Left scale bar is 0.2 mm. (Left, inset) Illustration of compression along the axis of nanotubes. (B) Slight buckles in the middle section, heavy buckles (almost completely folded) near the bottom of film, and the zigzag edge of the compressed film. (C) SEM image of a 1.2 mm-thick film before and after compression, showing the evolution of buckles with increasing compression cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2005) American Association for the Advancement of Science). Using a CVD method similar to that reported for growing vertical CNT arrays (except for the substitution of the carbon source by dichlorobenzene), Wu and coworkers prepared a macroscopic-monolithic sponge of randomly (e.g. non-aligned) interconnected CNTs (Fig. 12).88 The pristine CNT sponges were hydrophobic (with a contact angle of about 156° for water droplets) and displayed structural flexibility that was rarely observed in other high-porosity materials (e.g. aerogels) or aligned CNT arrays. By varying the injection rate of the carbon source, the authors were capable of controlling the bulk densities of the resulting sponges (e.g. from 5.8 to 25.5 mg cm−3).89 Moreover, by introducing solvents (e.g. ethanol) and then gently compressing the sponge to remove the solvent, they formed denser pellets in the dry state with controlled shapes (e.g. flat carpets or spherical particles) that instantaneously swell to larger sizes and recover to the original volume in the presence of the original solvent (i.e. by adding droplets of ethanol). The excellent compressibility and the percolation of the CNT forming the 3D scaffold during large-strain deformation were further exploited for the preparation of strain sensors. In this case, sponges with densities ranging from 5 to 25 mg cm−3 and porosities of ca. 99% were subjected to 300 cycles of large-strain compression to find that the resistivity of the sponges changes linearly and reversibly after every cycle. Fig. 12  Light, porous, flexible carbon nanotube sponges. (a) A monolithic sponge with a size of 4 cm × 3 cm × 0.8 cm and a bulk density of 7.5 mg cm−3. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the sponge showing a porous morphology and overlapped CNTs. (c) TEM image of large-cavity, thin-walled CNTs. (d) Illustration of the sponge consisting of CNT piles (black lines) as the skeleton and open pores (void space). (e) Picture of a CNT and a polymeric sponge placed in a water bath. The CNT sponge is floating on the top while the polyurethane sponge absorbed water and sank to below the surface level. (f) A CNT sponge bent to arch-shape at a large-angle by fingertips. (g) A 5.5 cm × 1 cm × 0.18 cm sponge twisted by three round turns at the ends without breaking. (h) Densification of two cubic-shaped sponges into small pellets (a flat carpet and a spherical particle, respectively) and full recovery to original structure upon ethanol absorption. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH). These features were also of great utility for environmental applications because of the capability of CNT sponges to absorb and remove different types of oil from water biphasic systems (Fig. 13).88,90 The same authors demonstrated the photocatalytic properties of these sponges when they were impregnated with CdS quantum dots.91 Meanwhile, in a very recent work, Sherrell et al. have explored the microwave decoration of Pt NPs on entangled 3D CNT architectures and their applications as cathodes in PEM fuel cells.92 The authors observed that the open macrostructure allows for rapid transfer of both fuel and waste to and from the electrode. The Pt entangled CNT cathode, in combination with an E-TEK 0.2 mg cm−2 anode, had a maximum power and an energy density of 940 mW cm−2 and 2700 mA cm−2, respectively, and a power and an energy density of 4.01 W mgPt−1 and 6.35 A mgPt−1 at 0.65 V. It is worth noting that these power densities corresponded to a specific mass activity of 0.81 gPt per kW for the combined mass of both anode and cathode electrodes, approaching the current US Department of Energy efficiency target. Finally, Chen et al. have demonstrated that MWCNT sponges coated by atomic layer deposition with V2O5 can be used as high-performance cathodes in Li-ion batteries.93 Fig. 13  Environmental application of CNT sponges. (a) Absorption capacity (Q) measured for a range of oils (solid symbols) and organic solvents. The dashed line indicates increasing absorption capacity for higher-density liquids. (b) Summary of the absorption capacity for diesel oil measured from CNT sponges, natural products (cotton, loofah), polymeric sponges (polyurethane, polyester) and activated carbon. The maximum weight gain for oils by previously reported nanowire membranes (Q = 20, from L. A. Capadona et al. Polymer 2006, 47, 5754) is included for comparison. (c) Snapshots showing the absorption of a 28 cm2 mm-thick vegetable oil film (dyed with Oil Blue) distributed on a water bath by a small spherical sponge. The growing size of the sponge accompanied by the shrinkage of oil film indicates continuous oil absorption and storage inside the sponge. (d) Active absorption of a continuous 20 cm2 oil strip distributed in a rectangular water channel by a small non-densified sponge (<1 cm3) placed near the left edge and in contact with oil. (e) Large-area oil cleanup. (left panel) A diesel oil film (2 g in total weight) with an area of 227 cm2 spreading on water and a densified sponge pellet placed in the center. The oil area is about 800 times that of the projected sponge area (middle). Clean water surface after complete oil absorption by the sponge, which has grown to a larger size and changed to a rectangular shape. Inset shows the floating pellet during the absorption process. The white-color region along the path of the drifting pellet indicates the removal of oil film and exposure of fresh water (right). Pictures of the CNT sponge before and after absorption. The sponge has swollen from a 6-mm-diameter spherical particle to a rectangular monolith (2 cm × 1.4 cm × 0.6 cm) after collecting all the oil from water. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright (2010) Wiley VCH). 2. Graphene-based 3D architectures and aerogelsGraphene, another allotrope of carbon, has become a “rising star” material since its discovery in 200494 because of the above-mentioned exceptional properties (e.g. high electron mobility, theoretically high surface area of 2600 m2 g−1, and high transparency) that it exhibits. Obviously, these excellent properties are relevant at the nanoscale so that to harness these properties for macroscopic applications, both large-scale synthesis and integration of individual graphene sheets into advanced multifunctional structures are required. With regards to the first issue, significant improvements have been accomplished in recent years and homogeneous dispersions of individual graphene sheets have been obtained in various solvents.95 For this purpose, the most widely used technique is Hummers’ method.96 According to this method, the reduced GO is prepared by exfoliating graphite oxide, obtained by oxidation of natural graphite powder with strong chemical oxidants, such as HNO3, KMnO4, and H2SO4. Afterwards, GO has demonstrated its capability to provide novel structures and functionalities if aggregation during synthesis and processing is prevented.97 Otherwise, the lack of single graphene sheets homogeneously distributed throughout the entire structure would compromise not only the proper manufacture, but also the performance of the nanocomposites. The easiness of Hummers’ method for GO production and the reliability of its quality are, in our opinion, responsible for the popularization of graphene among material chemists, and the reason why the use of graphene as a versatile nanoscale building block that can self-assemble (i.e. like CNTs and other nanomaterials) in materials synthesis is in full bloom. For instance, a great deal of work has shown the huge potential of graphene sheets self-assembled (via multiple-step processes)98–104 into high-performance thin films such as transparent and conducting membranes98–100 or strong layered paperlike materials,101–104 among others.The tremendous interest of all these 2D structures has been highlighted within the last few years in a number of excellent reviews that cover from the different preparation procedures105,106 to the industrial processes where these graphene-based thin-film composites and freestanding nanosheets can be applied (e.g. from photocatalysis107 to electrochemistry108,109 up to thin-film electronics and optoelectronics110 including biological and chemical sensors,111 among others). Nonetheless, there are also cases where it is crucial to prepare self-supported graphene-based macroporous structures. For instance, electron double layer capacitors (EDLCs) fabricated from curved or surface-modified graphene sheets and using ionic liquids as electrolytes showed ultrahigh energy densities of 65–85 Wh kg−1 because of their high operating voltages.112,113 However, in most of these studies, the high specific capacitances and energy densities were only achievable by charging/discharging at low current densities (<1 A g−1) or cyclic voltammetry (CV) scanning at low potential scan rates (<50 mV s−1), which defeats the primary purpose of using a supercapacitor in applications where high power densities are required. This phenomenon was partially attributed to the lack of sufficiently large pores for the facile access of electrolytes to graphene sheets.114,115The scientific community has assumed the need of 3D graphene-based structures as an important goal to accomplish so that this topic of research has become one of the most widely studied during the last two-three years. Preliminary results in this research area have been partially covered by the above-mentioned reviews and by some others more recently published.116–119 Shi and coworkers have very recently provided an overview of some of the most recent advances in the area of 3D micro- and nano-architectures of graphene-based materials,120,121 but the tremendous activity in the field has allowed us to further extend the number of revised works. It is worth noting that nearly 50 works dealing with graphene 3D architectures have been published within the 2011–2012 period. This figure represents ca. 80% of all the works included in this review. Thus, the aim of this part of our review is to summarize the development of processes focused on the preparation of homogeneous graphene suspensions and their subsequent chemical processing into 3D architectures and aerogels. We will also explore the most interesting applications where these 3D graphene-based structures have been successfully applied. As for CNTs, we will not include those exciting works dealing with macroporous films because, while recognizing the tremendous relevance in this topic, we consider that the recent activity in this field has already been covered by some of the excellent reviews mentioned above. Thus, this review will rather focus the attention onto “true” 3D architectures and aerogels in which the third dimension is within the range of the other two, with particular interest in those synthetic processes that are analogous to those described before for CNT-based 3D architectures. We consider that the compilation of information from graphene-based three-dimensional architectures and/or aerogels besides that described above for CNT-based ones in a single revision can be of great interest for readers working with both allotropes.2.1 Organogels and hydrogels from GO suspensionsMonolithic graphene architectures can be prepared from either graphene or GO in organic or aqueous suspensions, the stabilization and homogeneity of which typically depends on the presence of gelator molecules, monomers or polymers. After gelation, these organic entities will form chemical or physical cross-linkers that are ultimately responsible for the preservation of the 3D structure and, eventually, will provide functionality to the resulting material. For instance, self-assembly of gelator molecules is a well-known process for the preparation of supramolecular gels in which a large number of solvent molecules are immobilized by the network structure.122 Thus, both supramolecular organogels and hydrogels can be obtained just depending on, respectively, the organic or aqueous nature of the solvent where the gelator molecules are solubilized. For instance, Banerjee and coworkers incorporated unfunctionalized and non-oxidized graphene into transparent, stable, supramolecular fluorescent organogels formed by an N-terminally pyrene conjugated oligopeptide, Py-Phe-Phe-Ala-OMe, (where Py stands for pyrene 1-butyryl acyl, Ala for Alanine, and OMe for methoxyl group) in o-dichlorobenzene.123 Graphene has poor solubility in most solvents, and it needs to be further functionalized in order to improve its solubility like, for example, by π–π stacking with hydrophilic aromatic molecules or by coupling to diazonium salts. In this case, graphene was well dispersed into the gel medium by using non-covalent π–π stacking interactions with the pyrene-conjugated gelator peptide. In the presence of graphene, the minimum gelation concentration of the hybrid organogel was lowered significantly suggesting a favorable interaction between the graphene and the gelator peptide within the hybrid organogel system.However, GO is the most common form of graphene that is used for preparation of this sort of structures because of the soluble character conferred by the presence of hydroxyl, epoxide, and carboxylic groups at the basal planes and edges of this oxidized form. These functional groups also provide the tethering sites for the linking of organic molecules. Thus, aqueous suspensions of GO stabilized with gelator molecules (those are, small organic molecules including amides, peptides, ureas, saccharides, nucleobases, molecules with long alkyl chains, or steroid derivatives, among others) have been used for preparation of supramolecular hydrogels. The typical procedure consisted of the dispersion of GO into an aqueous solution (by the above-mentioned Hummers method or a modification of it), and the mixing of it with another aqueous solution that contained the gelator molecule. Thus, Banerjee and coworkers also formed GO-based supramolecular hydrogels from Fmoc protected synthetic dipeptides (e.g. Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH and Fmoc-Phe-Asp-OH, where Tyr stands for Tyrosine and Asp for Aspartic acid) (Fig. 14).124 More recently, they have demonstrated the possibility of substituting peptides with amino acids and nucleosides in the formation of GO-based supramolecular hydrogels. In these hydrogels, GO sheets form a network and amino acids/nucleosides act as physical cross-linking agents. Interestingly, one of these hydrogels (GO-tryptophan) was successfully utilized for the in situ synthesis of Au NPs within the gel matrix. The authors claimed that this is a facile and convenient green chemical approach (i.e. neither external toxic reducing nor stabilizing agents were required) to make a gel-based nanohybrid system, in which the Au NPs are almost uniformly fabricated on the surfaces of GO nanosheets. The authors did not explore yet the functional properties of this hybrid nanomaterial, but catalytic organic transformations can be easily envisaged using this green chemical approach.125 Very recently, Huang et al. have described the formation of GO hydrogels with selectively reversible gel–sol transition.126 In this case, either in situ released multivalent metal ions (e.g. La3+, Co2+, Ni2+) or in situ protonized polyamines (e.g. polyethylenimine, melamine, and polyamidoamine) were capable of assembling GO sheets into 3D hydrogel architectures with the assistance of the hydrolysis product of glucono-δ-lactone whereas reversible gel–sol transition was triggered by the addition of EDTA solution. Finally, Han and coworkers have produced GO-based 3D gel-networks using amphiphilic molecules that possess a polar carbohydrate head-group attached to a nonpolar pyrene group (e.g.D-lactopyranosyl or D-cellopyranosyl).127 Fig. 14  Photographs of hydrogels obtained from (a) Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH, (b) and Fmoc-Phe-Asp-OH, (c) reduced GO containing hybrid hydrogel obtained from Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH and (d) reduced GO dispersed in the solution state by Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH. SEM (e and f), TEM (g and h) and AFM (i and j) of reduced GO hydrogels obtained from Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH (e, g and i) and Fmoc-Phe-Asp-OH (f, h and j). (Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry). Monomers also offer a suitable alternative to gelator molecules for preparation of GO hydrogels. For instance, Zhu et al. added N-isopropylacrylamide and N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide to an aqueous dispersion of GO. Polymerization was carried out upon γ-irradiation and under a nitrogen atmosphere for the achievement of PNIPAM/GO nanocomposite hydrogel. The combination of GO with PNIPAM hydrogel leaded to excellent photothermal properties, where the phase transition of the nanocomposite hydrogel was remotely controlled by laser exposure in a reversible fashion. These features were useful for the preparation of liquid microvalve with potential application in biomaterials, drug delivery, and microdevices (Fig. 15).128 Aqueous dispersions of GO also containing N-isopropylacrylamide have been used for the preparation of GO thermoresponsive nanocomposite hydrogels by frontal polymerization (FP).129 The main peculiarity of FPs is that they are carried out in long reactors where initiation (either thermal or light induced) is only triggered at one of the ends of the reactor rather than in the whole bulk. Thus, a well-defined polymerization front propagates axially along the reaction vessel (from one end of the reactor to the other) taking advantage of the exothermic nature of acrylic polymerizations.130 The nanocomposite hydrogels showed a particular rheological behaviour. The storage modulus and complex viscosity were found to increase by increasing the graphene content up to a maximum value and then abruptly slowed down as a consequence of the lubrication effect exerted by graphene sheets. Finally, Sun et al. demonstrated a facile one-step strategy for GO interpenetrating PNIPAM hydrogel networks via the covalently bonding reaction between epichlorohydrin and terminal carboxyl groups of both GO sheets and PNIPAM-co-AA (where AA stands for acrylic acid) microgels suspended in water.131 The cross-linking reaction was highly efficient, resulting in a hydrogel network with better mechanical strength and both pH- and temperature-sensitive due to the presence of a certain number of carboxyl groups that remained available after condensation. Fig. 15  (a) Photographs of the PNIPAM/GO hydrogels prepared with various amounts of GO (0.0, 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 mg mL−1): the original hydrogel; the hydrogel after NIR laser irradiation for 2 min; and the hydrogel after cooling. (b) Liquid microvalves made with the PNIPAM/GO hydrogel (1, 2) and a PNIPAM hydrogel (3, 4). The photographs show the microvalves before (1, 3), after (2, 4) NIR (808 nm, 2 W) irradiation for 2 min. The rectangular boxes mark the positions of the hydrogels. The solutions encapsulated in the left and right sides are a red rhodamine solution and light-yellow NiSO4, respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH). GO can also be suspended in aqueous solutions containing resorcinol and formaldehyde, the sol–gel polymerization of which—at 85 °C and catalysed by sodium carbonate—resulted in a gel that, after water removal with acetone, supercritical CO2 drying and pyrolysis at 1050 °C under nitrogen, yielded the final carbon-based graphene 3D aerogel (Fig. 16).132 The BET surface area for the graphene aerogel was high, but yet below the theoretical surface area for a single graphene sheet (584 versus 2600 m2 g−1), most likely due to layering or overlapping of graphene sheets within the assembly. Meanwhile, remarkable electrical conductivities of around 0.87 S cm−1 were found in these carbon-based graphene 3D aerogels, well above those reported for macroscopic 3D graphene networks prepared by physical cross-linking. In a subsequent work, the same authors studied the preparation of carbon-based graphene 3D aerogel from less concentrated resorcinol suspensions.133 Interestingly, the resulting aerogels exhibited similar electrical conductivities while the increment of the surface area (up to 1200 m2 g−1) was extraordinary. Following the same synthetic approach, Markovic and coworkers also reported the formation of carbon-based graphene 3D aerogels.134 However, the use of freeze-drying provided aerogels in which both the electrical conductivity (e.g. 0.13 S cm−1) and the surface area (e.g. 240 m2 g−1) were below those of aerogels obtained from supercritical CO2 drying. Alternatively, Zhang and coworkers substituted the catalyser used in the above-described sol–gel polymerization with alkali-treated GO to obtain carbon-based graphene 3D aerogels with a significant enhancement in both the surface area and the electrical conductivity (e.g. 763 m2 g−1 and 0.53 S cm−1)135 as compared to the first carbon-based graphene 3D aerogels described by Worsley et al.132 These carbon-based graphene 3D aerogels prepared from alkali-treated GO proved to be efficient as electrodes in supercapacitor cells, with a specific capacitance of 122 F g−1 (at a current density of 50 mA g−1) and an excellent rate performance (the capacitance remained at 78 F g−1 for current densities of up to 50 A g−1). Fig. 16  FE-SEM of the graphene aerogel at low (a) and high (b) magnification. TEM of the graphene aerogel at low (c) and high (d) magnification. Black arrow denotes holey carbon on the TEM grid. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society). As mentioned above, polymers have also been used for stabilization of GO in aqueous solution and subsequent production of 3D architectures. For instance, Mann and coworkers used an aqueous suspension of polystyrene sulfonate-stabilized graphene sheets (PSS-G) mixed with an aqueous solution of PVA to produce (via unidirectional freezing and subsequent freeze-drying) graphene–polymer nanocomposites with a sponge-like and highly ordered 3D macroporous architecture (Fig. 17).136 Interestingly, whereas bare PVA scaffolds exhibited viscoeleastic behavior, the PSS-G/PVA monoliths showed both elastic and viscoelastic properties depending on the applied stress. Other studies were undertaken in the same manuscript to demonstrate the potential of using PSS-G dispersions for the fabrication of graphene–polymer hollow microspheres. In this latter case, the high negative charge of the PSS-G sheets (zeta potential = −73 mV) was exploited to promote the assembly of the polyanionic PSS-G sheets onto the surface of positively charged polystyrene beads (diameter ca. 990 nm; zeta potential = +37 mV) coated with the poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH). Whereas no precipitate was observed when a PSS-G dispersion was added to a colloidal suspension of negatively charged polystyrene beads (zeta potential = −48 mV), immediate sedimentation occurred in mixtures of PSS-G and PAH-coated polystyrene beads. Subsequent addition of toluene to dried aggregates of PSS-G coated beads resulted in dissolution and removal of the polystyrene template, and the formation of deflated hollow spheres, often with intact continuous walls. Fig. 17  SEM images of (a and b) longitudinal sections, and (c and d) cross-sections of a PSS-G/PVA freeze-dried monolith (1:10 wt% ratio). Scale bars: (a, c, and d) = 10 μm, (b) = 5 μm. Arrows in (a and b) indicate the direction of freezing. (a and c) Region X showing layered structure, and (b and d) region Y with macroporous architecture. (e) Higher-magnification image of cross-section in region X showing layered structure with interlamellar cross-links, scale bar = 1 μm. (f) Image of a single wall showing loosely packed graphene sheets, scale bar = 1 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH). Unidirectional freezing and subsequent freeze-drying were also the process applied to a bare GO suspension for the preparation of GO foams.137 The GO foams showed a high adsorption capacity for SO2 gas and converted it to SO3. The GO foam not only acted as the oxidant in the reaction, but also as the catalyst in the reaction of SO2 with O2 to form SO3. The authors remarked that since this reaction takes place at room temperature and does not need noble metal catalyst, it could be a green and inexpensive method for the treatment of SO2 gas.Within this context and besides the above-mentioned organic gelators, monomers and polymers, Banerjee and coworkers have also used pluronic copolymers (P123, F68 or F127) to prepare an aqueous GO suspension that, upon reduction with hydrazine (Hz), yielded a black homogeneous solution of the graphene–pluronic copolymer.138 The presence of PEO blocks in pluronic polymers allowed the gelation of the suspension by simple addition of α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) and formation of supramolecular pseudopolyrotaxane assemblies by PEO accommodation into α-CD cavities. The formation of the rotaxane structure was confirmed by X-ray diffraction. Freeze-drying resulted in the formation of macroporous 3D architectures, the SEM images of which demonstrated that both supramolecular native and graphene-containing hybrid hydrogels exhibited a loose sponge-like structure and a cross-linked network after the removal of the trapped water molecules.There are now a number of polymers that have been demonstrated to be suitable for GO dispersion and preparation of 3D architectures of interest in different applications. For instance, hydrophilic and biocompatible 3D chitosan-graphene mesostructures with large specific surface area (603.2 m2 g−1) and unique mesoporosity were prepared by simple thermal treatment of GO nanosheets and chitosan.139 The 3D mesostructures were used to remove reactive black 5 from aqueous solutions. Biocompatible 3D architectures were also formed from GO and PVA.140 The GO/PVA hydrogels exhibited pH-induced gel–sol transition and were used for loading and selectively releasing drugs at physiological pH. Meanwhile, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) blended with graphene sheets followed by foaming with subcritical CO2 has been used for preparation of PPMA–graphene nanocomposite microcellular foams with high electrical conductivity and improved electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding efficiency with microwave absorption as the dominant EMI shielding mechanism. Interestingly, because of the presence of the numerous microcellular cells, the graphene–PMMA foam also exhibited greatly improved ductility and tensile toughness compared to its bulk counterpart.141 Moreover, mixing GO and conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS in water also resulted in a dispersion with dramatically increased viscosity that turned into sticky thin films upon casting in this particular work, but it is our belief that it could be used for hydrogels preparation as well.142 The sticky interconnect can greatly simplify the fabrication of organic tandem architectures, which has been quite challenging via solution processing. Thus, it could facilitate the construction of high-efficiency solar cells with different combinations of solution-processable materials. Bao et al. also explored the use of graphene-based macroporous polymers as saturable absorbers with wideband absorption. In this case, GO and graphene were chemically functionalized (e.g. GO was non-covalently bonded with poly[(m-phenylenevinylene)-co-(2,5-dioctoxy-p-phenylenevinylene)] (GO-PVV) whereas was modified with either 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (G-PBASE) or with 4-(2-(pyridin-4-yl)vinlyl) phenyl group (G-dye)) to enhance the solubility, improve its dispersion in a polymer matrix, and enrich the optical properties of the 3D polymer architectures resulting after electrospinning (Fig. 18).143 The authors mentioned that electrospun nanocomposites could be used as a practical and efficient photonic material for the generation of ultra-short pulses in fibre lasers. Finally, silicone foams can also be functionalized with GO sheets. Silicone foams are the result of the condensation reaction between SiOH and SiH containing compounds in the presence of platinum as the catalyst with the evolution of hydrogen. GO-functionalized silicone foams were obtained upon the addition of a GO suspension in ethanol to the SiH compound, to avoid inhibiting the Pt catalyst present in the SiOH compound. After ethanol evaporation, the SiOH compound was thoroughly mixed in a 1:1 ratio with the GO/SiH compound mixture and foaming took place. The authors suggested the potential application of these open cell graphene-based polymeric foams as scaffolds for tissue engineering purposes.144 Within this context of materials useful for biomedical purposes, GO hydrogels can be also obtained upon the addition of a small amount of Pluronic to a GO suspension.145 It is worth mentioning that Pluronic block-copolymers are well-known to form thermosensitive hydrogels at a concentration of 15 wt% or higher, whereas less than 1 wt% of Pluronic was used in this case so that the resulting GO hydrogels could not be considered as hydrogels formed by Pluronic itself. Interestingly, the transition from sol to gel occurred at nearly body temperature so that an in vivo mouse experiment confirmed the stable gel formation after injection with no severe acute cytotoxicity. Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structure of PVAc and graphene-based nanofillers (GO, GO-PPV, G-PBASE, and G-dye). (b) The dispersions of graphene derivatives 5 h after ultrasonication (1: GO, 2: GO-PPV, 3: G-PBASE, 4: G-dye; all in DMF, 0.15 mg mL−1). (c) Typical picture of membranes electrospun on quartz substrates (loading of G-dye: top, 0.07 wt%; bottom, 0.035 wt%). (d) Transferring the freestanding membrane onto the end face of an optical fiber for mode locking. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH). Biomacromolecules are another class of compounds capable of interacting with GO. For instance, it has been observed that DNA chains flatly lay on the surfaces of GO sheets via stacking interactions and hence, it can be applied for non-covalent functionalization or assembly of GO sheets in not only 2D, but also 3D assemblies. The experimental procedure followed for preparation of 3D assemblies was based on the mixing of an aqueous dispersion of GO and an aqueous solution of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) followed by heating the homogeneous mixture at 90 °C for 5 min.146 The mechanism proposed for gelation was based on the dsDNA unwinding to single stranded DNA (ssDNA) upon heating (corroborated by the dramatic increase in the modulus of the aqueous mixture of GO and dsDNA when temperature raised from 40 to 90 °C) and the subsequent linking of adjacent GO sheets via strong interaction with the ssDNA chains. Interestingly, the GO/DNA composite self-assembled hydrogels were stable in a variety of harsh conditions, from strong acidic (pH 2) to basic (pH 13) up to salty (1 M NaCl) aqueous solutions, or even in organic solvents such as tetrahydrofuran (THF). The as-prepared GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogels proved effective for dye adsorption and exhibited an intriguing self-healing property (Fig. 19). Within this context, GO/hemoglobin (Hb) composite supramolecular hydrogels have also been prepared by mixing the aqueous dispersions of both components and violent shaking of the resulting blend for about 15 s.147 The oxidation of pyrogallol by H2O2 was chosen as a model reaction to test the activity of the enzyme-containing hydrogel (Fig. 20). Interestingly, not only activity, but also the stability found for the GO/Hb hydrogel was much higher than those of Hb itself in organic solvents, revealing a great potential in industrial applications (e.g. as organic synthesis and enzymatic biotransformations) for the composite hydrogel. Fig. 19  (a) Scheme representing the procedure of preparing GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogels and the proposed gelation mechanism. (b) Effects of pH, NaCl, buffer, and organic solvent on GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogels stability. From left to right: water (pH = 2), water (pH = 13), NaCl aqueous solution (1 M), phosphate buffer (pH = 8, 10 mM) and THF. Each of the above solution (0.8 mL) was added slowly onto typical self-assembled hydrogels (0.2 mL), and the sample was allowed to stand at room temperature for one week. (c and d) SEM images with low and high magnifications of GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogel interior microstructures. (e) Self-healing process: the as-prepared free-standing self-assembled hydrogel was cut with a razor into three small blocks and the blocks could adhere to each other by pushing the freshly formed surfaces to contact together followed by heating at 90 °C in air for 3 min. (Adapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).  Fig. 20  (A) Scheme of the peroxidatic reaction; (B) the extended 90 min reaction courses in methylene dichloride with different catalysts; (C) the reaction courses for the first 5 min in methylene dichloride with different catalysts. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry). We would like to conclude this section mentioning the very recent work by Seo and coworkers.148 In this case, sponge-like bulk GO materials (or even series of multilayer free-standing films) were assembled from colloidal suspensions of bare GO sheets (e.g. without any further additive) by the combined effect of the vacuum evaporation, temperature and centrifugal force. For instance, GO sponges were produced when the temperature of the centrifugal vacuum chamber was 40 °C, while uniform free-standing GO films were obtained at 80 °C. Thermal annealing at 800 °C and under H2/Ar flow resulted in the formation of reduced GO sponges and films with less than 5 wt% oxygen. Also without the addition of further additives, Nguyen and coworkers have recently described the hydrogelation of GO by ultrasonication. In this process, sonication fractured the GO nanosheets to produce smaller fragments whose freshly exposed bare sheet edges lacked of the carboxylic acid functional groups.149 Considering that carboxylic groups serve to stabilize the sheets in solution, gelation was ascribed to the change in the GO surface chemistry.2.2 Aerogels obtained upon the reduction of GO aqueous suspensionsAs observed above, GO sheets can be dispersed in water to form a stable colloidal dispersion because the electrostatic repulsion between GO sheets, resulting from their ionized carboxyl groups, prevents their aggregation in aqueous medium. In colloidal chemistry, it is well-known that gelation can be induced by simply changing the electrostatic repulsion forces between colloids. This principle could be applied to a GO dispersion as well. To some extent, GO can be regarded as an amphiphilic macromolecule. However, the sizes of large GO sheets (several micrometers) are much larger than those of conventional polymers. Therefore, they can contact with each other even in a dilute solution. The acidification of a GO dispersion can lead to insufficient mutual repulsion—because of carbonyl groups protonation—and thus, to the formation of a graphite oxide flocculent or even a hydrogel when the GO concentration is above a certain threshold value (e.g. >4 mg mL−1).150 In these cases, the lyophilized GO dispersion typically showed a 3D network composed of GO sheets that, for GO dilutions as low as 3 mg mL−1, maintained the volume of the original solution.First reports on the preparation of GO-based 3D architectures following this simple colloidal chemistry approach were based on the submission of a homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion to a hydrothermal treatment either in the presence or in the absence of further additives. Wang and coworkers used a GO suspension that also contained a noble-metal salt and glucose151 whereas no further components than GO were used by Shi and coworkers.152 After freeze-drying, the resulting monoliths exhibited a macroporous cellular-type morphology, the framework of which was formed upon physical cross-linking by the partial overlapping or coalescing of flexible graphene sheets (Fig. 21). For synthesis carried out in the presence of noble metals, the morphology could be tuned by the use of different noble metals as catalyzers (e.g. Au, Pt, Ir, or Ru) whereas, in the absence of noble metals, both the GO concentration at the suspension and the length of the hydrothermal treatment also proved effective in tuning the morphology (Fig. 22). Interestingly, the structure was always mechanically strong enough to support weights of at least a few hundreds of grams even though the monolith itself only weighs some few tens of milligrams. In addition to the excellent apparent mechanical strength, these monoliths exhibited a pretty decent electrical conductivity of around 10−3 S cm−1. In a recent work, Ruoff and coworkers have also demonstrated the validity of this approach for preparation of graphene sponges exhibiting a high efficiency in the absorption of not only petroleum products and fats, but also toxic solvents such as toluene and chloroform.153 Simple heat treatment allowed regeneration and reutilization of the sponges, with full release of adsorbates (>99%) over more than 10 regeneration processes. Synthetic approaches carried out at high-temperatures and high vapour pressures can also applied to GO aqueous dispersions mixed with organic co-solvents. Thus, the GO-based 3D architectures obtained upon the solvothermal reduction of a GO dispersion in propylene carbonate (PC) can be used as an electrode material for fabricating supercapacitors with a PC electrolyte.154 The supercapacitor cell was suitable for operation in a wide voltage range of 0–3 V and exhibited a specific capacitance of 140 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 1 A g−1 that decreased to 90 F g−1 when the current density increased to 30 A g−1. Fig. 21  (a) Photographs of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h; (b) photographs of a strong SGH allowing easy handling and supporting weight; (c–e) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures; (f) the room temperature I–V curve of the SGH exhibiting Ohmic characteristics, the inset shows the two-probe method for the conductivity measurements. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).  Fig. 22  (a) SEM micrographs of the sample prepared when the concentration of the GO suspension was 0.1 mg mL−1. (c and d) SEM micrographs of the sample obtained when the concentration of the GO suspension was 0.07 mg mL−1. SEM images of the 3D structure containing Au (e), Pt (f), Ir (g), and Ru (h). (i and j) TEM micrographs of GO bearing Pd nanoparticles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH). Since these pioneering works, hydrothermal treatments have been widely applied for the preparation of gel-like 3D reduced GO structures using both inorganic and organic compounds as additional reducing agents. For instance, Jiang et al. reported on the application of hydrothermal treatment at 120 °C over 10 h of aqueous dispersions of GO also containing divalent ions (Ca2+, Ni2+ or Co2+).155 As described above for CNT-based 3D architectures,58 the analogue GO-based 3D structure could be strengthened upon the immersion of the as-prepared GO monolithic cylinder in a PVA aqueous solution for 5 min and then freeze-dried. Macroscopic multifunctional graphene-based hydrogels with robust interconnected networks can be also obtained under the synergistic effects of the reduction of GO sheets by ferrous ions and in situ deposition of the resulting NPs onto the graphene sheets. Thus, control of the pH value under mild conditions allowed the incorporation of either α-FeOOH nanorods or magnetic Fe3O4 NPs into the 3D structure and provided functionality to the resulting monoliths.156 In particular, these materials proved efficacy as adsorbents for the removal of pollutants from waste waters (Fig. 23). Within this context of using iron salts, Wu et al. hydrothermally treated an aqueous GO dispersion also containing iron acetate and polypyrrole so that, besides gelation, Fe3O4 NPs nucleated and grew on the graphene surface with simultaneous incorporation of nitrogen species into the graphene lattice.157 The as-prepared hydrogel was freeze-dried and then heated at 600 °C to finally obtain a black monolithic hybrid aerogel composed of N-doped graphene networks and Fe3O4 NPs that exhibited an excellent electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline electrolytes. The high current density, low ring current, low H2O2 yield, high electron transfer number (∼4), and good durability of these materials paved the way for their potential application as a non-precious metal cathode catalyst in fuel cells. Fig. 23  Panel 1: Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the graphene/iron oxide hydrogels. Panel 2: (a) Photograph of the magnetic property of the hydrogel under a magnet. SEM image with low (b) and high (c) magnification of the interior microstructures of the freeze-dried graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel prepared in the presence of 0.5 mmol of FeSO4 at pH 11. (d) TEM image of the microstructures of the hydrogel after sonication. Panel 3: (a) Photographs showing the process of the graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel adsorbing gasoline. The graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel was dried from the hydrogel prepared with a 10 mL of GO (2 mg mL−1) suspension at pH 3 in the presence of 0.5 mmol of FeSO4. The gasoline was labelled with Sudan III for clear presentation. (b) Regeneration capacity of the aerogels for adsorbing gasoline. Gasoline can be removed by putting the aerogel in the oven at 100 °C for recycled use. (c) Adsorption capacities of the aerogels for a range of organic solvents and oils in terms of their weight gain. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society). Typical reducing agents either combined or not with hydrothermal treatments can also be used for preparation of graphene xerogels. For instance, Yang and coworkers combined the use of KMnO4 with a low-temperature hydrothermal treatment (at 100 °C) for the achievement of 3D graphene macro assemblies composed of compact shells and porous cores158 whereas Kim and coworkers used a mixture of hypophosphorous acid–iodine mixture under atmospheric conditions for preparation of ultra-low density graphene xerogels that exhibited good electrical conductivity (up to 5.0 S cm−1) and high C/O atomic ratio (14.7).159 Within this context, Hz160 and hydriodic acid (HI)161 have been the most widely used reducing agents. The former offered the capability of producing aqueous dispersions of reduced GO without needing further stabilizers whereas the reduced GO powders provided by the latter have exhibited extremely high (e.g. up to 300 S cm−1) electrical conductivity. More recently, L-ascorbic acid also exhibited the capability to reduce GO to graphene by simple heating (i.e. under atmospheric conditions and without stirring) an aqueous suspension of GO for a couple of hours. The authors mentioned that, as compared to other reducing agents (e.g. Hz, NaBH4, LiAlH4, etc.), L-ascorbic acid provided no gaseous by-products, the lack of which was critical for the preparation of uniform gels.162 The graphene aerogels resulting after submission of the graphene hydrogel to either supercritical CO2 drying or freeze-drying were ultralightweighted but tough (capable of supporting more than 14000 times their own weight), and exhibited high surface areas and electrical conductivity. More recently, reducing agents like NaHSO3, Na2S, Vitamin C, hydroquinone, ammonia boron trifluoride, or sodium ascorbate have been used as well for the preparation of 3D graphene architectures.163–165 Interestingly, one could also accomplish GO reduction by NaHSO3 in the presence of preformed Fe3O4 NPs, thus providing a suitable process—after freeze-drying—for the preparation of electrically conductive magnetic 3D architectures in which Fe3O4 NPs were embedded within the graphene network.166 It is worth noting that most of these macroporous materials exhibited an interesting performance as electrodes in both Li-ion batteries and supercapacitor cells. Bioinspired approaches taking advantage of the affinity between the outer surface of the bacteria membrane and iron ions have also been explored. Thus, bacteria/Fe3+ complexes formed upon simple mixing the bacterial cells with an aqueous solution of FeCl3 at 4 °C can be used as structure directing agents in the preparation of GO-based 3D architectures.167 The intriguing structure resulting after simple freeze-drying (hydrothermal treatment was not used in this case) endowed these carbon materials with some desirable features (porosity, surface area, and foreign atom) for their successful application as electrodes in supercapacitors with remarkable specific capacitances of up to 327 F g−1 and good cyclability using an aqueous solution of H2SO4 as electrolyte (Fig. 24). Fig. 24  (a) CV curves of P–F–GO–E at different scan rates, (b) the magnification of (a) from 1 mV s−1 to 20 mV s−1, (c) specific capacitance of P–F–GO–E at different current densities. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry). Reducing treatments can be applied not only before gelation (i.e. to induce it), but also after gelation for strengthening of preformed structures. Thus, Giannelis and coworkers applied a unidirectional-freezing process to an aqueous dispersion of GO, nafion, and chloroplatinic acid.168 After freeze-drying and structure formation, the macroporous samples were treated with Hz or monosodium citrate to promote the in situ reduction of GO and chloroplatinic acid into graphene nanosheets and Pt NPs, respectively. The microcellular scaffolds combine high levels of ionic (from Nafion) and electronic (from graphene) conductivity along with catalytic activity (from Pt) and, thus, are ideal candidates for fuel cell applications and biosensors. Shi and coworkers have also studied this sort of reducing treatments post-aerogel formation. In this case, graphene hydrogels obtained by a one-step hydrothermal treatment were further reduced with either Hz or HI.169 After dialysis, the resulting hydrogels were immersed in an aqueous solution of KOH to exchange the embedded water with an electrolyte, and evaluated as electrodes in supercapacitor cells. As compared to graphene hydrogels non-subjected to this additional reducing treatment, these hydrogels exhibited a remarkable improvement in the retention of the capacity (e.g. nearly 74% up to 100 A g−1) (Fig. 25). Finally, Lin et al. demonstrated that preformed GO aerogels, obtained from an aqueous dispersion of bare GO by simple freeze-drying, can be thermally reduced in an argon atmosphere at 1050 °C. The resulting graphene aerogels were hydrophobic and become superhydrophobic upon the application of a fluorinated surfactant throughout the internal surface of the 3D architecture.170 Fig. 25  Plots of specific capacitance versus discharging current density for grapheme hydrogels further reduced with HI (GH-HI in a) and Hz (GH-Hz in b) compared to non-further reduced ones (GH-H). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society). 2.3 Graphene-surface modified aerogels2.3.1 Chemical vapor deposition of GO on preformed nickel foams. Cheng and coworkers first developed a general strategy for the synthesis of 3D graphene foams using template-directed CVD.171 The procedure consisted of the decomposition of CH4 at 1000 °C under ambient pressure in the presence of a porous structure with an interconnected 3D macroporous structure of nickel (Fig. 26). Graphene films were then precipitated on the surface of the nickel foam. A thin layer of PMMA was subsequently deposited on the surface of the graphene films as a support to prevent the graphene network from collapsing during nickel etching. After etching away the nickel skeleton by a HCl (or FeCl3) solution, hot acetone was applied for the removal of the PMMA layer. The resulting graphene-foam monoliths exhibited a continuous and interconnected graphene 3D network in which all the graphene sheets were in direct contact with each other without breaks, coping and inheriting the interconnected 3D scaffold structure of the nickel-foam template—despite the occurrence of a small shrinkage of the graphene skeleton. These graphene foam-like 3D networks have proved efficacy as gas-sensing devices thanks to the integration of the inherent ultra-high sensitivity of graphene sheets into a mechanically robust and flexible macroscale 3D network.172 Moreover, the capability to expel chemisorbed molecules from the foam's surface by Joule-heating led to fully reversible and low-power operation systems. All these features in combination with the easiness to assemble the 3D graphene foams into a device with good electrical contact (without lithography) made them rival in durability and affordability with traditional sensors. Meanwhile, infiltrating graphene with PDMS resulted in the formation of composites that exhibited good flexibility and could be bent, stretched, and twisted without breaking. Both graphene and graphene/PDMS composites show a very high electrical conductivity of ca. 10 S cm−1 at an ultralow graphene loading of ca. 0.5 wt% (0.22 vol%).171 Graphene/PDMS composites also exhibited remarkable elastic properties so that they could recover their original form even after 10000 cycles for a bend radius of 2.5 mm. Based on this excellent electromechanical stability, graphene/PDMS composites were envisaged as a key component of stretchable and curvilinear large-area electronics such as sensory skins for robotics, structural health monitors and wearable communication devices. Fig. 26  Scheme representing the CVD growth of graphene foams using nickel (Ni) foams as template. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright (2011) Nature Publishing Group). After the seminal work by Cheng and coworkers, Ruoff and coworkers explored the use of different etching agents for Ni removal in the formation of thick- and thin-wall 3D graphene foams.173 They found that Ni etching processes based on ferric nitrate (Fe(NO3)3) and ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8) were much slower and gentler than that based on dilute HCl, which caused bubble formation during etching (Fig. 27). They also found that, for thin-wall graphene foams, the quality of the 3D structure obtained after etching increased significantly, particularly in thin-wall graphene foams. This novel etching process allowed controlling the density of the resulting 3D graphene foam and this factor was ultimately critical for the temperature-dependent electron and phonon transport of these materials. Fig. 27  SEM micrographs of the strut walls of freestanding graphene-based foams obtained upon the use of HCl (a), Fe(NO3)3 (b and c) or (NH4)2S2O8 (e and f) as etching agents for Ni removal. All scale bars are 50 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society). The excellent electrical conductivity of the 3D graphene architectures obtained by CVD makes them also suitable as electrodes for different applications, from DMFCs and MFCs to supercapacitors up to lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries. For methanol oxidation purposes, Pt NPs were typically required as catalyser. The 3D graphene architectures were surface functionalized with Pt-NPs—as catalyser—using pulse electrodeposition techniques that ensured not only control of particle size, uniform distribution, and strong adhesion of the NPs throughout the entire internal surface of the substrate, but also Pt-NPs accessibility for the electrochemical oxidation of methanol. The excellent Pt accessibility in combination with the high conductivity provided by the graphene network was critical for the achievement of high catalytic efficiencies.174 Moreover, polyaniline (PANI) hybridized 3D graphene foams can be used as anodes in MFCs. The electrode was prepared by PANI deposition on the surface of the graphene foams obtained after Ni etching with HCl by aniline-monomer impregnation and rapid mixture polymerization under acidic conditions and using (NH4)2S2O8 as the catalyst.175 The performance of the 3D graphene/PANI architecture as an MFC anode was remarkable thanks to the high bacterial biofilm loading and the efficient extracellular electron transfer (Fig. 28). Fig. 28  SEM micrographs of graphene/PANI (a–c) and carbon cloth (d–f) electrodes after 60 h incubation in MFC with S. oneidensis MR-1 cell suspension. With a higher magnification, images (b) and (e) were taken at the electrode surface while images (c) and (f) were focused on the electrode interior. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society). 3D graphene/PANI foams have been used as electrodes not only in MFCs, but also in supercapacitor cells. The performance of these foams as monolithic electrodes in supercapacitor cells was demonstrated by the achievement of specific capacitances of around 346 F g−1 and good cycling stability.176 Finally, Tang et al. described the use of a N-methyl pyrrolidinone (NMP) suspension of as-prepared lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4, obtained from a ball-milling mixture of LiH2PO4, FeC2O4·2H2O and sucrose, thermally treated at 350 °C in an argon atmosphere) for impregnation of the 3D graphene architecture.177 The graphene–LiFePO4 composite exhibited high reversible capacity and good rate performance when used as electrode in high rate Li-ion batteries. However, it is worth noting that the electrode was the powdered sample (mixed with acetylene black and polyvinylidene fluoride—PVDF—as binder) rather than the monolithic one. In a recent work, Ruoff and coworkers have obtained a robust graphene foam by exposing the nickel foam to CH4 at 1050 °C for 1 h and a subsequent slow cooling down (Fig. 29).178 In this procedure, the nickel is saturated by carbon at 1050 °C so that most of it precipitates at the surface of the nickel foam struts during the slow cooling, forming a continuous graphite coating with a wall thickness of tens of nanometers. The authors remarked that this fabrication process differs from that reported by Cheng and coworkers in the wall thicknesses (i.e. above or below 10 graphene layers, respectively) so that the PMMA supporting layer was no longer needed in the current case. The procedure followed for the preparation of the electrode was also rather innovative; a graphene foam with a diameter of ∼7.6 mm and a thickness of ∼1.6 mm was impregnated with a slurry containing LiFePO4, carbon black, and PVDF at a weight ratio of 70:20:10 (wt%, dispersing in NMP as the solvent) and then dried at 80 °C under vacuum. This impregnation procedure resulted in no significant deformation of the 3D architecture—indicative of its mechanical strength—and allowed the LiFePO4 particles disperse homogeneous around the internal surface of the 3D architecture and strongly adhere to it. The elastic properties of the 3D architecture allowed the compression of the structure when assembled into the cell (ca. 10-fold, from 1.6 mm to 160 μm) while the macroporous structure—that provides access to the LiFePO4 particles—was preserved. As a result, this 3D electrodes presented excellent electrochemical stability in LiPF6-organic carbonate electrolytes at potentials up to 5 V versus Li/Li+ and enhanced both the rate capability and specific capacity of the battery as compared to regular electrodes (e.g. prepared by drop-casting the electrode slurry onto a 20 μm thick aluminium foil, see Fig. 30). Fig. 29  (a) Photograph of UGFs in different geometries. (b) SEM micrograph showing the microstructure of the ultrathin graphene foam. (c) SEM image of a broken strut within the ultrathin graphene foam. Note the hollow, triangular structure. (d) TEM image of the ultrathin graphene foam. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society).  Fig. 30  (a) Comparison of the specific capacities of ultrathin graphene foam and the Al-electrode, respectively, with a LiFePO4 loading of ∼12 mg cm−1 at different charge/discharge current densities. (b) Maximum specific capacity per electrode mass of ultrathin graphene foam shown in comparison with that of the Al-electrode of this work and previous reports using LiFePO4 on the Al foil at lower loadings as well as LiFePO4 on Ni foam. See ref. 176 for further information on these previous reports. (c) Cyclic voltammetry of ultrathin graphene foam, Al and Ni foils measured at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC (1:1 by volume) as the electrolyte and the Li foil as the counter/reference electrode. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society). Finally, it is worth mentioning that graphene foams grown by CVD could be surface modified with cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanowires by hydrothermal treatment. The 3D graphene–Co3O4 composite was used in both supercapacitor cells (i.e. with a specific capacitance of ∼1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability) and biosensors (with a ultrahigh sensitivity for glucose detection of 3.39 mA mM cm−2 and a remarkable lower detection limit of <25 nM).1792.3.2 Physical impregnation of graphene on preformed sponges. As described in Section 1.2 for CNTs, graphene-based 3D architectures can be prepared by simple impregnation of preformed 3D architectures with graphene sheets. Thus, Cui and coworkers prepared graphene-based sponges from polyurethane ones that were suitable (in terms of both performance and economy) as 3D electrodes in MFCs (Fig. 31).180 Meanwhile, Tai and coworkers used melamine sponges to create graphene-based 3D architectures with superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties of utility for separation and absorption of oils or organic solvents from water (Fig. 32).181 Zhang and coworkers have also used this impregnation-based approach for preparation of graphene-based aligned porous structures.182 For this purpose, they dissolved hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) and tetraethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) as monomers, and 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA, 1 wt% relative to TEGDMA) as UV initiator in several organic solvents (e.g. camphene, cyclohexane, and dioxane) and applied the unidirectional freezing process described above in Section 1.1. The frozen solution was polymerized on dry ice by exposition to UV light. Polymer formation allowed the preservation of the aligned porous structure even after warming up to room temperature and removal of solvent under vacuum. Soaking the porous polymer structure into an aqueous GO suspension, subsequent drying and then reduction with Hz resulted in the formation of 3D graphene composites that, besides electrically conductive (e.g. 1.91 × 10−4 S cm−1), were suitable as monolithic columns for chromatographic purposes. Finally, we would like to end this section mentioning the very recent work by Ruoff and coworkers describing the production of graphene castings by a pH-mediated hydrothermal reduction of GO suspensions also containing ammonia or NaOH. Combined with moulding methods, the process allowed controllable fabrication of compact high-density graphene macrostructures with various shapes; e.g. triangular prism, quadrangular prism, joint ring, crucible, screw stem, and gear, among others.183 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the plain sponge (left) with 3D open structure and the graphene sponge composite (right) with conformal graphene coating. (b) SEM micrograph of the graphene sponge showing the macroscale porous structure and the graphene surface (inset). (c–f) SEM images of a colonized graphene sponge anode after 50 days of operation at different scales. Microbial biofilms wrap the branches (d), but do not clog the macroscale pores (c). Most of the graphene sponge anode surface is covered by microorganisms (e) interconnected via microbial nanowires (f). (Adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry).  Fig. 32  Effect of graphene loading on the water contact angle of the pure sponge (a). Relationship between pH values and contact angles of the graphene-based sponges after 12 h floating on aqueous solutions with different pH values (b). Photograph of pure (white color) and graphene-based (black color) sponges after being placed on water, the inset is a photograph of the graphene-based sponge partially immersed in water by a force (c). Water droplets as quasi-spheres and motor oil trace on the surface of the graphene-based sponge (d), the inset in (d) is an optical image of a water droplet at a contact angle of 162°. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry). 3. 3D architectures and aerogels containing both graphene and CNTsIn this review, we have shown the interesting 3D architectures that can be prepared using either CNTs or graphene—separately—as building blocks. The combination of both allotropes, CNT and graphene, also hold great promise in a number of applications because of the intriguing properties and synergies that can result from the simultaneous assembly of 2D graphene sheets and 1D-CNTs. Moreover, CNTs can bridge the defects for electron transfer as well as increase the layer spacing between graphene sheets. For instance, synergistic assembly of GO, SWCNTs and conjugate polymer PEDOT:PSS in aqueous solution created an adhesive and conductive glue that was highly suitable as electrode in ultracapacitors.184 Within the context of quasi-solid state electrolytes, Yun'ko and coworkers demonstrated that mixtures containing graphene, SWCNTs and 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII) ionic liquid (IL) displayed an increase in light conversion efficiencies not only as compared to pure PMII, but also to the individual mixtures of PMII with either SWCNTs or graphene.185 The authors suggested that this significant increase occurred because of the efficient electron transfer in the IL-mediated self-organisation of graphene and SWNT nanomaterials. Meanwhile, Coleman and coworkers demonstrated that the conductivity and shear resistance of transparent hybrid SWCNT films increased noticeably upon the incorporation of graphene (with a peak in the DC conductivity for 3 wt% graphene) while yet maintaining high transmittances.186 These beautiful works are just representative of quite a few publications exploring the improvement of different properties in film structures composed of CNTs and graphene.187–190One of the most straightforward approaches to synergistically integrate CNTs and graphene is the vertical growth of CNTs on graphene films.191 A modification of this interesting approach was afterwards exploited for the formation of 3D nanostructures upon the vertical growth of CNTs pillars in between the graphene layers that become available after GO exfoliation. The experimental procedure, allowing the controlled growth of CNTs on graphene, simply consisted of the dispersion (with the aid of ultrasounds) of CNTs (previously purified and cut in a mixture of H2SO4/HNO3) on an aqueous GO suspension over 1 hour, filtration and desiccation of the resulting mixture, and thermal treatment at 750 °C for 1 hour in an argon atmosphere.192 Alternatively, CNTs could also be grown on GO by placing powdered GO in a quartz tube furnace, heating it to 700 °C under a H2 (20 sccm) and Ar (65 sccm) mixture gas and injecting either benzene or pyridine into the reactor for the preparation of, respectively, CNT- or nitrogen-doped CNT-graphene 3D nanostructures.193 Both the 3D CNT-graphene nanostructures prepared from pre-formed CNTs and those where CNTs grown in situ on GO exhibited outstanding performance as, respectively, electrodes in supercapacitors (providing specific capacitances of around 385 F g−1 using KOH as an aqueous electrolyte) and cathodes in fuel cells (providing high catalytic activity for oxygen reduction reaction).Nonetheless, it is worth distinguishing between these 3D nanostructures and the 3D architectures (3D aerogels) reviewed in this manuscript. While recognizing the tremendous relevance of 3D nanostructures composed of both CNTs and graphene, it is not our aim to provide a detailed description of them in this review. Actually, there is (at least) one excellent review already covering this area.194 Thus, as in previous sections, we will just focus on “true” 3D architectures and aerogels in which the third dimension is within the range of the other two. For instance, Zhang and coworkers reported on this sort of architectures (Fig. 33) in a pioneering work195 that described a green process for the preparation of CNT–graphene hybrid aerogels that are suitable as substrates for water purification purposes. The process was based on the homogeneous mixing (under sonication) of pre-dispersed GO sheets and MWCNTs (either pristine or acid functionalized) to obtain homogeneous MWCNT–GO complexes. After that, addition of Vitamin C and a catalytic amount of HCl induced the formation of a hydrogel, the supercritical CO2 drying of which finally provided a 3D aerogel. The resulting ultralight CNT–graphene hybrid aerogels showed large surface areas (435 m2 g−1) and reasonably high conductivities (7.5 × 10−2 S cm−1). The combination of these features allowed the use of CNT-graphene 3D aerogels as capacitive deionization electrodes in desalination of brackish water with a remarkable desalination capacity of 633.3 mg g−1 in 35000 mg L−1 NaCl aqueous solution that was nearly 16-fold higher than that reported for previous materials used for this purpose. Moreover, CNT-graphene 3D aerogels also exhibited excellent scavenging capability for basic dyes and heavy metal ions as sorbents and binding species. Fig. 33  SEM micrographs of the resulting graphene–MWCNT (a and b) and graphene–c-MWCNT (c and d) hybrid aerogels. Arrows in (b) and (d) are the indication of the CNTs. Adsorption of dyes (A: methylene blue, B: fuchsin, C: rhodamine B, D: acid fuchsin) by graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (e) and binding of heavy metal ions with graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (f). For comparison, the related data collected with graphene alone aerogel were also shown in (f). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry). Within the context of 3D graphene–CNT hybrids, Dong et al. have described a smart approach based on a two-step CVD under atmospheric pressure that first consisted on the above-mentioned growth of graphene on a Ni foam, followed by the impregnation of the resulting graphene–Ni foam with an aqueous NiCl2 solution also containing polyethylene glycol, on top of which CNTs were grown upon the application of an additional CVD treatment.196 The resulting free-standing 3D graphene–CNT hybrids obtained after removal of the original Ni foam were used as electrochemical electrodes for sensing applications. In particular, the authors demonstrated the capability to, after modification of the electrode with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) molecules, detect dopamine and H2O2 (directly in the former case and indirectly in the latter) with high sensitivity and low lower-detection-limit. Such excellent performance has been attributed to (1) the large surface (active) area of 3D graphene; (2) the high charge transfer rate ensured by the exceptionally high conductivity of graphene and 3D multiplexed conductive pathways of graphene foam; and (3) the macroporous structure of graphene foam which ensures efficient mass transport of the diffusional redox species. The same authors have also shown how 3D graphene foams can selectively detect dopamine with remarkable sensitivity and lower detection limit.197 Besides the above-mentioned features provided by 3D graphene foams in this field, the latter sensor also benefited from the intimate interactions (hydrophobic and π–π interactions) between dopamine molecules and graphene promotes electron transfer from dopamine.4. Outlook and future directionsThis review aims providing a comprehensive description of the diverse synthetic approaches that can be used for preparation of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures and aerogels. Despite the numerous papers revised in this work, we consider that the study of hierarchical composites based on CNTs and graphene is still in its infancy as demonstrated by the exponential growth of publications in this field during the last two years; i.e. ca. 75% of the works revised herein are publications from 2011 and 2012. This is most likely due to the outstanding potential for application that these 3D architectures exhibit in areas like energy and environmental remediation that, nowadays, are of great relevance for the future development of the society. From a practical point of view, the reason behind this tremendous activity also resides in the interesting concept of creating both structural and functional hierarchical composites with improved performance through easy (at least, in most of the cases) preparation processes. Within this context, those treatments allowing the preparation of homogeneous suspensions of both CNTs and GO in water have been critical because of the possibility to combine these carbon allotropes with a number of both small and large molecules (e.g. oligomers and polymers) in aqueous solutions. These compounds are of help not only for the processing of these aqueous solutions/suspensions into 3D architectures and aerogels, but also to control the morphology of the resulting macrostructure, and even to provide additional properties and hence, expand the range of applications of the resulting materials.The combined revision of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architecture performed in this work also offers an interesting perspective. First discovery of CNTs in 1991 determined the pioneering character of this allotrope for the preparation of 3D architectures. However, it is obvious that the great interest that surrounded CNTs after their discovery has been dwarfed (at least partially) by the swell of interest in graphene. This review allows a straightforward comparison between the preparation methods and the performance of 3D architectures based on CNTs and graphene in different applications. Actually, we can notice how graphene took advantage of the path opened by CNTs and some of the processes used for preparation of CNT-based 3D architectures were used onwards for preparation of graphene-based 3D architectures as well. For instance, the preparation of aqueous suspensions with the aid of organic compounds (e.g. organogelators or polymers, among others) that are subsequently subjected to freeze- or supercritical CO2 drying processes is a common synthetic approach that was originally explored for preparation of CNT-based 3D architectures and later on extended to the preparation of graphene-based ones. Less similar are the CVD techniques described for preparation of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures, using flat substrates in the former case and Ni foams in the latter. However, while the CVD techniques used for CNTs would be hardly successful for preparation of graphene foams, the use of Ni foams for preparation of CNT-based 3D architectures seems to be plausible and attempts in this direction could be seen in the near future. Nonetheless, we consider that one of the most interesting aspects of this review is that it points out that the gelation capability upon GO reduction is, in terms of preparation, an obvious advantage versus CNTs. Thus, we could say that we are facing one of those cases where the copy (e.g. graphene) improved on the original (e.g. CNTs) and this is most likely one of the main reasons for the much larger number of works published during the last few years on graphene-based 3D architectures than on CNT-based ones.This conclusion is further emphasized when one looks at the performance of the devices prepared from CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures. In both cases, applications took advantage of the traditional features of carbon materials. For instance, we have seen how the excellent adsorption capabilities of both types of materials—in combination with the pores hierarchy provided by the 3D structure that allow mass transport and accessibility to the active surface—are exploited for separation purposes (e.g. as chromatographic monoliths) as well as for water purification treatments of not only soluble pollutants (e.g. basic dyes and heavy metal ions) in waste waters, but also immiscible oils or organic solvents in aqueous biphasic systems. Nonetheless, the use of these materials as electrodes in DMFCs and MFCs, supercapacitors, and Li-ion batteries is the field where they have been most widely applied. In this case, besides the hierarchical character of the 3D porous structures, we are taking advantage of their excellent electrical conductivity. A close inspection of the electrical conductivity of the 3D architectures reviewed in this manuscript reveals that, for 3D architectures obtained from aqueous suspensions of either CNTs or GO, CNT-based 3D architectures were typically more electrically conductive than graphene-based ones (Table 1). This apparent advantage of CNT-based 3D architectures can however be minimized when they are used as electrodes. For instance, we have mentioned in this review that Cui et al. fabricated both CNT- and graphene-sponges by coating a polyurethane sponge with either CNTs or GO, respectively, and used them as electrodes in MFCs.81,180 According to the experimental part of these works, the performance of these two sponges (that were analogous in terms of preparation) as electrodes in MFCs was also assessed under identical experimental conditions, so that a straightforward comparison is allowed. The electrical conductivity of the CNT-based sponges was nearly two orders of magnitude higher than that of the graphene-based ones (1 S cm−1versus 0.01 S cm−1, respectively). However, upon the simple use of a stainless steel mesh as a current collector, the drawback in electrical conductivity was experimentally circumvented and graphene-based sponges exhibited a comparable performance to that of CNT-based ones. Interestingly, the authors noticed that the cost of graphene-based electrodes is one order of magnitude less than CNT-based ones. One gets a similar impression from the performance as electrodes in supercapacitors described for CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures, even though the comparison is not as straightforward as above. In any case, both the specific capacitances at low current densities as well as the capacitance retentions at high current densities are typically higher for graphene (e.g. 220 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 170 F g−1 at 120 A g−1)169 than for CNT-based 3D architectures (e.g. 120 at 1 A g−1 and 90 F g−1 at 29 A g−1)66 (Table 1). The reason behind this behaviour probably resides in the elastic character of the graphene-based 3D architectures, which favour the electrical contact with the current collector when the electrode is assembled into the supercapacitor cell. In any case, it is worth mentioning that the use of CVD techniques provides graphene-based 3D architectures with excellent electrical conductivities (Table 1), even higher than those of CNT-based ones, but it is obvious that this happens at the expense of cost-effectiveness. Thus, we could summarize saying that, despite the neat performance of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures may be similar, the latter offers certain advantages over the former (easy preparation of more efficient—thanks to their elastic properties—and economical devices) that favour their practical implementation as electrodes in cells for energy generation and storage as well as monoliths, filters or membranes in sustainable processes for catalysis and environmental remediation. Nonetheless, the most promising 3D architectures do not necessarily have to be prepared from either CNTs or graphene separately and, as discussed in Section 3, 3D architectures obtained upon the combination of both allotropes, CNTs and graphene, also hold great promise in a number of applications because of the intriguing properties and synergies that can result from the simultaneous assembly of 2D graphene sheets and 1D-CNTs. Actually, number of amazing works have already demonstrated these features in film structures composed of CNTs and graphene. However, the field of 3D architectures is almost unexplored.
Table 1 Summarized data with regard to the electrical, mechanical and textural properties, and to the performance as capacitors of some of the most relevant CNT and graphene 3D architectures

ReferenceElectrical conductivityRheological propertiesSpecific surface areaPorosityCapacitance52ca. 1–2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)—ca. 590–680 m2 g−1ca. 99%—533.1 S cm−1————551.2–6.9 × 10−2 S cm−1 (two-probe method)—280–400 m2 g−14.4–5.1 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)—560.67 S cm−1—580 m2 g−1——575 × 10−7 S cm−1————580.6 S cm−1 for non-reinforced ca. 10−5 S cm−1 for reinforced (two-probe method)The aerogel supported more than 8000 times its own weight———610.7–2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)E = 0.05–100 MPa———621.1 S cm−1 (four-probe method)—184 m2 g−1——641.1 S cm−1 for SWCNT aerogelE = 1.2 MPa for SWCNT aerogel742 m2 g−1——1.0 S cm−1 for SWCNT/SiO2 aerogelE = 7.3 MPa for SWCNT/SiO2 aerogel1.0 S cm−1 for SWCNT/SnO2 aerogelE = 1.0 MPa for SWCNT/SnO2 aerogel(four-probe method)E = 15.0–17.3 MPa for SWCNT/TiO2 aerogel664.8 S cm−1 (four-probe method)E = 11 MPa400–550 m2 g−165–83%120 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO490 F g−1 at 29 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 (each electrode was 1 mm thick and weighed 17 mg)69, 72, 73 and 742.5 S cm−1E = 5.0 MPa—4.0–9.4 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)—1.8 S cm−1 (cross-linked with glutaraldehyde) (four-probe method in every case)E = 2.5 MPa (cross-linked with glutaraldehyde)750.7 S cm−1 (frozen at −65 °C)E = 1.2 MPa (frozen at −65 °C)—45–69%—0.32 S cm−1 (short MWCNTs)E = 4.0 MPa (short MWCNTs)1.6 S cm−1 (chondroitin sulphate, CS)E = 7 MPa (CS)0.13 S cm−1 (CS and short MWCNTs)E = 5.3 MPa (CS and short MWCNTs)0.05 S cm−1 (gelatine)E = 8.4 MPa (gelatine)n/a (gelatine and short MWCNTs) (four-probe method in every case)E = 12.1 MPa (gelatine and short MWCNTs)77 and 781.0 S cm−1 (four-probe method)E = 3.2 MPa———8050 S cm−1——95.8%—811.0 S cm−1——ca. 98%—82——174 m2 g−1—1230 F g−1 at 5 A g−1500 F g−1 at 100 A g−1 (normalized by mass of MnO2)61.5 F g−1 at 5 A g−125 F g−1 at 100 A g−1 (normalized by mass of the electrode)83——174 m2 g−1—240 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4120 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO490 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M Et4NBF440 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M Et4NBF4190 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M LiClO475 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M LiClO485—E = 50 MPa at cycle 1 for strains below 20%—ca. 87%—E = 12 MPa at cycle 1 for strains between 20 and 70%E = 5.85 MPa at cycle 1000 for strains below 50%881.67 S cm−1 (two-probe method)E = 0.17 MPa for strains below 10%300–400 m2 g−1>99%—123—G′ = 30 kPa———124—G′ = 14.6 kPa for peptide 1———G′ = 41.4 kPa for peptide 2125—G′ = 60.6 kPa for arginine———G′ = 11.0 kPa for tryptophanG′ = 39.4 kPa for adenosine126—G′ = 12.7 kPa for PEI cross-linked hydrogels———G′ = 7.47 kPa for La3+ cross-linked hydrogels127—G′ = 1–102 kPa for hydrogels———G′ = 10−1–10−2 kPa for organogels129—G′ = 1 kPa———132 and 1331.0 S cm−1 (four-probe method)—584–1199 m2 g−1——1341.3 S cm−1 (four-probe method)—195–244 m2 g−1——1355.3 S cm−1E = 3.6–29.6 MPa763 m2 g−191.4–94.9%122 F g−1 at 50 mA g−1 in 6 M KOH78 F g−1 at 50 A g−1 in 6 M KOH136—E = 6 MPa for strains below 10%ca. 37 m2 g−1——138—G′ = 1–102 kPa———1413.1 × 10−2 S cm−1E = 0.6 GPa for 0.5 wt%ca. 700 m2 g−1——E = 0.57 GPa for 1.0 wt%1420.4 S cm−1 (four-probe method)————143—E = 0.45–0.75 GPa———144—E = 175 MPa———145—E = 1.7 kPa for F127 concentration of 0.25 wt%———E = 0.8 kPa for F127 concentration of 0.5 wt%E = 0.4 kPa for F127 concentration of 1.0 wt%146—G′ = 4.6 kPa———147—G′ = 4.1 kPa———149—G′ = 0.3 kPa for 30 min ultrasoundca. 180–220 m2 g−1——G′ = 1.6 kPa for 120 min ultrasound1512.5 × 10−3 S cm−1——— 1522.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 for HT over 1 hourG′ = 55 kPa for HT reduction over 1 hour——160 F g−1 at 1 A g−14.9 × 10−3 S cm−1 for HT over 12 hours (two-probe method)G′ = 470 kPa for HT reduction over 12 hours1542.0 × 10−2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)—166–146 m2 g−1—140 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in PC90 F g−1 at 30 A g−1156—E = 0.1 MPa———G′ = 50 kPaThe aerogel supported more than 5000 times its own weight1590.4–5.0 S cm−1E = 0.02–0.05 MPa36–158 m2 g−10.6–1.3 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)—1620.6 S cm−1 (four-probe method)E = 1.2–6.2 MPa in the elastic region512 m2 g−11.2–9.6 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)128 F g−1 at 50 mA g−1E = 0.3–2.2 MPa in the yield región76 F g−1 at 20 A g−1The aerogel supported more than 14000 times its own weight 1630.23 S cm−1 for vitamin CE = 0.13 MPa for NaHSO3——166 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 for NaHSO36.8 × 10−2 S cm−1 for Na2S1.1 S cm−1 for HI0.17 S cm−1 for NaHSO30.87 S cm−1 for NaHSO3 and tretated at 400°C (two-probe method in every case)1641.0 × 10−2 S cm−1 (two-probe method)G′ = 275 kPa——240 F g−1 at 1.2 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4165——249.0 m2 g−1—230 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4130 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO41661.5 × 10−2 S cm−1—95 m2 g−1——167——182 m2 g−1—327 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4160 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO41681.0 × 10−2 S cm−1E = 0.6 MPa for strains of 10%—ca. 92%—1691.3–3.2 × 10−2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)—778–964 m2 g−1—220 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 5 M KOH170 F g−1 at 120 A g−1 in 5 M KOH1703.8 × 10−7 S cm−1 (four-probe method)E = 0.6 GPa———171 and 17210 S cm−1 (two-probe method)—ca. 850 m2 g−1ca. 99.7%—176————346 F g−1 at 4 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO41776.0 × 102 S cm−1—500–600 m2 g−1——1781.3 × 103 S cm−1 (termal treated at 300 K)————1801.0 × 10−2 S cm−1————1821.9 × 10−4 S cm−1E increases from 290 kPa to 750 kPa up to 9 MPa depending on the aerogel porosity———1838.2 S cm−1The compressive strength is within the 300–400 MPa range———1957.5 × 10−2 S cm−1—435 m2 g−1——The field of catalysis should also be mentioned in this section because we consider that it is clearly underexplored. The use of carbon nanomaterials has grown in catalysis and electrocatalysis, and some promising results have already been obtained with CNTs and graphene used either as supports for immobilizing active species or as metal-free catalysts. Surprisingly, CNTs and graphene have been processed in the form of films most of the time as summarized by several interesting reviews.198,199 Actually, our review just contains a few reports on the use of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures as catalytic supports.84,91,137 Within the following years, we can envisage an increased number of scientific reports taking advantage of the porosity and flow characteristics of macroporous CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures to be used as flow-through reactors in separation and catalytic processes.Besides those applications in the fields of energy, catalysis, and sustainability, current health-related research is definitively an area of great interest and, despite the advances within the last few years being quite exciting, researchers are yet learning how to create new biocompatible materials with nanostructured features and superior performances. The ultimate goal is reproducing the natural nanoscale elements present in the human body and, thereby, developing new materials with improved biological activities. Both CNTs and GO can be effectively functionalized to act as carriers for a number of drugs, proteins and biological compounds, the release of which can thereafter selectively triggered. Functionalization can also confer these structures an enhanced biocompatible character and, eventually, create synergistic effects with other compounds to promote cell adhesion and/or differentiation.200,201 This field of research has been certainly explored with CNT-based 3D architectures and aerogels but results can be yet considered preliminary and much work has to be done. Meanwhile, this field of research is much less explored for graphene-based 3D architectures and only a few examples have been summarized in this review. Under these circumstances, we think that the forthcoming years will most likely offer us a significant enhancement of the research activity in this area.Within the context of biomaterials, we would like to mention the use of both CNTs and graphene in optical and electrochemical biosensors. For instance, graphene can act as a suitable substrate for enzyme adsorption that not only preserves enzyme functionally active, but also improves its thermostability at the adsorbed state.202,203 Meanwhile, within the context of optical bionsensors, a graphene-based chemiluminescence resonance energy transfer platform for homogeneous immunoassay of C-reactive protein (CRP, a key marker for human inflammation and cardiovascular diseases) has been designed by using a luminol/hydrogen peroxide chemiluminescence reaction catalyzed by HRP with an anti-CRP antibody conjugated to graphene nanosheets.204 These are just some recent examples on graphene-based devices, but there are excellent reviews in this field for both allotropes.205–207 Interestingly, examples where biosensors based on CNTs and graphene have been processed in the form of 3D architectures or aerogels are almost negligible.196 As mentioned above for catalytic applications, this is surprising considering that other macroporous materials (for instance, polymers and metals)208–210 have been widely used as biosensors for many years. Actually, the past few years have seen an explosion in the use of ordered mesoporous carbon and, although in a lesser extent, templated macroporous carbon as novel materials to design nanostructured electrodes devoted to sensing and biosensing because of the attractive features that these materials offer for exploitation in electrochemistry (e.g., good electronic conductivity, great porosity – high specific surface area, large pore volume and size – and widely open structure).211 These features are common to those offered by CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures and aerogels so that the use of these materials as biosensors is definitively open for research and we should see an increasing activity in the field within the following years.Considering the multidisciplinary character of all these fields of research (Table 2), their development and successful implementation will require the expertise of researchers from chemistry, physics, and nanotechnology, but also from different areas in engineering and medicine. We want to express our gratitude to all the researchers involved in the recent advances herein overviewed. We also want to apologize to the authors of those excellent works that, unintentionally, have been omitted. In any case, one of the goals of this review is to increase the visibility of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures and aerogels and call the attention of further research studies from both academia and industry, whose contribution will indeed be valuable. It is hoped that with the research effort of all of us, we will be able to witness the full development of CNT- and graphene-based 3D architectures and aerogels with enhanced performance in some of the above-mentioned applications and, why not, in new interesting applications not yet envisaged.
Table 2 Summary of the most relevant applications of CNT and graphene 3D architectures and of the method used for their preparation

ReferencePreparation methodApplication56From MWCNT suspensions with organogelators – GelationSensors – Pressure and chemical vapour detection66From MWCNT suspensions with DES – Formaldehyde polymerization (sol–gel)Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors68From MWCNT suspensions with PVA – Freeze-dryingCatalysis – Chemical adsorption69From MWCNT suspensions with chitosan – Freeze-dryingEnergy – Electrodes in DMFC72From MWCNT suspensions with chitosan – Freeze-dryingEnergy – Electrodes in MFC74–76From MWCNT suspensions with chitosan (and hydroxyapatite) – Freeze-dryingBiomaterials – Tissue Engineering79MWCNT impregnation on preformed collagen scaffoldsBiomaterials – Tissue Engineering81SWCNT impregnation on preformed aerogelsEnergy – Electrodes in MFC82, 83MWCNT impregnation on preformed aerogels and MnO2 surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors84CNT–alumina hydrosol co-impregnation on preformed foamsCatalysis89MWCNT array growth by modified CVDSensors – Strain detection90MWCNT array growth by modified CVDEnvironmental – Chemical removal91MWCNT array growth by modified CVD and CdS surface functionalizationCatalysis – Photocatalysis92MWCNT array growth by modified CVD and Pt surface functionalizationEnergy – Cathodes in PEM FC93MWCNT array growth by modified CVD and V2O5 surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in Li-ion batteries128From GO suspensions with acrylic monomers – Photoinitated polymerizationBiomaterials – Liquid microvalve for microdevices135From alkali-treated GO – Formaldehyde polymerization (sol–gel)Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors137From GO suspensions – Freeze-dryingCatalysis – SO2 adsorption and treatment139From GO suspensions with chitosan – Thermal treatmentEnvironmental – Chemical removal140From GO suspensions with PVA – Hydrogel formationBiomaterials – Drug delivery and controlled release143From either GO or graphene suspensions with molecular and polymeric dyes – ElectrospinningPhotonic materials – Ultra-short pulse generators145From GO suspensions with pluronicBiomaterials – Tissue engineering153From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatmentEnvironmental – Chemical removal154From GO suspensions – Solvotermal treatment in PCEnergy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors156From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatmentEnvironmental – Chemical removal157From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatment, Freeze-drying and CarbonizationEnergy – Non precious metal cathode167From GO suspensions with Fe3+ salts – Freeze-drying and Thermal treatmentEnergy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors169From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatment and Chemical post-reductionEnergy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors172Graphene growth by template directed CVDSensors – Gas detection174Graphene growth by template directed CVD and Pt surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in DMFC175Graphene growth by template directed CVD and polyaniline surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in MFC176Graphene growth by template directed CVD and polyaniline surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors178Graphene growth by template directed CVD and Li surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in Li-ion batteries179Graphene growth by template directed CVD and Co3O4 surface functionalizationEnergy – Electrodes in SupercapacitorsBiosensors – Glucose detection180Graphene impregnation on preformed polyurethane spongesEnergy – Electrodes in MFC181Graphene impregnation on preformed melamine spongesEnvironmental – Chemical removal182Graphene impregnation on preformed acrilate-based spongesSeparation – Monolithic columns195From GO and MWCNT suspensions – Reduction, Hydrogel formation and Supercritical dryingEnvironmental – Electrodes for Capacitive Desalinization Processes196,197Graphene growth by template directed CVD, NiCl2 surface functionalization and subsequent MWCNT growth by modified CVD (two CVD processes)Biosensors – Dopamine and H2O2 detectionAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by MINECO (projects MAT2012-34811, MAT2011-25329 and MAT2009-10214).ReferencesM.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Gold nanoparticles: assembly, supramolecular chemistry, quantum-size-related properties, and applications toward biology, catalysis, and nanotechnology, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS .S. Lin, M. Li, E. Dujardin, C. Girard and S. Mann, One-dimensional plasmon coupling by facile self-assembly of gold nanoparticles into branched chain networks, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2553–2559 CrossRef CAS .O. Núñez, K. Nakanishi and N. Tanaka, Preparation of monolithic silica columns for high-performance liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr., A, 2008, 1191, 231–252 CrossRef .L. Rieux, H. Niederländer, E. Verpoorte and R. Bischoff, Silica monolithic columns: synthesis, characterisation and applications to the analysis of biological molecules, J. Sep. Sci., 2005, 28, 1628–1641 CrossRef CAS .K. Miyabe and G. Guiochon, Characterization of monolithic columns for HPLC, J. Sep. Sci., 2004, 27, 853–873 CrossRef CAS .H.-C. Chien, W.-Y. Cheng, Y.-H. Wang and S.-Y. Lu, Ultrahigh specific capacitances for supercapacitors achieved by nickel cobaltite/carbon aerogel composites, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201201176 .D. Carriazo, F. Picó, M. C. Gutiérrez, F. Rubio, J. M. Rojo and F. del Monte, Block-copolymer assisted synthesis of hierarchical carbons suitable as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 20, 773–780 RSC .Y. Li, Z.-Y. Fu and B.-L. Su, Hierarchically structured porous materials for energy conversion and storage, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201200591 .H. Minakuchi, K. Nakanishi, N. Soga, N. Ishizuka and N. Tanaka, Octadecylsilylated porous silica rods as separation media for reversed-phase liquid chromatography, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 3498–3501 CrossRef CAS .K. Nakanishi, Y. Sagawa and N. Soga, Pore surface characteristics of macroporous silica gels prepared from polymer-containing solution, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1991, 134, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .K. Nakanishi, R. Takahashi and N. Soga, Dual-porosity silica gels by polymer-incorporated sol–gel process, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 147–148, 291–295 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Kistler, Coherent expanded aerogels and jellies, Nature, 1931, 127, 741 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Pekala, Organic aerogels from the polycondensation of resorcinol with formaldehyde, J. Mater. Sci., 1989, 24, 3221–3227 CrossRef CAS .H. Minakuchi, K. Nakanishi, N. Soga, N. Ishizuka and N. Tanaka, Octadecylsilylated porous silica rods as separation media for reversed-phase liquid chromatography, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 3498–3501 CrossRef CAS .W. W. Lukens and G. D. Stucky, Synthesis of mesoporous carbon foams templated by organic colloids, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1665–1670 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhao, P. Yang, N. Melosh, J. Feng, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Continuous mesoporous silica films with highly ordered large pore structures, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1380–1385 CrossRef CAS .C. Liang and S. Dai, Dual phase separation for synthesis of bimodal meso-/macroporous carbon monoliths, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2115–2124 CrossRef CAS .C. Liang and S. Dai, Synthesis of mesoporous carbon materials via enhanced hydrogen-bonding interaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5316–5317 CrossRef CAS .F. Svec, Recent developments in the field of monolithic stationary phases for capillary electrochromatography, J. Sep. Sci., 2005, 28, 729–745 CrossRef CAS .G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldia, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, Block copolymer-templated mesoporous oxides, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 109–126 CrossRef CAS .N. Leventis, Three-dimensional core–shell superstructures: mechanically strong aerogels, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 874–884 CrossRef CAS .B. Dunn and J. I. Zink, Molecules in glass: probes, ordered assemblies, and functional materials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 874–884 CrossRef .J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Recent progress in the synthesis of porous carbon materials, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073–2094 CrossRef CAS .J. Biener, M. Stadermann, M. Suss, M. A. Worsley, M. M. Biener, K. A. Rose and T. F. Baumann, Advanced carbon aerogels for energy applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 656–667 CAS .T. Yamamoto, T. Sugimoto, T. Suzuki, S. R. Mukai and H. Tamon, Preparation and characterization of carbon cryogel microspheres, Carbon, 2002, 40, 1345–1351 CrossRef CAS .A. Javey, J. Guo, Q. Wang, M. Lundstrom and H. Dai, Ballistic carbon nanotube field-effect transistors, Nature, 2003, 424, 654–657 CrossRef CAS .M. Orlita, C. Faugeras, P. Plochocka, P. Neugebauer, G. Martinez, D. K. Maude, A. L. Barra, M. Sprinkle, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer and M. Potemski, Approaching the dirac point in high-mobility multilayer epitaxial graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 267601–267604 CrossRef CAS .E. Pop, D. Mann, Q. Wang, K. Goodson and H. Dai, Thermal conductance of an individual single-wall carbon nanotube above room temperature, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 96–100 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Superior thermal conductivity of single-layer graphene, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Yu, B. S. Files, S. Arepalli and R. S. Ruoff, Tensile loading of ropes of single wall carbon nanotubes and their mechanical properties, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 5552–5555 CrossRef CAS .C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Measurement of the elastic properties and intrinsic strength of monolayer graphene, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .S. Iijima, Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .Y.-Q. Xu, E. Flor, M. J. Kim, B. Hamadani, H. Schmidt, R. E. Smalley and R. H. Hauge, Vertical array growth of small diameter single-walled carbon nanotubes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6560–6561 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Jung, S. Kar, S. Talapatra, C. Soldano, G. Viswanathan, X. Li, Z. Yao, F. S. Ou, A. Avadhanula, R. Vajtai, S. Curran, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Aligned carbon nanotube–polymer hybrid architectures for diverse flexible electronic applications, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .R. Duggal, F. Hussain and M. Pasquali, Self-assembly of single-walled carbon nanotubes into a sheet by drop drying, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Dalton, S. Collins, E. Muñoz, J. M. Razal, V. H. Ebron, J. P. Ferraris, J. N. Coleman, B. G. Kim and B. H. Baughman, Super-tough carbon-nanotube fibres, Nature, 2003, 423, 703 CrossRef CAS .D. Wei, Y. Liu, L. Cao, L. Fu, X. Li, Y. Wang, G. Yu and D. Zhu, A new method to synthesize complicated multi-branched carbon nanotubes with controlled architecture and composition, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Materials science: strong, transparent, multifunctional, carbon nanotube sheets, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhu, Y. Sun, D. W. Hess and C.-P. Wong, Well-aligned open-ended carbon nanotube architectures: an approach for device assembly, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .G. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, C. R. Martin and E. R. Fisher, Carbon nanotubule membranes for electrochemical energy storage and production, Nature, 1998, 393, 346–349 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, M. C. Gupta, K. L. Dudley and R. W. Lawrence, Novel carbon nanotube-polystyrene foam composites for electromagnetic interference shielding, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2131–2134 CrossRef CAS .R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. De Heer, Carbon nanotubes - the route toward applications, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yan, M. B. Chan-Park and Q. Zhang, Advances in carbon-nanotube assembly, Small, 2008, 3, 24–42 CrossRef .H. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Wu and S. Fan, Aligned carbon nanotube composite films for thermal management, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1652–1656 CrossRef CAS .P. Avouris, M. Freitag and V. Perebeinos, Carbon-nanotube photonics and optoelectronics, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 341–350 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Coleman, U. Khan, W. J. Blau and Y. K. Gun'ko, Small but strong: a review of the mechanical properties of carbon nanotube-polymer composites, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1624–1652 CrossRef CAS .W.-D. Zhang, I. Y. Phang and T. Liu, Growth of carbon nanotubes on clay: unique nanostructured filler for high-performance polymer nanocomposites, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .H. Qian, E. S. Greenhalgh, M. S. P. Shaffer and A. Bismarck, Carbon nanotube-based hierarchical composites: a review, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4751–4762 RSC .K. Hata, D. N. Futaba, K. Mizuno, T. Namai, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Water-assisted highly efficient synthesis of impurity-free single-walled carbon nanotubes, Science, 2004, 306, 1362–1364 CrossRef CAS .L. Liu, W. Ma and Z. Zhang, Macroscopic carbon nanotube assemblies: preparation, properties and potential applications, Small, 2011, 7, 1504–1520 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, C. Xue, R. Ramasubramaniam and H. Liu, A new method for the preparation of stable carbon nanotube organogels, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2142–2146 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Kohlmeyer, M. Lor, J. Deng, H. Liu and J. Chen, Preparation of stable carbon nanotube aerogels with high electrical conductivity and porosity, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2352–2361 CrossRef CAS .S. Roy and A. Banerjee, Functionalized single walled carbon nanotube containing amino acid based hydrogel: a hybrid nanomaterial, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2105–2111 RSC .L. Lascialfari, C. Vinattieri, G. Ghini, L. Luconi, D. Berti, M. Mannini, C. Bianchini, A. Brandi, G. Giambastiani and S. Cicchi, Soft matter nanocomposites by grafting a versatile organogelator to carbon nanostructures, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 10660–10665 RSC .X. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Xu, Y. Su and Y. Luo, Ultralight conducting polymer/carbon nanotube composite aerogels”, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1884–1893 CrossRef CAS .J. Zou, J. Liu, A. S. Karakoti, A. Kumar, D. Joung, Q. Li, S. I. Khondaker, S. Seal and L. Zhai, Ultralight multiwalled carbon nanotube aerogel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7293–7302 CrossRef CAS .G. N. Ostojic, Optical properties of assembled single-walled carbon nanotube gels, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2102–2107 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Bryning, D. E. Milkie, M. F. Islam, L. A. Hough, J. M. Kikkawa and A. G. Yodh, Carbon nanotube aerogels, Adv. Mater., 2007, 17, 661–664 CrossRef .H. Kim, M. Vural and M. F. Islam, Single-walled carbon nanotube aerogel-based elastic conductors, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2865–2869 CrossRef .J. G. Duque, C. E. Hamilton, G. Gupta, S. A. Crooker, J. J. Crochet, A. Mohite, H. Htoon, K. A. D. Obrey, A. M. Dattelbaum and S. K. Doorn, Fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotube aerogels in surfactant-free environments, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6686–6694 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Worsley, S. O. Kucheyev, J. H. Satcher Jr., A. V. Hamza and T. F. Baumann, Mechanically robust and electrically conductive carbon nanotube foams, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 073115 CrossRef .M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, S. O. Kucheyev, J. M. Zaug, A. V. Hamza, J. H. Satcher Jr. and T. F. Baumann, Properties of single-walled carbon nanotube-based aerogels as a function of nanotube loading, Acta Mater., 2009, 57, 5131–5136 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Worsley, J. H. Satcher Jr. and T. F. Baumann, Synthesis and characterization of monolithic carbon aerogel nanocomposites containing double-walled carbon nanotubes, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9763–9766 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Worsley, S. O. Kucheyev, J. D. Kuntz, T. Y. Olson, T. Y.-J. Han, A. V. Hamza, J. H. Satcher Jr. and T. F. Baumann, Carbon scaffolds for stiff and highly conductive monolithic oxide_carbon nanotube composites, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3054–3061 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Gutiérrez, F. Rubio and F. del Monte, Resorcinol-formaldehyde polycondensation in deep eutectic solvents for the preparation of carbons and carbon–carbon nanotube composites, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2711–2719 CrossRef .M. C. Gutiérrez, D. Carriazo, A. Tamayo, R. Jiménez, F. Picó, J. M. Rojo, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Deep eutectic solvents assisted synthesis of hierarchical carbon electrodes exhibiting capacitance retention at high current densities, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10553–10537 CrossRef .D. Carriazo, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Resorcinol-based deep eutectic solvents as both carbonaceous precursors and templating agents in the synthesis of hierarchical porous carbon monoliths, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6146–6152 CrossRef CAS .T. Skaltsas, G. Avgouropoulos and D. Tasis, Impact of the fabrication method on the physicochemical properties of carbon nanotube-based aerogels, Microporous and Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 143, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Gutiérrez, M. J. Hortigüela, J. M. Amarilla, R. Jiménez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Macroporous 3D architectures of self-assembled MWCNT surface decorated with Pt nanoparticles as anodes for a direct methanol fuel cell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5557–5560 Search PubMed .M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Ice templated materials: sophisticated structures exhibiting enhanced functionalities obtained after unidirectional freezing and ice segregation induced self-assembly, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 634–648 CrossRef .M. J. Hortigüela, M. C. Gutiérrez, I. Aranaz, M. Jobbagy, A. Abarrategi, C. Moreno-Vicente, A. Civantos, V. Ramos, J. L. López-Lacomba, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Urea assisted hydroxyapatite mineralization on MWCNT/CHI scaffolds, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5933–5940 RSC .K. Katuri, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez, R. Jiménez, F. del Monte and Donal Leech, Three-dimensional microchanelled electrodes in flow-through configuration for bioanode formation and current generation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4201–4210 CAS .M. C. Gutiérrez, Z. Y. García-Carvajal, M. J. Hortigüela, L. Yuste, F. Rojo, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Biocompatible MWCNT scaffolds for immobilization and proliferation of E. coli, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2992–2995 RSC .S. Nardecchia, M. C. Serrano, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. T. Portolés, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Osteoconductive performance of carbon nanotube scaffolds homogeneously mineralized by flow-through electrodeposition, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4411–4420 CrossRef CAS .S. Nardecchia, M. C. Serrano, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Unravelling cytocompatibility issues of 3D CNT-based scaffolds: a multifactor study in vitro, Submitted 2012.A. Abarrategi, M. C. Gutiérrez, C. Moreno-Vicente, M. J. Hortigüela, V. Ramos, J. L. López-Lacomba, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Multiwall carbon nanotube scaffolds for tissue engineering purposes, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .P. D. Petrov and G. L. Georgiev, Ice-mediated coating of macroporous cryogels by carbon nanotubes: a concept towards electrically conducting nanocomposites, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5768–5770 RSC .P. D. Petrov and G. L. Georgiev, Fabrication of super-macroporous nanocomposites by deposition of carbon nanotubes onto polymer cryogels, Eur. Polym. J., 2012, 48, 1366–1373 CrossRef CAS .E. Hirata, M. Uo, H. Takita, T. Akasaka, F. Watari and A. Yokoyama, Multiwalled carbon nanotube-coating of 3D collagen scaffolds for bone tissue engineering, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3284–3291 CrossRef CAS .X. Xie, L. Hu, M. Pasta, G. F. Wells, D. Kong, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Three-dimensional carbon nanotube-textile anode for high-performance microbial fuel cells, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .X. Xie, M. Ye, L. Hu, N. Liu, J. R. McDonough, W. Chen, H. N. Alshareef, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Carbon nanotube-coated macroporous sponge for microbial fuel cell electrodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5265–5270 CAS .W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi, L. Hu, X. Xie, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, High-performance nanostructured supercapacitors on a sponge, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5165–5172 CrossRef CAS .W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi and H. N. Alshareef, High energy density supercapacitors using macroporous kitchen sponges, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14394–14402 RSC .S. Lu and Y. Liu, Preparation of meso-macroporous carbon nanotube-alumina composite monoliths and their application to the preferential oxidation of CO in hydrogen-rich gases, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 492–501 CrossRef CAS .A. Cao, P. L. Dickrell, W. G. Sawyer, M. N. Ghasemi-Nejhad and P. M. Ajayan, Super-compressible foamlike carbon nanotube films, Science, 2005, 310, 1307–1310 CrossRef CAS .S. Talapatra, S. Kar, S. K. Pal, R. Vajtai, L. Ci, P. Victor, M. M. Shaijumon, S. Kaur, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Direct growth of aligned carbon nanotubes on bulk metals, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 112–116 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Jung, S. Kar, S. Talapatra, C. Soldano, G. Viswanathan, X. Li, Z. Yao, F. S. Ou, A. Avadhanula, R. Vajtai, S. Curran, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Aligned carbon nanotube–polymer hybrid architectures for diverse flexible electronic applications, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .X. Gui, J. Wei, K. Wang, A. Cao, H. Zhu, Y. Jia, Q. Shu and D. Wu, Carbon nanotube sponges, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 617–621 CrossRef CAS .X. Gui, A. Cao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, L. Fan, K. Wang, H. Zhu and D. Wu, Soft controlled compressibility, highly conductive nanotube sponges and composites, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2320–2326 CrossRef CAS .X. Gui, H. Li, K. Wang, J. Wei, Y. Jia, Z. Li, L. Fan, A. Cao, H. Zhu and D. Wu, Recyclable carbon nanotube sponges for oil absorption, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 4798–4804 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, X. Gui, C. Ji, P. Li, Z. Li, L. Zhang, E. Shi, K. Zhu, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu and A. Cao, Photocatalytic, recyclable CdS nanoparticle–carbon nanotube hybrid sponges, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .P. C. Sherrell, W. Zhang, J. Zhao, G. G. Wallace, J. Chen and A. I. Minett, Microwave decoration of Pt nanoparticles on entangled 3D carbon nanotube architectures as PEM fuel cell cathode, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, H. Zhu, Y.-C. Chen, Y. Shang, A. Cao, L. Hu and G. W. Rubloff, MWCNT/V2O5 core–shell sponge for high areal capacity and power density Li-ion cathodes, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7948–7955 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Chemical methods for the production of graphenes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, Preparation of graphitic oxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Graphene-based materials, Science, 2008, 320, 1170–1171 CrossRef CAS .G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Large-area ultrathin films of reduced graphene oxide as a transparent and flexible electronic material, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, Langmuir-blodgett assembly of graphite oxide single layers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Mullen, Transparent, conductive graphene electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Flexible graphene films via the filtration of water-soluble noncovalent functionalized graphene sheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Preparation and characterization of graphene oxide paper, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, M. B. Muller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Mechanically strong, electrically conductive and biocompatible graphene paper, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Patil, J. L. Vickery, T. B. Scott and S. Mann, Aqueous stabilization and self-assembly of graphene sheets into layered bio-nanocomposites using DNA, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3159–3164 CrossRef CAS .X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Graphene-based composites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Graphene based materials: past, present and future, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS .Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Graphene-based semiconductor photocatalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Graphene-based materials in electrochemistry, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, An overview of the applications of graphene-based materials in supercapacitors, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS .G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Chemically derived graphene oxide: towards large-area thin-film electronics and optoelectronics, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392–2415 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Biological and chemical sensors based on graphene materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .C. G. Liu, Z. N. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Graphene-based supercapacitor with an ultrahigh energy density, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS .T. Y. Kim, H. W. Lee, M. Stoller, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff and K. S. Suh, High-performance supercapacitors based on poly(ionic liquid)-modified graphene electrodes, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 436–442 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, Graphene-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983–5992 RSC .R. Kotz and M. Carlen, Principles and applications of electrochemical capacitors, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef CAS .S. Guo and S. Dong, Graphene nanosheet: synthesis, molecular engineering, thin film, hybrids, and energy and analytical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Graphene oxide, highly reduced graphene oxide, and graphene: versatile building blocks for carbon-based materials, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS .H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Functional composite materials based on chemically converted graphene, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089–1115 CrossRef CAS .A.-H. Lu, G.-P. Hao, Q. Sun, X.-Q. Zhang and W.-C. Li, Chemical synthesis of carbon materials with intriguing nanostructure and morphology, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 1107–1131 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xu and G. Shi, Assembly of chemically modified graphene: methods and applications, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3311–3323 RSC .C. Li and G. Shi, Three-dimensional graphene architectures, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .M. Suzuki and K. Hanabusa, Polymer organogelators that make supramolecular organogels through physical cross-linking and self-assembly, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 455–463 RSC .B. Adhikari, J. Nanda and A. Banerjee, Pyrene-containing peptide-based fluorescent organogels: inclusion of graphene into the organogel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11488–11496 CrossRef CAS .B. Adhikari and A. Banerjee, Short peptide based hydrogels: incorporation of graphene into the hydrogel, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9259–9266 RSC .B. Adhikari, A. Biswas and A. Banerjee, Graphene oxide-based supramolecular hydrogels for making nanohybrid systems with Au nanoparticles, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1460–1469 CrossRef CAS .H. Huang, S. Lü, X. Zhang and Z. Shao, Glucono-δ-lactone controlled assembly of graphene oxide hydrogels with selectively reversible gel–sol transition, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4609–4615 RSC .Q.-Y. Cheng, D. Zhou, Y. Gao, Q. Chen, Z. Zhang and B.-H. Han, Supramolecular self-assembly induced graphene oxide based hydrogels and organogels, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3005–3010 CrossRef CAS .C.-H. Zhu, Y. Lu, J. Peng, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Photothermally sensitive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)/graphene oxide nanocomposite hydrogels as remote light-controlled liquid microvalves, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4017–4022 CrossRef CAS .V. Alzari, D. Nuvoli, S. Scognamillo, M. Piccinini, E. Gioffredi, G. Malucelli, S. Marceddu, M. Sechi, V. Sanna and A. Mariani, Graphene-containing thermoresponsive nanocomposite hydrogels of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) prepared by frontal polymerization, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8727–8733 RSC .J. D. Mota-Morales, M. C. Gutiérrez, I. C. Sánchez, G. Luna-Bárcenas and F. del Monte, Frontal polymerizations carried out in deep-eutectic mixtures providing both the monomers and the polymerization medium, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5328–5330 RSC .S. Sun and P. Wu, A one-step strategy for thermal- and pH-responsive graphene oxide interpenetrating polymer hydrogel networks, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4095–4097 RSC .M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher, Jr. and T. F. Baumann, Synthesis of graphene aerogel with high electrical conductivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Worsley, T. Y. Olson, J. R. I. Lee, T. M. Willey, M. H. Nielsen, S. K. Roberts, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher, Jr. and T. F. Baumann, High surface area, sp2-cross-linked three-dimensional graphene monoliths, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS .Z. M. Markovic, B. M. Babic, M. D. Dramicanin, I. D. H. Antunovic, V. B. Pavlovic, D. B. Perusko and B. M. T. Markovic, Preparation of highly conductive carbon cryogel based on pristine graphene, Synth. Met., 2011, 162, 743–747 CrossRef .F. Meng, X. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Yue, H. Guo and Y. Luo, Alkali-treated graphene oxide as a solid base catalyst: synthesis and electrochemical capacitance of graphene/carbon composite aerogels, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18537–18539 RSC .J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Fabrication of graphene–polymer nanocomposites with higher-order three-dimensional architectures, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .Y. Long, C. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Gao, W. Wang and Y. Liu, Oxidation of SO2 to SO3 catalyzed by graphene oxide foams, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13934–13941 RSC .S.-Z. Zu and B.-H. Han, Aqueous dispersion of graphene sheets stabilized by pluronic copolymers: formation of supramolecular hydrogel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13651–13657 CAS .J.-S. Cheng, J. Du and W. Zhu, Facile synthesis of three-dimensional chitosan–graphene mesostructures for reactive black 5 removal, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 88, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, A pH-sensitive graphene oxide composite hydrogel, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2376–2378 RSC .H.-B. Zhang, Q. Yan, W.-G. Zheng, Z. He and Z.-Z. Yu, Tough graphene-polymer microcellular foams for electromagnetic interference shielding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 918–924 CAS .V. C. Tung, J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. Huang, Sticky interconnect for solution-processed tandem solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9262–9265 CrossRef CAS .Q. Bao, H. Zhang, J.-X. Yang, S. Wang, D. Y. Tang, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Graphene–polymer nanofiber membrane for ultrafast photonics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 782–791 CrossRef CAS .R. Verdejo, F. Barroso-Bujans, M. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J. A. de Saja and M. A. López-Manchado, Functionalized graphene sheet filled silicone foam nanocomposites, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2221–2226 RSC .A. Sahu, W. I. Cho and G. Tae, A stimuli-sensitive injectable graphene oxide composite hydrogel, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5820–5822 RSC .Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, Three-dimensional self-assembly of graphene oxide and DNA into multifunctional hydrogels, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS .C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, A graphene oxide/hemoglobin composite hydrogel for enzymatic catalysis in organic solvents, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962–4964 RSC .F. Liu and T. Seo, A controllable self-assembly method for large-scale synthesis of graphene sponges and free-standing graphene films, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS .O. C. Compton, Z. An, K. W. Putz, B. Jin Hong, B. G. Hauser, L. C. Brinson and S. T. Nguyen, Additive-free hydrogelation of graphene oxide by ultrasonication, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3399–3406 CrossRef CAS .H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, On the gelation of graphene oxide, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5545–5551 CAS .Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Noble-metal-promoted three-dimensional macroassembly of single-layered graphene oxide, Angew. Chem., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CAS .Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, Self-assembled graphene hydrogel via a one-step hydrothermal process, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS .H. Bi, X. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Wan, L. He, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Spongy graphene as a highly efficient and recyclable sorbent for oils and organic solvents, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4421–4425 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Supercapacitors based on self-assembled graphene organogel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17249–17254 RSC .X. Jiang, Y. Ma, J. Li, Q. Fan and W. Huang, Self-assembly of reduced graphene oxide into three-dimensional architecture by divalent ion linkage, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22462–22465 CAS .H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Macroscopic multifunctional graphene-based hydrogels and aerogels by a metal ion induced self-assembly process, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS .Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, 3D nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel-supported Fe3O4 nanoparticles as efficient electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS .W. Lv, Y. Tao, W. Ni, Z. Zhou, F.-Y. Su, X.-C. Chen, F.-M. Jin and Q.-H. Yang, One-pot self-assembly of three-dimensional graphene macroassemblies with porous core and layered Shell, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12352–12357 RSC .H. D. Pham, V. H. Pham, T. V. Cuong, T.-D. Nguyen-Phan, J. S. Chung, E. W. Shin and S. Kim, Synthesis of the chemically converted graphene xerogel with superior electrical conductivity, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9672–9674 RSC .D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Processable aqueous dispersions of graphene nanosheets, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Reduced graphene oxide by chemical graphitization, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1 CrossRef  , Article number: 73.X. Zhang, Z. Sui, B. Xu, S. Yue, Y. Luo, W. Zhanc and B. Liu, Mechanically strong and highly conductive graphene aerogel and its use as electrodes for electrochemical power sources, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6494–6497 RSC .W. Chen and L. Yan, In situ self-assembly of mild chemical reduction graphene for three-dimensional architectures, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .K.-X. Sheng, Y.-X. Xu, C. Li and G.-Q. Shi, High-performance self-assembled graphene hydrogels prepared by chemical reduction of graphene oxide, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .Z.-S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Three-dimensional nitrogen and boron co-doped graphene for high-performance all-solid-state supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS .W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Self-assembly and embedding of nanoparticles by in situ reduced graphene for preparation of a 3D graphene/nanoparticle aerogel, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS .H. Sun, L. Cao and L. Lu, Bacteria promoted hierarchical carbon materials for high-performance supercapacitor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6206–6213 CAS .L. Estevez, A. Kelarakis, Q. Gong, E. H. Da'as and E. P. Giannelis, Multifunctional graphene/platinum/nafion hybrids via ice templating, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6122–6125 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang and G.-Q. Shi, Preparation of highly conductive graphene hydrogels for fabricating supercapacitors with high rate capability, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206–17212 CAS .Y. Lin, G. J. Ehlert, C. Bukowsky and H. A. Sodano, Superhydrophobic functionalized graphene aerogels, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2200–2203 CAS .Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Three-dimensional flexible and conductive interconnected graphene networks grown by chemical vapour deposition, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .F. Yavari, Z. Chen, A. V. Thomas, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, High sensitivity gas detection using a macroscopic three-dimensional graphene foam network, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1 Search PubMed  , Article number: 166.M. T. Pettes, H. Li, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Thermal transport in three-dimensional foam architectures of few-layer graphene and ultrathin graphite, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS .T. Maiyalagan, X. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, Electrodeposited Pt on three-dimensional interconnected graphene as a free-standing electrode for fuel cell application, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286–5290 RSC .Y.-C. Yong, X.-C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, Macroporous and monolithic anode based on polyaniline hybridized three-dimensional graphene for high-performance microbial fuel cells, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS .X. Dong, J. Wang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. Li, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Supercapacitor electrode based on three-dimensional graphene-polyaniline hybrid, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 576–580 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tang, F. Huang, H. Bi, Z. Liu and D. Wan, Highly conductive three-dimensional graphene for enhancing the rate performance of LiFePO4 cathode, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Ultrathin graphite foam: a three-dimensional conductive network for battery electrodes, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS .X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, 3D graphene-cobalt oxide electrode for high-performance supercapacitor and enzymeless glucose detection, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS .X. Xie, G. Yu, N. Liu, Z. Bao, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Graphene–sponges as high-performance low-cost anodes for microbial fuel cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6862–6866 CAS .D. D. Nguyen, N.-H. Tai, S.-B. Lee and W.-S. Kuo, Superhydrophobic and superoleophilic properties of graphene-based sponges fabricated using a facile dip coating method, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7908–7912 CAS .M. Barrow, A. Eltmimi, A. Ahmed, P. Myers and H. Zhang, Frozen polymerization for aligned porous structures with enhanced mechanical stability, conductivity, and as stationary phase for HPLC, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 12, 11615–11620 RSC .H. Bi, K. Yin, X. Xie, Y. Zhou, N. Wan, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Low temperature casting of graphene with high compressive strength, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5124–5129 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo, V. C. Tung, A. R. Koltonow, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, Graphene oxide based conductive glue as a binder for ultracapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12993–12996 RSC .I. Ahmad, U. Khanb and Y. K. Gun'ko, Graphene, carbon nanotube and ionic liquid mixtures: towards new quasi-solid state electrolytes for dye sensitised solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16990–16996 RSC .P. J. King, U. Khan, M. Lotya, S. De and J. N. Coleman, Improvement of transparent conducting nanotube films by addition of small quantities of graphene, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4238–4246 CrossRef CAS .D. Cai, M. Song and C. Xu, Highly conductive carbon-nanotube/graphite-oxide hybrid films, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1706–1709 CrossRef CAS .L. Qiu, X. Yang, X. Gou, W. Yang, Z.-F. Ma, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Dispersing carbon nanotubes with graphene oxide in water and synergistic effects between graphene derivative, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 10653–10658 CrossRef CAS .D. Yu and L. Dai, Self-assembled graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid films for supercapacitors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Low-temperature solution processing of graphene-carbon nanotube hybrid materials for high-performance transparent conductors, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Lee, J. E. Kim, T. H. Han, J. W. Hwang, S. Jeon, S.-Y. Choi, S. H. Hong, W. J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Versatile carbon hybrid films composed of vertical carbon nanotubes grown on mechanically compliant graphene films, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1247–1252 CrossRef CAS .Z. Fan, J. Yan, L. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. Zhang, W. Qian and F. Wei, A three-dimensional carbon nanotube/graphene sandwich and its application as electrode in supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ma, L. Sun, W. Huang, L. Zhang, J. Zhao, Q. Fan and W. Huang, Three-dimensional nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes/graphene structure used as a metal-free electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24592–24597 CAS .S. H. Lee, D. H. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Tailored assembly of carbon nanotubes and graphene, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 21, 1338–1354 CrossRef .Z. Sui, Q. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Ma and B. Cao, Green synthesis of carbon nanotube–graphene hybrid aerogels and their use as versatile agents for water purification, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Synthesis of graphene–carbon nanotube hybrid foam and its use as a novel three-dimensional electrode for electrochemical sensing, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044–17048 RSC .X. Dong, X. Wang, L. Wang, H. Song, H. Zhang, W. Huang and P. Chen, 3D graphene foam as a monolithic and macroporous carbon electrode for electrochemical sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3129–3133 CAS .B. S. Sherigara, W. Kutner and F. D'Souza, Electrocatalytic properties and sensor applications of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 753–772 CrossRef CAS .B. F. Machado and Philippe Serp, Graphene-based materials for catalysis, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .N. Saito, Y. Usui, K. Aoki, N. Narita, M. Shimizu, K. Hara, N. Ogiwara, K. Nakamura, N. Ishigaki, H. Kato, S. Taruta and M. Endo, Carbon nanotubes: biomaterial applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1897–1903 RSC .Y. Zhang, T. R. Nayak, H. Hong and W. Cai, Graphene: a versatile nanoplatform for biomedical applications, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3833–3842 RSC .L. Jin, K. Yang, K. Yao, S. Zhang, H. Tao, S.-T. Lee, Z. Liu and R. Peng, Functionalized graphene oxidein enzyme engineering: a selective modulator for enzyme activity and thermostability, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4864–4875 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, L. Deng, J. Li, S. Guo, E. Wang and S. Dong, Hemin-graphene hybrid nanosheets with intrinsic peroxidase-like activity for label-free colorimetric detection of single-nucleotide polymorphism, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1282–1290 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Lee, H.-A. Joung, M.-G. Kim and C. B. Park, Graphene-based chemiluminescence
resonance energy transfer for homogeneous immunoassay, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2978–2983 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Vashist, D. Zheng, K. Al-Rubeaan, J. H. T. Luong and F.-S. Sheu, Advances in carbon nanotube based electrochemical sensors for bioanalytical applications, Biotechnol. Adv., 2011, 29, 169–188 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Jacobs, M. J. Peairs and B. J. Venton, Review: carbon nanotube based electrochemical sensors for biomolecules, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 662, 105–127 CrossRef CAS .T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Recent advances in graphene-based biosensors, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4637–4648 CrossRef CAS .W. Qian, Z.-Z. Gu, A. Fujishima and O. Sato, Three-dimensionally ordered macroporous polymer materials: an approach for biosensor applications, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 4526–4529 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Song, W. Cao and X. Xia, Adsorption and direct electron transfer from hemoglobin into a three-dimensionally ordered macroporous gold film, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1267–1267 CrossRef CAS .Y.-Y. Song, D. Zhang, W. Gao and X.-H. Xia, Nonenzymatic glucose detection by using a three-dimensionally ordered, macroporous platinum template, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2177–2182 CrossRef CAS .A. Walcarius, Electrocatalysis, sensors and biosensors in analytical chemistry based on ordered mesoporous and macroporous carbon-modified electrodes, TrAC, 2012, 38, 79–97 CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Stefania Nardecchia, Francisco del Monte, M. Luisa Ferrer, Daniel Carriazo and María C. Gutiérrez	Stefania Nardecchia graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 2005 at the University of Roma, obtained her PhD from the University of Madrid in 2012. In 2008 she joined the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the Institute of Materials Science of Madrid (ICMM-CSIC) where she is currently working. Her research interests focused on materials for drug release and biomaterials for bone and neural tissue regeneration.
	Daniel Carriazo obtained his PhD from the University of Salamanca in 2008 on the synthesis of layered double hydroxides and porous oxides for catalytic applications. In 2009 he joined the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the Institute of Materials Science of Madrid (ICMM-CSIC) where he is currently working. During 2011 he spent eight months working in the group headed by Prof. Niederberger at the ETH-Zürich on the synthesis of nano-materials by non-aqueous routes. His present scientific interest is focused on the synthesis of carbonaceous materials with hierarchical porosity for energy storage and environmental applications.
	María Luisa Ferrer is a tenured scientist at the Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM-CSIC). After an MSc degree in Polymer Science (1992), she completed her PhD in chemistry at the University Autonoma of Madrid (1995). She was a postdoctoral fellow over the next three years, first at the University of Patras (Greece) and, after that, at UCLA (USA). After that, she got a teaching appointment at the UMH (Spain). She joined the ICMM-CSIC in 2000 to work on the preparation of hierarchical materials with applications in both energy and biomaterials.
	María C. Gutiérrez obtained her PhD in Organic Chemistry at the University of Granada in 2001. From 2001 to 2003, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Furstoss in Biocatalysis and Fine Chemistry at the Université de la Méditerranée (France), and participated in European projects from IV and V Framework Programmes. In 2004, she joined the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the ICMM-CSIC in Spain and became a tenured scientist in 2009. Her research interest is the development of New Routes for Preparation of Hierarchical and Multifunctional Materials for Applications in Biotechnology and Biomedicine.
	Francisco del Monte is a Scientist at the Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM-CSIC) in Spain. He received a BSc degree in organic chemistry in 1991, an MSc degree in polymer science in 1992, and a PhD in chemistry in 1996. He then spent two years as a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Los Angeles, California. Since 2004, he leads the Group of Bioinspired Materials at the ICMM-CSIC. His current scientific interest is the use of biomimetic chemistry and deep eutectic solvents for the preparation of hierarchically organized materials.

 	Fig. 1  Picture of SWCNT aerogels weighing 17.4 mg (density: 9.8 mg mL−1) before (a), during (b) and after (c) application of a 20 g weight. Monoliths were obtained from SWCNTs functionalized with ferrocene-grafted poly(p-phenyleneethynylene). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright (2011) Elsevier Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Picture of SWCNT aerogels (density: 7.5 mg mL−1) non-reinforced (left, black coloured) and reinforced (right, gray coloured) with 1 wt% PVA. (b) Three PVA-reinforced aerogel monoliths (total mass = 13.0 mg) supporting 100 g (ca. 8000 times their weight). (c) SEM micrograph revealing the macroporus architecture of PVA-reinforced aerogel (0.5 wt% PVA, 10 mg mL−1 CNT content). (d) TEM micrograph of non-reinforced CNT aerogel. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright (2007) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Picture of aerogels without (blank) and with SWCNTs. (b) PL spectrum of aerogels exposed to CO2, THF, and ether vapors. The PL spectrum of non-exposed (e.g. in vacuum) is also included for comparison. (c) Shift in PL emission wavelength relative to the signal collected under vacuum as a function of SWCNT diameter after exposure of SWNT-aerogels to air (green square), CO2 (red dots), THF (blue triangle), and ether (yellow star). (d) Emission wavelength shifts for SWCNTs with different diameter after alternating exposure to ether and vacuum: (9,5) light blue squares; (7,6) red dots; (7,5) green triangle; and (8,3) blue triangle. (Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of (a and b) as-synthesized and (c and d) annealed at 320 °C TiO2/SWCNT-CA composites at low and high magnifications. TEM images of annealed (e and f) TiO2–SWCNT-CA composites at low and high magnifications. Inset in (f) is the electron diffraction pattern of the annealed TiO2/SWCNT-CA. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM micrographs of CFA (a, b and c), CFACNT1 (d) and CFACNT5 (f, h and i). TEM micrographs of colloidal carbon corresponding to CFA and CFACNT1 (c), and fibrillar carbon corresponding to CFACNT1 and CFACNT5 (e and g). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2011) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM micrographs of MWCNT scaffolds: (a) cross-section view, (b) longitudinal view according to plane 1 and (c) longitudinal view according to plane 2. Bars are 200 μm in every case. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images (a–c) of biofilm at different magnifications taken from the inner part of the 3D scaffold. (Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM micrographs of MWCNT scaffolds after mineralization under flow-through conditions that reveal the homogeneity of the mineral coating irrespective of the experimental conditions used for electrodeposition; 30 °C–30 min–1.4 V for (a) and (b), 60 °C–30 min–1.8 V for (c) and 60 °C–30 min–2.1 V for (d). Bars are 5 μm in (b) and 20 μm in (a), (c) and (d). (Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH)	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of CNT-sponge showing the macroporous structure and continuous three-dimensional (3D) CNT coating (a). Picture of the sponge before (white) and after (black) application of the CNT coating (b). SEM image of the CNT-sponge before (c) and after (d and e) microbial colonization. A single microorganism lying on the CNT surface (f), illustrating the strong interaction between the microbial nanowires and CNTs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Picture of a 2.5 mm-tall SWCNT forest growth with water-assisted CVD on a 7 mm by 7 mm silicon wafer. A matchstick on the left and a ruler with millimeter markings on the right is for size reference. (B) SEM micrograph of the same SWCNT forest. Scale bar is 1 mm. (C) SEM image of the SWCNT forest ledge. Scale bar is 1 μm. (D) Low-resolution TEM image of the nanotubes. Scale bar is 100 nm. (E) High-resolution TEM image of the SWCNTs. Scale bar is 5 nm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright (2004) American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) SEM micrograph of an original freestanding film (left, top) (thickness 0.86 mm) and a compressed film (left, bottom) (ε = 85%, 1000 cycles), with a reduced thickness of 0.72 mm, showing horizontal lines (wavelike buckles) uniformly distributed across the film section. Left scale bar is 0.2 mm. (Left, inset) Illustration of compression along the axis of nanotubes. (B) Slight buckles in the middle section, heavy buckles (almost completely folded) near the bottom of film, and the zigzag edge of the compressed film. (C) SEM image of a 1.2 mm-thick film before and after compression, showing the evolution of buckles with increasing compression cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2005) American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 12  Light, porous, flexible carbon nanotube sponges. (a) A monolithic sponge with a size of 4 cm × 3 cm × 0.8 cm and a bulk density of 7.5 mg cm−3. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the sponge showing a porous morphology and overlapped CNTs. (c) TEM image of large-cavity, thin-walled CNTs. (d) Illustration of the sponge consisting of CNT piles (black lines) as the skeleton and open pores (void space). (e) Picture of a CNT and a polymeric sponge placed in a water bath. The CNT sponge is floating on the top while the polyurethane sponge absorbed water and sank to below the surface level. (f) A CNT sponge bent to arch-shape at a large-angle by fingertips. (g) A 5.5 cm × 1 cm × 0.18 cm sponge twisted by three round turns at the ends without breaking. (h) Densification of two cubic-shaped sponges into small pellets (a flat carpet and a spherical particle, respectively) and full recovery to original structure upon ethanol absorption. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 13  Environmental application of CNT sponges. (a) Absorption capacity (Q) measured for a range of oils (solid symbols) and organic solvents. The dashed line indicates increasing absorption capacity for higher-density liquids. (b) Summary of the absorption capacity for diesel oil measured from CNT sponges, natural products (cotton, loofah), polymeric sponges (polyurethane, polyester) and activated carbon. The maximum weight gain for oils by previously reported nanowire membranes (Q = 20, from L. A. Capadona et al. Polymer 2006, 47, 5754) is included for comparison. (c) Snapshots showing the absorption of a 28 cm2 mm-thick vegetable oil film (dyed with Oil Blue) distributed on a water bath by a small spherical sponge. The growing size of the sponge accompanied by the shrinkage of oil film indicates continuous oil absorption and storage inside the sponge. (d) Active absorption of a continuous 20 cm2 oil strip distributed in a rectangular water channel by a small non-densified sponge (<1 cm3) placed near the left edge and in contact with oil. (e) Large-area oil cleanup. (left panel) A diesel oil film (2 g in total weight) with an area of 227 cm2 spreading on water and a densified sponge pellet placed in the center. The oil area is about 800 times that of the projected sponge area (middle). Clean water surface after complete oil absorption by the sponge, which has grown to a larger size and changed to a rectangular shape. Inset shows the floating pellet during the absorption process. The white-color region along the path of the drifting pellet indicates the removal of oil film and exposure of fresh water (right). Pictures of the CNT sponge before and after absorption. The sponge has swollen from a 6-mm-diameter spherical particle to a rectangular monolith (2 cm × 1.4 cm × 0.6 cm) after collecting all the oil from water. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright (2010) Wiley VCH).	 

 	Fig. 14  Photographs of hydrogels obtained from (a) Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH, (b) and Fmoc-Phe-Asp-OH, (c) reduced GO containing hybrid hydrogel obtained from Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH and (d) reduced GO dispersed in the solution state by Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH. SEM (e and f), TEM (g and h) and AFM (i and j) of reduced GO hydrogels obtained from Fmoc-Tyr-Asp-OH (e, g and i) and Fmoc-Phe-Asp-OH (f, h and j). (Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photographs of the PNIPAM/GO hydrogels prepared with various amounts of GO (0.0, 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 mg mL−1): the original hydrogel; the hydrogel after NIR laser irradiation for 2 min; and the hydrogel after cooling. (b) Liquid microvalves made with the PNIPAM/GO hydrogel (1, 2) and a PNIPAM hydrogel (3, 4). The photographs show the microvalves before (1, 3), after (2, 4) NIR (808 nm, 2 W) irradiation for 2 min. The rectangular boxes mark the positions of the hydrogels. The solutions encapsulated in the left and right sides are a red rhodamine solution and light-yellow NiSO4, respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 16  FE-SEM of the graphene aerogel at low (a) and high (b) magnification. TEM of the graphene aerogel at low (c) and high (d) magnification. Black arrow denotes holey carbon on the TEM grid. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of (a and b) longitudinal sections, and (c and d) cross-sections of a PSS-G/PVA freeze-dried monolith (1:10 wt% ratio). Scale bars: (a, c, and d) = 10 μm, (b) = 5 μm. Arrows in (a and b) indicate the direction of freezing. (a and c) Region X showing layered structure, and (b and d) region Y with macroporous architecture. (e) Higher-magnification image of cross-section in region X showing layered structure with interlamellar cross-links, scale bar = 1 μm. (f) Image of a single wall showing loosely packed graphene sheets, scale bar = 1 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2009) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structure of PVAc and graphene-based nanofillers (GO, GO-PPV, G-PBASE, and G-dye). (b) The dispersions of graphene derivatives 5 h after ultrasonication (1: GO, 2: GO-PPV, 3: G-PBASE, 4: G-dye; all in DMF, 0.15 mg mL−1). (c) Typical picture of membranes electrospun on quartz substrates (loading of G-dye: top, 0.07 wt%; bottom, 0.035 wt%). (d) Transferring the freestanding membrane onto the end face of an optical fiber for mode locking. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Scheme representing the procedure of preparing GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogels and the proposed gelation mechanism. (b) Effects of pH, NaCl, buffer, and organic solvent on GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogels stability. From left to right: water (pH = 2), water (pH = 13), NaCl aqueous solution (1 M), phosphate buffer (pH = 8, 10 mM) and THF. Each of the above solution (0.8 mL) was added slowly onto typical self-assembled hydrogels (0.2 mL), and the sample was allowed to stand at room temperature for one week. (c and d) SEM images with low and high magnifications of GO/DNA self-assembled hydrogel interior microstructures. (e) Self-healing process: the as-prepared free-standing self-assembled hydrogel was cut with a razor into three small blocks and the blocks could adhere to each other by pushing the freshly formed surfaces to contact together followed by heating at 90 °C in air for 3 min. (Adapted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Scheme of the peroxidatic reaction; (B) the extended 90 min reaction courses in methylene dichloride with different catalysts; (C) the reaction courses for the first 5 min in methylene dichloride with different catalysts. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Photographs of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h; (b) photographs of a strong SGH allowing easy handling and supporting weight; (c–e) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures; (f) the room temperature I–V curve of the SGH exhibiting Ohmic characteristics, the inset shows the two-probe method for the conductivity measurements. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) SEM micrographs of the sample prepared when the concentration of the GO suspension was 0.1 mg mL−1. (c and d) SEM micrographs of the sample obtained when the concentration of the GO suspension was 0.07 mg mL−1. SEM images of the 3D structure containing Au (e), Pt (f), Ir (g), and Ru (h). (i and j) TEM micrographs of GO bearing Pd nanoparticles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 23  Panel 1: Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the graphene/iron oxide hydrogels. Panel 2: (a) Photograph of the magnetic property of the hydrogel under a magnet. SEM image with low (b) and high (c) magnification of the interior microstructures of the freeze-dried graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel prepared in the presence of 0.5 mmol of FeSO4 at pH 11. (d) TEM image of the microstructures of the hydrogel after sonication. Panel 3: (a) Photographs showing the process of the graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel adsorbing gasoline. The graphene/α-FeOOH aerogel was dried from the hydrogel prepared with a 10 mL of GO (2 mg mL−1) suspension at pH 3 in the presence of 0.5 mmol of FeSO4. The gasoline was labelled with Sudan III for clear presentation. (b) Regeneration capacity of the aerogels for adsorbing gasoline. Gasoline can be removed by putting the aerogel in the oven at 100 °C for recycled use. (c) Adsorption capacities of the aerogels for a range of organic solvents and oils in terms of their weight gain. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) CV curves of P–F–GO–E at different scan rates, (b) the magnification of (a) from 1 mV s−1 to 20 mV s−1, (c) specific capacitance of P–F–GO–E at different current densities. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 25  Plots of specific capacitance versus discharging current density for grapheme hydrogels further reduced with HI (GH-HI in a) and Hz (GH-Hz in b) compared to non-further reduced ones (GH-H). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 26  Scheme representing the CVD growth of graphene foams using nickel (Ni) foams as template. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright (2011) Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 27  SEM micrographs of the strut walls of freestanding graphene-based foams obtained upon the use of HCl (a), Fe(NO3)3 (b and c) or (NH4)2S2O8 (e and f) as etching agents for Ni removal. All scale bars are 50 μm. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 28  SEM micrographs of graphene/PANI (a–c) and carbon cloth (d–f) electrodes after 60 h incubation in MFC with S. oneidensis MR-1 cell suspension. With a higher magnification, images (b) and (e) were taken at the electrode surface while images (c) and (f) were focused on the electrode interior. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Photograph of UGFs in different geometries. (b) SEM micrograph showing the microstructure of the ultrathin graphene foam. (c) SEM image of a broken strut within the ultrathin graphene foam. Note the hollow, triangular structure. (d) TEM image of the ultrathin graphene foam. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Comparison of the specific capacities of ultrathin graphene foam and the Al-electrode, respectively, with a LiFePO4 loading of ∼12 mg cm−1 at different charge/discharge current densities. (b) Maximum specific capacity per electrode mass of ultrathin graphene foam shown in comparison with that of the Al-electrode of this work and previous reports using LiFePO4 on the Al foil at lower loadings as well as LiFePO4 on Ni foam. See ref. 176 for further information on these previous reports. (c) Cyclic voltammetry of ultrathin graphene foam, Al and Ni foils measured at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC (1:1 by volume) as the electrolyte and the Li foil as the counter/reference electrode. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic of the plain sponge (left) with 3D open structure and the graphene sponge composite (right) with conformal graphene coating. (b) SEM micrograph of the graphene sponge showing the macroscale porous structure and the graphene surface (inset). (c–f) SEM images of a colonized graphene sponge anode after 50 days of operation at different scales. Microbial biofilms wrap the branches (d), but do not clog the macroscale pores (c). Most of the graphene sponge anode surface is covered by microorganisms (e) interconnected via microbial nanowires (f). (Adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 32  Effect of graphene loading on the water contact angle of the pure sponge (a). Relationship between pH values and contact angles of the graphene-based sponges after 12 h floating on aqueous solutions with different pH values (b). Photograph of pure (white color) and graphene-based (black color) sponges after being placed on water, the inset is a photograph of the graphene-based sponge partially immersed in water by a force (c). Water droplets as quasi-spheres and motor oil trace on the surface of the graphene-based sponge (d), the inset in (d) is an optical image of a water droplet at a contact angle of 162°. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 33  SEM micrographs of the resulting graphene–MWCNT (a and b) and graphene–c-MWCNT (c and d) hybrid aerogels. Arrows in (b) and (d) are the indication of the CNTs. Adsorption of dyes (A: methylene blue, B: fuchsin, C: rhodamine B, D: acid fuchsin) by graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (e) and binding of heavy metal ions with graphene–CNT hybrid aerogels (f). For comparison, the related data collected with graphene alone aerogel were also shown in (f). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

52	ca. 1–2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	ca. 590–680 m2 g−1	ca. 99%	—
53	3.1 S cm−1	—	—	—	—
55	1.2–6.9 × 10−2 S cm−1 (two-probe method)	—	280–400 m2 g−1	4.4–5.1 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)	—
56	0.67 S cm−1	—	580 m2 g−1	—	—
57	5 × 10−7 S cm−1	—	—	—	—
58	0.6 S cm−1 for non-reinforced ca. 10−5 S cm−1 for reinforced (two-probe method)	The aerogel supported more than 8000 times its own weight	—	—	—
61	0.7–2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	E = 0.05–100 MPa	—	—	—
62	1.1 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	184 m2 g−1	—	—
64	1.1 S cm−1 for SWCNT aerogel	E = 1.2 MPa for SWCNT aerogel	742 m2 g−1	—	—
1.0 S cm−1 for SWCNT/SiO2 aerogel	E = 7.3 MPa for SWCNT/SiO2 aerogel
1.0 S cm−1 for SWCNT/SnO2 aerogel	E = 1.0 MPa for SWCNT/SnO2 aerogel
(four-probe method)	E = 15.0–17.3 MPa for SWCNT/TiO2 aerogel
66	4.8 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	E = 11 MPa	400–550 m2 g−1	65–83%	120 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4
90 F g−1 at 29 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 (each electrode was 1 mm thick and weighed 17 mg)
69, 72, 73 and 74	2.5 S cm−1	E = 5.0 MPa	—	4.0–9.4 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)	—
1.8 S cm−1 (cross-linked with glutaraldehyde) (four-probe method in every case)	E = 2.5 MPa (cross-linked with glutaraldehyde)
75	0.7 S cm−1 (frozen at −65 °C)	E = 1.2 MPa (frozen at −65 °C)	—	45–69%	—
0.32 S cm−1 (short MWCNTs)	E = 4.0 MPa (short MWCNTs)
1.6 S cm−1 (chondroitin sulphate, CS)	E = 7 MPa (CS)
0.13 S cm−1 (CS and short MWCNTs)	E = 5.3 MPa (CS and short MWCNTs)
0.05 S cm−1 (gelatine)	E = 8.4 MPa (gelatine)
n/a (gelatine and short MWCNTs) (four-probe method in every case)	E = 12.1 MPa (gelatine and short MWCNTs)
77 and 78	1.0 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	E = 3.2 MPa	—	—	—
80	50 S cm−1	—	—	95.8%	—
81	1.0 S cm−1	—	—	ca. 98%	—
82	—	—	174 m2 g−1	—	1230 F g−1 at 5 A g−1
500 F g−1 at 100 A g−1 (normalized by mass of MnO2)
61.5 F g−1 at 5 A g−1
25 F g−1 at 100 A g−1 (normalized by mass of the electrode)
83	—	—	174 m2 g−1	—	240 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4
120 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4
90 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M Et4NBF4
40 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M Et4NBF4
190 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M LiClO4
75 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M LiClO4
85	—	E = 50 MPa at cycle 1 for strains below 20%	—	ca. 87%	—
E = 12 MPa at cycle 1 for strains between 20 and 70%
E = 5.85 MPa at cycle 1000 for strains below 50%
88	1.67 S cm−1 (two-probe method)	E = 0.17 MPa for strains below 10%	300–400 m2 g−1	>99%	—
123	—	G′ = 30 kPa	—	—	—
124	—	G′ = 14.6 kPa for peptide 1	—	—	—
G′ = 41.4 kPa for peptide 2
125	—	G′ = 60.6 kPa for arginine	—	—	—
G′ = 11.0 kPa for tryptophan
G′ = 39.4 kPa for adenosine
126	—	G′ = 12.7 kPa for PEI cross-linked hydrogels	—	—	—
G′ = 7.47 kPa for La3+ cross-linked hydrogels
127	—	G′ = 1–102 kPa for hydrogels	—	—	—
G′ = 10−1–10−2 kPa for organogels
129	—	G′ = 1 kPa	—	—	—
132 and 133	1.0 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	584–1199 m2 g−1	—	—
134	1.3 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	195–244 m2 g−1	—	—
135	5.3 S cm−1	E = 3.6–29.6 MPa	763 m2 g−1	91.4–94.9%	122 F g−1 at 50 mA g−1 in 6 M KOH
78 F g−1 at 50 A g−1 in 6 M KOH
136	—	E = 6 MPa for strains below 10%	ca. 37 m2 g−1	—	—
138	—	G′ = 1–102 kPa	—	—	—
141	3.1 × 10−2 S cm−1	E = 0.6 GPa for 0.5 wt%	ca. 700 m2 g−1	—	—
E = 0.57 GPa for 1.0 wt%
142	0.4 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	—	—	—
143	—	E = 0.45–0.75 GPa	—	—	—
144	—	E = 175 MPa	—	—	—
145	—	E = 1.7 kPa for F127 concentration of 0.25 wt%	—	—	—
E = 0.8 kPa for F127 concentration of 0.5 wt%
E = 0.4 kPa for F127 concentration of 1.0 wt%
146	—	G′ = 4.6 kPa	—	—	—
147	—	G′ = 4.1 kPa	—	—	—
149	—	G′ = 0.3 kPa for 30 min ultrasound	ca. 180–220 m2 g−1	—	—
G′ = 1.6 kPa for 120 min ultrasound
151	2.5 × 10−3 S cm−1	—	—	—	 
152	2.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 for HT over 1 hour	G′ = 55 kPa for HT reduction over 1 hour	—	—	160 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
4.9 × 10−3 S cm−1 for HT over 12 hours (two-probe method)	G′ = 470 kPa for HT reduction over 12 hours
154	2.0 × 10−2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	166–146 m2 g−1	—	140 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in PC
90 F g−1 at 30 A g−1
156	—	E = 0.1 MPa	—	—	—
G′ = 50 kPa
The aerogel supported more than 5000 times its own weight
159	0.4–5.0 S cm−1	E = 0.02–0.05 MPa	36–158 m2 g−1	0.6–1.3 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)	—
162	0.6 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	E = 1.2–6.2 MPa in the elastic region	512 m2 g−1	1.2–9.6 × 10−2 (as specific gravity)	128 F g−1 at 50 mA g−1
E = 0.3–2.2 MPa in the yield región	76 F g−1 at 20 A g−1
The aerogel supported more than 14000 times its own weight	 
163	0.23 S cm−1 for vitamin C	E = 0.13 MPa for NaHSO3	—	—	166 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 for NaHSO3
6.8 × 10−2 S cm−1 for Na2S
1.1 S cm−1 for HI
0.17 S cm−1 for NaHSO3
0.87 S cm−1 for NaHSO3 and tretated at 400°C (two-probe method in every case)
164	1.0 × 10−2 S cm−1 (two-probe method)	G′ = 275 kPa	—	—	240 F g−1 at 1.2 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4
165	—	—	249.0 m2 g−1	—	230 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4
130 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4
166	1.5 × 10−2 S cm−1	—	95 m2 g−1	—	—
167	—	—	182 m2 g−1	—	327 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4
160 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4
168	1.0 × 10−2 S cm−1	E = 0.6 MPa for strains of 10%	—	ca. 92%	—
169	1.3–3.2 × 10−2 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	—	778–964 m2 g−1	—	220 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 5 M KOH
170 F g−1 at 120 A g−1 in 5 M KOH
170	3.8 × 10−7 S cm−1 (four-probe method)	E = 0.6 GPa	—	—	—
171 and 172	10 S cm−1 (two-probe method)	—	ca. 850 m2 g−1	ca. 99.7%	—
176	—	—	—	—	346 F g−1 at 4 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4
177	6.0 × 102 S cm−1	—	500–600 m2 g−1	—	—
178	1.3 × 103 S cm−1 (termal treated at 300 K)	—	—	—	—
180	1.0 × 10−2 S cm−1	—	—	—	—
182	1.9 × 10−4 S cm−1	E increases from 290 kPa to 750 kPa up to 9 MPa depending on the aerogel porosity	—	—	—
183	8.2 S cm−1	The compressive strength is within the 300–400 MPa range	—	—	—
195	7.5 × 10−2 S cm−1	—	435 m2 g−1	—	—

56	From MWCNT suspensions with organogelators – Gelation	Sensors – Pressure and chemical vapour detection
66	From MWCNT suspensions with DES – Formaldehyde polymerization (sol–gel)	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
68	From MWCNT suspensions with PVA – Freeze-drying	Catalysis – Chemical adsorption
69	From MWCNT suspensions with chitosan – Freeze-drying	Energy – Electrodes in DMFC
72	From MWCNT suspensions with chitosan – Freeze-drying	Energy – Electrodes in MFC
74–76	From MWCNT suspensions with chitosan (and hydroxyapatite) – Freeze-drying	Biomaterials – Tissue Engineering
79	MWCNT impregnation on preformed collagen scaffolds	Biomaterials – Tissue Engineering
81	SWCNT impregnation on preformed aerogels	Energy – Electrodes in MFC
82, 83	MWCNT impregnation on preformed aerogels and MnO2 surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
84	CNT–alumina hydrosol co-impregnation on preformed foams	Catalysis
89	MWCNT array growth by modified CVD	Sensors – Strain detection
90	MWCNT array growth by modified CVD	Environmental – Chemical removal
91	MWCNT array growth by modified CVD and CdS surface functionalization	Catalysis – Photocatalysis
92	MWCNT array growth by modified CVD and Pt surface functionalization	Energy – Cathodes in PEM FC
93	MWCNT array growth by modified CVD and V2O5 surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in Li-ion batteries
128	From GO suspensions with acrylic monomers – Photoinitated polymerization	Biomaterials – Liquid microvalve for microdevices
135	From alkali-treated GO – Formaldehyde polymerization (sol–gel)	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
137	From GO suspensions – Freeze-drying	Catalysis – SO2 adsorption and treatment
139	From GO suspensions with chitosan – Thermal treatment	Environmental – Chemical removal
140	From GO suspensions with PVA – Hydrogel formation	Biomaterials – Drug delivery and controlled release
143	From either GO or graphene suspensions with molecular and polymeric dyes – Electrospinning	Photonic materials – Ultra-short pulse generators
145	From GO suspensions with pluronic	Biomaterials – Tissue engineering
153	From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatment	Environmental – Chemical removal
154	From GO suspensions – Solvotermal treatment in PC	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
156	From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatment	Environmental – Chemical removal
157	From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatment, Freeze-drying and Carbonization	Energy – Non precious metal cathode
167	From GO suspensions with Fe3+ salts – Freeze-drying and Thermal treatment	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
169	From GO suspensions – Hydrothermal treatment and Chemical post-reduction	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
172	Graphene growth by template directed CVD	Sensors – Gas detection
174	Graphene growth by template directed CVD and Pt surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in DMFC
175	Graphene growth by template directed CVD and polyaniline surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in MFC
176	Graphene growth by template directed CVD and polyaniline surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
178	Graphene growth by template directed CVD and Li surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in Li-ion batteries
179	Graphene growth by template directed CVD and Co3O4 surface functionalization	Energy – Electrodes in Supercapacitors
Biosensors – Glucose detection
180	Graphene impregnation on preformed polyurethane sponges	Energy – Electrodes in MFC
181	Graphene impregnation on preformed melamine sponges	Environmental – Chemical removal
182	Graphene impregnation on preformed acrilate-based sponges	Separation – Monolithic columns
195	From GO and MWCNT suspensions – Reduction, Hydrogel formation and Supercritical drying	Environmental – Electrodes for Capacitive Desalinization Processes
196,197	Graphene growth by template directed CVD, NiCl2 surface functionalization and subsequent MWCNT growth by modified CVD (two CVD processes)	Biosensors – Dopamine and H2O2 detection

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
