Carbon dot/inorganic nanomaterial composites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA02628G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02628G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14709-14731Carbon dot/inorganic nanomaterial composites

        
          
            Qingqing 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huawei 
            Cai
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Wenjing 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Wu
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Yongzhong 
            Wu
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Xiao 
            Gong
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China. E-mail: xgong@whut.edu.cn
bLaboratory of Clinical Nuclear Medicine, Department of Nuclear Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 610041, Chengdu, China
cHuaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), Department of Radiology, Functional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China. E-mail: wuminscu@scu.edu.cn
dSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou 215009, China
Received 
      1st April 2022
    , Accepted 16th June 2022First published on 17th June 2022AbstractCarbon dots (CDs), a carbon-based 0-dimensional fluorescent material with a simple preparation method, wide range of raw materials, and excellent physical and chemical properties, have attracted the attention of many researchers in recent years because of their stable and adjustable photoluminescence properties, good biocompatibility, and abundant surface defects. Composites of CDs and inorganic nanomaterials with excellent physical properties can expand the application scope of CDs, make up for the limitation of single-component CDs in applications, and improve the application performance of inorganic nanomaterials and enhance the versatility of inorganic nanomaterials. Such composite materials have been widely used in sensing, catalysis, biology, and optoelectronics. This review summarizes the preparation methods and formation mechanism of carbon dot/inorganic nanohybrid materials, introduces the properties and junctions of CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials, and outlines the applications of nanohybrid materials in the fields of sensing, therapeutic systems, catalysis, photoelectric devices and so on. Finally, the development prospects and challenges in preparing and applying CDs/inorganic nanomaterials are discussed.
Introduction
As one of the elements with high abundance in nature, carbon exists in the Earth's atmosphere and crust in many forms. Carbon-based nanomaterials such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, nano-diamonds, carbon nanofibers, and graphene have been discovered with the development of nanoscience.1–4 Recently, researchers discovered a new kind of carbon-based nanomaterial with excellent luminous properties, which are named carbon dots (CDs). In general, the mainly carbon-based nanoparticles can be called CDs, the size of which is less than 10 nm. CDs are divided into four categories: carbon quantum dots (CQDs), graphene quantum dots (GQDs), carbon nanodots (CNDs), and carbonized polymer dots (CPDs).5 CDs have sp2 carbon as the core and are covered in other chemical groups, while polymer dots have a lower degree of carbonization whose crystalline carbon nuclei are difficult to observe.6
Compared with the traditional fluorescent semiconductor quantum dots and organic dyes, CDs have unique physical and chemical properties, such as adjustable surface groups, excellent optical properties, better optical stability, good biocompatibility, water solubility, low toxicity, and environmental friendliness.7–17 Due to their high quantum yield and adjustable fluorescence characteristics, CDs have been widely used in photoelectric fields such as light-emitting diodes and luminescent solar concentrators.18,19 However, these applications have not fully utilized the excellent physical and chemical properties of CDs, such as high electron transfer efficiency, wide light absorption range, and catalytic activity brought about by abundant surface-active sites. Inorganic nanomaterials have attracted extensive attention due to their large surface area, excellent physical properties such as magnetism, electrical conductivity, and thermal conductivity, and excellent chemical stability.20–25 CDs combined with inorganic nanomaterials can use their superb characteristics to give inorganic nanomaterials more excellent and rich properties. The properties of the two can complement and interact with each other.
For example, CDs and metal nanoparticles/semiconductor quantum dots can be compounded to construct a fluorescence nano-detection platform with a double emission ratio.26 In the energy field, when CDs are attached to the surface of electrode materials such as ZnO and SnO2, CDs with broad light absorption, photostability, and high electron transfer efficiency can significantly improve the energy storage performance and cycle stability of batteries.27 Due to their excellent biocompatibility, near-infrared fluorescence emission, and photothermal absorption properties, CDs can combine with some magnetic materials for photothermal therapy and near-infrared imaging.28,29 At the same time, CDs can be used as a catalyst or a component in the catalyst to improve the photocatalytic activity of the substrate material by promoting the recombination and separation of electrons and holes.30 It is hard to apply one-component CDs in these fields whereas hybrid nanomaterials containing CDs can widen the application fields. Hybrid nanomaterials have a wide range of applications in sensing, biology, electrochemistry, photoelectric and other fields.31–38
Some reviews have reported on the application of CD-based composites in photocatalysis,39,40 electrocatalysis,41 diagnosis and treatment,42,43 and sensing systems.44 Still, there has never been a systematic summary of CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials. This review summarizes the development and applications of CDs/inorganic nanomaterials in recent years. Firstly, the methods and strategies for preparing and compounding CDs and inorganic nanomaterials are proposed. Secondly, the properties and structures of CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials are highlighted. Exploring the mechanism and properties of CDs in hybrid materials will be beneficial to the preparation of hybrid materials with desired properties. The third section provides an overview of the applications of nanohybrid materials in sensing, therapeutic systems, catalysis, and optoelectronic devices, which will help readers to understand the latest development directions. Finally, the development prospects and challenges of CDs/inorganic nanomaterials in preparation and application are discussed.
Preparation of CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials
Synthesis methods of CDs
Carbon sources are plentiful and cheap, from laboratory chemicals to natural plants and trees to the foods we eat (orange juice, eggs, oats, etc.). According to different carbon sources and different treatment methods, the preparation methods can be divided into top-down and bottom-up.

Top-down methods. 
Top-down methods refer to the CDs obtained from bulk carbon materials (graphite, carbon nanotubes, candle ashes, etc.) by chemical, electrochemical or physical methods to strip, crack, or decompose them. Strong acid oxidation,45 arc-discharge,46 laser ablation,47,48 and electrochemical methods49–51 are common top-down approaches. In 2004, Xu et al.46 found a mixture of fluorescent nanoparticles when they used arc discharge to prepare SWCNT. Laser ablation is the first reported method for preparing CDs with high quantum yields. Helena et al.52 prepared CDs by direct laser ablation and after being modified with PEG200 and NAC, the CDs were excited and produced fluorescence at 450 nm under 340 nm light. Chemical oxidation and electrochemical methods are used to prepare CDs to cut and oxidize carbon sources. Researchers often use strong oxidants such as nitric acid, potassium permanganate, and Fenton reagent to cut bulk carbon sources to nanoparticles. Chua et al.53 prepared GQDs by oxidizing C60 with sulfuric acid (98%) and potassium permanganate (Fig. 1a). The traditional electrochemical approach uses a graphite rod as carbon source54 and some small molecules are chosen to prepare CDs such as sodium citrate.55 The advantages of the top-down method are fewer by-products and high repeatability. The disadvantages lie in low yield and low fluorescence quantum efficiency, and it usually requires post-treatment such as surface passivation to obtain CDs with better fluorescence performance. At the same time, treatment with the large number of strong oxidants used in the reaction is also a problem.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the chemical oxidation process of fullerene C60 with strong acid and oxidant. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the electrochemical preparation of GQDs from coke. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) The solvothermal process for multicolor CDs from L-glutamic acid and o-phenylenediamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Illustration of the microwave assisted method for URTP CDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


Bottom-up methods. 
Bottom-up methods refer to the treatment of small molecules by calcination,56,57 hydrothermal,58,59 solvothermal60,61 ultrasonic and microwave62,63 treatments at specific temperatures and times to obtain CDs. The hydrothermal method and microwave method are commonly used preparation methods. The hydrothermal method is a convenient and economical approach, and the raw materials include small molecules,63 natural products,64 and polymers.65 Similar to hydrothermal processes, nonaqueous solvents such as methanol, ethanol, formamide, and dimethylformamide are used to prepare CDs by solvothermal heating.60,66 Ding et al.66 used L-glutamic acid and o-phenylenediamine as carbon sources by changing the solvents to regulate the fluorescence of CDs (Fig. 1c). Microwave-assisted synthesis is faster than hydrothermal and solvothermal methods, requiring only simple equipment. Jiang et al.67 used ethanolamine and phosphoric acid to prepare ultralong-lifetime room-temperature-phosphorescent CDs via microwave-assisted heating. Pyrolyzation is also a convenient way to form CDs (Fig. 1d). Rong et al.57 prepared highly fluorescent N-CDs by the pyrolysis of guanidinium chloride and citric acid.
The advantage of these methods is that there are more functional groups on the surface of the synthesized CDs, and they have a better fluorescence quantum efficiency without further surface modification. Although the top-down method cannot accurately regulate the particle size of CDs, the bottom-up approach can well restrict the particle size of CDs and thus regulate the luminescence behavior of CDs. Therefore, the bottom-up method is a method that researchers are more inclined to use when preparing CDs.

Synthesis methods and composite mechanism of CDs/inorganic nanohybrids


In situ preparation. 

In situ preparation refers to directly synthesizing nanohybrid materials by mixing CDs and precursors of nanoparticles under reasonable reaction conditions without secondary processing. Because the preparation process of inorganic nanomaterials is relatively complex, and the purity and ratio of the precursor have a significant influence on the final formation of nanoparticles, this kind of synthesis method has stringent requirements for the precursor. The reaction conditions and precursors need to be reasonably selected when choosing the in situ preparation to prepare a nanohybrid.
The reported methods fall into two main categories. In one type the reaction process of CDs and nanoparticle synthesis can promote each other, using inorganic nanoparticles as the basis for CDs synthesis. As shown in Fig. 2a, Zhan et al.68 used citric acid (CA) and (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) as precursors of composite materials and water and ethanol as solvents to obtain SiO2/CDs composite materials through high-temperature hydrothermal reaction. CDs are formed during dehydration condensation of APTES and served as the core for further dehydration condensation of APTES. CDs are coated with SiO2 nanolayers, which prevent the aggregation of CDs and make the composite show bright fluorescence in the solid state. SiO2/CDs exhibiting polychromatic emission were prepared by adjusting the ratio of CA to APTES or H2O to ethanol to control the loading rate of CDs and the morphology of composite materials.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of a solid SiO2/CDs composite prepared by a one-step hydrothermal method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of a magnetic Fe3O4/CDs composite prepared by a high-temperature hydrothermal method with ammonium ferric citrate and melamine as raw materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the other type the reactants can act as both nanoparticle precursors and carbon sources. For example, the researchers utilized ammonium ferric citrate (FAC) as both an iron precursor and a carbon source, and triethylene tetramine (TETA) as a reducing agent and a nitrogen source (Fig. 2b).69 Fe(III) was reduced to Fe3O4 NPs by TETA, while citrate and TETA were carbonized to form nitrogen-doped CDs. Finally, hybrid NPs with fluorescence characteristics and superparamagnetism were synthesized using magnetic iron oxide and fluorescent CDs. Xie et al.70 prepared Fe3O4/CDs hybrid nanoparticles by a one-step hydrothermal method with melamine and ammonium ferric citrate as carbon and iron sources of composites. Fe3O4/CDs hybrid nanoparticles were used to monitor and remove heavy metal ion Hg2+.
Although in situ preparation of CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials is more straightforward and faster, this method has strict requirements for precursor materials and reaction conditions. The experiments explored are only applicable to specific materials and cannot be applied to most materials. Therefore, the development of in situ preparation with a higher application breadth may be a breakthrough in the preparation of carbon dot hybrid materials.



Ex situ preparation. 
Due to the extensive coverage of inorganic nanomaterials, the complexity of their surface states and structures, and the diversity of preparation methods of hybrid materials, there exist many ways to classify the composite mechanisms of CDs and inorganic nanomaterials. Generally speaking, the composite mechanisms can be broadly classified into three categories according to the different connection methods between them. The first type is physical mixing, in which CDs are connected with inorganic materials through non-covalent interactions such as electrostatic adsorption and hydrogen bonding. The second type is chemical covalent bonding. CDs are associated with inorganic materials by solid forces such as covalent bonds and ionic bonds. The third type is nucleation and growth. This kind of composite material is formed by one material using another material as a nucleating agent or attachment matrix for its nucleation and growth. Because of the complexity of preparation methods, the composite mechanism of CDs and inorganic nanomaterials can be further explained according to different preparation methods. In recent years, many researchers have explored various ways to obtain CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials. The multi-step preparation methods can be divided into the following three types.
In the first category researchers prepare CDs and other nanoparticles respectively and then combine these two materials to form nanohybrid materials. CDs and inorganic nanoparticles can be directly mixed mechanically. Hybrid nanoparticles are obtained after forming homogeneous solutions by centrifugation, washing, and drying. In this process, the uniformity of the solutions is critical. Therefore, ultrasound71 and prolonged stirring72 are used to obtain the hybrid nanoparticles. The relationship between CDs and inorganic nanoparticles can be better understood by characterizing the bonding mode between CDs and inorganic nanoparticles.
Due to the various surface groups of CDs, CDs and inorganic nanoparticles can be connected by electrostatic interactions or covalent bonding. For the covalent bonding method, the most common method for amide modification is a reaction between amino compounds and acylating reagents such as acid chlorides or carboxylic acids, in which EDC and NHS function as coupling agents.73 Rao et al.74 fabricated C-dots@SiO2@Q-dots via carbodiimide chemistry. They modified CdTe quantum dots with thioglycolic acid (TGA) and prepared amino-functionalized silica-coated CDs. Covalent bonds conjugated these two. Niu et al.75 prepared red fluorescent CDs/gold nanorods for dual-mode imaging and photothermal therapy (Fig. 3a). Gold nanorods were modified with polyethylene glycol to fill the surface with carboxyl groups. EDC and NHS conjugated the carboxyl group with the amino groups on the CD surface to realize the conjugation of gold nanorods and red fluorescent CDs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of GNR–PEG and GNR–PEG–CDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. (b) CDs catalyzed Ag-NPs as reducing agents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) CDs/NiCo2O4 composites synthesized via the hydrothermal method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) CDs deposited directly on 2D WS2 during the high-temperature preparation process and used for photocatalysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
Based on electrostatic interactions, researchers consider fabricating the positively charged CDs that are usually negatively charged themselves. Positively charged polymers such as polyethyleneimine (PEI) are applied to fabricate positively charged CDs. Yang et al.76 prepared positively charged CDs from FA and PEI by one-step hydrothermal treatment. The positively charged N,C-dots were synthesized by the hydrothermal treatment of pancreatin. Wang et al.77 prepared CDs–AuNPs by assembling CDs on AuNPs by electrostatic interactions. They attached a thiol-modified aptamer to the surface of the AuNPs. The positively charged N,C-dots were mixed with the aptamer/AuNPs, and the N,C-dots/aptamer/AuNPs nanocomposite was assembled.
In the second type, the prepared CDs are added to the precursor of inorganic nanomaterials, and the CDs bind to the inorganic nanomaterial during their formation. CDs can be used as reducing agents or surface-active particles to synthesize hybrid structures.
In 2013, Choi et al.78 prepared CD-Ag nanoparticles using CDs as reducing agents and templates. First, they prepared CDs by thermal decomposition of the oligosaccharide alpha-cyclodextrin and used PEG to post-process the surface of CDs. Then, the CDs were added to AgNO3 solutions and under ultraviolet irradiation, they reduced Ag+ ions to silver nanoparticles due to the photoexcited ones. Shen et al.79 also utilized the reducibility of CDs to prepare Ag/CDs nanoparticles (Fig. 3b). The CDs were designed by a one-step hydrothermal method with chitosan and were mixed with AgNO3 solutions, which were incubated in a water bath of 50 °C for 5 min. Wei et al.38 synthesized CDs/NiCo2O4 composites (NCO) with different morphologies due to the surface interface characteristics of CDs and solutions through hydrothermal reactions (Fig. 3c). When no CDs were added, the NCO-0 spheres had nanoneedles on the surface, like sea urchins. When the amount of CDs was 0.25 mg mL−1, the NCO-0.25 was like a chestnut. And with increasing the number of CDs, the obtained NCO-0.5 just looked like a flower and NCO-1 was like bayberry.
The third method is to add prepared nanoparticles to the CDs precursor solution. This preparation method is suitable for the preparation of inorganic nanomaterials whose synthesis process is complex while the synthesis process of CDs is relatively simple and fast. In addition, the high-temperature synthesis process of CDs does not affect the performance of nanoparticles. Meanwhile, CDs are adsorbed or deposited on the substrate of nanoparticles at high temperatures (Fig. 3d).80

Structures and properties of CDs/inorganic nanohybrid materials
Metal/CDs
Because of their controllable composition, morphology and crystal structure, excellent physical and chemical properties, unique surface recognition ability, and optical properties of absorption and emission in the blue to near infrared (NIR) region, metal nanoclusters have attracted extensive attention of researchers in the fields of sensing, substance detection, and biological antibacterials.23,81,82 As a nanoparticle with low toxicity, high conductivity, and exceptional reducibility, CDs also have full-color tunable fluorescence emission characteristics from the blue to the near-infrared region.
The advantages of the hybridization of CDs and metal nanoparticles are reflected in two aspects: on the one hand, in the sensing field, fluorescence detection platforms are constructed using the quenching mechanisms of CDs, including Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), surface energy transfer (SET), photoinduced electron transfer (PET), internal filtering effect (IFE), and Dexter energy transfer (DET). Moreover, the strong plasma resonance signal with metal nanoclusters (AuNPs, AgNPs, etc.) can combine with the photoluminescence signal caused by the fluorescence quenching effect of CDs to enable double ratio detection.83–86
In the study of Yang et al.,26 they developed a novel fluorescence “on” ratiometric fluorescent sensor based on FRET (Fig. 4a). The photoluminescence intensity of N-CQDs can be quenched by AuNCs via the FRET effect, while carbendazim can cause aggregation of AuNCs and restore the fluorescence of CDs. As shown in the TEM images of Fig. 4b, with the increasing amount of carbendazim, AuNCs continued to accumulate and the particle size gradually increased. Carbendazim ratio detection was achieved by recording the photoluminescence and second-order Rayleigh scattering (SRS) signals of the N-CQDs/AuNCs system. Therefore, the change of ratiometric fluorescence intensity could reflect the different concentrations of carbendazim. In 2022, N-doped CDs were prepared by using orange peel.87 Due to the IFE, the fluorescence of N-CDs was effectively quenched by AuNPs. However, thiram could bind AuNPs through the Au–S bond, resulting in AuNPs aggregation. At this time, the IFE disappeared and CDs fluorescence recovered. Based on the combination of the N-CDs probe and AuNPs, the fluorescence sensor with high selectivity for thiram has high sensitivity. Lin et al.88 constructed a two-ion detection platform using the aggregation-induced fluorescence quenching caused by electrostatic binding between Fe3+ and CuNCs and the fluorescence enhancement caused by FRET and photoinduced electron transfer (PET) of CDs induced by Tb3+ addition. The zeta potential clearly shows the charge change of CDs and CuNCs after recombination, proving that the two are connected by electrostatic interaction between the negative charge on the CD surface and the positive control on the CuNC surface (Fig. 4c). In the TEM images (Fig. 4d), aggregation of CuNCs and size change of CDs were observed after adding metal ions.
 Fig. 4  (a) CDs/AuNCs fluorescent nanoprobes used for carbendazim detection based on FRET. (b) TEM images of AuNCs without (b1) and with the addition of 100 μM (b2), 300 μM (b3) and 600 μM (b4) carbendazim, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Zeta potentials of CDs, CuNCs and CDs–CuNCs. (d) TEM images of CDs (d1), CD–CuNCs (d2), CDs–CuNCs/Fe3+ (d3) and CDs–CuNCs/Fe3+ + Tb3+ (d4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
On the other hand, metal nanoparticles have many unique physical and chemical properties, such as surface plasmon resonance effect, high conductivity, and photothermal efficiency, which can be used in biological imaging, antibacterials, photothermal therapy, photocatalysis, and other fields. Because the functional groups contained on the surface of CDs can produce electrostatic interaction with metal ions, metal ions can be absorbed on the surface of CDs. Electrons are then transferred from the CDs to the metal ions, which are reduced to nanoparticles by the CDs. Many CDs/metal nanoparticle hybrid materials prepared by this mechanism have been studied. Due to the differences in reaction conditions and the nature of CDs, the structures of the metal nanomaterials formed are also different, such as gold nanoflowers,89 bulbous gold90,91 and silver nanoparticles31 (Fig. 5a–f). TEM images show that CDs are well dispersed and attached to the surface of metal nanoparticles to form hybrid materials. In composite materials, CDs have excellent electron transport capacity and outstanding chemical stability, reducing the aggregation of metal nanoparticles, increasing their surface-active sites, and further expanding their application in various fields.89,90,92 As shown in Fig. 5g and h, Wei et al.93 prepared non-toxic CDs by pyrolysis of fluorescent natural Gynostemma, which was used as a reducing agent to prepare CDs/AgNPs composites. Compared with most antibacterial materials such as quaternary ammonium compounds, metal ions, and antibiotics, composite materials have a higher bactericidal ability and relatively low cost, and can slowly release silver ions to inactivate bacteria, which can be widely used against a variety of bacteria and viruses.
 Fig. 5  TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) images of CDs/gold nanoflowers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. TEM (c) and HRTEM (d) images of CDs/bulbous gold. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. HRTEM images of CDs (e) and CDs/silver nanoparticles (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. The antibacterial effect of a CDs/AgNPs composite on (g) Escherichia coli and (h) Glucococcus aureus, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In conclusion, as a therapeutic platform with good biocompatibility and photothermal properties, CDs and metal nanoparticle hybrid materials can be widely used in drug delivery, photothermal/photodynamic therapy, and biological antibacterial treatment fields.94–96
Metal oxide/CDs
Metal oxide nanoparticles have attracted much attention due to their stability, relatively low production cost, and functional properties in various fields.22 Based on the excellent application performance of metal oxide nanoparticles, many researchers compound them with CDs, which have rich surface defects, a wide wavelength range of light absorption, visible solid light absorption, up-conversion luminescence, and other characteristics, to construct a series of CDs and oxide hybrid materials.29,97,98
Due to the rich structure and morphology of metal nanoparticles, the hybrid materials show a variety of composite mechanisms and manifestations. In the most common composite type of hybrid material CDs are embedded in inorganic materials by metal oxides' mesoporous, lamellar, and tubular properties. For example, CQDs are embedded in ZnFe2O4 with mesoporous structure, and TEM images (Fig. 6a and b) show that CQDs have good dispersion.99 More importantly, the composites show an apparent mesoporous structure (Fig. 6c), and the specific surface area and pore volume of the composites do not change much compared with those of pure ZnFe2O4. 15 vol% CQDs/ZnFe2O4 showed the best photocatalytic activity, and compared with the commercial P25 photocatalyst it displayed excellent NO removal performance (Fig. 6d). In addition, CDs may increase the specific surface area of mesoporous materials (Fig. 6e and f). As shown in Fig. 6g, the specific surface area of the CDs–ZnSnO3 composite material is significantly larger than that of pure ZnSnO3. Tetracycline (TC) degradation was used to measure the photocatalytic capacity of CDs–ZnSnO3. CDs' up-conversion and electron transfer properties and the porous cubic ZnSnO3 endowed this excellent composite with stability and photocatalytic performance for degrading tetracycline under visible light (Fig. 6h).100
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image, (c) nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms, and (d) photocurrent responses of CQDs/ZnFe2O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image, (f) HRTEM images, and (g) nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm of CDs–ZnSnO3. (h) The comparative degradation percentage of TC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition, CDs can also be used as a regulator for synthesizing metal oxide nanoparticles. For example, Zhao et al.101 added the prepared CDs into the SnO2–Co3O4 precursor and prepared a hybrid material with lamellar structure by a hydrothermal method (Fig. 7a and b). CDs and SnO2–Co3O4 are connected by strong electrostatic interaction generated by electron transfer. CDs on the surface of SnO2 can effectively protect SnO2 and make it stable for a long time, significantly improving the electrocatalyst's electrochemical performance (Fig. 7c). Similarly, studies in recent years show that ZnO-based energy storage devices are the development trend in the future energy field,102–104 but the development of high performance nickel–zinc (Ni–Zn) alkaline batteries is troubled by the short life and poor rate performance of ZnO anode materials.27 Interestingly, researchers found that CDs controlled the growth of ZnO. The strong adhesion between CDs and metal ions leads CDs and metal oxide nanorods to form dense metal nanoclusters through layer by layer assembly (Fig. 7d–f). ZnO–CDs nanocomposites can improve the cycle stability and rate performance of nickel–zinc batteries because the protective shell coated with a carbon layer on ZnO provides an electron path to enhance the conductivity of the nanocomposite. Using graphene quantum dots as a conductive bridge, Zhang et al.105 constructed a unique nano-skeleton through the bridging effect and prepared a self-supported C-GQDs/α-Fe2O3 composite electrode. The electrode solves the problems of ion transfer obstruction, conductivity reduction, and apparent capacity loss caused by adding a binder in the traditional electrode preparation process.
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image and (b) HRTEM image of CDs/SnO2–Co3O4. (c) The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curve of CDs/SnO2–Co3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. FESEM images of (d) ZnO nanorods and (e) ZnO nanoclusters. (f) Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms of ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, the adaptive fluorescence sensor composed of magnetic Fe3O4 and fluorescent CDs can improve the detection sensitivity, operability, and stability.106,107 The magnetic properties of iron oxide and the photothermal absorption properties of CDs can also be used in dual-mode imaging, near-infrared photoresponsive drug carriers, and photothermal therapy.
Semiconductor material/CDs
Semiconductor quantum dots have attracted much attention from many researchers in optics, electricity, and photocatalysis due to their narrow emission, highly tunable photoluminescence, and good optical stability.
First, semiconductor quantum dots have stable red fluorescence that most CDs find difficult to achieve. A novel nanometer-scale hybrid ratiometric fluorescent probe can be fabricated by combining CDs and semiconductor quantum dots. This hybrid probe exhibits a dual emission band and is widely used in analyte detection. At present, the widely used single sensor quenching the fluorescence intensity is not accurate and stable because the intensity of the single emission sensor changes while the emission color remains the same. The dual-emission ratiometric fluorescent probe can reduce the above limitations by utilizing self-calibration. Generally, the location of the two emission peaks has a large span and there are changes in different fluorescence intensities for the detected substance. So, the color change of the dual-emission fluorescent probe is noticeable and easily recognized by the naked eye under a UV lamp. And the sensitivity of the sensor is improved to eliminate background interference. Due to the non-overlapping emission peaks between red-emitting cadmium telluride quantum dots (CdTe QDs) and blue-emitting CDs and mature preparation methods, red-emitting CdTe QDs and blue-emitting CDs are usually used to prepare dual-emission hybrid probes. Liu et al.108 combined blue-emitting CDs with red-emitting CdTe QDs to construct MIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2, which were designed by the molecular imprinting technique using SiO2 particles as a medium for selective and sensitive determination of ciprofloxacin (CIP) (Fig. 8a and b). The addition of CIP increased the fluorescence intensity at 465 nm and decreased the fluorescence intensity at 657 nm. It can be observed from the fluorescence images that the fluorescence changed from red to blue with the increase of CIP (Fig. 8c and d). Meanwhile, TiO2/CDs/CdTe QDs were used as a photocatalyst to degrade CIP by applying TiO2 nanoparticles in the field of photocatalysis.
 Fig. 8  TEM images of (a) CDs@SiO2 and (b) MIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2. Fluorescence spectra and optical images of (c) molecularly imprinted MIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2 and (d) non-molecularly imprinted NIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2 with varying concentrations of CIP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) TEM image, (f) HRTEM image, (g) nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm, and (h) transient photocurrent density versus time plotted for g-C3N4/NCDs/MoS2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Similarly, Wang et al.109 covalently connected carboxyl-modified red fluorescent CdTe QDs to amino-functionalized blue fluorescent CDs and used this hybrid material to detect Cu2+ selectively. The preparation method was based on the amide coupling reactions. At an excitation wavelength of 340 nm, the dual emissions peaked at 437 and 654 nm. In this research, the red fluorescence of the CdTe QDs was quenched by Cu2+, while the blue fluorescence of the CDs was insensitive to the analyte. With the addition of Cu2+, the variation of fluorescence intensity ratios made the fluorescence color change from pink to blue. And this change could be observed directly under a UV lamp. Researchers tested this probe and found a detection limit of 0.36 nM, much lower than the maximum level of copper (20 μM) permitted in drinking water (EPA).
Furthermore, the combination of CDs and quantum dots with high catalytic activity also has good application prospects in catalysis.110 For example, CDs and MoS2 quantum dots can synergistically enhance the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 nanosheets. According to TEM images (Fig. 8e and f), CDs and MoS2 were evenly dispersed on g-C3N4 nanosheets. The nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm of the g-C3N4/NCDs/MoS2 composite photocatalyst shows that it has mesoporous properties and a high specific surface area (Fig. 8g and h). Many other semiconductors, such as Cu2O,111 CdS,112 MoO2,113 and g-C3N4,34,114,115 are used as catalysts in most photocatalytic reactions.
Applications
Sensing
Based on the excellent and unique fluorescence properties of CDs, they are considered for the preparation of fluorescent probes, usually ratiometric fluorescent probes. Compared with conventional fluorescent nanosensors constructed using organic dyes, CDs-based fluorescent nanoprobes have better biocompatibility and optical stability. And metal nanoclusters or semiconductor quantum dots can be combined with CDs, which can further improve the sensitivity and accuracy of fluorescent nanoprobes. Such fluorescent nanoprobes mainly detect and measure the concentrations of metal ions, gases, pH and small organic molecules based on the relationship between the concentration of the substance to be measured and the fluorescence intensity.84,85,108,109,116–120
A dual emissive multi-color fluorescent-nanoprobe was constructed by Yu et al.117 to detect Hg2+ and Cr6+ separately and simultaneously (Fig. 9a). Under UV light, this nanoprobe showed pink fluorescence. Cr6+ would quench the blue fluorescence emission of CDs, and Hg6+ would quench the red fluorescence emission of BSA-Au NCs. The fluorescent color change can be observed. In addition to this, environmental friendliness, low toxicity, and low cost make this nanohybrid material suitable for testing Hg2+ and Cr6+ in tap water, lake water, seawater, and human blood samples. Patel et al.121 reported that S and N co-doped CDs with abundant functional groups were used to change the surface state of metal oxide semiconductor WO3 and improve its selectivity and sensitivity for detection of NO2 and H2S (Fig. 9b). The gas sensor prepared by CDs–WO3 has excellent cycling stability and anti-interference ability. Lei et al.122 constructed a proportional fluorescent nanoprobe for pH detection (Fig. 9c). The double emission peaks of the nanohybrid were obtained by using red fluorescent Ag2S quantum dots and green fluorescent CDs. The change of pH changed the fluorescence intensity of Ag2S but did not affect the fluorescence intensity of CDs, to realize the ratiometric fluorescence detection of solution pH. In the research of He et al.,123 CDs are energy donors, and AuNCs are acceptors (Fig. 9d). They designed a novel ratiometric fluorescent probe based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer. The addition of DA will cause the quenching of red-emitting AuNCs but the fluorescence of blue-emitting CDs shows the same intensity and wavelength. Therefore, the change of ratiometric fluorescent intensity can reflect the different concentrations of DA. This sensing method has been applied to detect DA in serum samples successfully.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the AuNCs–CDs synthesis process and its detection effect on bimetallic ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Response of the CDs–WO3 composite to NO2 concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the Ag2S–CDs dual-emission fluorescent nanohybrid probe synthesis process and its detection effect on pH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2020, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the AuNCs–CDs fluorescent nanoprobe synthesis process and its detection mechanism on DA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
The determination of a single fluorescent probe based on CDs is easily affected by many factors, such as probe concentration, excitation intensity, instrument efficiency, and measurement conditions. In contrast, the ratiometric fluorescent probe with dual emission self-calibration is less prone to such problems.
Photocatalysis
The application of nanomaterials in photocatalysis is an essential subject in nanoscience. Many research studies have been done to design inexpensive and environmentally friendly nano-catalysts with adjustable chemical activity and selectivity. These catalysts are generally developed through the design and regulation of energy band gaps, chemical composition, and surface modification to improve the performance of the photocatalyst.124 CDs with controllable size have broad and adjustable absorption and luminescence spectra. What's more, their excellent fluorescence properties make them a strong candidate in the field of photocatalysis.
As one of the top five widely used nanomaterials, nano-TiO2 has been commonly used in photocatalysis and photothermal therapy due to its low cost, good biocompatibility, excellent photostability, and oxidation ability. However, the narrow band gap and rapid electron–hole recombination of TiO2 limit its further development. The broad light absorption, photostability, and high electron transfer efficiency of CDs are used to fix them on TiO2 to generate composite materials that absorb visible light and produce long-life charge separation.30,125–127 Zhao et al.128 used carbon quantum dots/titanium dioxide (CQDs/TiO2) composites as photocatalysts for metal–heteroatom cross-coupling (Fig. 10a). CDs expanded the absorption wavelength of the TiO2 photocatalyst in the visible region, while TiO2 provided a fixed platform for CDs to achieve long-term charge separation. More importantly, CDs prepared from various materials have enhanced the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 by this method. Therefore, the photocatalyst prepared by this method has good cycling stability, excellent photostability, and low preparation cost. Pan et al.126 prepared CQDs/TiO2 nanotube composites, and it was found that these composites degraded rhodamine B (RhB) under visible light irradiation. In contrast, pure TiO2 nanotubes did not cause photocatalytic degradation of RhB.
 Fig. 10  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of TiO2 and CDs/TiO2 nanocomposites prepared from various carbon sources. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Comparison curves of the photocatalytic activity (b) and apparent rate constant (c) of the CDs hybrid photocatalyst with other photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
The conjugated π structure of CDs can promote photogenerated charge transfer, and CDs can also act as electron acceptors after photoexcitation. Meanwhile, CDs have the advantages of abundant surface functional groups and wide light absorption regions, so that photocatalysis can be carried out under sunlight irradiation. Considering the unique properties of CDs, some researchers tried to combine CDs with semiconductor photocatalysts to prepare highly reactive photocatalysts under visible light. Li et al.98 modified g-C3N4/SnO2 with CDs to prepare a photocatalyst with excellent photocatalytic performance (Fig. 10b and c). The results showed that the photodegradation rate of indomethacin (IDM) modified by CDs was 5.62 times that of g-C3N4/SnO2. This was due to the upconversion photoluminescence characteristics and effective charge separation ability of CDs, which made up for the original g-C3N4/SnO2 photocatalyst defects, such as broadband gap and the limited energy utilization in the visible region.
In photocatalytic reactions, CDs can be used as a photosensitizer to enhance absorption and improve the energy utilization of light. By taking advantage of the up-conversion property, visible light and even infrared light can be converted into short-wavelength light available to titanium dioxide. In addition to this, CDs are electron acceptors and they can bind to excited electrons generated by semiconductor nanoparticles, resulting in a reduction in the composition of electrons and holes and an increase in photocatalytic activity. Compared with other types of photocatalysts, as a green material of low price, with relatively simple and rapid preparation, and low toxicity and environmental friendliness, the future application of CDs in the field of photocatalysis is very promising and suitable for large-scale and industrial production.
Electrocatalysis
At present, the crisis brought about by the pollution caused by the burning of various fuels (coal, oil) and the exhaustion of raw materials will seriously affect people's lives. Therefore, it is urgent to explore ways to develop new energy sources. Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution is one of the most promising preparation methods.129,130 However, the shortcomings of the precious metal catalysts currently studied, such as scarcity of raw materials, high manufacturing cost, and poor stability, hinder their large-scale application. Therefore, exploring efficient, safe, and low-cost materials for electrocatalysis is a promising scientific research direction.
Catalysts for electrocatalysis need to have a large specific surface area, abundant surface-active sites, and high electron transfer efficiency. Liu et al.131 loaded ruthenium dots to self-crosslinking carbon dots (SC-CDs) to construct a high-performance electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (Fig. 11). Ru@SC-CDs with a low overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 had excellent HER activity and was comparable to the current commercial Pt/C under the same conditions. Besides, this composite was stable at all pH values. Cobalt hydroxide-based materials have a large specific surface area and surface-active sites but lack charge transfer channels and poor electrical conductivity, so they cannot be directly used for electrocatalysis. Jana et al.132 used CDs as a carrier to prepare high Ni–Co bimetallic nanocomposites with good electrochemical performance. The high electron transfer efficiency and abundant surface defects of CDs were used to stabilize and improve the properties of bimetallic composites. Liu et al.133 prepared a novel electrocatalyst by coupling N-doped CDs with cobalt hydroxide (Fig. 12a and b). N-CDs changed the chemical environment of the Co center, created an electron transfer channel, and increased the specific surface area of electrochemical activity. The optimized Co(OH)2@NCDs hybrid had a hierarchical sea urchin-like structure, and its specific surface area for electrochemical activity was about 29 times that of the original Co(OH)2. The combination of cobalt-based electrocatalysts and CDs has attracted extensive research interest for the addition of CDs improving stability and activity.
 Fig. 11  (a) The LSV curves of Ru@SC-CDs at different temperatures. The LSV curves of Ru@SC-CDs, SC-CDs, and Ru dots in 0.5 M H2SO4 (b) and 1 M PBS (c). Stability testing via polarization curves before and after 5000 cycles: (d) Ru@SC-CDs and (e) Pt/C. (f) Chronopotentiometry curves: Ru@SC-CDs and 20 wt% Pt/C in 1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of the Co(OH)2@NCDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) The LSV curves of different electrocatalysts in acid media. (d) The durability test of N–C@Co NPs-600 electrocatalysts in acid media. The inset is the current density stability test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) LSV curves: a series of NH2-CDs/Au catalysts, IrO2/C, and Au nanoparticles. (f) Black: current density of NH2-CDs/Au at 1.6 V (vs. RHE); red: corresponding potential under light irradiation of 8.2 mW cm−2. The black curve: the UV-vis absorption of NH2-CDs-3/Au. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
CDs are also applied in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Feng et al.134 provided approaches to fabricate N–C@Co NPs and CDs@Co3O4 NPs to enhance electrocatalytic activities for the HER and OER. The CDs changed the coordination environment of the catalyst and the electronic structure. They were beneficial in increasing the adsorption, suppressing the aggregation and oxidation of Co NPs, and accelerating the electron transfer rates (Fig. 12c and d). In order to fabricate a low-cost and high-performance electrocatalyst for the ORR, Niu et al.135 prepared a metal-free hybrid of graphene oxide decorated with nitrogen-doped CDs. Compared to the commercial Pt/C catalyst, this hybrid showed an excellent electrocatalytic performance with a kinetic current density of 18.4 mA cm−2 at −0.70 V and a more positive onset potential (0.13 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The electrocatalytic properties of nanohybrid materials are usually better than those of each component. For example, Liu et al.136 designed AuNP/amidogen-modified CD composites to obtain better ORR performance in the dark than AuNP and NH2-CDs (Fig. 12e and f). Naqvi et al.137 developed a new combination of N-CDs and copper cobalt alloy, which showed good electrocatalytic properties (current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 0.38 V in a strongly alkaline medium). At pH = 8 and 0.1 mV s−1, this electrocatalyst had a good redox peak value for the HER and OER.
Apart from the ORR, OER, and HER, CDs are applied to electrochemical CO2 reduction. For instance, Lv et al.138 fabricated an N–MoS2 and N-doped CDs composite for CO2 electroreduction with high performance. This composite showed a low onset overpotential requirement (130 mV) for CO formation, and the CO faradaic efficiency reached 90.2%.
The unique electron transfer characteristics and high specific surface area of CDs make them excellent catalysts. They can support various surface functional groups (e.g., –NH2, –OH, and –COOH) and have many catalytically favorable sites. Heteroatomic doping of CDs can change the electronic structure of the catalytic active center, which is conducive to the adsorption of hydrogen intermediates. The interaction between multi-component nanostructures may enhance the electron transfer efficiency and improve the catalytic activity.
Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (SCs), as a new electronic device, have higher power density, excellent coulomb efficiency, and greater cycling lifespan than lithium-ion batteries. However, compared with battery electrode materials, the SC electrode materials often have lower energy density due to the double-layer capacitance on the electrode surfaces.
Some researchers combined CDs with MTMOs (mixed transition metal oxides) or carbon-based nanomaterials. MTMOs have high energy densities, but the lower electronic conductivities and volume change effect cause short cycle life and poor rate performance. The addition of CDs will form larger interface areas, which is favorable for electrochemical reactions. And when the two are assembled, the paths and space for ion transfer and volume change will be more. Al-Enizi et al.36 prepared a novel carbon quantum dot/cerium doped nickel oxide (CQDs/Ce-NiO) nanocomposite with mesoporous properties (Fig. 13c and d). Based on NiO, CDs were used to improve the cycle stability and conductivity of the supercapacitor, and the excellent redox capacity of Ce3+ was used to increase its electron transfer capacity and current density. The supercapacitors had large BET specific surface area, high current density, and excellent cycle stability.
 Fig. 13  (a) Hybrid supercapacitor prepared from a CDs coated SWCNT/ZnO composite material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Comparison of rate performance between CQDs and CQDs/CoS2 supercapacitors (left) and specific volume and rate performance of CoS2 nanocomposites within 10000 cycles (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Specific capacitance values of a CQDs/Ce-NiO nanocomposite (left) and cycling stability (right) of the CQDs/Ce-NiO nanocomposite for up to 2000 cycles. (d) Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm of the CQDs/Ce-NiO nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
At the same time, using the photothermal characteristics of CDs to produce photoresponsive supercapacitors is also a development direction of CDs for supercapacitors. In the work of Sinha et al.,139 CDs were adsorbed on SWCNT/ZnO electrodes to form CDs-enhanced hybrid electrodes, which were used as working devices to prepare photoresponsive supercapacitors (Fig. 13a). By comparing the relative strength of the surface capacitance in the presence or absence of ultraviolet light, it could be seen that the capacitor had an ultraviolet light response. This was because the presence of CDs contributed to the creation of electron–hole pairs, which improved the ability of supercapacitors to store charge under ultraviolet light. More remarkable was that the supercapacitor had a hybrid capacitor composed of a double-layer and pseudo-capacitor. This work provided a new perspective for the research of electrochemical energy storage devices. The spherical electrode prepared by Arsalani et al.,140 using the CQDs/CoS2 nanocomposite, had a capacitance of 808 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and a capacity retention rate of 83.9% at 20 A g−1, and showed excellent cycling stability in more than 10000 cycles (Fig. 13b). The unique mesoporous nanostructure of CoS increased the specific surface area of the electrode, and the high electron transfer capacity of CDs improved the conductivity of the electrode. These advantages made electrode materials stand out in future applications.
By utilizing the reducibility of the CDs, Unnikrishnan et al.141 fabricated MnOx–CDGs composites. CDs could be used as a reducing agent for KMnO4 to synthesize MnOx–graphene hybrid nanocomposites, and they were also used to disperse graphene. Graphene plays a vital role in the conductivity of this composite. What's more, the addition of CDs makes MnOx–CDGs perform better than MnOx–GOs because of the more excellent electrical conductivity and the charge-transfer efficiency of CDs. This composite showed high charge–discharge cycling stability, and after 5000 cycles, the specific capacitance remained at 94% of the initial value. And they constructed a solid-state supercapacitor, which consists of MnOx–CDGs, NMP–PVDF, and H3PO4/PVA. The solid-state supercapacitor showed some flexibility and had potential applications in moderately bending energy devices.
In other words, CDs with low cost, high conductivity, and excellent optical performance were adsorbed or doped on the electrode of a supercapacitor, which can not only improve the energy storage performance of a supercapacitor but also reduce the cost and improve the possibility of practical application.
Photovoltaic devices
Due to the increasing global demand for energy, the exploration of new energy sources is currently a hot topic of research. Photovoltaic devices that directly convert solar energy into electrical energy have unique advantages in solving energy problems. Low-cost, high-efficiency and durable solar devices are prerequisites for their future applications.142–144 Compared with traditional silicon-based solar cells, CDs-doped third-generation solar cells (dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), perovskite solar cells (PSCs), organic solar cells (OSCs), etc.) have excellent characteristics such as high efficiency, high stability and low toxicity. CDs have a good photo-absorption capacity and electronic transmission characteristics, and they can be electron acceptors and donors. Therefore, they can be applied to photo-energy conversion devices like solar cells.145–147
Hui et al.148 doped red carbon dots in SnO2 in the high-efficiency electron transport layer and applied it to perovskite solar cells (Fig. 14a). In planar PSCs, the effective electron transport layer (ETL) plays an essential role in facilitating carrier separation and electron extraction. Due to red carbon dots, the efficiency of the planar perovskite cell was improved from 19.15% to 22.77%, and its moisture resistance was also improved. The electron mobility was significantly increased from 9.32 × 10−4 to 1.73 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 S−1, which is one of the highest electron mobilities reported in modified SnO2. At 25 °C and 40–60% humidity, the initial efficiency of the equipment remained above 95% after 1000 h. These results indicate that inexpensive RCQs are simple but excellent additives that can be added to ETLs to prepare stable, high-performance PSCs and other perovskite-based optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 14  (a) Crystallization mechanism of a red-carbon-quantum-dot-doped SnO2 composite, and the relationship between current density and voltage of perovskite cells based on SnO2 and SnO2-RCQs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) I–V curves and electrochemical parameters of DSSCs based on NiO@C-dots (1:1 EDA/CA molar ratio) with different CDs contents and sensitizers. The numerals in I–V curves represent the percentage of CDs by mass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Etefa et al.149 fabricated NiO@C-dots to construct DSSCs. Compared with no added CDs, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) improved significantly. The DSSCs based on NiO@C-dots achieved a PCE of 9.85% (Fig. 14b).
Theranostic systems
The realization of multiple functions in the same theranostic agent requires the integration of modalities with different functions (i.e., carrier, therapy, diagnostic), which is often challenging. These systems are generally limited due to high hydrophobicity, low photostability, intrinsic toxicity, and other safety issues arising from the various natures of the moieties and the complexity of the system.150 CDs owing to their excellent water solubility, unique fluorescence stability, and surface characteristics have drawn much attention in bioapplications.151–153 Theranostic systems based on CDs have been recently developed.
Due to the existence of CDs, the nanoparticles can absorb near-infrared (NIR) light and convert it into heat, thus realizing near-infrared response drug release and photothermal treatment with high efficacy. Wang et al.154 compounded CDs with magnetic Fe3O4 nanocrystals in porous carbon to produce multifunctional Fe3O4@c-CDs hybrid nanoparticles (about 100 nm). They applied the composite to bimodal imaging, near-infrared response drug carriers, and photothermal therapies.
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) have attracted broad interest due to their significant physicochemical properties, including large specific surface area, adjustable pore size, ease of surface functionalization, and superior biocompatibility. In recent years, photoluminescent (PL) MSNs have been designed as a therapeutic platform, showing advantages in the study of MSN imaging, drug delivery, and circulation and metabolic mechanisms, which has dramatically expanded the application of MSNs. Ryplida et al.153 combined amphoteric ion CDs with MSNs for photothermal therapy with adjustable pH (Fig. 15a). The characteristic amphiphilicity of CDs prepared from PEG-G-PDS polymer as a carbon source is key to applying composite materials. Firstly, the hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions between CDs and ICG cause loading of ICG into composite materials under a typical physiological environment. At this time, the introduction of ICG makes CDs show weak fluorescence due to fluorescence quenching due to aggregation. However, in tumor tissues with acidic pH, the conformation of amphoteric CDs is turned on due to passive targeting and enhanced permeability and retention (EPR effect), destroying the electrostatic interaction between ICG and CDs and causing the release of ICG to produce a photothermal effect that kills cancer cells (Fig. 15b). Jiao et al.155 prepared CDs with a negative surface charge using polyacrylic acid as a carbon source. CDs were covalently connected with MSNs with the –SS–NH2 group grafted on the surface through an amidation reaction for packaging therapeutic drugs dispersed in MSNs (Fig. 15c). At the same time, the disulfide bond was broken by the redox reaction to control drug release. In this system, CDs can manage drug release, track the drug-carrying status in vivo and improve the dispersion and stability of MSNs. More importantly, the fluorescence properties of CDs can also be used to conduct real-time cell imaging of tumor cells and track the treatment process of nanoparticles on tumors (Fig. 15d).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process and mechanism of action of pH-responsive ICG-MSN(CD). (b) Confocal microscopy fluorescence images of ICG-MSN(CD)-treated MDA-MB-231. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation process and mechanism of action of MSNs–SS–CDPAA/DOX. (d) TEM images of (d1) MSNs and (d2) MSNs–SS–CDPAA nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Non-toxic or low-toxic CDs are prerequisites for their application in the biological field because different carbon sources and preparation methods lead to the need to test the biocompatibility of different CDs before application. At the same time, since the surface groups of CDs are numerous and vulnerable to environmental influences, the stability of CDs and their toxicity in a virtual application environment need to be further observed and detected before they can be applied in the biological field, which is also an issue to be considered in its current application.
Lithium/sodium ion batteries
Carbon-based materials have promising potential applications in lithium/sodium-ion batteries owing to their chemical stability and electrical conductivity.8,105 And CDs are candidates for stabilizing the electrode materials due to their surface properties. To improve the performance of battery electrodes, Balogun et al.156 fabricated VO2 interwoven nanowires with carbon quantum dots through nanoscale surface engineering for LIBs and SIBs. This nanomaterial displayed excellent high-rate capability and cycling stability. Zhang et al.157 prepared a graphene-rich petal-like rutile TiO2 (G/P-RTiO2) and added CDs to G/P-RTiO2 to construct the electrode. CDs as designer additives induced rutile TiO2 from nanoparticles to nanoneedles in this research. And then, they self-organized to a 3D petal-like structure. This structure resulted in a shortened diffusion pathway of the sodium ions and an improved electrochemical performance for sodium storage. Moreover, an ultrathin graphene layer was formed on the surface of TiO2 which remarkably increased the conductivity of the ensemble. In another research, GQDs provided special soft protection to the anode. Zhu et al.158 designed and synthesized CuO + Cu + GQD (CCG) triaxial nanowire arrays as an LIB anode to improve the performance. Because of GQDs, the surface conductivity and the stability of the nanowire array structure were significantly increased. Due to this, the CCG anode showed a high-rate capability and excellent cyclability (up to 1000 cycles).
Conclusions and outlook
This review systematically summarized the recent progress in preparing and applying CDs/inorganic nanocomposites. CDs attract researchers' attention because of their unique physical and chemical properties as a kind of carbon-based material. Its surface contains abundant functional groups, which can readily recombine with inorganic nanoparticles and can be used in sensing, photoelectric, biological, and other fields. But at the same time, there are some problems to be solved in researching composite materials.
Although CDs have a wide absorption spectrum and excitation dependence, most of the current studies prepared blue/green CDs, while there were few studies on red and near-infrared CDs, resulting in a low quantum yield of the CDs prepared. Near-infrared fluorescent CDs have great application potential in the biological field, which are worth studying and exploring. At the same time, the luminescence mechanism of CDs needs to be systematically studied, and the relationship between the structure of CDs and fluorescence performance needs to be further explored.
For CDs/inorganic nanomaterials, in terms of synthesis, most of the reported methods for the preparation of CDs/inorganic nanomaterials involve ex situ preparation, which not only limits the loading of CDs in inorganic nanomaterials, but is also not suitable for large-scale applications and industrial production due to the complexity of the process. Furthermore, in the process of recombination of CDs and inorganic nanoparticles, the mechanism of action of CDs needs to be studied in more detail, such as the improvement of CDs–TiO2 photocatalytic activity under visible light. Some researchers have questioned the up-conversion nature of CDs, suggesting that it should be caused by two-photon excitation. In addition, the morphology and size of composites greatly influence their properties, so it is urgent to develop a synthesis method that can accurately control the structure of CDs and inorganic nanocomposites. In terms of application, although researchers have found the application prospects of CDs in the fields of sensing, catalysis, biology, and photoelectric devices, more extensive application fields still need to be explored. In addition, due to the rich groups on the surface of CDs, aggregation-induced fluorescence quenching, and other reasons, the performance of CDs may change in the practical application environment, which needs to be considered.
However, there is no doubt about the application potential of CDs. How to give full play to its characteristics, constructing CDs/inorganic nanoparticle materials with excellent performance, and coordinating the balance of all components still need the unremitting efforts of scientific researchers.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21774098) and the Opening Project of State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering (Sichuan University) (Grant No. sklpme2019-4-26).
References
J. Schneider, C. J. Reckmeier, Y. Xiong, M. von Seckendorff, A. S. Susha, P. Kasák and A. L. Rogach, Molecular Fluorescence in Citric Acid-Based Carbon Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(3), 2014–2022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, C. Bi, D. Wang and J. Huang, The Functions of Fullerenes in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(4), 782–794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Ma, Q. An, V. Levitas, Y. Zhang, B. Feng, J. Chaudhuri and W. A. Goddard, Shear driven formation of nano-diamonds at sub-gigapascals and 300 K, Carbon, 2019, 146, 364–368 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, J. Kong Yoong Lee, L. Tian, M. Srinivasan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Electrospun carbon nanofibers and their hybrid composites as advanced materials for energy conversion and storage, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 361–395 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yan, Z. Sun, H. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Jiang and Z. Bai, The fluorescence mechanism of carbon dots, and methods for tuning their emission color: a review, Mikrochim. Acta, 2019, 186(8), 583 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tao, S. Zhu, T. Feng, C. Xia, Y. Song and B. Yang, The polymeric characteristics and photoluminescence mechanism in polymer carbon dots: A review, Mater. Today Chem., 2017, 6, 13–25 CrossRef .
L. Mo, X. Xu, Z. Liu, H. Liu, B. Lei, J. Zhuang, Z. Guo, Y. Liu and C. Hu, Visible-light excitable thermally activated delayed fluorescence in aqueous solution from F, N-doped carbon dots confined in silica nanoparticles, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130728 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Li, L. Li, Z. Luo, Y. Xiang, W. Deng, G. Zou, H. Hou and X. Ji, Carbon Dots Evoked Li Ion Dynamics for Solid State Battery, Small, 2021, 17(39), 2102978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Ganganboina, N. K. Dega, H. L. Tran, W. Darmonto and R. A. Doong, Application of sulfur-doped graphene quantum dots@gold-carbon nanosphere for electrical pulse-induced impedimetric detection of glioma cells, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 181, 113151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Gao, X. Chen, G. Fang, S. Yuan and Y. Yuan, Excitation-Independent Dual-Color Carbon Dots: Surface-State Controlling and Solid-State Lighting, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4(9), 2352–2358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, D. Benetti, X. Tong, L. Jin, Z. M. Wang, D. Ma, H. Zhao and F. Rosei, Colloidal carbon dots based highly stable luminescent solar concentrators, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 378–387 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ju, Y. Wang, Y. M. Zhang, T. Zhang, Z. Liu, M. Li and S. Xiao-An Zhang, Photostable and Low-Toxic Yellow-Green Carbon Dots for Highly Selective Detection of Explosive 2,4,6-Trinitrophenol Based on the Dual Electron Transfer Mechanism, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(15), 13040–13047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, C. Li, Y. Ren, X. Sun, W. Pan, Y. Li, J. Wang and W. Wang, Carbon dots: surface engineering and applications, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4(35), 5772–5788 RSC .
H. Xie, H. Luo, Y. Liu, R. Guo, X. Ji, H. Hou and D. Zhang, Extremely low loading of carbon quantum dots for high energy density in polyetherimide nanocomposites, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 133601 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, Q. Wu, L. Wu, L. Liu, D. Wang and P. Wang, Reaction kinetic acceleration induced by atomic-hybridized channels in carbon quantum dot/ReS2 composites for efficient Cr(VI) reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 300, 119807 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yuan, Y.-K. Wang, G. Sharma, Y. Dong, X. Zheng, P. Li, A. Johnston, G. Bappi, J. Z. Fan, H. Kung, B. Chen, M. I. Saidaminov, K. Singh, O. Voznyy, O. M. Bakr, Z.-H. Lu and E. H. Sargent, Bright high-colour-purity deep-blue carbon dot light-emitting diodes via efficient edge amination, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 14(3), 171–176 CrossRef .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Glowing graphene quantum dots and carbon dots: properties, syntheses, and biological applications, Small, 2015, 11(14), 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yuan, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Li, Z. Tan, L. Fan and S. Yang, Bright Multicolor Bandgap Fluorescent Carbon Quantum Dots for Electroluminescent Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(3), 1604436 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Benetti and F. Rosei, Semi-transparent luminescent solar concentrators based on plasmon-enhanced carbon dots, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(41), 23345–23352 RSC .
B. Zheng, J. Fan, B. Chen, X. Qin, J. Wang, F. Wang, R. Deng and X. Liu, Rare-Earth Doping in Nanostructured Inorganic Materials, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 5519–5603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Liang, J. Wang, S. Jiao and D. Xue, Multifunctional inorganic nanomaterials for energy applications, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(1), 14–42 RSC .
H. J. Kwon, K. Shin, M. Soh, H. Chang, J. Kim, J. Lee, G. Ko, B. H. Kim, D. Kim and T. Hyeon, Large-Scale Synthesis and Medical Applications of Uniform-Sized Metal Oxide Nanoparticles, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(42), 1704290 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Singh, T. Dutta, K. H. Kim, M. Rawat, P. Samddar and P. Kumar, 'Green' synthesis of metals and their oxide nanoparticles: applications for environmental remediation, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 16(1), 84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rani, V. Kasneryk and M. Opanasenko, MOF-inorganic nanocomposites: Bridging a gap with inorganic materials, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 26, 101283 CrossRef .
F. Guan, Z. Song, F. Xin, H. Wang, D. Yu, G. Li and W. Liu, Preparation of hydrophobic transparent paper via using polydimethylsiloxane as transparent agent, J. Bioresour. Bioprod., 2020, 5(1), 37–43 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Xing, T. Zou, Z. Wang, R. Zhao, P. Hong, S. Peng, X. Zhang and Y. Wang, A novel and sensitive ratiometric fluorescence assay for carbendazim based on N-doped carbon quantum dots and gold nanocluster nanohybrid, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 386, 121958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Wei, Z.-Y. Zhu, X. Zhao, T.-B. Song, J.-H. Huang, Y.-X. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Chen, X.-Q. Niu, Y.-G. Wang and H.-M. Xiong, Self-assembled ZnO-carbon dots anode materials for high performance nickel-zinc alkaline batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 130660 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, E. V. Ushakova, A. L. Rogach and S. Qu, Optical Properties of Carbon Dots in the Deep-Red to Near-Infrared Region Are Attractive for Biomedical Applications, Small, 2021, 17(43), 2102325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, X. Ma, X. Han, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Yao and W. Shi, Synthesis of carbon dot-ZnO-based nanomaterials for antibacterial application, New J. Chem., 2021, 45(9), 4496–4505 RSC .
H. Luo, S. Dimitrov, M. Daboczi, J.-S. Kim, Q. Guo, Y. Fang, M.-A. Stoeckel, P. Samorì, O. Fenwick, A. B. Jorge Sobrido, X. Wang and M.-M. Titirici, Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Dots/TiO2 Nanoparticle Composites for Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(4), 3371–3381 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Divya, R. Karthikeyan, B. Sinduja, A. Anancia Grace, S. A. John, J. H. Hahn and V. Dharuman, Carbon dots stabilized silver-lipid nano hybrids for sensitive label free DNA detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 133, 48–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Wu, S. Guo, M. Han, Y. Zhou, Y. Sun, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Mesoporous nitrogen, sulfur co-doped carbon dots/CoS hybrid as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(6), 2717–2723 RSC .
M. Han, S. Zhu, S. Lu, Y. Song, T. Feng, S. Tao, J. Liu and B. Yang, Recent progress on the photocatalysis of carbon dots: Classification, mechanism and applications, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 201–218 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, J. Liu, X. Miao, M. Han, H. Zhang, Z. Cui, S. Sun, Z. Kang, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Peering into water splitting mechanism of g-C3N4-carbon dots metal-free photocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Jia, Y. Zhang, T. Qiu, W. Hong, Y. Jiang, G. Zou, H. Hou, X. Chen and X. Ji, Li4Ti5O12 quantum dot decorated carbon frameworks from carbon dots for fast lithium ion storage, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3(9), 1761–1767 RSC .
A. M. Al-Enizi, M. Ubaidullah and D. Kumar, Carbon quantum dots (CQDs)/Ce doped NiO nanocomposite for high performance supercapacitor, Mater. Today Commun., 2021, 27, 102340 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, R. Che, J. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Jiang, J. Liang, S. Chen and H. Su, Activated Carbon and Carbon Quantum Dots/Titanium Dioxide Composite Based on Waste Rice Noodles: Simultaneous Synthesis and Application in Water Pollution Control, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12(3), 472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Wei, H. Ding, P. Zhang, Y. F. Song, J. Chen, Y. G. Wang and H. M. Xiong, Carbon Dots/NiCo2 O4 Nanocomposites with Various Morphologies for High Performance Supercapacitors, Small, 2016, 12(43), 5927–5934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Chen, M. L. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Carbon dot-based composites for catalytic applications, Green Chem., 2020, 22(13), 4034–4054 RSC .
C. Rosso, G. Filippini and M. Prato, Carbon Dots as Nano-Organocatalysts for Synthetic Applications, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(15), 8090–8105 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Hoang, K. Dave and V. G. Gomes, Carbon quantum dot-based composites for energy storage and electrocatalysis: Mechanism, applications and future prospects, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104093 CrossRef CAS .
B. De and N. Karak, Recent progress in carbon dot–metal based nanohybrids for photochemical and electrochemical applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(5), 1826–1859 RSC .
H. Li, X. Yan, S. Qiao, G. Lu and X. Su, Yellow-Emissive Carbon Dot-Based Optical Sensing Platforms: Cell Imaging and Analytical Applications for Biocatalytic Reactions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(9), 7737–7744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Lu, J. Chen, S. Wang, B. Hu and X. Wang, Application of carbon dots and their composite materials for the detection and removal of radioactive ions: A review, Chemosphere, 2022, 287(Pt 3), 132313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Ray, A. Saha, N. R. Jana and R. Sarkar, Fluorescent Carbon Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization, and Bioimaging Application, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(43), 18546–18551 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xu, R. Ray, Y. L. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, Electrophoretic analysis and purification of fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotube fragments, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(40), 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, Quantum-sized carbon dots for bright and colorful photoluminescence, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(24), 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Hu, K.-Y. Niu, J. Sun, J. Yang, N.-Q. Zhao and X.-W. Du, One-step synthesis of fluorescent carbon nanoparticles by laser irradiation, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19(4), 484–488 RSC .
J. Zhou, C. Booker, R. Li, X. Zhou, T. K. Sham, X. Sun and Z. Ding, An electrochemical avenue to blue luminescent nanocrystals from multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(4), 744–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Zhao, Z. L. Zhang, B. H. Huang, J. Peng, M. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Facile preparation of low cytotoxicity fluorescent carbon nanocrystals by electrooxidation of graphite, Chem. Commun., 2008,(41), 5116–5118 RSC .
M. He, X. Guo, J. Huang, H. Shen, Q. Zeng and L. Wang, Mass production of tunable multicolor graphene quantum dots from an energy resource of coke by a one-step electrochemical exfoliation, Carbon, 2018, 140, 508–520 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gonçalves, P. A. S. Jorge, J. R. A. Fernandes and J. C. G. Esteves da Silva, Hg(II) sensing based on functionalized carbon dots obtained by direct laser ablation, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 145(2), 702–707 CrossRef .
C. K. Chua, Z. Sofer, P. Simek, O. Jankovsky, K. Klimova, S. Bakardjieva, S. Hrdlickova Kuckova and M. Pumera, Synthesis of strongly fluorescent graphene quantum dots by cage-opening buckminsterfullerene, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(3), 2548–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joseph and A. A. Anappara, White-Light-Emitting Carbon Dots Prepared by the Electrochemical Exfoliation of Graphite, Chemphyschem, 2017, 18(3), 292–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Q. Lu, J. Deng, H. Li and Y. Zhang, One-pot electrochemical synthesis of functionalized fluorescent carbon dots and their selective sensing for mercury ion, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 866, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Wu, X. Yan and M. Wu, Observation of pH-, solvent-, spin-, and excitation-dependent blue photoluminescence from carbon nanoparticles, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46(21), 3681–3683 RSC .
M. Rong, Y. Feng, Y. Wang and X. Chen, One-pot solid phase pyrolysis synthesis of nitrogen-doped carbon dots for Fe3+ sensing and bioimaging, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 868–874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Deng and H. Zhang, Highly fluorescent nitrogen-doped carbon dots with excellent thermal and photo stability applied as invisible ink for loading important information and anti-counterfeiting, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(2), 491–496 RSC .
F. Yuan, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Li, Z. Tan, L. Fan and S. Yang, Bright Multicolor Bandgap Fluorescent Carbon Quantum Dots for Electroluminescent Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(3), 1604436 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, C. Yu, C. Hu, W. Yang, C. Zhao, S. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang and J. Qiu, Solvothermal conversion of coal into nitrogen-doped carbon dots with singlet oxygen generation and high quantum yield, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 320, 570–575 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ju, H. Nie, X.-g. Zhang, Q. Chen, X. Guo, Z. Xing, M. Li and S. X.-A. Zhang, Inorganic Salt Incorporated Solvothermal Synthesis of Multicolor Carbon Dots, Emission Mechanism, and Antibacterial Study, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1(11), 6131–6138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qu, X. Liu, X. Guo, M. Chu, L. Zhang and D. Shen, Amplified Spontaneous Green Emission and Lasing Emission From Carbon Nanoparticles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(18), 2689–2695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Xiao, P. Zhuo, H. Yin, Y. Fan, X. Liu and Z. Chen, Carbon Dots Exhibiting Concentration-Dependent Full-Visible-Spectrum Emission for Light-Emitting Diode Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(49), 46054–46061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmadian-Fard-Fini, M. Salavati-Niasari and H. Safardoust-Hojaghan, Hydrothermal green synthesis and photocatalytic activity of magnetic CoFe2O4–carbon quantum dots nanocomposite by turmeric precursor, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28(21), 16205–16214 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, Y. Li, T. Peng, M. Yu, X. Hu and G. He, Fluorescent carbon dots directly derived from polyethyleneimine and their application for the detection of Co2+, Anal. Methods, 2018, 10(25), 2989–2993 RSC .
H. Ding, J. S. Wei, P. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, Q. Y. Gao and H. M. Xiong, Solvent-Controlled Synthesis of Highly Luminescent Carbon Dots with a Wide Color Gamut and Narrowed Emission Peak Widths, Small, 2018, 14(22), 1800612 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, Y. Wang, X. Gao, C. Cai and H. Lin, Facile, Quick, and Gram-Scale Synthesis of Ultralong-Lifetime Room-Temperature-Phosphorescent Carbon Dots by Microwave Irradiation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57(21), 6216–6220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhan, B. Shang, M. Chen and L. Wu, One-Step Synthesis of Silica-Coated Carbon Dots with Controllable Solid-State Fluorescence for White Light-Emitting Diodes, Small, 2019, 15(24), 1901161 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, X. Wang, Y. Guo, A. Iqbal, Y. Dong, W. Li, W. Liu, W. Qin, S. Chen, X. Zhou and Y. Yang, One-pot synthesis of polyamines improved magnetism and fluorescence Fe3O4-carbon dots hybrid NPs for dual modal imaging, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45(13), 5484–5491 RSC .
R. Xie, Y. Qu, M. Tang, J. Zhao, S. Chua, T. Li, F. Zhang, H. Wheatley and F. Chai, Carbon dots-magnetic nanocomposites for the detection and removal of Hg(2), Food Chem., 2021, 364, 130366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Song, Q. Wang, L. Wang, J. Lin, X. Wei, V. Murugadoss, S. Wu, Z. Guo, T. Ding and S. Wei, Carbon nitride nanoplatelet photocatalysts heterostructured with B-doped carbon nanodots for enhanced photodegradation of organic pollutants, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 559, 124–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Wang, C. L. Zheng, Q. L. Li and S. N. Ding, Electrochemiluminescence of a nanoAg-carbon nanodot composite and its application to detect sulfide ions, Analyst, 2014, 139(7), 1751–1755 RSC .
F. Yan, Y. Jiang, X. Sun, Z. Bai, Y. Zhang and X. Zhou, Surface modification and chemical functionalization of carbon dots: a review, Mikrochim. Acta, 2018, 185(9), 424 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Rao, W. Liu, Z. Lu, Y. Wang, H. Ge, P. Zou, X. Wang, H. He, X. Zeng and Y. Wang, Silica-coated carbon dots conjugated to CdTe quantum dots: a ratiometric fluorescent probe for copper(II), Microchim. Acta, 2015, 183(2), 581–588 CrossRef .
Y. Niu, G. Ling, L. Wang, S. Guan, Z. Xie, E. A. Barnoy, S. Zhou and D. Fixler, Gold Rod-Polyethylene Glycol-Carbon Dot Nanohybrids as Phototheranostic Probes, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(9), 706 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Shen, C. Su, J. Yang, M. Piao, F. Jia, G. Gao, L. Zhang and Q. Lin, One-step synthesis of photoluminescent carbon dots with excitation-independent emission for selective bioimaging and gene delivery, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 492, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Weng, Y. Liu, Z. Lu, C. M. Li and C. Yu, Aptamer induced assembly of fluorescent nitrogen-doped carbon dots on gold nanoparticles for sensitive detection of AFB1, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 78, 23–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, S.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J.-W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J.-R. Jeong, I.-W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B.-S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Versatile surface plasmon resonance of carbon-dot-supported silver nanoparticles in polymer optoelectronic devices, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7(9), 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, M. Chen, L. Hu, X. Chen and J. Wang, Growth and stabilization of silver nanoparticles on carbon dots and sensing application, Langmuir, 2013, 29(52), 16135–16140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Long, S. Liu, X. Li, J. Zhu, L. Zhang, T. Qing, P. Zhang and B. Feng, In-situ covalent bonding of carbon dots on two-dimensional tungsten disulfide interfaces for effective monitoring and remediation of chlortetracycline residue, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 432, 134315 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, F.-X. Xiao, H. Phan, S. Chen, Z. Yu, R. Wang, T.-Q. Nguyen and T. T. Yang Tan, Unraveling the cooperative synergy of zero-dimensional graphene quantum dots and metal nanocrystals enabled by layer-by-layer assembly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(4), 1700–1713 RSC .
K. Yorseng, S. Siengchin, B. Ashok and A. V. Rajulu, Nanocomposite egg shell powder with in situ generated silver nanoparticles using inherent collagen as reducing agent, J. Bioresour. Bioprod., 2020, 5(2), 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Le, Y. N. Ahn and S. J. Park, An effective method for cysteine determination based on fluorescence resonance energy system between co-doped graphene quantum dots and silver nanoparticles, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2022, 39, 1065–1071 CrossRef CAS .
E. Priyadarshini and K. Rawat, Au@carbon dot nanoconjugates as a dual mode enzyme-free sensing platform for cholesterol, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5(27), 5425–5432 RSC .
M. Amiri, S. Dadfarnia, A. M. Haji Shabani and S. Sadjadi, Non-enzymatic sensing of dopamine by localized surface plasmon resonance using carbon dots-functionalized gold nanoparticles, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2019, 172, 223–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, H. Zhou, R. C. Qian, J. Liu, Y. L. Ying and Y. T. Long, Analysis of the electron transfer properties of carbon quantum dots on gold nanorod surfaces via plasmonic resonance scattering spectroscopy, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53(42), 5729–5732 RSC .
L. Fu, Y. Hou, H. Guo, C. Liu, Y. Li, B. Jia, L. Zhou and W. Kong, Gold nanoparticles and nitrogen-doped carbon dots based fluorescent nanosensor for ultrasensitive detection of thiram in hawthorn, Microchem. J., 2022, 176, 107253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, J. Dong, B. Zhang, Z. Yuan, C. Lu, P. Han, J. Xu, L. Jia and L. Wang, Synthesis of bifunctional fluorescent nanohybrids of carbon dots-copper nanoclusters via a facile method for Fe(3+) and Tb(3+) ratiometric detection, Anal. Methods, 2021, 13(32), 3577–3584 RSC .
X. You, W. Lin, H. Wu, Y. Dong and Y. Chi, Carbon dot capped gold nanoflowers for electrochemiluminescent aptasensor of thrombin, Carbon, 2018, 127, 653–657 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Mahto, D. Samanta, S. Konar, H. Kalita and A. Pathak, N, S doped carbon dots—Plasmonic Au nanocomposites for visible-light photocatalytic reduction of nitroaromatics, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33(23), 3906–3916 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hua, Z. Mu, P. Hua, M. Wang and K. Qin, Ratiometric fl uorescence nanoprobe for monitoring of intracellular temperature and tyrosine based on a dual emissive carbon dots/gold nanohybrid, Talanta, 2020, 219, 121279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Liu, X. Hu, S. Zhou, R. Ankri, D. Fixler and Z. Xie, Multimodal bioimaging based on gold nanorod and carbon dot nanohybrids as a novel tool for atherosclerosis detection, Nano Res., 2018, 11(3), 1262–1273 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, F. Cheng, Y. Yao, X. Yi, B. Wei, H. Li, Y. Wu and J. He, Facile synthesis of a carbon dots and silver nanoparticles (CDs/AgNPs) composite for antibacterial application, RSC Adv., 2021, 11(30), 18417–18422 RSC .
T. Luo, Y. Nie, J. Lu, Q. Bi, Z. Cai, X. Song, H. Ai and R. Jin, Iron doped carbon dots based nanohybrids as a tetramodal imaging agent for gene delivery promotion and photothermal-chemodynamic cancer synergistic theranostics, Mater. Des., 2021, 208 Search PubMed .
A. N. Emam, S. A. Loutfy, A. A. Mostafa, H. Awad and M. B. Mohamed, Cyto-toxicity, biocompatibility and cellular response of carbon dots–plasmonic based nano-hybrids for bioimaging, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(38), 23502–23514 RSC .
W. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, M. Zhao, H. Long, Q. Wu and F. Nian, Tannin-Mn coordination polymer coated carbon quantum dots nanocomposite for fluorescence and magnetic resonance bimodal imaging, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2022, 33(2), 16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Park, H. Y. Kim, B. Ding and S. J. Park, A facile ultrasonic-assisted fabrication of nitrogen-doped carbon dots/BiOBr up-conversion nanocomposites for visible light photocatalytic enhancements, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, J. Huang, R. Li, P. Chen, D. Chen, M. Cai, H. Liu, Y. Feng, W. Lv and G. Liu, Synthesis of a carbon dots modified g-C3N4/SnO2 Z-scheme photocatalyst with superior photocatalytic activity for PPCPs degradation under visible light irradiation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 401, 123257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Liang, Y. Rao, D. Zhu, J. J. Cao, Z. Shen, W. Ho and S. C. Lee, Environment-Friendly Carbon Quantum Dots/ZnFe2O4 Photocatalysts: Characterization, Biocompatibility, and Mechanisms for NO Removal, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(5), 2924–2933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, X. Huang, Z. Chen, H. Sun and W. Shi, Investigation of visible-light-driven photocatalytic tetracycline degradation via carbon dots modified porous ZnSnO3 cubes: Mechanism and degradation pathway, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 253, 117518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Li, J. Liu, N. Liu, S. Qiao, Y. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Carbon quantum dots/SnO2–Co3O4 composite for highly efficient electrochemical water oxidation, Carbon, 2015, 92, 64–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Liu, X. M. Li, S. B. Cheng, R. Zhou, Y. C. Liang, L. Dong, C. X. Shan, H. B. Zeng and D. Z. Shen, Carbon-ZnO alternating quantum dot chains: electrostatic adsorption assembly and white light-emitting device application, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(15), 7155–7162 RSC .
R. Zhang, M. Zhao, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Zhao, Y. Miao, Y. Zhou, H. Wang, Y. Hao, G. Chen and F. Zhu, Solution-Processable ZnO/Carbon Quantum Dots Electron Extraction Layer for Highly Efficient Polymer Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(5), 4895–4903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Ramos-Ramon, N. K. R. Bogireddy, J. A. Giles Vieyra, T. V. K. Karthik and V. Agarwal, Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Dots Induced Enhancement in CO2 Sensing Response From ZnO-Porous Silicon Hybrid Structure, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, K. Jia, G. Liu, S. Ren, K. Li, X. Long, M. Li and J. Qiu, Preparation of coal-based graphene quantum dots/α-Fe2O3 nanocomposites and their lithium-ion storage properties, Fuel, 2019, 241, 646–652 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, P. Zhang, H. Pu and D. W. Sun, A fluorescence aptasensor based on carbon quantum dots and magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles for highly sensitive detection of 17beta-estradiol, Food Chem., 2022, 373(Pt B), 131591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, M. Chi, Z. Yang, M. Gao, C. Wang and X. Lu, Carbon dots/Fe3O4 hybrid nanofibers as efficient peroxidase mimics for sensitive detection of H2O2 and ascorbic acid, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4(10), 1621–1627 RSC .
X. Liu, T. Wang, Y. Lu, W. Wang, Z. Zhou and Y. Yan, Constructing carbon dots and CdTe quantum dots multi-functional composites for ultrasensitive sensing and rapid degrading ciprofloxacin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 289, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Chen, B. Yang, L. Yang, C. Jiang and Z. Zhang, Ratiometric fluorescent paper sensor utilizing hybrid carbon dots-quantum dots for the visual determination of copper ions, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(11), 5977–5984 RSC .
K. Lv, W. Suo, M. Shao, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, J. Feng, M. Fang and Y. Zhu, Nitrogen doped MoS2 and nitrogen doped carbon dots composite catalyst for electroreduction CO2 to CO with high Faradaic efficiency, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103834 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Huang, H. Yu, H. Ming, S. Lian, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Carbon quantum dots/Cu2O composites with protruding nanostructures and their highly efficient (near) infrared photocatalytic behavior, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(34), 17470 RSC .
W. Shi, F. Guo, M. Li, Y. Shi and Y. Tang, N-doped carbon dots/CdS hybrid photocatalyst that responds to visible/near-infrared light irradiation for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 212, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qing, Y. Meng, Y. Wang, X. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Liang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Guo and D. Xiao, Building nanoparticle-stacking MoO2-CDs via in-situ carbon dots reduction as high-performance anode material for lithium ion and sodium ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 740–752 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Y. Li, F. Liu, W. Jiang, D. Zhang and J. Liang, Visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of diclofenac by carbon quantum dots modified porous g-C3N4: Mechanisms, degradation pathway and DFT calculation, Water Res., 2019, 151, 8–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Q. Huang, J. Wang, Z. He and Z. Li, A novel MoS2 quantum dots (QDs) decorated Z-scheme g-C3N4 nanosheet/N-doped carbon dots heterostructure photocatalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 124–132 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, K. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Liu and M. Xie, Visual and fluorescent detection of mercury ions by using a dually emissive ratiometric nanohybrid containing carbon dots and CdTe quantum dots, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184(4), 1199–1206 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, L. Zhang, G. Ren, S. Li, B. Zhu, F. Chai, F. Qu, C. Wang and Z. Su, Multicolorful fluorescent-nanoprobe composed of Au nanocluster and carbon dots for colorimetric and fluorescent sensing Hg2+ and Cr6+, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 678–686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Sun, K. Zhang, H. Zhu, H. Yu, M. Sun, D. Huang and S. Wang, Visualizing gaseous nitrogen dioxide by ratiometric fluorescence of carbon nanodots-quantum dots hybrid, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87(4), 2087–2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, F. Pi, H. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, A novel molecularly imprinted electrochemical sensor modified with carbon dots, chitosan, gold nanoparticles for the determination of patulin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 98, 299–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, L. He, Y. Long, S. Pan, H. Liu, J. Yang and X. Hu, S-doped carbon dots capped ZnCdTe quantum dots for ratiometric fluorescence sensing of guanine, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 279, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
C. Patel, B. Mandal, R. G. Jadhav, T. Ghosh, M. Dubey, A. K. Das, M. T. Htay, V. V. Atuchin and S. S. Mukherjee, N Co-Doped Carbon Dot-Functionalized WO3 Nanostructures for NO2 and H2S Detection, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 2492–2500 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lei, Y. Fu, Y. Wu, L. Chen and J. Liang, A ratiometric fluorescent probe for pH detection based on Ag2S quantum dots-carbon dots nanohybrids, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2020, 7(7), 200482 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. He, C.-G. Pan, H.-X. Cao, M.-Z. Yue, L. Wang and G.-X. Liang, Highly sensitive and selective dual-emission ratiometric fluorescence detection of dopamine based on carbon dots-gold nanoclusters hybrid, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 265, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, Y. Zhang, Y. J. Heo and S. J. Park, Advanced Design and Synthesis of Composite Photocatalysts for the Remediation of Wastewater: A Review, Catalysts, 2019, 9(2), 122 CrossRef .
X. Wei, C. Wang, S. Ding, K. Yang, F. Tian and F. Li, One-step synthesis of Ag nanoparticles/carbon dots/TiO2 nanotube arrays composite photocatalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activity, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(1), 104729 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Y. Sheng, J. Zhang, J. Wei, P. Huang, X. Zhang and B. Feng, Preparation of carbon quantum dots/TiO2nanotubes composites and their visible light catalytic applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(42), 18082–18086 RSC .
T. Zhou, L. Li, J. Li, J. Wang, J. Bai, L. Xia, Q. Xu and B. Zhou, Electrochemically reduced TiO2 photoanode coupled with oxygen vacancy-rich carbon quantum dots for synergistically improving photoelectrochemical performance, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 131770 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, S. Reischauer, B. Pieber and M. Delbianco, Carbon dot/TiO2 nanocomposites as photocatalysts for metallaphotocatalytic carbon–heteroatom cross-couplings, Green Chem., 2021, 23(12), 4524–4530 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. A. Ziaee, K. Lu and R. Wang, Nanohybrid of Carbon Quantum Dots/Molybdenum Phosphide Nanoparticle for Efficient Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution in Alkaline Medium, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(11), 9460–9467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Yadav, Z. Li, T. Zhang, O. Sahin, S. Roy, G. Gao, H. Guo, R. Vajtai, L. Wang, P. M. Ajayan and J. Wu, Amine-Functionalized Carbon Nanodot Electrocatalysts Converting Carbon Dioxide to Methane, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2105690 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Yang, Z. Peng, Z. Liu, Z. Chen, L. Shang, S. Lu and T. Zhang, Self-crosslinking carbon dots loaded ruthenium dots as an efficient and super-stable hydrogen production electrocatalyst at all pH values, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104023 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jana, J. S. Chung and S. H. Hur, Carbon dot supported bimetallic nanocomposite for the hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 859, 157895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Ge, Y. Chen, M. Huang, R. Zhu, W. Li, Y. Liu, L. Feng and R. Che, Urchin-like cobalt hydroxide coupled with N-doped carbon dots hybrid for enhanced electrocatalytic water oxidation, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127598 CrossRef CAS .
T. Feng, Q. Zeng, S. Lu, M. Yang, S. Tao, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao and B. Yang, Morphological and Interfacial Engineering of Cobalt-Based Electrocatalysts by Carbon Dots for Enhanced Water Splitting, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(7), 7047–7057 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Niu, R.-H. Zhu, H. Yan, H.-B. Zeng, S. Cosnier, X.-J. Zhang and D. Shan, One-pot synthesis of nitrogen-rich carbon dots decorated graphene oxide as metal-free electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Carbon, 2016, 109, 402–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Zhao, C. Li, M. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Carbon Nanodot Surface Modifications Initiate Highly Efficient, Stable Catalysts for Both Oxygen Evolution and Reduction Reactions, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(9), 1502039 CrossRef .
S. T. R. Naqvi, T. Rasheed, S. Majeed, Z. Rani, R. Nawaz and M. N. Ashiq, Development of nitrogen doped carbon dots modified CuCo alloy nanoparticles for potential electrocatalytic water splitting, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 309, 113111 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lv, W. Suo, M. Shao, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, J. Feng, M. Fang and Y. Zhu, Nitrogen doped MoS2 and nitrogen doped carbon dots composite catalyst for electroreduction CO2 to CO with high Faradaic efficiency, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103834 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sinha, N. Roy and T. K. Mandal, SWCNT/ZnO nanocomposite decorated with carbon dots for photoresponsive supercapacitor applications, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 133915 Search PubMed .
N. Arsalani, L. S. Ghadimi, I. Ahadzadeh, A. G. Tabrizi and T. Nann, Green Synthesized Carbon Quantum Dots/Cobalt Sulfide Nanocomposite as Efficient Electrode Material for Supercapacitors, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35(11), 9635–9645 CrossRef CAS .
B. Unnikrishnan, C.-W. Wu, I. W. P. Chen, H.-T. Chang, C.-H. Lin and C.-C. Huang, Carbon Dot-Mediated Synthesis of Manganese Oxide Decorated Graphene Nanosheets for Supercapacitor Application, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4(6), 3008–3016 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Alami, B. Rajab, J. Abed, M. Faraj, A. A. Hawili and H. Alawadhi, Investigating various copper oxides-based counter electrodes for dye sensitized solar cell applications, Energy, 2019, 174, 526–533 CrossRef CAS .
M. Laska, Z. Krzemińska, K. Kluczyk-Korch, D. Schaadt, E. Popko, W. A. Jacak and J. E. Jacak, Metallization of solar cells, exciton channel of plasmon photovoltaic effect in perovskite cells, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104751 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wei, H. Wei, A. C. Gauthier, J. Song, Y. Jin and H. Xiao, Superhydrophobic modification of cellulose and cotton textiles: Methodologies and applications, J. Bioresour. Bioprod., 2020, 5(1), 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, B. Zhao, K. Xu, S. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Han, J. Xu, D. Xu, Z. Tan and S. F. Liu, p-Type Carbon Dots for Effective Surface Optimization for Near-Record-Efficiency CsPbI2 Br Solar Cells, Small, 2021, 17(37), 2102272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Kim, D. N. Nguyen, W. Jang, J. K. Kim and D. H. Wang, Formulation of conductive nanocomposites by incorporating silver-doped carbon quantum dots for efficient charge extraction, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45(15), 21324–21339 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Efa and T. Imae, Effects of carbon dots on ZnO nanoparticle-based dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 303, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hui, Y. Yang, Q. Xu, H. Gu, S. Feng, Z. Su, M. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Li, J. Fang, F. Xia, Y. Xia, Y. Chen, X. Gao and W. Huang, Red-Carbon-Quantum-Dot-Doped SnO2 Composite with Enhanced Electron Mobility for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(4), 1906374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Etefa, T. Imae and M. Yanagida, Enhanced Photosensitization by Carbon Dots Co-adsorbing with Dye on p-Type Semiconductor (Nickel Oxide) Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(16), 18596–18608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, M. Yang and Y. Duan, Chemistry, Biology, and Medicine of Fluorescent Nanomaterials and Related Systems: New Insights into Biosensing, Bioimaging, Genomics, Diagnostics, and Therapy, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(12), 6130–6178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Bai, S. Zeng and J. Hao, Theranostic Carbon Dots with Innovative NIR-II Emission for in Vivo Renal-Excreted Optical Imaging and Photothermal Therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(5), 4737–4744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. Liao, L. Wan, Y. Kuang, C. Liu, J. Duan, X. Xu, Z. Xu, B. Jiang and C. Li, Dual-stimuli responsive near-infrared emissive carbon dots/hollow mesoporous silica-based integrated theranostics platform for real-time visualized drug delivery, Nano Res., 2021, 14(11), 4264–4273 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ryplida, G. Lee, I. In and S. Y. Park, Zwitterionic carbon dot-encapsulating pH-responsive mesoporous silica nanoparticles for NIR light-triggered photothermal therapy through pH-controllable release, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7(6), 2600–2610 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Shen, Y. Li, Z. Wei, G. Cao, Z. Gai, K. Hong, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, Magnetic iron oxide-fluorescent carbon dots integrated nanoparticles for dual-modal imaging, near-infrared light-responsive drug carrier and photothermal therapy, Biomater. Sci., 2014, 2(6), 915–923 RSC .
J. Jiao, C. Liu, X. Li, J. Liu, D. Di, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhao and S. Wang, Fluorescent carbon dot modified mesoporous silica nanocarriers for redox-responsive controlled drug delivery and bioimaging, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 483, 343–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, Y. Luo, F. Lyu, F. Wang, H. Yang, H. Li, C. Liang, M. Huang, Y. Huang and Y. Tong, Carbon Quantum Dot Surface-Engineered VO2 Interwoven Nanowires: A Flexible Cathode Material for Lithium and Sodium Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(15), 9733–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. W. Foster, C. E. Banks, L. Shao, H. Hou, G. Zou, J. Chen, Z. Huang and X. Ji, Graphene-Rich Wrapped Petal-Like Rutile TiO2 tuned by Carbon Dots for High-Performance Sodium Storage, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(42), 9391–9399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, D. Chao, J. Sun, I. M. Bacho, Z. Fan, C. F. Ng, X. Xia, H. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen, G. Ding and H. J. Fan, Enhanced Lithium Storage Performance of CuO Nanowires by Coating of Graphene Quantum Dots, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2(2), 1400499 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the chemical oxidation process of fullerene C60 with strong acid and oxidant. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the electrochemical preparation of GQDs from coke. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) The solvothermal process for multicolor CDs from L-glutamic acid and o-phenylenediamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Illustration of the microwave assisted method for URTP CDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of a solid SiO2/CDs composite prepared by a one-step hydrothermal method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of a magnetic Fe3O4/CDs composite prepared by a high-temperature hydrothermal method with ammonium ferric citrate and melamine as raw materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of GNR–PEG and GNR–PEG–CDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. (b) CDs catalyzed Ag-NPs as reducing agents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) CDs/NiCo2O4 composites synthesized via the hydrothermal method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) CDs deposited directly on 2D WS2 during the high-temperature preparation process and used for photocatalysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) CDs/AuNCs fluorescent nanoprobes used for carbendazim detection based on FRET. (b) TEM images of AuNCs without (b1) and with the addition of 100 μM (b2), 300 μM (b3) and 600 μM (b4) carbendazim, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Zeta potentials of CDs, CuNCs and CDs–CuNCs. (d) TEM images of CDs (d1), CD–CuNCs (d2), CDs–CuNCs/Fe3+ (d3) and CDs–CuNCs/Fe3+ + Tb3+ (d4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) images of CDs/gold nanoflowers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. TEM (c) and HRTEM (d) images of CDs/bulbous gold. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. HRTEM images of CDs (e) and CDs/silver nanoparticles (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. The antibacterial effect of a CDs/AgNPs composite on (g) Escherichia coli and (h) Glucococcus aureus, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image, (c) nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms, and (d) photocurrent responses of CQDs/ZnFe2O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image, (f) HRTEM images, and (g) nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm of CDs–ZnSnO3. (h) The comparative degradation percentage of TC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image and (b) HRTEM image of CDs/SnO2–Co3O4. (c) The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curve of CDs/SnO2–Co3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. FESEM images of (d) ZnO nanorods and (e) ZnO nanoclusters. (f) Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherms of ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM images of (a) CDs@SiO2 and (b) MIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2. Fluorescence spectra and optical images of (c) molecularly imprinted MIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2 and (d) non-molecularly imprinted NIPs@CdTe/CDs@SiO2 with varying concentrations of CIP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) TEM image, (f) HRTEM image, (g) nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm, and (h) transient photocurrent density versus time plotted for g-C3N4/NCDs/MoS2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the AuNCs–CDs synthesis process and its detection effect on bimetallic ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Response of the CDs–WO3 composite to NO2 concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the Ag2S–CDs dual-emission fluorescent nanohybrid probe synthesis process and its detection effect on pH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2020, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of the AuNCs–CDs fluorescent nanoprobe synthesis process and its detection mechanism on DA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of TiO2 and CDs/TiO2 nanocomposites prepared from various carbon sources. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2021, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Comparison curves of the photocatalytic activity (b) and apparent rate constant (c) of the CDs hybrid photocatalyst with other photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The LSV curves of Ru@SC-CDs at different temperatures. The LSV curves of Ru@SC-CDs, SC-CDs, and Ru dots in 0.5 M H2SO4 (b) and 1 M PBS (c). Stability testing via polarization curves before and after 5000 cycles: (d) Ru@SC-CDs and (e) Pt/C. (f) Chronopotentiometry curves: Ru@SC-CDs and 20 wt% Pt/C in 1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of the Co(OH)2@NCDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) The LSV curves of different electrocatalysts in acid media. (d) The durability test of N–C@Co NPs-600 electrocatalysts in acid media. The inset is the current density stability test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) LSV curves: a series of NH2-CDs/Au catalysts, IrO2/C, and Au nanoparticles. (f) Black: current density of NH2-CDs/Au at 1.6 V (vs. RHE); red: corresponding potential under light irradiation of 8.2 mW cm−2. The black curve: the UV-vis absorption of NH2-CDs-3/Au. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Hybrid supercapacitor prepared from a CDs coated SWCNT/ZnO composite material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Comparison of rate performance between CQDs and CQDs/CoS2 supercapacitors (left) and specific volume and rate performance of CoS2 nanocomposites within 10000 cycles (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Specific capacitance values of a CQDs/Ce-NiO nanocomposite (left) and cycling stability (right) of the CQDs/Ce-NiO nanocomposite for up to 2000 cycles. (d) Nitrogen adsorption and desorption isotherm of the CQDs/Ce-NiO nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Crystallization mechanism of a red-carbon-quantum-dot-doped SnO2 composite, and the relationship between current density and voltage of perovskite cells based on SnO2 and SnO2-RCQs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) I–V curves and electrochemical parameters of DSSCs based on NiO@C-dots (1:1 EDA/CA molar ratio) with different CDs contents and sensitizers. The numerals in I–V curves represent the percentage of CDs by mass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process and mechanism of action of pH-responsive ICG-MSN(CD). (b) Confocal microscopy fluorescence images of ICG-MSN(CD)-treated MDA-MB-231. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation process and mechanism of action of MSNs–SS–CDPAA/DOX. (d) TEM images of (d1) MSNs and (d2) MSNs–SS–CDPAA nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
