Electrochemical energy storage devices working in extreme conditions  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00271F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00271F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3323-3351Electrochemical energy storage devices working in extreme conditions

        
          
            Mingzhe 
            Chen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yanyan 
            Zhang†
b, 
      
        
          
            Guichuan 
            Xing
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shu-Lei 
            Chou
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Yuxin 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering, University of Macau, Macau, China
bCollege of Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, P. R. China. E-mail: yxtang@fzu.edu.cn
cInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, Australian Institute for Innovative Materials, University of Wollongong, Innovation Campus, Squires Way, North Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail: shulei@uow.edu.au
Received 
      26th January 2021
    , Accepted 29th April 2021First published on 30th April 2021AbstractThe energy storage system (ESS) revolution has led to next-generation personal electronics, electric vehicles/hybrid electric vehicles, and stationary storage. With the rapid application of advanced ESSs, the uses of ESSs are becoming broader, not only in normal conditions, but also under extreme conditions (high/low-temperatures, high stretching/compression conditions, etc.), bringing new challenges in the energy storage field. To break the electrochemical constraints of ESSs under normal conditions, it is urgent to explore new approaches/concepts to address the critical challenges for ESSs working under extreme conditions via mechanistic understanding of new electrochemical reactions and phenomena in diverse scenarios. In this review, we first summarize the key scientific points (such as electrochemical thermodynamics and kinetics, and mechanical design) for electrochemical ESSs under extreme conditions, along with the scientific directions to maintain satisfactory performance. Then, we have covered the main obstacles to the utilization of existing ESSs under extreme conditions, and summarized the corresponding solutions to overcome them, as well as effective strategies to improve their electrochemical performance. Finally, we highlight existing critical barriers and the corresponding strategies needed for advancing ESSs under extreme conditions.
Mingzhe Chen
Mingzhe Chen received his Master's degree in 2015 from Sichuan University, China. He obtained his PhD degree at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, under the supervision of Dr Shu-Lei Chou and Prof. Shi-Xue Dou in 2019. His research focuses on advanced, low-cost electrodes for both lithium-ion batteries and sodium-ion batteries.
Yanyan Zhang
Yanyan Zhang is a professor in the college of chemical engineering, Fuzhou University. She obtained her BS and MS degrees at the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively. She received her PhD degree from the Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) in 2013. Her research interest is the rational design of advanced materials for lithium-ion batteries and zinc-ion batteries.
Guichuan Xing
Guichuan Xing is an associate professor at the Institute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering (IAPME), University of Macau. He obtained his BS degree from Fudan University in 2003, and PhD from National University of Singapore in 2011. After his postdoctoral fellow training at Nanyang Technological University, he joined IAPME as an Assistant Professor in 2016. Then he was promoted to associate professor in 2020. His research interests include ultrafast spectroscopies and metal-halide perovskites for light harvesting and light emission applications.
Shu-Lei Chou
Shu-Lei Chou is a professor at the ISEM, University of Wollongong. He obtained his Bachelor's (2003) and Master's degree (2007) from Nankai University, China. He received his PhD from the University of Wollongong in 2010. His research focuses on energy-storage materials for battery applications, and in particular on novel composite materials, new binders, and new electrolytes for Li/Na batteries.
Yuxin Tang
Yuxin Tang is a professor in the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University. He obtained his BS and MS degrees at the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and graduated from Nanyang Technological University with a PhD in materials Science (2013). His research interests include solid-state and fast charging energy storage devices, and the development of real-time electrochemical reaction monitoring techniques.

Broader context
Energy storage systems are one of the most active research fields in materials chemistry and electrochemistry recently. To meet the needs for usual and some critical applications, energy storage systems must show high performance under extreme conditions, though they are tested under mild conditions in most research reports. To fill the gap between high performance energy storage systems reported under mild conditions and those applicable to extreme cases, it is of great importance to study the key limiting parameters and potential design concept to address them. It is urgent to explore new approaches/concepts to address the critical challenges for energy storage systems working under extreme conditions via mechanistic understanding of new electrochemical reactions and phenomena in diverse scenarios. Our review starts by analyzing some key issues (from the viewpoints of thermodynamics/kinetics, materials design, mechanical properties, and others) for energy storage systems working under extreme conditions. Then a couple of common extreme conditions and how recent reports address these issues are systematically summarized, and existing critical barriers/corresponding strategies needed for advancing energy storage systems under extreme conditions are highlighted as well.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, fossil fuels are widely used around the world, but they have raised many concerns summed up as the energy crisis.1 Various types of intermittent renewable and clean energy sources are continuously emerging, such as wind energy and solar energy.2 Most of the new energy sources are intermittent, however, which remains a critical issue for stable power grid operation. Energy storage devices can be considered as a key approach to solve this problem.3 The increasing demand for environmentally friendly portable devices and electric vehicles/hybrid electric vehicles (EVs/HEVs) also requires higher efficiency and more reliable ESSs based on the current rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors.4–9 Safety concerns are critical issues for all types of ESSs, so aqueous systems and solid-state systems have been rapidly and extensively investigated in recent years, resulting in tremendous and fruitful scientific discoveries, as well as emerging new types of non-flammable electrolytes and shear-thickening electrolytes.10–13
Even with a large spectrum of consumer applications that will work under normal conditions, such as room temperature, atmospheric pressure, neutral solutions, and a sufficient amount of electrolyte, the demand for high reliability of ESSs (Fig. 1a) to work under extreme conditions or misusage is dramatically rising.14,15 For example, military-grade batteries must function well in the temperature range from −50 to 70 °C; ultrahigh power density is required at certain periods of time; high moisture environments cannot be avoided in some cases; high energy spikes can cause severe thermal runaway; etc.16–18 These extreme conditions have posed great challenges for researchers due to unknowns beyond the limitations. For example, the Li-dendrite issue and sluggish metal ion diffusion will be much more severe at low temperature, and high-temperature conditions will accelerate unfavorable side reactions in both bulk cathodes and solid/liquid interfaces.19 High moisture conditions can lead to surface degradation, resulting in much increased interfacial resistance.20 High loading electrodes and lean electrolyte conditions will cause unsatisfactory interfacial contact, leading to inferior rate performance and cycling stabilities.21,22 Some of the well-established and developed theories may face huge challenges under extreme conditions. Electrochemical energy storage devices working under extreme conditions offer tough but also challenging and interesting tasks for all researchers.
 Fig. 1  Status and challenges of current electrodes, electrolytes, and theoretical guidance of energy storage systems towards various extreme conditions. (a) Main circumstances of extreme conditions. (b) Challenges and theoretical directions of both electrodes and electrolytes. (c) Number of publications until Mar 2021 devoted to various extreme circumstances since the year of 2006. (d) Summary of methodologies in further research. 
Based on the above considerations, it is important and urgent to further explore the new phenomena and new concepts that arise under these extreme conditions for current ESSs, which will surely boost our understanding and lead to real applications of ESSs in any unfavorable scenarios. Until now, there has rarely or never been any comprehensive review on this topic. Such a timely review in this area is in great demand and represents high value for both scientific research and real applications for ESSs. We first summarize some of the universal principles needed when dealing with electrochemical thermodynamics and kinetics, mechanical design, etc., along with the scientific directions that should be taken to maintain satisfactory performance, in Fig. 1b. Also we have searched all the relevant papers published in recent years in terms of energy storage systems working in the illustrated extreme conditions in Fig. 1c, and we have witnessed an astounding increase in the number of publications, which strongly indicates that more and more researchers are putting emphasis on these highly practical circumstances, accompanied by main directions or strategies trying to resolve these intractable problems (Fig. 1d). Then, we systematically summarize the main obstacles and key strategies for various types of ESSs working in different extreme scenarios. The corresponding remedies and further requirements are also proposed at the end. We aim to provide a complete picture of the main barriers and current limitations of ESSs when working under extreme conditions, combined with potential strategies to overcome them as well.
2. Key scientific points for electrochemical energy storage in extreme conditions
2.1 Electrochemical thermodynamics and kinetics
Electrochemical energy storage devices utilize reversible electrochemical reactions to convert and store electrochemical energy via the simultaneous flow of both electrons and ions. In order to maintain satisfactory electrochemical performance under extreme conditions, the most important factors that should be taken into consideration are the electrochemical thermodynamics and kinetics.23 From the electrochemical thermodynamics point of view, the open cycle voltage (E) is determined by the following equation: ΔG = −nFE(1)where ΔG is the difference in the chemical potential of metal ions in the anode and cathode, also often referred to as the change in Gibbs free energy, due to the electrochemical reaction, n is the actual charge (in electrons) transferred by metal ions, and F is the Faraday constant.
When we link the potential difference across the cell to the free energy, other thermodynamic quantities can be derived from electrochemical measurements, for example, the change of entropy (ΔS) in a battery cell is given by the temperature dependence of ΔG: (2)
Therefore, the change of enthalpy (ΔH) is given by: (3)where T is the temperature, and ΔS is the change of entropy. ΔG is strongly affected by ΔH, T, and ΔS, and therefore the cell voltage is also subject to the working temperature and the change of the enthalpy and entropy of the cell system. The enthalpy function is complementary to the entropy one and relates to the heat generation within the battery, a critical parameter for accessing a cell's cycle life, safety and thermal behaviour under extreme conditions.
Moreover, the Nernst equation describes the dependence of a battery cell based on the concentration, temperature, and activity of species: (4)where E0 is the cell potential at the standard state and Q is the reaction quotient (or equilibrium constant K for ideal solutions). The Nernst equation is derived from Le Chatelier's principle. If the reactant concentrations are large relative to the products, Q will be less than one, lnQ is below zero, E is more positive, ΔG is more negative, and the reaction proceeds automatically to generate the products. When the electrochemical reaction is conducted under extreme conditions, the reaction quotient Q is significantly affected by the temperature, concentration, and activity of species, resulting in the change of the battery cell and then the thermodynamic quantities (enthalpy and entropy) related to battery safety and cycling life.
For kinetics analysis, it is well-recognized that the ionic conductivity is the dominant parameter for the overall kinetics in an electrochemical system. The ionic diffusivity (Di) is a parameter that is commonly used to characterize the movement of ions. Eqn (5) below shows the relationship between the Arrhenius parameter and the ionic diffusivity: (5)where D0 is the estimated pre-factor, ΔGθ is the energy barrier, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and ξ is the diffusion length. The ionic diffusivity (Di) is also related to the diffusion time (t). To achieve satisfactory performance under extreme conditions, it is important to lower the energy barrier (ΔGθ) wherever possible.
Besides, the kinetic boundary is also subjected to the following aspects: (i) the charge-transfer of the electrochemical reaction; (ii) activation polarization and ohmic polarization from multi-scale interfaces; and (iii) concentration polarization caused by the mass transport limitation. As one of the most dominating parameters, the current flow I, within a charge-transfer-controlled reaction, is defined by the Butler–Volmer equation: (6)where I0 is the exchange current density, η is the overpotential, αan is the anodic transfer coefficient, and αc is the cathodic transfer coefficient. From this equation, it can be seen that the overall reaction is largely determined by the exchange reaction rate, the activity of the reactants and the potential polarizations. As we know, the overpotential (η) can be expressed as follows (a and b are both constant): (7)
Therefore, it is important to increase the exchange current in both directions (electronic and ionic transport rates). When facing extreme conditions, the interfacial current density at the electrode–electrolyte system will be a significant obstacle for satisfactory electrochemical performance. Strategies to compensate the decreased current flow (I) under low-temperature, low-concentration electrolyte or high mass loading conditions, etc. can be developed towards minimizing the condition effects via both external and internal protection, accompanied by interfacial layer manipulation.
2.2 Electrochemistry in solid-state electrolytes and “water-in-salt” electrolytes
Solid-state electrolytes are composed of mobile ions and stabilized ions in ionic conductors, which are generally created from polyhedra with ligands. Both the ion valence and ion size can influence the ionic conductivity with various increased electrostatic interactions. To date, there are three principal migration mechanisms that have been proposed and accepted: (1) vacancy diffusion of adjacent site migration; (2) the direct interstitial mechanism between not fully occupied sites; and (3) the correlated interstitial mechanism, where the neighbouring lattice accommodates interstitial migration through adjacent sites.24 For simplified direct and uncorrelated hopping, the following eqn (8) shows the intrinsic correlations between the pre-factor (σ0), the entropy of migration (ΔSm), and the jump distance (α0): (8)where ν0 is the attempt frequency, zθ is a geometric factor (normally ≤1), and q is the product of charge. From this equation, it can be deduced that it is important to enhance the number of interstitials and vacancies, improve the hopping attempt frequencies, and increase the mobile ion concentration in solid state electrolytes for obtaining well-maintained electrochemical performance under extreme conditions such as low temperature.
As for “water-in-salt” electrolytes, they normally possess high ionic conductivity, and have greatly expanded the stable electrochemical window of aqueous electrolytes to over 3.0 V, which has shown significant promise not only in aqueous LIBs, but also in aqueous sodium and potassium ion batteries (SIBs/PIBs) and aqueous zinc-ion batteries.25 A “water-in-salt” electrolyte generally follows the Nernst equation (eqn (4)) where two different types of solutions are separated by a semipermeable membrane or electron distribution, as outlined in eqn (9): (9)where α1 and α2 are the activity of each solution at the virtual membrane, and the ionic activity is the availability of an ionic species in solution to enter into a reaction. It is suggested that, at very high concentrations, chaotropic bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (TFSI−) anions can generate a well-connected ion network rather than clusters, and that water channels can exist through the vacancies in the ion network. The water channels can serve as a medium for Li+ ion transportation, while ionization leads to an increased internal Helmholtz layer, which can be regarded as a special solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer that prevents the instant decomposition of water molecules at the electrode surface. For our narrowed focus, the high salinity condition provides an ideal environment for potential ion diffusion by water employed as a charge carrier for ionized Li+ ions. Such benefits also enable ultra-low temperature performance for water-in-salt aqueous zinc-ion batteries.
2.3 Mechanical design considerations for ultra-flexible and stretchable electrodes
Flexible and stretchable energy storage devices are attracting increasing attention, since they possess outstanding and unique advantages, such as flexibility, shape diversity, multi-scenario applications, and so on. Typically, inorganic semiconductors/electrode materials fracture at tensile strains with a low range of 0.5–1.0%. Therefore, the implementation of micro- or nanoscale structural forms for these materials in flexible devices relies critically on their ability to be bent repeatedly without fracture. The key challenges lie in the selection and design of bendable current collectors with satisfactory mechanical performance as well as the manufacturing of flexible electrode/electrolyte materials with well-maintained ion/electron conductivity. Considering the sheet resistance (Rsh) of a two-dimensional (2D) film that can be expressed as follows: (10)where ρ is the electrical resistance of the 2D film and τ is the thickness of the film,26 high quality flexible and stretchable electrodes should possess sufficiently low sheet resistance. The design of micro- or nanoscale flexible electrodes is subject to the following eqn (11): (11)where ε is the applied strain, and r is the curvature radius.27 The degree of bending can be improved simply by reducing the thickness of the substrate and increasing the curvature radius. The device electrode films should reside on both sides of a substrate such as stretchable textiles, which is critical for strongly adhering the active materials without failure. Stretchability is a different and much more challenging characteristic. With the rational design of the structure layout for the flexible thin film, the electrode film can be not only bendable but also stretchable. Currently, the structure configurations for stretchable electrodes mainly include the wave-like structure, bridge–island structure, origami and kirigami design, etc. Taking the wave-like structure as an example, the systems can be stretched reversibly to high levels of strain without cracking the materials since these strains can be reduced through changes in the amplitudes (A) and wavelengths (λ) of the wavy structures.27 The wavelength and amplitude are varied with the applied strain according to eqn (12): (12)λ0 is the wavelength in the unstrained configuration, for the case that ε is small compared to the strain needed to create the wavy geometry with wavelength λ0. Besides the structure design, the electrode materials themselves should have superior mechanical properties to cope with highly intense stretching or compression, which indicates that high ductility is a critical parameter to be primarily taken into consideration. Fiber or polymer-based electrodes can initially raise this issue, but how to maintain a high mass loading to achieve high volume energy densities under such extreme conditions still requires systematic investigation.
To sum up this section, it is well recognized that, in order to achieve satisfactory electrochemical performance of current ESSs in terms of extreme conditions, the thermodynamics, kinetics and surface physical/chemical properties are the critical factors to be firstly taken into consideration. Based on these considerations, the main obstacles and key strategies for various types of ESSs working in different extreme scenarios are summarized in Fig. 2. With the help of the theoretical guidance mentioned above, a more deliberate choice/modification of material candidates, rational material design and dedicated interfacial engineering will potentially enhance the ion/electron diffusion kinetics, efficient mass/heat/ion transportation through solid/solid or solid/liquid interfaces and thermal safety under various extreme conditions.
 Fig. 2  The relevant aspects that affect the performance of ESSs in extreme conditions. 
3. Major challenges and strategies for energy storage in extreme conditions
3.1 High-/low-temperature conditions
The requirements for the performance of ESSs vary when they are used in different areas, such as desert regions and for subsurface boring. These scenarios will lead to a high-temperature or high thermal environment. Although the elevated temperature will indeed reinforce the thermodynamic kinetics of most electrode materials, some commercial cathodes will suffer from fast voltage and capacity decay at higher temperature (e.g. LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 and LiMn2O4 over 55 °C, Fig. 3a and b).15,19,28 Cation migration is more likely to occur at increased temperature, and the cation ion dissolution phenomenon will be more severe, especially for Mn-based cathode materials.29,30 Furthermore, an increased generation rate of lithium dendrites on the anode surface will cause unprecedented internal short circuits, and the SEI layer will become thicker more quickly, which will also lead to a shortened cycle life. Also, gas evolution will be another critical issue as the SEI thickens and its composition changes (Fig. 3c).19 The chance of thermal runaway in a battery system increases dramatically as well.31
 Fig. 3  Illustrations of the thermal stabilities of electrodes/electrolytes. (a) Structural instabilities for different reasons of the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 (NMC) cathode and (b) spinel LiMn2O4 cathode at increased temperatures. (c) Challenges imposed by increased temperature of the electrode–electrolyte interface. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright, 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Measured state of health (defined as the discharge capacity of an aged cell compared to the discharge capacity of the same cell when it was new) as a function of time for cycling at 1C and different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Cycling performance of the LiFePO4 cathode with a DMF additive at 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) and (g) SEM images of NMC electrodes from cells aged for 350 cycles at 25 °C and 80 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (h) and (i) Fire test of conventional and as-prepared high concentration electrolytes. (j) Long-term cycling of Li||Li cells using different electrolytes at 1.0 mA h cm−2. The inset image is the enlarged voltage profile. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (k) Flammability test of a traditional battery and as-prepared non-flammable solid-state battery. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
One of the most effective ways to suppress the disadvantages mentioned above is the use of additives in the electrolyte. Based on the current commonly used organic electrolytes, the state of health is greatly subject to the aging time and temperature. A higher aging temperature will accelerate transition metal dissolution; therefore, the main strategies are focused on cathode–electrolyte interface (CEI) protection (Fig. 3d).32 Liu et al. found that N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) can be added into a commercial electrolyte (1–3 wt%) as a novel additive to improve its thermal stability.33 Density functional theory (DFT) studies indicated that DMF can undergo preferential oxidation before the bulk electrolyte, and the exclusive decomposition from DMF oxidation will create a stable interface layer on the cathode materials. A uniform CEI was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Much improved cycling stability was achieved with DMF as an additive at 60 °C (Fig. 3e). Genieser et al. also demonstrated that the cathodic charge transfer resistance is the main reason for the increased overall cell resistance.34 Furthermore, severe disintegration of cathode particles after aging at 80 °C was observed, as shown in Fig. 3f and g. Separation of single grains will lead to new decomposition as well as increased charge transfer resistance. A similar phenomenon was characterized by instant freezing with liquid nitrogen, with the exclusion of the occurrence of an internal short circuit.31 To achieve this goal, a polyethylene terephthalate ceramic separator (non-flammable) was employed. The researchers found that chemical crossover is the main mechanism behind the thermal runaway at elevated temperatures. Surface crystal structural change from a layered type to spinel was observed along with massive oxygen release. It is suggested that using polyanionic compounds as cathodes will be more appropriate in high temperature scenarios (over 55 °C).
Another strategy is eliminating the flammable organic-based electrolyte. Fire-retardant electrolytes are ideal candidates for ESSs that must work at abnormally high temperatures, which include localized high-concentration electrolytes and some types of solid-state electrolytes.12 Zhang et al. recently reported a fire-retardant high-concentration electrolyte containing 1.2 M lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide in a mixture of triethyl phosphate/bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)ether.35Fig. 3h and i indicate its non-flammable nature under 10 s ignition. In addition, the as-prepared non-flammable electrolyte can enable dendrite-free and long-term cycling stability with a high coulombic efficiency (Fig. 3j). The interfacial reaction kinetics can be improved simultaneously. Garnet-type solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) are subjected to high-temperature annealing (normally above 750 °C), and they are truly thermally stable under high temperature conditions. Among all the types of ceramic SSEs, garnet Li7La3Zr2O12 is one of the most promising candidates, since it possesses high ionic conductivity and good chemical stability against Li metal. For example, Hu et al. employed a Li7La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLCZNO) garnet SSE and a V2O5 cathode to work at 100 °C through a newly developed rapid thermal annealing technique.36 Both the cathode and garnet SSE were thermally stable and reliable under extreme conditions (Fig. 3k). Similar work also has been reported recently.37,38 Cathodes that are phase stable at elevated temperatures and thermally stable electrolytes as well as Li-dendrite-free anodes are all critical parts for ESSs to work under high-temperature conditions, and recent experiments regarding thermal runaway and fires using LiFePO4 as a cathode also indicate the importance of thermally stable cathodes in high temperature conditions, especially in large-scale and high capacity single cell scenarios.39
On the other hand, sub-zero temperatures (e.g., −20 °C) will significantly impede ion and electron transportation in electrode materials, and the resistance at interfaces will also greatly increase due to the sluggish diffusion and kinetics at lower temperature (according to the second law of thermodynamics), which combine to lead to unsatisfactory rate performance.40 This phenomenon is much more severe in sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs). Also, the traditional aqueous zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) cannot work below 0 °C due to the freezing of the water-based electrolyte.41 Changing these electrolytes to ionic liquids can be considered as an effective approach. The overall energy densities of ESSs will decrease as well, since the working voltages of the cathode materials cannot be maintained at low temperatures.
One of the possible strategies to ameliorate the disadvantages mentioned above is selecting electrode materials that possess multi-dimensional ion pathways with low energy barriers. These types of materials show superior electrochemical thermodynamics and kinetics at both room-temperature and sub-zero temperatures, since they have lower diffusion potentials.19,42,43 For instance, Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) are ideal cathode candidates, operating at sub-zero temperatures with acceptable energy retention and C-rate performance. Their (CN)− anions enlarge the diffusion channels for alkali ions with small lattice variations. By combining carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with cubic PB particles (as shown in Fig. 4a), satisfactory low-temperature performance was achieved (Fig. 4b).44 Solid-state polymer electrolytes also can guarantee effective ionic conductivity with a large electrochemical window. With the help of a facile large-scale ionic-exchange strategy, Xu et al. synthesized a solid-state polymer electrolyte that could be used for SIBs under extreme low temperature (−35 °C) conditions.45 This ion-exchange strategy can be applied to other types of membranes as well.
 Fig. 4  Both electrodes and electrolytes working at low temperatures. (a) SEM image of the PB/CNT composite and (b) its low-temperature performance. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of a Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) nanoparticle and (d) its C-rate performance at −20 °C. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (e) Comparisons of the water retention and anti-freezing properties of KOH-filled A-PAA and PVA hydrogels. (f) Discharge and power density plots, and (g) discharge capacity at 5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (h) Low-temperature stability of selected types of water-in-salt electrolytes at 0 °C and −20 °C. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (i) Polarized light microscope images of various components of selected electrolytes at different temperatures. (j) Molecular dynamics (MD) study of the electrolyte system of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)–water (where the fraction of DMSO is 0.3 in mol), and (k) cycling performance tested at −50 °C. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Another important branch that possesses multi-dimensional ion diffusion pathways is the class of polyanionic-type compounds. For example, the Na superionic conductor (NASICON) family of materials, Na3V2(PO4)3, Na3V2(PO4)2O2F, Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7), Na3V(PO3)3N, etc., all have three-dimensional (3D) sodium ion diffusion pathways with low energy barriers in all directions.46–50 Nanosizing and a suitable carbon network will facilitate both ion and electron conductivity, leading to improved C-rate performance at low temperatures. Chou et al. recently reported the superior low-temperature performance of the newly recognized Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) material with nanosized particles, which is shown in Fig. 4c and d.51 In addition, most of the polyanionic compounds only undergo single-phase structural variations with small volume changes, which is beneficial for their long-term cycling stability as well as their internal strain in comparison with solid-state electrolytes. Both PBAs and polyanionic compounds possessing multi-dimensional ion pathways have been widely investigated towards satisfactory low temperature performance, and this strategy is now emerging in other forms of ESSs as well, such as PIBs, zinc–air/ion batteries, etc.52–54 In addition, a particle surface doping strategy also has been adapted to ameliorate the low-temperature performance of spinel structured materials.55
Apart from the electrodes, the electrolytes are also important components for ensuring satisfactory electrochemical performance under low-temperature conditions. In the case of the conventional organic-based non-aqueous electrolytes, a dramatic decrease in the ionic conductivity will appear at sub-zero temperatures, and the resistance at interfaces will also be greatly increased. By employing a freezing-tolerant hydrogel electrolyte, flexible rechargeable zinc–air batteries could show a high energy density of 798 W h kg−1, even at −20 °C.41 An illustration comparing the water retention and anti-freezing properties of KOH-filled poly(acrylic acid) (A-PAA) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogels is displayed in Fig. 4e. By combining the high electronic conductivity of electrospun polymer fibers and the high ionic conductivity of the A-PAA hydrogel electrolyte at sub-zero temperatures, satisfactory capacity and power density retention can be achieved compared to those at room temperature (Fig. 4f and g).
Very recently Xu et al. proposed a novel advanced hybrid electrolyte, BSiS-A0.5 (15.3 mol LiTFSI in a 1 kg mixture of water/acetonitrile) (1:1 molar ratio) and Li+/water/acetonitrile (molar ratio = 1:1.11:1.11), which shows a very stable state at −20 °C compared to other hybrid components.56 The presence of acetonitrile can effectively decrease the interfacial water population at charged electrodes, and the CN and R–S–N–S species and the Li–F rich hybrid SEI layer will further suppress the reduction of water with an expanded electrochemical stability window as high as 4.5 V. Interestingly, Tao et al. discovered that dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) could be used as an additive in an aqueous solution of 2 M NaClO4.17 Only a small concentration of 0.3 M DMSO in 2 M NaClO4 aqueous electrolyte could sufficiently improve the ionic conductivity (0.11 mS cm−1), even at −50 °C. The fraction of DMSO was optimized at 0.3 according to polarizing microscope observations (Fig. 4i). It possesses an ultra-low freezing point of −130 °C while only −69.3 °C can be obtained with a fraction of 0.5. A molecular dynamics study also indicates that hydrogen bonds are stably generated between the DMSO and the water molecules (Fig. 4j). Good cycling stability was achieved with high coulombic efficiency (Fig. 4k). Other types of hydrogel electrolytes have been intensively reported recently.40,57–59 It can be anticipated that, with the rapid development of electrodes and electrolytes, especially with kinetics improvements, satisfactory low-temperature performance will be widely achieved in the near future.
3.2 High stretching/pressure/shear conditions
Flexible materials can be used in wearable devices for applications in energy storage and supercapacitors. How to enhance their tolerance to various types of mechanical stresses is a key issue that needs to be fully investigated and solved.13,60 Electrode compression is also another important technique for both cold and hot conditions, especially for the amelioration of the contact resistance at the interfaces between solid-state electrolytes and electrode materials. Besides, the high-pressure condition also plays an important role in the usually encountered harsh conditions, especially deep underground or in the deep ocean. On the other hand, shear-thickening electrolytes have aroused great interest in recent years since they can provide potentially enhanced battery safety during extreme compaction.61 All the high stretching, compression, and shear conditions require a robust framework and adequate mechanical toughness to assure reliability under extreme conditions for real applications.62
One representative strategy to achieve highly stretchable ESSs is to develop 3D flexible structured electrodes based on appropriate substrates. Chen et al. recently successfully fabricated a honeycomb-lantern-inspired 3D stretchable supercapacitor based on porous polypropylene (PPy)/black phosphorus oxide (BPO) composites electrodeposited on carbon nanotube (CNT) films.63 This unique flexible structure was beneficial for effective stress relief and ion transport. High strain capability up to 2400% could be achieved for the PPy/BPO–CNT electrode (Fig. 5a). As shown in Fig. 5b, five chair-shaped stretchable supercapacitors connected in series still could maintain the superior electrochemical properties. Another promising strategy was adapted by Zhi et al.64 They successfully synthesized a sewable Zn–MnO2 battery based on a nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC)/polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel, and superior shear resistance performance was obtained. Meanwhile, integrated with polymers such as low modulus silicone elastomers also can provide extraordinary flexibility with unusual “self-similar” interconnects up to 300% stretchability (Fig. 5c).65 At the atomic level, Huang et al. and Wang et al. almost simultaneously found the mechanism of lithium whisker growth stress with a delicately designed in situ atomic force microscope.66,67 They both measured the yield strength of Li whiskers in the range from 100–250 MPa under pure mechanical loading (Fig. 5d). Their interesting work indicates that the volume strain/pressure within the nano-/micro-size range also cannot be neglected. Therefore, Cui et al. synthesized a pressure-resistant high-volumetric-capacity anode for LIBs with a shell-protective strategy.68 The as-prepared silicon skin layer greatly improved the mechanical stability even over 100 MPa, while the inner porous structure can effectively accommodate the huge volume change. Meanwhile, a recent DFT study revealed that external pressure also can suppress lithium dendrite formation although some C-rate performance is sacrificed.69 Similar strategies are constantly being developed.69–72 External high pressure will also lead to exceptionally enhanced ionic conductivity of the electrode materials. Wang et al. investigated a traditional zero-strain material, Li4Ti5O12, under ultra-high pressure conditions, and they found that Li4Ti5O12 underwent a pressure-induced amorphization process over 26.9 GPa, with the Li+ diffusion coefficients significantly improved, as shown in Fig. 5e.73 This novel discovery will shed light upon the fabrication and assembly of all-solid-state ESSs. In addition, a compression molding fabrication process was recently employed as well.74 This compression process also could have a significant influence on the mechanical behavior and electrochemical performance of separators for ESSs.75,76 These exceptional results should receive more in-depth investigation in the near future.
 Fig. 5  Both electrodes and electrolytes working under high stretching/compression/shear conditions. (a) Normalized capacitance of different as-prepared PPy-based electrodes under various tensile strains. (b) 3D stretchable supercapacitors under different stretching conditions. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Photo showing the stretchable battery powering a red LED under 300% biaxial strain. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (d) Li whisker formation and growth process during electrochemical deposition for different times. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (e) Calculated structural transitions of Li4Ti5O12 under extreme pressures. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, Oxford University Press. (f) High speed bullet impact on the shear thickening electrolyte and the original electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (g) High pressure XRD measurement of Li2O2 up to 57 GPa and (h) corresponding unit cell volume changes versus pressure. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Interestingly, due to the unique physical and chemical properties of shear thickening electrolytes, more and more researchers are focusing on synthetic discoveries and in-depth understanding in this area. This topic is also very important for the real safety considerations for ESSs under extreme shear or compaction conditions. The as-mentioned shear-thickening electrolytes will turn into a solid-like barrier during a high energy event, such as a car crash, which will prevent internal shorting and result in reduced risk of thermal runaway. Veith et al. recently demonstrated a non-Newtonian electrolyte concept – SAFe Impact Resistant Electrolytes (SAFIRE) – by adding inert particles (silica) to a standard battery electrode.13 Voltage stability testing indicated its impact stability using a polyether ether ketone (PEEK) scaffold. Then, Lutkenhaus et al. investigated the effect of the nanorod aspect ratio on this shear thickening electrolyte.61 They adopted several anisotropic silica nanorods with aspect ratios ranging from 2 to 24, and they found that the interparticle attraction increased with decreasing aspect ratio. It is also important to balance the conductivity and the electrochemical performance of the as-prepared electrolyte while maintaining the shear-thickening behavior. Very recently, a (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) modified glass fiber filler was discovered to be functional for shear thickening electrolytes.77 APTES possesses both amine end groups and functionalized silica groups, which can both interact with the solvent molecules and the glass fibers as well. The frame sequence of an impact test at high speed (79 m s−1) is displayed in Fig. 5f. The bullet directly bounced back into the air once it hit the as-prepared shear thickening electrolyte due to the solid-like property of the electrolyte upon impact. The hydroclusters confine Brownian motion of the electrolyte molecules, and therefore a solid-like state can be formed upon high speed impact. All in all, shear thickening electrolytes are an interesting and practical topic that is relevant for the safety issues of current ESSs and surely should receive more attention.
In addition, the deep ocean or deep underground will bring another critical extreme condition of high pressure. The higher pressure will bring more compact contact between the solid–solid or solid–gas interfaces, which is quite desirable; however, the structural stability of the electrode itself under high pressure conditions has not been fully explored. The new discoveries and phenomena of electrochemical energy storage behaviors are exciting directions for researchers facing this high pressure condition. As for lithium–air batteries, new stable oxygen-rich lithium oxides under high pressure conditions have been discovered recently.78 Li2O3 (space group Imm), LiO2 (space group P4/mbm) and LiO4 (space group Ibam) can be produced under high pressure from the Li2O2 intermediate (Fig. 5g and h), and the LiO4 phase holds the potential to provide the O2 needed.
3.3 Lean/high concentration electrolyte conditions
Tremendous efforts have been continuously devoted to lithium–sulfur batteries, where flooded electrolytes have been employed ubiquitously at all times.79 The use of a lean electrolyte will cause low capacity and rapid capacity fading, while a flooded electrolyte will result in high cost for the full batteries and a higher risk of thermal runaway.22 In addition, the SEI layer cannot be rationally designed and manipulated under a flooded electrolyte for interfacial structural stability, since the SEI layer will constantly reform and consume electrolyte with extended cycling. In the case of lithium metal batteries and lithium–oxygen batteries, a localized high concentration electrolyte can effectively suppress Li dendrites with improved Li coulombic efficiency. The combination of a lean and concentrated electrolyte will shed light upon the practical direction for lower cost and highly efficient energy storage systems, especially those systems that mainly suffer from electrode dissolution such as high energy lithium–sulfur and lithium–oxygen batteries.
Ultra-low/lean concentration electrolytes have been one of the hottest topics recently in the energy storage research field. In the early years, Liu et al. employed polyethylene oxide (PEO)10LiTFSI polymer soft swellable gels with the help of a nanoscale confinement strategy.80 This polymer gel is well-swollen in the electrolyte and only takes up a small amount of liquid electrolyte (Fig. 6a), which can be attributed to its tiny electrolyte evaporation loss. Apart from the highly efficient Li+ conducting gel network, good polysulfide confinement can be achieved as well. The solid-state 6Li magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS NMR) technique also revealed a more intense Li2S characteristic peak under lean electrolyte conditions (Fig. 6b). Similar strategies have been witnessed in SIBs. Kuroda et al. synthesized glyme-based electrolytes using sodium triflate and glycol diether oligomers to achieve high conductivity and a well-swollen network with highly concentrated sodium salts.81 The interface stability is also determined by the polymer–inorganic solid electrolyte and the lithium metal. Wang et al. manipulated the SEI layer to give it better passivation, homogeneity, and mechanical strength.82 An as-prepared poly(vinylsulfonyl fluoride-ran-2-vinyl-1,3-dioxolane) (P(SF-DOL))–graphene oxide (GO) nanosheet composite was used as the SEI precursor, which can greatly reduce severe electrolyte decomposition and makes the use of a lean electrolyte possible (as shown in Fig. 6c). The same surface coating strategy has been employed to facilitate lean-electrolyte Li–S batteries as well.83 As for the polysulfides themselves, effective anchoring in lean electrolyte will ameliorate the retarded kinetics, since the shuttle effect can be suppressed due to the abundant defect-induced interfaces.84 The polysulfides can be bonded with Mo and P, so the shuttle factor is efficiently lowered (as shown in Fig. 6d). Modifications of sulfur substrates with polyacrylonitrile (PAN) will also enable satisfactory capacity retention under lean electrolyte conditions.85 In addition, very recently, reports have indicated that Li metal anodes can exhibit good stability under excess electrolyte, but how to maintain the electrochemical performance with lean electrolytes is still unclear. Qiao et al. reported that, under lean electrolyte conditions, uneven growth of the Li structure and the cracking of the SEI layer will get worse and a low-surface-area carbon substrate is more appropriate.22 DFT studies also indicated that nucleated Li is primarily generated around the edges of defective carbons (Fig. 6e, charge-difference map). Therefore, vertical Li dendrites can be suppressed and delayed. The same consideration is revealed in SIBs as well, since a low concentration electrolyte also can provide enough diffusivity even under a high mass loading of the electrodes.86 Lean electrolyte conditions will allow a wider temperature range, a lower chance of thermal runaway, and reduced manufacturing costs, and many applications, such as Li metal protection and suppression of sulfur dissolution, can be reasonably anticipated in the near future.
 Fig. 6  Lean/high concentration electrolyte conditions. (a) Electrolyte uptake test of solid binder powder in 1 M LiTFSI DME/DOL electrolyte. 1-PEO10LiTFSI, 2-LA133 acrylonitrile multi-copolymer, 3-carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), and 4-polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF). (b) 6Li MAS NMR spectra of different amounts of electrolyte on the cathode after 30 cycles. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Optical profilometry images of bare and resin pre-coated (RPC) Li surfaces. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Illustration of the abundant defect-induced interfaces of as-prepared anchored polysulfides. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Two-dimensional (2D) charge-difference map between the C3 defect-rich substrate and the surface Li. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM images of Li deposition of different sulfone electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (g) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (KFSI)-graphite dual-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
High-concentration lithium salts such as LiTFSI, as well as highly viscous solvents, also have great impacts on the overall electrochemical performance of non-aqueous batteries.87–90 High-concentration electrolytes can effectively protect the SEI layer on the highly reactive Li-metal surface, leading to a dendrite-free lithium–metal anode. Recently, ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) simulations revealed that, if tris(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)orthoformate (TFEO) and lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) molecules are close enough, fluoride anions generated from fast salt anion decomposition can lead to great decomposition of TFEO on the Li surface.91 Xu et al. investigated the stability of localized high-concentration sulfone (LHCE) electrolytes in lithium–metal batteries, and they found that strong resistance against oxidation of sulfones can be achieved with satisfactory wettability and compatibility with Li-metal.92 Thin deposited Li metal was observed in LHCE with reduced surface area and less reactivity (Fig. 6f). Other effective lithium salts such as lithium difluoro(oxalate)borate also have been confirmed.93 For a lithium-free graphite dual-ion battery system, potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide in alkyl carbonate was employed by Kovalenko et al. to achieve high voltage (5.0 V vs. K+/K, Fig. 6g) and high energy density (207 W h kg−1) batteries.94 In summary, the high concentration lithium electrolyte not only can provide sturdy protection layers for alkali metal anodes, but also can help the dual-ion battery system achieve high voltage platforms. More relevant studies are anticipated in the near future combining the usage of lean amounts of electrolyte towards the real application of ESSs.
3.4 High moisture/humidity conditions
Some districts on earth suffer from high humidity all year round. This situation requires water-resistant surfaces of electrodes, especially for alkali-metal containing oxides, such as layer-structured LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 and spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4.20 Layered oxides with high Ni content are even more moisture sensitive according to previous studies.95 The surfaces of high-Ni content electrodes are very active towards O2 and water, since they possess high surface energy. For sulfide-based solid-state electrolytes for both LIBs and SIBs, moisture resistance is also a critical issue for their further mass applications.96 Therefore, it is important to provide a detailed discussion on the recent advances in anti-moisture technologies with a view towards real manufacturing conditions in different situations.
Layered oxides for LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs are promising candidates due to their tunable electrochemistry, feasible synthesis routes, and high reversible capacity. Almost all layered oxides suffer, however, from the Na+/H+ exchange reaction when exposed to moisture. This will lead to many difficulties for large-scale synthesis as well as material transportation and storage. Rojo et al. systematically investigated the phase changes of an Mn-rich layered oxide, P2-type Na0.67Mn0.8Fe0.1Ti0.1O2, upon exposure to moisture.97 Compared to the pristine sample, the protonated sample shows dramatically decreased intensity in selected peaks. Also, a secondary phase of the protonated sample was observed from cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves. To ameliorate this shortcoming, surface coating can be used as an effective strategy. Zhou et al. determined the surface chemistry via Ti-enrichment-induced surface reconstruction of an O3-type NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2 (NMTN) material.98 Interestingly, the Ti element tends to move the particle surface during the high-temperature sintering process, as revealed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) in Fig. 7a. The Ti-enriched surface is generated by an observed second phase with a clear phase boundary. The Ti-doped sample shows both chemical and thermal stability. Upon exposure to humid air for 3 days, an O′3-Birnessite phase was formed via H2O insertion while the Ti-doped sample did not show any perceptible peak variations (Fig. 7b). Its thermal stability was confirmed via thermogravimetry/differential scanning calorimetery (TG/DSC) analysis (Fig. 7c). The electrochemical performance was improved as well, which can be attributed to the surface secondary phase, which hinders Mn dissolution in the generated spinel-like phase upon exposure to moisture. This surface coating strategy also can be used for the protection of lithium metal in lithium-metal batteries.99 The strict assembly-environment conditions of lithium–metal batteries are considered as a great challenge for practical applications. The strategy of chemical modification on the surface of lithium employing a poly(tetramethylene ether glycol) (PTMEG)–Li/Sn alloy hybrid layer has been proven to be highly effective even under 24 h exposure to humid air (78% humidity) recently (Fig. 7d). Zuo et al. also discovered that higher potentials of the redox couple can contribute better moisture stability, which indicates the main route of surface deterioration towards moisture in the air of P2-type layered oxides.100 Their work has clearly indicated the relationship between the oxidation states/chemical potentials of various elements and moisture durability in P2-type oxides. Other researchers also found that a high content of moisture will lead to a thick, porous, non-dense SEI film, as well as decreased initial coulombic efficiency,100,101 although some types of electrodes respond favorably to water insertion, since more stable phases can be generated.102,103 More relevant work on electrode materials should be done in the future towards stabilizing their chemistry under highly humid conditions.
 Fig. 7  Moisture protection strategies for both electrodes and electrolytes. (a) EELS result for the Ti element on the surface of the O3-NaMn0.9Ti0.1Ni0.1O2 material. (b) Structural evolution of pristine and moisture exposed samples. (c) Thermal stability test of NMTN. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) Photographs of the pristine Li and treated Li after exposure to air for different durations (test conditions: 258C, 78% relative humidity). Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Illustration of protonated H-G0.15-LLZO layer formation after water treatment. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the as-prepared moisture- and oxygen-impermeable poreless polyurethane separator. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (g) Illustration of the reaction principles of the as-designed moisture-resistant battery. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Another important component in ESSs suffering from the moisture sensitivity issue is the solid-state electrolyte, especially sulfide-based electrolytes for LIBs and SIBs, since they are easily oxidized with O2 and H2O, leading to the generation of harmful gases such as H2S.104 Wang et al. recently discovered that As-doping of the Na3PS4 material could lead to higher ionic conductivity as well as exceptionally improved moisture stability.96 The improved ionic conductivity can be ascribed to the effect of the longer Na–S bond length in the metastable transition state on Na-ion migration, and the energy barriers of the surface–moisture reaction were elevated as well. On the other hand, although garnet type solid-state electrolytes possess stable chemistry with respect to Li metal and dry O2, their moisture stability is still not fully revealed. Aguadero et al. recently revealed the impact of moisture-induced chemical degradation of a garnet type Li6.55Ga0.15La3Zr2O12 solid-state electrolyte.105 A protonated H-Ga0.15-LLZO layer was observed after the Li6.55Ga0.15La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) material was exposed to liquid H2O at 100 °C and remained stable for an extended period of time (8 weeks, Fig. 7e). They found that greater reactivity occurs in the grain boundaries rather than in the grains. They demonstrated that the deterioration of the Li charge transportation and diffusion kinetics has a strong relationship with the proton-containing garnet layer. Separators also face similar situations. Choi et al. developed a moisture- and oxygen-impermeable separator for aprotic Li–O2 batteries.106 A cheap poreless polyurethane separator can effectively suppress the surface degradation of Li metal and enhance the reversibility of the air-cathode simultaneously, as illustrated in Fig. 7f. Interestingly, moisture or small droplets in humid air can be used alone as electrolytes by employing the new concept of introducing magnesium foil in contact with ultralight polyaniline (PANI) foam.107 Zhang et al. revealed that adsorbed trace water can react with the Mg foil, resulting in a final product of Mg(OH)2 and H2. The PANI foam can act as the ion transmitter and the cathode at the same time, which is demonstrated in Fig. 7g. Surface protection is important for both electrodes and separators, and fundamental discoveries of anti-moisture materials with acceptable electrochemical properties are still in urgent demand.108,109
3.5 High salinity conditions
One of the greatest challenges in developing next generation batteries is the replacement of organic electrolytes. One of the most promising strategies is the utilization of water-in-salt electrolytes, which are non-flammable and non-toxic with enhanced electrochemical stability.25,110,111 Water-in-salt electrolytes can be used in both aqueous battery systems and aqueous supercapacitors, and they can effectively suppress mechanical damage to the electrode network as well as the dissolution of the interfacial electrode particles.112 The working voltage window can be significantly enlarged compared to conventional water-based aqueous electrolytes. In addition, water-in salt electrolytes also can be used in the hydrogen evolution reaction and zinc metal batteries.113 Similar benefits have been revealed and studied in these systems.114
Wang et al. first achieved significant progress in this promising research area.115 They employed the Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2 material as a cathode and the NaTi2(PO4)3 material as an anode in an aqueous battery. Based on sodium trifluoromethane sulfonate (NaCF3SO3), a high concentration (over 9 M) liquefied solution can offer a wide voltage window of 2.5 V through suppressing hydrogen evolution with reduced electrochemical activity of water on the anode (Fig. 8a).116 Pronounced ion aggregation and intimate Na–F contact have been found in this water-in-salt electrolyte, which play a key role in postponing water decomposition. Their pioneering work triggered great interest of researchers in this novel aqueous system. A spinel structured LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 material was found to be stable and could deliver a platform around 2.5 V in a full aqueous Li-ion cell (Fig. 8b).117 Specifically, Grimaud et al. recently have conducted comprehensive research on the role of the hydrogen evolution reaction in the SEI formation process.118 Further water reduction was found to be suppressed by the initial reaction between the generated hydroxides and TFSI− anions occurring at the SEI surface, followed by a nucleophilic attack. The detailed mechanism is described in Fig. 8c. They also found that residual trapped LiTFSI with a signal around −82 ppm and two other signals around −207 ppm and −98 ppm corresponded to LiF and CFx groups, respectively (Fig. 8d), indicating the fragmentation of CF3 groups during the formation process for the amorphous component of the SEI.
 Fig. 8  Water-in-salt electrolytes and related mechanisms. (a) The cation–anion and ion–solvent interactions in sodium-ion water-in-salt electrolyte, and the molar and weight salt/solvent ratios in this sodium trifluoromethane sulfonate–H2O binary system. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Charge/discharge profile of the full aqueous Li-ion battery (cathode: LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4; anode: Mo6S8) in water-in-salt electrolyte. The inset is the corresponding CV curve. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of SEI formation under the water reduction mediated mechanism in a 20 M LiTFSI water-in-salt electrolyte. (d) 19F MAS NMR spectrum of the gas diffusion layer. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Visualization of equilibrated electrolyte systems from molecular dynamics simulations. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) 3D tomography and 2D X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) mapping of various states of the LiMn2O4 material in a water-in-salt aqueous system. (g) XANES spectra of selected regions from (f) on the current collector. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, AAAS. 
These water-in-salt high concentration electrolytes also can function in potassium-ion batteries and Zn metal batteries as well.110,113,119,120 Recent DFT studies revealed that there is no free water present, and shared water molecules with anions constitute the cation solvation shells (Fig. 8e).121 In addition, a new simplified Poisson–Fermi theory was proposed by Bazant et al. recently.122 They further analyzed the competing solvation and polarization forces acting on the water molecules around the electrified interfaces in these water-in-salt electrolytes. They showed that the electric double layer structures can have a strong influence on the SEI layer, and therefore on the free water molecules, which are able to accumulate at the surface without decomposition under extended voltage windows. In addition, a system-level investigation on the electrodes under water-in-salt electrolyte conditions is important for researchers to further understand how the cycling stability is improved in this battery system. Chen-Wiegart et al. employed both synchrotron transmission X-ray microscopy and X-ray absorption spectroscopic imaging to understand the mechanism by which the extended voltage windows are prevented from degrading the cyclability.123 Mechanical damage to the electrode network can be effectively suppressed with less dissolution of electrode particles. Limitation of the ion/water transportation under chemically heterogeneous conditions is crucial, since water-in-salt electrolytes possess much higher viscosity. A tomographic reconstruction of the LiMn2O4 material under a focused ion beam is shown in Fig. 8f. The 2D color maps show that Mn is being oxidized during the charge/discharge process. Heterogeneous chemical states with less complete reactions were also observed in Fig. 8f, whereas no obvious differences can be detected on the surface of the electrode materials due to the current collectors (Fig. 8g). This phenomenon further highlights the importance of 3D tomography and the 2D XANES spectroscopic mapping technique.
Another example of ESSs working in high salinity conditions is the emerging seawater batteries. Seawater is a naturally available abundant renewable resource that covers almost 70% of the Earth's surface. Recent investigations mainly focus on the cathode current collectors, electrocatalysts, solid electrolyte, etc., and the major bottlenecks largely fall on the low energy density, large overpotentials, high surface resistance associated with solid electrolytes and low ionic conductivity of cathode electrodes. Therefore, it is important to develop a novel working system and highly efficient electrodes to overcome the abovementioned shortcomings. Representatively, Criddle et al. recently designed a mixing entropy battery for recovery of salinity-gradient energy in seawater.124 With the help of a plate-shape mixing entropy battery (equipped with anionic and cationic electrodes and that charges/discharges with fresh/seawater, as shown in Fig. 9a), an overall efficiency of 68% and decreased overpotential rise of each cycle can be well achieved (Fig. 9b). A similar strategy of this hybridization with cathode electrochemistry was adapted by Kim et al.125 They employed hydrophilic activated carbon cloth to construct the electric double layer (Fig. 9c). A much narrowed overpotential was obtained as well as improved power performance (16.2 mW cm−2). Another strategy direction is the modification of Na metal anodes with well-designed morphology and structure. By covering the Cu current collector with a uniform graphene monolayer, the nucleation rate of surficial Na metal at the initial stage can significantly lower the nucleation and plating potentials of Na ions.126 Further graphene surface thermal treatment with O2 plasma can result in a dropped voltage gap as well as extended cycling. Utilizing metal-free anode composites such as amorphous red phosphorus/carbon composites will also lower the overall cost of highly efficient seawater batteries when compared with LIBs and SIBs,127 since there is no cost incurred for the cathode parts (Fig. 9d). Hard carbon materials also can be considered as promising anodes for lowering the overall costs.128,129 Kim et al. summarized the average redox potential vs. gravimetric capacity for various types of anodes working in seawater batteries in Fig. 9e.130 In order to fully achieve their performance, more investigations such as constructing artificial SEI layers, nanoscale interfacial engineering and elevating the ionic conductivity of solid-state electrolytes are still urgently needed.131
 Fig. 9  Illustration of advanced seawater batteries. (a) Schematic illustrations of a whole work cycle for a mixing entropy battery. (b) Voltage profile of cycles with different cycle time showing the theoretical voltage rise. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic image of a metal-free SWB using a hard carbon anode. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (d) Comparison of the costs of battery systems. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Average redox potential vs. specific capacity of potential anode materials in seawater battery systems. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of a solar rechargeable seawater battery. (g) Energy diagram for unassisted solar charging. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2019, Cell Press. 
An appropriate apparatus that can accommodate the seawater package is also an important part for improving the overall energy efficiency. Very recently, Lee et al. newly developed a solar rechargeable seawater battery based on a photoelectrochemical process, resulting in direct conversion of sunlight to chemical energy (Fig. 9f).132 By employing an elaborately modified bismuth vanadate-based photoelectrode in tandem with a crystalline silicon photovoltaic cell, the solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency can be improved to 8.0% under 1 sun conditions (Fig. 9g). Other focuses such as a pH adjustment function and desalination systems also have been reported as well.133,134
In summary, high salinity conditions shed light upon high concentration water-in-salt electrolytes with an expanded stable voltage window for high-safety aqueous battery systems. The achieved research outcomes resulted in satisfactory electrochemical performance with various types of lithium salts, which can also be extended to other sorts of ESSs as well, such as SIBs, PIBs, and Zn-ion batteries.135,136 Further investigations should be focused on double layer theories and dynamic simulations of water molecules among the various types of virtual diffusion behavior. In addition, how to maintain the previous voltage platforms of several cathode materials using organic electrolytes is still unsolved. We consider that novel discoveries regarding new bonding or mixing formations seem to be necessary. Besides, how to lower the overall cost of water-in-salt electrolytes targeting their real applications still remains an open question for researchers. Also, seawater batteries should focus on the improvement of the ionic conductivity of solid-state electrolytes and the structural design of proper cathode electrodes with more suitable apparatus.
3.6 Ultrahigh mass loading conditions
A high loading density of active materials is of great practical importance towards higher volumetric battery energy densities. Owing to their high specific energy, low cost, and environmental friendliness, lithium–sulfur batteries have shown great promise for both portable devices and ESSs.21 Due to the non-conducting nature of sulfur, large amounts of conductive carbon are necessary to build up satisfactory electrodes, and therefore a high sulfur loading should be the focus of future investigations.137,138 On the other hand, composites with three-dimensional architectures are one of the achievable strategies for the high loading of substrates. This strategy is also widely used in the electrocatalysis research field, especially in the realization of single-atom catalysis.139 Obstacles to the stability and capability of high loading active materials fall away in these energy storage scenarios.140
Increasing the practical loading densities is very important for both volumetric and gravimetric energy densities towards real scenarios. Some high capacity electrodes suffer from a short life and low active particle utilization, such as room-temperature Li–S and Na–S batteries. One of the most effective strategies is to utilize free-standing electrodes to boost the loading amount of active sulfur or Li2S in Li–S batteries. N-Doping on the carbon matrix has been proven to be effective to enhance the loading amount of sulfur since the additional N–S bonding can provide more stabilized sulfur complex anchoring sites. Sun et al. developed an alternative approach to enhance the performance of high sulfur-loading electrodes.141 Combined with a netting carbon film with a chitosan binder, a uniform distribution of sulfur molecules up to 10 mg cm−2 can be well achieved (as shown in Fig. 10a). Qiu et al. recently fabricated a low-cost free-standing flexible Li2S-based paper electrode with an ultra-high mass loading of active materials.137 By electrospinning of a viscous aqueous solution of Li2SO4 with polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) in air, a loaded substrate could be obtained with various loading amounts. Satisfactory capacity retention was achieved at high loading density (9.0 mg cm−2, Fig. 10b). Loading substrates with 3D holey-graphene architectures also has been reported recently.142 Duan et al. obtained a high loading density of 11 mg cm−2 based on a 3D holey-graphene/niobia composite. In addition, free-standing electrodes can be utilized for other cathodes of LIBs and SIBs as well. Surprisingly, with the help of aqueous solvent, high pressure, and an ion-conductive additive, an ultra-thick cathode electrode was obtained.143 The 400 μm thick cathode possessed an ultra-high loading density of 110.0 mg cm−2 (Fig. 10c). Even at such a high loading density, high capacity retention of 96% over 150 cycles still can be achieved. The densifying cold sintering process that was employed can be reasonably anticipated to be achievable for other types of systems. Liu et al. adapted the stacking technology for all-phosphate sodium-ion batteries. They selected carbon tubes as the substrate for their binder-free, metal-current-collector-free, carbon-additive-free full SIBs. Even with sixfold stacked electrodes, the total cell capacity could be increased linearly. Self-supported nanocomposites can reduce the amount of binder and conductive carbon, which is also an important direction to achieve high mass loading. Hu et al. recently have achieved incredibly high mass loading of self-supported fire-resistant-LiFePO4 electrodes with 72 mg cm−2 and 108 mg cm−2, as shown in Fig. 10d and e.144 Other synthetic methods also have been reported for high mass loading of active materials, such as the atomic layer deposition method,145 the microwave-assisted method,146,147etc. High loading density is critical for the practical application of all types of battery systems, and therefore further investigations should focus on the structural design as well as morphology control in mass production without deterioration of the C-rate performance.148–151
 Fig. 10  High loading density of active materials in various battery systems. (a) Schematic design of the modified high sulfur-loading electrode. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Cyclability of freestanding flexible Li2S@NCNF electrodes with different loading densities. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Photographs of thick electrodes with different thickness. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Cross-sectional SEM images of the ultrahigh-capacity and fire-resistant-LiFePO4 electrodes with different active material mass loadings of (d) 72 mg cm−2 and (e) 108 mg cm−2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts with metal loading as high as 10 wt%. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2019, AAAS. (g) HAADF-STEM image and enlarged image of Pt1/NPC catalysts. (h) Mass activity performance, with the inset the mass activity at 0.025 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) Mass loading availabilities of metal nitrogen doped carbon (M-NC) single atom catalysts. (j) Faradaic efficiency of CO oxidation. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
On the other hand, increasing the loading amount and purity of single-atom catalysts and single-clusters is important for their real applications with higher activity and selectivity, stability, and atomic efficiency. A sulfur-tethering synthesis strategy toward high-loading noble metal catalysts recently has been proposed by Liang et al.152 Mesoporous sulfur-doped carbons were used as robust supports, which allows a high mass loading with various types of noble metals. Fig. 10f presents the preparation process and model structure of the atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts. Up to 10 wt% Ru, Rh, Pd, Ir, and Pt catalysts were obtained with 10 or even 20 times higher activity than the commercial Pt/C and Ir/C catalysts. Another synthetic approach for a high loading amount of platinum single atoms is the photochemical solid-phase method. Wang et al. employed nitrogen-doped carbon as the substrate to synthesize the Pt1/FeOx catalyst for highly efficient CO oxidation (Fig. 10g).153 A homogeneous distribution of Pt atoms was uniformly dispersed on the nitrogen-doped carbon with high loading amounts (3.8 wt%). Superior ORR and HER performances were obtained in an acidic solution, which can be ascribed to the unique structure of Pt–N4 coordination (Fig. 10h). Another strategy adapted by Wan et al. is the cascade anchoring strategy, which is also suitable for mass production of high-loading single-atom metal–nitrogen catalysts.154 Up to a 12.1 wt% loading density can be achieved without decreased O2 reduction performance as well as CO2 reduction (Fig. 10i and j). Various metal loading capabilities are achieved, and the faradaic efficiency of CO oxidation based on nickel is also obtained at a high level. Their mass production and scalability strategies are suitable for other types of catalysts as well.155–157
3.7 Ultralong cycles and ultrahigh rate conditions
Long-cycling stability is one of the most important parameters for evaluating electrode materials for all types of energy storage systems.158,159 The cycling stability is dependent on the structures of both the cathode and anode materials, as well as the physical and chemical properties of liquid–solid or solid–solid interfaces.160 With extended cycling, alkali metal dendrites will penetrate the separators, leading to electrochemical failure.161 As for ultra-high rates, both the electron and ion transportation pathways need to be deliberately designed, which is closely related to the intrinsic properties of electrodes and interfacial layers with good contact. In addition, some electrodes may possess different electron and ion diffusion mechanisms under extremely high charge/discharge rates.162,163 These extreme situations are still unclear to date, and they should receive more comprehensive investigations soon. Deliberate material choice, structural design and interfacial modification as well as system reconstruction are the current amelioration directions towards ultralong cycles and ultrahigh rate conditions.
Both polyanionic compounds and Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) normally possess sturdy 3D open frameworks with small or even tiny lattice variation, so that they can be regarded as ideal candidates for ultra-long cycling stability.46,47,164,165 For a narrower focus, it is necessary to highlight the polyanions and PBAs that possess 3D alkali ion diffusion channels with low diffusion energy barriers.42,166 Materials such as Li3V2(PO4)3,167 Na3V2(PO4)3,168 Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7),169 Na3V(PO3)3N,170 Na2−xFeFe(CN)6,171 and Na1+xMnFe(CN)6172 all possess 3D alkali ion diffusion channels, so both satisfactory rate performances and long cycling stabilities can be achieved at the same time. What needs to be especially pointed out is the class of zero-strain materials, which have intrinsic phase stability and thermodynamic stability. Chou et al. employed synchrotron based in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the properties of the high-voltage zero-strain Na3V(PO3)3N material (Fig. 11a).50,173 Aluminum ion batteries and zinc batteries also need relevant strategies to boost their cycling stabilities. One of these general strategies is morphology design and control. Gao et al. recently designed a “trihigh tricontinuous” (3H3C) graphene film to accommodate Al ions.174 The continuous graphene matrix can be regarded as a continuous electron conductor and a continuous active material (Fig. 11b). Due to the intrinsic nature of the Al ion intercalation mechanism, there is no obvious voltage decay even after 16000 cycles, although the working voltage is still not very high. Similar strategies were reported at about the same time.175–177 In the case of layer structured oxide materials, long-term cycling stability cannot be easily achieved due to their complex phase constitution and phase variations, as well as the rearrangement of both alkali and transition metal ions in their local structures, especially for lithium-rich layered oxides for LIBs. Indris et al. recently systematically investigated the reasons for degradation of Li-rich layered cathode materials.178 After cycling a Li1.28Ni0.2Mn0.6O2 lithium-rich cathode for more than one year, they employed the advanced Bragg coherent diffractive imaging technique to further analyze the degradation mechanism of a long-cycled electrode (Fig. 11c). A surface-bulk-limited reaction theory was proposed based on the detected crystal strains of a single cycled particle, and they proposed that after 500 cycles Li-containing rock-salt-type and Li-poor spinel coherent phases tend to co-exist with a certain amount of Li/O loss. More comprehensive understanding of these layer structured oxides for LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs is still very much required to obtain a long-cycle life, as well as the corresponding remedies.
 Fig. 11  Potential to meet ultralong cycle and ultrahigh rate conditions. (a) In situ XRD analysis of the Na3V(PO3)3N electrode during the 1st charge and 1st discharge processes. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the “trihigh tricontinuous” (3H3C) graphene film cathode. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2017, AAAS. (c) 3D rendering of the crystallite from the Bragg coherent diffractive imaging results of the Li1.28Ni0.2Mn0.6O2 lithium-rich cathode, where the color map denotes strain and the corresponding cross sections. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Side-view SEM picture of the poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride) (P(MVE–MA)) membrane. (e) Stress–strain curves of the PP separator in the transverse direction. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of the MXene structure. Intercalated water molecules enable high accessibility of protons to the redox-active sites. (g) SEM images of the Ti3C2Tx MXene hydrogel cross-section. (h) SEM image of the macroporous templated Ti3C2Tx electrode cross-section. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic illustrations of the MXene films with fast ion transportation. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Moreover, for anodes that suffer from severe volume expansion, it is also important to manipulate the structures of the material hosts as well as the morphologies of the crystallized anodes during fabrication. Guo et al. recently investigated phosphorus-based anodes for PIBs with Sn4P3 particles confined in N-doped carbon fibers. This well-designed structure will suppress the huge volume expansion during cycling. They also investigated the influence of different potassium salts and additives in the electrolyte for PIBs, and it was found that KFSI in ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (EC/DEC) with 5 wt% fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) showed the best electrochemical stability.179 Phosphorus/selenium-based hollow structures also can accommodate the volume expansion.180–182
Apart from the electrode point of view, separators and electrolytes are also important factors that cannot be ignored for ultra-long cycling performance. Bacterial cellulose supported poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride) (P(MVE–MA)) can act as a multifunctional polymer electrolyte towards ultra-long cycling conditions.158 Unexpected high stress and high strain were found in the P(MVE–MA) membrane at the same time, which is very important for suppressing lithium dendrites as well as high pressure conditions (Fig. 11d and e). In summary, both robust frameworks for crystallized particles and well-designed structures are essential to achieve ultra-long cycling stability, and it is suggested that further work be focused on the degradation mechanism with different periods of cycling.
Similar to materials that can achieve ultra-long cycling stability, electrodes that possess ultra-high rates capabilities are also dependent on the intrinsic nature of the crystal structures (such as multi-dimensional diffusion channels and ionic conductivity); the design of their morphology needs to include an electron-conducting carbon matrix as well as good interlayer stability with various solid–solid/solid–liquid contacts.183–187 One of the most promising types of electrodes is MXenes with various functional groups on the surface of each layer. Macroporous electrode architectures enabled an MXene capacitance closer to the theoretical limit. Intercalated water can function as fast protons for ultra-fast electron transportation in both the Ti3C2Tx MXene hydrogel and macroporous templated Ti3C2Tx electrode (Fig. 11f–h).188 Vertical alignment was also achieved by mechanical shearing of a discotic lamellar liquid-crystal phase of Ti3C2Tx, which indicates an electrode design that is capable of thickness-independent electrochemical energy storage (Fig. 11i).189 The vertical alignment strategy provides a special and interesting route for achieving ultra-high rates.
In addition, what we intend to specifically point out is that with the help of recently developed advanced in situ techniques, which are a powerful and meaningful measurement method assessing cell performance under harsh conditions, the phase transition behavior under high C-rates of several well-studied cathode materials has shown unexpected phenomena rather than those that were previously recognized under low C currents. Ceder et al. recently developed an electrochemically functional cell with an ionic liquid electrolyte for operando characterization of battery materials inside a transmission electron microscope (TEM), as shown in Fig. 12a.162 This in situ TEM observation allows researchers to access real-time probing of Li+-ion transport in Li4Ti5O12, as indicated by the in situ EELS results (Fig. 12b). They discovered that rapid diffusion in Li4Ti5O12 is enabled by kinetic pathways comprising distorted Li polyhedra in metastable intermediates along two-phase boundaries. Koyama et al. also employed operando XRD to determine the phase variations during fast charge and discharge processes, and they proposed a hidden two-phase transition of LiFePO4via a metastable phase under high rates (Fig. 12c and d).163 In summary, in order to meet the requirements under ultra-high rates, it is critical to systematically design the structures of materials and pay more attention to interface issues. New battery systems such as the aqueous Zn ion battery and the Al ion battery are promising for targeting this goal.190,191 Besides, some new concepts such as the job-sharing mechanism (the electron and ion transportation happen simultaneously) can be extended if some materials possess special channels for ions and electrons independently. The interface issues, transportation hysteresis and local structure changes are the main obstacles facing ultrahigh rate conditions up till now. In addition, we consider that some of the newly recognized material synthesis methods such as 3D printing and subtractive manufacturing can be used for realizing fast charge transportation, especially for large-scale energy storage systems. Various well-designed structures can be realized via these methods which significantly facilitate charge transfer in distinctive routes. Other accessories such as current collectors should be taken into consideration for ultrahigh rate conditions as well. Finally, the rational design on micro-scale electrode materials towards fast charging is also important to improve the Coulombic efficiency and tap density of electrode, which can bridge the gap from the fundamental research to industry applications.
 Fig. 12  Unprecedented discoveries on diffusion mechanisms under ultra-high rates. (a) Schematic illustration of the design of an electrochemically functional cell for operando characterization of battery materials inside a TEM, and (b) the corresponding in situ EELS results for Li. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (c) and (d) Operando XRD patterns of LiFePO4/Li cells under different C-rates. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
3.8 Other electrochemical reactions in extreme conditions
Understanding the mechanisms of oxygen and hydrogen evolution under high acidity and alkalinity conditions is important since, in some circumstances, only high acidity or alkalinity solutions are available.192,193 Most of the reported noble-metal-free catalysts only can work in neutral solution (pH = 7), but not in acidic (pH = 0) and alkaline (pH = 14) media.194 Even for some of the noble-metal-based catalysts, the electrochemical activity cannot be well maintained in highly acid and alkaline solutions. Therefore, the development of increased durability and activity over wider pH ranges is of significant importance. How to well maintain the superior catalytic performance, however, without severe corrosion in such strongly acid or alkaline solutions is still an open question for researchers.
One effective strategy is using a modified conductive carbon matrix to boost the water splitting performance. Jaramillo et al. recently found that introducing sulfur onto the surface of molybdenum phosphide (MoP) can sufficiently enhance the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in acidic environments.195 Its durability in strong acid was confirmed as well. Such improvements can be attributed to the synergistic effects between sulfur and phosphorus, which creates a high-surface-area electrode rather than pure sulfide or pure phosphide. Similar results were published by other researchers on different transition metals.193,194,196,197 In addition, very recently, a novel type of organic proton donor for the HER under strong-acid/base-free conditions was reported by Wan et al.198 By utilizing the advantages of the electron deficiency of the boron center of borinic acid (BA), the HER could be achieved under these conditions. The reaction mechanism of the dissociation reaction between BA and water is illustrated in Fig. 13a. Another interesting strategy is directly synthesizing catalysts that can intrinsically function in strong acid/alkaline conditions. Meyer et al. synthesized an [(18C6)K(THF)2][FeI(L)] Fe(I) cage complex with the help of tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution under an Ar atmosphere.199 The crystal structure of the [(18C6)K(THF)2][FeI(L)] Fe(I) cage complex is shown in Fig. 13b. The observed decomposition resistance of this compound can be attributed to its electrocatalytic chemical inertness (electron-withdrawing ribbed substituents). The same phenomenon has been observed in cobalt(II)-containing analogues.
 Fig. 13  Energy conversion under high acidity and alkalinity and high-voltage conditions. (a) Dissociation reaction between borinic acid and water. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesis and crystal structure of the [(18C6)K(THF)2][FeI(L)] catalyst. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) HAADF image of the as-obtained fully ordered face-centered tetragonal (fct)-FePt nanoparticle after 20000 potential cycles. (d) and (e) HER polarization curves and HER activity performances of the fct-FePt nanoparticle. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the working voltage vs. the reversible capacity of the electrode materials in relation to the energy levels below HOMO conditions. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Oxidation stabilities for different electrolytes at various electrolyte concentrations. Reproduced with permission.206 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. (h) Cyclic voltammetry profiles at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 of the high voltage Na3MnZr(PO4)3 cathode. Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In the case of noble metal-based catalysts, the severe corrosion and reactivity under such strong acid or alkaline conditions are problematic. In order to solve this issue, researchers have focused on the exposure of certain facets that can resist severe corrosion. Sun et al. discovered a new approach to synthesize fully ordered face-centered-FePt nanoparticles to enhance their electrocatalysis capability in acid.200 Their stability is evidenced by the aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscope (HAADF-STEM) image after 20000 potential cycles (Fig. 13c). Fe/Pt ordering within the fct-FePt nanoparticles is easily observed. Both the HER polarization curves and HER activity before and after 10000 cycles in strong acid solution are presented in Fig. 13d and e. A gold substrate also shows great influence on the intrinsic and extrinsic activity of the nickel-based oxyhydroxide oxygen evolution reaction (OER) under strongly alkaline conditions.18 Nickel oxyhydroxide (NiOOH), nickel–iron oxyhydroxide (NiFeOOH), and nickel–cerium oxyhydroxide (NiCeOOH) were all investigated, and they found that the stronger physical adhesion effect plays an important role in the electrochemical properties. In addition, by employing in situ18O isotope labelling mass spectrometry, the generated O2 was found to come from lattice oxygen, which enables pH-independent OER activity. Such advanced techniques are significantly useful for further determining the fundamental reaction mechanisms in strongly acid or alkaline conditions.
Electrochemical behaviors at high potentials are also one of the extreme conditions that needs to be paid more attention since higher working voltages will bring greater energy densities. For lithium-ion batteries, nickel-rich layered oxides, lithium-rich layered oxides, and high-voltage spinel oxides are considered as promising high-voltage cathodes in the last ten years and have received tremendous investigation.7,30,178,201–205 One key scientific point is the voltage window limitation near the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) based on the current known liquid/solid state electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 13f.5 The real status of the SEI layer at the edge of the HOMO is critical for the real applications of the abovementioned layer structured oxide cathodes, since some of these materials possess reversible redox reactions outside of the thermodynamic stability window. Therefore breakthroughs can be anticipated from the electrode–electrolyte compatibility with discoveries of novel electrolyte systems. On the other hand, the detailed structural variations in high voltage regions also play a critical role for achieving satisfactory electrochemical performance. Here we intend to highlight several promising aspects, including high concentration electrolytes stabilizing the cathode interlayer surface of Ni-rich layered oxides,206 high-voltage aqueous electrolyte systems (Fig. 13g),207 explorations of higher redox potentials (Fig. 13h),208,209etc. Higher voltage working platforms are commonly far away from the thermodynamically stable phase; therefore, such chemical potentials are close to HOMO status, resulting in relatively unstable intermediates that require external electron cloud rearrangement (e.g. heteroatom doping) and/or external crystal/surface protection.210 However, the understanding of ESSs working under high-voltage conditions is still rather inadequate, and more attention and investigation are strongly recommended in this area for the higher goal of high energy ESSs.
4. Perspectives and outlook
Energy storage in extreme conditions is an important focus for the real and wide applications of ESSs, although these issues are more challenging compared to normal conditions, and they have not been deeply investigated to date. In this review, we first addressed the key scientific points for electrochemical energy storage under extreme conditions from the electrochemical thermodynamics and kinetics points of view, as well as highlighting the essential techniques for solid-state electrolytes and “water-in-salt” electrolytes, and the required mechanical properties under high shear/compression conditions. We mainly summarized the extreme conditions in several parts, such as high/low temperatures, high shear/pressure conditions, high moisture conditions, high acidity or alkalinity conditions, lean electrolyte conditions, etc., which are commonly encountered in practical applications in various scenarios. To meet the high demands on the electrochemical properties under such extreme conditions requires a full understanding of the materials and related mechanism principles, as well as rational materials engineering and novel concepts/systems. Basically, several challenges, including fundamentals, materials and techniques, facing such extreme conditions are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Challenges and remedies for current/future ESSs working in extreme conditions




Fundamental
(a) The physical and chemical stabilities on both the macroscale and microscale are the determining factors for the overall performance stability of ESSs under extreme working conditions. The complexity of such critical parameters ought to be unveiled through ab initio calculations, modelling, and advanced operando characterization


(b) The understanding of physical and chemical stability maintainace as well as possible property changes of solid–liquid and solid–solid interfaces under extreme conditions is still in the preliminary stage. More theories and related techniques are strongly required to precisely probe the real states and proper predictions are required as well


(c) Such extreme conditions will easily result in high overpotential and voltage hysteresis, which will bring an inevitable energy penalty inherently. More relevant remedies such as electrocatalysis in certain positions should be taken into consideration


(d) Potential new phenomena and properties of both electrodes and electrolytes or substrates under extreme conditions are rarely explored or understood. Such directions are of great value for researchers towards real applications in various harsh situations






Materials
(a) Some of the emerging host/substrate materials can provide remarkable additional anti-pressure or anti-shear abilities. Their core strategies such as the chain induction effect also can be adapted for high mass loading of electrodes and longer cycle life


(b) Some special electrolyte additives or new electrolyte systems can bring higher voltage windows as well as shear thickening abilities. Such additives also can be employed in some certain environments, e.g. seawater batteries, to achieve higher energy density


(c) Directions on stability reinforcement at the atomic scale and molecular scale are critical for longer cycling, higher rates, high moisture conditions, etc.


(d) More balanced, systematic material and morphology designs facing various special requirements under extreme conditions are strongly recommended






Techniques
(a) Proper interfacial protection layers with tunable structures and composites are necessary facing extreme conditions


(b) Atomic scale heteroatom doping to boost multi-electron reactions, high voltage stability and high anti-pressure abilities


(c) External/internal thermal control systems for high/low-temperature conditions


(d) More advanced in situ characterization techniques are strongly required to fully understand the special/unique behaviors of both electrodes and electrolytes under various extreme conditions


(e) Big data assisted analysis/artificial intelligence to precisely predict electrochemical behaviors beyond current achievable conditions


(f) Overall ESS management technique improvements are also important directions targeting these special applications


(g) Manufacturing large quantities of well-designed electrodes/electrolytes while maintaining their qualities for dealing with extreme conditions will remain a great challenge in the future




Nevertheless, in the current state of development, the electrode materials do not have ideal properties that can face all the extreme conditions mentioned above. Therefore, several aspects of materials design are required to overcome their intrinsic weak functionalities. For the cathodes, key strategies are based on structural reconstruction and morphology control. Downsizing the materials can boost their high-rate performance, and surface modifications are effective to suppress the interfacial reactions of moisture sensitive materials. By carefully choosing materials with high ionic conductivity combined with well-constructed carbon networks, their low-temperature performance can be improved, even if the mass loading of the electrodes is increased simultaneously. In the case of the anodes, multi-dimensional structural designs will be helpful towards alleviating huge volume shrinkage, which is critical for ultra-long cycling stability. Surface modifications are also essential for Li-metal batteries, and the problematic Li dendrites can be suppressed by selecting appropriate Li alloys, even at low temperatures. Electrolytes are also key targets for investigating such difficulties under extreme conditions. Water-in-salt electrolytes are promising in aqueous systems for various electrochemical systems (such as LIBs, SIBs, and zinc-ion batteries), and lean electrolytes are critical for large-scale applications of room-temperature Li–S/Na–S systems, which have been initially achieved by good polysulfide confinement and substrate construction. Safety concerns arising from severe compaction are initially addressed by shear-thickening electrolytes as well. High concentration electrolytes are also one of the available strategies to suppress Li-dendrite issues, even under extremely low temperatures. The combination of theoretical calculations and experimental studies should be highlighted as well, especially towards various complex ESSs. Multiscale modeling tools for achieving fundamental understanding and diagnostics are even more important when dealing with extreme conditions.
The effective and universal strategies are of great importance for several extreme conditions that occur simultaneously in practical applications. Nevertheless, many questions and obstacles still remain to be better understood and properly solved, leaving huge open space for future developments in relation to these extreme conditions. We here highlight some of the strategies as well as envisioning some of the critical barriers for future research:
(1) Appropriate heteroatom doping in various sites can ameliorate several obstacles that have already been encountered. Surface doping is effective for moisture suppression, as well as less poor performance under high acidity or alkalinity conditions. Along with molecular dynamics simulations, appropriate heteroatom doping in tetrahedral/octahedral sites can greatly improve the ionic conductivity of several types of solid-state electrolytes. Heteroatom doping is also beneficial for high-rate performance, since more cation vacancies can be created.
(2) Proper surface protection and modification for both electrodes and electrolytes have shown great potential for targeting those critical issues mentioned above. Moisture-sensitive materials can be protected by artificial surface layers or interlayers, and Li dendrites can be suppressed with well-designed polymer layers. The well-decorated solid–solid or solid–liquid interfaces can also possess higher ionic and electronic conductivities, which is important towards performance at ultra-high rates and with ultra-long cycling stability.
(3) Multi-dimensional space and structural fabrication. An ultra-high loading amount cannot be well achieved without well-designed structural fabrication, and the huge volume expansion of several anodes also requires void space to accommodate the volume changes towards ultra-long cycling stability. Carefully chosen substrates will absorb high shear force as well as high tension from stretching, which will meet the requirements of wearable electronic devices. Interlayer structural design and construction are also important for accommodating Li dendrites and high-performance aqueous systems involving water-in-salt electrolytes.
(4) Optimization of current electrolytes in both aqueous and non-aqueous systems is critical for various ESSs under all types of extreme conditions, especially for high-/low-temperature conditions and lean/high concentration electrolyte conditions. Ultra-low temperature performance can be achieved with organic additives, even in aqueous systems, and lean electrolytes require more sustainable loading on substrates and better wetting abilities for Li–S batteries. By adding small amounts of certain types of polymers, shear thickening electrolytes can be obtained to withstand severe compaction. Wider voltage windows can be achieved by water-in-salt electrolytes, and further modifications ought to be focused on low-cost and environmentally friendly organic solutions.
(5) More theoretical calculations are strongly required towards practical applications for extreme conditions. The interfacial hopping energy barrier, ion diffusion energy barrier, surface absorption energy, molecular dynamics properties, etc. will face dramatic changes under extreme conditions, and even the well-known theories may need to be altered or will fail as well. New models and concepts should be reestablished based on previous experience, which is also helpful for discovering novel materials that are suitable for abnormal conditions.
(6) More advanced state-of-the-art techniques and characterizations are required as well, such as in situ STEM/EELS, 3D X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), 3D Bragg coherent diffractive imaging, etc., to precisely probe the changes in phase, lattices, interface components, valence states, and so on. These state-of-art techniques are powerful and indispensable for exploration beyond the current limitations.
(7) Mass production of well-fabricated materials on the laboratory scale is still problematic, and it needs both scientists and engineers to work closely together. Manufacturing large quantities while maintaining their qualities for dealing with extreme conditions will inevitably pose a challenge. The fabrication process, cost, toxicity, and batch stability should all be taken into consideration simultaneously.
We believe that, with a further research emphasis on these challenging extreme conditions, more and more cutting-edge methods, theoretical tools, and state-of-the-art characterizations will be put to practical use, and the above-mentioned issues will be eventually resolved, although the journey beyond the current limitations may be painful.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21875040 & 21905051). This work was also funded by the Science and Technology Development Fund, Macau SAR (Grant No. 0057/2019/A1, 0092/2019/A2 and 0035/2019/AMJ). The authors thank Dr Tania Silver for her critical reading of the manuscript.
References
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Davies, M. G. Verde, O. Mnyshenko, Y. R. Chen, R. Rajeev, Y. S. Meng and G. Elliott, Nat. Energy, 2018, 4, 42–50 CrossRef .
W. Li, B. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
M. Zhao, B. Q. Li, H. J. Peng, H. Yuan, J. Y. Wei and J. Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12636–12652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hua, Z. Wu, M. Chen, M. Knapp, X. Guo, S. Indris, J. R. Binder, N. N. Bramnik, B. Zhong, H. Guo, S. Chou, Y.-M. Kang and H. Ehrenberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25391–25400 RSC .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, Q. Liu, S.-W. Wang, E. Wang, X. Guo and S.-L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803609 CrossRef .
N. Zhao, W. Khokhar, Z. Bi, C. Shi, X. Guo, L.-Z. Fan and C.-W. Nan, Joule, 2019, 3, 1190–1199 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, Q. Li, X. Yu, L. Chen and H. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6820–6877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. Wan, Y. Ye, K. Liu, L. Y. Chou and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1686–1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Veith, B. L. Armstrong, H. Wang, S. Kalnaus, W. E. Tenhaeff and M. L. Patterson, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2084–2088 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cho and H. A. Gabbar, Saf. Extreme Environ., 2019, 1, 11–25 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, L. F. Cui, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Li, G. Hong, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7364–7368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Nian, J. Wang, S. Liu, T. Sun, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16994–16999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chakthranont, J. Kibsgaard, A. Gallo, J. Park, M. Mitani, D. Sokaras, T. Kroll, R. Sinclair, M. B. Mogensen and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5399–5409 CrossRef CAS .
M.-T. F. Rodrigues, G. Babu, H. Gullapalli, K. Kalaga, F. N. Sayed, K. Kato, J. Joyner and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, H. Celio, J. Li, A. Dolocan and A. Manthiram, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6480–6485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, X.-B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700260 CrossRef .
H. Li, D. Chao, B. Chen, X. Chen, C. Chuah, Y. Tang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2012–2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4998–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1278–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, G. Feng and R. Qiao, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 47, 99–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Ren and C. F. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805924 CrossRef .
A. J. Baca, J. H. Ahn, Y. Sun, M. A. Meitl, E. Menard, H. S. Kim, W. M. Choi, D. H. Kim, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5524–5542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Yang, G. Zhang, S. Ge and C. Y. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 7266–7271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abdellahi, A. Urban, S. Dacek and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5373–5383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, D. A. Kitchaev, D. H. Kwon, C. W. Lee, J. K. Papp, Y. S. Liu, Z. Lun, R. J. Clement, T. Shi, B. D. McCloskey, J. Guo, M. Balasubramanian and G. Ceder, Nature, 2018, 556, 185–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Ren, H. Hsu, X. Feng, G.-L. Xu, M. Zhuang, H. Gao, L. Lu, X. Han, Z. Chu, J. Li, X. He, K. Amine and M. Ouyang, Joule, 2018, 2, 2047–2064 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4924–4933 RSC .
L. You, K. Duan, G. Zhang, W. Song, T. Yang, X. Song, S. Wang and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5942–5950 CrossRef CAS .
R. Genieser, S. Ferrari, M. Loveridge, S. D. Beattie, R. Beanl, H. Amari, G. West and R. Bhagat, J. Power Sources, 2018, 373, 172–183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zheng, L. Yu, X. Ren, M. H. Engelhard, C. Niu, H. Lee, W. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1548–1558 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, K. Fu, Y. Gong, C. Yang, Y. Yao, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel, H. Xie, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4917–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Xu, M.-C. Zhang, G.-Q. Zhang, J.-H. Liu, X.-Z. Liu, X. Zhang, D.-D. Zhao, C.-L. Xu and Y.-Q. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 441, 227220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, K. Wen, J. Fan, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11631–11663 RSC .
B. Mao, C. Liu, K. Yang, S. Li, P. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Meng, F. Gao, Q. Duan, Q. Wang and J. Sun, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 139, 110717 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mo, G. Liang, Q. Meng, Z. Liu, H. Li, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 706–715 RSC .
Z. Pei, Z. Yuan, C. Wang, S. Zhao, J. Fei, L. Wei, J. Chen, C. Wang, R. Qi, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 4823–4829 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Y. Zhang, G. Xing and Y. Tang, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Wang, G. Zhang, S. Ge, T. Xu, Y. Ji, X. G. Yang and Y. Leng, Nature, 2016, 529, 515–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. You, H. R. Yao, S. Xin, Y. X. Yin, T. T. Zuo, C. P. Yang, Y. G. Guo, Y. Cui, L. J. Wan and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7243–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Du, M. Tao, J. Li, T. Yang, W. Gao, J. Deng, Y. Qi, S. J. Bao and M. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903351 CrossRef .
E. Wang, W. Xiang, R. Rajagopalan, Z. Wu, J. Yang, M. Chen, B. Zhong, S. X. Dou, S. Chou, X. Guo and Y.-M. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9833–9841 RSC .
E. Wang, M. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Guo, Z. Wu, W. Xiang, B. Zhong, X. Guo, S. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Guo, P. F. Wang, X. L. Wu, X. H. Zhang, Q. Yan, H. Chen, J. P. Zhang and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701968 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-Y. Wang, B.-H. Hou, J.-Z. Guo, Q.-L. Ning, W.-L. Pang, J. Wang, C.-L. Lü and X.-L. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703252 CrossRef .
M. Chen, W. Hua, J. Xiao, D. Cortie, X. Guo, E. Wang, Q. Gu, Z. Hu, S. Indris, X. L. Wang, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2449–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, W. Hua, J. Xiao, D. Cortie, W. Chen, E. Wang, Z. Hu, Q. Gu, X. Wang, S. Indris, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1480 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, H. Sun, X. Chen, X. Fu, C. Chen, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3282–3293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, R. Ran, Y. Chen, Z. Shao and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 512–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Holoubek, Y. Yin, M. Li, M. Yu, Y. S. Meng, P. Liu and Z. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18892–18897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Tang, H. Xia, Y. Zeng, L. Qiao, Z. Zhu, Z. Lv, Y. Zhang, X. Ge, S. Xi, Z. Wang, Y. Du and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14038–14042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Vatamanu, L. Xing, O. Borodin, H. Chen, X. Guan, X. Liu, K. Xu and W. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902654 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, N. Lin, W. Cai, Y. Zhao, J. Zhou, J. Liang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 7402–7406 RSC .
L. Yan, J. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 685–691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geng, M. Cheng, B. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and C. C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907684 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Rana, J. H. Park, E. Ducrot, H. Park, M. Kota, T. H. Han, J. Y. Lee, J. Kim, J.-H. Kim, P. Howlett, M. Forsyth, D. MacFarlane and H. S. Park, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 197–205 CrossRef .
Y. Ye, H. Xiao, K. Reaves, B. McCulloch, J. F. Mike and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2774–2784 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, Y. Tang, Z. Zhu, J. Wei, W. Li, H. Xia, Y. Jiang, Z. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Ge, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Zhang, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805468 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, G. Liang, F. Mo, Q. Yang, L. Ma and C. Zhi, Small, 2018, 14, 1803978 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su, H. Zhang, H. Cheng, B. Lu, C. Yu, C. Chuang, T. I. Kim, T. Song, K. Shigeta, S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. V. Braun, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Yang, C. Du, Q. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Zhao, B. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Sun, P. Jia, H. Li, L. Geng, J. Chen, H. Ye, Z. Wang, Y. Li, H. Sun, X. Li, Q. Dai, Y. Tang, Q. Peng, T. Shen, S. Zhang, T. Zhu and J. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 94–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, X. Ren, Y. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, X. Li, J. Xiao, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang, W. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1042–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Liao, Y. Li, J. Zhao, F. Shi, K. Yan, A. Pei, G. Chen, G. Li, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7060–7065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, R. Zhang, P. Shi, X. Chen and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003416 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qian, Z. He, C. Liang, Y. Cha and W. Ji, Mater. Lett., 2020, 260, 126933 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, Y. Kang, H. Song and Q. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 424, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. Córdoba, A. Kuhn, J. C. Pérez-Flores, E. Morán, J. M. Gallardo-Amores and F. García-Alvarado, J. Power Sources, 2019, 422, 42–48 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, Y. He, H. Sheng, X. Lu, H. Dong, S. Samanta, H. Dong, X. Li, D. Y. Kim, H.-K. Mao, Y. Liu, H. Li, H. Li and L. Wang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Bai, H. Li, Y. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Ni, L. Liu, F. Wu, Y. Yao and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6666–6669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, B. Xiong, F. Zeng, R. Xu, F. Yang, J. Kang, M. Xiang, L. Li, X. Sheng and Z. Hao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 17142–17151 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gundlapalli and S. Jayanti, J. Power Sources, 2019, 427, 231–242 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, C.-F. Cheng, L. Zhou, F. Zou, W. Liang, M. Wang and Y. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 297–304 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, D. Y. Kim, L. Yang, N. Li, L. Tang, K. Amine and H. K. Mao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600453 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Choudhury, S. Wei, Y. Ozhabes, D. Gunceler, M. J. Zachman, Z. Tu, J. H. Shin, P. Nath, A. Agrawal, L. F. Kourkoutis, T. A. Arias and L. A. Archer, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 898 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, W. A. Henderson, H. Pan, B. R. Perdue, R. Cao, J. Z. Hu, C. Wan, K. S. Han, K. T. Mueller, J. G. Zhang, Y. Shao and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3061–3067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Galle Kankanamge, K. Li, K. D. Fulfer, P. Du, R. Jorn, R. Kumar and D. G. Kuroda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25237–25246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Yan, J. L. Gray, X. He, D. Wang, T. Chen, Q. Huang, Y. C. Li, H. Wang, S. H. Kim, T. E. Mallouk and D. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 384–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shin, J. Lu and X. Ji, Carbon Energy, 2019, 1, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Zhang, K. Liu, T. Yang, J. Tian, C. Wang, M. Chen and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46767–46775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Lei, A. Naveed, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 307–315 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Lu, Q. Zhou, X. Qi, Q. Meng, X. Rong, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1156–1158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, S. Liu, G. C. Li, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4652–4659 RSC .
J. Yu, N. Gao, J. Peng, N. Ma, X. Liu, C. Shen, K. Xie and Z. Fang, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, F. Wu, A. Mariani and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4185–4193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pranay Reddy, P. Fischer, M. Marinaro and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2758–2766 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, F. A. Soto, V. Ponce, J. M. Seminario, X. Cao, J.-G. Zhang and P. B. Balbuena, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25047–25055 RSC .
X. Ren, S. Chen, H. Lee, D. Mei, M. H. Engelhard, S. D. Burton, W. Zhao, J. Zheng, Q. Li, M. S. Ding, M. Schroeder, J. Alvarado, K. Xu, Y. S. Meng, J. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Chem, 2018, 4, 1877–1892 CAS .
L. Yu, S. Chen, H. Lee, L. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, Q. Li, S. Jiao, J. Liu, W. Xu and J.-G. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2059–2067 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Kravchyk, P. Bhauriyal, L. Piveteau, C. P. Guntlin, B. Pathak and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4469 CrossRef .
J.-H. Park, J.-K. Park and J.-W. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2016, 37, 344–348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, S. L. Shang, J. H. Seo, D. Wang, X. Luo, Q. Huang, S. Chen, J. Lu, X. Li, Z. K. Liu and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605561 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Han, N. Sharma, E. Gonzalo, J. C. Pramudita, H. E. A. Br, J. M. López del Am and T. Rojo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18963–18975 RSC .
S. Guo, Q. Li, P. Liu, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 135 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jiang, L. Jin, Z. Han, W. Hu, Z. Zeng, Y. Sun and J. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11374–11378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zuo, J. Qiu, X. Liu, F. Ren, H. Liu, H. He, C. Luo, J. Li, G. F. Ortiz, H. Duan, J. Liu, M.-S. Wang, Y. Li, R. Fu and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. Daniel, S. J. An and D. Wood, MRS Adv., 2016, 1, 1029–1035 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zarrabeitia, E. Castillo-Martínez, J. M. López Del Amo, A. Eguía-Barrio, M. A. Muñoz-Márquez, T. Rojo and M. Casas-Cabanas, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 378–387 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jo, Y. Kim, J. Yang, M. Jeong, K. Song, Y. I. Kim, J. M. Lim, M. Cho, J. H. Shim, Y. M. Kim, W. S. Yoon and Y. M. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3385 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Cao, Y. Ma, A. Natan, P. Aurora and H. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Brugge, A. K. O. Hekselman, A. Cavallaro, F. M. Pesci, R. J. Chater, J. A. Kilner and A. Aguadero, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3704–3713 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. Min, Y.-H. Lee, J. H. Choi, M. C. Jang, S. A. Freunberge and J. W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1747–1756 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xie, M. Z. Rong and M. Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1805–1809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim and K. Y. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5069–5074 RSC .
W. M. C. Nunes, G. C. D. Souza, L. R. A. D. Silva, B. P. Gonçalves, J. M. L. D. Oliveira and D. B. D. Alencar, Int. J. Adv. Res. Biol. Sci., 2019, 6, 386–389 Search PubMed .
D. Reber, R.-S. Kühnel and C. Battaglia, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, Z. Cao, Y. Wu, W. Wahyudi, W. Wang, X. Guo, L. Cavallo, J.-Y. Hwang, A. Shamim, L.-J. Li, Y.-K. Sun and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2613–2622 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, L. Suo, F. Wang, N. Eidson, C. Yang, F. Han, Z. Ma, T. Gao, M. Zhu and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 82, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. X. Jiang, C. Fang and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097–14099 RSC .
R. S. Kuhnel, D. Reber, A. Remh, R. Figi, D. Bleiner and C. Battaglia, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10435–10438 RSC .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, Y. Wang, X. Rong, W. Sun, X. Fan, S. Xu, M. A. Schroeder, A. V. Cresce, F. Wang, C. Yang, Y.-S. Hu, K. Xu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701189 CrossRef .
F. Wang, L. Suo, Y. Liang, C. Yang, F. Han, T. Gao, W. Sun and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1600922 CrossRef .
N. Dubouis, P. Lemaire, B. Mirvaux, E. Salager, M. Deschamps and A. Grimaud, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3491–3499 RSC .
D. P. Leonard, Z. Wei, G. Chen, F. Du and X. Ji, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 373–374 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ferdousi, M. Hilder, A. Basile, H. Zhu, L. A. O'Dell, D. Saurel, T. Rojo, M. Arm, M. Forsyth and P. C. Howlett, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1700–1711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, J. I. Feldblyum, D. G. Mackanic, F. Lissel, D. L. Michels, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2876–2883 RSC .
M. McEldrew, Z. A. H. Goodwin, A. A. Kornyshev and M. Z. Bazant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5840–5846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lin, K. Sun, M. Ge, L. M. Housel, A. H. McCarthy, M. N. Vila, C. Zhao, X. Xiao, W.-K. Lee, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and Y. K. Chen-Wiegart, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay7129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ye, M. Pasta, X. Xie, Y. Cui and C. S. Criddle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2295–2300 RSC .
J. Park, J.-S. Park, S. T. Senthilkumar and Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227600 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. Choi, D. Y. Hwang, J. Park, K. S. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Kim, S. K. Kwak, Y.-J. Yu and S. J. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19672–19680 RSC .
Y. Kim, S. M. Hwang, H. Yu and Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3046–3054 RSC .
J.-K. Kim, E. Lee, H. Kim, C. Johnson, J. Cho and Y. Kim, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 328–332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, J.-K. Kim, C. Vaalma, G. H. Bae, G.-T. Kim, S. Passerini and Y. Kim, Carbon, 2018, 129, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Senthilkumar, W. Go, J. Han, L. Pham Thi Thuy, K. Kishor, Y. Kim and Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22803–22825 RSC .
Y. Kim, H. Kim, S. Park, I. Seo and Y. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. M. Hwang, I. Hwang, J. Han, J. H. Kim, Y. H. Jo, K. Seo, Y. Kim and J. S. Lee, iScience, 2019, 19, 232–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, J. Fu, R. Chen, Q. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Chen and Y. Liu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 160, 396–402 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ligaray, N. Kim, S. Park, J.-S. Park, J. Park, Y. Kim and K. H. Cho, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125082 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rashad, M. Asif, Y. Wang, Z. He and I. Ahmed, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 342–375 CrossRef .
J. Han, H. Zhang, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3704–3707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Dong and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700018 CrossRef .
P. Bhattacharya, M. I. Nasiri, D. Lv, A. M. Schwarz, J. T. Darsell, W. A. Henderson, D. A. Tomalia, J. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and J. Xiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 176–186 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, X. Niu, T. Qian, X. Shen, J. Zhou, N. Xu and C. Yan, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15497–15504 RSC .
L. Shen, C. Yuan, H. Luo, X. Zhang, S. Yang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 572–574 RSC .
H. M. Kim, H.-H. Sun, I. Belharouak, A. Manthiram and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Mei, J. Liang, Z. Zhao, C. Lee, H. Fei, M. Ding, J. Lau, M. Li, C. Wang, X. Xu, G. Hao, B. Papandrea, I. Shakir, B. Dunn, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 356, 599–604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, S. Xia, Y. Huang, X. Hu, B. Yuan, S. Chen, Y. Yu and W. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903961 CrossRef .
H. Li, L. Peng, D. Wu, J. Wu, Y.-J. Zhu and X. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802930 CrossRef .
D. Ma, Y. Li, J. Yang, H. Mi, S. Luo, L. Deng, C. Yan, P. Zhang, Z. Lin, X. Ren, J. Li and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 317–325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, X. Dai, W. Zhang, Q. Sheng, H. Zhuo, Y. Xiao and H. Wang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 876–889 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 130–136 RSC .
S. Chu, Y. Zhong, R. Cai, Z. Zhang, S. Wei and Z. Shao, Small, 2016, 12, 6724–6734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Chang, S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Small, 2016, 12, 174–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Niu, H. Pan, W. Xu, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang, L. Luo, C. Wang, D. Mei, J. Meng, X. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Mai and J. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, P. Bai, S. Gao and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41380–41388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M.-X. Chen, Q.-Q. Yan, S.-L. Xu, S.-Q. Chu, P. Chen, Y. Lin and H.-W. Liang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax6322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. Liu, Y. Song and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8450–8458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, L. B. Huang, X. Z. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, C. He, Z. Y. Wu, L. J. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Yang, L. Gu, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1278 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Liu, H. Xiao and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3375–3383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, Y. Sun, M. Lu, J. Zhu, M. Li, Y. Shan, J. Shen and C. Song, Energy Fuels, 2019, 33, 7696–7704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Y. Ren, A. Wang, X. Liu, X. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Miao, L. Li, J. Liu, J. Wang, G. Wang, D. Su and T. Zhang, Chem.
Sci., 2017, 8, 5126–5131 RSC .
T. Dong, J. Zhang, G. Xu, J. Chai, H. Du, L. Wang, H. Wen, X. Zang, A. Du, Q. Jia, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1197–1203 RSC .
Q. Wang, S. Wang, X. Guo, L. Ruan, N. Wei, Y. Ma, J. Li, M. Wang, W. Li and W. Zeng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, E. Wang, Q. Liu, X. Guo, W. Chen, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 163–178 CrossRef .
N. Wang, Z. Bai, Y. Qian and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4126–4133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, D.-H. Seo, T. Chen, L. Wu, M. Topsakal, Y. Zhu, D. Lu, G. Ceder and F. Wang, Science, 2020, 367, 1030–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koyama, T. Uyama, Y. Orikasa, T. Naka, H. Komatsu, K. Shimoda, H. Murayama, K. Fukuda, H. Arai, E. Matsubara, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2855–2863 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Hu, Q. Liu, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, Q. Gu, J.-L. Wang, L.-Z. Wang, X. Guo, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605535 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, D. Cortie, Z. Hu, H. Jin, S. Wang, Q. Gu, W. Hua, E. Wang, W. Lai, L. Chen, S.-L. Chou, X.-L. Wang and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800944 CrossRef .
K. M. Bui, V. A. Dinh, S. Okada and T. Ohno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30433–30439 RSC .
J. Shin, J. Yang, C. Sergey, M. S. Song and Y. M. Kang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700128 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Chen, S. Zhou, C. Han, M. Xu, N. Zhao and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 323–330 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, X. Wu and P. Shen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6268–6278 CrossRef .
J. Kim, G. Yoon, M. H. Lee, H. Kim, S. Lee and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7826–7832 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Gang, Z. Hu, Z. Yan, W. Li, Y. Li, Q. F. Gu, Z. Wang, S. L. Chou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Li, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, J.-L. Wang, Q.-F. Gu, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, J. Xiao, W. Hua, Z. Hu, W. Wang, Q. Gu, Y. Tang, S. Chou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12076–12083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, H. Xu, S. Wang, T. Huang, J. Xi, S. Cai, F. Guo, Z. Xu, W. Gao and C. Gao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao7233 CrossRef .
B. Li, J. Quan, A. Loh, J. Chai, Y. Chen, C. Tan, X. Ge, T. S. Hor, Z. Liu, H. Zhang and Y. Zong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 156–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dong, W. Yang, W. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Li, C. Xu, S. Wan, F. He, F. Kang and G. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, K.-W. Huang, J. Chen and J. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax4279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hua, S. Wang, M. Knapp, S. J. Leake, A. Senyshyn, C. Richter, M. Yavuz, J. R. Binder, C. P. Grey, H. Ehrenberg, S. Indris and B. Schwarz, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5365 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, W. K. Pang, V. Sencadas and Z. Guo, Joule, 2018, 2, 1534–1547 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Hu, Y. Liang, L. Li, C. Zou, H. Jin, S. Wang, H. Lu, Q. Gu, S. L. Chou, Y. Liu and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5159–5164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Q. Liu, W. Lai, Q. Gu, L. Li, M. Chen, W. Wang, S.-L. Chou, Y. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 20, 1903542 CrossRef .
L. Han, S. Wu, Z. Hu, M. Chen, J. Ding, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Cao and S. Chou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10402–10409 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, W. Li, B. Ma and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
L. B. Tang, B. Zhang, C. S. An, H. Li, B. Xiao, J. H. Li, Z. J. He and J. C. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 8169–8178 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 540–550 CrossRef .
G. Huang, J. Han, F. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Kashani, K. Watanabe and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805334 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, T. S. Mathis, M. Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, A. Dang, Z. Zhou, H. Cho, Y. Gogotsi and S. Yang, Nature, 2018, 557, 409–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, T. Han, C. Lin, W. Xiang, Y. Zhao, P. Gao, F. Du, X. Li and Y. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700041 CrossRef .
X. Ding, F. Zhang, B. Ji, Y. Liu, J. Li, C. S. Lee and Y. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42294–42300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12495–12498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
L. L. Feng, G. D. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. C. Zou, D. Wang and X. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 980–988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14433–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rauf, Y.-D. Zhao, Y.-C. Wang, Y.-P. Zheng, C. Chen, X.-D. Yang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 73, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, C. Wang, T. Ding, J. Zuo and Q. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18887–18892 RSC .
X. H. Lv, X. Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Xu and W. M. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9821–9824 RSC .
Y. Z. Voloshin, V. V. Novikov, Y. V. Nelyubina, A. S. Belov, D. M. Roitershtein, A. Savitsky, A. Mokhir, J. Sutter, M. E. Miehlich and K. Meyer, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3436–3439 RSC .
Q. Li, L. Wu, G. Wu, D. Su, H. Lv, S. Zhang, W. Zhu, A. Casimir, H. Zhu, A. Mendoza-Garcia and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2468–2473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hua, M. Chen, B. Schwarz, M. Knapp, M. Bruns, J. Barthel, X. Yang, F. Sigel, R. Azmi, A. Senyshyn, A. Missiul, L. Simonelli, M. Etter, S. Wang, X. Mu, A. Fiedler, J. R. Binder, X. Guo, S. Chou, B. Zhong, S. Indris and H. Ehrenberg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803094 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Z. Hu, Z. Wu, W. Hua, K. Ozawa, Q. Gu, Y. M. Kang, X. Guo, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26051–26057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Nie, B. Zhong, M. Chen, K. Yin, L. Li, H. Liu and X. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 97, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Ouyang, X. Yu, M. Ge, X. Huang, E. Hu, C. Ma, S. Li, R. Xiao, W. Yang, Y. Chu, Y. Liu, H. Yu, X.-Q. Yang, X. Huang, L. Chen and H. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701785 CrossRef .
X. Fan, L. Chen, X. Ji, T. Deng, S. Hou, J. Chen, J. Zheng, F. Wang, J. Jiang, K. Xu and C. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 174–185 CAS .
R.-S. Kühnel, D. Reber and C. Battaglia, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2005–2006 CrossRef .
H. Gao, I. D. Seymour, S. Xin, L. Xue, G. Henkelman and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 18192–18199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Gao, H. Gao, H. Jin and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908680 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Q. Liu, Z. Hu, Y. Zhang, G. Xing, Y. Tang and S.-L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002244 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Mingzhe Chen
	Mingzhe Chen received his Master's degree in 2015 from Sichuan University, China. He obtained his PhD degree at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, under the supervision of Dr Shu-Lei Chou and Prof. Shi-Xue Dou in 2019. His research focuses on advanced, low-cost electrodes for both lithium-ion batteries and sodium-ion batteries.

Yanyan Zhang
	Yanyan Zhang is a professor in the college of chemical engineering, Fuzhou University. She obtained her BS and MS degrees at the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively. She received her PhD degree from the Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) in 2013. Her research interest is the rational design of advanced materials for lithium-ion batteries and zinc-ion batteries.

Guichuan Xing
	Guichuan Xing is an associate professor at the Institute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering (IAPME), University of Macau. He obtained his BS degree from Fudan University in 2003, and PhD from National University of Singapore in 2011. After his postdoctoral fellow training at Nanyang Technological University, he joined IAPME as an Assistant Professor in 2016. Then he was promoted to associate professor in 2020. His research interests include ultrafast spectroscopies and metal-halide perovskites for light harvesting and light emission applications.

Shu-Lei Chou
	Shu-Lei Chou is a professor at the ISEM, University of Wollongong. He obtained his Bachelor's (2003) and Master's degree (2007) from Nankai University, China. He received his PhD from the University of Wollongong in 2010. His research focuses on energy-storage materials for battery applications, and in particular on novel composite materials, new binders, and new electrolytes for Li/Na batteries.

Yuxin Tang
	Yuxin Tang is a professor in the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University. He obtained his BS and MS degrees at the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and graduated from Nanyang Technological University with a PhD in materials Science (2013). His research interests include solid-state and fast charging energy storage devices, and the development of real-time electrochemical reaction monitoring techniques.

Broader context
Energy storage systems are one of the most active research fields in materials chemistry and electrochemistry recently. To meet the needs for usual and some critical applications, energy storage systems must show high performance under extreme conditions, though they are tested under mild conditions in most research reports. To fill the gap between high performance energy storage systems reported under mild conditions and those applicable to extreme cases, it is of great importance to study the key limiting parameters and potential design concept to address them. It is urgent to explore new approaches/concepts to address the critical challenges for energy storage systems working under extreme conditions via mechanistic understanding of new electrochemical reactions and phenomena in diverse scenarios. Our review starts by analyzing some key issues (from the viewpoints of thermodynamics/kinetics, materials design, mechanical properties, and others) for energy storage systems working under extreme conditions. Then a couple of common extreme conditions and how recent reports address these issues are systematically summarized, and existing critical barriers/corresponding strategies needed for advancing energy storage systems under extreme conditions are highlighted as well.


 	Fig. 1  Status and challenges of current electrodes, electrolytes, and theoretical guidance of energy storage systems towards various extreme conditions. (a) Main circumstances of extreme conditions. (b) Challenges and theoretical directions of both electrodes and electrolytes. (c) Number of publications until Mar 2021 devoted to various extreme circumstances since the year of 2006. (d) Summary of methodologies in further research.	 
ΔG = −nFE	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 2  The relevant aspects that affect the performance of ESSs in extreme conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustrations of the thermal stabilities of electrodes/electrolytes. (a) Structural instabilities for different reasons of the LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 (NMC) cathode and (b) spinel LiMn2O4 cathode at increased temperatures. (c) Challenges imposed by increased temperature of the electrode–electrolyte interface. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright, 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Measured state of health (defined as the discharge capacity of an aged cell compared to the discharge capacity of the same cell when it was new) as a function of time for cycling at 1C and different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Cycling performance of the LiFePO4 cathode with a DMF additive at 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) and (g) SEM images of NMC electrodes from cells aged for 350 cycles at 25 °C and 80 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (h) and (i) Fire test of conventional and as-prepared high concentration electrolytes. (j) Long-term cycling of Li||Li cells using different electrolytes at 1.0 mA h cm−2. The inset image is the enlarged voltage profile. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (k) Flammability test of a traditional battery and as-prepared non-flammable solid-state battery. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Both electrodes and electrolytes working at low temperatures. (a) SEM image of the PB/CNT composite and (b) its low-temperature performance. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of a Na4Fe3(PO4)2(P2O7) nanoparticle and (d) its C-rate performance at −20 °C. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (e) Comparisons of the water retention and anti-freezing properties of KOH-filled A-PAA and PVA hydrogels. (f) Discharge and power density plots, and (g) discharge capacity at 5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (h) Low-temperature stability of selected types of water-in-salt electrolytes at 0 °C and −20 °C. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (i) Polarized light microscope images of various components of selected electrolytes at different temperatures. (j) Molecular dynamics (MD) study of the electrolyte system of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)–water (where the fraction of DMSO is 0.3 in mol), and (k) cycling performance tested at −50 °C. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Both electrodes and electrolytes working under high stretching/compression/shear conditions. (a) Normalized capacitance of different as-prepared PPy-based electrodes under various tensile strains. (b) 3D stretchable supercapacitors under different stretching conditions. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Photo showing the stretchable battery powering a red LED under 300% biaxial strain. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (d) Li whisker formation and growth process during electrochemical deposition for different times. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (e) Calculated structural transitions of Li4Ti5O12 under extreme pressures. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, Oxford University Press. (f) High speed bullet impact on the shear thickening electrolyte and the original electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (g) High pressure XRD measurement of Li2O2 up to 57 GPa and (h) corresponding unit cell volume changes versus pressure. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Lean/high concentration electrolyte conditions. (a) Electrolyte uptake test of solid binder powder in 1 M LiTFSI DME/DOL electrolyte. 1-PEO10LiTFSI, 2-LA133 acrylonitrile multi-copolymer, 3-carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), and 4-polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF). (b) 6Li MAS NMR spectra of different amounts of electrolyte on the cathode after 30 cycles. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Optical profilometry images of bare and resin pre-coated (RPC) Li surfaces. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Illustration of the abundant defect-induced interfaces of as-prepared anchored polysulfides. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Two-dimensional (2D) charge-difference map between the C3 defect-rich substrate and the surface Li. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) SEM images of Li deposition of different sulfone electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (g) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (KFSI)-graphite dual-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Moisture protection strategies for both electrodes and electrolytes. (a) EELS result for the Ti element on the surface of the O3-NaMn0.9Ti0.1Ni0.1O2 material. (b) Structural evolution of pristine and moisture exposed samples. (c) Thermal stability test of NMTN. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) Photographs of the pristine Li and treated Li after exposure to air for different durations (test conditions: 258C, 78% relative humidity). Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Illustration of protonated H-G0.15-LLZO layer formation after water treatment. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the as-prepared moisture- and oxygen-impermeable poreless polyurethane separator. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (g) Illustration of the reaction principles of the as-designed moisture-resistant battery. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Water-in-salt electrolytes and related mechanisms. (a) The cation–anion and ion–solvent interactions in sodium-ion water-in-salt electrolyte, and the molar and weight salt/solvent ratios in this sodium trifluoromethane sulfonate–H2O binary system. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Charge/discharge profile of the full aqueous Li-ion battery (cathode: LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4; anode: Mo6S8) in water-in-salt electrolyte. The inset is the corresponding CV curve. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of SEI formation under the water reduction mediated mechanism in a 20 M LiTFSI water-in-salt electrolyte. (d) 19F MAS NMR spectrum of the gas diffusion layer. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Visualization of equilibrated electrolyte systems from molecular dynamics simulations. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) 3D tomography and 2D X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) mapping of various states of the LiMn2O4 material in a water-in-salt aqueous system. (g) XANES spectra of selected regions from (f) on the current collector. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration of advanced seawater batteries. (a) Schematic illustrations of a whole work cycle for a mixing entropy battery. (b) Voltage profile of cycles with different cycle time showing the theoretical voltage rise. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic image of a metal-free SWB using a hard carbon anode. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (d) Comparison of the costs of battery systems. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Average redox potential vs. specific capacity of potential anode materials in seawater battery systems. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of a solar rechargeable seawater battery. (g) Energy diagram for unassisted solar charging. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2019, Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 10  High loading density of active materials in various battery systems. (a) Schematic design of the modified high sulfur-loading electrode. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Cyclability of freestanding flexible Li2S@NCNF electrodes with different loading densities. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Photographs of thick electrodes with different thickness. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Cross-sectional SEM images of the ultrahigh-capacity and fire-resistant-LiFePO4 electrodes with different active material mass loadings of (d) 72 mg cm−2 and (e) 108 mg cm−2, respectively. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of atomically dispersed noble metal catalysts with metal loading as high as 10 wt%. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2019, AAAS. (g) HAADF-STEM image and enlarged image of Pt1/NPC catalysts. (h) Mass activity performance, with the inset the mass activity at 0.025 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (i) Mass loading availabilities of metal nitrogen doped carbon (M-NC) single atom catalysts. (j) Faradaic efficiency of CO oxidation. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Potential to meet ultralong cycle and ultrahigh rate conditions. (a) In situ XRD analysis of the Na3V(PO3)3N electrode during the 1st charge and 1st discharge processes. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the “trihigh tricontinuous” (3H3C) graphene film cathode. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2017, AAAS. (c) 3D rendering of the crystallite from the Bragg coherent diffractive imaging results of the Li1.28Ni0.2Mn0.6O2 lithium-rich cathode, where the color map denotes strain and the corresponding cross sections. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Side-view SEM picture of the poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride) (P(MVE–MA)) membrane. (e) Stress–strain curves of the PP separator in the transverse direction. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of the MXene structure. Intercalated water molecules enable high accessibility of protons to the redox-active sites. (g) SEM images of the Ti3C2Tx MXene hydrogel cross-section. (h) SEM image of the macroporous templated Ti3C2Tx electrode cross-section. Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic illustrations of the MXene films with fast ion transportation. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Unprecedented discoveries on diffusion mechanisms under ultra-high rates. (a) Schematic illustration of the design of an electrochemically functional cell for operando characterization of battery materials inside a TEM, and (b) the corresponding in situ EELS results for Li. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (c) and (d) Operando XRD patterns of LiFePO4/Li cells under different C-rates. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Energy conversion under high acidity and alkalinity and high-voltage conditions. (a) Dissociation reaction between borinic acid and water. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesis and crystal structure of the [(18C6)K(THF)2][FeI(L)] catalyst. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) HAADF image of the as-obtained fully ordered face-centered tetragonal (fct)-FePt nanoparticle after 20000 potential cycles. (d) and (e) HER polarization curves and HER activity performances of the fct-FePt nanoparticle. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the working voltage vs. the reversible capacity of the electrode materials in relation to the energy levels below HOMO conditions. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Oxidation stabilities for different electrolytes at various electrolyte concentrations. Reproduced with permission.206 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc. (h) Cyclic voltammetry profiles at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 of the high voltage Na3MnZr(PO4)3 cathode. Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
Fundamental	(a) The physical and chemical stabilities on both the macroscale and microscale are the determining factors for the overall performance stability of ESSs under extreme working conditions. The complexity of such critical parameters ought to be unveiled through ab initio calculations, modelling, and advanced operando characterization
(b) The understanding of physical and chemical stability maintainace as well as possible property changes of solid–liquid and solid–solid interfaces under extreme conditions is still in the preliminary stage. More theories and related techniques are strongly required to precisely probe the real states and proper predictions are required as well
(c) Such extreme conditions will easily result in high overpotential and voltage hysteresis, which will bring an inevitable energy penalty inherently. More relevant remedies such as electrocatalysis in certain positions should be taken into consideration
(d) Potential new phenomena and properties of both electrodes and electrolytes or substrates under extreme conditions are rarely explored or understood. Such directions are of great value for researchers towards real applications in various harsh situations


Materials	(a) Some of the emerging host/substrate materials can provide remarkable additional anti-pressure or anti-shear abilities. Their core strategies such as the chain induction effect also can be adapted for high mass loading of electrodes and longer cycle life
(b) Some special electrolyte additives or new electrolyte systems can bring higher voltage windows as well as shear thickening abilities. Such additives also can be employed in some certain environments, e.g. seawater batteries, to achieve higher energy density
(c) Directions on stability reinforcement at the atomic scale and molecular scale are critical for longer cycling, higher rates, high moisture conditions, etc.
(d) More balanced, systematic material and morphology designs facing various special requirements under extreme conditions are strongly recommended


Techniques	(a) Proper interfacial protection layers with tunable structures and composites are necessary facing extreme conditions
(b) Atomic scale heteroatom doping to boost multi-electron reactions, high voltage stability and high anti-pressure abilities
(c) External/internal thermal control systems for high/low-temperature conditions
(d) More advanced in situ characterization techniques are strongly required to fully understand the special/unique behaviors of both electrodes and electrolytes under various extreme conditions
(e) Big data assisted analysis/artificial intelligence to precisely predict electrochemical behaviors beyond current achievable conditions
(f) Overall ESS management technique improvements are also important directions targeting these special applications
(g) Manufacturing large quantities of well-designed electrodes/electrolytes while maintaining their qualities for dealing with extreme conditions will remain a great challenge in the future
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
