Morphology characterization in organic and hybrid solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22056C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22056C
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8045-8074Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMorphology characterization in organic and hybrid solar cells

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Maxim P. 
            Nikiforov†
a and 

        
          
            Seth B. 
            Darling
          
          
        
      *ab
aCenter for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Argonne, IL 60439, USA. E-mail: darling@anl.gov;  Fax: +1 630-252-4646;   Tel: +1 630-252-4580
bInstitute for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, 5747 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Received 
      26th April 2012
    , Accepted 1st June 2012First published on 6th June 2012AbstractOrganic and hybrid organic–inorganic photovoltaics are among the most promising options for low-cost and highly scalable renewable energy. In order to fully realize the potential of these technologies, power conversion efficiencies and stability will both have to be improved beyond the current state-of-the-art. The morphology of the active layer is of paramount importance in the photon to electron conversion process in organic and hybrid solar cells, with all length scales, from molecular ordering to intradevice composition variability, playing key roles. Given the central influence of morphology, characterizing the structure of these surprisingly complex material systems at multiple length scales is one of the grand challenges in the field. This review addresses the techniques, some of which have only recently been applied to organic and hybrid photovoltaics, available to scientists and engineers working to understand—and ultimately improve—the operation of these fascinating devices.Wei ChenWei Chen is a Director's postdoctoral fellow at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory. He received a PhD in polymer science and engineering at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Thomas P. Russell. His research interests include the development of high performance materials and processing technologies used in solar energy conversion and energy storage systems, as well as the application of neutron, X-ray, and electron scattering techniques for deciphering their complex structure–performance relationships.Maxim P. NikiforovDr Nikiforov is an Argonne Scholar at Argonne National Laboratory. His current research interests are improvements of power conversion efficiency of solar cells by understanding local electrical and optical properties of organic photovoltaic materials and devices. He received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 2008 from Prof. Dawn Bonnell's research group, where he studied electrical properties of interfaces using scanning probe microscopy. As a Postdoctoral Research Associate at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (2008–2011) he developed methods for localized measurements of phase transitions in polymers (the work received an R&D100 Award in 2010).Seth B. DarlingSeth B. Darling is a Scientist at Argonne National Laboratory and a Joint Staff Appointee at the Institute for Molecular Engineering at the University of Chicago. After receiving his PhD in physical chemistry from the University of Chicago, he joined Argonne National Laboratory as the Glenn Seaborg Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellow in the Materials Science Division where he studied directed self-assembly of polymers and polymer–nanoparticle hybrid systems. Following his postdoc, Dr Darling joined the Center for Nanoscale Materials at Argonne as a staff scientist. His group's research centers around polymer molecular engineering with a particular emphasis on organic photovoltaics.

Broader context
Organic and hybrid solar cells have captured a great deal of attention in recent years both because of their tremendous potential as low-cost and highly scalable photovoltaic technologies and because of their impressive advances in performance. In order to push these technologies toward large-scale utilization, yet higher performance will be required, and for that we must expound a deeper understanding of their internal structure and properties. Deciphering the internal morphology of organic and hybrid photovoltaics has proven a daunting challenge for researchers in the field, but many techniques have been developed to tackle it. This review highlights the broad range of tools available to researchers who aim to probe the complex, multi-length-scale structures within the active layers of organic and hybrid solar cells. Beyond introducing the techniques and providing illustrative examples of their use, we discuss strengths, weaknesses, and complementarity of the myriad approaches.

1. Introduction
Organic,1–5 and more recently hybrid organic–inorganic,6–8 solar cells have garnered increasing attention as potential low-cost alternatives to traditional inorganic photovoltaic (PV) technologies such as crystalline silicon or cadmium telluride. Additional advantages of these next-generation alternatives include the use of earth-abundant materials, mechanical flexibility, light weight, and the option for tunable coloring for aesthetic architectural installation. Key to their low-cost9 is solution-based high-throughput processing.10,11
Power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have steadily improved, with recent reports of single-junction cells of ∼8%12 and tandem cells of ∼10% PCE.13,14 Hybrid PVs, too, have seen recent improvements, particularly in the context of carrier multiplication phenomena such as exciton fission15 and multiple exciton generation.16 Current PCEs of hybrid cells are lower than those of OPVs, typically in the 1–3% range for high-performance devices.17,18 Here we focus on solid-state devices, though dye-sensitized solar cells,19,20 which typically incorporate a liquid electrolyte, can also be viewed as hybrid PVs and are an exciting technology.
Despite promising progress in device performance, PCEs will need to improve further before OPVs and hybrid PVs can make a meaningful impact in the energy marketplace, i.e., beyond niche applications. While there are numerous factors that contribute to the PCE of PV devices, the morphology of the active layer is among the most important. A second persistent issue with these technologies is the lack of long-term environmental stability. The combination of water and/or oxygen and ultraviolet (UV) light leads to photochemistry of conjugated molecules that is generally detrimental to PCE. Moreover, morphological properties can evolve over time, particularly when the active layer structures are far from their equilibrium morphology.
1.1. Mechanism of optoelectronic conversion
Organic and hybrid PV conversion of light to electricity has both similarities to and differences from that of their inorganic counterparts. Fig. 1 schematically depicts the typical layer structure of a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell.21,22 Light enters the device through a transparent anode, often glass or plastic coated with a transparent or mesh conductor such as indium tin oxide (ITO) or silver wires. Under this layer is an interfacial layer whose primary function is to prevent unwanted charge carriers from reaching the top electrode, the most common example being the organic hole transporter poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), though metal oxides are becoming increasingly popular23–28 due to performance and lifetime issues associated with PEDOT:PSS—particularly in tandem solar cells. Continuing deeper into the device, next comes the active layer, whose primary functions are to absorb light and to deliver electrons and holes to opposite sides of the film. In BHJ devices, the active layer is comprised of an interpenetrating network of electron-donating (p-type or hole-transporting) and electron-accepting (n-type or electron-transporting) materials. A second interfacial layer, often LiF, Ca, or TiOx, separates the active layer from the reflective back cathode. An inverted architecture flips the electrodes (and respective interfacial layers), which can eliminate the need for reactive, low work function metals that are a source of device degradation.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a bulk heterojunction solar cell. 
In traditional silicon-based PVs, photon absorption produces a weakly bound electron–hole pair, which is readily separated by the ambient thermal energy. When organic semiconductors absorb light, on the other hand, the pair is bound as an exciton with energies of ∼0.3 to 0.5 eV—too strong for thermal charge separation—primarily because of the low dielectric constant of organics. Rather, the exciton must migrate to an interface between the electron-donor and electron-acceptor, where the offset in molecular orbital energies is sufficient to overcome the coulombic attraction of the charges. Fig. 2 depicts the situation in which the electron-donor is the primary light absorber, as is most often the case in OPVs. When the electron is transferred to the acceptor, a charge transfer (CT) state is achieved at the interface.29,30 One possible, undesirable outcome at this point is geminate recombination of the electron and hole (Fig. 2). (Geminate recombination can also occur prior to achieving the CT state if the exciton fails to reach a donor–acceptor interface within its lifetime.) The target outcome, though, is continuation into a truly charge separated (CS) state, from which the charge carriers can make their way to their respective electrodes through some combination of diffusion and drift. Along the way, non-geminate recombination is a competing pathway. The kinetics of charge formation, recombination, and sweep-out (field-induced charge carrier movement toward electrodes) dynamics play a vital role in the electrical performance of organic and hybrid solar cells.31
 Fig. 2  Energy diagram for the photovoltaic process assuming light absorption within the donor material. The electron excited into the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) transfers to the acceptor material, creating a charge transfer (CT) state. Possible outcomes then include recombination or a transition into a charge separated (CS) state. 
Models for organic and hybrid PVs require more subtle and complex treatment than those for traditional devices,32 but for the purposes of this review a simplified picture will be presented. Fig. 3a represents an equivalent circuit model for a solar cell; it is comprised of a photocurrent source, a diode representing non-geminate recombination, and two resistors (series and shunt). The series resistor embodies charge carrier transport resistance, and the shunt resistor accounts for leakage current. A typical current density–voltage (J–V) curve for a solar cell, both in the dark and under illumination, is shown in Fig. 3b. Key parameters include the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), which is the ratio of the available power at the maximum power point (Pm) divided by the Voc and the Jsc. Power conversion efficiency (η) is defined as: (1)where Pin is the light intensity incident on the device (as measured with a calibrated reference cell) and M is the spectral mismatch factor that accounts for deviations in the solar simulator output compared with the standard (usually AM1.5) spectrum and in the spectral response of the measured device compared with the reference cell (Table 1).
 Fig. 3  (a) Simplified equivalent circuit model for a solar cell. (b) Typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves for a solar cell in the dark and under illumination, showing key parameters. 
Table 1 Definitions for symbols used in this review





η

Power conversion efficiency


FF
Fill factor



J
sc

Short circuit current density



V
oc

Open circuit voltage



P
in

Incident light intensity



P
m

Maximum power point



λ

Wavelength



k
i

Incident wavevector



k
f

Final wavevector



q

Wavevector transfer



I(q)
Scattering intensity



α

Incident out-of-plane scattering angle



β

Final out-of-plane scattering angle



Φ

In-plane scattering angle



K

Scherrer constant



C
S

Solid angle correction



C
eff

Efficiency correction



P

Polarization correction



C
FF

Flat field correction



C

α


X-ray absorption correction



X

Polar angle


rDoC
Relative degree of crystallinity



S

Orientational order parameter



f
⊥,f‖
Molecular order parameters



n
p

Particle number density



P(q)
Form factor



S(q)
Structure factor



f(r)
Schultz size distribution



r
eff

Effective diameter



φ

Effective volume fraction



α(t)
Extent of phase volume development



n

Avrami exponent



k

Rate constant



Q
inv

Scattering invariant


〈2〉
Electron density variance



ρ

Electron density



g(r)
Correlation function



d

Domain periodicity



ξ
TS

Teubner–Strey correlation length



ξ

Correlation length



V

Cluster volume



R

Mean cluster radius



P(r)
Pair distance distribution function



σ

Film roughness




Table 2 Abbreviations for characterization techniques




WAS
Wide angle scattering


SAS
Small angle scattering


ND
Neutron diffraction


XRD
X-ray diffraction


WAXS
Wide angle X-ray scattering


GIWAXS
Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering


GID
Grazing incidence diffraction


SANS
Small angle neutron scattering


SAXS
Small angle X-ray scattering


GISANS
Grazing incidence small angle neutron scattering


GISAXS
Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering


GIUSAXS
Grazing incidence ultrasmall angle X-ray scattering


GIUSANS
Grazing incidence ultrasmall angle neutron scattering


USAXS
Ultrasmall angle X-ray scattering


USANS
Ultrasmall angle neutron scattering


NR
Neutron reflectivity


PSNR
Phase sensitive neutron reflectivity


XRR
X-ray reflectivity


RSoXR
Resonant soft X-ray reflectivity


EDXR
Energy dispersive X-ray reflectivity


RSoXS
Resonant soft X-ray scattering


NEXAFS
Near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure


STXM
Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy


LBIC
Light-beam induced current


SPM
Scanning probe microscopy


AFM
Atomic force microscopy


C-AFM
Conductive atomic force microscopy


SSPM
Scanning surface potential microscopy


tr-EFM
Time-resolved electrical force microscopy


KFM/KPFM
Kelvin probe force microscopy


SNOM
Scanning near-field optical microscopy


SEM
Scanning electron microscopy


TEM
Transmission electron microscopy


STEM
Scanning transmission electron microscopy


EELS
Electron-energy loss spectroscopy


EF-TEM
Energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy


SAED
Selected area electron diffraction


SIMS
Secondary ion mass spectrometry


DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry




1.2. Importance of morphology
Active layer morphology is central to the performance of organic and hybrid PVs. This topic has been extensively reviewed in the literature, both for OPVs3,33–47 and hybrid PVs,48–50 so only a brief summary will be provided here. To understand the issues, it helps to begin with the constraints imposed by physical parameters, in particular the competition between exciton diffusion, charge transport, and light absorption. Given the optical extinction coefficient of organic semiconductors, an active layer thickness of 100–200 nm is typically needed to ensure strong absorption. Exciton diffusion distances hover around 10 nm in this class of materials,51 though there are few direct measurements of this parameter. This leads to the need for the BHJ architecture (as opposed to a bilayer) in which there are closely spaced donor–acceptor interfaces throughout the active layer volume, Fig. 1. A further constraint stems from the relatively low charge carrier mobility of organic semiconductors, often several orders of magnitude lower than that of silicon, which limits the overall active layer thickness.
Morphology influences essentially every aspect of the photovoltaic process, especially charge separation, charge carrier mobility, series resistance, and both geminate and non-geminate recombination rates. Controlling the active layer morphology, therefore, has been a subject of attention for many researchers, with a number of approaches reported, such as the use of processing additives52 or utilization of self-assembling systems, such as block copolymers.53–56 There are many length scales of interest within the active layer. Molecular ordering and orientation directly influence charge transport and, to a lesser extent, light absorption, exciton separation, and recombination. At the other extreme are spatial variations in composition or morphology at different areas across a device at the cell or even the module scale. In between these lie crucial factors such as donor and acceptor domain ordering, intermixing of materials, and inhomogeneities in crystallinity. As well as defining pathways for charge transport and energy gradients, these intermediate scale morphologies influence the charge separation/recombination processes.
Many of the materials used in these next-generation devices offer little contrast for characterization techniques—particularly in the case of OPVs. This, in combination with the relevance of structures spanning more than three orders of magnitude in size and the fact that most of the structures are buried within the active layer, makes morphology characterization in organic and hybrid PVs a daunting challenge. In this review, we will discuss each of the techniques used to characterize active layer morphology in organic and hybrid PVs (Table 2), focusing on their relative strengths and weaknesses. In Section 2, reciprocal-space techniques such as X-ray and neutron scattering will be discussed, which generally provide spatially averaged information, followed by real-space techniques such as optical, scanning probe, and electron microscopies in Section 3, which typically result in spatially localized data; some additional ancillary techniques will be covered in Section 4. It is our hope that this review will serve as a practical guide for researchers needing to identify the appropriate approaches at their disposal to decipher active layer morphologies at multiple length scales.
2. Reciprocal-space techniques
Key structural features in the active layers of organic and hybrid solar cells are not only the characteristic domain size, crystallinity, crystallite size and orientation, but also the surface composition and interfacial structure. No single technique is able to fully probe the morphology in thin films of photovoltaic molecular blends at multiple length scales with high chemical specificity and spatial resolution. Consequently, one must use a variety of complementary techniques. In this section, an overview of neutron and X-ray scattering techniques for comprehensively characterizing nanostructured BHJ morphology from small distances (few Ångströms) to intermediate length scales (1 nm–100 nm) to longer distances (100 nm–1 μm) will be discussed.
2.1. The scattering geometry
Neutron and X-ray scattering probe nanostructures by exploring so-called reciprocal space, or Fourier space, and provide information about the size of scattering features. Fig. 4 shows a summary schematic view of scattering measurements in three different geometries. In the transmission scattering geometry (Fig. 4a), the scattering intensity, I(q), is measured as a function of the angle between the incoming beam and the scattered beam, 2θ, and the resulting patterns are typically represented as scattered intensity as a function of the magnitude of the wavevector transfer, q = 4πsin(θ)/λ, where λ is the wavelength of neutrons or X-rays. In the grazing incidence scattering geometry (Fig. 4b), the incident wavevector, ki, is kept at a grazing angle, α, with respect to the sample surface to minimize unwanted background (both elastic and inelastic) emanating from the bulk, and to enhance the near-surface scattering. The scattered beam, of wavevector kf, makes an angle β with respect to the sample surface and an in-plane angle Φ with respect to the transmitted beam. Following the definition of the angles (α, β, and Φ), the components of the wavevector transfer, q = kf − ki, can be expressed as (2)where k0 = |kf| = |ki| = 2π/λ is the elastically conserved wavevector modulus. It can also be decomposed into two components, q⊥ = qz and q∥ = (qx2 + qy2)1/2, respectively parallel with and perpendicular to the surface. Depending on the distance from the sample to the detector, the related experiments in both transmission and grazing incidence geometries can be typically referred to as wide angle scattering (WAS) or small angle scattering (SAS). Here WAS is the collective name given to techniques including neutron (ND) and X-ray diffraction (XRD), wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS), grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS), and grazing incidence diffraction (GID), while SAS is the collective name given to small angle neutron (SANS) and X-ray (SAXS) scattering as well as grazing incidence neutron (GISANS) and X-ray (GISAXS) scattering. To resolve even larger length scales relative to SAS, the sample-detector distance can be further increased (GIUSAXS and GIUSANS) or a Bonse–Hart camera can be applied (USAXS and USANS). In the case of specular neutron (NR) and X-ray reflectivity (XRR), Fig. 4c, a beam of neutrons or X-rays impinges under an incident angle θ onto the sample surface and the specular intensity I(θ) is detected in a θ/2θ-geometry, in contrast to grazing incidence scattering in which the specular reflection is blocked and the diffuse scattering is detected. In other words, the in-plane scattering angle Φ is null and only the perpendicular wavevector transfer is changed, with the additional condition that the incident and exit angles with respect to the surface be kept equal: αi = αf ≡ θ. The perpendicular wavevector transfer is then given by: q⊥ = qz = 2k0sin(θ). Since q∥ = 0, specular NR and XRR are useful for revealing information about material composition normal to the sample surface.
 Fig. 4  Common geometries for neutron and X-ray scattering measurements: (a) transmission; (b) grazing incidence; and (c) reflection. Partially reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
2.2. Wide angle scattering and diffraction techniques
The X-ray scattering cross-section of organic materials is small in comparison with that of inorganic materials because organic materials are mostly comprised of light elements such as C, H, and O. Therefore, WAXS or XRD signals are weak in organic thin film systems.58–62 To overcome this problem, the grazing incidence technique is usually used to determine crystalline structures on the atomic length scale, i.e. the orientation of crystallites, an estimation of crystallite sizes, and the degree of crystallinity.57,63–94 There are two primary methods applied for measuring the scattering angle and scattered intensity of the diffracted X-rays: a point or line detector (GID) and an area detector (GIWAXS). The point or line detector with collimating slits or Soller collimators provides both high accuracy and high resolution, but only a small fraction of the reciprocal space volume is measurable as a result of the time limitations and beam damage from the slow measurements with long exposure times. The area detector, on the other hand, allows for rapid collection of a large range of scattering angles at the expense of resolution and accuracy. The quick measurements reduce the beam damage of OPV materials and enable time-resolved measurements like in situ heating and solvent evaporation. In most cases, the sampled area/volume of the material is macroscopic, resulting in averaged information on the morphology. Here, four cases of GIWAXS studies on semiconducting polymers are discussed to exemplify how to extract information about the molecular arrangement.
Molecular packing structure and orientation of crystalline domains in films of conjugated polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) were probed with GIWAXS,94 as shown in Fig. 5a. Self-organization in P3HT results in a lamellar structure with two-dimensional conjugated sheets formed by interchain stacking, leading to (100) reflections due to the lamellar layer structure and (010) reflections due to π–π interchain stacking. Orientations of P3HT crystallites with respect to the substrate can be identified from the different intensity distributions of (100) and (010) reflections. The schematic 2D GIWAXS patterns in the sequence from left to right on the top of Fig. 5a show the characteristics of lamellar structures oriented mostly parallel to the substrate surface, predominantly perpendicular to the substrate surface, and randomly with respect to the substrate surface, respectively. It was found that, in samples with high regioregularity (>91%) and low molecular weight, the preferential orientation of ordered domains is with the (100)-axis normal to the film and the (010)-axis in the plane of the film, termed the “edge-on” orientation. In contrast, in samples with low regioregularity (81%) and high molecular weight, the crystallites are preferentially oriented with the (100)-axis in the plane and the (010)-axis normal to the film, called the “face-on” orientation (Fig. 5a). The molecular organization of P3HT can also be manipulated by the introduction of inorganic nanoparticles in hybrid PV applications, as tracked using GIXS by Su et al.95
 Fig. 5  Examples of extracting information about the molecular organization of semiconducting polymers from GIWAXS. (a) Schematic diagram showing the relationship between lamellar orientation and the resulting 2D GIWAXS pattern and two different orientations of ordered P3HT domains with respect to SiO2/Si substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society and from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature94 copyright 1999. (b) 2D GIWAXS patterns of thin films of PTB7:PC61BM blends prepared using four different solvents—pure CB, mixtures of CB and DIO (98:2 v/v%) (CB + DIO), pure DCB, and mixtures of DCB and DIO (98:2 v/v%) (DCB + DIO), as well as their corresponding qy and qz scans with Gaussian fits determining the peak positions and FWHMs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) GIWAXS pattern (overlay demonstrates geometry of radial and azimuthal binning) and the corresponding sector plot of neat PCPDTBT films cast from CB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright John Wiley and Sons 2011. (d) Top: 3D sector plots of PCPDTBT:PC71BM blends cast from CB containing 3% (the first three plots) or 0% (the fourth plot) ODT, showing the scattered intensity (linear colour scale) vs. polar angle χ and wavevector q at times of 2, 26 and 78 min after spin-coating; bottom: time evolution of the orientational order parameters S calculated for the (100) and (100)′ crystallographic planes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Positions and full widths at half-maximum (FWHMs) of scattering peaks, which are estimated from line shape analysis, respectively correlate to distances of the lamellar layers and π–π interchain stacking, as well as to crystalline correlation lengths (crystallite sizes) via the Scherrer equation in reciprocal space96 (3)where qhkl is the wavevector and Δqhkl is the intrinsic FWHM of the scattering peak. The Scherrer constant K is most often cited in the literature as having a value of about 0.9, as derived in Scherrer's original paper with K = 2(ln 2/π)1/2 ≃ 0.93. Apart from sample-specific contributions to the peak breadth, it is important that the resolution Δqres of the apparatus is accurately determined and accounted for: Δqhkl = [(Δqexp)2 − (Δqres)2]1/2(4)where Δqexp denotes the experimentally determined breadth from a line profile. There are three contributions to the radial resolution: the beam divergence, the beam bandwidth, and geometric smearing. The geometric smearing effect is most pronounced at large scattering angles, so in the GIWAXS case the crystallite-size resolution is limited by geometric smearing, reaching about 5% of the q value. Serving as an example, Fig. 5b shows 2D GIWAXS patterns of four thin films of semiconducting PTB7 copolymer (a thieno[3,4-b]thiophene and benzodithiophene alternating copolymer) and [6,6]-Phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) blends prepared using four different solvents—pure chlorobenzene (CB), mixtures of CB and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) (98:2 v/v%) (CB + DIO), pure 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB), and mixtures of DCB and DIO (98:2 v/v%) (DCB + DIO), as well as their corresponding qy and qz line profiles, with Gaussian fits determining peak positions and FWHMs.97 Regardless of the solvents used, the crystallite sizes of PTB7 (100) lamellae are estimated to be ∼3 to 4 nm, which corresponds to roughly two or three stacked PTB7 lamellae, and those of both PTB7 (010) π–π stacks and PC61BM are ∼2 nm, which approximates to six π-stacked copolymer chains and three units of C60 (∼7 Å),98 respectively.
Further quantitative structural information can be obtained through sector plots63,74 (pole figures99,100), which are constructed from the detector images. A sector plot is simply an alternative representation of the data in a Cartesian coordinate system obtained by mapping the spherical geometry of reciprocal space onto a Cartesian grid.74 As the collected intensity with a flat detector in grazing incidence geometry is distorted101 and the detector image is not a direct map of reciprocal space, the raw intensity is needed for solid angle correction (CS), efficiency correction (Ceff) for medium (e.g. air) attenuation and detector sensor absorption, polarization correction (P), flat field correction for removing artifacts caused by variations in the pixel-to-pixel sensitivity of the detector (CFF), and X-ray absorption correction (Ca, which is often negligible for thin films).99,104 Thus, the corrected intensity can be represented as (5)
The ideal pole figure collection technique is capable of measuring the entire span of crystallite orientations: polar angles, χ, from −90° to 90°. To amend the distortion and move toward a complete pole figure, the pole figure compilation for thin films, where the crystallite orientation distribution is isotropic in the plane of the substrate, using GIWAXS with an area detector involves two separate measurements: one in grazing incidence geometry and one with the geometry locally satisfying the specular condition. The resulting sector plots are three dimensional data sets whose x-axis represents polar angle χ, y-axis represents q, and z-axis (color) represents intensity, as illustrated in Fig. 5c by a 2D GIWAXS pattern and the corresponding sector plot of films of neat poly(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]-dithiophene-2,6-diyl)) (PCPDTBT) polymers cast from CB.74 From the pole figure, the relative degree of crystallinity (rDoC) can be calculated according to82,83 (6)where χmin is the minimum χ allowed by the GIWAXS geometry. Furthermore, the orientational distribution of the crystallographic features can be quantitatively described in terms of an orientational order parameter S, given by105 (7)where the separate molecular orientation parameters f⊥ and f‖ used to represent the orientation of the polymeric crystallites, respectively, along the plane of the film surface and along the axis normal to the surface are determined from the geometrically corrected scattered intensity63,81 (8)and (9)
From a practical perspective, S is a quantity that varies between −0.5 and 1, where a value of 1 (−0.5) indicates a parallel (orthogonal) orientation of the normal of a crystallographic plane relative to the substrate normal. Conversely, a completely isotropic distribution of the crystallographic planes leads to an S value of 0. The corrections and data analysis for the pole figure technique can be carried out quickly using the GIXSGUI package106 and WxDiff software.99
As shown in Fig. 5d, in situ GIWAXS has been used to monitor the structural evolution of PCPDTBT:[6,6]-Phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) films processed from CB with and without the addition of 3% octanedithiol (ODT) at times of 2, 26, and 78 min after spin-coating.63 Results of the in situ GIWAXS experiments showed that although the (100), (100)′, and (010) peaks were present after only 2 min, these features displayed markedly different orientations: S(100) = 0.67, S(100)′ = 0.25, and S(010) = 0.01. During the first 26 min, the increase in S(100) from 0.67 to 0.75 suggests that early during the film drying process, polymeric crystallites rotate into a more edge-on orientation or new crystallites are preferentially nucleated with an edge-on orientation, whereas the decrease in S(100)′ from 0.25 to 0.18 indicates that the (100)′ peak evolved toward a less edge-on orientation. From 26 min onward, the population of the (100) crystallites exhibited a nearly constant edge-on character [S(010) = 0.76]. Conversely, the population of the (100)′ crystallites appears to have rotated toward a face-on orientation [S(100)′ = −0.06]. Consequently, it has been demonstrated that the addition of ODT to the CB solution from which PCPDTBT:PC71BM is cast simultaneously reduces the nucleation barrier for polymer crystallization during the initial film formation, facilitates crystallite reorientation, and allows for nucleation to occur during a prolonged film drying process.63
Techniques other than GIWAXS, WAXS, and XRD can also give information about the conformational structure of polymer molecules and about how they pack together. A good case in point is ND, which has been used to determine the atomic ordering in linear polymers and dendritic and hyper-branched macromolecules.107–109 Although at the current stage ND is rarely applied to investigate OPV systems, wide q-range ND measurements together with the atomic pair distribution function (PDF) technique110 can provide new atomistic insights into the 3D structure and geometric characteristics of semiconducting polymers and fullerenes,98 especially in solution.111 Understanding the nature of the polymeric molecules in the solution phase (conformation, aggregation, etc.) will shed light on the mechanisms of morphology formation—a largely untapped area of OPV study.
2.3. Small angle scattering techniques
In contrast to the ability of WAS to characterize sub-nanometer-sized structures, SAS provides a powerful means of investigating the size scale of nanoscopic heterogeneities and assessing the uniformity in the distribution and degree of mixing between the two components of molecular photovoltaic blends.57,65,69,91,97,112–137 Extracting structural parameters of the morphology from SAS intensities requires fitting to a model. Here, the P3HT:fullerene BHJ solar cell, one of the most studied OPV systems, will be used as an archetype to demonstrate how to explore the microstructures in films of photovoltaic blends, i.e. the domain shapes and sizes, size distributions, and spatial correlations, using SAS techniques such as GI(U)SAXS,57,65,121–123,125,127,130–135 GISANS,112 SANS,113,120,133,138 SAXS,57,114 and resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS).69,97,124,128,136,137 As with the wide angle techniques, the sampled region of the materials is generally macroscopic and thereby produces averaged information.
Recently, Wu et al.57 investigated the concomitant development of P3HT and PC61BM crystallization in BHJ thin films using simultaneous GISAXS/GIWAXS. As shown in Fig. 6a, the PC61BM exhibited short-range packing during the annealing process, resulting in a prompt and drastic increase of scattering intensity in the low-q region (0.004–0.04 Å−1) of the corresponding GISAXS patterns. To obtain detailed structural evolution of the PC61BM aggregates, GISAXS profiles in the lower-q region contributed by PC61BM aggregates were fitted by a model57 of polydisperse spheres with the Schultz size distribution using I(q) = 〈np〉〈P(q)〉S(q)(10)where the averaged form factor is 〈P(q)〉 and the structure factor is S(q). The number density of the scattering particles n0(r) = 〈n0〉f(r) is defined by the mean number density 〈n0〉 and the Schultz size distribution function f(r). The form factor P(q) = [3j1(qr)/qr]2 for spheres is defined by the first-order spherical Bessel function j1(qr). For spheres with small polydispersity, S(q) can be approximated by the structure factor of the effective one-component system of hard spheres S(q) = [1 − npC(q)]−1(11)where C(q) = 4πreff3ζ−6{α0ζ3(sinζ − ζcos ζ)+β0ζ2[2ζsin ζ − (ζ2 − 2)cos ζ − 2] + γ[(4ζ3 − 24ζ)sin ζ − (ζ4 − 12ζ + 24)cos ζ + 24]} is defined by ζ = qreff, α0 = (1 + 2ϕ)2(1 − ϕ)−4, β0 = −6ϕ[1 + (ϕ/2)]2(1 − ϕ)−4 and γ = ϕα0/2 with the effective diameter reff and volume fraction ϕ. The selected GISAXS profiles (Fig. 6a) for 60, 600, and 1800 s at 150 °C roughly overlapped, revealing quickly saturated PC61BM aggregation (inset of Fig. 6a). A broad interference shoulder at qx ≈ 0.025 Å−1 shaped during the annealing, corresponding to the formation of a liquid-like or distorted face-centered-cubic-like packing of PC61BM aggregates with a mean spacing of ca. 25 nm. For comparison, the GISAXS profile similarly measured for a pristine P3HT film annealed at 150 °C for 1800 s contributed only marginally in this monitored q region. Therefore, scattering in the low-q region was mainly dominated by large PC61BM aggregates.
 Fig. 6  Examples of extracting structural/morphology parameters from SAS techniques. (a) Approximately overlapped GISAXS data collected after 60, 600, and 1800 s of thermal annealing of P3HT films. For comparison, the GISAXS data for a pristine P3HT film annealed at 150 °C for 1800 s are also shown; the data are fitted (dashed curve) with polydisperse (in rod length) rods. Inset: corresponding mean size (D) evolution of PC61BM aggregates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Selected GISAXS profiles measured for a P3HT:PC61BM film during the heating process to 150 °C and the subsequent isothermal annealing within 60 s. The data are fitted (solid curves) using polydisperse spheres with Schultz size distributions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) GISAXS intensity vs. in-plane wavevector, qx,y, for 1:1 P3HT:PC61BM mixtures annealed at various temperatures for 30 min. The solid lines are Teubner–Strey fits to the data. Inset: domain spacings from GISAXS data of 1:1 P3HT:PC61BM mixtures at various annealing conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Top: 2D GISANS data (left column) and corresponding 2D IsGISAXS simulations (right column) of P3HT:PC61BM BHJ films with different PC61BM content. Inset: schematic presentation of the model used for the GISANS simulations. Bottom: horizontal (left column) and vertical (right column) line cuts of the GISANS data (symbols) and corresponding fits (solid lines) of P3HT:PC61BM films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) Left: plot of SANS intensity (I(q)) vs. wavevector (q) for both annealed and unannealed samples of 1:1 by weight ratio of PC61BM and P3HT as well as annealed and unannealed samples of pure P3HT. The solid lines labeled “Best Fits” are from a polydisperse Schulz model having hard sphere interactions. Right: cartoon of morphology change after thermal annealing showing the coarsening of the PC61BM phase separated structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2010 American Physical Society. (f) GISAXS profiles of P3HT:PC61BM thin films without annealing and with one-step annealing treatments at 90 °C, 110 °C, and 150 °C (i.e., the CAST, PR_90, PR_110, and PR_150 films, respectively). The solid lines are calculated by model fitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (g) SANS profiles of P3HT:PC61BM blend films. As spun (black triangle); preannealed 30 min (blue triangle); postannealed 5 s (red triangle); postannealed 30 s (green triangle); postannealed 1 min (brown triangle); postannealed 5 min (aqua triangle); postannealed 30 min (purple triangle); and postannealed 1 h (orange triangle). The inset represents the correlation length (ξ) and the scattering invariant (Qinv) vs. the postannealing time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (h) Structure factor in absolute intensity and (i) Debye–Bueche fits of 50 vol% PC61BM blends after annealing for 0, 20, and 60 min and 6 h at 150 °C. The exponents of Porod analysis at high q are also listed. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (j) RSoXS intensity vs. wavevector (q) for transmission X-rays at resonant (284.3 eV) and nonresonant (270 eV) X-ray energies for an annealed (30 min, 150 °C) P3HT:PC61BM BHJ film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. (k) RSoXS profiles (open symbols), the calculated scattering intensities I(q) (solid lines), and (l) the P(r) functions of thin films of PTB7:PC61BM/DCB + DIO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Illustrated in Fig. 6b are the data fitting results using the polydisperse sphere model for a P3HT:PC61BM film during the heating process to 150 °C and the subsequent isothermal annealing within 60 s. The PC61BM aggregates grew slightly from a diameter of ca. 7 nm (as-cast film) to 10 nm during heating toward 150 °C. In the subsequent 60 s of isothermal annealing, the PC61BM aggregate size increased quickly from 10 to 17.5 nm, then remained constant during prolonged thermal annealing over 1800 s. In all of the GISAXS data fitting, a scattering term described by the correlation function I(qx) = (1+qx2ξ2)−2 was included to account for the relatively sharp upturn scattering in the very low-q region 0.004–0.007 Å−1. The fitted values for the correlation length ξ were about the same (60 ± 10 nm) for all sets of data. This indicated that the correlation length might associate better with the P3HT aggregates of nanowhisker or protofibril structures already formed in solution, as evidenced by the GISAXS fitting data of the pristine P3HT annealed at 150 °C, which was modelled by a fractal system of polydisperse rods140 with a mean rod length of 69 nm, a rod diameter of 11.2 nm, and 75% polydispersity in rod length (Fig. 6a).
PC61BM aggregation (phase separation) kinetics could be deduced from structural evolution revealed by time-resolved GISAXS via the Avrami–Erofeev expression α(t) = 1 − exp[−(kt)n](12)where the extent of the phase volume development α(t) at time t is characterized by the Avrami exponent n and rate constant k, assuming no induction time in the system, and α(t) was taken from the scattering invariant117,141,142 (13)in the GISAXS q region where PC61BM aggregates dominated the scattering contribution. The invariant Qinv (as given in eqn (13)) is the integral of I(q)q2 and a measure of the degree of phase separation in the system; it is independent of size or structural morphology and is linearly related to the electron density variance 〈2〉 within the system. For a two-phase system 〈2〉 = ϕ1ϕ2(ρ1 − ρ2)2, where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are fractions of the components and ρ1 and ρ2 are electron densities of the components. An Avrami analysis of the observed structural evolution indicates that two competing kinetics, PC61BM aggregation and P3HT crystallization, led to local phase separation with space-filling PC61BM and P3HT nanodomains less than 20 nm in size upon annealing below 180 °C, in agreement with the observations by Kozub,122 Chen and their co-workers.133 Kozub et al. demonstrated that the Teubner–Strey model is also appropriate for describing GISAXS intensities from P3HT:PC61BM films. Teubner and Strey143,144 presented a phenomenological theory for the scattering intensity (14)where a2, c1, and c2 are constants and Ibkgd(q) is a background function employed in polymeric systems. It is speculated that Ibkgd(q) accounts for the connectivity of polymer chains and is assumed to be of the form Ibkgd(q) = (eq2 + f)−1, where e and f are constants. When c12/4a2c2 < 1, the inverse Fourier transform of I(q) yields the following correlation function (15)where the domain periodicity, d, and the correlation length, ξTS, are the two relevant static length scales: (16)and (17)
Chen et al. treated the SANS of this two-component system using the Debye–Anderson–Brumberger (DAB) equation (18)where K is a constant, ξ is the correlation length and 〈2〉 = ϕ1ϕ2(b1 − b2)2 is the scattering invariant where ϕi is the volume fraction of phase i with a neutron scattering length density (SLD) of bi. From ξ, the chord length (that is, the average size of each domain) can be calculated if the volume fractions of the phases are known. The analyses presented in Fig. 6c and g suggest that polymer crystallization drives the structure formation process in miscible P3HT:fullerene BHJ films as a result of competition between P3HT crystallization and fullerene diffusion.
While most analysis methods adapted from transmission scattering experiments are only able to extract structural length scales and do not account for reflection–refraction effects, the use of advanced modelling can reveal object information, that is, phase sizes, structural length scales, and intermixing ratios of the components. This has been demonstrated in a P3HT:fullerene BHJ on the basis of the distorted wave Born approximation (DWBA) by applying the simulation software IsGISAXS145 or FitGISAXS.146 A good example of this approach is the simulation of 2D GISANS patterns using the structural model presented at the top of Fig. 6d in the framework of the DWBA to extract lateral structures (horizontally scattered intensity) and material composition (vertically scattered intensity) in P3HT:PC61BM blend films (Fig. 6d). The main advantage of using neutron scattering is that neutrons are more sensitive to the material composition of the investigated sample than are X-rays. To fit the scattering data of such a complex system, the model had to involve up to three object types that all resembled PC61BM domains. For all blend ratios, large PC61BM domains with a size of 100–200 nm were detected, but these domains occurred with a probability smaller than 0.05%. Highly probable (>90%) are smaller PC61BM domains, dominating the morphology. In the model, the exact Yoneda peak position is given by the actual molecular PC61BM distribution in the P3HT matrix. This includes the object sizes and the structural lengths as well as the SLDs of the phases. For the symmetric P3HT:PC61BM ratio, which is typically highly efficient in photovoltaic devices, a structure size of 20 nm, the largest PC61BM phases, and ∼18 vol% dispersed PC61BM in the amorphous P3HT phase were observed. The molecularly dispersed PC61BM content was found to increase with the overall PC61BM content, complemented by absorption measurements.
Neutron scattering in the transmission geometry has also been used to investigate the lateral structure of P3HT:PC61BM systems. To characterize the phase separated morphology, Kiel et al.138 modelled PC61BM agglomerates as polydisperse (Schultz distribution) spheres having hard sphere interactions surrounded by a matrix of P3HT and solubilized PC61BM, as shown in Fig. 6e. The model contained a total of four unknown fitting parameters: scatterer volume fraction, scatterer mean radius, scatterer polydispersity, and matrix SLD. The fitting results indicated that annealing increases the PC61BM agglomerate size and volume fraction, suggesting a coarsening of the phase separated morphology and that PC61BM is soluble to ∼16 vol% concentration in the P3HT matrix, which agrees well with a recent study by Yin et al.113 where the authors show a miscibility limit for PC61BM in P3HT of ∼20 vol% for the same system through Porod (Fig. 6h) and Debye–Bueche (Fig. 6i) analyses of SANS data. Liao et al.121 took into account the SAS model adopted by Kiel et al.138 and developed an improved model to analyze the GISAXS profile (19) (20)where the first term on the right-hand side in eqn (19) is the DAB model, ξ is the correlation length of the PC61BM-dispersed P3HT phase, A is a prefactor treated as an independent fitting parameter and is related to the product of electron density fluctuation, ξ3; the second term on the right-hand side is used to model the PC61BM clusters, assuming that the polydisperse spheres have a Schultz size distribution with a hard-sphere interaction between clusters, η is the volume fraction of the PC61BM cluster, and Δρ is the difference in SLD between the PC61BM cluster and surrounding matrix. V is the average cluster volume. F2(q,ri) is the form factor of a spherical cluster with diameter ri. H(q,ri,ri) is the pair structure function describing the interaction between clusters with the Percus–Yevick approximation. R is the mean cluster radius. The polydispersity is defined as a/R, where a2 is the variance of the Schultz size distribution f(r). The quantitative structural characterization by this model includes (1) the mean size, volume fraction, and size distribution of aggregated PC61BM clusters, (2) the specific interface area between PC61BM and P3HT, (3) the local cluster agglomeration, and (4) the correlation length of the PC61BM molecular network within the P3HT phase. The mean cluster radii (R = 4.6–8.9 nm) of PC61BM determined by the model fitting represented in Fig. 6f are in agreement with that (R = 5.9 nm) determined by Kiel et al.138 for P3HT:PC61BM annealed at 140 °C. Taken together, the above analyses of GISANS,112 SANS,113,138 and GISAXS121 indicate that P3HT:PC61BM films exhibit a complex structure147 containing at least P3HT crystals, PC61BM crystals, and a homogeneous mixture of the two, challenging the traditional view of an ideal morphology consisting of pure polymer/fullerene domains with discrete interfaces.21,22,148–150
A recent advance is the development of RSoXS.69,97,128,136,137,151 For soft, organic matter, scattering contrast using conventional hard X-ray scattering at higher energies relies on electron density differences, unless energies near an absorption edge are used to exploit “anomalous” enhancements. The RSoXS technique achieves contrast between functional moieties and can have orders of magnitude more scattering intensity, facilitating investigations of the morphology of very thin organic films at length scales from several nanometers to several micrometers in transmission. Fig. 6j shows as an example the RSoXS results of a P3HT:PC61BM blend.136 Due to the energy dependence of the optical constants of the constituents and thus their contrast, the scattering intensity profiles exhibit strong energy dependence. At 284.3 eV, the scattering contrast between the P3HT and PC61BM constituents is optimized. The spacing corresponding to the feature observed is 2π/q ≈ 20 nm. At 270 eV, the contrast between P3HT and PC61BM is much reduced.
Taking advantage of RSoXS, in conjunction with GISAXS and analytical transmission electron microscopy (TEM), hierarchical nanomorphologies ranging from several nanometers of crystallites to tens of nanometers of nanocrystallite aggregates in polymer-rich and fullerene-rich domains, themselves hundreds of nanometers in size, have been observed in PTB7:PC61BM films prepared using mixed solvents of DCB + DIO (Fig. 6k).97 The pair distance distribution function,141,142 (21)assists interpretation of RSoXS data, providing ensemble-averaged information about the distances between the phases in the sample and the shape of the domains. The first zero crossing is an indication of the mean domain size,128 but the interference effect may lead to a considerable distortion of the P(r) function: P(r) shows damped oscillations about zero in the region of the maximum distance D,141,142 giving only an approximate estimation of domain size. Moreover, the magnitude of P(r) is a measure of domain purity. It has been proposed97 that these hierarchical nanomorphologies are coupled to significantly enhanced exciton dissociation, which consequently contributes to the photocurrent, indicating that the nanostructural characteristics at multiple length scales are one of the key factors determining the performance of PTB7 copolymer in OPV devices. This type of structure–property analysis leads the community to reconsider what structures should be targeted in OPV devices.
2.4. Reflectivity techniques
Vertical composition in the active layer of organic and hybrid solar cells is perhaps just as important as lateral morphology; for example, the existence of enrichment layers can act as blocking layers to improve performance in devices. Furthermore, a composition gradient along the surface normal might improve charge-carrier transport to the electrodes. To detect vertical material composition profiles with sub-nanometer resolution, NR73,120,152−160 and XRR124,130,161–169 measurements are appropriate. Here, four types of reflectivity measurements are discussed.
For X-rays, the contrast depends on the electron densities of the investigated materials, and is often quite small for molecular PV systems. By deuterating one component, the contrast can be controlled when neutrons are used in the reflectivity experiment instead of X-rays. For polymer:fullerene blends, a high neutron scattering contrast naturally exists between polymers and fullerene-based acceptors, making this technique particularly attractive. Parnell et al.157 used neutron reflectivity to probe the distribution of PC61BM in a P3HT:PC61BM thin film that was either freshly cast, or both solvent and thermally annealed. As illustrated by the concentration profiles in Fig. 7a, the freshly cast films had a surface layer that was relatively depleted in PC61BM, while being relatively rich in PC61BM at the film–substrate interface. Solvent annealing was shown to have little effect on the PC61BM distribution within the film; however, thermal annealing increased the PC61BM concentration at the surface to a level found in the bulk of the film.
 Fig. 7  Examples of extracting morphological parameters (thickness and roughness) from reflectivity techniques. (a) Left: neutron reflectivity data and corresponding fits for three P3HT:PC61BM blend samples (the data are offset for clarity). Middle: reflectivity data for the sample both solvent annealed and 60 min thermally annealed plotted as RQ4vs. Q to highlight the quality of the fit. Right: the PC61BM concentration profiles for P3HT:PC61BM blend films including a pristine blend film, a solvent annealed film as well as a sample both solvent annealed and thermally annealed for 60 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (b) RQ4vs. Q for pure films of P3HT (△) and PC61BM (○) (top) and the fast grown film spin coated from a 1:1 mixture by weight of P3HT and PC61BM in chlorobenzene spin coated at 2500 rpm (middle), as well as the corresponding SLD profiles from the best fit lines of the data (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. (c) Representative RSoXR data at 282.4 eV (open circle) and numerical fits (solid line) of Si/PFB/F8BT samples as a function of annealing. (1) As-prepared, (2) 100 °C, (3) 120 °C, (4) 140 °C, (5) 160 °C, and (6) 200 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. (d) EDXR profiles (shifted in height for clarity) collected on P3HT:PC61BM as deposited sample, during illumination for about 70 h. The inset reports the morphological data point evolution (film roughness σ vs. time, film thickness d vs. time) obtained by the analysis of the EDXR patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
Analysis of conventional specular neutron reflectometry can be challenging due to the possibility of multiple solutions inherent in a single dataset, particularly for OPV systems. Phase sensitive neutron reflectometry (PSNR), however, permits determination of the unique SLD profile of the film under investigation, which is affected by variation in the media surrounding the film, through the use of reference materials. By collecting two composite reflectivity datasets, corresponding to the common unknown film of interest and that of a known one in the surrounding media (either D2O or air backing in this case), phase information is preserved so that virtually all ambiguity in determining the SLD profile is eliminated. The unique SLD profile can then be retrieved either by direct inversion (completely model independent and with no adjustable parameters) or by simultaneous fitting of the two reflectivity datasets—the results can be shown to be essentially equivalent either way. Kiel et al.159,160 applied this technique to investigate the vertical morphology of a P3HT:PC61BM thin film and also found the depletion of PC61BM at the cathode interface (Fig. 7b).
Interfaces between donor and acceptor domains are critical to the performance of organic and hybrid solar cells as these often dominate charge separation and recombination processes. Usually, these interfaces are difficult to characterize with conventional methods. Soft X-rays are sensitive to both the interface and the surface, and there is a high intrinsic material contrast that exists for most polymers at soft X-ray energies, so resonant soft X-ray reflectivity (RSoXR) is capable of providing quantitative interface characterization without the need for deuteration. As shown in Fig. 7c, as-prepared (no annealing) planar photovoltaic heterojunctions based on the polyfluorene copolymers poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis(N,N′-(4-butylphenyl))bis(N,N′-phenyl-1,4-phenylene)diamine) (PFB) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT)162,163 have sharp interfaces of 0.68 nm interfacial width consistent with the surface roughness of the initially spin-coated films. This value increases to only 0.70 nm and 1.0 nm when the film is annealed at relatively low temperatures of 100 and 120 °C, respectively. When the films are annealed near or above the glass transition temperatures of the polymers (∼140 °C), substantial increases in the interfacial width are observed, with a jump to 2.6 nm for 140 °C and to ∼6.7 nm for 200 °C. It is evident that the interfacial widths between active layers can be controlled by annealing at elevated temperature, pre-annealing of the bottom layer, or casting from different solvent mixtures.

In situ studies of the effect of morphological/structural aging processes on OPV or hybrid PV performance can be particularly enlightening. Such studies are especially relevant in the context of device stability. For example, remarkable aging effects have been observed for blends with high fullerene content.169 Energy dispersive X-ray reflectivity (EDXR) allows the in situ determination of morphological parameters (thickness and roughness). In energy dispersive mode, a polychromatic X-ray beam is used to carry out an energy scan, at a fixed angle, of the scattered radiation intensity. It prevents systematic errors induced by imperfect repositioning of the diffractometer–reflectometer arms, necessary to collect sequences of patterns, as well as spurious contributions to the scattered intensity coming from other cell components accidently crossed by the X-ray beam during an angular scan.
Paci et al.165 applied EDXR to study the effects of white light illumination on the morphology of P3HT:PC61BM BHJs. The curves undergo a progressive compression, testified by the shift of their minima toward lower q values as a function of time (Fig. 7d). This indicates an increase in the film thickness, with the change at approximately the 1% level. Variation in the morphological parameters gives evidence of modification in the film packing, suggesting that the blend molecules undergo bulk reorganization under illumination, likely due to heating effects (the measured sample temperature was about 70 °C). Therefore, the results demonstrate that the EDXR approach for in situ non-invasive investigations of the bulk, interface and surface properties of the active layer of organic solar cell provides a powerful tool to address organic device durability.
Taken together, the wide-angle, small-angle, and reflectometry techniques outlined above can provide deep and multifaceted insights into the morphology of OPV and hybrid PV materials and devices over a broad range of sizes. In most cases, however, these data can be complemented by real-space measurements, which will be discussed in the following section, to establish a more complete understanding.
3. Real-space techniques
Reciprocal-space techniques provide invaluable area-averaged information about the structure of materials. Real-space techniques allow for spatially resolved visualization of inhomogeneity in material properties. Many excellent reviews have been written on this topic;40,170,171 however, morphological characterization of OPV materials is rapidly evolving. In this review we cover recent advances in the real-space morphological characterization of OPV materials as well as reference milestones from research some time ago. In this section, we discuss X-ray, electron beam, scanning probe, and optical techniques used in characterization of the morphology in organic photovoltaic materials.
3.1. X-ray microscopy
Several different techniques comprise the field of X-ray microscopy. These methods can mostly be grouped into diffraction-based techniques172 and absorption-based techniques. Despite relatively wide use of diffraction-based X-ray microscopy in materials science,172–176 this technique has not been used for the characterization of organic photovoltaic materials yet, and thus this technique is beyond the scope of this review. On the other hand, absorption-based techniques, predominately based on near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy, are often used for the characterization of OPV materials. At least two names, NEXAFS microscopy177 and scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM),178–180 have been used for NEXAFS-based X-ray microscopy in the field of polymer characterization. Here, we use the term NEXAFS microscopy for the technique, as this name reflects the physics of contrast formation. Fig. 8 shows a schematic of the NEXAFS absorption process. A NEXAFS absorption event produces Auger electrons from core-excited carbon atoms; on the way to the surface, Auger electrons produce secondary electrons through scattering, which can be used as a measure for NEXAFS spectra with a probing depth of ∼2.5 nm.181,182 Due to the high surface sensitivity of NEXAFS microscopy, sample roughness of less than 100 nm and the absence of tall protruding asperities are desirable for the best performance of the technique. NEXAFS microscopy cannot characterize buried interfaces of OPV devices, thus encapsulated samples cannot be characterized using NEXAFS. NEXAFS microscopy provides rich information about the chemical and phase composition of the sample.183–185 In some cases it may also provide information about the crystallographic orientation of domains in thin film materials.178
 Fig. 8  NEXAFS process schematic. 
NEXAFS microscopy maps of P3HT:PC61BM:porphyrin blends show compositional variations on the surface of the sample (Fig. 9a). Phase segregation is observed on the sub-micrometer scale. By performing a composition variation of the ternary blend, Burke and co-workers correlated phase segregation and changes in thickness of the polymer film. Relative concentrations (%) of each component (Fig. 9a) were obtained by decomposing the NEXAFS spectrum at each point into a weighted sum of pristine P3HT, PC61BM, and porphyrin NEXAFS spectra.184
 Fig. 9  (a) 5 × 5 μm compositional maps of P3HT, PCBM, and porphyrin concentrations for blend ratios 5:5:3 together with the corresponding thickness map. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematics of molecular arrangements of PBTTT molecules on the surface. AFM image of terraced PBTTT on mica substrate before floating off for X-ray transmission measurements. Backbone orientation and the local tilt angle maps calculated from multiple NEXAFS microscopy images taken of the same spot of the film but with different incident linear polarization of the X-ray beam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) 2 μm × 2 μm NEXAFS PFB and F8BT composition maps of PFB:F8BT 1:1 blend nanoparticles. Arcs show where rotational averages have been taken to obtain radial composition profiles. The three nanoparticles used in the subsequent analyses are marked in the two figures. The very thin background regions between the particles contain insufficient material to allow an accurate NEXAFS measurement of the composition in these areas. In order to highlight the meaningful regions of data, areas of the sample thinner than a 15 nm threshold were greyed out in a linear fashion such that a 0 nm thick region would be completely grey and a 15 nm section would have full color. Near-edge Xx-ray absorption spectra for PFB and F8BT. Schematic representations of the three structural models used to fit the radial compositional profiles. Three possible models were investigated to determine radial composition profiles. In the model the mass profiles were convoluted with a 31 nm FWHM Gaussian peak and then vertically averaged compositions were determined. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. 
In addition to information regarding sample composition, information about molecular orientation within the film can be extracted from NEXAFS microscopy data. Schuettfort et al. determined the backbone orientation of the poly(2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (PBTTT) and the π-system tilt angle with respect to the substrate by using a decomposition of the NEXAFS spectrum into a plurality of peaks corresponding to different electron transitions within the PBTTT macromolecule and taking into account the dependence of the transition intensity on the tilt angle between the NEXAFS transitional dipole moment and the substrate, X-ray angle of incidence, and molecular orientation (Fig. 9b). In order to achieve this, spatially resolved NEXAFS spectra at several incidence angles of X-ray illumination were collected. The domain structure of pentacene-based materials on the sub-micrometer length scale has also been studied using NEXAFS microscopy.186–188
Interpretation of NEXAFS spectra depends strongly on a model used to explain the interaction between X-rays and matter. Burke and co-workers showed that the compositional profile of core–shell PFB:F8BT particles can be deconvoluted from NEXAFS spectra by model fitting spectra to a core–shell model (Fig. 9c).183 Sub-10 nm instrumental resolution of the technique was also demonstrated.
Sample requirements, spatial resolution, and information that can be learned from NEXAFS microscopy are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Guidelines for selection of morphology characterization techniques




Technique
Sample
OPV device relevance
Resolution
Type of information


Roughness
Conductivity
Optical transparency
Special geometry
Material access requirements
Operation in inert environment
Ultimate resolution
Resolution limiting factor




GIWAXS
Smooth films optimum
N/A
N/A
Planar samples preferred
Devices accessible
Able to run under vacuum or inert gas environment (N2 or He)

q resolution variable with slits or collimator
Geometric smearing
Crystalline structures on the atomic length scale, i.e. the orientation of crystallites, an estimation of crystallite sizes, and the degree of crystallinity


SAS
N/A
N/A
N/A
Planar samples preferred
Devices accessible
Able to run under vacuum or inert gas environment (N2 or He)

q resolution variable with slits or collimator
Beam divergence and size & wavelength distribution
Domain shapes and sizes, size distributions, spatial correlations, and degree of mixing


NR and XRR
Smooth films optimum
N/A
N/A
Planar samples preferred
Devices accessible
Able to run under vacuum or inert gas environment (N2 or He)

q resolution variable with slits or collimator
Beam divergence
Thickness, interfacial roughness, and vertical composition in the active layer


STXM
N/A
Required for high-resolution imaging
N/A
Special sample preparation for TEM imaging (microtome, FIB, etc.)
No encapsulation
No glove box operation
10s to 100s nm
Incoming beam zone plate resolution; imaging CCD signal-to-noise; model used for data fitting
Chemical composition;molecular orientation, etc.


Optical microscopy
Ideal surface roughness smaller than light wavelength (100s of nm)
N/A
Important only for transmission modes
Planar samples preferred
Complete devices accessible
Glove box operation is feasible
100s nm
Light diffraction limit
Morphology on micrometer scale, i.e. material phase contrast, thickness variation, optical properties variation


Raman microscopy
Ideal surface roughness smaller than light wavelength (1000s of nm)
N/A
Not important
Planar samples preferred
Complete devices accessible
Glove box operation is cumbersome
100s nm
Light diffraction limit
Chemical information on micrometer scale, i.e. phase attribution within film; spatially resolved fluorescence


LBIC
1000s of nm
Complete device required
Complete device required
Complete device required
Encapsulated devices can be studied
Glove box operation is difficult
100s nm
Light diffraction limit
Spatially resolved photocurrent generation


SPM
100s of nm
N/A
N/A
Planar samples required
No encapsulation
Glove box operation is feasible
10s of nm
Probe sharpness
Sample topography, mechanical/electrical properties, surface potential, charging kinetics, etc.


C-AFM
100s of nm
Proper sample grounding required
N/A
Planar samples required
No encapsulation
Glove box operation is feasible
10s of nm
Probe sharpness
Sample conductivity


Photoconductive AFM
100s of nm
Proper sample grounding required
Sample transparency required
Planar samples required
No encapsulation
Glove box operation is feasible
10s of nm
Probe sharpness
Sample photoconductivity


Aperture-SNOM
About 100 nm
N/A
Sample transparency required
Planar samples required
No encapsulation
Glove box operation is difficult
10s of nm
Aperture size
Optical properties, etc.


SEM
Image contrast easier to interpret on smooth samples
Required for high-resolution imaging
N/A
Virtually no constraints
Imaging of cross section of encapsulated device is possible
No glove box operation
Few nm
Diffraction limit of electron beam; sample electrical properties
Sample topography, chemical composition, crystal structure, etc.


TEM
N/A
Required for high-resolution imaging
N/A
Sample preparation for cross-sections (microtome, FIB, etc.)
No encapsulation
No glove box operation; TEM holders available to maintain inert atmosphere during sample transfer
∼1 nm
Diffraction limit of electron beam; sample electrical properties; sample holder stability
Morphology ranging from molecular ordering to domain structures; crystallinity, etc.


Laser-SQUID microscope
1000s of nm
Complete device required
Complete device required
Complete device required
Encapsulated devices can be studied
No glove box operation
1000s nm
Light diffraction limit
Spatially resolved photocurrent generation; no physical contact to the sample is required


Transient absorption imaging
100s of nm
N/A
N/A
Planar samples beneficial
Encapsulated devices can be studied
Glove box operation is difficult
100s nm
Light diffraction limit
Spatially and time-resolved light absorption (linear, differential) of the sample; kinetics of charge build-up and dissipation on illumination


SIMS
N/A
N/A
N/A
Planar samples preferred
No encapsulation
SIMS instrument can be connected to glove box
50 nm (lateral); ∼1 nm (vertical)
Beam diameter (lateral); surface roughness (vertical)
Chemical composition




3.2. Optical techniques
Operation modes of optical techniques can be divided into two large classes: transmission and reflection. In transmission mode, information about the sample is obtained by the analysis of the light beam that passes through the sample (Fig. 10: yellow and red beams). In this mode, light emitted by the light source (white lamp, laser, diode, etc.) is conditioned (polarized, energy filtered, chopped, etc.) while passing through fixture 1. After passing through the sample, the light beam contains information about its optical properties. Conditioning the outgoing light (Fig. 10: fixture 2) reveals the information carried by the beam and enhances the contrast. The type of detector utilized determines the microscopy mode (Fig. 10: detector 2). For example, optical microscopy in transmission mode might require a 2D charge-coupled device (CCD), while transient absorption microscopy requires an ultrafast detector synchronized with the light source. In reflection mode, the conditioned light is reflected by the sample and analyzed. Depending on the type of detector used, reflection mode results in optical microscopy (2D CCD), Raman microscopy (energy-resolved detector), etc. Here we limit discussion of optical characterization techniques to ones recently used for the characterization of OPV materials, such as optical microscopy, light-beam-induced current (LBIC), Raman microscopy, and transient absorption microscopy. Table 3 provides a summary of sample requirements, typical spatial resolution, and typical information obtainable by optical techniques.
 Fig. 10  Schematic for optical-based techniques (optical microscopy, Raman microscopy, light-beam-induced current (LBIC)). Beam from the light source travels towards the sample. Depending on the geometry of the sample, either a reflected and/or a transmitted beam is analyzed using various detectors (CCD camera (optical microscopy), Raman spectrometer (Raman microscopy)). 

Optical microscopy. 
In optical microscopy conditioned light is delivered to the sample and then either the transmitted or reflected beam is analyzed. Various techniques for contrast enhancement, such as dark field, bright field, polarization, etc., are utilized in optical microscopy (see ref. 189 and 190 for detailed information on microscopy modes). The differences among the techniques mentioned lie in the way incident and analytical light beams are conditioned (fixtures 1, 2 (Fig. 10)) and focused (focusing optics (Fig. 10)) along the beam path. Light in the UV–near IR range is typically used for optical microscopy; thus, for ideal performance, samples should be optically smooth (roughness less than 500 nm). For transmission optical microscopy, as the name suggests, optically transparent samples and substrates are required. It is relatively easy to set-up an optical microscope inside a glove box as a quality control tool. Optical microscopy set-ups usually allow for studies of encapsulated OPV devices. The typical constraint in this case is the distance between the encapsulation surface and the layer of interest (active layer), which needs to be smaller than the working distance (the distance between the last lens surface and the imaging plane) of the focusing optics (Fig. 10). Image contrast in optical microscopy comes from interference of light passing through the sample or reflected off the sample. This contrast is a convolution of chemical, electrical, and topographic information about the sample. Phase separation at micrometer length scales and above can be observed using optical microscopy. Specialized sample preparation, such as sample polishing, staining, labeling, etc., is often required to obtain high-quality images. Spatial resolution of this technique is on the order of several micrometers.
In OPVs and hybrid PVs, macroscopic phase separation of materials is often detectable by optical microscopy. In many cases fullerenes will phase separate from the blend, forming large-scale crystallites. Nicolet and co-workers showed that optical microscopy data differentiate the two-phase region of the phase diagram (solid PC61BM and liquid P3HT) where PC61BM crystallites are formed (Fig. 11a).191 Other research groups used optical microscopy to visualize aggregation of one component of the blend.196,197 For crystalline organic semiconductors, conventional cross-polarized optical microscopy is suitable for the study of domains on the length scale of micrometers or more. Rivnay et al. revealed the micrometer-scale hierarchical structure of the n-type perylene diimide semiconductor PDI8–CN2 using cross-polarized optical microscopy.198 Polarized microscopy has also been utilized for phase separation studies of solar cell materials199 or for studies of solar cell active layers with a strong in-plane texture.200
 Fig. 11  (a) Left: optical microscopy images (40×) of P3HT:PC61BM thin films while heating with different amounts of P3HT (mol. weight 60 kg mol−1). The scale bar represents 50 μm. Right: overlay of phase diagrams between different molecular weights of P3HTs and PC61BM obtained on the basis of the DSC thermograms. Solid lines: solidus lines; dashed lines: liquidus lines. P3HT mol. w. 9.6 kg mol−1 (blue diamonds), 25 kg mol−1 (red squares), and 60 kg mol−1 (black triangles). Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Top: LBIC experiments with different striped silver electrodes; PV410 silver. Bottom: outline of the cell with the rectangular ITO area shaded gray overlaid with the striped silver electrode pattern and a rectangular silver bus shaded black (left) and an image of one of the devices seen from the silver electrode side (middle). Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (c) Top: laser-SQUID microscope image of the solar cell. Bottom: LBIC image of the solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (d) Voltage dependent photocurrent images of an ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/Al annealed device. Top: normalized Raman image showing ratio of aggregated to unaggregated P3HT measured at 0 V (scale bar size = 3 μm). Bottom: photocurrent images under −0.5 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e) Top: ΔT/T(x,y) image at λ = 640 nm and τ = 200 fs pump probe delay of a 5 × 5 μm2 region. Scale bar: 1 μm. Excitation intensity ∼300 nJ cm−2. Bottom: intensity trace profile of ΔT/T(x,y) signal across the interfacial region (named “B”) between a crystalline P3HT-rich phase (“A”) and a PC61BM-rich cluster. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 


Light-beam-induced current (LBIC). 
Light-beam-induced current is a characterization technique where a beam of light (often a laser) illuminates a solar cell while a short circuit current is read at the solar cell's output. Movement of the light beam across the surface creates a current map, which allows visualization of inhomogeneity in electrical current generation across the solar cell surface. The LBIC technique is routinely used for the evaluation of CdTe,201 CIGS,202 and silicon203 solar cells. Recently, it has been applied to OPV devices as well.192,194,204,205 The LBIC technique requires a fully functional solar cell; this comprises the main sample requirement for using the LBIC technique. (LBIC works on bare as well as encapsulated solar cells.) In the context of OPV materials, LBIC has typically been used for rough mapping of the active areas of the film, while on polysilicon and CdTe solar cells this technique has been used for defect characterization201 and determination of carrier diffusion length.206 Spatial resolution of LBIC is limited by the focus size of the incoming light, which is technically limited by diffraction in the case of laser beams. However, currently this technique achieves a resolution of about 100 μm in applications of LBIC for OPV devices.
Krebs and co-workers192 used LBIC to evaluate the effect of different techniques for back electrode application on the performance of OPV solar cells. Fig. 11b shows a light-induced current map along with schematics of the device and an optical photograph of the device. Nakatani and co-workers have recently demonstrated an elegant modification of the LBIC technique,193,207 where the photocurrent of the solar cell is detected using a SQUID magnetometer (Fig. 11c). This approach allows for a completely contactless evaluation of the electrical properties of the solar cells.


Raman microscopy. 
Raman microscopy is an optical characterization technique where a laser beam of certain energy illuminates the sample (yellow beam in Fig. 10), interacts with matter, and scatters into a detector (blue beam in Fig. 10). The illumination beam interacts with molecular vibrations of the sample, resulting in an energy shift of the scattered beam. A spectrometer, which resolves energy shifts of 10−3 to 10−1 eV, is typically used as a detector (detector 2 in Fig. 10). Each data point in Raman microscopy constitutes a spectrum. When data are collected on a grid pattern, 3-dimentional data sets (x position × y position × energy shift) are created. Spatially resolved spectroscopic data contain information about a material's chemical structure as well as fluorescent properties of the material, etc. Thus, Raman microscopy can be used for phase mapping, understanding spatially resolved variations in material fluorescence, and so on. Samples for Raman microscopy should be optically smooth (roughness less than 500 nm). Encapsulated solar cell devices can also be used, provided the encapsulation layer is optically clear and does not fluoresce under the laser illumination used. Light energy density in Raman microscopy is relatively high (mW per tens of μm2), and thus sample degradation due to heat or radiation damage is often a concern. Spatial resolution of Raman microscopy is determined by the size of the laser beam and grid density. Point-to-point resolution of about 1 μm is practically achievable.
Klimov et al. were among the first to pioneer the use of confocal Raman microscopy to study phase separation in OPV materials (P3HT:PC61BM blend).208 The research group led by J.K. Grey moved materials analysis with Raman microscopy to the next level by combining resonance Raman microscopy with concurrent photocurrent imaging and extensive data analysis. This effort resulted in visualization of an aggregation state in P3HT:PC61BM blends as well as correlation of the aggregation state with photocurrent generation abilities of the active layer (Fig. 11d).194,209,210


Other optical techniques. 
Optical properties of materials, such as luminescence, transient absorption, etc., are crucial for the performance of the materials inside a device. Thus, the use of optical techniques for the characterization of OPV materials is attracting increasing attention. Brenner and McNeill combined confocal photoluminescence and photocurrent microscopy to obtain spatially resolved correlations between material performance (photocurrent generation) and an important energy loss mechanism (luminescence) in the PFB:F8BT system.211 This knowledge allowed them to find that, regardless of excitation wavelength, the F8BT-rich domain is more efficient at generating photocurrent despite a relatively high degree of exciton recombination. Pronounced exciplex emission was observed in the PFB-rich domain, suggesting that the increased intermixing of F8BT and PFB in this phase results in efficient geminate recombination rather than promoting charge separation.211
Grancini et al.195 measured linear and differential transmission spectra of a P3HT:PC61BM blend with ∼150 fs temporal and ∼300 nm spatial resolution (Fig. 11e). The authors found a long-lived charge-transfer state at the intercrystal region between the pure P3HT:PC61BM phases.195 This observation emphasizes the importance of high spatial-resolution mapping of material properties, because such dynamics would have been washed out by any standard pump-probe measurement performed on a macroscopic sample.195

3.3. Scanning probe microscopy-based techniques
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a microscopy technique where material properties are examined using an extremely sharp probe (∼10 nm radius). The probe is most often used to measure a topographical profile of the surface. At the same time, many functional properties of a sample, such as Young's modulus,217–220 resistance,213,221,222 surface potential,215,223 glass transition temperature,224,225etc., can be measured using scanning probe microscopy. Fig. 12 shows a generalized schematic of an ambient scanning probe microscope. The key component of this set-up is an atomic force microscopy (AFM) probe, which is kept in close proximity (or contact) to the sample by a controller. The AFM controller is responsible for scan rastering as well as for keeping the AFM probe in close proximity to the surface. Measurements of the functional properties of materials often require modifications in controller operations, which result in changes of the probe or sample excitation routine, as well as the addition of new components as discussed below. In order to achieve optimal results during sample property measurements, relatively flat samples (roughness less than 100 nm) are desirable. In general, encapsulated samples are not suitable for AFM studies because intimate contact between the AFM probe and sample surface is required. In this review, we cover only four of the most popular AFM techniques for OPV characterization. Table 3 provides a summary of sample requirements, typical spatial resolution, and typical information obtainable by SPM techniques.
 Fig. 12  Generalized schematic of an AFM. 

Topography measurements using AFM. 
Topographic measurements are the most common use of AFM. Several operation modes are used to acquire topographical information about the sample. The most common modes in air are the contact mode (when the probe applies constant force on the surface) and the intermittent contact mode (the probe oscillates in near proximity to the sample's surface, touching it from time-to-time). Tapping mode, a popular imaging mode, is one implementation of the intermittent contact mode that works as follows. Natural oscillations of the probe are excited by a piezo-drive, and the AFM controller maintains constant oscillation amplitude. Typically the set-point amplitude is defined as a fraction of the AFM probe free amplitude (oscillation amplitude of the probe far away from the surface). Changes in height that the controller has to request in order to maintain constant amplitude of the AFM oscillations while the AFM probe travels across the surface are recorded as a topography signal.
Typically, a phase image is captured along with the topography. This image reflects the difference in the phase of oscillations of the piezo-drive and the phase of actual oscillations of the AFM probe registered by the photodetector. It is commonly believed that phase images represent differences in stiffness across the sample, based on the assumption that there is no adhesion between probe and sample. For most AFM experiments, adhesion between the AFM probe and surface plays a large role in image formation. Thus, a phase image reflects a combination of the sample's elastic and viscous properties. Inference about elastic properties of the sample—typically followed by chemical attribution of the phase image contrast—is often misleading. Detailed explanation of the interplay between a phase image and a sample's elastic and viscous properties is beyond the scope of this review; more details on this topic can be found elsewhere.226Fig. 13a shows typical topography and phase images of P3HT after annealing at 150 °C.212 Dante et al. observed the development of a fibril-like contrast in phase images after annealing, while the topography image remained largely unchanged.212 Little beyond change of contrast can be inferred from these images. The AFM probe radius (typically about 10 nm) limits spatial resolution in topographic imaging.
 Fig. 13  (a) Tapping mode AFM topographic and phase images (1 μm × 1 μm) of annealed films of pure P3HT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Topography, Young's modulus, and resistance of an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM sample. Image size 2 μm × 2 μm. Adapted from ref. 213. (c) Images taken on a P3HT/PC61BM solar cell after 2 min of annealing: electron-dominated dark current (collected at −5 V tip bias), hole-dominated dark current (collected at +5 V tip bias), and short-circuit photocurrent when excited with 532 nm laser light. Inset to right panel shows the photocurrent histogram. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (d) KPFM image under dark conditions and under illumination with a 488 nm laser of a locally degraded sample (18 h, 2 Sun, synthetic air, 20% H2O). Conductive AFM image with a bias voltage of 3 V under dark conditions and under illumination with a 488 nm laser of a locally degraded sample (18 h, 2 Sun, synthetic air, 20% H2O). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Charging rate image of a polymer blend film. AFM height image of a 50:50 film of F8BT/PFB spin coated from xylenes. The recessed domains are enriched in PFB (film thickness: 90 nm). EFM photoinduced charging rate map generated by plotting the inverse exponential time constant for photoinduced charging at each point in (1). The dark rings indicate regions of slower charging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. 


Conductive AFM (C-AFM) and photocurrent AFM. 
Semiconducting materials are at the heart of OPV devices. Conductive AFM provides information about electrical properties of these devices and the underlying materials with high spatial resolution (∼10 nm). Sample preparation is crucial to the performance of this technique. Typically, two terminal electrical measurements are performed. A metal- or doped diamond-coated AFM probe serves as one electrode and a bulk conductor underneath the OPV material serves as the other. Robust contact to the bulk conductor is a prerequisite for stable operation of conductive AFM. Usually, C-AFM is performed in contact mode, when the AFM probe is in constant contact with the surface. Despite the obvious benefit of a robust electrical contact between the AFM probe and the surface, this operation technique often results in fast sample degradation due to mechanical wear of the soft molecular sample. Alexeev and co-workers were the first to use C-AFM for the characterization of semiconducting polymer blends.227 Later several research groups successfully used the technique for OPV material characterization and obtained qualitative information about electrical properties of the samples.222,228 Despite successful generation of current maps by many groups, electrical properties of the materials are rarely measured quantitatively using AFM because of the uncertainty in contact radius between the AFM probe and the surface in each point of the scan. In order to obtain quantitative electrical information, information about the area of contact between the AFM probe and the sample surface is required. A relatively new mode of scanning probe microscope operation called PeakForce tapping allows for concurrent measurements of mechanical and electrical properties of the sample. In short, force–distance and current–distance curves are measured at each point of the scan. From the distance dependence of force, the contact area between the AFM probe and the surface can be estimated. This approach allows for quantitative measurements of mechanical and electrical properties of OPV materials.213Fig. 13b shows spatially resolved quantitative maps of surface topography, mechanical properties, and material resistance.213
One variation of C-AFM is photocurrent microscopy. For this technique, the sample is a thin-layer solar cell without a top electrode; rather, the AFM probe serves as the top electrode. During operation the AFM probe–surface junction is illuminated with light (usually a laser) and the spatially resolved short circuit current of the solar cell flowing between the AFM probe and bottom electrode is measured. Douhéret and co-workers pioneered this technique in 2006 by demonstrating the effect of tungsten lamp illumination on local current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PC61BM solar cells.229 Ginger and co-workers brought the use of the technique to the next level by improving the tip–surface junction illumination scheme, which allowed for robust mapping of the photocurrent in OPV-based solar cells.230Fig. 13c shows typical information that can be obtained using a combination of C-AFM and photocurrent microscopy, such as spatially resolved maps of dark hole current (conductive AFM), dark electron current (conductive AFM), and short circuit current at 532 nm illumination (photocurrent AFM) on P3HT:PC61BM-based solar cells.214 Currently, several groups are adapting the methodology developed by Ginger and co-workers.222,231 Usually, the AFM probe radius (∼10 to 20 nm) limits the resolution of conductive AFM on polymeric samples.


Scanning surface potential microscopy (SSPM) or Kelvin probe force microscopy (KFM). 
Perhaps the most common of the so called “advanced” SPM techniques is scanning surface potential microscopy (SSPM), sometimes referred to as Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), which maps the work function of surfaces.232,233 In SSPM, the cantilever oscillation is driven electrically. This is a non-contact (generally 50–200 nm separation) technique with feedback on the first harmonic of the cantilever oscillations. An ac voltage is applied to the tip and varied until it matches the surface potential, at which point the first harmonic of the force is nullified.
The apparent ease with which potential variations can be mapped belies the challenges in interpreting images on electrically237,238 and topographically inhomogeneous surfaces. In the cases of semiconductor and dielectric surfaces the electrostatic properties of a surface are not characterized solely by intrinsic potential and topography. SSPM images must be interpreted in terms of effective surface potential that includes capacitive interactions, surface and volume bound charges, double layers and remanent polarization.239–242 For semiconductor surfaces, tip-induced band bending243 can offset local surface potential.244 Despite these challenges the obvious need to examine variations in local potential in electronic nanodevices spurred efforts to overcome some of the obstacles with careful analytical treatments that determined limits in quantification. It is fair to say at this point that absolute values of potential cannot be quantified, but variations in potential can be determined with energy resolution of 2–4 meV and spatial resolution of the order of 50–100 nm.
SSPM has been widely used for the characterization of OPV materials and devices. Lee and co-workers characterized the electrical potential distribution of the cross-section of a P3HT:PC61BM-based solar cell and found that the electric field is confined to the cathode interface, while the rest of device is nearly field free.245 Sengupta et al. performed degradation studies measuring changes in surface potential in the dark and under illumination after sample exposure to light, oxygen, and water (Fig. 13d).215 In some cases, scanning surface potential microscopy allows for the inference of 3D structural information in semiconducting polymer blends (F8BT:PFB).246
Modifications of SSPM, such as detecting surface potential using oscillation frequency instead of amplitude as a feedback mode (called time-resolved electrical force microscopy (tr-EFM)), allowed Coffey and Ginger to understand photoinduced charging inside solar cells.216Fig. 13e shows sample topography as well as a charging rate image of F8BT:PFB films. Charge generation seems slowest at the interfaces between polymer domains. Each dark ring corresponds to a region where charge accumulates under the tip at a rate ∼30 to 50% slower than that in the surrounding regions.216


Scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM). 
Scanning near-field optical microscopy measures optical properties of materials directly. There are two flavors of this type of microscopy: aperture-based and apertureless (scattering). In aperture-based SNOM, light passes through the sample and a small aperture acts as a diaphragm limiting area from which the optical signal is collected. In the case of scattering SNOM, focused light illuminates the AFM probe–surface junction, and then scattered light is collected and analyzed to extract dielectric properties of the sample. Spatial resolution achievable in a SNOM experiment is limited by either the SNOM aperture (about 100 nm) or by the probe sharpness (about 10 nm). Both SNOM techniques find limited application for the characterization of OPV materials due to difficulties with the experimental setup. Kuehn et al. studied thiophene oligomers (PQT-12) using aperture SNOM; optical dichroism was measured and then correlated with a molecular orientation within crystal domains.247

3.4. Electron microscopy-based techniques
Electron microscopy is a microscopy technique where a beam of electrons is used for imaging an object. There are three general types of electron microscopy:
(1) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), where a beam of electrons scans a sample in a raster pattern. When the electron beam interacts with the sample, it loses energy, which is converted into heat, emission of secondary/backscattered electrons, light emission, or X-ray emission. These data provide information about the properties of the sample, such as topography or composition. For SEM, the record resolution is about 1–2 nm under ideal conditions.248
(2) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), where the beam of electrons shines through a sample and the changes in electron beam intensity/energy profile/etc. form an image. For TEM, spatial resolution has surpassed 0.5 Å.249
(3) Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), where the electron beam again shines through the sample, but is now focused and rastered before interacting with the sample, as in SEM, rather than focusing after, as in TEM. This approach simplifies analytical techniques such as annular dark-field imaging, but results in a slower data acquisition than that with TEM.
As electron microscope designs are complex and vary from model to model, rather than presenting an abridged description of these instruments we refer readers to textbooks that describe SEM250,251 and TEM252 setups in great detail.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 
In the field of OPVs and hybrid PVs, SEM is typically used for the evaluation of solar cell cross-sections. For this purpose, the SEM is usually operated in secondary electron mode, where the primary electron beam knocks out electrons from the sample surface, which are then drawn to the detector by an electrical field. For the best performance of this technique, electrical conductivity of the sample is desirable. Since most OPV devices are fabricated on ITO-coated glass, coating the solar cell cross-section with a thin layer (about 1–10 nm) of carbon or gold is a common practice to ensure surface conductivity of the sample and avoid imaging artifacts such as charging. Encapsulated samples cannot be imaged using SEM (except in cross-section). SEM usually produces images in which information about sample topography is convoluted with the chemical composition of the surface layer.

Fig. 14a shows a typical cross-sectional SEM of a porphyrin–fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cell.234 Essentially, all of the functional layers within the OPV device are visible: glass (substrate), ITO (bottom current collector), PEDOT : PSS (hole transport layer), p-layer (seed porphyrin layer), i-layer (active layer, mixture of porphyrin and fullerene), and n-layer (electron transport layer, fullerene rich).234
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of the p-i-n structure made from porphyrin precursor (BP) and SIMEF (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BP/BP:SIMEF/SIMEF). Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Bright field (BF), sulfur map (S), and carbon map (C) for a 1: 1 P3HT–PC61BM film annealed for 30 min. Films annealed at high temperatures, such as 190 °C, exhibit the presence of P3HT fibers in a PCBM-rich matrix. Scale bar: 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Bright field TEM image of PTB7:PC61BM/DCB + DIO thin film (black lines are added to represent the heterojunctions between PTB7-rich and PC61BM-rich domains). Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Dark-field TEM images of as-cast films of (1) DPPT-TT; (2) DPPT-2T; and (3) DPPT-T, and corresponding orientation maps of (4) DPPTTT and (5) DPPT-2T. The insets of the dark-field TEM images show the diffraction patterns acquired from the same areas and illustrate the beam-tilt configurations for image acquisition. Note that the objective aperture (dashed circle) is always centered in the TEM column. The color wheel between the orientation maps shows the correlation of the colors with π-π stacking directions. All scale bars denote 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Outcome of electron tomography applied to the PF10TBT–PC61BM films (with high molecular weight PF10TBT-polymer): (1) one slice taken out of the (x,y)-plane of the final 3D dataset with bright-looking polymer strands and darker PC61BM-rich regions; (2) a snapshot of the corresponding volume reconstruction showing the existence of a 3D nanoscale polymer network (volume dimensions are 1112 nm × 1090 nm × 75 nm, the polymer strands are made thinner here than they are in reality to facilitate visualisation); (3) zoom-in of the same volume (with volume dimensions of 227 nm × 227 nm × 75 nm and the thickness of the polymer strands to scale). Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
TEM is often used for the characterization of the phase composition of OPV materials with nanometer spatial resolution. The main modes of operation for TEM are imaging, diffraction, and spectroscopy. In imaging mode, the electron beam illuminates part of the sample and the intensity of the beam after it passes through the sample is recorded. The energy profile of the beam changes as it passes through the sample; when a microscope operates in spectroscopy mode, the energy-resolved profile of the beam is recorded at each point. This mode is typically called electron-energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). In diffraction mode, as the name suggests, the diffraction pattern from the area selected by the aperture located in the beam path is recorded. TEM requires preparation of samples transparent to a high-energy (∼30 to 300 keV) electron beam. Depending on the electron beam energy and sample average atomic number, sample thicknesses amenable for TEM measurements vary from a few nm to 100s of nanometers. This range is amenable to studies of OPV active layers, which are typically in the range of ∼100 nm thick. Specialized sample preparation procedures, such as microtoming, cryomicrotoming, focused ion beam (FIB) sample carving, etc., result in samples suitable for cross-sectional TEM investigations. In the case of OPV materials, which are largely semi-crystalline organic materials, beam damage (heating, charging, etc.) is often a concern. Special precautions, such as imaging at cryogenic temperatures or varying the incident beam energy, are often required to slow down sample structure change under the electron beam. TEM provides a breadth of material information ranging from chemical to phase composition to oxidation state with extremely high spatial resolution and rapid acquisition rate, which explains its wide use despite the experimental complexity of the imaging techniques and sample preparation.

Fig. 14b shows a bright field TEM image of a P3HT:PC61BM blend annealed at 190 °C.122 Phase attribution is nearly impossible based on a bright field image alone because variations in thickness and other local properties result in contrast changes that are often larger than the small inherent contrast between the polymer-rich and fullerene-rich phases, considering they are both comprised primarily of carbon. One of the most effective means of enhancing the contrast between the domains is to apply energy filtering rather than imaging the (primarily) elastically scattered electrons. For example, an energy-filtered image windowed around the sulfur absorption edge clearly shows sulfur enrichment of the fibril-like structures on the micrograph (Fig. 14b). This observation combined with knowledge that the PC61BM molecule does not contain sulfur allows for phase identification of the fibril-like structures as crystallized P3HT.122 While plan view TEM images can provide rich information regarding morphology, cross-sectional images can provide equally useful and complementary insights by sampling the orthogonal direction. Moon et al. have performed cross-sectional TEM imaging on the P3HT:PC61BM system by sectioning the blend with a focused ion beam.253 They report that these data reveal pathways for charge transport through the film thickness, though these studies face the typical challenges associated with bright-field imaging described above. Herzing et al. have combined EF-TEM and tomography to highlight the power of this approach for deciphering 3D morphology in OPVs, including explicit comparison with traditional bright field methods.254
Chen and co-workers have shown that energy-filtered TEM (EF-TEM) can also uncover details about the morphology at multiple length scales in high-performance OPV active layers (Fig. 14c),103 which do not exhibit fibrils frequently observed in P3HT systems. In this case, EF-TEM images from the low loss region exhibited the best contrast and revealed domains on the length scale of 100s of nm, in agreement with X-ray scattering measurements. Using a smaller energy window, one can select for a specific element's signature, as described above, or for other spectroscopic fingerprints such as plasmon resonances.
Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) also provides invaluable structural information about the material within the film. Based on dark-field TEM images alone (Fig. 14d), the domain structure of diketopyrrolopyrrole-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DPPT-TT) and DPPT-2T films is unclear.235 Yet the combination of SAED and dark-field imaging reveals structural arrangements within DPPT-TT and DPPT-2T films suggesting the formation of a percolation network of the domains with similar orientation.235 Dark-field microscopy is often used for probing domain structure in OPV materials with sub-100 nm resolution.255,256
STEM has been far less commonly applied to OPV and hybrid PV systems. Klein et al. recently examined the conjugated polymer poly(3-hexylselenophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HS) in BHJs with PC61BM using low-energy STEM and a high-angle annular dark-field detector.257 Following annealing, needle-like structures were observed that they identified as P3HS whiskers. This morphology was correlated with the macroscopic optoelectronic device properties.
Visualization of the 3D structure of a sample using TEM is also possible by collecting a series of images at different tilt angles. Variation in tilt angle results in the capture of different projections of the sample onto the imaging plane. When enough sample projections are captured, the original 3D structure of the sample can be solved. The end result is a treasure trove of information as it can reveal unprecedented details regarding the donor/acceptor interfacial morphology and charge transport pathways. The tomographic reconstruction presented in Fig. 14e is from a poly[9,9-didecanefluorene-alt-(bis-thienylene) benzothiadiazole] (PF10TBT):PC61BM sample, and it shows the interconnected polymer-rich strands forming a truly three-dimensional network within the film.236 While obtaining suitable contrast in this sort of system is often challenging, hybrid PVs provide far easier routes to image contrast due to the substantial difference in Z-number between the constituent materials. Oosterhout et al. have performed electron tomography on P3HT:ZnO hybrid solar cell active layers.258 They statistically analyzed morphology for spherical contact distance and percolation pathways. With these data and an analysis of the 3D exciton diffusion, they were able to correlate morphology with optoelectronic performance and to identify the limiting factors on that performance.

4. Additional techniques
A combination of the methods discussed in Sections 2 and 3 can provide powerful insight into the active layer morphology, but there are some additional complementary tools available to researchers for deciphering aspects of buried structures. This section will cover several of these techniques.
Whereas the vast majority of real-space techniques outlined in the previous section focus on lateral morphology, the vertical direction is at least as important in OPV active layers. Key aspects include the interfaces between the layers and the vertical composition gradient. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)—and low-impact energy SIMS specifically—is an effective technique for probing this dimension. SIMS involves sputtering the surface of a sample with a focused primary ion beam and collecting and analyzing ejected secondary ions. Ejected ions are monitored with a mass spectrometer to determine the composition of the film with parts per billion (ppb) sensitivity. For depth profiling, it is necessary to establish a depth scale following the SIMS measurement by using AFM or a profilometer to measure the crater dimensions coupled with assumptions regarding the erosion rate of the materials being studied. In addition to depth profiling, SIMS can also be used for lateral imaging (compositional mapping) by rastering the primary beam across a sample surface, typically with <100 nm resolution.
SIMS has been employed in a number of OPV259–265 and hybrid PV266 morphology experiments. Krebs et al. have reported extensively on the analysis of degradation mechanisms in OPVs, which were among the first studies to clearly demonstrate that oxygen and water enter devices via diffusion from the atmosphere through the top (aluminum) electrode.262–265 In this case, isotopic labelling of the oxygen enabled definitive identification of species originating from atmospheric exposure as opposed to those already present in the film.

Fig. 15 presents an example of the depth profile information one can extract from SIMS measurements of OPV active layers.267 In these data, 120Sn was used to track the ITO anode interface, and 32S, 16O, and 12C to track the distribution of polymer and fullerene. The SIMS profiles clearly show an enrichment of the sulphur signal relative to carbon, indicating that the cathode–active layer interface is P3HT rich. The cathode interface has also been investigated in a variety of alternative OPV systems by several other groups using SIMS-based analysis.268,269 Ellipsometry, a non-destructive and contactless optical technique based on the measurement of material dielectric properties, has also been applied in vertical morphology studies, where it contributed to some of the earliest reports that the cathode–active layer interface in P3HT–PC61BM solar cells is enriched in P3HT.270
 Fig. 15  SIMS depth profile of a P3HT:PCBM active layer before and after annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 
Perhaps the most significant concern with the use of SIMS for morphology characterization of soft matter systems such as OPVs is unpredictable sputter damage caused by the high-energy ion beam, which is most commonly comprised of Cs+ ions. Recently, these concerns have been largely alleviated by using larger probe species such as C60+, or even argon gas clusters,271 which spread out the impact energy over a larger area and therefore result in substantially less collateral damage.
In contrast to techniques that directly probe structures using either real- or reciprocal-space methods, there are also techniques available that can provide thermodynamic properties of the active layer materials that, in turn, reveal insights into morphological behavior. Initial morphologies of cast films are typically the result of some combination of kinetic and thermodynamic parameters, while either solvent or thermal annealing (or long-term operation of a device) can result in reorganization at various length scales, generally toward morphologies more dominated by thermodynamics. A prime example of a technique that can shed light on such structural evolution is differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC is a thermoanalytical method in which the difference in the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of a sample is measured as a function of temperature and compared to a reference. Therefore, it provides what is essentially bulk phase information about the material. One of the most common applications of DSC to OPV morphology studies is in the analysis of crystallization or liquid crystallization behavior (or lack thereof).272–276 In these experiments, melting temperature(s) can be identified both for small molecule semiconductors and polymeric materials, but the amount of crystallization can also be deduced from analysis of the thermochemical data. Also, phase diagrams for multi-component systems, such as P3HT:PC61BM (Fig. 11a), can be constructed based on DSC data.191 Coupled with techniques such as GIWAXS, DSC can help complete the picture for molecular ordering in active layer blends.
Beyond crystallization information, DSC is also useful for the analysis of glass transitions, order–order transitions, and order–disorder transitions. In studies of block copolymer PV systems, all of these can be of significant morphological importance.53–55,278 For example, observation of two glass transitions is a key indication of microphase separation in a block copolymer sample, whereas a single glass transition suggests the polymer blocks are thoroughly mixed. In general, though, DSC can be utilized to build up a phase diagram for a binary277,279,280—or even a ternary281,282—blend. By measuring various crystallization temperatures and glass transition temperatures as a function of blend ratio, one can establish a thermodynamic picture of the phase behavior of a mixture. Fig. 16 represents such a phase diagram for the common P3HT:PC61BM OPV blend.277 Analysis of these data revealed that the film morphology was a result of competition between crystallization of the two components, each hindering the other. As a single glass transition was observed, it was determined that the components are well mixed in the molten state, as can be expected given the substantial miscibility of P3HT and fullerenes.283 Moreover, knowing the temperature of this glass transition provides guidance for the minimum temperature required for thermal annealing treatment, which is often employed to improve device performance.
 Fig. 16  Phase diagram of P3HT:PCBM blends as determined using DSC: melt crystallization temperature (▲) and melting temperature (●) of P3HT; melt crystallization temperature (△), cold crystallization temperature (□), and melting temperature (○) of PCBM; and Tg (×) with its range (vertical bar) of the blends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
Understanding—and ultimately controlling—morphology in organic and hybrid solar cells is one of the keys to unlocking the vast potential of these exciting technologies. Morphology is intimately intertwined with essentially every step in the conversion of light to electricity, yet deciphering its details at multiple length scales has proven to be a tremendous challenge for the field. Not every system under study will require thorough knowledge of morphology at every length scale and with detailed composition information, but frequently research in OPVs and hybrid PVs can benefit from a combination of real- and reciprocal-space techniques. In this review, we have presented a high-level overview of the broad suite of techniques that have been applied to morphology studies, some for many years and some only very recently. Here we provide a table (Table 3) that can serve as a first reference point for researchers interested in probing morphology, directing them to the various techniques available and some of their strengths and limitations. Some details on each technique can be found in this review, and the references herein are an excellent resource for in-depth information.
The complexity of morphology in OPVs means that in most cases a single research group will not have all of the expertise and instruments at its disposal, not only to design and synthesize newer and better performing materials and processes, but also to execute complete morphological analysis and to correlate this analysis with photophysical and device properties. Progress in this field will surely require an ever increasing degree of collaboration. Indeed, one subject not covered in this review but of immense importance is guidance from multi-scale molecular simulation, which can aid in the fitting and interpretation of experimental data as well as in the design of new materials. Perhaps the most exciting and important direction for future research in morphology characterization of OPVs and hybrid PVs is in the area of high-throughput processed materials and devices. If these technologies are ever to contribute substantial energy to the global supply, high-throughput processing will be crucial, and morphologies of devices fabricated using these processes are inevitably different from those prepared with traditional techniques such as spin casting. As the power of morphology characterization and the resulting structure–property–function analyses is turned toward commercially relevant materials and devices, OPVs and hybrid PVs will be poised to achieve their potential as game-changing technologies.
Acknowledgements
W. Chen and M.P. Nikiforov gratefully acknowledge financial support from Argonne Director's Postdoctoral Fellowships. This work was performed at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, a U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences User Facility under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.
Notes and references
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J. L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1700–1708 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2700–2720 CAS .
T. Aiwei, Q. Shengchun, T. Feng, Y. B. Hou, Y. S. Wang and Z. G. Wang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 9384–9394 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Eck and M. Krueger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1851–1864 CAS .
S. B. Darling, F. You, T. D. Veselka and A. Velosa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3133–3139 Search PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sondergaard, M. Hosel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 565–572 Search PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293 CrossRef CAS .

          W. W. Kromhout, UCLA engineers create tandem polymer solar cells that set record for energy-conversion, http://newsroom.ucla.edu/portal/ucla/ucla-engineers-create-tandem-polymer-228468.aspx.
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, M. Choi, W. Luan, Y.-S. Kim and S.-T. Tu, Solid-State Electron., 2012, 69, 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H.-F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Kruger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thavasi, V. Renugopalakrishnan, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 63, 81–99 CrossRef .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Tseng, A. U. Mane, J. W. Elam and S. B. Darling, Sol.
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 99, 235–239 CrossRef .
I. Hancox, L. A. Rochford, D. Clare, P. Sullivan and T. S. Jones, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 013304 CrossRef .
L. Fengmin, S. Shuyan, G. Xiaoyang, Z. Yun and X. Zhiyuan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 842–845 CrossRef .
Y. M. Sun, C. J. Takacs, S. R. Cowan, J. H. Seo, X. Gong, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Brown, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, D. D. Wanger, L. Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Cowan, N. Banerji, W. L. Leong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1116–1128 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Servaites, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4410–4422 CAS .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185–1199 RSC .
M. Riede, T. Mueller, W. Tress, R. Schueppel and K. Leo, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424001 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Benanti and D. Venkataraman, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer and P. Muller-Buschbaum, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482–5493 RSC .
X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353–1362 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Nicholson and F. A. Castro, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 492001 CrossRef .
M. A. Brady, G. M. Su and M. L. Chabinyc, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11065–11077 RSC .
D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline and A. Herzing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5980–5993 CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653–5667 CAS .
G. Renaud, R. Lazzari and F. Leroy, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2009, 64, 255–380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .
B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3160–3166 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 3015–3041 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Roberson, M. A. Poggi, J. Kowalik, G. P. Smestad, L. A. Bottomley and L. M. Tolbert, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1491–1499 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Orilall and U. Wiesner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 520–535 RSC .
J. J. M. Halls, K. Pichler, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 3120–3122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1226–1237 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9205–9216 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1266–1273 CAS .
I. Botiz and S. B. Darling, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 42–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, S. Huettner and M. Thelakkat, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10788–10797 RSC .
W.-R. Wu, U. S. Jeng, C.-J. Su, K.-H. Wei, M.-S. Su, M.-Y. Chiu, C.-Y. Chen, W.-B. Su, C.-H. Su and A.-C. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6233–6243 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, Y. Qin, D. A. Stevens, O. Ugurlu, V. Kalihari, M. A. Hillmyer and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10790–10797 CAS .
N. C. Miller, S. Sweetnam, E. T. Hoke, R. Gysel, C. E. Miller, J. A. Bartelt, X. Xie, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1566–1570 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Wu, Y.-C. Huang, H.-L. Cheng, W.-Y. Chou and F.-C. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15057–15066 CAS .
J. Y. Kim, Y. Qin, D. M. Stevens, V. Kalihari, M. A. Hillmyer and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21928–21936 CAS .
N. C. Cates, R. Gysel, Z. Beiley, C. E. Miller, M. F. Toney, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4153–4157 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, M. F. Toney, G. C. Bazan and E. J. Kramer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2884–2887 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, C. Guo, K. Vakhshouri, E. D. Gomez and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4824–4831 CAS .
Y. Lin, J. A. Lim, Q. Wei, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. L. Briseno and J. J. Watkins, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 622–632 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ko, E. T. Hoke, L. Pandey, S. Hong, R. Mondal, C. Risko, Y. Yi, R. Noriega, M. D. McGehee, J.-L. Brédas, A. Salleo and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5222–5232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, S. Hong, J. H. Oh, R. Mondal, T. Okamoto, E. Verploegen, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and Z. Bao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4356–4363 RSC .
A. T. Yiu, P. M. Beaujuge, O. P. Lee, C. H. Woo, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 2180–2185 CrossRef .
H. Yan, B. A. Collins, E. Gann, C. Wang, H. Ade and C. R. McNeill, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 677–688 CrossRef .
G. C. Welch, L. A. Perez, C. V. Hoven, Y. Zhang, X.-D. Dang, A. Sharenko, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, N. Thuc-Quyen and G. C. Bazan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12700–12709 RSC .
N. D. Treat, C. G. Shuttle, M. F. Toney, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15224–15231 RSC .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, K. Xiao, J. K. Keum, X. Yu, K. Hong, J. Browning, I. N. Ivanov, J. Chen, J. Alonzo, D. Li, B. G. Sumpter, E. A. Payzant, C. M. Rouleau and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5529–5535 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2284–2288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mei, H. Kim do, A. L. Ayzner, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20130–20133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lilliu, T. Agostinelli, E. Pires, M. Hampton, J. Nelson and J. E. Macdonald, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2725–2734 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ko, E. Verploegen, S. Hong, R. Mondal, E. T. Hoke, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16722–16725 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Hopkinson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, A. D. F. Dunbar, T. Wang, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones, D. G. Lidzey and A. M. Donald, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2908–2917 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hlaing, X. Lu, T. Hofmann, K. G. Yager, C. T. Black and B. M. Ocko, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7532–7538 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, D. S. Germack, R. Joseph Kline, D. M. Delongchamp, D. A. Fischer, C. R. Snyder, M. F. Toney, J. G. Kushmerick and L. J. Richter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1375–1381 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hammond, R. J. Kline, A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter, D. S. Germack, H.-W. Ro, C. L. Soles, D. A. Fischer, T. Xu, L. Yu, M. F. Toney and D. M. DeLongchamp, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8248–8257 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Gomez, K. P. Barteau, H. Wang, M. F. Toney and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 436–438 RSC .
B. W. Boudouris, V. Ho, L. H. Jimison, M. F. Toney, A. Salleo and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6653–6658 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Bloking, X. Han, A. T. Higgs, J. P. Kastrop, L. Pandey, J. E. Norton, C. Risko, C. E. Chen, J.-L. Bredas, M. D. McGehee and A. Sellinger, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5484–5490 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Liang, J. Szarko, B. Lee, H. J. Son, B. S. Rolczynski, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 742–748 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach, M. F. Toney, L. J. Richter and D. M. DeLongchamp, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3828–3836 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mondal, S. Ko, J. E. Norton, N. Miyaki, H. A. Becerril, E. Verploegen, M. F. Toney, J.-L. Bredas, M. D. McGehee and Z. Bao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7195–7197 RSC .
A. C. Mayer, M. F. Toney, S. R. Scully, J. Rivnay, C. J. Brabec, M. Scharber, M. Koppe, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1173–1179 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, Y. Miyamoto, B. Ma and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2273–2281 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Chiu, U. S. Jeng, M.-S. Su and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2009, 43, 428–432 CrossRef .
C. H. Woo, B. C. Thompson, B. J. Kim, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16324–16329 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Liao, C.-S. Tsao, T.-H. Lin, M.-H. Jao, C.-M. Chuang, S.-Y. Chang, Y.-C. Huang, Y.-T. Shao, C.-Y. Chen, C.-J. Su, U.-S. Jeng, Y.-F. Chen and W. F. Su, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1657–1666 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Smilgies, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2009, 42, 1030–1034 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Chen, K. Hong, L. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS .
P. Juhas, D. M. Cherba, P. M. Duxbury, W. F. Punch and S. J. Billinge, Nature, 2006, 440, 655–658 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Baker, L. H. Jimison, S. Mannsfeld, S. Volkman, S. Yin, V. Subramanian, A. Salleo, A. P. Alivisatos and M. F. Toney, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9146–9151 CrossRef CAS .
A pole figure is a graphical representation of the orientation distribution of a particular set of crystallographic lattice planes.
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. Virkar, C. Reese, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Herman, J. E. Goldberger, S. Chao, D. T. Martin and S. I. Stupp, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 565–573 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Chen, K. Hong, L. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Jiang, Documentation for GIXSGUI v1.3,  2011 Search PubMed .

          R. J. Roe, Methods of X-ray and Neutron Scattering in Polymer Science, Oxford University Press, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
GIXSGUI (Grazing-incidence X-ray Scattering Graphical User Interface) is a Matlab package to visualize and perform preliminary processing on X-ray scattering data. While both transmission and reflection geometries are supported, the package is more focused on handling grazing-incidence data. This package is designed for sector 8-ID-E at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory. It should also be compatible with GIXS data taken at other places. Currently supported image formats include TIF, CBF (Crystallographic Binary File) and MAT (Matlab).
V. Petkov, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 28–38 CrossRef CAS .
J. Swenson, P. Carlsson, L. Börjesson, L. M. Torell, R. L. McGreevy and W. S. Howells, Comput. Theor. Polym. Sci., 2000, 10, 465–472 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petkov, V. Parvanov, D. Tomalia, D. Swanson, D. Bergstrom and T. Vogt, Solid State Commun., 2005, 134, 671–675 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Billinge and I. Levin, Science, 2007, 316, 561–565 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hargreaves, D. T. Bowron and K. Edler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16524–16536 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, R. Meier, L. Porcar, R. Cubitt and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 683–688 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin and M. Dadmun, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4756–4768 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verduzco, I. Botiz, D. L. Pickel, S. M. Kilbey, II, K. Hong, E. Dimasi and S. B. Darling, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, T. Salim, L. H. Wong, Y. L. Foo, F. Boey and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 377–386 RSC .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H.-Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parnell, A. J. Cadby, O. O. Mykhaylyk, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. E. Hopkinson, A. M. Donald and R. A. L. Jones, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6503–6508 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ortony, T. Chatterjee, L. E. Garner, A. Chworos, A. Mikhailovsky, E. J. Kramer and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8380–8387 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Newbloom, F. S. Kim, S. A. Jenekhe and D. C. Pozzo, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3801–3809 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, B. Akgun and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 870–878 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Liao, C.-S. Tsao, T.-H. Lin, C.-M. Chuang, C.-Y. Chen, U. S. Jeng, C.-H. Su, Y.-F. Chen and W.-F. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13064–13073 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kozub, K. Vakhshouri, L. M. Orme, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5722–5726 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kim, H. J. Kim, H. H. Lee, T. Kim and J.-J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2067–2071 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Liu, C. Wang, A. Nakahara and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2071–2078 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wiedemann, L. Sims, A. Abdellah, A. Exner, R. Meier, K. P. Musselman, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, P. Mueller-Buschbaum, G. Scarpa, P. Lugli and L. Schmidt-Mende, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 263109 CrossRef .
M. Tong, S. Cho, J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, B. B. Y. Hsu, D. Moses, R. C. Coffin, E. J. Kramer, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3959–3965 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Szarko, J. Guo, Y. Liang, B. Lee, B. S. Rolczynski, J. Strzalka, T. Xu, S. Loser, T. J. Marks, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5468–5472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Swaraj, C. Wang, H. Yan, B. Watts, L. Jan, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2863–2869 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 561–567 CrossRef .
M. A. Ruderer, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, G. Kaune, S. V. Roth and P. Mueller-Buschbaum, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 664–671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Liang, S. Xiao, J. M. Szarko, M. Sprung, M. K. Mukhopadhyay, J. Wang, L. Yu and L. X. Chen, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1497–1507 RSC .
R. Meier, M. A. Ruderer, A. Diethert, G. Kaune, V. Körstgens, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 2899–2909 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 561–567 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaune, E. Metwalli, R. Meier, V. Körstgens, K. Schlage, S. Couet, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1055–1062 CAS .
K. Sivanandan, T. Chatterjee, N. Treat, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 233–241 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gann, A. Young, B. A. Collins, H. Yan, J. Nasiatka, H. A. Padmore, H. Ade, A. Hexemer and C. Wang, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83, 045110 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, J. Cochran, H. Yan, E. Gann, C. Hub, R. Fink, C. Wang, T. Schuettfort, C. R. McNeill, M. L. Chabinyc and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 536–543 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, A. P. R. Eberle and M. E. Mackay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 168701 CrossRef .
M. A. Ruderer, R. Meier, L. Porcar, R. Cubitt and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 683–688 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Lin, T.-L. Lin, U. S. Jeng, Y.-J. Zhong, C.-T. Yeh and T.-Y. Chen, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2007, 40, s540–s543 CrossRef CAS .

          L. A. Feigin and D. I. Svergun, Structure Analysis by Small-Angle X-Ray and Neutron Scattering, Plenum Press, New York,  1987 Search PubMed .

          O. Glatter and O. Kratky, Small Angle X-Ray Scattering, Academic Press, London,  1982 Search PubMed .
M. Teubner and R. Strey, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 3195–3200 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Morkved, P. Stepanek, K. Krishnan, F. S. Bates and T. P. Lodge, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 7247–7259 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lazzari, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2002, 35, 406–421 CrossRef CAS .
D. Babonneau, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2010, 43, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Carsten and D. Vladimir, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .
C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. Nasiatka, E. R. Chan, A. T. Young, H. A. Padmore, W. F. Schlotter, J. Lüning, S. Swaraj, B. Watts, E. Gann, H. Yan and H. Ade, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2010, 14, 012016 CrossRef .
C. W. Rochester, S. A. Mauger and A. J. Moulé, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7287–7292 CAS .
H. Chen, R. Hegde, J. Browning and M. D. Dadmun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5635–5641 RSC .
P. A. Staniec, A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, H. Yi, A. J. Pearson, T. Wang, P. E. Hopkinson, C. Kinane, R. M. Dalgliesh, A. M. Donald, A. J. Ryan, A. Iraqi, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 499–504 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Liu, U. S. Jeng, N. L. Yamada, A.-C. Su, W.-R. Wu, C.-J. Su, S.-J. Lin, K.-H. Wei and M.-Y. Chiu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9276–9282 RSC .
K. H. Lee, P. E. Schwenn, A. R. G. Smith, H. Cavaye, P. E. Shaw, M. James, K. B. Krueger, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. L. Burn, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 766–770 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Mat., 2010, 22, 2444–2447 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mitchell, P. L. Burn, R. K. Thomas, G. Fragneto, J. P. J. Markham and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 2391–2396 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, M. E. Mackay, B. J. Kirby, B. B. Maranville and C. F. Majkrzak, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 074902–074907 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641 RSC .
J. W. Andreasen, S. A. Gevorgyan, C. M. Schlepütz and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, C. Wang, A. Garcia, S. Swaraj, Z. Gu, C. R. McNeill, T. Schuettfort, K. E. Sohn, E. J. Kramer, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 102220–102229 CrossRef .
H. Yan, S. Swaraj, C. Wang, I. Hwang, N. C. Greenham, C. Groves, H. Ade and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4329–4337 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, A. Garcia, H. Yan, K. E. Sohn, A. Hexemer, T.-Q. Nguyen, G. C. Bazan, E. J. Kramer and H. Ade, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12538–12539 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, D. Bailo, V. Rossi Albertini and R. de Bettignies, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 494, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, V. Rossi Albertini, P. Perfetti and R. de Bettignies, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19740–19747 CAS .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, V. R. Albertini, P. Perfetti, R. de Bettignies, J. Leroy, M. Firon and C. Sentein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 043507–043503 CrossRef .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, V. R. Albertini, P. Perfetti, R. de Bettignies, M. Firon, J. Leroy and C. Sentein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 194110–194113 CrossRef .
B. Paci, A. Generosi, V. R. Albertini, R. Generosi, P. Perfetti, R. D. Bettignies and C. Sentein, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9931–9936 CAS .
A. Salleo, R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3812–3838 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, L. J. Richter and M. F. Toney, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 319–337 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thibault, M. Dierolf, A. Menzel, O. Bunk, C. David and F. Pfeiffer, Science, 2008, 321, 379–382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Diaz, P. Trtik, M. Guizar-Sicairos, A. Menzel, P. Thibault and O. Bunk, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 020104 CrossRef .
J. Hilhorst, M. M. van Schooneveld, J. Wang, E. de Smit, T. Tyliszczak, J. Raabe, A. P. Hitchcock, M. Obst, F. M. F. de Groot and A. V. Petukhov, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3614–3620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miao, R. L. Sandberg and C. Song, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2012, 18, 399–410 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura and C. Chang, Ultramicroscopy, 2012, 113, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, Y. Liu, M. H. Rafailovich, J. Sokolov, D. Gersappe, D. A. Winesett and H. Ade, Nature, 1999, 400, 49–51 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schuettfort, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, M. Lee, H. Sirringhaus and C. R. McNeill, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1849–1864 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sciascia, N. Martino, T. Schuettfort, B. Watts, G. Grancini, M. R. Antognazza, M. Zavelani-Rossi, C. R. McNeill and M. Caironi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5086–5090 CrossRef CAS .
B. Watts, T. Schuettfort and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1122–1131 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Chua, M. Dipankar, S. Sivaramakrishnan, X. Gao, D. Qi, A. T. S. Wee and P. K. H. Ho, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 8587–8594 CrossRef CAS .
B. Watts, L. Thomsen and P. C. Dastoor, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2006, 151, 105–120 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Burke, A. J. Stapleton, B. Vaughan, X. Zhou, A. L. D. Kilcoyne, W. J. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265710 CrossRef .
K. B. Burke, W. J. Belcher, L. Thomsen, B. Watts, C. R. McNeill, H. Ade and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3098–3103 CrossRef CAS .
T. Salim, L. H. Wong, B. Braeuer, R. Kukreja, Y. L. Foo, Z. Bao and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 242–250 RSC .
B. Braeuer, A. Virkar, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, D. P. Bernstein, R. Kukreja, K. W. Chou, T. Tyliszczak, Z. Bao and Y. Acremann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3693–3697 CrossRef .
C. Hub, M. Burkhardt, M. Halik, G. Tzvetkov and R. Fink, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4884–4887 RSC .
S. Kowarik, K. Broch, A. Hinderhofer, A. Schwartzberg, J. Oriol Osso, D. Kilcoyne, F. Schreiber and S. R. Leone, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13061–13067 CAS .

          http://www.olympusmicro.com/primer/techniques/index.html, Access date: 03/16/2012.

          http://www.microscopyu.com/articles/formulas/index.html, Access date: 03/16/2012.
C. Nicolet, D. Deribew, C. Renaud, G. Fleury, C. Brochon, E. Cloutet, L. Vignau, G. Wantz, H. Cramail, M. Geoghegan and G. Hadziioannou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 12717–12727 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, R. Sondergaard and M. Jorgensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1348–1353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakatani, T. Hayashi and H. Itozaki, Phys. C, 2011, 471, 1249–1252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, T. P. Martin, A. K. Thomas and J. K. Grey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 178–182 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, D. Polli, D. Fazzi, J. Cabanilas-Gonzalez, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1099–1105 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cooling, K. B. Burke, X. Zhou, S. J. Lind, K. C. Gordon, T. W. Jones, P. C. Dastoor and W. J. Belcher, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .
C. Muller, J. Bergqvist, K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. S. Anselmo, R. Magnusson, M. I. Alonso, E. Moons, H. Arwin, M. Campoy-Quiles and O. Inganas, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10676–10684 RSC .
J. Rivnay, L. H. Jimison, J. E. Northrup, M. F. Toney, R. Noriega, S. Lu, T. J. Marks, A. Facchetti and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Huang, C. C. Lee, S. G. Wang, Y. K. Han and M. Y. Chang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1336–B1342 CrossRef CAS .
B. Park, Y. H. Huh and J. C. Shin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3543–3549 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bajaj, L. O. Bubulac, P. R. Newman, W. E. Tennant and P. M. Raccah, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1987, 5, 3186–3189 CAS .
G. A. Medvedkin and J. Wennerberg, Solid State Phenom., 1999, 67–68, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
S. Spadoni, M. Acciarri, D. Narducci and S. Pizzini, Philos. Mag. B, 2000, 80, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Bull, L. S. C. Pingree, S. A. Jenekhe, D. S. Ginger and C. K. Luscombe, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 627–636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, E. W. C. Coenen, M. Jorgensen, D. M. Tanenbaum, F. C. Krebs, H. Gorter, S. Sabik, L. H. Slooff, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon and R. Andriessen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stemmer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1993, 63, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakatani, T. Hayashi and H. Itozaki, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2011, 21, 416–419 CrossRef CAS .
E. Klimov, W. Li, X. Yang, G. G. Hoffmann and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4493–4496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao and J. K. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9654–9662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, T. P. Martin, E. T. Niles, A. J. Wise, A. K. Thomas and J. K. Grey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15121–15128 CAS .
T. J. K. Brenner and C. R. McNeill, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19364–19370 CAS .
M. Dante, J. Peet and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7241–7249 CAS .
M. P. Nikiforov and S. B. Darling, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012 DOI:10.1002/pip.2217  , in press.
C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sengupta, A. L. Domanski, S. A. L. Weber, M. B. Untch, H.-J. Butt, T. Sauermann, H. J. Egelhaaf and R. Berger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19994–20001 CAS .
D. C. Coffey and D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jesse, M. P. Nikiforov, L. T. Germinario and S. V. Kalinin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073104 CrossRef .
M. P. Nikiforov, S. Jesse, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, L. T. Germinario and S. V. Kalinin, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 395709 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hurley, M. Kopycinska-Muller, A. B. Kos and R. H. Geiss, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2005, 16, 2167–2172 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rabe, S. Amelio, M. Kopycinska, S. Hirsekorn, M. Kempf, M. Goken and W. Arnold, Surf. Interface Anal., 2002, 33, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Nikiforov, M. J. Brukman and D. A. Bonnell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 182101 CrossRef .
D. A. Kamkar, M. F. Wang, F. Wudl and T. Q. Nguyen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1149–1157 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shao, M. P. Nikiforov and D. A. Bonnell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 112904 CrossRef .
M. P. Nikiforov, S. Gam, S. Jesse, R. J. Composto and S. V. Kalinin, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6724–6730 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Nelson and W. P. King, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78, 023702 CrossRef CAS .
R. Garcia and R. Perez, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 47, 197–301 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alexeev, J. Loos and M. M. Koetse, Ultramicroscopy, 2006, 106, 191–199 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2946–2952 CrossRef CAS .
O. Douhéret, L. Lutsen, A. Swinnen, M. Breselge, K. Vandewal, L. Goris and J. Manca, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 032107 CrossRef .
D. C. Coffey, O. G. Reid, D. B. Rodovsky, G. P. Bartholomew and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 738–744 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Hamadani, S. Jung, P. M. Haney, L. J. Richter and N. B. Zhitenev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. R. Weaver and D. W. Abraham, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1991, 9, 1559–1561 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nonnenmacher, M. P. Oboyle and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 2921–2923 CrossRef .
Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, M. R. Hammond, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, R. S. Ashraf, J. N. Smith, T. D. Anthopoulos, B. Schroeder, Y. H. Geerts, D. A. Fischer and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15073–15084 CAS .
S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With, S. Veenstra and J. Loos, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5388–5393 RSC .
A. K. Henning and T. Hochwitz, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1996, 42, 88–98 CrossRef .
H. O. Jacobs, P. Leuchtmann, O. J. Homan and A. Stemmer, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 1168–1173 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kalinin and D. A. Bonnell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63 CrossRef CAS  , Art. No. 125411.
S. Cunningham, I. A. Larkin and J. H. Davis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 123–125 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kalinin, C. Y. Johnson and D. A. Bonnell, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 3816–3823 CrossRef CAS .
K. Franke, H. Huelz and M. Weihnacht, Surf. Sci., 1998, 415, 178–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Donolato, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 1478–1481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Leng, C. C. Williams, L. C. Su and G. B. Stringfellow, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1264–1266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Kong, H. Kim, S.-O. Kang and K. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 243301 CrossRef .
M. Chiesa, L. Burgi, J. S. Kim, R. Shikler, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 559–563 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuehn, P. Pingel, M. Breusing, T. Fischer, J. Stumpe, D. Neher and T. Elsaesser, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 860–868 CrossRef CAS .
FEI, http://www.fei.com/products/scanning-electron-microscopes/magellan.aspx, access date: 04/11/2012.
S. J. Pennycook and C. Colliex, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 13–18 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Reimer, Scanning Electron Microscopy: Physics of Image Formation and Microanalysis, Springer,  1998 Search PubMed .

          J. Goldstein, D. E. Newbury, D. C. Joy, C. E. Lyman, P. Echlin, E. Lifshin, L. Sawyer and J. R. Michael, Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis, Springer,  2003 Search PubMed .

          D. B. Willliams and C. B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy: a Textbook for Materials Science, Springer,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 230–234 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter and I. M. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17501–17508 CAS .
M. Brinkmann, C. Contal, N. Kayunkid, T. Djuric and R. Resel, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7604–7610 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. D. Hudson, D. M. DeLongchamp, D. J. Gundlach, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4098–4106 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. G. Klein, M. Pfaff, E. Müller, J. Czolk, M. Reinhard, S. Valouch, U. Lemmer, A. Colsmann and D. Gerthsen, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Welch, L. A. Perez, C. V. Hoven, Y. Zhang, X. D. Dang, A. Sharenko, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, T. Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12700–12709 RSC .
K. Q. Ngo, P. Philipp, Y. Jin, S. E. Morris, M. Shtein, J. Kieffer and T. Wirtz, Surf. Interface Anal., 2011, 43, 194–197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Oh, W. S. Jang, T. I. Lee, J. M. Myoung and H. K. Baik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 023303 CrossRef .
K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 213–227 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alstrup, K. Norrman, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2777–2792 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 697–712 CAS .
M. Hermenau, M. Riede, K. Leo, S. A. Gevorgyan, F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1268–1277 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Jakobsen, J. W. Andreasen, K. Nomnan and F. C. Krebs, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2203–2212 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Audinot, P. Leveque, R. Bechara, N. Leclerc, J. Guillot, H. N. Migeon, G. Hadziioannou and T. Heiser, Surf. Interface Anal., 2010, 42, 1010–1013 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jeon, H. K. Lee, D. H. Wang, S. M. Park, J. W. Kim, K. J. Kim, J. H. Park and O. O. Park, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2443–2447 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fostiropoulos and M. Rusu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1489–1494 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rabbani, A. M. Barber, J. S. Fletcher, N. P. Lockyer and J. C. Vickerman, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3793–3800 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424017 CrossRef .
S. W. Leng, B. Wex, L. H. Chan, M. J. Graham, S. Jin, A. J. Jing, K. U. Jeong, R. M. Van Horn, B. Sun, M. F. Zhu, B. R. Kaafarani and S. Z. D. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 5403–5411 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Struijk, A. B. Sieval, J. E. J. Dakhorst, M. van Dijk, P. Kimkes, R. B. M. Koehorst, H. Donker, T. J. Schaafsma, S. J. Picken, A. M. van de Craats, J. M. Warman, H. Zuilhof and E. J. R. Sudholter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 11057–11066 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Sun, R. Li, S. S. Sun, E. Lafalce and X. M. Jiang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6389–6396 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Li, Q. F. Dong, B. Xu, H. Li, S. P. Wen, J. N. Pei, S. Y. Yao, H. G. Lu, P. F. Li and W. J. Tian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2272–2280 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. Van Assche, J. Manca, D. Vanderzande and B. Van Mele, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verduzco, I. Botiz, D. L. Pickel, S. M. Kilbey II, K. Hong, E. Dimasi and S. B. Darling, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vandenbergh, B. Conings, S. Bertho, J. Kesters, D. Spoltore, S. Esiner, J. Zhao, G. Van Assche, M. M. Wienk, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, B. Van Mele, R. A. J. Janssen, J. Manca and D. J. M. Vanderzande, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 8470–8478 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Li, Q. F. Dong, Y. W. Li, B. Xu, M. Deng, J. N. Pei, J. B. Zhang, F. P. Chen, S. P. Wen, Y. J. Gao and W. J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2159–2168 RSC .
N. Li, F. Machui, D. Waller, M. Koppe and C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3465–3471 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Keivanidis, I. A. Howard and R. H. Friend, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3189–3202 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3160–3166 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Wei Chen	Wei Chen is a Director's postdoctoral fellow at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory. He received a PhD in polymer science and engineering at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Thomas P. Russell. His research interests include the development of high performance materials and processing technologies used in solar energy conversion and energy storage systems, as well as the application of neutron, X-ray, and electron scattering techniques for deciphering their complex structure–performance relationships.
Maxim P. Nikiforov	Dr Nikiforov is an Argonne Scholar at Argonne National Laboratory. His current research interests are improvements of power conversion efficiency of solar cells by understanding local electrical and optical properties of organic photovoltaic materials and devices. He received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 2008 from Prof. Dawn Bonnell's research group, where he studied electrical properties of interfaces using scanning probe microscopy. As a Postdoctoral Research Associate at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (2008–2011) he developed methods for localized measurements of phase transitions in polymers (the work received an R&D100 Award in 2010).
Seth B. Darling	Seth B. Darling is a Scientist at Argonne National Laboratory and a Joint Staff Appointee at the Institute for Molecular Engineering at the University of Chicago. After receiving his PhD in physical chemistry from the University of Chicago, he joined Argonne National Laboratory as the Glenn Seaborg Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellow in the Materials Science Division where he studied directed self-assembly of polymers and polymer–nanoparticle hybrid systems. Following his postdoc, Dr Darling joined the Center for Nanoscale Materials at Argonne as a staff scientist. His group's research centers around polymer molecular engineering with a particular emphasis on organic photovoltaics.

Broader context
Organic and hybrid solar cells have captured a great deal of attention in recent years both because of their tremendous potential as low-cost and highly scalable photovoltaic technologies and because of their impressive advances in performance. In order to push these technologies toward large-scale utilization, yet higher performance will be required, and for that we must expound a deeper understanding of their internal structure and properties. Deciphering the internal morphology of organic and hybrid photovoltaics has proven a daunting challenge for researchers in the field, but many techniques have been developed to tackle it. This review highlights the broad range of tools available to researchers who aim to probe the complex, multi-length-scale structures within the active layers of organic and hybrid solar cells. Beyond introducing the techniques and providing illustrative examples of their use, we discuss strengths, weaknesses, and complementarity of the myriad approaches.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a bulk heterojunction solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy diagram for the photovoltaic process assuming light absorption within the donor material. The electron excited into the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) transfers to the acceptor material, creating a charge transfer (CT) state. Possible outcomes then include recombination or a transition into a charge separated (CS) state.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Simplified equivalent circuit model for a solar cell. (b) Typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves for a solar cell in the dark and under illumination, showing key parameters.	 

η
	Power conversion efficiency
FF	Fill factor

J
sc
	Short circuit current density

V
oc
	Open circuit voltage

P
in
	Incident light intensity

P
m
	Maximum power point

λ
	Wavelength

k
i
	Incident wavevector

k
f
	Final wavevector

q
	Wavevector transfer

I(q)	Scattering intensity

α
	Incident out-of-plane scattering angle

β
	Final out-of-plane scattering angle

Φ
	In-plane scattering angle

K
	Scherrer constant

C
S
	Solid angle correction

C
eff
	Efficiency correction

P
	Polarization correction

C
FF
	Flat field correction

C

α

	X-ray absorption correction

X
	Polar angle
rDoC	Relative degree of crystallinity

S
	Orientational order parameter

f
⊥,f‖	Molecular order parameters

n
p
	Particle number density

P(q)	Form factor

S(q)	Structure factor

f(r)	Schultz size distribution

r
eff
	Effective diameter

φ
	Effective volume fraction

α(t)	Extent of phase volume development

n
	Avrami exponent

k
	Rate constant

Q
inv
	Scattering invariant
〈2〉	Electron density variance

ρ
	Electron density

g(r)	Correlation function

d
	Domain periodicity

ξ
TS
	Teubner–Strey correlation length

ξ
	Correlation length

V
	Cluster volume

R
	Mean cluster radius

P(r)	Pair distance distribution function

σ
	Film roughness
WAS	Wide angle scattering
SAS	Small angle scattering
ND	Neutron diffraction
XRD	X-ray diffraction
WAXS	Wide angle X-ray scattering
GIWAXS	Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering
GID	Grazing incidence diffraction
SANS	Small angle neutron scattering
SAXS	Small angle X-ray scattering
GISANS	Grazing incidence small angle neutron scattering
GISAXS	Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GIUSAXS	Grazing incidence ultrasmall angle X-ray scattering
GIUSANS	Grazing incidence ultrasmall angle neutron scattering
USAXS	Ultrasmall angle X-ray scattering
USANS	Ultrasmall angle neutron scattering
NR	Neutron reflectivity
PSNR	Phase sensitive neutron reflectivity
XRR	X-ray reflectivity
RSoXR	Resonant soft X-ray reflectivity
EDXR	Energy dispersive X-ray reflectivity
RSoXS	Resonant soft X-ray scattering
NEXAFS	Near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure
STXM	Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy
LBIC	Light-beam induced current
SPM	Scanning probe microscopy
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
C-AFM	Conductive atomic force microscopy
SSPM	Scanning surface potential microscopy
tr-EFM	Time-resolved electrical force microscopy
KFM/KPFM	Kelvin probe force microscopy
SNOM	Scanning near-field optical microscopy
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
EELS	Electron-energy loss spectroscopy
EF-TEM	Energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy
SAED	Selected area electron diffraction
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
DSC	Differential scanning calorimetry
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Common geometries for neutron and X-ray scattering measurements: (a) transmission; (b) grazing incidence; and (c) reflection. Partially reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Examples of extracting information about the molecular organization of semiconducting polymers from GIWAXS. (a) Schematic diagram showing the relationship between lamellar orientation and the resulting 2D GIWAXS pattern and two different orientations of ordered P3HT domains with respect to SiO2/Si substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society and from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature94 copyright 1999. (b) 2D GIWAXS patterns of thin films of PTB7:PC61BM blends prepared using four different solvents—pure CB, mixtures of CB and DIO (98:2 v/v%) (CB + DIO), pure DCB, and mixtures of DCB and DIO (98:2 v/v%) (DCB + DIO), as well as their corresponding qy and qz scans with Gaussian fits determining the peak positions and FWHMs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) GIWAXS pattern (overlay demonstrates geometry of radial and azimuthal binning) and the corresponding sector plot of neat PCPDTBT films cast from CB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright John Wiley and Sons 2011. (d) Top: 3D sector plots of PCPDTBT:PC71BM blends cast from CB containing 3% (the first three plots) or 0% (the fourth plot) ODT, showing the scattered intensity (linear colour scale) vs. polar angle χ and wavevector q at times of 2, 26 and 78 min after spin-coating; bottom: time evolution of the orientational order parameters S calculated for the (100) and (100)′ crystallographic planes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 
	(3)
Δqhkl = [(Δqexp)2 − (Δqres)2]1/2	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
I(q) = 〈np〉〈P(q)〉S(q)	(10)
S(q) = [1 − npC(q)]−1	(11)

 	Fig. 6  Examples of extracting structural/morphology parameters from SAS techniques. (a) Approximately overlapped GISAXS data collected after 60, 600, and 1800 s of thermal annealing of P3HT films. For comparison, the GISAXS data for a pristine P3HT film annealed at 150 °C for 1800 s are also shown; the data are fitted (dashed curve) with polydisperse (in rod length) rods. Inset: corresponding mean size (D) evolution of PC61BM aggregates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Selected GISAXS profiles measured for a P3HT:PC61BM film during the heating process to 150 °C and the subsequent isothermal annealing within 60 s. The data are fitted (solid curves) using polydisperse spheres with Schultz size distributions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) GISAXS intensity vs. in-plane wavevector, qx,y, for 1:1 P3HT:PC61BM mixtures annealed at various temperatures for 30 min. The solid lines are Teubner–Strey fits to the data. Inset: domain spacings from GISAXS data of 1:1 P3HT:PC61BM mixtures at various annealing conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Top: 2D GISANS data (left column) and corresponding 2D IsGISAXS simulations (right column) of P3HT:PC61BM BHJ films with different PC61BM content. Inset: schematic presentation of the model used for the GISANS simulations. Bottom: horizontal (left column) and vertical (right column) line cuts of the GISANS data (symbols) and corresponding fits (solid lines) of P3HT:PC61BM films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) Left: plot of SANS intensity (I(q)) vs. wavevector (q) for both annealed and unannealed samples of 1:1 by weight ratio of PC61BM and P3HT as well as annealed and unannealed samples of pure P3HT. The solid lines labeled “Best Fits” are from a polydisperse Schulz model having hard sphere interactions. Right: cartoon of morphology change after thermal annealing showing the coarsening of the PC61BM phase separated structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2010 American Physical Society. (f) GISAXS profiles of P3HT:PC61BM thin films without annealing and with one-step annealing treatments at 90 °C, 110 °C, and 150 °C (i.e., the CAST, PR_90, PR_110, and PR_150 films, respectively). The solid lines are calculated by model fitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (g) SANS profiles of P3HT:PC61BM blend films. As spun (black triangle); preannealed 30 min (blue triangle); postannealed 5 s (red triangle); postannealed 30 s (green triangle); postannealed 1 min (brown triangle); postannealed 5 min (aqua triangle); postannealed 30 min (purple triangle); and postannealed 1 h (orange triangle). The inset represents the correlation length (ξ) and the scattering invariant (Qinv) vs. the postannealing time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (h) Structure factor in absolute intensity and (i) Debye–Bueche fits of 50 vol% PC61BM blends after annealing for 0, 20, and 60 min and 6 h at 150 °C. The exponents of Porod analysis at high q are also listed. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (j) RSoXS intensity vs. wavevector (q) for transmission X-rays at resonant (284.3 eV) and nonresonant (270 eV) X-ray energies for an annealed (30 min, 150 °C) P3HT:PC61BM BHJ film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. (k) RSoXS profiles (open symbols), the calculated scattering intensities I(q) (solid lines), and (l) the P(r) functions of thin films of PTB7:PC61BM/DCB + DIO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
α(t) = 1 − exp[−(kt)n]	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)

 	Fig. 7  Examples of extracting morphological parameters (thickness and roughness) from reflectivity techniques. (a) Left: neutron reflectivity data and corresponding fits for three P3HT:PC61BM blend samples (the data are offset for clarity). Middle: reflectivity data for the sample both solvent annealed and 60 min thermally annealed plotted as RQ4vs. Q to highlight the quality of the fit. Right: the PC61BM concentration profiles for P3HT:PC61BM blend films including a pristine blend film, a solvent annealed film as well as a sample both solvent annealed and thermally annealed for 60 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (b) RQ4vs. Q for pure films of P3HT (△) and PC61BM (○) (top) and the fast grown film spin coated from a 1:1 mixture by weight of P3HT and PC61BM in chlorobenzene spin coated at 2500 rpm (middle), as well as the corresponding SLD profiles from the best fit lines of the data (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. (c) Representative RSoXR data at 282.4 eV (open circle) and numerical fits (solid line) of Si/PFB/F8BT samples as a function of annealing. (1) As-prepared, (2) 100 °C, (3) 120 °C, (4) 140 °C, (5) 160 °C, and (6) 200 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. (d) EDXR profiles (shifted in height for clarity) collected on P3HT:PC61BM as deposited sample, during illumination for about 70 h. The inset reports the morphological data point evolution (film roughness σ vs. time, film thickness d vs. time) obtained by the analysis of the EDXR patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  NEXAFS process schematic.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) 5 × 5 μm compositional maps of P3HT, PCBM, and porphyrin concentrations for blend ratios 5:5:3 together with the corresponding thickness map. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematics of molecular arrangements of PBTTT molecules on the surface. AFM image of terraced PBTTT on mica substrate before floating off for X-ray transmission measurements. Backbone orientation and the local tilt angle maps calculated from multiple NEXAFS microscopy images taken of the same spot of the film but with different incident linear polarization of the X-ray beam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) 2 μm × 2 μm NEXAFS PFB and F8BT composition maps of PFB:F8BT 1:1 blend nanoparticles. Arcs show where rotational averages have been taken to obtain radial composition profiles. The three nanoparticles used in the subsequent analyses are marked in the two figures. The very thin background regions between the particles contain insufficient material to allow an accurate NEXAFS measurement of the composition in these areas. In order to highlight the meaningful regions of data, areas of the sample thinner than a 15 nm threshold were greyed out in a linear fashion such that a 0 nm thick region would be completely grey and a 15 nm section would have full color. Near-edge Xx-ray absorption spectra for PFB and F8BT. Schematic representations of the three structural models used to fit the radial compositional profiles. Three possible models were investigated to determine radial composition profiles. In the model the mass profiles were convoluted with a 31 nm FWHM Gaussian peak and then vertically averaged compositions were determined. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics.	 


GIWAXS	Smooth films optimum	N/A	N/A	Planar samples preferred	Devices accessible	Able to run under vacuum or inert gas environment (N2 or He)	
q resolution variable with slits or collimator	Geometric smearing	Crystalline structures on the atomic length scale, i.e. the orientation of crystallites, an estimation of crystallite sizes, and the degree of crystallinity
SAS	N/A	N/A	N/A	Planar samples preferred	Devices accessible	Able to run under vacuum or inert gas environment (N2 or He)	
q resolution variable with slits or collimator	Beam divergence and size & wavelength distribution	Domain shapes and sizes, size distributions, spatial correlations, and degree of mixing
NR and XRR	Smooth films optimum	N/A	N/A	Planar samples preferred	Devices accessible	Able to run under vacuum or inert gas environment (N2 or He)	
q resolution variable with slits or collimator	Beam divergence	Thickness, interfacial roughness, and vertical composition in the active layer
STXM	N/A	Required for high-resolution imaging	N/A	Special sample preparation for TEM imaging (microtome, FIB, etc.)	No encapsulation	No glove box operation	10s to 100s nm	Incoming beam zone plate resolution; imaging CCD signal-to-noise; model used for data fitting	Chemical composition;molecular orientation, etc.
Optical microscopy	Ideal surface roughness smaller than light wavelength (100s of nm)	N/A	Important only for transmission modes	Planar samples preferred	Complete devices accessible	Glove box operation is feasible	100s nm	Light diffraction limit	Morphology on micrometer scale, i.e. material phase contrast, thickness variation, optical properties variation
Raman microscopy	Ideal surface roughness smaller than light wavelength (1000s of nm)	N/A	Not important	Planar samples preferred	Complete devices accessible	Glove box operation is cumbersome	100s nm	Light diffraction limit	Chemical information on micrometer scale, i.e. phase attribution within film; spatially resolved fluorescence
LBIC	1000s of nm	Complete device required	Complete device required	Complete device required	Encapsulated devices can be studied	Glove box operation is difficult	100s nm	Light diffraction limit	Spatially resolved photocurrent generation
SPM	100s of nm	N/A	N/A	Planar samples required	No encapsulation	Glove box operation is feasible	10s of nm	Probe sharpness	Sample topography, mechanical/electrical properties, surface potential, charging kinetics, etc.
C-AFM	100s of nm	Proper sample grounding required	N/A	Planar samples required	No encapsulation	Glove box operation is feasible	10s of nm	Probe sharpness	Sample conductivity
Photoconductive AFM	100s of nm	Proper sample grounding required	Sample transparency required	Planar samples required	No encapsulation	Glove box operation is feasible	10s of nm	Probe sharpness	Sample photoconductivity
Aperture-SNOM	About 100 nm	N/A	Sample transparency required	Planar samples required	No encapsulation	Glove box operation is difficult	10s of nm	Aperture size	Optical properties, etc.
SEM	Image contrast easier to interpret on smooth samples	Required for high-resolution imaging	N/A	Virtually no constraints	Imaging of cross section of encapsulated device is possible	No glove box operation	Few nm	Diffraction limit of electron beam; sample electrical properties	Sample topography, chemical composition, crystal structure, etc.
TEM	N/A	Required for high-resolution imaging	N/A	Sample preparation for cross-sections (microtome, FIB, etc.)	No encapsulation	No glove box operation; TEM holders available to maintain inert atmosphere during sample transfer	∼1 nm	Diffraction limit of electron beam; sample electrical properties; sample holder stability	Morphology ranging from molecular ordering to domain structures; crystallinity, etc.
Laser-SQUID microscope	1000s of nm	Complete device required	Complete device required	Complete device required	Encapsulated devices can be studied	No glove box operation	1000s nm	Light diffraction limit	Spatially resolved photocurrent generation; no physical contact to the sample is required
Transient absorption imaging	100s of nm	N/A	N/A	Planar samples beneficial	Encapsulated devices can be studied	Glove box operation is difficult	100s nm	Light diffraction limit	Spatially and time-resolved light absorption (linear, differential) of the sample; kinetics of charge build-up and dissipation on illumination
SIMS	N/A	N/A	N/A	Planar samples preferred	No encapsulation	SIMS instrument can be connected to glove box	50 nm (lateral); ∼1 nm (vertical)	Beam diameter (lateral); surface roughness (vertical)	Chemical composition

 	Fig. 10  Schematic for optical-based techniques (optical microscopy, Raman microscopy, light-beam-induced current (LBIC)). Beam from the light source travels towards the sample. Depending on the geometry of the sample, either a reflected and/or a transmitted beam is analyzed using various detectors (CCD camera (optical microscopy), Raman spectrometer (Raman microscopy)).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Left: optical microscopy images (40×) of P3HT:PC61BM thin films while heating with different amounts of P3HT (mol. weight 60 kg mol−1). The scale bar represents 50 μm. Right: overlay of phase diagrams between different molecular weights of P3HTs and PC61BM obtained on the basis of the DSC thermograms. Solid lines: solidus lines; dashed lines: liquidus lines. P3HT mol. w. 9.6 kg mol−1 (blue diamonds), 25 kg mol−1 (red squares), and 60 kg mol−1 (black triangles). Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Top: LBIC experiments with different striped silver electrodes; PV410 silver. Bottom: outline of the cell with the rectangular ITO area shaded gray overlaid with the striped silver electrode pattern and a rectangular silver bus shaded black (left) and an image of one of the devices seen from the silver electrode side (middle). Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (c) Top: laser-SQUID microscope image of the solar cell. Bottom: LBIC image of the solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (d) Voltage dependent photocurrent images of an ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PC61BM/Al annealed device. Top: normalized Raman image showing ratio of aggregated to unaggregated P3HT measured at 0 V (scale bar size = 3 μm). Bottom: photocurrent images under −0.5 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e) Top: ΔT/T(x,y) image at λ = 640 nm and τ = 200 fs pump probe delay of a 5 × 5 μm2 region. Scale bar: 1 μm. Excitation intensity ∼300 nJ cm−2. Bottom: intensity trace profile of ΔT/T(x,y) signal across the interfacial region (named “B”) between a crystalline P3HT-rich phase (“A”) and a PC61BM-rich cluster. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Generalized schematic of an AFM.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Tapping mode AFM topographic and phase images (1 μm × 1 μm) of annealed films of pure P3HT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Topography, Young's modulus, and resistance of an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM sample. Image size 2 μm × 2 μm. Adapted from ref. 213. (c) Images taken on a P3HT/PC61BM solar cell after 2 min of annealing: electron-dominated dark current (collected at −5 V tip bias), hole-dominated dark current (collected at +5 V tip bias), and short-circuit photocurrent when excited with 532 nm laser light. Inset to right panel shows the photocurrent histogram. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (d) KPFM image under dark conditions and under illumination with a 488 nm laser of a locally degraded sample (18 h, 2 Sun, synthetic air, 20% H2O). Conductive AFM image with a bias voltage of 3 V under dark conditions and under illumination with a 488 nm laser of a locally degraded sample (18 h, 2 Sun, synthetic air, 20% H2O). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Charging rate image of a polymer blend film. AFM height image of a 50:50 film of F8BT/PFB spin coated from xylenes. The recessed domains are enriched in PFB (film thickness: 90 nm). EFM photoinduced charging rate map generated by plotting the inverse exponential time constant for photoinduced charging at each point in (1). The dark rings indicate regions of slower charging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of the p-i-n structure made from porphyrin precursor (BP) and SIMEF (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/BP/BP:SIMEF/SIMEF). Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Bright field (BF), sulfur map (S), and carbon map (C) for a 1: 1 P3HT–PC61BM film annealed for 30 min. Films annealed at high temperatures, such as 190 °C, exhibit the presence of P3HT fibers in a PCBM-rich matrix. Scale bar: 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Bright field TEM image of PTB7:PC61BM/DCB + DIO thin film (black lines are added to represent the heterojunctions between PTB7-rich and PC61BM-rich domains). Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Dark-field TEM images of as-cast films of (1) DPPT-TT; (2) DPPT-2T; and (3) DPPT-T, and corresponding orientation maps of (4) DPPTTT and (5) DPPT-2T. The insets of the dark-field TEM images show the diffraction patterns acquired from the same areas and illustrate the beam-tilt configurations for image acquisition. Note that the objective aperture (dashed circle) is always centered in the TEM column. The color wheel between the orientation maps shows the correlation of the colors with π-π stacking directions. All scale bars denote 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Outcome of electron tomography applied to the PF10TBT–PC61BM films (with high molecular weight PF10TBT-polymer): (1) one slice taken out of the (x,y)-plane of the final 3D dataset with bright-looking polymer strands and darker PC61BM-rich regions; (2) a snapshot of the corresponding volume reconstruction showing the existence of a 3D nanoscale polymer network (volume dimensions are 1112 nm × 1090 nm × 75 nm, the polymer strands are made thinner here than they are in reality to facilitate visualisation); (3) zoom-in of the same volume (with volume dimensions of 227 nm × 227 nm × 75 nm and the thickness of the polymer strands to scale). Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  SIMS depth profile of a P3HT:PCBM active layer before and after annealing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  Phase diagram of P3HT:PCBM blends as determined using DSC: melt crystallization temperature (▲) and melting temperature (●) of P3HT; melt crystallization temperature (△), cold crystallization temperature (□), and melting temperature (○) of PCBM; and Tg (×) with its range (vertical bar) of the blends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
