Low-power photon upconversion through triplet–triplet annihilation in polymers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33654E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33654E
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20817-20830Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLow-power photon upconversion through triplet–triplet annihilation in polymers

        
          
            Yoan C. 
            Simon
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Christoph 
            Weder
          
          
        
      *
      Adolphe Merkle Institute and Fribourg Center for NanomaterialsUniversity of Fribourg, Rte de l'Ancienne Papeterie, P.O. Box 209, 1723 Marly, Switzerland. E-mail: yoan.simon@unifr.ch; christoph.weder@unifr.ch
Received 
      6th June 2012
    , Accepted 17th July 2012First published on 7th August 2012AbstractLow-power upconversion via sensitized triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA-UC) is a useful and versatile process that allows for the conversion of optical radiation into photons of higher energy. While this effect had been known to occur in solution for some 50 years, it was only very recently realized for the first time in polymers. The possibility to realize the TTA-UC process in solid materials is important for a variety of applications that range from the optimization of photovoltaic devices to bioimaging. This article provides a brief introduction to the field, summarizes the underlying photophysical aspects, reviews the design concepts for TTA-UC in polymers, and summarizes the recent advances in the development of such materials.Yoan C. SimonYoan C. Simon was born in Montpellier (France) in 1981. He obtained his Master's degree in Materials Chemistry from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Montpellier (2004). He then worked for his PhD at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst (USA) with E. Bryan Coughlin on carborane-containing polymeric architectures. In 2008, he was awarded an ETH Fellowship to develop photocross-linkable monomers towards 2D polymers with A. Dieter Schlüter in Zürich (Switzerland). Since 2009, he has been leading a research group focusing on light- and mechanically responsive materials at the Adolphe Merkle Institute, University of Fribourg, in the Polymer Chemistry and Materials group.Christoph WederChristoph Weder is Professor of Polymer Chemistry and Materials at the Adolphe Merkle Institute of the University of Fribourg, Switzerland. He also serves as director of this recently established center for fundamental and applied research on soft nanomaterials. His main research interests are the design, synthesis, investigation of structure–property relationship, and exploitation of novel functional polymer systems, in particular advanced materials with unusual optic or mechanical properties, stimuli-responsive polymers, biomimetic materials, and polymer nanocomposites.
1 Introduction
Optical upconversion (UC) refers to a collection of processes that permit the conversion of optical radiation into light of a shorter wavelength. These effects are potentially useful for a plethora of applications, including the conversion of laser light, high-resolution optical microscopy, solar harvesting, bioimaging, drug delivery, optical data storage, oxygen sensing and many others.2–4 Anti-Stokes emission (Fig. 1) was observed long ago for processes that involved thermal excitation, but the shifts attainable through thermal excitation are very small, generally of the order of a few kT.5 Thus, optical upconversion remained a curiosity until the advent of lasers, which promoted the discovery of a diverse range of UC processes in which the emission and excitation energies are different by many multiples of kT, i.e., clearly in violation of Stokes' law. Evidently, no energy is created in such UC processes; rather, the various UC schemes rely on different approaches to harness and combine the energy of multiple photons. Examples include nonlinear-optical processes such as second and third harmonic generation,6 and simultaneous absorption of multiple photons.5,7 Nonlinear-optical materials have come to play an important role in a variety of technological applications, but since they require coherent, high-intensity excitation by (pulsed) high-power lasers, they cannot be exploited in applications where the upconversion of low-power, non-coherent, continuous-wave excitation is either desirable or a must. Several alternative processes that allow for low-power upconversion have been known since the 1960s. Upconversion based on energy-transfer processes, excited-state absorption, cooperative upconversion involving multiple ions, or photon avalanches can be observed in certain materials doped with transition-metal (d) or rare-earth (f) ions, which exhibit long excited-state lifetimes and offer accessibility of multiple energy levels with similar spacings. The related materials, processes, and applications have been comprehensively reviewed in several recent articles.5,8,9
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the Stokes (downconversion) and anti-Stokes (upconversion) shifts. Solid and dotted lines represent absorption and emission spectra, respectively. 
UC at low power densities (<100 mW cm−2) and of non-coherent light can also be achieved by way of triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA-UC) in multi-chromophore systems that comprise a triplet sensitizer and an emitter.10 The effect was first demonstrated fifty years ago by Parker and Hatchard,11−13 who employed solutions of anthracene and phenanthrene to upconvert ultraviolet (UV) light. The generally accepted mechanism for this process is that light is absorbed by the sensitizer, whose first singlet excited state (1S*) is converted into a triplet (3S*) upon intersystem crossing (ISC). Triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) to an emitter (3E*) and triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) of two emitter triplets eventually populate an emitter first singlet excited state (1E*), which decays radiatively and leads to delayed fluorescence by the emitter (Fig. 2). Interestingly, for almost half a century, TTA-UC, also referred to as sensitized photon upconversion, had been limited to liquid solutions of sensitizer–emitter pairs. The recent discovery that TTA-UC can also be realized in solid polymer matrices,14,15 which on account of their processability and mechanical characteristics are more suitable for many potential applications than liquid solutions, has further fueled the interest in this process. Several recent reviews provide excellent accounts of the photophysical aspects of TTA-UC, known chromophore systems and principles for their design and selection, as well as general strategies to develop solid-state TTA-UC materials.9,10 This perspective article summarizes the state of the field from a materials science perspective, and details in particular several, recently developed approaches to achieve TTA-UC in polymeric materials. It also identifies general strategies and perspectives that appear to be relevant for the further development of polymer-based upconverting materials.
 Fig. 2  Schematic energy-level diagram of TTA upconversion. The process involves population of the first singlet excited state of a sensitizer (1S*) upon absorption of incident light, intersystem crossing (ISC) to the triplet excited state (3S*), triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) from the sensitizer to an emitter (3E*), and triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) of two emitter triplets to populate the emitter singlet excited state (1E*), which decays radiatively (fluorescence). Colored solid lines represent the intended radiative processes (absorption and emission). Vertical dashed lines represent undesired nonradiative and radiative decay pathways. Slanted dotted arrows represent cascading energy transfer processes. GS denotes the ground states (for simplicity drawn at the same energy level) and ΔE is the energy difference between incident and emitted light. 
2 Background
General mechanistic considerations
As illustrated in Fig. 2, TTA-UC relies on a pair of chromophores that involves a sensitizer (also referred to as donor or host) and an emitter (also referred to as acceptor or guest), which interact in an intricate series of events. Several well-established sensitizer–emitter pairs are shown in Fig. 3, together with their optical absorption (sensitizer) and emission (emitter) maxima. The current literature still presents discussions about the mechanistic aspects of TTA-UC,16–18 but the generally accepted view is that it involves a cascade of absorption by the sensitizer and population of its first singlet excited state, intersystem crossing, triplet–triplet energy transfer between the sensitizer and the emitter, triplet–triplet annihilation that involves two emitter molecules and populates the first singlet excited state of one of them, and finally radiative relaxation of the emitter singlet excited state in the form of anti-Stokes delayed fluorescence.10 The overall quantum yield of this process, ΦUC, can in its most basic form be expressed by:19 ΦUC = ½fΦISCΦETΦTTAΦE(1)where ΦISC, ΦET, ΦTTA, and ΦE are the quantum efficiencies for intersystem crossing, energy transfer, triplet–triplet annihilation, and emitter photoluminescence, respectively. The factor ½ expresses that two incident photons are combined into one and f is a factor that expresses the probability that the triplet–triplet annihilation results in a singlet (which can decay radiatively as desired) as opposed to a triplet or quintet excited state. As will become apparent from the discussion below, some of these quantities are, at least in solution, largely dependent on the chromophores (i.e. f, ΦISC, and ΦE), whereas others (ΦET, ΦTTA) depend on external factors such as molecular mobility, the distance between chromophores, which in statistically mixed systems is a function of concentration, and also the concentration of triplet excited states, which amongst other factors also depends on the incident power density. Eqn (1) does not explicitly account for back-transfer (i.e., energy transfer from the emitter to the sensitizer) and internal re-absorption, nor effects that are brought about by auxiliary species, such as quenching of the sensitizer or emitter triplet excited states by oxygen, which in fact represent a significant obstacle for efficient TTA-UC under ambient conditions.20
 Fig. 3  Examples of combinations of sensitizers (right) and emitters (left) together with their respective absorption and emission maxima. Dashed arrows are drawn between pairs that have successfully been used for TTA-UC. 
Selection of chromophores
The emitter must primarily offer a high fluorescence quantum yield, and the energy level of its first triplet excited state (3E*) should closely match that of (3S*) in order to maximize the anti-Stokes shift. The splitting of the energy levels of the first excited singlet and triplet states should be large, and the regular Stokes shift should be small, to maximize the anti-Stokes shift of the TTA-UC process. Polycyclic aromatic compounds such as polyacenes (Fig. 3) are particularly attractive emitters because of the wide gap between their low lying first triplet excited states with respect to their singlet excited states.21 An interesting alternative to polyaromatic carbon compounds for emission are boron-containing chromophores such as boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) derivatives.22
To serve as an effective sensitizer in the TTA-UC scheme, chromophores should offer a high extinction coefficient, a high rate for intersystem crossing, and a low internal conversion rate, i.e., a long lifetime of the triplet excited state (3S*). It is usually desirable that the splitting of the energy levels of the first singlet and triplet excited states is small, so that a large anti-Stokes shift can be achieved upon TTA-UC. Additionally, the energy of the singlet state from which radiative relaxation will occur cannot be higher than twice that of the excitation wavelength. Similarly, the singlet and triplet levels of the sensitizer must normally be positioned between the triplet and singlet of the emitter. For certain applications, such as solar harvesting, it is essential that the absorption spectrum of the sensitizer is broad, so that a maximum of non-coherent incident light can be harvested. On the other hand, the sensitizer's absorption spectrum should not overlap with the fluorescence spectrum of the emitter to avoid re-absorption of the upconverted emission, which reduces the overall quantum efficiency. The electronic properties of the ensemble must further be matched to minimize back-transfer from the emitter to the sensitizer.
Given these considerations, the phenanthrene–naphthalene and proflavine hydrochloride–anthracene sensitizer–emitter pairs used by Parker and Hatchard in their original work on sensitized photon upconversion are far from being optimized. The main problem lies in the fact that the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons used as sensitizers show inefficient intersystem crossing, leading to a low yield of long-lived triplet excited states.13 Indeed, it is interesting to note that few other examples for TTA-UC systems have been described, in which the sensitizer is a metal-free organic compound. One example was reported by Chen et al., who demonstrated upconversion in solutions of 2,4,5,7-tetraiodo-6-hydroxy-3-fluorenone (TIHF) as sensitizer and diphenylanthracene (DPA) as emitter (Fig. 3).23 Here, halogenation of the sensitizer was used to enhance the population of 3S* on account of the heavy atom effect, i.e., increasing the rate of the spin-forbidden intersystem crossing by the presence of a heavy atom. Using a similar approach, Zhao et al. developed a library of sensitizers by iodinating BODIPY dyes (Fig. 3), which cover a broad range of possible excitation wavelengths and are useful for upconversion in conjunction with emitters such as perylene and chloro-bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (CBPEA).24,25 Similarly, Guo et al. developed new metal-free naphthalene sensitizers where the presence of two bromides adjacent to n-octylamine groups on the naphthalene provides enough spin–orbit coupling for the ISC step to occur efficiently. Used in conjunction with perylene emitters, these sensitizers permit green (532 nm) to blue (450 nm) upconversion.26 Finally, Wu et al. reported a new kind of C60-BODIPY dyad as heavy-atom-free sensitizers for TTA upconversion. In such complexes, the conjugated chromophores act as antennae that capture light and funnel the energy to the fullerenes, which act as singlet-to-triplet converters via ISC. This antenna-converter approach could be extended to other types of chromophores so as to perform TTA-UC from a wide range of wavelengths.27
The development of efficient TTA-UC systems has in the last decade primarily benefitted from the utilization of metal complexes,10 which can serve as highly effective triplet generators, also on account of heavy-atom promoted spin–orbit coupling.28–30 Numerous strategies have therefore been developed to obtain new efficient metal-based sensitizers.31–35 The most commonly used chromophore systems include Pt– or Pd–porphyrin complexes as sensitizers, such as octaethylporphyrin (PdOEP and PtOEP) and tetrabenzyltetraphenylporphyrin (Pd(TPBP) and Pt(TPBP)), and anthracene derivatives as emitters. Several groups have extensively used these systems to create polymer-based upconverting systems on the one hand (vide infra) and to conduct systematic studies to probe the underlying photophysical effects of the TTA-UC process on the other.14,15,36–38 While porphyrin complexes have been exceedingly valuable to promote the state of the field, it is noted that their solubility is usually rather low.39 In addition, they feature complex absorption spectra that are composed of a high-energy Soret-band and a low-energy Q-band, and which can make the design of effective upconverting systems quite intricate. Excitation usually involves the Q-band, which is normally very narrow and does therefore not permit harnessing radiation over a broad wavelength range. On the other hand, care has to be taken so that the Soret-band does not overlap with the fluorescence spectrum of the emitter in order to avoid internal re-absorption.
In summary, many sensitizer–emitter pairs have been studied in detail, which permit TTA-UC with excitation in the range of ∼350 to 790 nm (i.e., from the near UV to the near infrared, NIR) and emission in the range of ∼320 to 560 nm (i.e., from the near UV to the green regime) with anti-Stokes shifts of as much as 210 nm. However, current chromophore systems still have several limitations that warrant future development, such as the general increase of the overall efficiency, the extension of the excitation range further into the NIR (vide infra), the broadening of the sensitizer absorption bands for more efficient harvesting, the development of new design concepts for metal-free sensitizers, and approaches to maintain operational stability.
Energy transfer, triplet–triplet annihilation, and overall efficiency
The triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) between the sensitizer and the emitter can, in principle, be treated as a combination of Förster- (resonant energy transfer) and Dexter-type (electron transfer) mechanisms (Fig. 4a). However, since the TTET process usually involves forbidden transitions, resonant transfer is usually very small.40 The Dexter-type electron transfer can be described by the Perrin approximation, which is founded on the special decay profile of the overlap of the involved orbitals, i.e., an exponential decrease of the wave function. Thus, the Perrin approximation makes the simplification that electron energy transfer can be considered to proceed with an efficiency of unity if the donor and the acceptor are confined within a sphere of a given radius R, and that it does not occur beyond this limit (Fig. 4b). Monguzzi et al. demonstrated for dilute solid solutions of PtOEP (sensitizer, donor) and DPA (emitter, acceptor) in frozen 1,1,1-trichloroethane that the energy transfer in this system was fitting this assumption.37 They observed that the TTET efficiency of this system was greatly enhanced when the temperature was increased and the system liquefied. It was also shown for the same system that the intensity of residual PtOEP phosphorescence diminishes with increasing DPA concentration until it is eventually completely quenched.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of Dexter and Förster type energy transfer processes. S: sensitizer, E: emitter. (b) Schematic representation of the active-sphere (Perrin) approximation. 
Thus, the experiments reflect that, at least at low chromophore concentrations, translational (and rotational) mobility is essential and that diffusion of the involved donor and acceptor species during the lifetime of the excited state increases the yields of the energy transfer process. A quantitative description of the underlying energy transfer processes was recently provided by Monguzzi et al.19 It backs the experimental findings and explains that providing translational mobility and/or maximizing the concentrations of the sensitizer and the emitter to the point where the average distance between these species is within the Perrin limit are effective strategies for maximizing the efficiency of the TTET process. It is important to point out, however, that increasing the sensitizer concentration also leads to a higher probability for back-transfer, i.e., from the emitter to the sensitizer, which reduces the overall efficiency of the upconversion process. For the design of upconverting materials, this means that the sensitizer content should be kept low, but the concentration must be such that the optical density of the material is sufficiently high, to allow for efficient harvesting of incident light; consequently the remaining knobs that one can turn to maximize the TTET efficiency are the acceptor concentration, the molecular architecture of the material, the morphology, and the mobility within the system.
Evidently, the key element of the overall UC process is the triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) step. TTA processes have been studied extensively in the context of organic light-emitting diodes, where annihilation represents an undesired pathway that competes with the desired radiative relaxation process.41 The mechanism involves the formation of encounter complexes, upon dimerization of two identical species in their excited triplet state, 3M*. Spin statistics, which have been comprehensively reviewed by Saltiel and Atwater,42 reveal that three different dimers can be formed:  
The spin multiplicities of the encounter complexes in a diffusion-controlled environment result in probabilities of 5/9, 3/9, and 1/9 for the formation of quintet 5(MM)*, triplet 3(MM)*, and singlet 1(MM)* encounter complexes. These dissociate, as shown above, to return one of the species to its ground state, while the other remains in an excited state of the corresponding multiplicity. As the resulting triplet 3M* and quintet 5M* excited states cannot decay radiatively, only 1/9 of all annihilated triplets result a priori in the formation of an emissive singlet excited state (1M*), putting the spin-statistical limit of the quantum efficiency ΦUC to 11%. However, as pointed out by Cheng et al.,43 the triplets (and likely also the quintets) formed upon annihilation can be recycled, i.e., they can be annihilated again (and again) until they decay via the singlet pathway. Furthermore, the quintet state of polyaromatic organic compounds is often inaccessible.44 If one takes these recycling effects into account, the theoretical efficiency of the TTA step increases to 40%.43,45,46 To date the highest value was reported by Zhao and coworkers with 20%.9,47,48
It has been theorized that the triplet decay channel could also become forbidden, if the energy difference between the emitter's first and second triplet excited states were very large, thereby making the singlet route the exclusive relaxation pathway.49 A compelling approach to maximize the anti-Stokes shift through an entropically driven process was developed by Cheng et al.50 This approach compensates the enthalpic losses in the TTET step that usually arise from the lower energy of (3E*) relative to that of (3S*). By carefully adjusting the chromophore concentrations, i.e. a huge excess of the emitter with respect to the sensitizer, it was possible to achieve efficient TTET even if the energy level of 3S* was kept slightly below that of 3E* (42 nm). Using this approach, it was feasible to attain an anti-Stokes shift of as much as 0.94 eV (∼210 nm).
Finally, it is noted that the spin statistics of the TTA step can also be influenced via the environment that surrounds the annihilating species. For example, Monguzzi et al. have shown that the TTA step can be manipulated by the presence of a magnetic field.38 The observed change in efficiency can be related to the probability of forming either of the possible encounter complexes, which by way of molecular orientation is a function of the surrounding magnetic field. This finding could help material scientists to develop more effective UC systems, for instance, by incorporating magnetic nanoparticles to impart local magnetization. In another example, Baluschev et al. demonstrated that the local increase of the electromagnetic field provoked by the surface plasmon resonance of an adjacent (Kretschman-type geometry) silver surface enhanced the upconverted emission.51 It is thought that local field effects increase the concentration of triplet excited states of the emitter in the vicinity of the metal surface, which leads to an increased upconversion quantum yield on account of a higher local density of excitons.
Power dependence, triplet concentration, and oxygen quenching
The TTA-UC process is dependent on the concentration of triplet excited states, and therewith also on the power density of the incident light. This is readily seen, when radiation from a green continuous wave laser with a power density of ∼350 mW cm−2 is directed through a solution of DPA–PdOEP in toluene (Fig. 5). At first (time t ≈ 0 s), only a green “beam” originating from scattered incident light can be seen. After a few tenths of seconds, the color along its trace changes to blue, due to emission from the DPA singlet excited state. The delay of the fluorescence is characteristic of the process and reflects the need to first populate a sufficiently high number of triplet excited states, before TTA becomes a probable process. The concentration of triplet excited states (and therewith also the delay of the UC) depends on several parameters, including the concentration of chromophores (vide supra), relaxation through desired (annihilation to a singlet excited state) and undesired pathways (including phosphorescence and quenching by auxiliary species, such as O2, vide infra), and the power density of the incident light. The upconversion of non-coherent incident light of minimal power density is perhaps the most important promise of the TTA-UC process, and as such the dependence of the upconverted intensity on the incident power density is an important metric. Several groups have also studied the power dependence to gain insights into the mechanistic aspects of the upconversion process. A quadratic dependence of the upconverted light intensity to the incident power density, originally observed by Parker and Hatchard,11 and later in many other studies,52 was originally attributed to the bi-molecular nature of the annihilation step and has widely been used as indication for the underlying mechanism. However, it was recently shown, first by Monguzzi et al.,53 and subsequently by other groups,45 that the quadratic power dependence is the result of experimental conditions that prevent reaching a regime in which the concentration of triplets is sufficiently high for the annihilation route to be favored over alternative relaxation pathways (Fig. 6).53 Thus, if the incident power density is increased beyond a certain threshold, the relationship between the upconverted intensity on the incident power density becomes linear, i.e., it depends directly on the concentration of triplet excited states generated (Fig. 6). This finding has been further corroborated by Schmidt and coworkers.45 Very recently, Haefele et al. have shown that rigorously removing oxygen – a well known triplet quencher – from the UC system allows one to shift the transition from the linear regime – where the quantum efficiency is maximal – to the quadratic regime towards much lower power densities than hitherto reported.54 This has allowed them to access the linear regime when exciting a solution of PdOEP and DPA in toluene with non-coherent light of a power density of a few mW cm−2. Thus, it has now been demonstrated that the annihilation-dominated regime, where the TTA-UC has its highest efficiency, can be reached with radiation of an intensity that corresponds to that of solar irradiance.
 Fig. 5  Pictures illustrating the gradual population of the 9,10-diphenylanthracene triplet excited states and the subsequent phenomenon of TTA-UC in a non-deaerated solution of DPA (2 × 10−3 M) and PdOEP (10−5 M) in N,N-dimethylformamide at: (a) t = 0 s; (b) t = 0.25 s; (c) t = 0.7 s; and (d) t = 2.1 s. 
 Fig. 6  Double logarithmic plot showing the DPA fluorescence (blue circles) and PtOEP phosphorescence (red circles) intensity of a PtOEP–DPA solution in 1,1,2-trichloroethane (PtOEP and DPA concentrations: 1.5 × 10−4 and 1.0 × 10−1 M, respectively) as a function of the excitation power density. Solid lines are linear fits to the data. While the residual PtOEP phosphorescence scales always linearly with the excitation power density, the upconverted emission (DPA fluorescence) clearly shows a threshold that marks a transition from a quadratic to a linear relation. The green vertical lines indicate the power density that can be achieved by solar irradiance at 532 nm under AM 1.5 conditions, when integrated over a bandwidth of 1, 10, and 100 nm, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2008 by The American Chemical Society.) 
From these findings, it is apparent that the oxygen solubility and permeability of a polymer matrix will have a significant influence on the overall efficiency of the UC process, if operated under ambient conditions. The knowledge acquired in other domains (packaging, gas-exchange membranes, etc.)55,56 will be of paramount importance for the implementation of polymeric TTA-UC materials. Permeant transport across a polymer involves (i) the sorption of a gas molecule upon collision with the surface, (ii) the solution of the penetrant, (iii) a diffusive random walk along the voids or free-volume of the material, and (iv) the desorption on the other side of the material.57 The solubility and diffusivity of a penetrant molecule are governed by the shape and size of the molecule in question, the affinity of the gas for a given polymer, and the morphology of the polymeric material. In semicrystalline materials, dense crystalline regions can generally not be penetrated by diffusing species such as oxygen and slow down diffusion by increasing the tortuosity within the material. In the amorphous regions, molecular mobility dictates local fluctuations and consequently the diffusivity of the penetrants. Consequently, the latter is greatly diminished upon glass formation.58 Nevertheless, the long chain relaxation timescale contributes to the generation of excess free volume with pore sizes on the order of a couple of Å, where the penetrant gas can reside for long periods. In summary, the very nature and morphology of the polymer will impact oxygen solubility and diffusivity, and significantly influence the upconversion efficiency by way of impacting quenching of triplet excited states by ambient oxygen.
Mechanistic considerations for upconversion in solid materials
While TTA-UC has only recently been realized in solid materials, all the steps required in the process have been extensively studied individually in different types of solids.59,60 From absorption to energy transfers to the various limiting processes, every key step has been theorized.61,62 As should be evident from the above description, solid materials must comprise a sensitizer and an emitter in a manner (concentration, morphology) that enables the underlying photophysical processes. Obviously, auxiliary matrix materials should not interfere with the electronic processes by absorbing incident or emitted radiation or quenching any of the excited states. In addition, it is desirable to exclude O2, in order to prevent quenching of the excited triplet states. The essential step for TTA-UC is the formation of an encounter complex between two emitter molecules in their triplet excited states and this requires either a high level of translational mobility of these species (as in solution) or, alternatively, efficient exciton migration/diffusion. Both approaches have been utilized to achieve upconversion in solid materials. Recognizing that the triplet exciton diffusion length in single crystals is comparable to that of dyes in low-viscosity solutions,36 Monguzzi et al. recently created solid upconverting materials by growing PtOEP-doped DPA crystals.19 Indeed, weak blue upconverted emission could be observed in these materials, but the quantum yield was very low. A detailed characterization of these materials revealed that this was due to the formation of a phase-separated morphology, i.e. the PtOEP and the DPA crystallized separately, which severely limited the energy transfer between the sensitizer and the emitter. It would seem that this problem could be solved by optimizing the morphology of such solid mixtures, but in reality, the co-crystallization of organic molecules is very difficult to control.63
Also with the requirements of the annihilation step in mind, Levin probed the kinetics of diffusion-controlled TTA of porphyrin in frozen thin layers of decanol that were deposited on NaA zeolite.64 He found that the dimension of the decanol layer had a significant impact on the rate of TTA; a 20-fold acceleration of the process was observed when the film thickness was reduced from 75 to 1 molecular layers. The (mechanistic) origin of this effect is not yet clear, nor is it known how broadly applicable it is to other systems, but it appears that confining annihilators can be utilized to design materials in which the annihilation step is accelerated, e.g. in phase-separated block copolymers or nanoporous materials.
Bryukhanov et al. explored the triplet–triplet annihilation in heterogeneous solids, taking into account the variation of the TTA rate constant of 1,2-benzanthracene dispersed in a poly(vinyl butyral) medium. This was done by modulating random diffusion of triplet excitation energy quanta by utilizing fractal dimensions to describe the inhomogeneities of a system.65 It was shown that, at low temperature, TTA can be described as a static process between randomly located annihilators in fixed positions, whereas a diffusion component had to be taken into account to justify the acceleration of the exchange processes at elevated temperature. As of now, it is unclear whether the excited molecules need to actually diffuse or if close proximity is sufficient for efficient energy transfer.62,66
3 Strategies for the design of TTA-UC in polymeric systems
Dispersion of chromophores in polymeric matrices
The simplest, and so far most widely used approach to create upconverting polymeric materials involves simply blending the sensitizer and the emitter into a “photophysically inert” polymer matrix, which merely serves as a mechanical support for the chromophores. While this route is particularly attractive as it requires minimal synthetic efforts, the main obstacle is to molecularly dissolve the chromophores at concentrations that are sufficiently high to support the required electronic interactions, i.e., exciton migration and annihilation. Unless special measures are taken, the solubility of small molecules in polymers is often limited to a few percent (if that). Thus, under equilibrium conditions phase separation and dye aggregation are bound to occur, if their concentrations are chosen above the solubility limit.
In what appears to be the first example of TTA-UC in solid polymer systems, the groups of Castellano and Weder demonstrated that exciton diffusion can be achieved in solid polymer films, by blending comparably low concentrations (0.17 and 0.01 wt%, respectively) of the previously employed sensitizer PdOEP and emitter DPA into a rubbery host polymer – an ethylene oxide/epichlorohydrin copolymer (P(EO-EP), Fig. 7).14,15 This matrix was selected on the account of its adequate transparency, high dye solubility, and suitable mechanical properties, but most importantly because of its low crystallinity and low glass transition temperature (−37 °C), which impart rubbery behavior as well as rotational and possibly translational mobility to the dissolved dye molecules. Indeed, when the PdOEP in the blend film was selectively excited with non-coherent light from a Xe lamp (λex = 544 ± 18 nm) at various incident power densities between 6 and 27 mW cm−2, blue upconverted DPA fluorescence was clearly observable. The quadratic incident power dependence alongside static and time-resolved emission results is indicative of the sensitized TTA-UC mechanism. The fact that the effect is observed at low chromophore content supports the conclusion that the rubbery matrix indeed permits the required bimolecular processes, presumably, as designed, on account of adequate chromophore mobility. It should be noted that the materials were processed and studied under ambient conditions. Given that triplet excited states are readily quenched by oxygen, the observation of upconversion seems to suggest that blending the upconverting chromophores into a polymer protects them at least partially from this effect.
 Fig. 7  (A) Chemical structures of a PdOEP sensitizer, DPA emitter and P(EO-EP). (B) Picture of a blend film comprising 0.17 wt% and 0.01 wt% of PdOEP and DPA in Tecoflex® SG-80A. The sample was irradiated with a green laser (peak wavelength 543 nm, power density 350 mW cm−2). The upconverted blue emission is clearly visible without any filters. 
Building upon this initial study, the groups of Weder and Castellano conducted a systematic study that explored how the nature of the elastomeric matrix and the temperature influence the upconverting properties.15 Using the above-described P(EO-EP)-based blend and similar materials based on a series of thermoplastic polyurethane elastomers as matrices (Fig. 7), it was shown that cooling the PdOEP/DPA-containing elastomer films to below the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the respective polymer completely suppresses the upconverted emission. Conversely, the upconverted emission intensity dramatically increased with increasing temperature (Fig. 8). This behavior was completely reversible through several heating and cooling cycles. A comparison of samples containing the same concentrations of chromophores in different polymer hosts showed that the intensity of the upconverted DPA emission was greatest in the softest (lowest modulus) of the polymers studied. Together with the above-discussed thermal activation effect, this illustrates the importance of translational mobility for the observation of efficient TTA-UC, which in these low-dye content materials is clearly mediated by diffusion-controlled steps. This approach has been extended to a variety of different chromophore systems by Castellano et al.10,67
 Fig. 8  (a) Upconverted PL intensity as a function of temperature of PdOEP/DPA-doped P(EO-EP) films as a function of temperature, λexc = 544 nm, 2 mJ per pulse at 10 Hz. (b) Integrated emission intensity plot for the data shown in (a). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.) 
Interestingly, TTA-UC has in the meantime also been realized in blends of upconverting dye pairs in glassy host polymers. For example, Merkel and Dinnocenzo have reported upconversion with an efficiency of 0.02% in glassy poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) comprising 0.005 wt% of PtOEP as sensitizer and 0.09% of DPA as emitter.68 Monguzzi et al. reported that upconversion can be seen in cellulose acetate comprising 0.005 wt% of PdPh4TPB as sensitizer and 3 wt% of 9,10-bisphenylethynyl anthracene as emitter below the glass transition temperature (Tg = 67 °C). Thus, in both these studies TTA-UC was observed under conditions where the dye molecules are immobilized. In the latter study, samples were prepared by drop-casting DMF solutions onto hot glass slides; this process presumably allows one to solidify blends that are “supersaturated” with the chromophores. Our group has used melt-processing to create homogeneous high-dye-content blends of PMMA and up to 0.16 and 25 wt% of PdOEP and DPA, respectively.69–73 These materials were made by melt-mixing the components at 210 °C (where the mixture is thermodynamically miscible), and quenching the materials to below Tg, thereby kinetically trapping homogeneously blended materials. Unlike solution-cast reference blends of a similar dye content, which had a phase-separated morphology and showed no appreciable upconversion, TTA-UC occurred readily in these molecularly mixed blends. The study strikingly illustrates the importance of processing, and the opportunities and possible pitfalls that can arise in the context of the influence that processing has on the final morphology, which in turn exerts a dominating influence on the TTA-UC mechanism.
Several groups have studied the mechanistic basis for TTA-UC in solid polymer matrices, as the mechanisms for exciton transport and annihilation are not imminently clear.16–18 Baluschev et al. originally suggested two potential pathways for upconversion in solids, including the “conventional” sequence outlined in Fig. 2, and a pathway that involves absorption by the sensitizer, ISC, TTA of the sensitizer to a higher singlet level, singlet energy transfer to the emitter, and fluorescence from the latter.17 While Baluschev et al. originally questioned the hypothesis of aggregation between the donor and the acceptor on the basis of concentration dependence of TTA in solution and poor yields in crystalline structures,16,18 they have subsequently performed a thorough study to shed light on the energy transfers at play in mixtures of polyfluorene and Pt porphyrin complexes.74 In their study, they aimed at understanding the possible effects of aggregations of both components with themselves and with one another at different concentrations. It was shown by transmission electron microscopy that above 2 wt% the Pt porphyrin complex was prone to aggregation and phase-separated. Additionally, co-aggregation of the sensitizer and the emitter was inferred. These local inhomogeneities were deemed to be responsible for the non-linearity observed in the Stern–Volmer plots. In a more recent article, the same group looked at electron-exchange-assisted upconversion in thin films of π-conjugated polymers and found out that TTA occurred in platinum porphyrin complexes before the singlet energy transfer to the emitter.75 More generally, these findings suggest that precise architectural control can help maximize the efficiency and minimize parasitic energy recycling effects.
Covalently connecting the chromophores to the polymer
The aforementioned problems with respect to phase separation can be solved, and the concentration of the chromophores can be maximized, if these species are covalently integrated into a polymeric structure. Interestingly, there has – to the best of our knowledge – so far only been one report in the literature that describes the rather special architecture in which sensitizing Pt–porphyrins were used as end-groups of an oligofluorene, which serves as an oligomeric emitter (Fig. 9). The conjugated nature of the latter and the absence of a “diluting” matrix polymer are an excellent basis for highly efficient exciton migration. In fact exciton migration in conjugated polymers is a well-studied subject,76,77 which has, for example, been explored in the context of phosphorescent polymer light-emitting diodes, where it represents an undesirable decay pathway.78 Connecting the Pt–porphyrins to the oligofluorene prevents them from aggregating and should lead to highly efficient triplet-energy transfer to the polymeric emitter.79 However, the architecture (Fig. 9) contributes to the back-transfer from the first excited triplet state of the emitter to that of the sensitizer as will be further described. Back-transfer has been described as a major issue by Monguzzi et al. and is usually due to the energetic proximity of the triplet levels of the emitter and the sensitizer,19 facilitated electron transfer and high concentrations of sensitizer with respect to the emitter. Yet in the architecture depicted Fig. 9, the core is oligomeric (and not polymeric) in nature and core and termini (i.e., emitter and sensitizer moieties) are fully conjugated. Both of these features, combined with the relative energetic proximity of the two components, lead to a relatively low upconversion efficiency in these materials. One can speculate that back-transfer could be reduced by limiting the quantity of Pd–porphyrin (through mixing or an increased length of the emitting core) and/or electronically decoupling the chromophore pair.
 Fig. 9  Upconversion system with the sensitizing metal complex tethered to the light-emitting conjugated polymer.79 
The available data on polymeric TTA-UC materials do not yet allow a firm conclusion if translational mobility of the chromophores is required for efficient low-power upconversion. One may speculate that at high dye concentration the segmental mobility offered by rubbery materials may become less relevant or even obsolete, as a high volume fraction of dyes may make the various energy transfer steps possible without any positional rearrangement. However, the limited solubility of typical chromophores in polymeric matrices makes it difficult to probe a broad range of compositions by fabricating simple blends (vide supra), since the dyes have a tendency to phase separate from the matrix and from another already at low concentrations. To answer the question what molecular and supramolecular architectures are most suitable to support the upconversion process in solid polymeric materials and to shine some light on the underlying mechanism(s), a systematic study of a series of rationally designed polymers with covalently attached chromophores may therefore be a valuable venture. If the content of a well-known pair of sensitizer and emitter, the arrangements of these building blocks (e.g. block vs. alternating structure, cf.Fig. 10), the morphology (homogeneous vs. phase separated), and the state of matter (rubbery vs. glassy) were systematically varied, a comparative analysis should enhance the fundamental understanding of how these various design elements affect the optical properties. Based on the available data points, one may speculate that a random arrangement of a few donors and a maximum content of non-aggregating emitters should be an architecture that should best promote the required excitonic processes.
 Fig. 10  Examples of potential polymeric architectures where the sensitizer and the emitter are covalently linked together. 
Upconverting nanoparticles
Upconverting nanoparticles are of interest in the context of medical applications such as imaging and controlled drug release. Tailored to absorb optical irradiation in the tissue transparency window (i.e., between 700 and 1100 nm), they have the potential to overcome the inherent limitations of directly absorbing materials with respect to penetration depth, autofluorescence, and damage of the surrounding tissue upon irradiation.80–82 Lanthanide-doped nanocrystals such as NaYF4 doped with Er3+ or Yb3+ represent the current state of the art,1,81–83 but they require significant amounts of rare earth ions and the power density necessary for excitation of these materials is still relatively high (∼40 mW cm−2). Yao et al. have pioneered the development of non-polymeric nanoparticles and nanowires that permit upconversion through TTA-UC from 500 nm to 441 nm (Fig. 11).1,84,85 They demonstrated the fabrication of core–shell nanoobjects with a porphyrin core (sensitizer) and a perylene shell (emitter) through microemulsion-assisted processes using cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant. Liu et al. further developed this concept using silica as an inorganic matrix and achieving TTA-UC from 532 to 430 nm with a PdOEP–DPA pair.86
 Fig. 11  Transmission electron microscopy image of core–shell upconverting particles synthesized by reduction of a perylene salt on a porphyrin core. The scale bar is 50 nm. (Reproduced from ref. 1.) 
More recently, Wohnhaas et al. reported an interesting design strategy that relies on dissolving a dye pair (PdOEP and perylene were used in the original study) in a solvent (decaline) and encapsulating this solution in a polymeric nanocontainer (made of poly(styrene), poly(methyl methacrylate) or poly(styrene-co-acrylic acid) PSAA) (Fig. 12). This approach allows one to effectively impart the advantages of an upconverting solution (high TTA-UC efficiency on account of high translational mobility) to a polymeric nanoparticle. Initial studies suggest that the methodology may have a remarkable potential for applications in cell imaging. They have indeed shown internalization into the cytoplasm of PSAA capsules in in vitro-cultured HeLa cells with no apparent cytotoxicity over 2 weeks and efficient visualization by upconversion. However, the unwanted release of the cargo from the capsules is perhaps a concern for in vivo applications.
 Fig. 12  Examples of nanoparticles and nanocontainers obtained by various emulsion procedures. (Top) Upconverting nanocontainers where the dyes are dissolved in a decaline solution. (Reproduced from ref. 87. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.) 
An alternative approach involves the fabrication of polymer nanoparticles that are doped with upconverting chromophore pairs, as discussed above. Monguzzi et al. utilized the microemulsion polymerization of styrene, divinylbenzene and vinylbenzyl chloride and a subsequent dyeing procedure using the upconverting PtOEP–DPA pair to attain glassy polymer nanoparticles.88 The resulting nanoparticles display a modest UC efficiency of 3.7%, despite their remarkably high TTET efficiency of up to 88%, which is in contrast with that of the corresponding bulk materials. It may be speculated that the confinement provided by the particle size, which is of the same order as typical exciton diffusion lengths, has a significant influence on this behavior.
In parallel, work in our laboratories has demonstrated the possibility to infuse moderately cross-linked, rubbery poly(n-butylacrylate) nanoparticles with a mixture of PdOEP and DPA to afford upconverting polymeric particles (Fig. 13).89 The design takes advantage of our above-discussed finding that rubbery matrix polymers appear to be particularly suitable host materials for low-dye content TTA-UC systems. The nanoparticles were prepared by surfactant-free emulsion polymerization of n-butylacrylate with divinylbenzene as a cross-linker, followed by dyeing of the resulting particles with a chromophore solution. Blue emission (∼440 nm) of these water-dispersible systems was observed upon excitation at 532 nm at incident power densities as low as 40 mW cm−2 and in both aqueous suspensions of the particles as well as thin films processed from the latter. The possibility to disperse these nanoparticles in water and the fact that TTA-UC is possible without de-aeration of the medium makes the design approach highly attractive. However, the fact that a quadratic dependence of the upconverted light intensity vs. the incident power density was observed even at moderately high power densities (4.6 W cm−2) may indicate that triplet quenching by O2 is a dominant process in non-deaerated media.
 Fig. 13  (Left) Upconversion from green to blue by an aqueous suspension of dye-doped (DPA–PdOEP) cross-linked poly(n-butyl acrylate) nanoparticles. The 500 nm short-pass filter allows to cut out the scattered green light from the 543 nm HeNe laser. (Right) Transmission electron micrograph of the dye-doped polymeric nanoparticles. 
Development of near-infrared (NIR) TTA-UC systems
The aforementioned use of upconverting materials in biomedical applications has triggered the quest for new chromophore pairs, which promote the TTA-UC process with excitation wavelengths that lie in the transparency window of tissue (∼750 to 1100 nm, i.e. the NIR regime). These upconverting strategies can be combined with alternative imaging methods such as magnetic resonance imaging or tomography to create multimodal probes that are powerful instruments from a biomedical point of view.3,90–93
The possibility to enable efficient low-power upconversion towards NIR wavelength is also important in the context of increasing the efficiency of solar harvesting in connection with photovoltaic devices and photocatalytic hydrogen production systems, which currently leave a significant portion of the solar spectrum (on the high-wavelength end) unutilized (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the incorporation of an upconverting layer in a photovoltaic cell. 
Several reviews detail the benefits of incorporating UC materials into solar harvesting systems,94–96 for example by integrating them with plasmonic nanostructures or photonic structures for light concentration.97,98 TTA-UC materials appear to be excellent candidates for this purpose, primarily on account of being able to operate at low power density.99,100
Thus, in solar harvesting (where broad absorption spectra are desirable) and biomedical applications (where narrow absorbance can be an advantage, because it allows one to utilize several different imaging particles, which can be separately addressed), there is an unsatisfied need to extend the operating region of TTA-UC to the NIR regime. Fig. 3 shows that so far no chromophore pairs are known, which permit the sensitized upconversion of light of a wavelength of >790 nm. Chromophore “designers” may therefore take inspiration from the compounds originally developed for the photodynamic therapy (PDT) of cancer, which are required to work in the transparency window of the body (i.e. above 700 nm).101 Another approach is to extend porphyrins with aromatic “antennas”. This design has been of particular interest as it allows one to induce a bathochromic shift of the absorption bands of the metal complexes by relatively simple means. For example, Baluschev et al. reported significant upconversion from NIR to turquoise by coupling naphthaloporphyrin and a bistetracene.102 Exciting at 695 nm with a continuous-wave diode laser, they observed luminescence at local maxima of 500, 533 and 573 nm alongside phosphorescence peaks of the sensitizing unit at 916 and 942 nm. When exposed to the longer wavelengths of the spectrum of the sun, i.e. a 1 W cm−2 non-coherent (Δλ ∼ 20 nm) light source, the upconversion was found to be remarkably efficient.
Yakutkin et al. reported the synthesis of tetraanthraporphyrins for conjoined TTA-UC. The extension of the conjugation brought by the anthrenyl units allows for the upconversion regime to be extended towards the IR regime. Combined with rubrene as an emitter, these systems permit light upconversion from 790 to 570 nm with a UC quantum yield reaching 1.2%. The same group had previously reported an elegant approach to increase the width of the absorption band in porphyrin-based upconverting chromophore systems. As the Q-band of porphyrins is usually very narrow,103 these chromophores are not well suited to absorb over a broader range of the spectrum, as desirable for solar harvesting. However, the absorption of the sensitizing element can be broadened by combining two different types of sensitizers who will separately transfer to the emitter such as the two porphyrins used in this study (PdPh4TBP and PdPh4OMe8TNP). Thus, the approach has allowed to broaden the excitation window for UC; it is noteworthy that the efficiency of the process and the threshold power density for TTA-UC were sufficiently high and low, respectively, to enable the upconversion of sunlight.
A similar approach to extend low-power sensitized upconversion to the NIR region was reported by Singh-Rachford et al. (Fig. 15),104 who synthesized a chromophore with three different metal complexes (two zinc porphyrins conjugated with a ruthenium bis-terpyridine). The rationale behind this multi-complex structure lies in the extended electronic interactions across the metallated chromophores, the strong absorption in the NIR regime and the low-lying excited states displaying remarkable charge separation on the order of μs. This complex structure allowed for delayed emission of perylene diimide upon excitation at 780 nm.
 Fig. 15  Supermolecular chromophore system for NIR upconversion developed by Singh-Rachford et al. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.) 
Recently, the efforts of Wu et al. to create all-organic sensitizers based on iodinated BODIPY illustrated just how the extension of π-conjugated systems can be precisely fine-tuned to a desirable absorption wavelength.25 In parallel, they developed Pt–acetylide-based perylenes to attain the triplet levels of perylene.105 The utilization of acetylide complexes was then further developed by several groups.26,47,48,106–108 Moreover, the methodology developed by Castellano to attain the triplet level of perylene compounds opens up new potential avenues of research in terms of synthesis of novel NIR absorbing dyes. Dyes like perylenes, quaterrylenes, hexarylenes, etc. could indeed be transformed in an efficient sensitizer. By carefully controlling the molecular design, phosphorescing properties might be imparted to those dyes, thereby making them suitable candidates for their utilization in upconverting systems.
All of these aforementioned attempts to extend the operational window of upconversion to NIR have been mostly focusing on solution samples. Nevertheless, to express the full potential of these systems, it is essential to transfer this knowledge into solid polymeric materials. The realization of both bulk and particulate objects that exhibit NIR upconverting abilities bears the promise of enhanced photovoltaic efficiency (Fig. 14) and harmless biological imaging in the tissue transparency window.
Photochemistry: using TTA-UC to induce chemical reactions
The utilization of TTA-UC as a photochemical route still remains an oddity in comparison to several other UC methodologies, such as two-photon absorption or energy transfer upconversion, which have been vastly developed over the years for nanofabrication and other drug release methodologies.6,109,110 For instance, two-photon absorption has proven useful in the context of solid-state optical data storage.71 By focusing an intense laser beam (3 mJ over 10 ns) onto two-photon absorbing dyes, aggregation and de-aggregation of the excimer-forming cyano-oligophenylene vinylenes in poly(ethylene terephthalate glycol) allowed us to alternate between “on” and “off” states. The development of TTA-UC photochemical reaction could bring about the possibility to operate at lower powers and therefore make more efficient storage devices. Moreover, in biological systems where polymeric drug delivery systems (e.g. micelles) offer the possibility to optically trigger the release of the drug payload,109,111 operating at lower power densities would minimize the damage elicited by high power lasers. In the following paragraphs, several attempts to perform photochemical reactions by means of TTA-UC are reviewed.
Islangulov and Castellano have depicted a photochemical process using TTA, whereby the emitter, anthracene, is also the reactive species. Based on earlier work by Saltiel et al. ascertaining that the dimerization of anthracene proceeds readily via TTA,112 they have managed to operate a bimolecular [4 + 4] cycloaddition by exciting the system in the presence of a ruthenium complex at wavelengths (458 nm) at which dimerization does not naturally occur.113 Instead, they use the sensitizing ability of the ruthenium complex to achieve the desired reaction. More recently, Tanaka et al. have reported the utilization of visible light to accelerate guanine oxidation.114 To that end, [Ru(dmb)3]2+ (dmb = 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine) and anthracene were utilized as an upconverting pair capable of blue-shifting 520 nm into the UV range thereby favoring the oxidation of 2′-deoxyguanosine by riboflavin. A POSS-containing (POSS = polyoligomeric silsesquioxane) polymer network was used as a scaffold for the encapsulation of [Ru(dmb)3]2+ and anthracene.115,116 Also, photoelectrochemistry was demonstrated by Khnayzer et al. using an upconverting system.117 However, in such systems, the upconverting solution was separated from the reaction mixture such that the upconverted light of a solution was contained in a cuvette immersed in the reaction media. One can imagine that tethered polymer systems would allow mixing of different components in a homogeneous manner.
From an application perspective, one of the most interesting reports that has come out in recent years deals with low power visible-to-UV UC. In these systems, a biacetyl is used as a sensitizer in conjunction with 2,5-diphenyloxazole as an emitter. The upconverted fluorescence at 360 nm originates from an incoming radiation at 442 nm, i.e. a 0.64 eV anti-Stokes energy shift. This could be used in conjunction with photocleavable moieties in order to enable chemistry that normally occurs within the UV range akin to the work of other people with an alternative upconversion strategy for drug delivery or rewritable memory.81,82,118 Overall, the utilization of low-power photochemical reactions in conjunction with polymeric systems, whether in the solid state or in colloidal systems, would be highly beneficial and has yet to be further developed.
4 Conclusions and perspectives
The present perspective article was designed so as to provide material scientists and chemists with a comprehensive overview of the challenges and requirements associated with the design of polymeric materials for TTA-UC and their potential applications. As reviewed here, sensitized upconversion in solution has been a very active field with an excitation range spanning between ∼350 and 790 nm and an emission range comprised between ∼320 and 560 nm. Record anti-Stokes shifts have been reported to be as large as 210 nm and UC efficiencies of up to 20% have been shown. However, to fully harness the potential of sensitized upconversion, several developments have yet to happen in solids. Polymeric materials have emerged as a versatile platform to implement TTA-UC. So far rubbery materials have been the most efficient; yet, promising results in glassy material might help shift this paradigm if it is demonstrated that molecular mobility can be circumvented by exciton diffusion in high dye-content systems. In particular, systems where the dyes are tethered to a polymer backbone will help in increasing the concentration of the emitter and controlling the architecture of the resulting material. More generally, a vast arena is available to polymer scientists to tailor the morphology of polymers so as to probe its effects on energy transfers. Additionally, morphology also affects oxygen solubility and diffusivity, and as a consequence the triplet manifolds in TTA-UC. Also, it is to date unclear how much the polymer matrix shields the dyes from unwanted oxygen quenching, and the nature and structure of the polymers will have to be varied to mitigate those effects. Finally, it is apparent that the range of operation of TTA-UC (notably towards the NIR region) and the efficiency have to be further extended to make TTA-UC more applicable.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. E. Johan Foster, Roberto Vadrucci and Soo-Hyon Lee for very helpful comments and discussions and for providing some of the illustrations. The authors are grateful for the financial support of the Swiss National Science Foundation (200021_13540/1) and the Adolphe Merkle Foundation.
References
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4959–4961 RSC .
C. Zhang, H. P. Zhou, L. Y. Liao, W. Feng, W. Sun, Z. X. Li, C. H. Xu, C. J. Fang, L. D. Sun, Y. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 633–637 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hilderbrand, F. W. Shao, C. Salthouse, U. Mahmood and R. Weissleder, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4188–4190 RSC .
S. M. Borisov, C. Larndorfer and I. Klimant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201200794 .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–173 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. He, L. S. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081–11095 RSC .
M. Haase and H. Schafer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808–5829 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhao, S. M. Ji and H. M. Guo, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 937–950 RSC .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Parker and C. G. Hatchard, Proc. Chem. Soc., London, 1962, 147 CAS .
C. A. Parker and C. G. Hatchard, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1962, 269, 574–584 CrossRef .
C. A. Parker and C. G. Hatchard, Proc. Chem. Soc., London, 1962, 386–387 CAS .
R. R. Islangulov, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12652–12653 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12007–12014 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, B. Minch, T. Miteva, G. Nelles and A. Yasuda, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 076103 CrossRef .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, B. Minch, T. Miteva, G. Nelles and A. Yasuda, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 023101 CrossRef .
R. P. Steer, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 076102 CrossRef .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, S. Hoseinkhani, M. Campione and F. Meinardi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4322–4332 RSC .
F. N. Castellano and T. N. Singh-Rachford, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 9266–9269 CrossRef .
R. Rieger and K. Mullen, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2010, 23, 315–325 CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, A. Haefele, R. Ziessel and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16164–16165 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chen, C. Y. Hung, K. H. Wang, H. L. Chen, W. S. Fann, F. C. Chien, P. L. Chen, T. J. Chow, C. P. Hsu and S. S. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4064–4066 RSC .
Y. Chen, J. Zhao, L. Xie, H. Guo and Q. Li, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3942–3953 RSC .
W. Wu, H. Guo, W. Wu, S. Ji and J. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 7056–7064 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, W. H. Wu, H. M. Guo and J. Z. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 3933–3943 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, J. Zhao, J. Sun and S. Guo, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 5305–5312 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weissman, E. Shirman, T. Ben-Moshe, R. Cohen, G. Leitus, L. J. W. Shimon and B. Rybtchinski, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4790–4792 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, Z. Shuai, G. Pourtois and J. L. Bredas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 3899–3907 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bolton and J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1981–1988 RSC .
X. Yi, J. Zhao, W. Wu, D. Huang, S. Ji and J. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 8931–8940 RSC .
S. Ji, H. Guo, W. Wu, W. Wu and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8283–8286 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, J. Sun, S. Ji, W. Wu, J. Zhao and H. Guo, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 11550–11561 RSC .
W. H. Wu, J. Z. Zhao, H. M. Guo, J. F. Sun, S. M. Ji and Z. L. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1961–1968 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Ji, W. H. Wu, W. T. Wu, H. M. Guo and J. Z. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1626–1629 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2008, 684196 Search PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 155122 CrossRef .
J. Mezyk, R. Tubino, A. Monguzzi, A. Mech and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 087404 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Mamardashvili, N. Z. Mamardashvili and B. D. Berezin, Molecules, 2000, 5, 762–766 CrossRef CAS .
F. Perrin, C. R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sci., 1924, 178, 1978–1980 CAS .
Y. C. Luo and H. Aziz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1285–1293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Saltiel and B. W. Atwater, Adv. Photochem., 1988, 14, 1–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 66–71 RSC .
S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 7711–7714 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Auckett, Y. Y. Chen, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2009, 185, 012002 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1795–1799 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Guo, S. M. Ji, W. H. Wu, W. T. Wu, J. Y. Shao and J. Z. Zhao, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2832–2840 RSC .
H. M. Guo, M. L. Muro-Small, S. M. Ji, J. Z. Zhao and F. N. Castellano, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6802–6804 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Arbogast, A. P. Darmanyan, C. S. Foote, Y. Rubin, F. N. Diederich, M. M. Alvarez, S. J. Anz and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 11–12 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Schmidt, Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and M. J. Crossley, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 1047–1053 CrossRef .
S. Baluschev, F. Yu, T. Miteva, S. Ahl, A. Yasuda, G. Nelles, W. Knoll and G. Wegner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2482–2484 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Islangulov, D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3776–3778 RSC .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 195112 CrossRef .
A. Haefele, J. Blumhoff, R. S. Khnayzer and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hiltner, R. Y. F. Liu, Y. S. Hu and E. Baer, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2005, 43, 1047–1063 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, S. Shenogin and S. Nazarenko, Polymer, 2002, 43, 4733–4743 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Litvinov, O. Persyn, V. Miri and J. M. Lefebvre, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7668–7679 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Karayiannis, V. G. Mavrantzas and D. N. Theodorou, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2978–2995 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bergamini, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri, V. Balzani, S. K. Lee and F. Vogtle, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2004, 3, 898–905 CAS .
G. Wegner, S. Baluschev, F. Laquai and C. Y. Chi, Macromol. Symp., 2008, 268, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
F. Laquai, Y. S. Park, J. J. Kim and T. Basche, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1203–1231 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Wuest, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 74–75 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Levin, Dokl. Phys. Chem., 2003, 388, 10–12 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Bryukhanov, I. G. Samusev and S. G. Karstina, J. Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 71, 54–59 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 523–537 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Castellano and T. N. Singh-Rachford, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 195–200 CrossRef .
P. B. Merkel and J. P. Dinnocenzo, J. Lumin., 2009, 129, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Crenshaw and C. Weder, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1471–1476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kunzelman, B. R. Crenshaw and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2989–2991 RSC .
J. Lott, C. Ryan, B. Valle, J. R. Johnson, D. A. Schiraldi, J. Shan, K. D. Singer and C. Weder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2425–2429 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Lott, in Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH USA,  2010 Search PubMed .

          S. Y. Lee, J. Lott, Y. C. Simon and C. Weder, manuscript in preparation.
P. E. Keivanidis, S. Baluschev, G. Lieser and G. Wegner, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2316–2326 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Keivanidis, F. Laquai, J. W. F. Robertson, S. Baluschev, J. Jacob, K. Mullen and G. Wegner, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1893–1899 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Hoffmann, E. Scheler, J. M. Koenen, M. Forster, U. Scherf, P. Strohriegl, H. Bässler and A. Kohler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 165208 CrossRef .
A. Kohler and H. Bässler, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4003–4011 RSC .
S. Reineke, G. Schwartz, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2009, 3, 67–69 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, J. Jacob, Y. S. Avlasevich, P. E. Keivanidis, T. Miteva, A. Yasuda, G. Nelles, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen and G. Wegner, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1250–1253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, S. L. Gai, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, W. X. Wang, Y. L. Dai and N. Niu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1166–1172 CrossRef .
C. J. Carling, F. Nourmohammadian, J. C. Boyer and N. R. Branda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3782–3785 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Carling, J. C. Boyer and N. R. Branda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10838–10839 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. G. Deng, Y. F. Shi, R. Y. Zhang and D. Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3895–3900 RSC .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1380–1384 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 85–87 RSC .
Q. Liu, T. S. Yang, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5390–5397 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wohnhaas, A. Turshatov, V. Mailander, S. Lorenz, S. Baluschev, T. Miteva and K. Landfester, Macromol. Biosci., 2011, 11, 772–778 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, M. Frigoli, C. Larpent, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Simon, S. Bai, M. K. Sing, H. Dietsch, M. Achermann and C. Weder, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 498–502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Il Park, J. H. Kim, K. T. Lee, K. S. Jeon, H. Bin Na, J. H. Yu, H. M. Kim, N. Lee, S. H. Choi, S. I. Baik, H. Kim, S. P. Park, B. J. Park, Y. W. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. Y. Yoon, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon, Y. D. Suh and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4467–4471 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, Y. F. Shi, Y. C. Zhang, X. H. Sun, N. O. Reich, D. Y. Zhao and G. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2850–2851 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Wu, G. Han, D. J. Milliron, S. Aloni, V. Altoe, D. V. Talapin, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10917–10921 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765–4769 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shpaisman, O. Niitsoo, I. Lubomirsky and D. Cahen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1541–1546 CrossRef CAS .
J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4835–4848 CAS .
S. Fischer, J. C. Goldschmidt, P. Loper, G. H. Bauer, R. Bruggemann, K. Kramer, D. Biner, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 044912 CrossRef .
A. C. Atre, A. Garcia-Etxarri, H. Alaeian and J. A. Dionne, J. Opt., 2012, 14, 024008 CrossRef .
M. Peters, J. C. Goldschmidt, P. Loper, B. Gross, J. Upping, F. Dimroth, R. B. Wehrspohn and B. Blasi, Energies, 2010, 3, 171–193 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lissau, J. M. Gardner and A. Morandeira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23226–23232 CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. G. C. R. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953–6959 CAS .
A. Karotki, M. Kruk, M. Drobizhev, A. Rebane, E. Nickel and C. W. Spangler, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2001, 7, 971–975 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, T. Miteva, Y. Avlasevich, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov, G. Nelles, A. Cheprakov, A. Yasuda, K. Mullen and G. Wegner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7693–7696 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Knyukshto, A. M. Shul'ga, E. I. Sagun and E. I. Zen'kevich, Opt. Spectrosc., 2006, 100, 590–601 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford, A. Nayak, M. L. Muro-Small, S. Goeb, M. J. Therien and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14203–14211 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Wu, H. M. Guo, W. H. Wu, S. M. Ji and J. Z. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 11446–11460 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Rachford, S. Goeb and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2008, 130, 2766–2767 CrossRef CAS .
E. O. Danilov, A. A. Rachford, S. Goeb and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 5763–5768 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Du and R. Eisenberg, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 502–506 RSC .
H. C. Kim, S. Kreiling, S. Hartner, L. Hesse, A. Greiner and N. Hampp, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 5323, 899–903 Search PubMed .
B. H. Cumpston, S. P. Ananthavel, S. Barlow, D. L. Dyer, J. E. Ehrlich, L. L. Erskine, A. A. Heikal, S. M. Kuebler, I. Y. S. Lee, D. McCord-Maughon, J. Q. Qin, H. Rockel, M. Rumi, X. L. Wu, S. R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Nature, 1999, 398, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sinkel, A. Greiner and S. Agarwal, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 1857–1867 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Charlton, R. Dabestani and J. Saltiel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 3473–3476 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Islangulov and F. N. Castellano, Angew. Chem., 2006, 45, 5957–5959 CAS .
K. Tanaka, N. Kitamura, K. Inafuku and Y. Chujo, Nucleic Acids Symp. Ser., 2009, 53, 183–184 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Islangulov and F. N. Castellano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5957–5959 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Inafuku and Y. Chujo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 4378–4380 RSC .
R. S. Khnayzer, J. Blumhoff, J. A. Harrington, A. Haefele, F. Deng and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 209–211 RSC .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, L. Bromberg and A. Concheiro, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 848–860 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Yoan C. Simon	Yoan C. Simon was born in Montpellier (France) in 1981. He obtained his Master's degree in Materials Chemistry from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de Montpellier (2004). He then worked for his PhD at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst (USA) with E. Bryan Coughlin on carborane-containing polymeric architectures. In 2008, he was awarded an ETH Fellowship to develop photocross-linkable monomers towards 2D polymers with A. Dieter Schlüter in Zürich (Switzerland). Since 2009, he has been leading a research group focusing on light- and mechanically responsive materials at the Adolphe Merkle Institute, University of Fribourg, in the Polymer Chemistry and Materials group.
Christoph Weder	Christoph Weder is Professor of Polymer Chemistry and Materials at the Adolphe Merkle Institute of the University of Fribourg, Switzerland. He also serves as director of this recently established center for fundamental and applied research on soft nanomaterials. His main research interests are the design, synthesis, investigation of structure–property relationship, and exploitation of novel functional polymer systems, in particular advanced materials with unusual optic or mechanical properties, stimuli-responsive polymers, biomimetic materials, and polymer nanocomposites.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the Stokes (downconversion) and anti-Stokes (upconversion) shifts. Solid and dotted lines represent absorption and emission spectra, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic energy-level diagram of TTA upconversion. The process involves population of the first singlet excited state of a sensitizer (1S*) upon absorption of incident light, intersystem crossing (ISC) to the triplet excited state (3S*), triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) from the sensitizer to an emitter (3E*), and triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) of two emitter triplets to populate the emitter singlet excited state (1E*), which decays radiatively (fluorescence). Colored solid lines represent the intended radiative processes (absorption and emission). Vertical dashed lines represent undesired nonradiative and radiative decay pathways. Slanted dotted arrows represent cascading energy transfer processes. GS denotes the ground states (for simplicity drawn at the same energy level) and ΔE is the energy difference between incident and emitted light.	 
ΦUC = ½fΦISCΦETΦTTAΦE	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Examples of combinations of sensitizers (right) and emitters (left) together with their respective absorption and emission maxima. Dashed arrows are drawn between pairs that have successfully been used for TTA-UC.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of Dexter and Förster type energy transfer processes. S: sensitizer, E: emitter. (b) Schematic representation of the active-sphere (Perrin) approximation.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Pictures illustrating the gradual population of the 9,10-diphenylanthracene triplet excited states and the subsequent phenomenon of TTA-UC in a non-deaerated solution of DPA (2 × 10−3 M) and PdOEP (10−5 M) in N,N-dimethylformamide at: (a) t = 0 s; (b) t = 0.25 s; (c) t = 0.7 s; and (d) t = 2.1 s.	 

 	Fig. 6  Double logarithmic plot showing the DPA fluorescence (blue circles) and PtOEP phosphorescence (red circles) intensity of a PtOEP–DPA solution in 1,1,2-trichloroethane (PtOEP and DPA concentrations: 1.5 × 10−4 and 1.0 × 10−1 M, respectively) as a function of the excitation power density. Solid lines are linear fits to the data. While the residual PtOEP phosphorescence scales always linearly with the excitation power density, the upconverted emission (DPA fluorescence) clearly shows a threshold that marks a transition from a quadratic to a linear relation. The green vertical lines indicate the power density that can be achieved by solar irradiance at 532 nm under AM 1.5 conditions, when integrated over a bandwidth of 1, 10, and 100 nm, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2008 by The American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Chemical structures of a PdOEP sensitizer, DPA emitter and P(EO-EP). (B) Picture of a blend film comprising 0.17 wt% and 0.01 wt% of PdOEP and DPA in Tecoflex® SG-80A. The sample was irradiated with a green laser (peak wavelength 543 nm, power density 350 mW cm−2). The upconverted blue emission is clearly visible without any filters.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Upconverted PL intensity as a function of temperature of PdOEP/DPA-doped P(EO-EP) films as a function of temperature, λexc = 544 nm, 2 mJ per pulse at 10 Hz. (b) Integrated emission intensity plot for the data shown in (a). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Upconversion system with the sensitizing metal complex tethered to the light-emitting conjugated polymer.79	 

 	Fig. 10  Examples of potential polymeric architectures where the sensitizer and the emitter are covalently linked together.	 

 	Fig. 11  Transmission electron microscopy image of core–shell upconverting particles synthesized by reduction of a perylene salt on a porphyrin core. The scale bar is 50 nm. (Reproduced from ref. 1.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Examples of nanoparticles and nanocontainers obtained by various emulsion procedures. (Top) Upconverting nanocontainers where the dyes are dissolved in a decaline solution. (Reproduced from ref. 87. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (Left) Upconversion from green to blue by an aqueous suspension of dye-doped (DPA–PdOEP) cross-linked poly(n-butyl acrylate) nanoparticles. The 500 nm short-pass filter allows to cut out the scattered green light from the 543 nm HeNe laser. (Right) Transmission electron micrograph of the dye-doped polymeric nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the incorporation of an upconverting layer in a photovoltaic cell.	 

 	Fig. 15  Supermolecular chromophore system for NIR upconversion developed by Singh-Rachford et al. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2010 The American Chemical Society.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
