Electrocatalytic valorisation of biomass derived chemicals  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CY00533H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CY00533H
(Perspective)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 3216-3232Electrocatalytic valorisation of biomass derived chemicals

        
          
            Lei 
            Du
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Yuyan 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Junming 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Geping 
            Yin
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chunyu 
            Du
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aThe Gene and Linda Voiland School of Chemical Engineering and Bioengineering, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA. E-mail: junming.sun@wsu.edu
bPacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA. E-mail: yuyan.shao@pnnl.gov; yong.wang@pnnl.gov
cSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
Received 
      16th March 2018
    , Accepted 6th June 2018First published on 7th June 2018AbstractElectrocatalytic conversion of biomass-derived platform chemicals to value-added products can provide an approach to store large scale renewable energy (wind, solar) in chemical bonds. Recently, tremendous efforts have been made in this field. Herein, we discuss some general design principles of electrochemical devices for the conversion of biomass-derived intermediates. We primarily focus on the review of electro-valorisation of glycerol and also summarize the most recent advances in electrochemical conversion of 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural (HMF) through oxidation. We emphasize the role of both precious and non-precious metal electrocatalysts in electrocatalytic conversion in various practical electrochemical reactors and how to avoid competing reactions such as hydrogen evolution. We also provide a perspective on future opportunities and challenges in this field, including catalytic materials discovery, mechanism understanding, and system design.Lei DuDr. Lei Du received his PhD degree in the year 2017 from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He is currently a lecturer at the Harbin Institute of Technology. He studied at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Washington State University as a visiting student directed by Dr. Yuyan Shao and Prof. Yong Wang. His main research interests include chemical conversion in electrocatalysis, its mechanism and devices.Yuyan ShaoDr. Yuyan Shao received his PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology. He is a Senior Scientist at the US DOE Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. His research is focused on the fundamental study and high performance functional materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, etc. He is named in Thomson Reuters' Highly Cited Researchers-2014. He has published over 90 papers.Junming SunDr. Junming Sun is an assistant research & major professor in Prof. Yong Wang's group at Washington State University, USA. He received his PhD degree from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007 (supervised by Prof. Xinhe Bao), after which he worked with Prof. Bruce C. Gates at UC Davis (2007–2008) and then with Prof. Yong Wang at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (2008–2011) as a postdoc researcher. His current research interests include fundamental understanding and rational design of acid–base/supported metal catalysts for biomass derived small oxygenates and bimetallic catalysts for hydrodeoxygenation.Geping YinDr. Geping Yin is a professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology. She received her PhD degree in the year 2000 at the Harbin Institute of Technology supervised by Prof. Derui Zhou. Prof. Yin worked at the Tokyo Institute of Technology (1985) and Yokohama National University (2008) as a visiting scholar. She focuses on the fields of advanced electrode materials, chemical power source systems, etc.Chunyu DuDr. Chunyu Du is a Professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He received his PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2004. He has engaged in research in the fields of electrocatalysis and batteries for more than twenty years and has published about 140 research papers in refereed journals. His main research interests include the development of novel electrode materials and the mechanisms of electrochemical reactions.Yong WangDr. Yong Wang has been a Laboratory Fellow at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Associate Director of the Institute for Integrated Catalysis (http://iic.pnl.gov) since 2008. In 2009, Dr. Wang assumed a joint position at Washington State University and PNNL. He was elected as a fellow of the National Academy of Inventors (NAI) and a member of the Washington State Academy of Sciences (WSAS), and is a fellow of 4 major professional societies: AIChE (American Institute of Chemical Engineers), ACS (American Society of Chemistry), RSC (Royal Society of Chemistry), and AAAS (American Association for the Advancement of Science). He has won numerous awards including the Presidential Green Chemistry Award, 3 R&D 100 Awards, 2 PNNL Inventor of the Year Awards, and Battelle Distinguished Inventor Award.
1. Introduction
Biomass is an abundant and renewable hydrocarbon resource, which, however, has not been well utilized. Due to the increasing demand for sustainable energy, zero CO2 emission, etc., biomass conversion has become a popular research topic in the last few decades.1–4 Biomass-derived intermediates are potentially key raw materials for chemical and energy sources.2,5–9 One of the largest biomass products all over the world is lignocellulose that consists of 40–50 wt% cellulose.6 Cellulose can be further hydrolysed into C5 and C6 sugars.7,10–12 Using biological or thermochemical processes, these sugars can be readily converted into platform molecules such as alcohols, glycerol, furans, levulinic acid, and 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural (HMF),11,13 which can be further valorised to value-added products.
The widely-used valorisation strategy for biomass-derived chemicals is the traditional thermal catalytic processes, which are commonly performed at relatively high temperatures (e.g., 200–300 °C) and sometimes consume a large amount of hydrogen (i.e., in hydrodeoxygenation). Such operating conditions present great challenges in minimizing side reactions of reactive intermediates, maintaining hydrothermal stability of catalysts that are employed in the condensed phase to accommodate the wet nature of biomass feedstocks, realizing sustainability, etc.2 In contrast, electrocatalytic conversion using nanocatalysts has shown unique advantages. First, electrocatalysis can proceed at low temperatures (typically less than 100 °C) and ambient pressure. More importantly, hydrogen is directly extracted from water and/or electrolyte solutions if needed (no additional hydrogen source is needed).14,15 Second, electrochemical systems usually use module design which can be linearly scaled up or scaled down.16 Third, electrochemical reactions are sensitive to electric double-layers, which can be tuned by the properties of electrocatalysts, applied potentials, electrolytes, etc. Thus, the selectivity to products is expected to be facilely controlled by electrochemical parameters.
Electrochemical conversions are usually carried out in fuel cells and electrolysers (detailed devices and systems will be discussed in the following section). Coupled electrochemical reactions must be considered during the design of device integrations towards a certain electro-valorisation reaction. For example, water oxidation, i.e. the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), is generally coupled with electro-reduction of biomass derived intermediates17 and other reduction reactions such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),18–20 electro-reduction of CO2,21 or nitrogen reduction to ammonia.22–25 However, the coupled OER is pretty sluggish due to a large overpotential of over 0.3 V,18,26,27 leading to low efficiency of the whole device. Accordingly, electro-oxidation of platform chemicals provides a highly valuable and efficient anodic process (up to almost 100% selectivity in some cases, which will be discussed below) to replace the inefficient OER. On the other hand, the competitive electrochemical reactions should also be considered, especially the possible competition of the HER and electro-reduction of biomass-derived intermediates.
For the past few years, considerable efforts have been made on studying electro-valorisation of biomass-derived intermediates.17,28,29 Among hundreds of biomass-derived intermediates,11,12 electro-valorisation of glycerol and 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural (HMF) has been investigated intensively. Glycerol is a representative polyol and one of the most yielded products from biomass, with an annual world production of several million tonnes.11,30,31 HMF, another important building block with furan rings and –CO and –OH groups all in its molecular structure,17 provides a good model system for investigating biomass upgrading.
Some good review papers regarding electro-valorisation of glycerol28 and HMF17 have been published in the past few years. A previous review on glycerol mainly discussed the dependence of glycerol conversion on the composition and structure of precious electrocatalysts.28 Here we focus on recent progress in the past five years, particularly research using practical devices. On the other hand, a recent HMF review included both reduction and oxidation of HMF, with a focus on HMF conversions, but lacked discussions on possible competition between HMF reduction and the HER,17 which are included here. For further insight into these electro-valorisation processes for practical applications, better understanding of both the nature of electrocatalysts and the relationships between these electro-valorisation processes and the competing HER in aqueous media is required. Herein, we summarize some general principles for the electrochemical device design and review recent advances in this field with a focus on the correlation between the nature of electrocatalysts, electrocatalysis conditions, and activity/selectivity in practical electrocatalytic reactors. We also pay attention to possible water redox reactions during the conversions (i.e., the HER is a possible competing reaction for electro-reduction of biomass-derived intermediates) and provide some promising approaches to suppress the competitions.
2. Electro-valorisation devices and systems
Electro-valorisation processes include electro-oxidation and electro-reduction reactions, which are usually performed in aqueous acidic or alkaline electrolytes. The schematic illustration of typical devices for alkaline electro-valorisation is shown in Fig. 1 and is used as an example to briefly discuss the suitability of these devices as follows.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of electro-valorisation devices including electrolyzers and fuel cells in alkaline electrolytes. R, O and P represent reductants, oxidants and products, respectively. Illustrations in acidic media and any other possible exhausted chemicals are omitted. 
In an electrolytic cell, electric energy is supplied to drive electro-oxidation reactions of biomass-derived intermediates and hydrogen production (hydrogen evolution reaction, HER) at anodes and cathodes, respectively (Fig. 1). As a feasible alternative, the HER can be replaced by electro-reduction of biomass-derived intermediates (will be discussed in the following paragraph). On the other hand, electro-oxidation of biomass-derived intermediates (in a lower potential range than the applied potential of oxygen reduction, i.e. <0.9 vs. RHE,32 reversible hydrogen electrode) can be coupled with the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) to build so-called cogeneration fuel cells,28,33 which produce both electric energy and useful oxygenates such as aldehydes and carboxylic acids by feeding polyols such as glycerol at anodes (Fig. 1). However, so far, the progress on cogeneration fuel cells has been slow because most electro-oxidation reactions of biomass derived intermediates require potentials higher than 0.9 V and the output voltages of such cogeneration fuel cells are very low which makes them much less attractive.34,35
Electro-reduction reactions of biomass derived intermediates include hydrogenation (or hydrodeoxygenation) or hydrogenolysis of polyols, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, carboxyls, etc. These reactions typically consume electric energy and form products at cathodes in an electrolyser instead of a fuel cell (Fig. 1). Such electro-reduction reactions are commonly coupled with the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). However, the OER itself has many challenges like slow kinetics and low efficiency.18,36,37 Thus, electro-oxidation of biomass-derived chemicals has been studied to replace the OER38,39 in such a configuration due to its lower overpotential than that of the OER and its additional economic benefits by producing potentially value-added oxygenate products. Such integrations may potentially provide value-added products at both sides and store electric energy in chemical bonds.17 It should be pointed out that the HER is a major competing reaction for electro-reduction of biomass-derived chemicals at cathodes. A currently feasible strategy is to employ catalysts with medium/high HER overpotentials (especially non-PGMs) such as Fe, Ni, Cu, Ag, Pb, etc. metals that suppress the HER.
Based on the above discussions, when considering suitable devices (fuel cells vs. electrolytic cells) for electro-valorisation in aqueous solutions, the electrochemical reactions of oxygen and hydrogen (ORR, OER and HER) must be considered. Further, the electro-valorisation of biomass-derived chemicals can also be extended to organic electrolytes (e.g., acetone,16 ionic liquids,40,41etc.) due to their possible wide electrochemical windows and ability to solubilize most organic compounds, which could be helpful in controlling product selectivity. Such variable integrations including both fuel cells and electrolysers with different anodic/cathodic reactions and electrolytes present good opportunities to develop new energy conversion and storage technologies that need further exploration.
As we discussed above, glycerol and 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural (HMF) conversions by electrochemical approaches have been investigated more intensively than other biomass-derived intermediates, which is probably due to the unique properties of these two platform chemicals. Glycerol is a simple C3 polyol that contains two C–C bonds and three C–OH bonds in one molecule. Through controllable valorisation, glycerol can be converted into value-added building blocks such as hydroxypyruvate, dihydroxyacetone, glycerate, glyceraldehyde, tartronate, etc. Besides, glycerol includes C–OH bonds with different chemical properties, i.e. terminal vs. middle hydroxyls, which can be an ideal model molecule to investigate the selective conversion of polyols. Investigations on glycerol are of great practical significance since glycerol is one of the most yielded biomass-derived intermediates. On the other hand, HMF, another important building block with simple molecular structures including furan rings and –CO and –OH groups, provides a promising model system for investigating the upgrading of ring compounds. Thus, the following discussions primarily focus on electro-valorisation of glycerol and HMF.
3. Electro-oxidation of glycerol
Glycerol is a main by-product of biodiesel production and its yield has increased rapidly for the past few years.30,42 Although crude glycerol can be directly burned to generate heat, this application is less attractive due to its low heating value.28 Glycerol has also been studied as a fuel for fuel cells,43–55 but it might not be the most efficient way of utilizing glycerol because of its sluggish kinetics and incomplete oxidation56 compared with C1 molecules including methanol and formic acid, leading to uncompetitive output power density. Interestingly, the incomplete oxidation of glycerol commonly results in value-added chemicals. With the increased production and the decreased price,11,30 upgrading of glycerol to value-added chemicals instead of being used as the anode feed in fuel cells therefore attracts more and more attention.
Traditional thermal catalytic conversion of glycerol has been intensively investigated to produce lactic acid,57 1,2-propanediol,58 1,3-propanediol, acrolein,31 hydrogen (glycerol reforming),59–62 esterification products between glycerol and acetic acid63 and ketalization products between glycerol and acetone.64 However, the catalysts for thermal conversion still suffer from rapid deactivation due to the polymerization/coking reactions of both reactants and intermediates as well as low hydrothermal stability of catalysts. For example, the remarkable fading of a Bi modified Pt catalyst was observed after running for 20 h at 80 °C in aqueous glycerol solution although the introduction of a second metal enhanced the durability.65 Besides, the selectivity of traditional thermal catalysis is low in some cases. For example, the thermal catalytic selectivity on Bi modified Pt catalysts for the conversion from glycerol to dihydroxyacetone (middle hydroxyl oxidation product) is only 53%.65 In contrast, there have been some promising results reported on the electrocatalytic valorisation of glycerol:66 optimized electrocatalytic oxidation of glycerol tends to more selectively form middle hydroxyl oxidation products (close to 100% selectivity) instead of terminal hydroxyl oxidation, i.e. higher selectivity to dihydroxyacetone.67 These facts indicate that the electro-valorisation is promising to handle glycerol conversion in terms of selectivity and stability. It should be mentioned that products of glycerol electrooxidation including glycerate, tartronate, dihydroxyacetone, glycolate, etc. are important additives for food, polymers, cosmetics or pharmaceuticals. The selective formation of these value-added products needs to be further explored.
The hydroxyl groups in glycerol molecules can be selectively electro-oxidized to form aldehyde (R–CHO), ketone (R–CO–R') and/or carboxyl (R–COOH) groups. Several value-added products such as hydroxypyruvate, glycerate, glyceraldehyde, tartronate, dihydroxyacetone, etc. with different degrees of oxidation (DOX) have been produced via glycerol electro-oxidation on precious metal catalysts such as Pt,68–73 Au (ref. 74–81) and Pd.68,82–86 Noteworthily, glycerol oxidation was recently reported to be coupled with the ORR in cogeneration fuel cells34,87 or with the HER in electrolytic cells,88,89 providing a promising direction for electro-valorisation of glycerol in electrochemical reactors that concurrently generate electric energy or hydrogen.
A good review was published a few years ago regarding glycerol electro-oxidation.28 To date, research on glycerol conversion has been mainly focused on precious metal catalysts.90–97 In this review, we include newly published results and use some typical examples to illustrate how precious metal catalysts influence the performances.
3.1 Pt-based catalysts
Pt has been studied as an anode catalyst for glycerol oxidation in a cogeneration fuel cell. Typically, supported Pt nanoparticles with a face-centred cubic structure (Fig. 2a) and a mean size of 2–3 nm (Fig. 2b) were employed in the glycerol electro-oxidation.34 As shown in Fig. 2c, Pt nanoparticles are uniformly dispersed on Cabot Vulcan XC-72R carbon black, and employed as anode catalysts in an alkaline cogeneration fuel cell.34 In such a device, glycerate and tartronate are mainly produced at a lower anode potential (below ∼0.5 V). The best selectivity for glycerate is 49%, whereas the selectivity for tartronate is 50%.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD pattern, (b) particle size distribution, and (c) TEM image of a Pt/C catalyst. The pictures are taken with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2012) Elsevier B.V. 
As the pH of the electrolyte increases, the power density of the fuel cell increases, and the selectivity to C3 acetates (glycerate, tartronate and mesoxalate) also increases.34 The enhanced power density could be attributed to the improved OH− diffusion rate and increased OHads coverage on Pt surfaces. The selectivity to C3 acetates may be attributed to the promoted deprotonation/dehydrogenation of hydroxyls in glycerol and therefore alkoxy intermediate formation on Pt facets by the enhanced OH− concentration/OHads coverage.98 It is notable that both the oxalate (fully oxidized C2 product) and mesoxalate (fully oxidized C3 product) with a higher DOX are produced at a lower glycerol concentration, indicating that the deep electro-oxidation reaction occurred at low reactant concentration albeit the low selectivity.34 In addition, it is well-known that the introduction of a secondary metal can generate synergetic effects and thus remarkably promotes the electro-oxidation of intermediates, the so-called bifunctional mechanism.99,100 This has been demonstrated in other systems, for example, Ru in PtRu alloys promotes the generation of OHads species, which can accelerate the oxidation of the poisonous intermediate CO, leading to significantly enhanced activity of the alloy catalysts in methanol electro-oxidation reaction.99,100 Such an activity enhancement is also found for glycerol oxidation reactions,75,80,95 leading to the production of compounds with high DOX such as tartronate on Pt catalysts in the presence of Ru and Rh.101 However, the selectivity to tartronate is still <50% and formate is observed on PtRu/C catalysts.88
Based on the above discussions, chemicals with higher DOX are favoured at higher pH values and lower glycerol concentrations in alkaline media. In some cases where a secondary metal (e.g., PtRu, PtRh, etc.) is used to facilitate the hydroxyl oxidation, deep oxidation of glycerol occurs. In addition, the secondary Ru metal in PtRu/C catalysts can also tune the binding energy of glycerol (optimal value is 1.75 eV when the atomic ratio of Pt/Ru is 1:1), leading to higher glycerol oxidation activity.102
The selectivity to certain products thus far reported is still low,34e.g., the best selectivity to glycerate is 49%, tartronate is 50%, glycolate is 22% and oxalate is 28%. In order to achieve higher selectivity to glycerate, milder oxidation of glycerol is required. We mentioned previously that increased pH in alkaline media promoted production with high DOX through enhancing deprotonation/dehydrogenation of hydroxyls in glycerol and facilitating alkoxy intermediate formation. On the other hand, the acidic media probably favour products with low DOX. In combination with tuneable electrode potentials, glycerate may be generated with improved selectivity.

Fig. 3a shows the product selectivity versus anode potential on a Pt/C catalyst after a reaction for 10 h at 60 °C in an acidic electrolyser.103 When the applied anode potential is 1.097 V, the selectivity to glycerate reaches up to 87.0% at 91.8% glycerol conversion (Fig. 3b).103 More importantly, a glycerate selectivity of 80% at 10% glycerol conversion has been achieved in a practical continuous-flow electrocatalytic reactor (Fig. 3c), which presents great promise of Pt/C catalysts to efficiently convert glycerol into glycerate.103 It should be noted that glyceraldehyde, which is easily oxidized to glycerate, can be obtained with a reasonable selectivity at a low applied anode potential (i.e., ∼48.8% selectivity at 0.697 V in Fig. 3a).93,103
 Fig. 3  (a) Product selectivity after reaction for 10 h in 0.1 M glycerol and 0.5 M H2SO4 at 60 °C under different operating anode potentials; (b) glycerol conversion vs. product selectivity over 20 wt% Pt/C at a potential of 1.097 V; (c) time-on-stream data for a continuous-flow reactor fed with 0.1 M glycerol at 0.18 mL min−1 (GLA and GAD represent glycerate and glyceraldehyde, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2014) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
By comparing the main products in alkaline and acidic media, it seems that the products on the Pt/C catalyst in acidic media and at high potentials present even lower DOX than those in alkaline media in a low potential range. In this regard, high pH values in both alkaline and acidic media tend to generate high DOX products. This is likely due to i) the blocked active sites by specific adsorption of anions (i.e. SO42−) in acidic media,104 ii) the promoted oxidation of hydroxyl groups in glycerol to alkoxy by lowering the active barrier98 in alkaline media, and iii) the enhanced oxidation kinetics when more OHads species adsorb on Pt surfaces because the oxidation of alcohol is governed by both –ROads and OHads.98
The above-mentioned products are all based on the preferential oxidation of terminal hydroxyls in glycerol. The oxidation of secondary/middle hydroxyls leads to the formation of dihydroxyacetone intermediates or products, which are widely employed as important feedstocks in the pharmaceutical industry. However, the selective oxidation of secondary hydroxyls rather than the terminal ones is relatively more difficult, likely due to the steric effect105 and reaction probability (two in three are terminal hydroxyls in the glycerol). A successful example is the use of a reversible Bi-modified Pt/C catalyst. The Pt/C catalyst produces dihydroxyacetone as the main product, even reaching a selectivity of 100% at ∼0.4 V in Bi2O3-saturated (∼10−5–10−4 M) 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with 0.1 M glycerol.67 At ∼0.6 V, the concentration of products to dihydroxyacetone reaches a maximum with a selectivity close to 90%.67 This high selectivity is in clear contrast to the traditional thermal catalysis, in which a selectivity of only 63% is achieved for dihydroxyacetone production on Bi modified Au–Pt bimetallic catalysts.65 This remarkable enhancement in selectivity highlights the advantages of electro-valorisation in some cases compared with the conventional thermal catalysis. Generally, it was found that the presence of Bi on Pt catalysts shows high selectivity to dihydroxyacetone at low potentials (0.4–0.8 V), to glyceraldehyde and glycerate at moderate potentials (0.8–1.3 V), and to formate and glycolate at high potentials (1.3–1.5 V).67 However, on Pt/C without Bi, the selectivity to dihydroxyacetone is almost 0, where glyceraldehyde is the main product at low potentials, and the selectivity for other products is similar to that on Bi modified Pt/C.67 These facts indicate that Bi, which starts to desorb from Pt surfaces at 0.6–0.7 V,106 is necessary for blocking terminal alcohol oxidation (probably changing the adsorption mode of glycerol85) and promoting dihydroxyacetone production (secondary hydroxyl oxidation). This is why a similar trend of products except dihydroxyacetone and glyceraldehyde is observed for Pt with and without Bi modification respectively at potentials >0.6 V. Although this report illustrates a possibility of tuning the oxidation of glycerol, the detailed reaction mechanism and structural information on electrocatalysts are still unclear and need further investigation. Some other reports employed PdBi for glycerol oxidation,85,107–110 however, these papers did not report selectivity to products. In addition, investigations using practical electrochemical reactors remain to be explored. Recently, a PtSb/C catalyst was reported as an efficient electrocatalyst for glycerol conversion to dihydroxyacetone,111 indicating some secondary metals other than Bi are likely promising promoters for selective oxidation of glycerol.
To summarize, Pt-based catalysts present tremendous advantages in forming products with low DOX, such as dihydroxyacetone, glyceraldehyde, glycerate, tartronate, etc., which can be facilely tuned by changing electrolyte pH values and applied potentials. Through appropriate surface modification, the selectivity to secondary hydroxyl oxidation is significantly improved.
3.2 Au-based catalysts
Au catalysts, which commonly present remarkably high resistance to CO poisoning74–76,112,113 and kinetic promotion112 during organic molecule oxidation, have also been studied for upgrading glycerol.114 Interestingly, Au catalysts show almost no activity towards glycerol oxidation in neutral or acidic media.115 Therefore, the following discussion is focused on alkaline media.
Two types of Au catalysts prepared by organic phase nanocapsule and aqueous phase methods were denoted as Au/C-NC (Fig. 4a) and Au/C-AQ (Fig. 4b), respectively, which were then applied in cogeneration fuel cells.35 The Au/C-AQ catalyst shows an averaged particle size of 4.7 nm, larger than that of Au/C-NC (3.0 nm)35 due to the efficient protection by an organic stabilizer (oleylamine) from agglomeration.116 Both Au catalysts mainly produced tartronate (approximately 70% selectivity on Au/C-NC in Fig. 4c and 60% selectivity on Au/C-AQ in Fig. 4d) at 0.3–0.5 V.35 This result is different from that on Pt, on which mixed glycerate and tartronate were produced in the similar potential range (ref. 34, section 3.1).34 The high selectivity to tartronate rather than mixed glycerate and tartronate indicates the more facile oxidation of glycerate to tartronate on Au catalysts than that on Pt. In addition, after 12 h operation under the same conditions, the Au/C-AQ catalyst presents a glycerol conversion of 95.6% (Fig. 4d), which is much higher than that on Au/C-NC (89.2% Fig. 4c).35 The low efficiency of Au/C-NC could be attributed to the residual hydrophobic ligands from oleylamine that may block the active sites,116 which probably decreases the retention time of reactants/intermediates, leading to less active sites for further electro-oxidation and higher selectivity to tartronate rather than other high DOX products.35 Although this paper does not analyse the effects of Au particle size on product selectivity, it is hypothesized that the catalyst size is probably another factor that needs to be further investigated.
 Fig. 4  TEM images and particle size histograms of (a) Au/C-NC and (b) Au/C-AQ and electrocatalytic selective oxidation of glycerol on (c) Au/C-NC (55 wt%) and (d) Au/C-AQ (55 wt%) in anion exchange membrane direct glycerol fuel cells under optimized conditions for high yields of tartronate. Anode catalyst: Au/C-AQ or Au/C-NC (1 mgAu cm−2); cathode catalyst: Fe–Cu-based catalyst (Acta 4020, 3 mg cm−2), anion exchange membrane (A901, Tokuyama Inc.). Anode fuel: 8.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol, 30 ml, 1.0 ml min−1; cathode fuel: high purity O2, 100 ml min−1, ambient pressure. Glycerol:Au = 1:1300 (mol:mol); cell voltage: 0.1 V; cell temperature: 60 °C; reaction time: 12 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V. 
At higher electrode potentials, products with higher DOX were generated on Au catalysts,117 showing a similar trend to that on Pt. As the anode potential increases from 0.35 to 0.65 V, selectivity to mesoxalate increases from ∼0% to 57% at the expense of tartronate (drops from 79% to 26%) on Au/C in 2.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol at 50 °C for 1 h.117 Further increasing the applied anode potential on the Au catalyst, however, will lead to C–C bond cleavage. For example, over 40 wt% Au nanoparticles (2.5 nm) supported on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) (Fig. 5a and b), a high selectivity to glycolate (85%) was observed at a potential of 1.6 V (Fig. 5c).87 Other previous independent reports also support this conclusion.78,79,118 In addition to the applied potentials, the influence of the pH value and reactant concentration on the selectivity on Au catalysts shows a similar trend to those on Pt catalysts.87 Recently, the support and loading of Au were also reported to influence the product selectivity albeit to a lesser extent.119
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image and (b) XRD pattern of Au/CNT; (c) electro-oxidation of glycerol (2.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol) on the Au/CNT catalyst under different applied potentials for 3 h at room temperature. The pictures are taken with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared with Pt-based catalysts, the Au-based catalysts show more products with higher DOX including tartronate, mesoxalate and even C–C cleavage products such as glycolate, oxalate, etc., indicating that Au promotes oxidation reactions of hydroxyls and C–C cleavage of glycerol.
3.3 Pd-based catalysts
Compared to Pt- and Au-based catalysts, Pd-based catalysts generally present lower barriers for C–C bond cleavage and higher oxidative activity toward high DOX products such as formate. Indeed, ∼7% formate was found on a Pd/C catalyst at 0.8 V in 0.1 M NaOH (ESI of ref. 120), whereas almost none was observed in higher basic concentrations (0.5–4.0 M KOH) on Au/C catalysts even at a potential of up to 1.0 V.87 Over the Pd/C catalyst at 0.8 V, glycerate and glycolate were the dominant products in 0.1 M NaOH,120 indicating that Pd-based catalysts probably efficiently promoted the oxidation of terminal hydroxyls and C–C bond cleavage.120–123 Notably, the introduction of Sn (ref. 124 and 125) and/or employing nitrogen doped carbon as the support126 in Pd-based composite catalysts could inhibit the C–C bond cleavage and thus lead to favourable production of C3 compounds.
3.4 Summary of glycerol oxidation on Pt-, Au- and Pd-based catalysts

Table 1 summarizes the product selectivity in electrochemical devices/reactors on the precious metal catalysts as discussed above. In general, the potential is an important factor affecting the reaction pathway, i.e. higher applied anode potentials result in products with higher DOX on the same catalysts. Despite the highly debated reaction mechanisms, some general trends for glycerol electro-oxidation in alkaline/acidic media can be summarized on the Pt-, Au- and Pd-based catalysts, as shown in Fig. 6.119,127,128
Table 1 The main products on several typical catalysts




Catalysts
Potential
Media
Temperature
Main products
Ref.




Pt
<0.5 V
KOH
50 °C
Glycerate & tartronate

34



Pt
0.697 V
H2SO4
60 °C
Glyceraldehyde & glycerate

103



Pt
1.097 V
H2SO4
60 °C
Glycerate

103



Pt–Bi
0.4–0.6 V
H2SO4
Room temp.
Dihydroxyacetone

67



Au
0.3–0.5 V
KOH
60 °C
Tartronate

35



Au
0.65 V
KOH
50 °C
Mesoxalate

117



Au
1.0 V
KOH
Room temp.
Glycolate & oxalate

87



Au
1.6 V
KOH
Room temp.
Glycolate

87



Pd
0.8 V
NaOH
Room temp.
Glycolate & glycerate

120





 Fig. 6  Glycerol and its partial products after electro-oxidation on various precious catalysts mainly in alkaline media (red words mean uncertain routes on certain catalysts). 
Generally, glycerol electro-oxidation goes through route I (blue pathways in Fig. 6) on Pt, Au and Pd catalysts, during which the terminal hydroxyl is initially oxidized. Over Bi modified Pt catalysts, however, oxidation of internal secondary hydroxyl groups (route II, yellow pathways in Fig. 6) is favoured to produce dihydroxyacetone in acidic media. Through route I, Pt- and Au-based catalysts tend to produce C3 products due to the low activity and selectivity for C–C bond cleavage. Compared with Pt, however, Au catalysts favour the production of C3 compounds with higher DOX. At higher applied potentials (i.e., mainly glycolate products at 1.6 V (ref. 87)), C–C bond cleavage will be promoted on Au catalysts toward the production of C2 chemicals. In addition, glycerol is probably oxidized directly rather than going through the glyceraldehyde intermediate to glycerate on Au catalysts, followed by the successive oxidation of glycerate to tartronate/mesoxalate or glycolate depending on the applied potentials. The reaction pathway to the oxalate formation is still unclear on Au catalysts. On Pd catalysts, direct or indirect glycerol oxidation is proposed to produce glycerate, which is then converted into glycolate via C–C bond cleavage.
Based on the above discussions, the nature of catalysts (Pt, Au and Pd) is the dominant factor for selectivity, which probably affects the form of adsorbed glycerol and binding energetics. However, the effects of nanoscale factors such as facets, size distributions, catalyst–support interactions, etc. on glycerol electro-valorisation remain to be explored. Learning from the catalyst design/synthesis for other electrocatalysis systems including the ORR, OER, HER, etc., the properties such as compositions (e.g. incorporation of secondary transition metal, etc.),129–133 nanostructures (e.g. core–shell and hierarchical porous structures),134–136 preferential facets137–140 and supports (e.g. strong catalyst–support interactions, etc.).141,142 are likely helpful to tune electrochemical activity, durability and mass transfer.143 Thus the rational design of electrocatalysts is expected to further optimize the conversion and selectivity for biomass upgrading.144 In addition, higher pH values/potentials and lower glycerol concentrations facilitate deep oxidation of glycerol, which lead to the formation of high DOX products such as glycolate, mesoxalate and oxalate depending on the catalysts employed (Fig. 6). It is expected that by tuning pH, the adsorbed OHads could be optimized, accelerating hydroxyl oxidation to alkoxy groups by both thermodynamics (lowering active barrier) and dynamics (increasing oxidation kinetics). Together with the applied electrode potentials, biomass-derived intermediates with hydroxyls can be valorised to value-added products in a controlled way.
3.5 Non-precious catalysts
Although the precious metal catalysts show promising performances in glycerol valorisation, their high cost limits their practical applications. In addition to precious metal catalysts, several investigations employed low cost transition metal catalysts, such as Ni-based catalysts.145–149 Recently, the products including glycerate, glycolate, tartronate and oxalate have been reported on Ni-based alloy (NiFe, NiCo, NiFeCo) catalysts although the reported selectivity is still lower compared with those of Pt-, Au- and Pd-based catalysts.150 However, it is notable that the Ni-based catalysts are not stable in alkaline media at high potentials, e.g. 1.6 V in ref. 150. Therefore, the real catalysts for glycerol oxidation in these cases should be Ni-based (oxy)hydroxides. In this regard, some transition metal-based (oxy)hydroxides are likely promising in handling glycerol upgrading. Moreover, TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl), a known mediator in homogeneous catalysis, was found to be a good promoter to produce dihydroxyacetone on glassy carbon electrodes in NaHCO3 media. In particular, longer reaction time results in comparable amounts of hydroxypyruvate, which could be generated by precise oxidation of dihydroxyacetone (route II in Fig. 6).151 This work bridges the homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, which is a unique and efficient strategy in electro-valorisation of biomass-derived chemicals. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no report yet on non-precious metal catalysts in electro-valorisation of glycerol in practical electrochemical reactors. So far, there have been very limited investigations on non-precious catalysts for glycerol oxidation, which deserve more effort in the future.
4. Electro-valorisation of 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural (HMF)
Cyclic compounds are another key biomass-derived products. Unique structures of furan rings and branches make them possible to be either oxidized or reduced, most products of which are important raw materials for the fine chemical industry. 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural (HMF) is one of the main five-membered heterocyclic molecules derived from biomass,5,152,153 which contains furan rings and –CO and –OH groups, and has been intensively investigated using electrocatalytic approaches.17 A recent review systematically summarized the progress related to furanic compounds conversion with a focus on metal catalysts and homogeneous catalysts.17 In this section, we mainly discuss typical precious metal catalysts and new advances using phosphide as an electrocatalyst in understanding the effects of the catalyst nature on the electro-valorisation processes of HMF. We also discuss possible competitions between the HER and HMF electro-reduction.
4.1 Electro-oxidation of HMF on precious catalysts
An HMF molecule consists of furan rings and aldehyde and hydroxyl functional groups that can be oxidized through aldehyde oxidation and/or hydroxyl oxidation processes into several value-added chemicals such as 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furan carboxylic acid (HFCA), 2-formyl-5-furan carboxylic acid (FFCA), 2,5-furan dicarboxylic acid (FDCA), 2,5-furan dicarbaldehyde (FDC), etc. (Fig. 7).17,154
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of HMF and its products. 
Similar to the glycerol electro-oxidation, the electro-oxidation from HMF to FDCA typically requires metallic catalysts such as Au, Pd, and Pd–Au alloys.17 On Au/C catalysts, the major product is HFCA (98% selectivity) at potentials from 0.6 to 0.9 V, indicating that the initial aldehyde oxidation (Fig. 7) was favoured on Au and higher potential (1.2 V) was required for further hydroxyl branch oxidation to FFCA and aldehyde oxidation to FDCA (selectivities to FFCA and FDCA are 5% and 14%).154 Differently, Pd/C catalysts achieved a higher FDCA selectivity at both 0.6 V and 0.9 V, where the major products are FFCA (64%) and HFCA (70%), respectively.154 This observation indicates that HMF oxidation on Pd/C probably follows two competitive pathways including FDC (lower potentials) and HFCA (higher potentials) as intermediates, which depend on the potential ranges. Note that alloying Au and Pd is found to change HMF oxidation mechanisms. Fig. 8a presents Pd–Au alloy nanoparticles supported on carbon black. This catalyst was employed as an anode catalyst in an alkaline flow reactor at 25 °C. The product distribution at different applied potentials after 1 h reaction was analysed and is plotted in Fig. 8b. Interestingly, the selectivity to FDCA shows a “volcanic curve” vs. applied potentials. When the applied potential is increased from 0.5 to 0.9 V, the selectivity to FDCA increases,154 which can be attributed to the enhanced HFCA selectivity, quickly producing FFCA and successive FDCA at high potentials, and probably optimized reacting pathways by Au and Pd. At 0.9 V, the molar selectivity to FDCA reaches up to a maximum of 83%, after which the FDCA selectivity decreases with further increased potentials, probably due to the surface oxidation of metal atoms and thus deactivation of the active sites for FDCA production. Since the oxidation sequence of these products is HFCA → FFCA → FDCA or FDC → FFCA → FDCA (Fig. 7), it is still unclear why the Pd–Au alloy significantly enhances the selectivity to FDCA and whether the reaction goes through the FDC intermediate or not since almost no FDC was detected.154
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of Pd1Au2/C (b) product distribution on Pd1Au2/C for the oxidation of 0.02 M HMF in 0.1 M KOH. Reaction conditions: 1 h; AEM-electrolysis flow cell; 25 °C.154 Copyright (2014) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
From the discussions above, the combination of Pd and Au significantly improves the oxidizing ability towards HMF to FDCA in terms of tuned electronic structures, modified reaction pathways or other unknown mechanisms. It is enlightened that the selectivity to FDCA can be improved by introducing a secondary component in nanostructures.
4.2 Electro-oxidation of HMF on non-precious catalysts
In ref. 39, TEMPO was used as a mediator in an electrochemical cell, achieving an FDCA yield of almost 100% from HMF at 1.54 V. TEMPO is a representative non-precious homogeneous catalyst. In comparison with homogeneous catalysis, heterogeneous catalysis has the advantages of facile product separation and high stability. Recently, non-precious catalysts such as phosphide38,155 and sulphide156 have been investigated for converting HMF into FDCA (Fig. 9a). For instance, ∼100% HMF conversion and an FDCA yield of ∼90% were achieved on CoP at 1.423 V in 1.0 M KOH media under atmosphere conditions (Fig. 9b), while hydrogen was produced at cathodes simultaneously.38 Notably, at such a potential, the oxygen evolution reaction does not take place. In addition, this work integrated both HMF oxidation at anodes and H2 evolution at cathodes in an electrolyser with the same CoP catalysts at both sides. The required voltage to achieve a current density of 20 mA cm−2 is only 1.44 V, which is 150 mV lower than that for water splitting.38 This report successfully integrates the electro-valorisation of biomass and the HER by replacing the sluggish OER with value-added HMF oxidation reaction, which could be an important approach for future applications. In addition, the HMF oxidation mechanisms on CoP catalysts seem to be different from those with TEMPO (Fig. 9c).39 During TEMPO-mediated electrocatalytic HMF oxidation, FFCA apparently accumulated and reached a maximum until FDCA started to form (Fig. 9c).39 FDCA was formed immediately after starting electrolysis in CoP-catalytic processes (Fig. 9b).38 However, the fundamental reasons for the significantly enhanced selectivity are still unclear; further effort is needed to understand the mechanisms of the HMF conversion.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the electrochemical cells with Co-P/CF catalyzed HMF oxidation; (b) concentrations of HMF and oxidation products over the charge passed during the chronoamperometry experiment conducted at 1.423 V in 1.0 M KOH containing 50 mM HMF.38 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during the electrochemical oxidation of HMF at 1.54 V in 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO (DFF and HMFCA represent the same products FDC and HFCA in this paper, respectively).39 Copyright (2015) Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
It is noteworthy that HMF can be converted to FDCA with a selectivity of around 80% on Au/TiO2 catalysts by traditional thermal catalysis,157 which is much lower than the above-mentioned electrocatalytic conversions. In addition, in the above electrocatalytic conversions, non-precious metal electrocatalysts were used which could significantly decrease the cost. To summarize it, the electro-valorisation provides a better solution for HMF conversion with lower cost than traditional technologies such as thermal catalysis.
4.3 Electro-reduction of HMF: in competition with the HER
The electro-reduction of HMF usually includes hydrogenation and hydrodeoxygenation reactions.17 Hydrogen can be directly extracted from electrolytes (i.e., water, H+ and OH−), eliminating the requirement of an external hydrogen supply as opposed to the thermal catalysis. However, it is a great challenge to control the competitive reactions between the HER and the hydrogenation of furan rings/aldehyde branches or hydrodeoxygenation of aldehyde/hydroxyl branches on the catalyst surfaces. Therefore, efforts should be made to lower the HER activity/selectivity (i.e., increase the HER overpotential). This should be emphasized, but effective approaches are rarely reported.17 Herein, some insights regarding the competition between the HER and electro-reduction of HMF are provided.
It is well known that the Pt group metals (PGMs) show much lower overpotential for the HER, i.e. probably high selectivity for the HER. The HER is thus expected to take place simultaneously if these metals or catalysts with low hydrogen-evolution overpotential are employed. From this point of view, catalysts such as Fe, Ni, Cu, Ag, Pb, etc. metals (mostly non-PGMs) with medium/high HER overpotential are good choices for electro-reduction of biomass-derived intermediates.
A series of non-PGMs were investigated for the conversion of HMF to 2,5-dihydroxymethylfuran (DHMF) by aldehyde hydrogenation. It was found that the production of DHMF strongly depends on the catalysts and pH of the solution: metals such as Fe, Ni, Cu, and Pb are beneficial for DHMF generation in acidic solution,158 while Fe, Ni, Ag, Zn, Cd and In work well for DHMF production in neutral media.159 An interesting fact is that the presence of glucose not only enhances the formation of DHMF but also suppresses the hydrogenolysis of HMF in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution,159 the reason for which is unclear yet.
An Ag electrode with a dendritic fractal morphology has been successfully prepared on a Cu substrate via galvanic displacement (Fig. 10a). The high-surface-area Ag electrode catalyst selectively produced DHMF in borate buffer (pH 9.2) solution.160 After cathodic polarization at −0.56 V for a while, the Faradaic efficiency and selectivity for DHMF formation were both ∼99%,160 indicating that the HER and other competing reactions are negligible. Notably, the Ag electrodes are stable after polarization (Fig. 10b). Moreover, the applied potential range significantly affects the Faradaic efficiency and yield. In a lower potential range between −0.36 and −0.26 V, both the Faradaic efficiency and selectivity for DHMF are low, due to the side-reaction consuming HMF.160 However, when the potential is decreased to lower than −0.36 V, where hydrogen atom adsorption starts to take place in the absence of HMF, the Faradaic efficiency and selectivity to DHMF increase and reach up to ∼100% at −0.56 V, confirming the possible synergy between adsorbed hydrogen and HMF conversion.160 Upon further decreasing the potential, the hydrogen coverage increases, which can suppress the adsorption of HMF molecules. When the applied cathodic potential is lower than −0.86 V, while the selectivity to DHMF remains high (more than 97%), the Faradaic efficiency for DHMF decreases rapidly (lower than 90%), due to the competing HER.160 Although more electric energy will be consumed in the high overpotential range, the conversion rate of DHMF is much higher than that in the low overpotential range.160
 Fig. 10  SEM images of Ag electrodes (a) as-deposited and (b) after polarization at −0.56 V for HMF reduction.160 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
An electrochemical operation protocol is another potential way to suppress the HER. Recently, a half-wave rectified alternating current (a.c.) electrochemical method (a.c. voltage of −5 V to 0 V with a frequency of 400 Hz) using an amidoxime-functionalized carbon electrode was proposed to extract uranium element from sea water, which avoided side reactions involving ions such as Na+, Ca2+, etc. in sea water.161 This suppression of side reactions can be attributed to modifying amidoxime that can provide chelation sites for preferable binding to targeted uranyl ions and reduced/deposited charge-neutral species, e.g. (UO2); on the other hand, the voltage that alternates between cathodic polarization and zero leads to extraction of uranium and releasing of other ions without specific binding, respectively.161 During these processes, water splitting was remarkably suppressed by enhancing the frequency at a high voltage (−5 V) (see Fig. S2 in ref. 161). This work provides a promising strategy to improve selectivity by modifying electrodes to enhance the binding ability to targeted value-added products and suppressing unfavourable side reactions including the HER by employing alternating current. Moreover, further investigation particularly theoretical modelling is still needed to understand the electrocatalytic hydrogenation/hydrodeoxygenation. The adsorption free energy is considered a good descriptor for catalyst activity. For example, adsorbed H (H*) is regarded as a main intermediate during the HER. The adsorption free energy of H*, i.e. ΔGH*, is thus a descriptor to estimate the adsorption strength on different catalysts.129,162 ΔGH* < 0 indicates strong binding of the intermediate, leading to occupied active sites and poisoning; meanwhile, ΔGH* > 0 means weak binding, leading to the intermediate activation barrier.143,163 Both of them decrease HER exchange current densities and |ΔGH*| ≈ 0 is thus a necessary but insufficient factor for high HER activity.143,164 |ΔGH*| ≫ 0 on different catalysts is a good parameter to screen catalysts with a high barrier for the HER, which is probably good for targeted electro-reduction reactions. Similarly, some suitable descriptors like ΔGintermediates for intermediates of biomass conversion also need to be established. The integration of ΔGH* and ΔGintermediates should be proposed to screen good catalysts for electro-reduction of biomass-derived chemicals.
5. Concluding remarks
Electrocatalytic conversion is promising to produce value-added chemicals from biomass-derived platform chemicals due to its mild operation conditions, high conversion efficiency/selectivity and scalability. It also allows renewable energy storage on a large scale. We reviewed the electro-valorisation of glycerol and 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural, as affected by catalysts, electrochemical systems, electrocatalytic operation parameters such as electrode potentials and electrolytes (particularly pH values).
In addition to the advantages of electrochemical oxidation of biomass intermediates as discussed above, electrocatalysis also shows promise for electrochemical hydrogenation (i.e., reduction process). For example, electrocatalysis presented a much higher TOF of 3899 h−1 towards hydrogeneration of benzaldehyde to benzyl alcohol on Pd/C compared with thermal catalysis (1062 h−1).165 The activation energies of benzaldehyde hydrogenation through electrocatalysis were lower than those of thermal catalysis.165 However, there are still some scientific challenges and technology gaps for practical applications in terms of selectivity, efficiency and conversion rates.
There has been very limited fundamental understanding of the catalyst composition/structure–property relationship regarding electro-valorisation of biomass (e.g. how a secondary metal, metal size distribution, preferential facet, porous structure, metal composition/segregation, etc. affect biomass valorisation and the underlying mechanisms), which is the foundation for the rational design of catalysts.144,166,167 Moreover, organic biomass molecules such as glycerol, HMF, etc. are more complicated, conversions of which involve much more electrons than other electrocatalytic reactions such as the HER, ORR/OER. In this regard, electro-valorisation of biomass intermediates can be more challenging compared with the relatively simple HER, ORR/OER because of the abundance of intermediates, for which a good model system will be even more crucial. Combination of advanced characterization tools (e.g. in situ characterization for both products and electrode/electrolyte interfaces)168–170 and theory will also be very helpful in revealing the underlying reaction mechanism and interface evolution. Homogenous electrocatalysis using mediators also shows great potential for electro-valorisation.171 For example, allylic C–H bond oxidation has been successfully achieved by homogenous electrocatalysis, presenting not only scaled-up production (demonstrated on 100 grams) but also a broad choice of substrates.16 However, a greater challenge for homogenous catalysis is the separation of catalysts and products.
We should point out that biomass upgrading involves many types of molecules, including furfural,172–175 phenol,176–178 cellulose,179 lignin,180–182 levulinic acid,183–186 ethers,187 aldehydes,188 alcohols,189 ketones,190 quercetin,191 sugar alcohols,192–196 sugars,118,197–201etc. Therefore, electrocatalytic conversion of biomass derived chemicals is a broad open space for exploration. Furthermore, photocatalysis39 and biocatalysis202 can be integrated with electrocatalysis, i.e. photoelectrocatalysis and bioelectrocatalysis, for biomass valorisation. Photocatalysis is a promising strategy to directly utilize clean solar energy to upgrade biomass-derived chemicals,39 which likely accelerates the kinetics/selectivity by employing photogenerated electron–hole pairs, while biocatalysis shows a possibility for researchers to learn from biological organisms such as bacteria that is an existing model for certain conversion processes (e.g. CO2 reduction202). A multidisciplinary approach involving electrochemistry, photochemistry, biology, materials and catalysis, etc. can be developed for more efficient electro-valorisation of biomass-derived intermediates. By taking advantage of knowledge and advanced experimental and theoretical tools that have been developed for other electrocatalysis systems such as the ORR, OER, HER for the past decades,129,134,135,137–139,141–143 biomass electrocatalysis could potentially provide great opportunities for scientific discovery and technological development. It could play an important role in developing a sustainable society, particularly for the electric grid and chemical/fuel industries by storing renewable electric energy and producing key feedstock chemicals.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) (No. DE-FG02-05ER15712, FWP-47319, and DE-0014561). Y. S. acknowledges the support from the Chemical Transformation Initiative of Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). The PNNL is operated by Battelle for the DOE under Contract DE-AC05-76RLO1830. This work is also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21433003). L. D. acknowledges the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (Grant No. 2018M630364).
Notes and references
H. Wang, J. Male and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1047–1070 CrossRef .
C. Liu, H. Wang, A. M. Karim, J. Sun and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7594–7623 RSC .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301–312 RSC .
M. W. Nolte and B. H. Shanks, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 7–18 CrossRef .
A. Corma, S. Iborra and A. Velty, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2411–2502 CrossRef PubMed .
I. T. Horvath and P. T. Anastas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2169–2173 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, X. Zhao, A. Wang, G. W. Huber and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11559–11624 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef PubMed .
B. E. Logan and K. Rabaey, Science, 2012, 337, 686–690 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Sheldon, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 950–963 RSC .

          T. Werpy, G. Petersen, A. Aden, J. Bozell, J. Holladay, J. White, A. Manheim, D. Eliot, L. Lasure and S. Jones, Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass, Volume 1-Results of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas,  2004 Search PubMed .

          J. E. Holladay, J. F. White, J. J. Bozell and D. Johnson, Top Value-Added Chemicals from Biomass-Volume II—Results of Screening for Potential Candidates from Biorefinery Lignin,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. J. Bozell and G. R. Petersen, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 539–554 RSC .
A. M. Couper, D. Pletcher and F. C. Walsh, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 837–865 CrossRef .
J. D. Watkins, J. E. Taylor, S. D. Bull and F. Marken, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 3357–3360 CrossRef .
E. J. Horn, B. R. Rosen, Y. Chen, J. Tang, K. Chen, M. D. Eastgate and P. S. Baran, Nature, 2016, 533, 77–81 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kwon, K. J. P. Schouten, J. C. van der Waal, E. de Jong and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6704–6717 CrossRef .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cheng, N. Singh, J. A. Macia-Agullo, G. D. Stucky, E. W. McFarland and J. Baltrusaitis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13304–13313 CrossRef .
J. Herranz, J. Durst, E. Fabbri, A. Patru, X. Cheng, A. A. Permyakova and T. J. Schmidt, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 4–28 CrossRef .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Norskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 57–68 CrossRef .
V. Kyriakou, I. Garagounis, E. Vasileiou, A. Vourros and M. Stoukides, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 2–13 CrossRef .
V. Rosca, M. Duca, M. T. de Groot and M. T. Koper, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2209–2244 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Cheng and Q. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 967–984 CrossRef .
L. Du, L. Luo, Z. Feng, M. Engelhard, X. Xie, B. Han, J. Sun, J. Zhang, G. Yin, C. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Shao, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 245–252 CrossRef .
M. Simoes, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2106–2124 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bellini, M. Bevilacqua, M. Innocenti, A. Lavacchi, H. A. Miller, J. Filippi, A. Marchionni, W. Oberhauser, L. Wang and F. Vizza, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, D3032–D3043 CrossRef .
C. A. G. Quispe, C. J. R. Coronado and J. A. Carvalho Jr, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 475–493 CrossRef .
H. W. Tan, A. R. Abdul Aziz and M. K. Aroua, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 118–127 CrossRef .
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 57–69 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Holade, C. Morais, T. W. Napporn, K. Servat and K. B. Kokoh, ECS Trans., 2014, 58, 25–35 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Xin and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119-120, 40–48 CrossRef .
J. Qi, L. Xin, D. J. Chadderdon, Y. Qiu, Y. B. Jiang, N. Benipal, C. H. Liang and W. Z. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 154, 360–368 CrossRef .
L. Han, S. Dong and E. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9266–9291 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef .
N. Jiang, B. You, R. Boonstra, I. M. Terrero Rodriguez and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 386–390 CrossRef .
H. G. Cha and K. S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328–333 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Shi, J. F. Brennecke and E. J. Maginn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 6250–6255 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Meng, L. Aldous, B. S. Pilgrim, T. J. Donohoe and R. G. Compton, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 1369–1375 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Zhang and H. Liu, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 1100–1111 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Matsuoka, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe, M. Matsuoka and Z. Ogumi, J. Power Sources, 2005, 150, 27–31 CrossRef .
C. W. Xu, R. Zeng, P. K. Shen and Z. D. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 1031–1035 CrossRef .
P. K. Shen and C. W. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 184–188 CrossRef .
C. W. Xu, Z. Q. Tian, P. K. Shen and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2610–2618 CrossRef .
J. F. Gomes, V. L. Oliveira, P. M. P. Pratta and G. Tremiliosi, Electrocatalysis, 2015, 6, 7–19 CrossRef .
A. Falase, K. Garcia, C. Lau and P. Atanassov, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1488–1491 CrossRef .
H. J. Kim, S. M. Choi, S. Green, G. A. Tompsett, S. H. Lee, G. W. Huber and W. B. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 366–375 CrossRef .
M. Mougenot, A. Caillard, M. Simoes, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and P. Brault, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 372–379 CrossRef .
W. Hong, C. Shang, J. Wang and E. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2910–2915 RSC .
Y. P. Zuo, L. Wu, K. Cai, T. T. Li, W. M. Yin, D. Li, N. Li, J. W. Liu and H. Y. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17725–17730 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Zanata, P. S. Fernández, H. E. Troiani, A. L. Soldati, R. Landers, G. A. Camara, A. E. Carvalho and C. A. Martins, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 445–455 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhang, L. Xin, J. Qi, D. J. Chadderdon and W. Z. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136, 29–39 CrossRef .
Y. X. Chen, M. Bellini, M. Bevilacqua, P. Fornasiero, A. Lavacchi, H. A. Miller, L. Q. Wang and F. Vizza, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 524–533 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schnaidt, M. Heinen, D. Denot, Z. Jusys and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 661, 250–264 CrossRef .
Y. Shen, S. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Ren and H. Liu, Chemistry, 2010, 16, 7368–7371 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang and H. Liu, Catal. Lett., 2007, 117, 62–67 CrossRef .
A. M. Karim, C. Howard, B. Roberts, L. Kovarik, L. Zhang, D. L. King and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2387–2394 CrossRef .
D. L. King, L. Zhang, G. Xia, A. M. Karim, D. J. Heldebrant, X. Wang, T. Peterson and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 206–213 CrossRef .
Z. Wei, A. M. Karim, Y. Li, D. L. King and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2015, 322, 49–59 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, A. M. Karim, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Wei, D. L. King and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2012, 287, 37–43 CrossRef .
W. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Wang, J. Gao and J. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 632–636 CrossRef .
M. R. Nanda, Y. Zhang, Z. Yuan, W. Qin, H. S. Ghaziaskar and C. Xu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 56, 1022–1031 CrossRef .
A. Villa, S. Campisi, C. E. Chan-Thaw, D. Motta, D. Wang and L. Prati, Catal. Today, 2015, 249, 103–108 CrossRef .
A. C. Garcia, Y. Y. Birdja, G. Tremiliosi-Filho and M. T. M. Koper, J. Catal., 2017, 346, 117–124 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, Y. Birdja, I. Spanos, P. Rodriguez and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 759–764 CrossRef .
V. Bambagioni, C. Bianchini, A. Marchionni, J. Filippi, F. Vizza, J. Teddy, P. Serp and M. Zhiani, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 241–251 CrossRef .
F. S. Lopes, T. Nogueira, C. L. do Lago and I. G. R. Gutz, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 2516–2519 CrossRef .
B. Habibi and S. Ghaderi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5115–5125 CrossRef .
P. S. Fernandez, C. A. Martins, M. E. Martins and G. A. Camara, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 686–691 CrossRef .
C. C. Caliman, L. M. Palma and J. Ribeiro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F853–F858 CrossRef .
C. A. Martins, P. S. Fernández, H. E. Troiani, M. E. Martins and G. A. Camara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 717–718, 231–236 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, S. C. S. Lai, P. Rodriguez and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6914–6917 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Z. Jeffery and G. A. Camara, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1129–1132 CrossRef .
M. Simoes, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 93, 354–362 CrossRef .
J. L. Bott-Neto, A. C. Garcia, V. L. Oliveira, N. E. de Souza and G. Tremiliosi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 735, 57–62 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon and M. T. M. Koper, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5420–5424 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yongprapat, A. Therdthianwong and S. Therdthianwong, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2012, 42, 483–490 CrossRef .
S. Yongprapat, S. Therdthianwong and A. Therdthianwong, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 87–93 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhang, L. Xin and W. Z. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9393–9401 CrossRef .
S. Dash and N. Munichandraiah, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H197–H202 CrossRef .
D. Renard, C. McCain, B. Baidoun, A. Bondy and K. Bandyopadhyay, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 463, 44–54 CrossRef .
M. Zhiani, H. Rostami, S. Majidi and K. Karami, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 5435–5441 CrossRef .
M. Simoes, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 40–49 CrossRef .
R. S. Ferreira, M. J. Giz and G. A. Camara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 697, 15–20 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Xin, J. Qi, Z. Wang and W. Li, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2150–2152 RSC .
J. de Paula, D. Nascimento and J. Linares, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 689–700 CrossRef .
M. S. Xiao, Y. Q. Miao, W. W. Li, Y. Yang and X. C. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 209–216 CrossRef .
M. Schell, Y. H. Xu and Z. Zdraveski, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 18962–18969 CrossRef .
G. Yildiz and F. Kadirgan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 725–730 CrossRef .
G. Yildiz and F. Kadirgan, Ann. Chim., 1994, 84, 455–465 Search PubMed .
L. Roquet, E. M. Belgsir, J. M. Leger and C. Lamy, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 2387–2394 CrossRef .
A. Hamelin, Y. H. Ho, S. C. Chang, X. P. Gao and M. J. Weaver, Langmuir, 1992, 8, 975–981 CrossRef .
R. S. Gonçalves, W. E. Triaca and T. Rabockai, Anal. Lett., 1985, 18, 957–973 CrossRef .
M. Avramov-Ivic, J. M. Léger, B. Beden, F. Hahn and C. Lamy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 351, 285–297 CrossRef .
M. L. Avramov-Ivić, J. M. Leger, C. Lamy, V. D. Jović and S. D. Petrović, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1991, 308, 309–317 CrossRef .
B. N. Zope, D. D. Hibbitts, M. Neurock and R. J. Davis, Science, 2010, 330, 74–78 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Gasteiger, N. Markovic, P. N. Ross and E. J. Cairns, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 12020–12029 CrossRef .
T. Yajima, H. Uchida and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2654–2659 CrossRef .
L. Huang, J.-Y. Sun, S.-H. Cao, M. Zhan, Z.-R. Ni, H.-J. Sun, Z. Chen, Z.-Y. Zhou, E. G. Sorte, Y. J. Tong and S.-G. Sun, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7686–7695 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, H. W. Kim, S. Lee, J. Han, D. Lee, J.-R. Kim, T.-W. Kim, C.-U. Kim, S.-Y. Jeong, H.-J. Chae, B.-S. Kim, H. Chang, W. B. Kim, S. M. Choi and H. J. Kim, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1683–1690 CrossRef .
H. J. Kim, J. Lee, S. K. Green, G. W. Huber and W. B. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1051–1056 CrossRef PubMed .
N. M. Markovic, T. J. Schmidt, B. N. Grgur, H. A. Gasteiger, R. J. Behm and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8568–8577 CrossRef .
F. Frusteri, F. Arena, G. Bonura, C. Cannilla, L. Spadaro and O. Di Blasi, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 367, 77–83 CrossRef .
S. Uhm, Y. Yun, Y. Tak and J. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1375–1379 CrossRef .
A. Zalineeva, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 705–717 CrossRef .
A. Zalineeva, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 335–338 CrossRef .
C. Coutanceau, A. Zalineeva, S. Baranton and M. Simoes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 15877–15886 CrossRef .
A. Zalineeva, A. Serov, M. Padilla, U. Martinez, K. Artyushkova, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and P. B. Atanassov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3937–3945 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lee, H. J. Kim, E. J. Lim, Y. Kim, Y. Noh, G. W. Huber and W. B. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2877–2887 RSC .
P. Rodriguez, Y. Kwon and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 177–182 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-h. Zhang, T. Zhu, Y.-j. Liang, C.-j. Zhang, S.-t. Shi and C.-W. Xu, J. Energy Inst., 2015, 89, 325–329 CrossRef .
J. H. Zhang, Y. J. Liang, N. Li, Z. Y. Li, C. W. Xu and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 156–159 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, S. J. Raaijman and M. T. M. Koper, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 79–81 CrossRef .
L. Du, F. P. Kong, G. Y. Chen, C. Y. Du, Y. Z. Gao and G. P. Yin, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1025–1036 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Xin, J. Qi, D. J. Chadderdon, K. Sun, K. M. Warsko and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 871–878 CrossRef .
Y. Holade, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn and K. B. Kokoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 162, 205–214 CrossRef .
H. Wang, L. Thia, N. Li, X. Ge, Z. Liu and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 25–31 Search PubMed .
Y. Holade, C. Morais, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn and K. B. Kokoh, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2403–2411 CrossRef .
L. M. Palma, T. S. Almeida, V. L. Oliveira, G. Tremiliosi, E. R. Gonzalez, A. R. de Andrade, K. Servat, C. Morais, T. W. Napporn and K. B. Kokoh, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64476–64483 RSC .
J. E. Frota, A. Purgatto and J. J. Linares, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2014, 41, 253–258 Search PubMed .
A. N. Geraldes, D. F. Silva, J. C. M. Silva, R. F. B. Souza, E. V. Spinace, A. O. Neto, M. Linardi and M. C. Santos, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2014, 25, 831–840 Search PubMed .
A. Zalineeva, A. Serov, M. Padilla, U. Martinez, K. Artyushkova, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and P. B. Atanassov, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 429–435 CrossRef .
A. Zalineeva, A. Serov, M. Padilla, U. Martinez, K. Artyushkova, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and P. Atanassov, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 57, 48–51 CrossRef .
H. B. Wang, L. Thia, N. Li, X. M. Ge, Z. L. Liu and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3174–3180 CrossRef .
L. Xin, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang and W. Li, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1105–1114 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, K. J. P. Schouten and M. T. M. Koper, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1176–1185 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Du, C. Du, G. Chen, F. Kong, G. Yin and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15250–15257 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600621 CrossRef .
S.-I. Lee, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1319 CrossRef .
O. Costa-Nunes, R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, J. Power Sources, 2005, 141, 241–249 CrossRef .
L. C. Seitz, C. F. Dickens, K. Nishio, Y. Hikita, J. Montoya, A. Doyle, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic, H. Y. Hwang, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2016, 353, 1011–1014 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, E. Sutter and R. R. Adzic, Science, 2007, 315, 220–222 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Strasser and S. Kuhl, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 166–177 CrossRef .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2007, 315, 493–497 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Q. Huang, Z. P. Zhao, L. Cao, Y. Chen, E. B. Zhu, Z. Y. Lin, M. F. Li, A. M. Yan, A. Zettl, Y. M. Wang, X. F. Duan, T. Mueller and Y. Huang, Science, 2015, 348, 1230–1234 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, S. G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Du, S. Zhang, G. Chen, G. Yin, C. Du, Q. Tan, Y. Sun, Y. Qu and Y. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14043–14049 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, S. A. Giles, J. Zheng, G. R. Jenness, S. Caratzoulas, D. G. Vlachos and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10141 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Du, Y. Y. Shao, J. M. Sun, G. P. Yin, J. Liu and Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 314–322 CrossRef .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
P. S. Fernandez, C. A. Martins, C. A. Angelucci, J. F. Gomes, G. A. Camara, M. E. Martins and G. Tremiliosi, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 263–268 CrossRef .
N. R. Stradiotto, K. E. Toghill, L. Xiao, A. Moshar and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 2627–2633 CrossRef .
R. M. A. Tehrani and S. Ghani, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 70, 153–157 CrossRef .
D. Y. Chen, G. G. W. Lee and S. D. Minteer, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, F9–F13 CrossRef .
V. L. Oliveira, C. Morais, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, G. Tremiliosi and K. B. Kokoh, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 703, 56–62 CrossRef .
V. L. Oliveira, C. Morais, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, P. Olivi, K. B. Kokoh and G. Tremiliosi, Electrocatalysis, 2015, 6, 447–454 CrossRef .
V. L. Oliveira, C. Morais, K. Servat, T. W. Napporn, G. Tremiliosi-Filho and K. B. Kokoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 117, 255–262 CrossRef .
R. Ciriminna, G. Palmisano, C. D. Pina, M. Rossi and M. Pagliaro, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 6993–6995 CrossRef .
T. Wang, M. S. Ide, M. R. Nolan, R. J. Davis and B. H. Shanks, Energy and Environ. Focus, 2016, 5, 13–17 CrossRef .
J. Nie, J. Xie and H. Liu, J. Catal., 2013, 301, 83–91 CrossRef .
D. J. Chadderdon, L. Xin, J. Qi, Y. Qiu, P. Krishna, K. L. More and W. Li, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3778–3786 RSC .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9913–9917 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, X. Liu, N. Jiang and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13639–13646 CrossRef PubMed .
K. R. Vuyyuru and P. Strasser, Catal. Today, 2012, 195, 144–154 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, Y. Y. Birdja, S. Raoufmoghaddam and M. T. Koper, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1745–1751 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kwon, E. de Jong, S. Raoufmoghaddam and M. T. M. Koper, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1659–1667 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Roylance, T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1840–1847 CrossRef .
C. Liu, P.-C. Hsu, J. Xie, J. Zhao, T. Wu, H. Wang, W. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17007 CrossRef .
E. Skúlason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Björketun, S. D. Gudmundsdóttir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182–18197 CrossRef .
J. Su, Y. Yang, G. Xia, J. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Zeradjanin, J.-P. Grote, G. Polymeros and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 2256–2269 CrossRef .
Y. Song, U. Sanyal, D. Pangotra, J. D. Holladay, D. M. Camaioni, O. Y. Gutiérrez and J. A. Lercher, J. Catal., 2018, 359, 68–75 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, A. Wang, J. T. Miller, X. Liu, X. Yang, W. Wang, L. Li, Y. Huang, C.-Y. Mou and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1546–1553 CrossRef .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Johnson, M. P. Hanrahan, M. Mellmer, J. A. Dumesic, A. J. Rossini and B. H. Shanks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17226–17234 CrossRef .
X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Li, T. Zhang, C.-Y. Mou and J.-F. Lee, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 288–296 CrossRef .
K. Liu, A. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Shen and T. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8533–8541 CrossRef .
R. Francke and R. D. Little, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2492–2521 RSC .
S. Jung and E. J. Biddinger, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6500–6508 CrossRef .
P. Nilges and U. Schröder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2925–2931 RSC .
B. Zhao, M. Chen, Q. Guo and Y. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 139–146 CrossRef .
S. K. Green, J. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. A. Tompsett, W. B. Kim and G. W. Huber, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1869–1879 RSC .
Z. Li, M. Garedew, C. H. Lam, J. E. Jackson, D. J. Miller and C. M. Saffron, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2540–2549 RSC .
B. Zhao, Q. Guo and Y. Fu, Electrochemistry, 2014, 82, 954–959 CrossRef .
N. Singh, Y. Song, O. Y. Gutiérrez, D. M. Camaioni, C. T. Campbell and J. A. Lercher, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7466–7470 CrossRef .
Y. Sugano, R. M. Latonen, M. Akieh-Pirkanniemi, J. Bobacka and A. Ivaska, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2240–2247 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lam, C. B. Lowe, Z. Li, K. N. Longe, J. T. Rayburn, M. A. Caldwell, C. E. Houdek, J. B. Maguire, C. M. Saffron, D. J. Miller and J. E. Jackson, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 601–609 RSC .
D. Shao, J. Liang, X. Cui, H. Xu and W. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 244, 288–295 CrossRef .
R. Tolba, M. Tian, J. Wen, Z.-H. Jiang and A. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 649, 9–15 CrossRef .
A. D. Dwivedi, K. Gupta, D. Tyagi, R. K. Rai, S. M. Mobin and S. K. Singh, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 4050–4058 CrossRef .
L. Xin, Z. Zhang, J. Qi, D. J. Chadderdon, Y. Qiu, K. M. Warsko and W. Li, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 674–686 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Nilges, T. R. dos Santos, F. Harnisch and U. Schröder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5231–5235 RSC .
Y. Qiu, L. Xin, D. J. Chadderdon, J. Qi, C. Liang and W. Li, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1305–1315 RSC .
W. B. Wu and J. M. Huang, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 10189–10195 CrossRef PubMed .
W. R. Fawcett and A. Lasia, Can. J. Chem., 1981, 59, 3256–3260 CrossRef .
L. Dai, Q. Qin, X. Zhao, C. Xu, C. Hu, S. Mo, Y. O. Wang, S. Lin, Z. Tang and N. Zheng, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 538–544 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Green, G. A. Tompsett, H. J. Kim, W. Bae Kim and G. W. Huber, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2410–2420 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. O. Brett and M.-E. Ghica, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 1745–1750 CrossRef .
Y. Kwon, E. de Jong, J. K. van der Waal and M. T. M. Koper, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 970–973 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. F. Matos, L. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes and I. T. E. Fonseca, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 571, 111–117 CrossRef .
J. P. F. Matos, L. F. A. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes, I. T. E. Fonseca, A. Rodes and A. Aldaz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 609, 42–50 CrossRef .
L. Proenca, M. I. S. Lopes, I. Fonseca, F. Hahn and C. Lamy, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 1423–1430 CrossRef .
A. S. Lourenco, F. A. Sanches, R. R. Magalhaes, D. J. Costa, W. F. Ribeiro, K. M. Bichinho, G. R. Salazar-Banda and M. C. Araujo, Talanta, 2014, 119, 509–516 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kwon and M. T. M. Koper, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 455–462 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bin, H. Wang, J. Li, H. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Kang, B. He and Z. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 170–178 CrossRef .
K. Park, P. N. Pintauro, M. M. Baizer and K. Nobe, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1986, 16, 941–946 CrossRef .
A. T. Governo, L. Proença, P. Parpot, M. I. S. Lopes and I. T. E. Fonseca, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1535–1545 Search PubMed .
S. M. Park, B. I. Sang, D. W. Park and D. H. Park, J. Microbiol., 2005, 43, 451–455 Search PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Lei Du	Dr. Lei Du received his PhD degree in the year 2017 from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He is currently a lecturer at the Harbin Institute of Technology. He studied at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Washington State University as a visiting student directed by Dr. Yuyan Shao and Prof. Yong Wang. His main research interests include chemical conversion in electrocatalysis, its mechanism and devices.
Yuyan Shao	Dr. Yuyan Shao received his PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology. He is a Senior Scientist at the US DOE Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. His research is focused on the fundamental study and high performance functional materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, etc. He is named in Thomson Reuters' Highly Cited Researchers-2014. He has published over 90 papers.
Junming Sun	Dr. Junming Sun is an assistant research & major professor in Prof. Yong Wang's group at Washington State University, USA. He received his PhD degree from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007 (supervised by Prof. Xinhe Bao), after which he worked with Prof. Bruce C. Gates at UC Davis (2007–2008) and then with Prof. Yong Wang at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (2008–2011) as a postdoc researcher. His current research interests include fundamental understanding and rational design of acid–base/supported metal catalysts for biomass derived small oxygenates and bimetallic catalysts for hydrodeoxygenation.
Geping Yin	Dr. Geping Yin is a professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology. She received her PhD degree in the year 2000 at the Harbin Institute of Technology supervised by Prof. Derui Zhou. Prof. Yin worked at the Tokyo Institute of Technology (1985) and Yokohama National University (2008) as a visiting scholar. She focuses on the fields of advanced electrode materials, chemical power source systems, etc.
Chunyu Du	Dr. Chunyu Du is a Professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He received his PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2004. He has engaged in research in the fields of electrocatalysis and batteries for more than twenty years and has published about 140 research papers in refereed journals. His main research interests include the development of novel electrode materials and the mechanisms of electrochemical reactions.
Yong Wang	Dr. Yong Wang has been a Laboratory Fellow at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Associate Director of the Institute for Integrated Catalysis (http://iic.pnl.gov) since 2008. In 2009, Dr. Wang assumed a joint position at Washington State University and PNNL. He was elected as a fellow of the National Academy of Inventors (NAI) and a member of the Washington State Academy of Sciences (WSAS), and is a fellow of 4 major professional societies: AIChE (American Institute of Chemical Engineers), ACS (American Society of Chemistry), RSC (Royal Society of Chemistry), and AAAS (American Association for the Advancement of Science). He has won numerous awards including the Presidential Green Chemistry Award, 3 R&D 100 Awards, 2 PNNL Inventor of the Year Awards, and Battelle Distinguished Inventor Award.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of electro-valorisation devices including electrolyzers and fuel cells in alkaline electrolytes. R, O and P represent reductants, oxidants and products, respectively. Illustrations in acidic media and any other possible exhausted chemicals are omitted.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD pattern, (b) particle size distribution, and (c) TEM image of a Pt/C catalyst. The pictures are taken with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2012) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Product selectivity after reaction for 10 h in 0.1 M glycerol and 0.5 M H2SO4 at 60 °C under different operating anode potentials; (b) glycerol conversion vs. product selectivity over 20 wt% Pt/C at a potential of 1.097 V; (c) time-on-stream data for a continuous-flow reactor fed with 0.1 M glycerol at 0.18 mL min−1 (GLA and GAD represent glycerate and glyceraldehyde, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2014) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images and particle size histograms of (a) Au/C-NC and (b) Au/C-AQ and electrocatalytic selective oxidation of glycerol on (c) Au/C-NC (55 wt%) and (d) Au/C-AQ (55 wt%) in anion exchange membrane direct glycerol fuel cells under optimized conditions for high yields of tartronate. Anode catalyst: Au/C-AQ or Au/C-NC (1 mgAu cm−2); cathode catalyst: Fe–Cu-based catalyst (Acta 4020, 3 mg cm−2), anion exchange membrane (A901, Tokuyama Inc.). Anode fuel: 8.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol, 30 ml, 1.0 ml min−1; cathode fuel: high purity O2, 100 ml min−1, ambient pressure. Glycerol:Au = 1:1300 (mol:mol); cell voltage: 0.1 V; cell temperature: 60 °C; reaction time: 12 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image and (b) XRD pattern of Au/CNT; (c) electro-oxidation of glycerol (2.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol) on the Au/CNT catalyst under different applied potentials for 3 h at room temperature. The pictures are taken with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Pt	<0.5 V	KOH	50 °C	Glycerate & tartronate	
34

Pt	0.697 V	H2SO4	60 °C	Glyceraldehyde & glycerate	
103

Pt	1.097 V	H2SO4	60 °C	Glycerate	
103

Pt–Bi	0.4–0.6 V	H2SO4	Room temp.	Dihydroxyacetone	
67

Au	0.3–0.5 V	KOH	60 °C	Tartronate	
35

Au	0.65 V	KOH	50 °C	Mesoxalate	
117

Au	1.0 V	KOH	Room temp.	Glycolate & oxalate	
87

Au	1.6 V	KOH	Room temp.	Glycolate	
87

Pd	0.8 V	NaOH	Room temp.	Glycolate & glycerate	
120


 	Fig. 6  Glycerol and its partial products after electro-oxidation on various precious catalysts mainly in alkaline media (red words mean uncertain routes on certain catalysts).	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of HMF and its products.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of Pd1Au2/C (b) product distribution on Pd1Au2/C for the oxidation of 0.02 M HMF in 0.1 M KOH. Reaction conditions: 1 h; AEM-electrolysis flow cell; 25 °C.154 Copyright (2014) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the electrochemical cells with Co-P/CF catalyzed HMF oxidation; (b) concentrations of HMF and oxidation products over the charge passed during the chronoamperometry experiment conducted at 1.423 V in 1.0 M KOH containing 50 mM HMF.38 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (c) Conversion and yield (%) changes of HMF and its oxidation products during the electrochemical oxidation of HMF at 1.54 V in 0.5 M borate buffer solution containing 5 mM HMF and 7.5 mM TEMPO (DFF and HMFCA represent the same products FDC and HFCA in this paper, respectively).39 Copyright (2015) Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of Ag electrodes (a) as-deposited and (b) after polarization at −0.56 V for HMF reduction.160 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
