Three-dimensional nanoscale organization of polymer solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B900901A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B900901A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5388-5393Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThree-dimensional nanoscale organization of polymer solar cells

        
          
            Svetlana 
            van Bavel
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Erwan 
            Sourty
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Gijsbertus 
            de With
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sjoerd 
            Veenstra
          
        
      bd and 

        
          
            Joachim 
            Loos
          
        
      *abe
aLaboratory of Materials and Interface Chemistry and Soft Matter Cryo-TEM Research Unit, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, NL-5600, MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. E-mail: j.loos@tue.nl;  Fax: +31 40 2445619;   Tel: +31 40 2473034
bDutch Polymer Institute, P.O. Box 902, NL-5600, AX, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
cFEI Company, Achtseweg Noord 5, NL-5651, GG, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
dEnergy research Centre of the Netherlands (ECN), P.O. Box 1, 1755, ZG, Petten, The Netherlands
eLaboratory of Polymer Technology, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, NL-5600, MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 
      15th January 2009
    , Accepted 27th March 2009First published on 7th May 2009AbstractThe performance of polymer solar cells (PSCs) strongly depends on the three-dimensional morphological organization of the compounds within the bulk heterojunction active layer. Donor and acceptor materials should form co-continuous networks with nanoscale phase separation to sustain effective dissociation of excitons into free electrons and holes at the donor/acceptor interface and to guarantee fast charge carrier transport from any place in the photoactive layer to the corresponding electrodes. Here, we describe applications of the technique of electron tomography to directly visualize with nanometre resolution and study in detail the 3D organization in the photoactive layers of PSCs, with the aim of identifying the critical morphology parameters contributing to high efficiency of bulk heterojunction systems.
Introduction
Nanostructured polymer solar cells (PSCs) have emerged as a promising low-cost alternative to conventional silicon-based photovoltaic devices. Since PSCs can be fabricated by processing polymers (together with other organic materials) from solution and depositing them onto different types of substrates by roll-to-roll production processes, they offer important advantages over their inorganic counterparts due to easy and fast processing and low cost of fabrication.1–3
For PSCs to become practical efficient devices, several issues still need to be addressed, including further understanding of their operation and stability and the control of the morphology formation, mainly the morphology of the photoactive layer, which directly determines the performance of PSC devices.4–7 Since the exciton diffusion length is limited to ∼10 nm, it is desirable for higher efficiency of PSCs that the donor and acceptor materials in the photoactive layer are well intermixed by forming phases at the nanometre range, a so-called bulk heterojunction structure.1,2,8,9
Nanoscale phase separation is not the only requirement for morphology of efficient photoactive layers in PSCs (see Table 1). Free electrons and holes, formed upon exciton dissociation, should be transported through the donor and acceptor phases towards the corresponding electrodes. Thus the (nanoscale) phases of donor and acceptor should form continuous percolation pathways leading to the positive and negative electrodes, respectively.4,5
Table 1 Morphology requirements for the photoactive layer of a high-performance polymer solar cell




Requirement
Morphology




Absorption of incident light
Thickness of the photoactive layer


Roughness of interfaces


Exciton dissociation
Maximized interface: phase separation between the donor and acceptor within the exciton diffusion length (∼10 nm)


Charge transport and collection
Short and continuous pathways leading through the donor phase to the positive electrode and through the acceptor phase to the negative electrode


High mesoscopic order and crystallinity of (ideally both) donor and acceptor


Enrichment of donor close to the positive electrode and acceptor close to the negative electrode


Processability
Thermodynamics and kinetics of film formation and phase separation




The transport of charge carriers can be enhanced if donor and/or acceptor (ideally both) are characterized by high mesoscopic order and crystallinity.10 In addition, transport and collection of charges is facilitated in case where there is enrichment of the acceptor material at the side of a photoactive layer close to a negative (metal) electrode and enrichment of the donor material close to a positive electrode (such as commonly used indium-doped tin oxide, or ITO).11 Such favourable concentration gradients of donor and acceptor materials through the thickness of the active layer ensure the existence of the shortest percolation paths to both electrodes and thus limit possibilities for charge recombination.
The efficiency of a bulk heterojunction PSC is thus largely dependent on the local nanoscale organization of the photoactive layer in all three dimensions.5,11
The thin-film nature of photoactive layers with typical thicknesses of about 100–200 nm and the requirement for local morphology information brings into play high-resolution microscopy techniques as the main tools for morphology characterization. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) including conventional imaging and electron diffraction (ED) operation modes,6,11–14scanning electron microscopy (SEM)4,15 and scanning probe microscopy (SPM) – in particular atomic force microscopy (AFM)13,15–20 – have proven their versatility for characterization of the morphology of the photoactive layer. The main difference between TEM (on the one hand) and SPM and SEM (on the other) is that TEM provides mainly morphological information on the lateral organization of thin-film samples by acquisition of 2D projections through the whole (3D) film, whereas SPM and SEM probe the topography or phase de-mixing at the sample surface.
Studies of cross-sections of photoactive layers either by SEM4,15 or by TEM13,21 have shown the potential to yield morphological information in the thickness of the active layer, but still they provide only local 2D information of the specimens in question. Besides, during preparation of cross-sections for TEM-investigations by means of a focused ion beam (FIB),21 it is difficult to avoid excessive heating of a specimen, which, in the case of polymers and other organic materials, may severely affect or even destroy completely the morphology under investigation.
Conventional morphology analysis by microscopy techniques such as TEM, SEM and SPM can not be straightforwardly used to characterize the morphological organization of the active layer in all three dimensions: basically it is limited to observations of the lateral organization. It is, however, the local organization of the active layer in all three dimensions which is responsible for charge carrier formation and transport from any place within the layer to the respective electrodes.
A powerful tool to characterize nanoscale morphology of various specimens in all three dimensions is the technique of electron tomography, also referred to as transmission electron microtomography.22–25 This technique is well-established to study biological structures and, more recently, it was applied to polymeric systems.22,25 Electron tomography uses a series of 2D projections taken by TEM at different angles by tilting the specimen with respect to the electron beam in the TEM column (see Fig. 1). The series of 2D projections thus obtained is subsequently used to reconstruct a 3D image of the specimen on the basis of computerized tomography,26 with nanometre-scale resolution. The resulting 3D image can then be used voxel by voxel to study in detail the specimen's morphological organization.
 Fig. 1  Principles of conventional TEM imaging (a) and electron tomography (b). A TEM image is basically a 2D projection taken of a 3D specimen under investigation: it gives no clear information on the morphological organization in the z-direction and may be difficult to interpret in the case of complex structures. In electron tomography, a series of such 2D projections is taken at various tilting angles by tilting the specimen along the tilt axis inside the TEM column, usually in the range of at least ±70 degrees. The tilt series is later used to reconstruct the 3D image of the specimen. 3D reconstruction is all about recovering the missing z-information of an object point in 3D space that is lost during (2D) projection imaging. 
In this article, we describe applications of electron tomography to three different PSC systems in order to obtain new insights into 3D morphological organization of the photoactive layers and the ways it influences the PSC device performance.
Experimental
All photoactive layers used in this study were prepared by spin-coating a solution of donor and acceptor materials on top of cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) patterned glass substrates covered by a 70 nm thick layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). Solar cell devices were fabricated by depositing a (negative) electrode consisting of LiF (1 nm) and Al (100 nm) on top of an active layer. For more details see the references cited in the next section.
For TEM investigations, the active layers were floated from the water-soluble PEDOT:PSS substrate onto the surface of demineralised water and picked up with 200-mesh copper TEM grids. Bright-field TEM morphology observation, acquisition of tilt series for TEM tomography and acquisition of electron diffraction patterns were performed on a Technai G2 20 and on a TITAN-Krios TEM (both FEI Co.) operated at 200 kV and at 300 kV, respectively. All tilt series were obtained in an automatic fashion by using EXPLORE 3D software, the alignment and reconstruction of the data series was performed by using INSPEC 3D (both FEI Co.), and visualization of the 3D reconstructed volume was carried out with Amira 4.1 (Mercury Computer Systems, Inc.).
Results and discussion

          MDMO-PPV/PCBM system
One of bulk-heterojunction solar cells is based on poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MDMO-PPV) as a donor and the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as an acceptor. Since it was discovered that MDMO-PPV/PCBM solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 2.5% under AM 1.5 conditions can be obtained using chlorobenzene as a solvent for spin-coating, this system has become the subject of detailed studies.16 It was found out that the most efficient solar cells based on MDMO-PPV and PCBM require a high content of 80 wt.-% of the latter.16,18 This is surprising because in polymer–fullerene cells, the polymer absorbs most of the light and fullerene derivatives such as PCBM have an almost negligible absorption coefficient in the visible region. The issue of why efficient MDMO-PPV/PCBM cells require 80 wt.-% of a material that hardly contributes to light absorption is still not completely understood.
It was shown that the better performance at high PCBM loadings is due to higher values of short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF).18 Since films with higher PCBM loadings absorb less light, better values of Jsc should be either due to better dissociation of excitons at the interface between the polymer and PCBM phases and/or due to better transport of free charges to the corresponding electrodes. The overall rise of FF with increasing weight percentage of PCBM indicates a smaller series resistance, and is attributed to more efficient charge transport.
Most of the morphological studies carried out so far on the MDMO-PPV/PCBM system were made using AFM,13,15–20 conventional bright-field TEM,12–14 and SEM4,15 and TEM13 of cross-sections of active layers. They showed that at compositions of >60 wt.-% PCBM, the phase separation sets in with domains of rather pure PCBM distributed in a homogeneous MDMO-PPV/PCBM matrix. It was speculated that MDMO-PPV/PCBM films are built up of interpenetrating networks at high PCBM loadings18 but no networks and no percolations could be observed experimentally with conventional microscopies.
Recently, the first application of electron tomography to visualize the 3D organization of a photoactive layer composed of 20 wt.-% MDMO-PPV and 80 wt.-% PCBM has been reported.5 Some slices acquired at different tilt angles out of the aligned tilt series taken from the MDMO-PPV/PCBM film and used as an input for electron tomography are presented in Fig. 2. These are in essence bright-field TEM images, so (denser) PCBM-rich domains look dark.
 Fig. 2  Several slices taken from the aligned tilt series of MDMO-PPV/PCBM active layer with 80 wt-% PCBM, in the bright-field TEM imaging mode. The corresponding tilt angle is indicated above each slice. The whole series of such slices taken in the range from −74 degrees to +75 degrees with a step of 1 degree is used as an input for 3D reconstruction. Dark domains are rich in PCBM. Some markers (gold particles with a diameter of 20 nm), indicated in one slice by white arrows, were deposited in advance on top of the active layer to facilitate alignment of the tilt series. 
After 3D reconstruction of the tilt series, detailed 3D information about form and size of PCBM-rich domains was obtained. Thanks to the better signal-to-noise ratio, electron tomography revealed in this case that the PCBM-rich domains are interlinked by thin PCBM-rich strands, all together forming a percolating nanoscale network (see the snapshot of the resulted volume reconstruction in Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  A bright-field TEM image (a) of the MDMO-PPV/PCBM film (with 80 wt.-% PCBM), where dark PCBM-rich domains are visible, next to a snapshot of the volume reconstruction, (b) of the same part of the film as obtained by electron tomography. In the volume data, thin PCBM-rich strands connecting PCBM-domains can be discerned. The volume dimensions are 1130 nm × 970 nm × 80 nm. 
The presence of such a nanoscale percolating network results in two advantages for the performance of corresponding solar cell devices. First, these interlinking PCBM domains form an additional interface where more excitons can dissociate into free charges, and second, such a 3D network creates efficient percolations for transport of electrons from any place within the photoactive layer to the top (metal) electrode. Both these aspects are reflected in higher values of short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) and, as a result, higher efficiency of devices made of 80 wt.-% PCBM and 20 wt.-% MDMO-PPV.18
No such beneficial morphology was observed in MDMO-PPV/PCBM layers with 60 wt.-% PCBM, giving rise to poorer solar cell devices.

          Polyfluorene/PCBM system
Recently, a new alternating copolymer, containing a fluorene unit and a benzathiadiazole unit with two neighbouring thiophene rings and abbreviated as PF10TBT, was shown to give rise to efficient polymer solar cells in combination with PCBM. The best power conversion efficiencies of around 4% were obtained for PSCs on basis of PF10TBT characterized by a relatively high molecular weight, viz. an Mw of 189 kg/mol (see the contribution of Veenstra et al. in this issue for more details).
When the technique of electron tomography was applied to the PF10TBT/PCBM photoactive layers giving rise to these most efficient PSC devices, it revealed that the volume of the film consists of the interconnected polymer-rich strands forming a truly three-dimensional network (see Fig. 4). The width of the polymer-rich strands, around several nanometres, is in the right range to benefit exciton dissociation at the interface between the polymer and PCBM. The existence of a polymer-rich 3D nanoscale network benefits hole transport within the whole volume of the active layer to the positive electrode, while adjacent PCBM-rich regions ensure efficient electron transport to the negative (metal) electrode. Indeed, better efficiency of free charges formation and transport is reflected in higher Jsc and FF values of the devices made with high Mw PF10TBT-polymer. Such beneficial 3D morphology was not observed in PF10TBT/PCBM photoactive layers made using the lower Mwpolymer, giving rise to poorer solar cell devices.
 Fig. 4  Outcome of electron tomography applied to the PF10TBT/PCBM films (with high molecular weight PF10TBT-polymer): (a) one slice taken out of the (x,y)-plane of the final 3D dataset with bright-looking polymer strands and darker PCBM-rich regions; (b) a snapshot of the corresponding volume reconstruction showing existence of a 3D nanoscale polymer network (volume dimensions are 1112 nm × 1090 nm × 75 nm, the polymer strands are made here thinner than they are in reality to facilitate visualisation); (c) zoom-in of the same volume (with volume dimensions of 227 nm × 227 nm × 75 nm and the thickness of the polymer strands to scale). 
P3HT/PCBM system
Currently, one of the most promising PSCs, both in terms of efficiency and long term stability, is the system based on regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as the electron donor and the fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as the electron acceptor material. The power conversion efficiencies of this system can be as high as 5%.27–29 An essential step to get this high efficiency is to subject P3HT/PCBM solar cells to an annealing treatment, either at elevated temperature or during slow solvent evaporation (so-called solvent-assisted annealing). Recently, the technique of electron tomography has been applied to perform a comprehensive analysis of the 3D nanoscale organization of the P3HT/PCBM photoactive layers before and after annealing treatment, with aim to determine the critical morphology parameters contributing to the improved performance of annealed P3HT/PCBM devices.11
It has long been known that crystallinity of P3HT increases considerably upon annealing of P3HT/PCBM films. It is evident, for instance, from results obtained by electron diffraction, that the intensity of the Debye–Scherrer ring attributed to the (020) reflections of the P3HT fibrillar crystals increases after thermal annealing (Fig. 5), corresponding to a three-fold increase of the level of P3HT crystallinity (as estimated from the ratio of the P3HT peak areas). This change is accompanied by the improved contrast between P3HT and PCBM observed in bright-field TEM images of P3HT/PCBM films. It can be seen that, in thermally annealed films, the length of P3HT nanowires can be from several hundred nanometers up to a few micrometers. Solvent-assisted annealing was shown to result in the same trends regarding morphology development and device performance of PSCs based on P3HT/PCBM,11 and (for the sake of simplicity) is omitted in the present discussion.
 Fig. 5  
            Bright-field TEM images of 100 nm thick P3HT/PCBM (1/1) photoactive layers: (a) as spin-coated from solution in o-dichlorobenzene, (b) after subsequent thermal annealing at 130 °C for 20 minutes. The insets are electron diffraction patterns acquired at the same spot as TEM images: a broad internal ring is attributed to PCBM nano-crystals and a thin outer ring to (020) reflections of P3HT crystals. (c) The plot of corresponding electron diffraction intensities (normalized to the PCBM-peak maximum). TA refers to thermally annealed layers (solid line) and SC to spin-coated layers (dashed line). 
The volume reconstruction of annealed P3HT/PCBM layers obtained by electron tomography provided 3D information on organization of crystalline P3HT nanowires in the volume of the film. It demonstrated the presence of a 3D nanoscale network of crystalline P3HT nanowires (see Fig. 6). The genuine three-dimensionality of the observed network is confirmed by the fact that P3HT nanowires are inclined in the volume of the film. The existence of a 3D network, rather than a 2D network, is beneficial for hole charge transport from any place within the photoactive layer to the positive electrode.
 Fig. 6  Outcome of electron tomography applied to thermally annealed P3HT/PCBM (1/1) films: (a) slice taken from the reconstructed volume dataset close to the bottom of the film, i.e. positive (ITO) electrode, (b) slice taken close to the top of the film, i.e. negative (metal) electrode, (c) snapshot of the reconstructed volume with dimensions of about 1700 nm × 1700 nm × 100 nm, (d) quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanowires distribution through the thickness of the layer. 
Another aspect of morphological organization revealed by electron tomography in annealed P3HT/PCBM films is the existence of concentration gradients of P3HT and PCBM through the film's thickness. By going slice by slice through the reconstructed volume, the amount of crystalline P3HT nanowires can be quantified in relation to the actual z-position within the photoactive layer. As obvious from Fig. 6, there is enrichment of crystalline P3HT nanowires in the lower part of the thermally annealed P3HT/PCBM layer close to the positive (ITO) electrode. Correspondingly, there is enrichment of PCBM close to the negative (metal) electrode. As mentioned in the Introduction, such a situation should be beneficial for collection of free charges. The reasons for existence of this concentration gradient are discussed elsewhere.11 The overall degree of P3HT crystallinity can also be determined from the electron tomography data presented in Fig. 6: in the case of thermally annealed P3HT/PCBM films, the degree of P3HT crystallinity can be as much as 60%.
All the changes in the 3D morphology organization of the P3HT/PCBM photoactive layers after annealing, resulting in formation of nanoscale interpenetrating networks of highly crystalline P3HT nanowires and PCBM nanocrystals with favourable concentration gradients within the thickness of the layer, are paramount for obtaining high efficiency PSCs. Indeed, characterization of the corresponding solar cell devices shows that values of the short-circuit current density and fill factor substantially increase after thermal or solvent-assisted annealing (for device performance data, see ref. 11).
A higher fill factor after annealing implies an improved balance of electron and hole transport, low traps and negligible space-charge effects. Electron mobility in PCBM is intrinsically higher than the mobility of holes in P3HT, so higher FF values suggest improved hole mobility in the P3HT/PCBM layer caused by increased crystallinity of P3HT after annealing.10,30 Other aspects facilitating hole transport and collection in annealed films are increased length of crystalline P3HT nanowires and their enrichment at the side of the layer close to the positive electrode. As a consequence, short and efficient percolation pathways are available for hole transport to the positive electrode and the chances of charge recombination are decreased.
Higher values of Jsc obtained after annealing imply that more charges are being extracted from the PSC. In general, this is attributed to improved light absorption and/or better dissociation of excitons at the interface between the P3HT and PCBM phases and/or better transport of free charges to the corresponding electrodes.30 Indeed, all these effects play a role in the case of annealed P3HT/PCBM. The increase in light absorption is confirmed by UV-Vis spectroscopy (data not shown). Better dissociation of excitons is ensured by formation of additional interface between P3HT and PCBM as a result of enhanced P3HT crystallization upon annealing, i.e. formation of micrometer-long crystalline P3HT nanowires. Finally, transportation and collection of free charges is improved thanks to higher P3HT crystallinity (higher hole mobility), thanks to formation of genuine 3D networks of P3HT nanowires and nanocrystalline PCBM clusters, and due to the existence of favourable concentration gradients.
To sum up this discussion, the electron tomography data show that after annealing of PSCs based on P3HT/PCBM, either at elevated temperature or during slow solvent evaporation, genuine 3D nanoscale networks are formed with high crystalline order and favourable concentration gradients of both P3HT and PCBM through the thickness of the P3HT/PCBM photoactive layer. These favourable morphological changes account for a considerable increase of the power conversion efficiency in the corresponding solar cell devices.
Conclusions
The efficiency of a bulk heterojunction PSC is strongly dependent on the local nanoscale organization of the photoactive layer in all three dimensions. The tool of choice to gain new insights into 3D nanoscale morphology of photoactive layers and the ways it affects device performance is the technique of electron tomography.
As described herein, application of electron tomography to photoactive layers shows that the existence of 3D nanoscale networks of donor and acceptor components is indispensable for efficient PSC devices: it ensures effective dissociation of excitons into free electrons and holes and benefits effective charge carrier transport from any place in the photoactive layer to the electrodes. The best performing bulk heterojunction system reported up to now, viz. the one based on combination of P3HT and PCBM, is additionally characterized by high crystallinity of the component having intrinsically lower mobility of free charges (i.e. P3HT) and by favourable concentration gradients, viz. enrichment of P3HT next to a positive (ITO) electrode and enrichment of PCBM next to a negative (metal) electrode.
Currently, based on the 3D morphology data obtained, further data processing is in progress to quantify the exact length and number of branches in the 3D networks observed, to quantify the number of hopping sites, etc., and to link these with the corresponding PSC device performance.
Acknowledgements
This work forms part of the research program of the Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI), Project No. 524. The authors would like to use this opportunity to thank René Janssen, Martijn Wienk and Xiaoniu Yang for helpful discussions.
References
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 273 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, J. Loos, F. Morrissey, C. M. Lewis, K. P. H. Kivits, L. J. van IJzendoorn, M. T. Rispens, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 665 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, Nature, 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. K. J. van Duren, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2152 .
T. Martens, J. D'Haen, T. Munters, Z. Beelen, L. Goris, J. Manca, M. D'Olieslaeger, D. Vanderzande, L. D. Schepper and R. Andriessen, Synth. Met., 2003, 138, 243 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Drees, W. Schwinger, F. Schaffler and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chirvase, J. Parisi, J. C. Hummelen and V. Dyakonov, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1317 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, X. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, X. Yang, G. deWith and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 218 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alexeev and J. Loos, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 149 CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 230 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinnai, Y. Nishikawa, T. Ikehara and T. Nishi, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2004, 170, 115 CAS .
M. Weyland and P. A. Midgley, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 32 CrossRef CAS .
G. Möbus and B. J. Inkson, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 18 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinnai and R. J. Spontak, Polymer, 2009, 50, 1067 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cormack, J. Appl. Phys., 1963, 34, 2722 CrossRef .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, H. X. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

Absorption of incident light	Thickness of the photoactive layer
Roughness of interfaces
Exciton dissociation	Maximized interface: phase separation between the donor and acceptor within the exciton diffusion length (∼10 nm)
Charge transport and collection	Short and continuous pathways leading through the donor phase to the positive electrode and through the acceptor phase to the negative electrode
High mesoscopic order and crystallinity of (ideally both) donor and acceptor
Enrichment of donor close to the positive electrode and acceptor close to the negative electrode
Processability	Thermodynamics and kinetics of film formation and phase separation

 	Fig. 1  Principles of conventional TEM imaging (a) and electron tomography (b). A TEM image is basically a 2D projection taken of a 3D specimen under investigation: it gives no clear information on the morphological organization in the z-direction and may be difficult to interpret in the case of complex structures. In electron tomography, a series of such 2D projections is taken at various tilting angles by tilting the specimen along the tilt axis inside the TEM column, usually in the range of at least ±70 degrees. The tilt series is later used to reconstruct the 3D image of the specimen. 3D reconstruction is all about recovering the missing z-information of an object point in 3D space that is lost during (2D) projection imaging.	 

 	Fig. 2  Several slices taken from the aligned tilt series of MDMO-PPV/PCBM active layer with 80 wt-% PCBM, in the bright-field TEM imaging mode. The corresponding tilt angle is indicated above each slice. The whole series of such slices taken in the range from −74 degrees to +75 degrees with a step of 1 degree is used as an input for 3D reconstruction. Dark domains are rich in PCBM. Some markers (gold particles with a diameter of 20 nm), indicated in one slice by white arrows, were deposited in advance on top of the active layer to facilitate alignment of the tilt series.	 

 	Fig. 3  A bright-field TEM image (a) of the MDMO-PPV/PCBM film (with 80 wt.-% PCBM), where dark PCBM-rich domains are visible, next to a snapshot of the volume reconstruction, (b) of the same part of the film as obtained by electron tomography. In the volume data, thin PCBM-rich strands connecting PCBM-domains can be discerned. The volume dimensions are 1130 nm × 970 nm × 80 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  Outcome of electron tomography applied to the PF10TBT/PCBM films (with high molecular weight PF10TBT-polymer): (a) one slice taken out of the (x,y)-plane of the final 3D dataset with bright-looking polymer strands and darker PCBM-rich regions; (b) a snapshot of the corresponding volume reconstruction showing existence of a 3D nanoscale polymer network (volume dimensions are 1112 nm × 1090 nm × 75 nm, the polymer strands are made here thinner than they are in reality to facilitate visualisation); (c) zoom-in of the same volume (with volume dimensions of 227 nm × 227 nm × 75 nm and the thickness of the polymer strands to scale).	 

 	Fig. 5  
            Bright-field TEM images of 100 nm thick P3HT/PCBM (1/1) photoactive layers: (a) as spin-coated from solution in o-dichlorobenzene, (b) after subsequent thermal annealing at 130 °C for 20 minutes. The insets are electron diffraction patterns acquired at the same spot as TEM images: a broad internal ring is attributed to PCBM nano-crystals and a thin outer ring to (020) reflections of P3HT crystals. (c) The plot of corresponding electron diffraction intensities (normalized to the PCBM-peak maximum). TA refers to thermally annealed layers (solid line) and SC to spin-coated layers (dashed line).	 

 	Fig. 6  Outcome of electron tomography applied to thermally annealed P3HT/PCBM (1/1) films: (a) slice taken from the reconstructed volume dataset close to the bottom of the film, i.e. positive (ITO) electrode, (b) slice taken close to the top of the film, i.e. negative (metal) electrode, (c) snapshot of the reconstructed volume with dimensions of about 1700 nm × 1700 nm × 100 nm, (d) quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanowires distribution through the thickness of the layer.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
