Functionalized oligoarylenes as building blocks for new organic materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B004407P View PDF VersionNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B004407P
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2403-2435Functionalized oligoarylenes as building blocks
for new organic materialsJosé L. Segura and Nazario Martín*Departamento Química Orgánica
I, Facultad Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Complutense, E-28040, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: nazmar@eucmax.sim.ucm.es;  Fax: +34 91 3944103;   Tel: +34 91 3944227Received 1st June 2000, Accepted 1st August 2000First published on UnassignedUnassigned2nd October 2000AbstractSome of the current directions in research on new organic materials
based on functionalized oligoarylenes are reviewed. Particular emphasis is
placed upon the use of chemical synthesis for the incorporation of suitable
functionalized oligoarylenes into more complex molecular and polymeric systems.
Selected examples of applications of these materials in different fields such
as light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic devices, nonlinear optics, two-photon
dyes, molecular switches or ligands will be presented.1 IntroductionDuring the last decade, an explosive growth of activity in the field of
polymeric and molecular materials in electronic and optoelectronic devices
has occurred. Hundreds of groups around the world are engaged in the research
and development of new organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), solid-state
lasers, photoconductive and photovoltaic devices, nonlinear optics materials
or field-effect transistors.1 One important
milestone in the development of these fields was the discovery in Cambridge
of electroluminescence in conjugated polymers.2
Conjugated polymers are a class of semiconductors that combine the optical
and electronic properties of semiconductors with the processing advantages
and mechanical properties of polymers.3 The
simplicity of manufacture, arising from the fact that many organic polymers
are processable either as the final materials or as a precursor, thus allowing
the fabrication of large-area thin films, and the possibility of tuning
the material’s optical and electronic properties by using the enormous
versatility of organic chemistry have allowed the realization of different
applications of practical relevance4 from what
a decade ago was no more than wishful thinking on the part of a few researchers.
One characteristic of main-chain conjugated polymers is that they inevitably
contain randomly distributed defects, i.e. non-conjugated segments,
which lead to a statistical distribution of conjugated lengths. Thus, shortly
after the publication of the first practical applications of conjugated polymers,
the study of monodisperse conjugated oligomers5,6
started as a way to develop structure–property relationships to rationalize
the properties of the parent polydisperse polymeric materials. With this aim,
conjugated oligomers have been used as model compounds to (i) study
the solid-state structure of polymers7
in order to be able to tune the molecular structure for given macroscopic
electrooptical properties,8
(ii)
apply a quantum-chemical approach to optical phenomena,9
(iii)
explain the electrochemical behavior,10 and (iv)
investigate the photophysical properties of conjugated polymers.11
However, in recent years, the study of well-defined monodisperse oligomers
has advanced into a strong field in its own right,12
given that they also exhibit interesting optoelectronic properties.5 All of the above explains the huge amount of work
that has been devoted to the development of new synthetic strategies towards
the synthesis of conjugated oligomeric materials with precise length and constitution.
All this work has been recently summarized in comprehensive review articles
covering from the recent progress in the synthesis and characterization of
monodisperse π-conjugated oligomers,5,12,13
to the study of the synthetic principles for band-gap control in π-conjugated
systems14 and the construction of nanoarchitectures.15,16 Less studied has been the chemical functionalization
of conjugated oligomeric materials in order to incorporate them into more
complex molecular and polymeric systems. Thus, the purpose of this feature
article is to complement the above cited literature with the study of new
synthetic methodologies that allow the incorporation of appropriately functionalized
oligoarylenes into more complex molecular and polymeric systems with applications
in materials science.2 Oligoarylenes as building blocks for
the synthesis of materials for LEDsAs stated above, the study of well-defined monodisperse oligomers as
new materials that exhibit interesting optoelectronic properties has been
the subject of intense study. In this section we will concentrate on the study
of different macromolecular systems, namely polymers and dendrimers that incorporate
conjugated oligoarylenes in their structures rather than in the study of luminescent
conjugated oligoarylenes which have already been extensively studied.5Although the use of low molecular weight oligomers allows strict control
of the effective conjugation length and therefore of the emitting properties,
molecular organic EL devices often suffer from recrystallization of the amorphous
films during operation or storage, leading to a rapid degradation of device
performances.3 In order to combine control
of the conjugation length with processability properties of polymeric materials,17 syntheses of different partially conjugated polymers
have been carried out.2.1 Non-conjugated polymers incorporating
oligoarylenes either as side chains or as a part of the main chainIn partially conjugated polymers, chromophores can either be attached as
side groups to a non-conjugated polymer backbone or integrated in the
backbone itself. Materials of this type can be seen as long chains of separated
small dye molecules connected by spacer units. Different luminescent fragments
as well as hole-transport and electron-transport materials have been
incorporated as substituents in polymeric systems,18
but because of the possibility of tuning the wavelength of emission as well
as the electron affinity and ionization potential by means of synthetic strategies,
conjugated oligomers present special interest from a chemist's point of view.There are various ways in which the great number of non-conjugated
polymeric materials containing isolated fragments of conjugated oligomers
can be classified, either by studying the different spacers used or by the
nature of the arylene building block of the conjugated oligoarylenes. Thus,
we will study how differently functionalized conjugated oligoarylenes containing
the same arylene building blocks have been incorporated in polymeric systems
by using a variety of linkers.Some of the most extensively studied oligoarylenes are those containing
the phenylenevinylene moiety. Strategies towards the stepwise synthesis of
oligo(phenylenevinylene)s have been recently reviewed12,13a
and have made it possible to obtain a great number of appropriately functionalized
oligo(phenylenevinylene)s to be incorporated in a variety of systems.Monofunctionalized oligo(phenylenevinylene)s can be incorporated
as side-chains in polymeric systems while difunctionalized analogues can
be introduced as a part of the main chain in the so called ‘segmented’
polymers. In Scheme 1 are depicted
two examples of oligo(phenylenevinylene)s incorporated in polymeric
systems as side chains. The first strategy, developed by Greiner and coworkers,19 leads to polymers with well-defined conjugated
structures in the side chains (3)
by grafting vinyl-substituted oligo(arylenevinylene)s (2) on to partially brominated polystyrene (1) using the palladium catalyzed Heck20 coupling reaction. Efficient organic light emitting
devices (OLEDs) could be manufactured from spin coated solutions
of 3 and other polymers prepared
by using the same synthetic procedure.21 As
an alternative to the above presented strategy, Karasz and coworkers prepared
polystyrene derivatives containing oligoarylenes (6)
by using the Williamson condensation of a precursor poly(p-acetoxystyrene)
4 and chloromethyl substituted oligo(phenylenevinylene)s (5).22 The
polymers are soluble with good film-forming ability and emit blue light
when used as the active layer of an LED. Scheme 1 A completely different approach for the preparation of polymers containing
oligo(phenylenevinylene)s is depicted in Scheme 2.
A norbornene monomer (7)
containing a phenylenevinylene oligomer unit as a side chain was polymerized
by using a ring-opening metathesis polymerization method to yield a blue-light
emitting electroluminescent polymer (10).
Mo(NAr)(CHCMe2Ph)(O-t-Bu)2
(8) was used as the initiator. Electroluminescent
quantum yields of up to 0.55% were obtained in LED devices with single
layers of 10 using ITO as the anode
and Ca as the cathode.23 Scheme 2 Other researchers have chosen the central ring of the oligo(arylenevinylene)
moieties to link them to the non conjugated polymer chains. Thus, Holmes and
coworkers have incorporated distyrylbenzene units to a poly(methacrylate)
(13) by polymerizing styrene monomers endowed
with oligo(phenylenevinylene)s as substituents (12) under standard radical conditions (Scheme 3). Together with the oligo(phenylenevinylene),
other monomers (11) containing
charge-transport moieties can be introduced. The composition of the polymer
can be varied by simply changing the ratio of the starting monomers, so as
to adjust the charge-transporting capability, the extent of crosslinking and
even the wavelength of emission.24 Scheme 3 The number of polymers in which difunctionalized oligo(arylenevinylene)s
have been introduced as a part of the main chain in non-conjugated polymeric
systems is so big that an exhaustive overview of these materials would not
be practical. In Scheme 4 are depicted
some representative examples of these conjugated–non-conjugated
block copolymers in which the oligo(arylenevinylene) system has
been incorporated through an ether linkage. Scheme 4 Derivatives 16 were obtained
by Wittig condensation polymerization between the bis(triphenylphosphonium)
salt 14 and dialdehyde 15. Thus, the conjugated oligomer skeleton was
formed after the polymerization reaction.25
Similarly, derivatives 19 were
obtained either by Wittig–Horner condensation polymerization of dialdehyde 17 and the bis(phosphonate)
1826 or by Heck-coupling
between the 1,4-diiodo-substituted central core of the oligomer 21 and the moiety containing the flexible spacer 20.27 A major
improvement in the use of the Heck methodology is that it directly produces
polymers with fixed trans double bonds, which are critical to maximizing
the efficiency of luminescence and wavelength output in OLEDs.Alternatively, polymer 24 was
obtained by reaction of the α,ω-dihydroxy-functionalized
oligomer 22 with an oligoethylene
glycol bis(mesylate)
23
(Scheme 5). In this case the functionalized
conjugated oligomer skeleton was synthesized first and then reacted with an
appropriately functionalized spacer to yield the block copolymer.28
α,ω-Dihydroxy-functionalized
oligo(arylenevinylene)s 22
have also been reacted with aliphatic diacid dichlorides (25) to yield the corresponding linear aryl-aliphatic
polyesters 26 showing good solubility
in organic solvents at ambient temperatures which enables film processing
by standard techniques like spin coating.29
These polyesters are amorphous and, above the glass transition temperature,
anisotropic melts are formed which typically represent a smectic A phase.
The optical properties related to absorption and emission spectra of these
polyesters duplicate the optical properties of other conjugated-oligomer
containing segmented polymers. Deposition and annealing of these light-emitting
liquid crystalline polymers on rubbed polyimide results in preferential orientation
of chromophores, which yields UV-dichroism and polarized photo- and
electroluminescence.29 Scheme 5 Other interesting types of oligo(arylenevinylene)-containing
polymeric systems are those containing Si-spacers. Wittig reaction between
the Si-containing-bis(triphenylphosphonium) salt 27 and terephthalaldehyde 28
yielded the corresponding polymeric system 29
which was subsequently isomerized to the all-trans configuration
by refluxing for 4 h in toluene in the presence of a catalytic amount
of iodine (Scheme 6).30 Similarly to the above mentioned polymers, this
class of silicon-containing poly(p-phenylenevinylene)
derivatives are highly soluble in common organic solvents. Derivatives of 29 with different substituents on the central
benzene ring have been also synthesized and their photophysical properties
have been studied. Multilayer LEDs based on these polymers have been made
exhibiting efficient blue emission.31 Furthermore,
Hadziioannou and coworkers observed lasing in the superradiant regime in optically
pumped films of the parent dioctyl-substituted 29
which paves the way for the possible development of solid-state electrically-pumped
polymer lasers.32 Scheme 6 A particular case of these ‘segmented polymers’ are those in
which tertiary amino groups are incorporated as part of the polymer chain.
Some representative examples (30–32) of this class of compounds are depicted
in Fig. 1. Jen and coworkers reported
the synthesis of polymers 30 by
Wittig–Horner condensation polymerization, similarly to that depicted
for 17 and 18
in Scheme 4, in which the ether
linkage was replaced by a tertiary amine.33
Similarly, derivatives 31 and 32 could be also obtained by Wittig–Horner
reaction of suitable substrates.34 This type
of compound combine the features of high luminescence efficiency and low oxidation
potential for efficient hole injection in electroluminescent devices. In fact,
it has been observed that these polymers also show potential as hole transporting
materials by virtue of their low oxidation potentials. Fig. 1  ‘Segmented polymers’
with tertiary amino groups as part of the main chain. It is important to point out that the amino groups do not interrupt the
extended conjugation along the main chain as is the case for the above silylene,
ether or ester linked analogues. As Hörhold has recently pointed out,
the aromatic amino groups are able to stabilize and localize positive charges
which are formed in photogeneration or hole injection processes.35
Thus, incorporation of the electron-rich amino groups in the backbone does
not interrupt the main-chain conjugation but has the effect of making
the electron transfer reversible and stabilizes the π-cationic stages.
Therefore, amino-PPVs are strong photoconductors and can be good candidates
for use as electroluminescent and photorefractive materials.35We have recently introduced the use of binaphthyl derivatives in the search
for chiral polymers with isolated conjugated oligo(phenylenevinylene)s
in their skeleton.36 Binaphthyl derivatives
are optically active materials, their chirality being derived from the restricted
rotation of the two naphthalene rings. The angle between the rings ranges
from 60 to 120° and therefore, conjugation between the two naphthalene
units is minimal.37 Thus, the conjugated system
in polymers containing binaphthyl units is confined to the region between
the two binaphthyl units (Fig. 2). Fig. 2  Structure of binaphthyl
containing conjugated–non-conjugated block copolymers showing the
conjugated region. The synthesis of the polymers (33)
was carried out by Knoevenagel condensation polymerization between bis(cyanomethyl)binaphthyl
derivatives and naphthalenedicarbaldehyde. The emission color of these polymers
can be tuned by introducing differently functionalized oligoarylenes between
the binaphthyl units and they exhibit circularly polarized luminescence. The
polymers exhibit a relatively good electron acceptor ability due to the presence
of the cyanovinylene moieties on the conjugated system. As materials exhibiting
high electron affinity are of special interest for the manufacture of LEDs
given that they can be used in combination with air stable electrodes, these
materials are promising candidates for use in the fabrication of LEDs emitting
circularly polarized light. Recent developments in the functionalization of
binaphthyl units38 allow the incorporation
of this versatile building block in polymeric systems39
not only through Knoevenagel condensation polymerizations but also via
Suzuki cross coupling40 or Wittig olefination
reactions.There are two ‘classical’ modifications that have been carried
out in conjugated polymers17,18 in order
to tune properties like color of the emission, electronic affinity or ionization
potential: i) replacement of the vinylene linkage between the phenylene
units in poly(phenylenevinylene) by an acetylenic triple bond like
in poly(phenyleneethynylene) or suppresion of the vinylene linkage
like in poly(p-phenylene) and ii) substitution
of the phenylene unit by other arylene building blocks like in polythiophene,
poly(thienylenevinylene), poly(pyridine), poly(naphthylenevinylene)
and others.By combining this last approach with the different spacers outlined along
this section, a great number of polymers have been synthesized containing
different oligoarylene units either as side chains or as part of the main
chain. In order to avoid repetition given that the main synthetic pathways
towards the incorporation of these oligomers to polymeric systems are similar
to that already reviewed for the oligo(phenylenevinylene) units,
we will briefly present a selection of the most significant polymeric systems
containing other oligoarylenes.In Fig. 3 are depicted some representative
examples of polymers containing isolated oligophenylenes (34,4135,4236,4337,443845) and
oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s (39)46 in their structures. Special attention is deserved
by polyethers containing oligophenylenes 35
and 37 which have been found to
combine solubility and film-forming properties with liquid crystalline
behavior at temperatures where the polymers are thermally stable. Furthermore,
these polymers exhibit blue-light emission, a photophysical property that,
when combined with orientation at the molecular level, is a very promising
concept for new optical materials. Fig. 3  Representative examples
of polymers containing isolated oligophenylenes and oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s. On the other hand, the incorporation of different heterocycles into the
structure of conjugated oligoarylenes allows not only the tuning of the emission
color of these materials but also the enhancement of their donor or acceptor
character.47 Probably the most extensively
studied oligoarylenes are those containing thiophene units48
and, consequently, different polymers with isolated thiophene-based oligomers
have been synthesized and studied (Fig. 4).
As in the case of the parent oligophenylene derivatives, oligothiophenes have
been incorporated in polymeric systems both as side chains (40)49 or
as part of the main chain using silicon atoms as spacers (41),50
amide groups (42),51 ester groups52
(43)53 or
binaphthyl moieties (44).40 Fig. 4  Selected examples of
polymers containing isolated thiophene-based oligomers. By simply changing the length of the oligothiophene chromophore in a homologuous
series of polymers such as 44,
it is possible to tune the emission color from yellow-green (44, n = 1)
to dark red (44, n = 7).
Furthermore, some of these polymers have been used to understand electrical
conduction in conjugated polymers. Miller and coworkers have studied how oligothiophenes
form molecular stacks in solution.52c
In order to confirm the hypothesis that π-stacks are important in polymer
conductivity, oligothiophene moieties were incorporated into polyesters.54 As the polymers are not fully conjugated they cannot
conduct via polarons or bipolarons; however they exhibit good conductivity
and their EPR and optical spectra are quite similar to those of oxidized polythiophenes
thus suggesting the importance of interchain electron transport.In addition to the use of the ‘electron excessive’ thiophene
moiety, other polymeric systems containing conjugated oligomers with different
electron-deficient and electron-rich heterocyclic units have been
studied. In this respect, incorporation of furan and pyrrole moieties usually
led to more electron-rich systems, indicated by the easier oxidation and
the reduction at more negative potentials than in the parent oligothiophene
derivatives. On the other hand, incorporation of electron-poor aromatic
moieties such as pyridine or fluorenones resulted in electron-deficient
conjugated oligomers that could be applied as electron-transporting materials
in electrooptical devices.47,55 In Fig. 5 are depicted representative examples
of alternating copolymers containing isolated oligomers with electron-rich
furan (45)56
and electron-deficient oxadiazole units (46,5747,584859). Fig. 5  Alternating copolymers
containing isolated oligomers with electron-rich furan and electron-deficient
oxadiazole units. Polyimide 45 containing furan
moieties is insoluble in common organic solvents, thermally stable up to 370°C
and emits intense blue luminescence with a double peak maximum at 419 and
436 nm. Systems containing the oxadiazole unit deserve special interest.
Several small organic molecules containing the oxadiazole unit have been successfully
used as electron-injection material to improve the balance of charge injections
and to increase the photon/electron quantum efficiency in LEDs. Therefore,
certain efforts have been made to prepare processable and thermally stable
oxadiazole-containing polymers. Polymer 46
has been successfully used in the fabrication of OLEDs in double layer devices
together with PPV and using aluminium
and ITO contacts. Polymer 47 has
been efficiently used as the electron injection layer to improve the quantum
efficiency of polymer LEDs based on dialkoxy derivatives of PPV.58Finally, Pei and Yang have demonstrated that by proper modification of
the chemical structure, 1,3,4-oxadiazole-containing polymers can be
used not only as electron-transport layers but also as luminescent materials.
Thus, they have reported bright blue-light emission from polymer LEDs
based on the oxadiazole-containing polymer 48.59 We will shortly mention the synthetic route used
to synthesize this polymer given that it is somewhat different to that previously
discussed for related oligophenylene-containing derivatives. In the synthesis
of 48, the formation of the oxadiazole
system takes place as the last step of the synthetic route once the polymeric
skeleton is formed (Scheme 7).
Condensation of the dihydrazide 50
and 1,2-bis[2-(4-(chloroformyl)phenoxy)ethoxy]ethane 51 quantitatively yielded the poly(hydrazide)
52. Cyclodehydration of 52
was carried out in phosphorus oxychloride to prepare the 1,3,4-oxadiazole-containing
polymer 48.59a Scheme 7 To conclude this section dedicated to the study of non-conjugated polymers
incorporating oligoarylenes as a part of their structures, we will review
a different group of polymeric materials, the so-called end-functionalized
polymers or rod–coil block copolymers.60
In this type of polymer the physical properties of conjugated oligoarylenes
are tuned by linking polymer chains to one or both ends of a well defined
oligoarylene segment. The use of a rigid π-conjugated block linked
to a non-conjugated flexible block represents a new class of self-assembling
materials which offer the ability to achieve one-, two- or three-dimensional
confinements of the conjugated domains. Synthetic strategies toward rod–coil
block copolymers involve either polymerization using a macroinitiator (“grafting
from” or “polymerization from” process) or condensation
of two preformed blocks (“grafting onto” process).A monofunctionalized block may be used as macroinitiator to start a “grafting
from” process as described by Zhong and François.61
They used living polystyrene (53)
as their macroinitiator. After treatment with cyclohexadiene (54) a polystyrene-block-poly(cyclohexa-1,3-diene)
system (55) was formed
and subsequently aromatized with p-chloranil to yield the corresponding
oligophenylene attached to a polystyrene chain (56, Scheme 8a). Although the aromatization
was not complete and several cyclohexene rings remain between oligophenylene
moieties, they discovered unique non-equilibrium honeycomb morphologies
in which monodisperse pores were arranged in hexagonal array. Very recently,
Müllen and coworkers have succeeded in synthesizing structurally perfect
rigid poly(fluoren-2,7-ylene) into rod–coil block copolymers
by using α-(phenyl)-ω-(hydroxymethylphenyl)-poly(fluoren-2,7-ylene)
(57) as macroinitiator (Scheme 8b).62 By treatment of 57
with an appropriate amount of ethylene oxide (58),
the corresponding rod–coil block copolymer 59
together with a small amount of poly(ethylene oxide) homopolymer
was obtained. Subsequent purification was carried out by repeated washing
with methanol. The absorption and fluorescence measurements of 59 reveal an influence of the coil blocks on
the optoelectronic properties of the rods. Scheme 8 The second method of preparing a block copolymer is by coupling two appropriately
functionalized polymers or oligomers. Evidently, this approach requires a
quantitative end-functionalization of the oligo- or polyarylene moiety.
Thus, as an alternative to obtain analogues to the above block copolymer 56
(Scheme 8)
fully aromatized, Müllen and coworkers prepared perfectly end-functionalized
oligo(2,5-diheptyl-p-phenylenes)
(60) with 7–10 repeat units. Further
reaction of 60 with either polystyrene (53) or poly(ethylene oxide)
62 yielded the corresponding luminescent rod–coil
block copolymers (61, 63, Scheme 9).63 Scheme 9 As previously stated, the scope of these strategies is not limited to oligo(phenylene)s.
Thus, functionalized oligo(phenylenevinylene)s,64,65
oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s66,67
and oligo(thiophene)s68 have also
been incorporated in rod–coil block copolymers.Yu and coworkers have recently reported the synthesis of rod–coil
block copolymers containing oligo(phenylenevinylene)s linked to
either polyisoprene (PI, 66)64b or poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG, 70).64a
The first one (66) was
obtained by reaction of a living anionic polyisoprene derivative (65) with oligo(phenylenevinylene)s
endowed with an aldehyde group (64, Scheme 10a). Four copolymers that have
the same oligo(phenylenevinylene) block but different lengths of
the PI block were synthesized. Alternating strips of oligo(phenylenevinylene)
and PI-rich domains were observed, the domain sizes of the strips suggesting
that these macrostructures could be bilayer lamellar phases. As Yu and coworkers
point out,64b the self-assembled
domains bring these conjugated oligomer derivatives into order and hence offer
the opportunity to study the intrinsic physical properties of conjugated polymers.
On the other hand, it could be observed that as the conjugation length increases,
the solubility of the conjugated block decreases dramatically, thus limiting
the size of the conjugated block to be used in the coupling reaction. In order
to solve this problem, Yu and coworkers modified the above presented synthetic
strategy by first coupling the coil block (in this case a polyethylene
glycol derivative) with a difunctionalized oligo(phenylenevinylene)
(67) followed by coupling of the functionalized
rod–coil polymer formed (68)
with another mono-functionalized oligo(phenylenevinylene)
(69) to yield a much longer conjugated block
in the final block copolymer (70, Scheme 10b).64a
The large differences in structure and solubility between the two blocks are
expected to facilitate the phase separation even when the molecular weight
of the copolymer is low. Scheme 10 Other interesting rod–coil block copolymers recently synthesized
are depicted in Fig. 6. Hempenius et
al. employed a polystyrene with a phenolic terminus that was modified
by an α-terthiophene unit, followed by a coupling reaction to yield
a well-defined triblock copolymer of poly(styrene-block-oligothiophene-block-styrene),
with the oligothiophene moiety containing eleven thiophene units (71). In this polymer, electrochemical doping
was hampered by the polystyrene segments, while chemical doping afforded small
nanoscopic charged aggregates that were soluble in organic solvents.68 Müllen and coworkers synthesized the rod–coil
poly(p-phenyleneethynylene-block-ethylene
oxide)
72 by reacting the
terminal carboxy group of an oligo(p-phenyleneethynylene)
with the hydroxy end-group of poly(ethylene oxide).66
More recently, the syntheses of diblock poly(p-phenyleneethynylene-block-isoprene)
73 and triblock poly(isoprene-block-p-phenyleneethynylene-block-isoprene)
74 have been reported by Godt and coworkers
by using polyisoprene with hydroxy end-groups.67
Oligo(p-phenyleneethynylene) containing materials are
specially interesting given that they present a favorable rigid-rod structure
which strongly tends to spontaneously assemble into stable, structurally well-defined
nanostructures. This, together with the special attention that poly(phenyleneethynylene)
homopolymers have attracted in the area of optical and electronic devices
make these materials interesting targets for more in-depth studies. Fig. 6  Selected examples of
rod–coil block copolymers. In recent years, the group of Stupp has reported on different supramolecular
materials formed by molecules with triblock architecture that self-organized
into discrete mushroom-shaped nanostructures.69
They have prepared self-organized films formed by triblock molecules containing
phenylenevinylene segments.65a The
nanostructured materials obtained contain thousands of molecular layers organized
with polar ordering and give rise to strong photoluminescence. More recently,
they have incorporated into these supramolecular materials triphenylamine
moieties which, as previously stated, are of interest as hole transport layers
in light emitting devices. Living anionic polymerization starting from n-buthyllithium
and triphenylamine (TPA) derivative 76
followed by quenching of the reaction with ethylene oxide as gas afforded
an oligomer of TPA (77).
Polymerization of ethylene oxide yielded the diblock copolymer 78. Reaction of 78
with difunctionalized oligo(phenylenevinylene)
79
yielded a triblock copolymer endowed with an aldehyde functionality which
was further reacted with a second oligo(phenylenevinylene) derivative (80) through a Wittig–Horner reaction.
Final deprotection of the terminal tert-butyldimethylsilyl (TBDMS)
group led to the triblock-copolymer 81
endowed with terminal hydroxy polar groups (Scheme 11).65b Electron diffraction (ED)
on films of 81 indicates that this
material contains crystalline domains with rod segments oriented perpendicular
to the plane of the film, being both ethylene oxide segments and TPA segments
contained in amorphous domains. The emission of 81
when excited with light at 302 nm shows substantial emission from oligo(phenylenevinylene)
segments and additional experiments suggest that energy transfer occurs between
the coil-like TPA and rod-like PPV segments of these polymers. This work paves
the way for the use of a broad range of functional chemistries to design nanostructured
organic materials. Scheme 11 2.2 Oligoarylene-containing molecular
materials for LEDsSome interesting charge-transport materials with applications in LEDs have
been synthesized by functionalizing oligoarylenes. As we have already seen,
different oligoarylenes have been reported to function as emitting materials
in organic LEDs; however, in general, their performances are poor probably
because oligoarylenes with well-defined structures are crystalline in
nature and therefore they form polycrystalline films by vacuum deposition
or spin coating. It has been observed, for example, that the fluorescence
quantum efficiencies of polycrystalline films of oligothiophenes are significantly
reduced as compared with those of the corresponding solutions and it has been
suggested that the fluorescence quantum efficiency may not be significantly
reduced in the amorphous film state.70 In
this sense is remarkable the work of Shirota and coworkers who have developed
synthetic strategies toward the preparation of efficient luminescent amorphous
materials derived, among others, from functionalized oligoarylenes.70One interesting example is a family of oligothiophenes end-capped with
bis(dimesitylboryl) functional groups (82, Fig. 7) which readily form stable amorphous
glasses with high glass transition temperatures (Tgs).71 It is thought that glass formation is due to the
incorporation of the nonplanar dimesitylboryl groups. The color of the emission
can be tuned by choosing an oligothiophene derivative of appropriate length.
Moreover, the incorporation of the dimesitylboryl moiety provides electron-accepting
properties (half-wave reduction potential of trimesitylboryl moiety:−1.94 V vs.
SCE)72 and therefore may be used as electron-transport
amorphous molecular materials.73 Fig. 7  Oligoarylene-containing
molecular materials for LEDs. Other important series of molecular amorphous materials derived from oligothiophenes
are 83a–d
(Fig. 7)
which consist of oligothiophenes of different lengths (n = 1–4)
end-capped with the triphenylamine donor group.74
These compounds readily form stable amorphous glasses with Tgs
of 86, 90, 93 and 98°C respectively when the melt samples are
cooled. While the HOMO levels of these compounds are more or less the same,
the HOMO–LUMO gap progressively decreases with increasing conjugation
length of the oligothiophene moiety and therefore the emission color is blue,
yellowish green, yellow and green for n = 1, 2,
3 and 4 respectively. In contrast to the above mentioned dimesitylboryl derivatives,
these systems present hole-transporting properties and can be efficiently
used as the emitting layer in two-layer LEDs together with different electron
transport layers.75The next type of compounds lie in the frontier between molecular and polymeric
materials. They are conjugated oligomeric systems in dendritic molecules which
are very interesting given that they may allow supramolecular control of interchain
interaction in order to develop at will either compact materials with high
electron mobility or, in contrast, single molecular wires. In Fig. 8
and 9 are depicted two representative examples of systems containing
oligoarylenes in a dendritic environment. Thus, in 1998 Roncali and coworkers
synthesized n-oligo(thienylenevinylene)s (nTVs)76 end-capped with dendritic chains 84 with the purpose of hindering aggregation
of the oligomeric system thus making easier the manipulation of the molecular
wires.77 The synthetic procedure used involved
the synthesis of the corresponding oligo(thienylenevinylene) end-functionalized
with two aldehyde functional groups followed by Wittig–Horner olefination
reactions with Fréchet-type dendrons78
functionalized with phosphonate groups. Electrochemical studies performed
on these systems confirm the expected absence of dimerization of radical cations
formed upon oxidation as a consequence of the decrease in the inter-chain
interactions. Fig. 8  n-Oligo(thienylenevinylene)s
end-capped with dendritic chains.  Fig. 9  Oligothiophene-containing
dendrimer used as multicomponent luminescent material for OLEDs. In 1999, Freeman et al. described the luminescent properties of
multi-component single layer OLEDs containing molecularly designed, oligothiophene-containing
dendrimers 85.79
Highly efficient Förster energy transfer from the donors on the surface
to the emitters at the dendrimer core was demonstrated through luminescence
studies, both in solution and in the solid state. This strategy can be used
to incorporate many other donor/emitter pairs which will allow the fine
tuning of the emitting properties of materials. Moreover, as Freeman et
al. point out, the physical separation of dyes by the sheer steric bulk
of the surrounding dendrimer should allow several different conjugated oligoarylenes-containing
dendrimers to be mixed within a single layer, thus affording a readily accessed
and very simple color tunable system.793 Photoinduced electron and/or energy
transfer in oligoarylene-containing dyads and triadsPhotoexcited electron transfer between donor and acceptor molecular semiconductors
provides a method of efficient charge generation following photoabsorption,
which can be exploited in photovoltaic diodes.80
The main advantages of using organic semiconductors in these devices are the
possibility of depositing large area films from solutions at low cost and
the possibility of selecting systems with a variety of energy gaps and chemical
modifications in order to make more efficient the use of the solar spectrum.81,82 On the other hand, the photogeneration
of charge carriers in conjugated polymers has proved to be of interest for
applications in photoreceptors, photodiodes and solar cells.3,83
The first simple photovoltaic devices fabricated from single-layer, thin films
of polymers were inefficient in the conversion of photons to electrical current.84 Although the devices had broad absorption bands
in the visible region, separation and collection of the generated electron–hole
pairs (excitons) were poor. It was subsequently recognized that
enhanced charge separation occurs at an interface between two materials with
disparate electron affinities, allowing for transport of the carriers in separate
materials with a low probability of recombination. Materials introduced into
the polymer to create heterojunctions for improved device performance have
included small organic molecules,85 polymers80,83 inorganic nanocrystals86
and fullerene C60.87,88 The
fullerene C60 provides a useful high electron affinity semiconductor
and, in mixed composites together with conjugated polymers, ultrafast photoinduced
electron transfer can occur with high quantum efficiency. However, the tendency
of C60 to phase-separate and crystallize limits its solubility
in conjugated polymers. As uniformity and high quality of conjugated polymer–C60
thin films are essential for opto-electronic device applications, soluble
functionalized C60 derivatives have been synthesized in an attempt
to suppress the phase separation once these derivatives are blended with the
conjugated polymers.89 As an alternative to
these procedures, other research groups have focused their efforts on the
synthesis of molecular dyads90 and triads91 bearing conjugated oligomer moieties covalently
linked to the electron acceptor C60 fullerene. As noted above,
well-structured oligomers allow the possibility of mimicking the basic
structural and electronic properties of the related polymers and, therefore,
different examples of conjugated oligoarylene–C60 dyads have
been recently reported.We have developed a synthetic route towards the preparation of end-functionalized
oligo(2,6-naphthylenevinylene)s. In Scheme 12
is depicted how, by reaction of the bis(triphenylphosphonium) salt
derivative 88 with functionalized
naphthalene 87, the corresponding
trimeric system 89 end-functionalized
with bromine groups could be obtained. Treatment of 89
with copper cyanide in dimethylformamide led to a mixture of the corresponding
monocyano (90) and dicyano (92) derivatives that can be easily separated.
Further reduction of the nitrile groups with DIBAL-H gave the trimeric
systems functionalized with one (91)
or two (93) aldehyde
groups.92 Among the suitable procedures for
the functionalization of fullerenes, the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of
azomethine ylides to C60 emerged as an important methodology for
the production of stable fullerene derivatives.93
We have adapted this synthetic approach for the preparation of dyad 9494 and triad 95.91 Interestingly,
the presence of the long alkoxy chains in the naphthylenevinylene units provides
enhanced solubility of these systems in common organic solvents thus allowing
appropriate spectroscopic and electrochemical characterization. This fact
is specially noteworthy for triad 95
given that unsubstituted fullerene dimers are highly insoluble materials.95 The redox properties of these systems were studied
by cyclic voltammetry showing amphoteric redox behavior due to the oxidation
of the conjugated oligomer and the reduction of the fullerene moiety. Relative
to the strong emission of the oligomer references, in the C60 containing
materials the trimer emission is nearly quenched. Photophysical studies on
dyad 94 show competition between
electron and energy transfer in this system. Scheme 12 By following similar synthetic methodologies, the synthesis of other dyads (96,90e97,90c9890f)
and triads (99)91b have been reported (Fig. 10).
A decrease in the fluorescence quantum yields, similar to that observed for 94 and 95,
is observed for oligothiophenes covalently attached to a C60 moiety 96 which means that an efficient fluorescence
quenching of the oligothiophene by the fullerene chromophore takes place.
Interestingly, Yamashiro et al. observed that intramolecular singlet–singlet
energy transfer occurs on the picosecond time scale and markedly depends on
the chain length of the oligothiophene moiety, in other words, the distance
between the two chromophores.90e
Similar efficient energy transfer could be also observed in triad 99 containing also an oligothiophene moiety.91b Fig. 10  Molecular dyads and
triads bearing conjugated oligomers covalently linked to the electron acceptor
C60 fullerene. Nierengarten and coworkers incorporated dyad 97
in a photovoltaic device by spin casting the dyad on a glass substrate coated
with indium tin oxide (ITO) followed by vacuum evaporation of an
aluminium electrode on the films. Under the light the device shows clear photovoltaic
behavior with an open circuit voltage of ca. 0.2 V and short-circuit
current density of 10 µA cm−2 corresponding
to a collecting efficiency of 1%.90c
More recently, photoinduced energy transfer has been also observed in the
fullerene derivative 98 which is
similar to 97 although the fullerene
moiety is now linked to two oligo(phenylenevinylene) moieties.90f The results obtained from the photophysical
studies suggest the possibility of building up more complex arrays where a
large number of oligo(phenylenevinylene) fragments allow an even
more pronounced excitation selectivity with an antenna effect.A different approach for the synthesis of light harvesting systems containing
fullerene and conjugated oligomer systems has been developed by Effenberger
and coworkers. Instead of the above mentioned 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition
of azomethine ylides to C60, they used a Diels–Alder reaction
between C60 and a conjugated oligomer endowed with a thiophene
5,5-dioxide moiety (100).90a,b An o-quinodimethane
type96 reactive diene (102)
is formed upon heating the thiophene 5,5-dioxide moiety through extrusion
of SO2 and reacts with the C60 moiety through a [4 + 2 ]
cycloaddition to yield the corresponding dyad 103a
(Scheme 13). Furthermore, by using this
synthetic strategy they have also synthesized what the authors call a trichromophoric “supermolecule”
103b which contains an anthracene donor linked
to the fullerene acceptor through a conjugated oligothiophene bridge (Scheme 13). This is an interesting variation
on the above presented structures. In this system the anthracene unit acts
as antenna and transfers the energy of absorbed light via the oligothiophene π-bridge
to the fullerene acceptor. There is a new role for the oligoarylene moiety
in these systems: they are acting as “molecular wires”.90a,b The photoinduced electron
transfer studies in dyad 103a
and triad 103b show that both
molecules exhibit long-lived charge-separated states at T = 5 K
thus indicating that the dyad is sufficient for allowing photoinduced charge-transfer
in these molecules. Scheme 13 In an attempt to enhance electron or charge-transfer, Echegoyen and coworkers
have synthesized the new donor (D)–acceptor (A)
systems 104 in which different
oligo(thienylenevinylene) moieties act as spacers between a fullerene
acceptor moiety and a dialkylaniline donor fragment (Fig. 11).90d Cyclic voltammetry analysis of 104 shows four quasi-reversible reduction waves
with cathodic peak potentials at −1.052, −1.594, −2.208,
and −2.428 V vs. Fc/Fc+ and two
irreversible reductions at −2.704 and −2.883 V. In addition,
two quasi-reversible oxidation processes occur with anodic peak potentials
at 0.140 and 0.364 V. The first three successive and nearly equally
spaced reductions and the fifth reductions are C60 based while
the fourth and sixth reductions are centered on the conjugated donor part.
Although no information about possible charge-transfer interactions between
the donor and acceptor parts of the molecule has been reported, good intramolecular
electron or charge-transfer can be anticipated for 104,
because of the strong donor ability of the dialkylaniline moiety and the low
aromatic stabilization energy of the thiophene ring.97 Fig. 11  D–A system
in which a bithiophene acts as spacer between the donor dialkylaniline and
the acceptor C60. Other interesting systems (105,98106,99107100) in which the oligoarylene moiety acts as “molecular
wire” are depicted in Fig. 12.
The electronic structure of the bridge component in these donor–bridge–acceptor (DBA)
systems play a critical role in the determination of the ease of electron
transfer. Fig. 12  DBA systems in which
conjugated oligomers act as molecular wires. Vollmer et al. have studied the photophysical properties of the
energy transfer in system 105,
in which a quinquethiophene bridge is terminally linked to the 5-position
of a porphyrin and to the 9-position of an anthracene group.98
The use of the quinquethiophene spacer provides a supermolecule with retention
of the identity of individual electronic levels of the donor and acceptor
moieties thus providing a highly selective excitation of the anthracene donor
which leads to quantitative energy transfer to the emitting porphyrin acceptor via
the quinquethiophene bridge. Furthermore, in contrast to other previously
studied polyenes used as spacers, in the oligothiophenes neither radiationless
deactivation of the excitation energy through the conjugated chain nor quenching
of the acceptor emission could be observed. The mechanism of the observed
ultrafast (< 10 ps) intramolecular singlet–singlet
energy transfer can be explained with different theories like Försters,
Dexters, superexchange or intramolecular relaxation. However, from the experimental
results presented, no clear distinction can be made.Davis et al. have synthesized a series of structurally well-defined
DBA molecules (106)
that incorporate tetracene as the donor and pyrromellitimide as the acceptor,
linked by phenylenevinylene oligomers of various lengths.99
Photoinduced electron transfer in this series exhibits very weak distance
dependence for donor–acceptor separations as large as 40 Å,
with rate constants of 1011 s−1. The experimental
data obtained in the study show the critical role that the energy gap from
donor-to-bridge charge injection plays in promoting molecular-wire behavior
in DBA molecules that possess highly conjugated bridges. Moreover, due to
the unusually high electron and hole mobilities displayed by PPV polymers,
the ability to exercise photochemical control over charge injection into well-defined
oligo(phenylenevinylene)-containing systems may lead to molecular
electronic devices based on these materials.Hermann et al. have introduced oligo(diazaphenylene)
bridges as spacers in DBA systems containing porphyrins as donor moieties
and flavins as the acceptor unit (107).100 This type of heterocyclic oligophenylene analogues
were chosen as spacers because of their rigid structure, their excellent chemical
stability, the easy control of their length and their transparency in the
visible and near-UV spectroscopic region. Thus, their absorption does
not interfere with that of the porphyrin. The results of the experimental
observations indicate that a charge-separated state can be populated after
excitation of the flavin moiety, which relaxes to the ground state on the
subnanosecond time scale.From all of the above, it can be concluded that a great deal of work is
still to be done in this area. The recent development of synthetic routes
towards functionalized monodisperse oligoarylenes with multinanometre dimensions
incorporating different carbo- and heterocycles opens up the way to their
incorporation in complex DBA systems. By means of the chemical synthesis,
the great control achieved on the band-gap of the system, wavelength of
absorption, electron donor and electron acceptor ability will allow the choice
of the appropriate oligoarylene to offer the best performances as linkers
in combination with a variety of donor and acceptor moieties.4 Oligoarylenes as building blocks for
the synthesis of materials for optoelectronics and photonic applicationsThe notion that altering the structure of a material can profoundly alter
its electromagnetic properties has enabled new technologies that offer control
over light. These new materials, often referred to somewhat imprecisely as “photonic
materials”, have in common the property of strong interaction with light.101 With the emergence of photonic technologies in
areas such as telecommunications where information is coded, transported and
routed optically, there is a strong technological demand for this kind of
material.102The interaction of light with a material can be described by the material’s
refractive index or relative permittivity. An important type of material for
photonic or optoelectronic applications are the so called second-order
nonlinear optical (NLO) materials that exhibit the linear electrooptic
effect by which the refractive index of the material can be controlled through
the application of an external electric field.103
Other important materials due to their potential photonic applications are (i)
those exhibiting photorefractive effect, (ii) molecules with a large
two-photon absorption cross section or (iii) light driven molecular
switches.The role that the chemistry of molecular and polymeric organic materials
has played in the development of new systems with potential photonic and optoelectronic
applications has increased within the last decade.104
In the next sections we will present a short overview of some of these compounds
that include conjugated oligoarylenes on their structures.4.1 Oligoarylene-containing molecular
materials exhibiting NLO behaviorAs a result of intensive research efforts, some fundamental relationships
between properties and the molecular structure of NLO organic materials have
emerged. Thus, second-order NLO chromophores need a push–pull structure,
which means that π–π conjugated segments must be end-functionalized
by strongly electron conjugated donor and acceptors, respectively. It has
been well recognized that NLO activity of chromophores is determined not only
by donor–acceptor (D–A) strength but more subtly by
conjugated electron relays. Thus, the relay activities of oligophenylenes,
oligo(phenylenevinylene)s, oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s,
oligothiophenes and oligo(thienylenevinylene)s (Fig. 13)
have been compared with those exhibited for typical relays such as a polyene
bearing the same D–A pairs and the same conjugation length.105 Fig. 13  Conjugated oligoarylenes
as π-conjugated segments in D–π–A compounds with second
order nonlinear optical applications. Experimental data as well as theoretical calculations have shown that polyene
systems display a relay activity highly superior to that of an oligophenyl
system. Experimental measurements on donor–acceptor-substituted
oligophenyl derivatives demonstrate that these systems present absorption
maxima that are greatest for bi- or terphenyls for a given donor–acceptor
combination. This fact is in agreement with the decrease of the β
values observed for the three-phenyl system in comparison with the two-phenyl
containing analogue and suggests that although oligophenylene systems impart
to this kind of materials enhanced thermal stability, they are not appropriate
candidates as π-spacers for NLO.106On the other hand, a high degree of conjugation has been observed between
the donor and acceptor end groups along a conjugated bridge containing three
or four thiophene units and a strong tendency to increase μβ(0)
values have been observed with an increasing number of thiophene units. The
difference between these conjugated bridges and those containing phenylene
units has been explained by a reduced aromaticity of the oligothiophene which
allows greater electronic interactions of the end groups (quinonoid resonance
structure) as well as an enhanced π-overlap between the preferentially
coplanar thiophene units in comparison to the preferentially twisted phenylene
units.107,108 The different degrees
of planarity of these π-chain molecules are a result of the more pronounced
steric interactions of the two ortho hydrogens in oligophenylenes.
As thiophene-derived chromophores have been recently developed with enhanced
thermal stability,109 oligothiophenes might
be good candidates to be used as π-spacers in NLO derivatives.Effenberger and coworkers have developed a synthetic route towards the
preparation of different donor/acceptor substituted ter- and quaterthiophenes (111) in the search for solvatochromic
materials.107b This synthetic route
starts from the donor substituted bi- or terthiophenes (108) and involves a Pd-catalyzed cross
coupling reaction via organozinc compounds as depicted in Scheme 14. Scheme 14 The solvatochromic shift of the charge-transfer (CT) band of
some of these push–pull oligothiophenes extends almost over the whole
visible range, indicating a large electronic interaction between the two α,α′-substituents
and full electron delocalization over the π-conjugated bridge. Because
of the strict connection between solvatochromism and first hyperpolarizability,110 and taking into account the recent synthesis
of highly efficient and stable NLO chromophores containing thiophene,111 bithiophene109c,112
and other easily delocalizable heteroaromatics105,113
as spacers, more work should be devoted to the incorporation of efficient
donor and acceptor groups in appropriate conjugated oligo(het)arylenes
in order to study their second order NLO response.Oligoarylenevinylene spacers lay in the frontier between oligoarylene and
polyene systems. Jen and coworkers have shown that chromophores containing
thienylenevinylene linkers exhibit a significantly larger μβ(0)
value compared to those containing phenylenevinylene linkers, and the μβ(0)
value increases noticeably with increasing the number of thienylenevinylene
units in the homologues.114 On the other
hand, due to the presence of the vinylene moiety, dimeric and trimeric thienylenevinylenes
are known to have a lower band-gap relative to the corresponding oligothiophenes,
namely bithiophene and terthiophene, respectively. Thus, thienylenevinylene
derivatives have been the spacer of choice in different NLO derivatives.97,105,109c,113–115
Some representative examples of NLO molecular materials together with their μβ
values are collected in Table 1.
Table 1 

CompoundRFig.μβ/10−48 esuRef.112CH3CH21100114     113CH3CH21300114     114CH3CH22300114     115CH3(CH2)2CH23800114     116CH3CH2620097     117690097     118CH3CH2740097     1191150109cSome of the trends outlined above for NLO materials can be confirmed by
comparison between appropriate NLO systems in Table 1.
Thus, it can be seen how replacement of the phenylene moiety in 112
(μβ = 1100 × 10−48)
by the thiophene system in 113
(μβ = 1300 × 10−48) produces an increase in the μβ value
similar to that observed for 118
in comparison with 116. By comparison
of derivatives 113, 114 and 115
containing the same donor and acceptor groups, the beneficial effect of an
increase in the number of vinylthiophene units in the spacer can be observed.
The same effect can be appreciated when comparing 116
with 117. By suppression of the
vinylene linkages, a decrease in the μβ value is observed.
Therefore, a μβ value of 2300 × 10−48 esu
is observed for the derivative with two vinylthiophene units (114) while a μβ value
of 1150 × 10−48 esu was measured
for the parent 119 bearing two
thiophene units. Finally, the effect of the replacement of the final donor
or acceptor group can be seen when comparing those derivatives with a final
dicyanovinyl acceptor group (113, 114) with the analogues containing the
stronger tricyanovinyl group (116
and 117 respectively).Derivatives containing oligo(aryleneethynylene) spacers have
been also used for NLO. It has been observed that the presence of the acetylenic
bridging unit reduces significantly the molecular charge-transfer giving
rise to materials with improved optical transparency.116
However, the penalty for this transparency is a decrease in β
for these derivatives. Improvement in the second order nonlinearity while
maintaining good optical transparency can be envisaged for these derivatives via
lengthening of the π-conjugated network.117
Thus, μβ values of up to 1200 × 10−48 esu
have been measured for D–A substituted oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s
containing three benzene units linked by two acetylene bridges.117Considering these synthetic possibilities, good prospects can be foreseen
for optimizing the μβ values and transparency of second order
NLO systems by using a variable number of carbocyclic and heterocyclic units
either directly attached or linked through vinylene or acetylene spacers and
combined with appropriate donor and acceptor functionalities.Other interesting types of organic materials for nonlinear optics are those
exhibiting cubic polarizability.118 The potential
applications of these materials include optical switching and information
processing. Compared to the extensive amount of research conducted on synthesis
and characterization of new molecular structures for second order nonlinear
processes, the scope of synthesis of new molecular materials and their characterization
for third-order nonlinear optical properties has received rather limited
attention. Consequently, there is an even greater need for the study of structure–property
relationship for third-order NLO processes using systematically derivatized
and sequentially built new structures.The study of families of conjugated oligomers is an important means of
gaining experimental information about the scaling of γ value
with chain length. With this aim, Samuel et al. have reported measurements
of γ as a function of n, where n is the number
of repeating units in a series of conjugated oligo(3-ethylthiopheneethynylene)s 123, 126–128.119 The
oligomers were synthesized by the novel convergent/divergent iterative
approach depicted in Scheme 15,
giving a doubling of the oligomer length at each stage.15,120 Scheme 15 It was observed in this series of compounds that γ/n
values increase strongly up to n = 8 but tend
to level off for n = 16, demonstrating the effects
of saturation. The authors suggest that the saturation arises as a result
of incomplete electron delocalization due to the presence of triple bonds.
There is a mismatch of electronic orbitals between the sp2-hybridized
carbon atoms in the thiophene rings and the sp-hybridized carbon atoms
between the rings. This mismatch causes the saturation and therefore limits
the cubic hyperpolarizability. However, as mentioned above, the presence of
the acetylene bridge contributes to the large energy gap of these molecules,
giving them improved transparency. These findings make them useful at wavelengths
where polyenes are too strong absorbing.Zhao et al. investigated the third-order nonlinearity of systematically
derivatized and sequentially built oligothiophenes and oligophenylenes (Fig. 14).121 Fig. 14  Oligothiophenes and
oligophenylenes with third-order nonlinear optical properties. These authors found that, as for second-order NLO materials, the increase
in the γ value with the number of phenylene units appears to
level off at n > 3 while no convergence γ
value was observed for the oligothiophene series due, again, to the much more
effective conjugation through the thiophene unit.121
On the other hand, the experimental results suggest that substitution by nitro
and iodo groups enhances the third-order optical nonlinearity of the thiophene
units.Although other functionalyzed oligothiophenes,122
oligophenylenes123 and oligo(phenylenevinylene)s124 have been used as third-order NLO materials,
and some preliminary structure–property correlations have been proposed,
much work remains to be done to clarify and optimize the understanding of
the structure–property relationships in order to provide the right tools
to efficiently design novel structures to play an important role in the development
of third-order NLO materials.4.2 Photorefractive materials containing
oligoarylene moietiesThere are some materials that combine second-order NLO effects with
photoconducting properties. They are the so-called photorefractive (PR)
materials which have potential application in holographic data storage. Storing
information throughout the volume of a medium, rather than just on the surface,
is an intriguing high-capacity alternative.125
Recently, the photorefractive effect has been observed both in molecular organic
systems126 and polymeric materials.127A convenient approach to prepare PR polymers is to mix all the necessary
molecular components into a polymer matrix, thus forming a composite. However,
one major drawback of these composite materials is their phase separation,
caused, as mentioned earlier, by the incompatibility between small molecules
and the polymer hosts. To minimize phase separation and, simultaneously, utilize
the advantage of orientational enhancement, Yu and coworkers have designed
and synthesized (Scheme 16)
a simple, small molecular system (132)
that connects covalently an NLO chromophore to a 3-alkylsubstituted oligothiophene.128 Scheme 16 The oligothiophene moiety plays a dual role as both the photocharge generator
and the charge transporter while the electrooptic effect can be generated
by aligning the dipoles of the NLO chromophore (D–A stilbene moiety)
under an applied electric field. Furthermore, an amorphous film of this material
can be prepared by sandwiching it between two indium tin oxide (ITO)
glass slides. The films can be maintained in the amorphous state for a long
time. This single molecular system exhibits large net optical gain coefficient
and diffraction energy and studies of the dynamics of holographic gratings
reveal that this material also has a fast response time to optical signals.
In comparison with the parent polymeric materials, this type of multifunctional
molecular system shows advantages in defining molecular structures and in
the ease of purification and sample preparation.128
This work paves the way for the future functionalization of new photoconductive
oligoarylenes with different NLO chromophores.4.3 Oligoarylene-containing organic
molecules with large two-photon absorption cross sectionsMolecular two-photon absorption (TPA) has found many applications
over recent years, including optical power limitation,129
three-dimensional optical data storage,130
microfabrication131 and two-photon-excited
fluorescence microscopy.132 In the presence
of intense laser pulses, molecules can simultaneously absorb two or more photons,
and the transition probability for absorption of two identical photons is
proportional to I2 where I is the intensity of
the laser pulse.133 It has been observed
that the peak of two-photon absorption occurs at wavelengths significantly
shorter than two times the one-photon absorption maximum, thus indicating
that the two-photon state is energetically above the lowest Bu
one-photon state. Furthermore, two-photon excited state absorption
generates a larger ‘effective’ two-photon absorptivity when
ns pulses are compared to ps pulses. Thus, there is an entry into the same
excited state manifold as for one-photon optical limiting. This may have
a profound influence on design criteria and the possibility that one chromophore
may provide optical power limiting throughout the visible region, but by two
different mechanisms.134The design of new chromophores with enhanced two-photon cross-sections, δ,
has been lacking. However, in the last few years two groups have attempted
to address the lack of such design paradigms. Reinhardt’s group designed
a series of molecules for use at 800 nm, and recognized the salient
problem of how to increase the two-photon cross-section while maintaining λmax
of the chromophores constant.135 Thus, they
identify as important parameters for an increase in the molecular two-photon
absorption: (i) the extension of the conjugation length; (ii)
the change in the identity of the conjugated bridge; (iii) the increase
in the π-donor strength; (iv) the incorporation of more polarizable
double bonds and (iv) the increase in the planarity of the chromophore.Perry, Marder and coworkers have identified similar design parameters,
but based on their observation of the effect of strong donor substitution
on stilbene derivatives.129b,133,136
Two distinct chromophore types emerge from these studies:Type 1: D–A–DType 2: A–D–ABoth types can be typified by suitable substituted oligo(phenylenevinylene)
derivatives. Some representative examples of type 1 (133) and type 2 (134) oligomeric derivatives are depicted
in Fig. 15. Fig. 15  Functionalized oligoarylenes
which present two-photon absorption. Stimulated by the research work carried out by the above mentioned groups,
other research groups have examined the two-photon-absorption properties
in the conjugated oligoarylene series.134,137
However, some additional work should be dedicated to the synthesis of other
oligomeric analogues following the design criteria outlined above (longer
oligomers, more planar systems like ladder polymers, the incorporation of
more polarizable spacers like the thiophene moiety) which will probably
lead to systems with enhanced two-photon absorption properties. Moreover,
as most of the chromophores recently reported as effective optical power limiters
employed ns pulses and they will be probably ineffective against lasers employing
microsecond pulses, the new chromophores should be designed in order to be
tested in the µs time domain. However, for two-photon absorptions (and
other third-order nonlinear optical applications) conjugated oligomer-based
systems probably cannot compete with “fully conjugated” polymers,
but may rather be used as model systems.4.4 Conjugated oligoarylenes as light
driven molecular switchesLight-driven molecular switches have been recently reported to be interesting
for numerous applications.138 Of special
interest is their use in optical information storage systems.139
Materials used for these applications allow reversible modulation of a given
electronic property by an external trigger which, in this case, is the light.Among other interesting photochromic materials, diarylethenes, namely those
bearing two thiophene derived groups, deserve special attention since they
undergo a reversible electrocyclic interconversion between an unconjugated (open, o)
state and a colored, conjugated state (closed, c) under
irradiation at well separated wavelengths (Fig. 16).140 Fig. 16  Diarylethenes as
photochromic materials. Reversible electrocyclic interconversion between the
unconjugated (open, o) state and the colored (closed, c)
takes place under irradiation. Lehn and coworkers have recently described the synthesis and some physicochemical
properties of diarylethene-derived molecular switches containing functionalized
oligothiophenes (139–141, Scheme 17).141 These systems represent a combination within
the same entity of both the switching and the oligothiophene features and
display, in the closed (c) form a total conjugation corresponding
to about eight connected thiophenes (141). Scheme 17 The key compound 135 gives
access to more complicated switch molecules with fewer steps by use of the
well known palladium-catalyzed carbon–carbon bond formation. The
presence of the pyridine moiety in peripheral positions of these molecular
switches allows the synthesis of either neutral molecules (139, 141)
or, by methylation, to the parent pyridinium salt derivatives (140). In the case of compounds 139 and 141,
UV light was not necessary to obtain the closed forms: photoswitching between
the open and closed forms could be achieved by irradiation with two different
wavelengths of the visible region. Thus, the open forms could be generated
by irradiation of the closed forms at a wavelength >600 nm while
subsequent irradiation of the open forms at a wavelength <450–500 nm
returned the compounds quantitatively. In the case of the methylated compounds,
they opened quantitatively upon irradiation at a wavelength >600 nm,
but conversion to the closed forms could only be achieved by irradiation at
around 330 nm. These molecular switches are found to display very large
changes in fluorescence and in electrochemical properties in the open and
closed forms due to the different levels of conjugation. Such changes represent
photocontrol of electrochemical properties in the fashion of a photoswitched
molecular wire.Of special interest for their potential use in optical data storage would
be compounds which absorb light strongly in the near-infrared (NIR)
region of the spectrum given that reading and writing is performed by diode
lasers which operate in this region.142 Thus,
the absorption wavelength tunability offered by the chemistry of conjugated
oligomers should be considered in order to synthesize this type of molecular
photoswitches exhibiting absorption in the NIR region.5 Linearly extended tetrathiafulvalene (TTF)
analogues with bridged π-conjugated oligoarylene spacers.The study of tetrathiafulvalene (TTF, Fig. 17)
and its derivatives has been the subject of unabated interest since it was
first reported by Wudl in 1970.143 For almost
two decades TTF derivatives have been used as strong electron-donor moieties
in charge-transfer (CT) complexes and ion radical salts exhibiting
interesting electrical conducting and superconducting properties. However,
during the last few years, the utility of TTF (i) as a building
block in macromolecular and supramolecular structures, (ii) as molecule-based
ferromagnetic compounds, (iii) as synthetic intermediates in organic
chemistry, (iv) as a donor moiety in intramolecular donor (D)–acceptor (A)
systems including NLO materials and the important association with the fullerene
core and (v) in the preparation of liquid crystalline materials
and Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) films, has made of TTF one of the
most extensively studied molecules.144 Fig. 17  Selected examples
of π-extended TTF analogues containing oligoheteroarylene spacers. Although different chemical modifications have been carried out on the
TTF unit in order to prepare building blocks for macro- and supramolecular
chemistry, the “classical” chemical modifications carried out
on the TTF skeleton are aimed at increasing electrical conductivity.145 Thus, one of the most effective strategies to
produce CT complexes with high electrical conductivity involves the synthesis
of TTF derivatives that allow enhanced dimensionality in the charge-transfer
complexes.146TTF analogues with extended π-conjugation (Fig. 17)
have been successfully used in the preparation of CT complexes with enhanced
dimensionality. This specific approach has been considered in detail by Roncali147 who has reviewed the synthesis of TTF analogues
with polyalkene, heterocyclic, heterocyclic π-conjugated and other
rigid π-conjugated spacers. Roncali points out that by precise control
of the spacer length it should be possible to tune the conduction mechanism
between the “vertical” mixed valence conduction of TTF charge-transfer
salts and the “horizontal” polaron/bipolaron conduction on
linear systems.A logical extension of this strategy consists in the use of long conjugated
oligoarylenes as spacer groups in order to achieve further improvement of π-donor
ability and to increase the number of accessible cationic states. In Fig. 17 are depicted some representative examples (142–144)
of TTF-analogues containing oligoheteroarylene spacers which can be easily
synthesized by Wittig–Horner olefination reaction from the corresponding
diformylsubstituted-conjugated oligomers and differently substituted phosphonate
esters.The use of oligothiophenes as π-spacers in π-extended TTF
derivatives (142) decreases
the oxidation potential and HOMO–LUMO gap of both constitutive building
blocks.148 However, interannular rotational
disorder in the oligothiophene spacers appears to be a major obstacle to extensive π-delocalization.
Consequently, more rigid spacers were incorporated between the thiophene units
in order to increase effective conjugation. With this aim, derivatives 143 were synthesized.149
Long alkyl chains were incorporated into the thiophene units in order to make
soluble even the longer TTF analogues. Contrary to that observed for the parent
analogues containing the oligothiophene spacers (142),
the lengthening of the thienylenevinylene spacer does not lead to any apparent
saturation of the effective conjugation up to the longest spacers analyzed.
This fact is due to the more planar and more rigid geometry of the oligo(thienylenevineylene)
spacers. Interestingly, electrochemical studies carried out on derivatives 143 show that an increase in the number of
thienylenevinylene units produces a positive shift of Ered1 whereas Eox1 is quite independent of the chain length and remains
at constant values. This result is due to the fact that the HOMO level of
conjugated TTF analogs is essentially determined by the end 1,4-dithiafulvenyl
groups. This means that the decrease in the HOMO–LUMO gap is caused
only by a lowering of the LUMO level and therefore, as shown by the optical
data in solution, a faster approach to the convergence limit of the effective
conjugation length (ECL) takes place when compared with that observed
for oligo(thienylenevinylene) analogues without the 1,4-dithiafulvenyl
groups.Preliminary attempts to synthesize radical cation salts of some of the
shorter members of these series of compounds by using galvanostatic electrocrystallization
produce an insulating material. This electrical behavior is due to the intercalation
of the anion between donor dimers stacked which do not allow intra-stack-electron
delocalization.147 Further studies should
be directed towards the influence of the length of the spacers on the crystal
structure of these materials as well as on their potential electrically conducting
behavior.Another interesting approach has been the replacement of the thiophene-containing
oligomers by furan-2,5-diylvinylene oligomers (144).
The smaller aromatic resonance energy of furan should allow a further decrease
of the overall aromatic character of the spacer and hence a better π-electron
delocalization over the whole conjugated system may be expected.150
In contrast to the oligo(thienylenevinylene) analogues, electrogenerated
cation radical salts of some of these materials show a weak but significant
electrical conductivity (10−4 S cm−1)
probably due to the ease of formation of the dicationic state in these compounds
which can contribute to some intrastack delocalization.We have recently reported the use of naphthalene spacers to prepare π-extended
TTF derivatives which form CT-complexes in combination with acceptor molecules
such as TCNQ or DDQ.151 As we have recently
developed a synthetic strategy towards the preparation of appropriately functionalized
oligo(2,6-naphthylenevinylenes),92 oligomeric
analogues of the above molecules should be considered as a realistic goal.
The structural study of these and other carbocyclic-containing π-extended
TTF derivatives [like oligo(phenylenevinylene)s or oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s]
will enable the determination of the influence of these π-extended
systems on the solid state properties of these materials, including electrical
conductivity.6 Conjugated oligoarylenes incorporating
ligand binding sitesTransition metal complexes are known to participate in a variety of processes
involved in, for example, (i) solar light energy conversion, (ii)
photocatalysis, (iii) artificial photosynthesis, (iv)
chemosensors and ferromagnets. To be effective, it is necessary to optimize
the choice of both the metal center and the coordinated organic framework.152 Thus, due to the interesting electronic properties
exhibited by conjugated oligomers, the preparation of derivatives which incorporate
metal ions as integral structural units represent especially interesting synthetic
targets for further materials science applications. Substrates of this type
would be expected to display a rich variety of physicochemical properties
such as, for example, multiple redox behavior and optical, magnetic, mechanical,
sensing and catalytic activity. The unique characteristics of particular metal
ions may be harnessed to fine-tune the electronic properties of the conjugated
organic component in order to perform a desired function.153Pyridine/benzene rods with biscyclometalating binding sites were reported
by Sauvage and coworkers who first prepared 3,3′,5,5′-tetra(2-pyridyl)biphenyl.154 This group155
also extended this rod by incorporating one, two or three phenylene spacers (147) using aromatic cross-coupling
reactions between the diboronic acid derivatives (146)
of the respective phenylene bridge and the brominated dipyridylbenzene (145) or its ruthenium complex156
yielding the assembled dinuclear complex directly (Scheme 18a).
Derivative 149 containing two
terpyridyl units could be obtained via Ni(0)-promoted
homocoupling of 4′-(p-bromophenyl)-2,2′:6′,2″-terpyridyl (148, Scheme 18b).157 Scheme 18 Diosmium and diruthenium complexes 150a,b could be subsequently prepared from 147 in which the metals are attached to the
4 and 4′ positions of biphenyl and stabilized by the surrounding pyridine
units. On the other hand, both the dinuclear Ru(II)/Ru(II)
complexes 151a and the mixed
valence species 151b
(Fig. 18) were prepared from the complete
tridentate terpyridyl-based series 149
with metal-to-metal distances of 7–20 Å.158 Barigletti et al. used these rods to
assemble the mixed-metal complexes (151c)
and investigated both their luminescence and electrochemical properties.159 Fig. 18  Ruthenium and osmium
complexes containing oligophenylene bridges. It was observed that the much higher electron donor character of the anionic
phenyl bridging ligands and the short Ru–C(phenyl) bonds lead
to substantially increased metal–metal interactions in derivatives 150 relative to the analogous systems in which
the meta-terpyridine moieties are chosen for metal coordination 151.160During the last decade, Ziessel and coworkers have been very active in
the design and synthesis of multitopic ligands.152,161
They have been specially engaged with the development of oligopyridine-based
ditopic ligands bridged by alkyne spacers comprising several ethynyl groups (152, 153, Fig. 19). The spacer serves as both a
rigid girder to maintain structural integrity and a conduit for electron flow.
The alkyne bridge actively promotes long-range electronic coupling between
remote cationic units, especially under illumination with visible light. They
have observed that the level of electronic communication along the molecular
wire can be controlled by insertion of suitable insulating groups into the
bridge. Thus, the presence of phenyl rings between the acetylenic units (154) severs electron delocalization along
the wire. Fig. 19  Oligopyridine based
ditopic ligands bridged by alkyne-containing spacers. By careful design, it has been possible to introduce directionality and
selectivity in this type of photoactive dyads being consequently able to modulate
the rate of triplet energy transfer by several orders of magnitude.162 An emerging problem of increasing the size of
the system is the lowering of solubility. Thus, Ziessel and Khatyr have achieved
solubility and tunability for an increasing number of oligophenyleneethynylene
derivatives containing two back-to-back terpyridines (158, 160, 161) by functionalizing the phenylene
rings with two dodecylene moieties (Scheme 19).163 Scheme 19 The synthetic strategy used to synthesize these derivatives involves the
use of palladium promoted coupling reactions of terminal alkynes (156, 157)
with oligophenyleneethynylenes end-capped with bromine atoms (155, 159).
This family of ditopic ligands allow to tune the edge-to-edge distance
between the two central pyridine rings from 16 to 44 Å. To the
best of our knowledge, there are no reports about the metal-to-metal
interactions in metal complexes of the longest members of this series. The
introduction of other carbocyclic units between the acetylenic bridges should
be studied in order to tune the electronic coupling between orbitals on the
acetylenic function and other arylene units which will allow to tune the metal–metal
interaction in this type of system.Other researchers have been engaged with the study of conjugated oligomers
containing more than two metal ion-binding sites. Thus, Schanze and coworkers
have recently synthesized a series of π-conjugated polymers that incorporate
a metal–bipyridine chromophore directly into a poly(phenyleneethynylene)
polymer.164 In order to better understand
the optical properties of these metal–organic π-conjugated materials
they have also synthesized a series of monodisperse oligo(phenyleneethynylene)
derivatives containing metal–organic sites (162a–f, Fig. 20)
as models for the structurally related polymers.165 Fig. 20  Monodisperse oligo(phenyleneethynylene)
derivatives containing metal–organic sites. Comparison of the UV–Vis spectra of the free oligomers (162a,b)
with those of the corresponding (L)Re(CO)3Cl (162c,d)
and (L)Ru(bpy)22+
(162e,f)
complexes demonstrates that metallation induces a substantial red-shift
of the lowest absorption. The low energy band likely arises from a long-axis
polarized π,π* transition localized predominantly on the chromophore
defined by the bis(dioctadecyloxyphenylethynyl)-capped bipyridine
segment. The transition is red-shifted because metallation forces the bipyridyl
unit into a planar conformation, thereby effectively increasing the conjugation
length. Thus, the use of a variety of metal cations in combination with conjugated
oligomers comprising electronically communicating ion-binding sites can
be envisaged as a new tool for synthetic chemists to efficiently tune the
physicochemical properties of these compounds for specific materials science
applications.7 OutlookThe very large number of studies dedicated to the synthesis of conjugated
oligoarylenes and to the examination of their properties has made it possible
to choose oligomers according to need to a degree that is amazing in some
occasions. By choice of the appropriate arylene units, linkages and number
of repeating units, an extraordinary control on the photophysical and electrochemical
properties of these materials can be achieved. Synthetic strategies have been
also developed that allow enhanced solubility, thermal stability and processability
of these materials and therefore, in addition to serving as models for higher
polymeric forms, these oligomeric structures have become more important in
their own right.The incorporation of different low molecular weight oligoarylenes either
as side chains or as a part of the main chain in conjugated–non-conjugated
block copolymers has already proved to be an effective way to combine the
control of the conjugation length characteristic of molecular systems with
processability properties of polymeric materials. They have been successfully
used in the fabrication of light emitting devices in which the emission color,
electron affinity and ionization potential can be tuned by choice of appropriate
conjugated oligomers and non-conjugated spacers.Only a few examples of oligoarylenes functionalized with dendritic substituents
have been reported. Nevertheless, these systems present high interest given
that they may allow supramolecular control of interchain interaction which
will permit the development at will of either compact materials favoring interstack
interactions or, in contrast, avoid interstack interactions thus favoring
the behavior of the systems as single molecular wires.Synthetic strategies have been developed that allow the incorporation of
different functionalities in oligoarylenes for specific applications. Photoinduced
electron and energy transfer have been reported for molecular dyads and triads
bearing conjugated oligoarylenes covalently linked to electron acceptor systems
like C60 or porphyrin systems and donor moieties like anthracene
or dialkylamines.As a result of intensive research efforts, some fundamental relationships
between properties and the molecular structure of oligoarylene-containing
materials have emerged. Thus, the bases for the development of improved oligoarylene-based
materials for NLO and two-photon absorption have been settled and certainly
a lot of work will be devoted to this task in the next few years.A number of tasks still remain to be performed before the bright prospects
of conjugated oligoarylenes can be realized. Of the wide variety of systems
that have become available, only a few have been extensively studied, and
the best materials for each specific application are yet to be identified.
The study of most of these applications is a multidisciplinary area and, consequently,
the efforts of synthetic chemists to prepare a variety of materials exhibiting
any specific property have to be complemented by the work of applied physicists
and materials scientists in order to find the optimum device structures to
maximize device performances.AcknowledgementsWe wish to acknowledge Professor F. Wudl on the occasion
of his 60th birthday for his continuous support in the area of fullerene chemistry.We
gratefully acknowledge the DGESIC of Spain (Project PB98-0818)
for financial support.ReferencesJ. R. Sheats and P. F. Barbara, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 191 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A.
R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. MacKay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burn and A.
B. Holmes, Nature (London), 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .For a comprehensive treatment
of the semiconductor device physics of conjugated polymers, see:
  (a) N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, Solid State Phys., 1995, 49, 1 Search PubMed .
  (a) F. Hide, M. A. Díaz-García, B. J. Schwartz and A. J. Heeger, Acc.
Chem. Res., 1997, 30, 430 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. K. H. Ho, D. S. Thomas, R. H. Friend and N. Tessler, Science, 1999, 285, 233 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Ziemells, Nature (London), 1999, 399, 408 CrossRef ; 
  (d) Y. Cao, I. D. Parker, G. Yu, C. Zhang and A. Heeger, Nature (London), 1999, 397, 414 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. de Leew, Phys. World, 1999, 12, 31 Search PubMed .Electronic Materials:
The Oligomer Approach, eds. K. Müllen and G.
Wegner, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998. Search PubMed .K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Adv.
Mater., 1998, 10, 433 .P. F. van Hutten, V.
V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 257 CrossRef CAS .F. Garnier, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 209 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. L. Brédas, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 263 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. L. Brédas, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne, D. A. Dos Santos and Z. Shuai, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 267 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Cornil, D. Beljonne
and J. L. Brédas,
in Electronic Materials: The Oligomer Approach, eds. K.
Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998, pp. 432–447. Search PubMed .J. Heinze and P. Tschuncky,
in Electronic Materials: The Oligomer Approach, eds. K.
Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998, pp. 479–513. Search PubMed .H. Bässler and B. Schweitzer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 173 CrossRef .R. E. Martin and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1350 CrossRef .
  (a) U. Scherf, Top. Curr. Chem., 1999, 201, 163 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) U. Scherf and K. Müllen, Synthesis, 1992, 23 CrossRef CAS .J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Tour, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 537 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Berresheim, M. Müller and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1747 CrossRef CAS .A. Kraft, A. G. Grimsdale and A.
B. Holmes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 38, 403 .J.
L. Segura, Acta Polym., 1998, 49, 319 CrossRef CAS .P. Heseman, H. Vestweber, J. Pommerehne, R. F. Mahrt and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 388 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. F. Heck, Palladium Reagents in Organic Synthesis, Academic
Press, London,  1985 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Tsuji, Palladium Reagents and Catalysis: Innovations in Organic
Synthesis, Wiley, Chichester,  1995. Search PubMed .C. Hochfilzer, S. Tasch, B. Winkler, J. Huslage and G. Leising, Synth. Met., 1997, 85, 1271 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Aguiar, B. Hu, F. E. Karasz and L. Ackelrud, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 3161 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aguiar, F. E. Karasz and L. Ackelrud, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 4598 CrossRef CAS .J.-K. Lee, R. R. Schrock, D. R. Baigent and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 1966 CrossRef CAS .X.-C. Li, T.-M. Yong, J. Grüner, A. B. Holmes, S. C. Moratti, F. Cacialli and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 437 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Zyung, D.-H. Hwang, I.-N. Kang, H.-K. Shim, W.-Y. Hwang and J.-J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1499 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J.-I. Lee, I.-N. Kang, D.-H. Hwang, H.-K. Shim, S.
C. Jeoung and D. Kim, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1925 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Sarker, B. Strehemel and D. C. Neckers, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 7409 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. T. Pasco, P. M. Lahti and F. E. Karasz, Polym.
Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 1998, 39(2), 739 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. T. Pasco, P. M. Lahti and F. E. Karasz, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 6933 CrossRef CAS .N. Benfaremo, D. J. Sandman, S. Tripathy, J. Kumar, K. Yang, M. F. Rabner and C. Lyons, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 3595 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. M. Oberski, K.-U. Clauswitz, G. Lüssem, F. Geffarth, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Polym. Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 1999, 40(2), 1187 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Lüssem, R. Festag, A. Greiner, C. Schmidt, C. Unterlechner, W. Heitz, J. H. Wendorff, M. Hopmeier and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 923 .H. K. Kim, M.-K. Ryu and S.-M. Lee, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 1236 CrossRef CAS .F. Garten, A. Hilberer, F. Cacialli, E. Esselink, Y. van Dam, B. Sclatmann, R. H. Friend, T. M. Klapwijk and G. Hadziioannou, Adv.
Mater., 1997, 9, 127 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Brouwer, V.
V. Krasnikov, A. Hilberer and G. Hadziioannou, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 935 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Y. Liu, M. S. Liu, X.-C. Li and A.
K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 3301 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, M. S. Liu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Acta Polym., 1999, 50, 105 CrossRef CAS .B. S. Chuah, F. Geneste, A. B. Holmes, R. E. Martin, H. Rost, F. Cacialli, R. H. Friend, H.-H. Hörhold, S. Pfeiffer and D.-H. Wang, Polym.
Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 1999, 40, 1174 Search PubMed .S. Pfeiffer, H. Rost and H.-H. Hörhold, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1999, 200, 2471 CrossRef CAS .R. Gómez, J. L. Segura and N. Martín, Chem. Commun., 1999, 619 RSC .S.
F. Mason, Molecular Optical Activity
and the Chiral Discriminations, Cambridge University Press, New
York,  1982, p. 72. Search PubMed .For recent syntheses of functionalized
binaphthyl derivatives, see:
  (a) R. Gómez, J. L. Segura and N. Martín, Org.
Lett., 2000, 2, 1585 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q.-S. Hu, D. Vitharana, G.-Y. Liu, V. Jain, M. W. Wagaman, L. Zhang, T. R. Lee and L. Pu, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 1082 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Johannsen, K. A. Jørgensen, X.-F. Zheng, Q.-S. Hu and L. Pu, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 299 CrossRef CAS .For recent reviews on the synthesis
of 1,1′-binaphthyl-containing polymers, see:
  (a) L. Pu, Acta Polym., 1997, 48, 116 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Pu, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 2405 CrossRef CAS .K. Y. Musick, Q.-S. Hu and L. Pu, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2933 CrossRef CAS .M.
A. Keegstra, V. Cimrová, D. Neher and U. Scherf, Macromol.
Chem. Phys., 1996, 195, 2511 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) F. Konstandakopoulou, K. Gravalos and J. Kallitsis, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5264 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) V. Demeide, K. S. Andrikopoulos, G. A. Voyiatzis, F. Konstandakopoulou and J.
K. Kallitsis, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 8848 CrossRef .Q.-S. Hu, D. Vitharana, G. Liu, V. Jain and L. Pu, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 5083 CrossRef .J. K. Kallitsis, K. G. Gravalos, A. Hilberer and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2989 CrossRef .Y. Kim, S. Kwon, D. Yoo, M. F. Rubner and M. S. Wrighton, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2699 CrossRef CAS .S. Dellsperger, F. Dötz, P. Smith and C. Weder, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2000, 201, 192 CrossRef CAS .U. Mitschke, T. Debaerdemaeker and P. Bäuerle, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2000, 425 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) P. Bäuerle, in Electronic Materials: The Oligomer Approach,
eds. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998, pp. 105–197 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Fichou, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 571 RSC .R. Advincula, M.K. Park, S. Inaoka, M. Kidowaki and K. Ichimura, Polym. Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 1999, 40(2), 1209 Search PubMed .
  (a) P. F. van
Hutten, R. E. Gill, J. K. Herrema and G. Hadziioannou, J.
Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 3218 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. R. Silcoff and T. Sheradsky, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 9116 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Novikova, N. N. Barashkov, A. Yassar, M. Hmyene and J. P. Ferraris, Synth. Met., 1996, 83, 47 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Novikova, N. N. Barashkov, A. Yassar, M. Hmyene and J. P. Ferraris, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 247 CrossRef .
  (a) Y. Kunugi, L. L. Miller, T. Maki and A. Canavesi, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1061 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Hong, L. L. Miller, D. D. Graf, K.
R. Mann and B. Zinger, Synth. Met., 1996, 82, 189 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. L. Miller and K. R. Mann, Acc.
Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 417 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Bouillud, L. Mazerolle, P. Gagnon, L. Goldenberg, M.
C. Petty and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2815 CrossRef .Y. Hong and L. L. Miller, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1999 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) U. Mitshke, E. M. Osteriz, T. Debaerdemaeker, M. Sokolowski and P. Bäuerle, Chem. Eur. J., 1998, 4, 2211 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Wang, M. Kilitziraki, J. A. H. MacBride, M. R. Bryce, L. E. Horsburgh, A. K. Sheridan, A. P. Monkman and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv.
Mater., 2000, 12, 217 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Uckert, Y.-H. Tak, K. Müllen and H. Bässler, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 905 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. M. Pyo, S. I. Kim, T. J. Shin, H. K. Park, M. Ree, K. H. Park and J. S. Kang, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 4777 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Ree, S. I. Kim, S. M. Pyo, T. J. Shin, H. K. Park and J. C. Jung, Macromol.
Symp., 1999, 142, 73 Search PubMed .M. Greczmiel, P. Pösch, H.-W. Schmidt, P. Strohriegel, E. Buchwald, M. Meier, W. Rieß and M. Schwoerer, Macromol.
Symp., 1996, 102, 371 Search PubMed .Y. Yang and Q. Pei, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 4807 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Q. Pei and Y. Yang, Chem.
Mater., 1995, 7, 1568 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Pei and Y. Yang, Adv.
Mater., 1995, 7, 559 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. Hirao and M. Hayashi, Acta
Polym., 1999, 50, 219 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. J. Goethals, Telechelic Polymers: Synthesis and Applications, CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL,  1989 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Yamashita, Chemistry and Industry of Macromonomers, 
Hüthig and Werf, Heidelberg,  1993. Search PubMed .
  (a) F. X. Zhong and B. François, Macromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1988, 9, 411 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) F. X. Zhong and B. François, Synth. Met., 1989, 29, E35 CrossRef ; 
  (c) F. X. Zhomg and B. François, Macromol. Chem., 1990, 191, 2735 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) F. X. Zhong and B. François, Macromol. Chem., 1990, 191, 2743 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) F. X. Zhong and B. François, Macromol. Chem., 1991, 192, 2277 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) F. X. Zhong and B. François, Synth. Met., 1991, 41-43, 955 ; 
  (g) G. Widawski, M. Rawiso and B. François, Nature
(London), 1994, 369, 387 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) B. François, G. Widawski, M. Rawiso and B. Cesar, Synth. Met., 1995, 69, 463 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) B. François, O. Pitois and J. François, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 1041 CAS .D. Marsitzky, M. Klapper and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 8658 CrossRef .D. Marsitzky, T. Brand, Y. Geerts, M. Klapper and K. Müllen, Macromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1998, 19, 385 Search PubMed .
  (a) H. Wang and L. Yu, Polym.
Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 1999, 40(2), 1072 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) W. Li, H. Wang, L. Yu, T. L. Morkved and H. M. Jaeger, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 3034 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) G. N. Tew, L. Li and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 1998, 120, 5601 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. N. Tew, M. U. Pralle and S. I. Stupp, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 517 CrossRef CAS .V. Francke, H. J. Räder, Y. Geerts and K. Müllen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1998, 19, 275 CrossRef CAS .H. Kukula, U. Ziener, M. Schops and A. Godt, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5160 CrossRef CAS .M.
A. Hempenius, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, J. A. E. H. Van Haare, R. A. J. Janssen, S. S. Sheiko, J. P. Spatz, M. Möller and E. W. Meijer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 2798 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. I. Stupp, V. LeBonheur, K. Walker, L.
S. Li, K. E. Huggins, M. Keser and A. Amstutz, Science, 1997, 276, 384 CrossRef ; 
  (b) E. R. Zubarev, M. U. Pralle, L. Li and S.
I. Stupp, Science, 1999, 283, 523 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shirota, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1 RSC .T. Noda, H. Ogawa and Y. Shirota, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 283 CrossRef CAS .A. Schulz and W. Kaim, Chem.
Ber., 1989, 122, 1863 Search PubMed .T. Noda and Y. Shirota, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9714 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Noda, I. Imae, N. Noma and Y. Shirota, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 239 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Noda, H. Ogawa, N. Noma and Y. Shirota, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 720 CrossRef CAS .T. Noda, H. Ogawa, N. Noma and Y. Shirota, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2177 RSC .I. Jestin, E. Levillain and J. Roncali, Chem.
Commun., 1998, 2655 RSC .J. Roncali, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 147 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Hawker and J. M. Fréchet, J.
Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7638 CrossRef CAS .A. W. Freeman, J.
M. F. Fréchet, S.
C. Koene and M. E. Thompson, Polym. Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc.,
Div. Polym. Chem.), 1999, 40, 1246 Search PubMed .J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature (London), 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS .For a comprehensive review
of organic solar cells, see:
  (a) G. A. Chamberlain, Solar Cells, 1983, 8, 47 Search PubMed .Proceedings of the European Conference
on Organic Solar Cells, ECOS, Cadarache (France), 1998. .
  (a) M. Granström, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature (London), 1998, 395, 257 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Gao, G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 692 CrossRef CAS .R. N. Marks, J. J. M. Halls, D. D. C. Bradley, R. H. Friend and A. B. Holmes, J. Phys. Condens.
Matter., 1994, 6, 1379 CrossRef CAS .R. A. J. Janssen, M.
P. T. Christiaans, C. Hare, N. Martín, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 103, 8840 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) N. C. Greenham, X. G. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev.
B., 1996, 54, 17628 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. U. Huynh, X. Peng and P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 923 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Synth. Met., 1993, 59, 333 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. A. J. Janssen, J. C. Hummelen, K. Lee, K. Pakbaz, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Chem.
Phys., 1995, 103, 788 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) L. S. Roman, M. R. Andersson, T. Yohannes and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 1164 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sariciftci, Prog. Quant. Electr., 1995, 19, 131 Search PubMed .J.
C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. LePeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Williams, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) F. Effenberger and G. Grube, Synthesis, 1998, 1372 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Knorr, M. Mehring, G. Grube and F. Effenberger, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 3502 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J.-F. Nierengarten, J.-F. Eckert, J.-F. Nicoud, L. Ouali, V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, Chem. Commun., 1999, 617 RSC ; 
  (d) S.-G. Liu, L. Shu, J. Rivera, H. Liu, J.-M. Raimundo, J. Roncali, A. Gorgues and L. Echegoyen, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 4884 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. Yamashiro, Y. Aso, T. Otsubo, H. Tang, Y. Harima and K. Yamahita, Chem. Lett., 1999, 443 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) N. Armaroli, F. Barigelletti, P. Ceroni, J.-F. Eckert, J.-F. Nicoud and J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2000, 599 RSC .
  (a) J. L. Segura and N. Martín, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 3239 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. J. Janssen, P. A. Van Hal, J. Knol and J.
K. Hummelen, in Electronic Materials:
The Oligomer Approach, eds. K. Müllen and G.
Wegner, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998. Search PubMed .J. L. Segura, N. Martín and M. Hanack, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 1999, 643 CrossRef CAS .M. Prato and M. Maggini, Acc.
Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 519 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Segura, R. Gómez, N. Martín, C. Luo and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun, 2000, 701 RSC .J. L. Segura and N. Martín, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 13 RSC .J. L. Segura and N. Martín, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 3199 CrossRef CAS .V.
P. Rao, A. K. Y. Jen, K. Y. Wong and K. J. Drost, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 1118 RSC .M. S. Vollmer, F. Würthner, F. Effenberger, P. Emele, D. U. Meyer, T. Stümpfig, H. Port and H. C. Wolf, Chem.
Eur. J., 1998, 4, 260 CrossRef CAS .W. B. Davis, W. A. Svec, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, Nature (London), 1998, 396, 60 CrossRef CAS .D. T. Hermann, A. C. Schindler, K. Polborn, R. Gompper, S. Stark, A. B. J. Parusel, G. Grabner and G. Köhler, Chem. Eur. J., 1999, 5, 3208 CrossRef CAS .J. Pendry, Science, 1999, 285, 1687 CrossRef CAS .For a recent
overview on the state of the art of materials for optics, see the supplement: “Frontiers
in optics”, 
  (a) Science,  1999, 286, 1499–1528. Search PubMed .S. R. Marder, B. Kippelen, A. K.-Y. Jen and N. Peyghambarian, Nature
(London), 1997, 388, 845 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) P. N. Prasad and B. A. Reinhardt, Chem. Mater., 1990, 2, 660 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Garito, R. F. Shi and M. Wu, Phys. Today, 1994,(5), 51 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) L. R. Dalton, A. W. Harper, R. Ghosn, W.
H. Steier, M. Ziari, H. Fetterman, Y. Shi, R.
V. Mustacich, A. K.-Y. Jen and K. J. Shea, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1060 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. R. Dalton, W. H. Steier, B. H. Robinson, C. Zhang, A. Ren, S. Garner, A. Chen, T. Londergan, L. Irwin, B. Carlson, L. Fitfield, G. Phelan, C. Kincaid, J. Amend and A. Jen, J.
Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1905 RSC .O.-K. Kim, A. Fort, M. Barzoukas, M. Blanchard-Desce and J.-M. Lehn, J.
Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2227 RSC .
  (a) J. L. Oudar, J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 67, 446 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Berkovic, Y. R. Shen and M. Shadt, Mol. Cryst. Liq.
Cryst, 1987, 1506, 607 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. O. Morley, V. J. Docherty and D. Pugh, J. Chem.
Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1987, 1351 RSC .
  (a) F. Effenberger and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 719 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Effenberger, F. Würthner and F. Steybe, J. Org.
Chem., 1995, 60, 2082 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) F. Würthner, F. Effenberger, R. Wortmann and P. Krämer, Chem. Phys., 1993, 173, 305 CrossRef ; 
  (b) L. T. Cheng, W. Tam, S. R. Marder, A.
E. Stiegman, G. Rikken and C. W. Spangler, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 10643 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Gilmour, S. R. Marder, J. W. Perry and L.
T. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 1994, 6, 494 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. K.-Y. Jen, V. P. Rao, K. J. Drost, K. Y. Wong and M. P. Cava, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 2057 RSC ; 
  (c) P. V. Bedworth, Y. Cai, A. Jen and S. R. Marder, J. Org. Chem., 1996, 61, 2242 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) V. P. Rao, A. K.-Y. Jen and Y. Cai, J. Chem.
Soc., Chem. Commun., 1996, 1237 RSC ; 
  (e) C.-F. Shu, W. J. Tsai, J.-Y. Chen, A.
K.-Y. Jen, Y. Zhang and T. A. Chen, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1996, 2279 RSC ; 
  (f) C.-F. Shu, W.-J. Tsai and A. K.-Y. Jen, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1996, 37, 7055 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. Buckely, E. Choe, R. DeMartino, T. Leslie, G. Nelson, J. Starnattof, D. Stuetz and H. Yoon, Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng., 1986, 54, 502 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. S. Paley, J. M. Harris, H. Looser, J.
C. Baumert, G. C. Bjorklund, D. Jundt and R. J. Twieg, J. Org. Chem., 1989, 54, 3774 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) V. P. Rao, Y. M. Cai and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Chem. Soc.,
Chem. Commun., 1994, 1689 RSC ; 
  (b) V. P. Rao, A. K. Y. Jen, K. Y. Wong and K.
J. Drost, Tetrahedron Lett., 1993, 34, 1747 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Y. Wong, A. K. Y. Jen, V. P. Rao and K.
J. Drost, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 100, 6818 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) I. D. L. Albert, J. O. Morley and D. Pugh, J. Phys.
Chem., 1995, 99, 8024 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) P. R. Varanasi, A. K. Y. Jen, J. Chandrasekhar, I. N. N. Namboothiri and A. Rathna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 12443 CrossRef ; 
  (f) A. Abboto, S. Bradamante, A. Facchetti and G. A. Pagani, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 5755 CrossRef ; 
  (g) B. Illien, P. Jehan, A. Botrel, A. Darchen, I. Ledoux, J. Zyss, P. Le Magueres and L. Ouahab, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 633 RSC ; 
  (h) S. S. P. Chou, G. T. Hsu and H. C. Lin, Tetrahedron Lett., 1999, 40, 2157 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) S. Brasselet, F. Cherioux, P. Audebert and J. Zyss, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1915 CrossRef CAS .C. Cai, I. Liakatas, M.-S. Wang, M. Bösch, C. Bosshard, P. Günter, S. Concilio, N. Tirelli and U.
W. Suter, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 1847 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Breitung, C.-F. Shu and R. J. McMahon, J.
Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 1154 CrossRef CAS .A. K.-J. Jen, V.
P. Rao, K. Y. Wong and K. J. Drost, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 90 RSC .
  (a) C. Maertens, J.-X. Zhang, P. Dubois and R. Jérôme, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin
Trans. 2, 1996, 713 RSC ; 
  (b) J. X. Zhang, P. Dubois and R. Jérôme, J.
Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1997, 1209 RSC .
  (a) M. Barzoukas, A. Fort, G. Klein, A. Boeglin, C. Serbutoviez, L. Oswald and J. F. Nicoud, Chem. Phys., 1991, 153, 457 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. W. Perry, A. E. Stiegman, S. R. Marder, D.
R. Coulter, D. N. Beratan, D. E. Brinza, F. L. Klavetter
and R. H. Grubbs, in Nonlinear
Optical Properties of Organic Materials; Proc. SPIE; The International
Society for Optical Engineering, Washington, DC,  1988; vol. 971,
p. 17. Search PubMed .P. Nguyen, G. Lesley, T. B. Marder, I. Ledoux and J. Zyss, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 406 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. Sauteret, J. P. Hermann, R. Frey, F. Pradere, J. Ducunig, R. H. Baughman and R. R. Chance, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 1976, 36, 956 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Kajzar, S. Etemad, G. L. Baker and J. Messier, Synth. Met., 1987, 17, 563 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) I. D. W. Samuel, I. Ledoux, C. Dhenaut, J. Zyss, H. H. Fox, R. R. Schrock and R. J. Silbey, Science, 1994, 265, 1070 CAS ; 
  (d) T. Bjornholm, D. R. Greve, T. Geisler, J.
C. Petersen, M. Jayaraman and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 1996, 11, 920 CrossRef ; 
  (e) C. Bosshard, R. Spreiter, P. Gunter, R.
R. Tykwinski, M. Schreiber and F. Diederich, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 231 CAS ; 
  (f) D. R. Greve, S. B. Schougaard, T. Geisler, J.
C. Petersen and T. Bjornholm, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 1113 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) I. R. Whittall, M. G. Humphrey, M. Samoc and B. Luther-Davies, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
Engl., 1997, 36, 370 CrossRef CAS .I. D. W. Samuel, I. Ledoux, C. Delporte, D. L. Pearson and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 819 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. S. Schumm, D. L. Pearson and J. M. Tour, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 1360 CrossRef ; 
  (b) D. L. Pearson, J. S. Schumm and J. M. Tour, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 2348 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M.-T. Zhao, B. P. Singh and P. N. Prasad, J.
Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 5535 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M.-T. Zhao, M. Samoc, B. P. Singh and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 7916 CrossRef CAS .E. Van
Keuren, H. Möhwald, S. Rozouvan, W. Schroff, V. Belov, H. Matsuda and S. Yamada, J.
Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 3584 CrossRef CAS .M. Rumi, G. Zerbi, K. Müllen, G. Müller and M. Rehahn, J. Chem.
Phys., 1997, 106, 24 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Wong, M. Samoc, B. Luther-Davies and M. G. Humphrey, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2005 RSC .H. Coufal, Nature (London), 1998, 393, 628 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) F. Würthner, R. Wortmann, R. Matshiner, K. Lukaszuk, K. Meerholz, Y. De
Nardin, R. Bittner, C. Bräuchle and R. Sens, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 2765 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Würthner, C. Thalaker, R. Matschiner, K. Lukaszuk and R. Wortmann, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1739 RSC ; 
  (c) P. M. Lundquist, R. Wortmann, C. Geletneky, R. J. Twieg, M. Jurich, V. Y. Lee, C. R. Moylan and D. M. Burland, Science, 1996, 274, 1182 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) W. E. Moerner and S. M. Silence, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 127 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Meerholz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 945 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Kippelen, S. R. Marder, E. Hendrickx, J. L. Maldonado, G. Guillemet, B. L. Volodin, D. D. Steele, Y. Enami,  Sandalphon, Y. J. Yao, J. F. Wang, H. Röckel, L. Erskine and N. Peyghambarian, Science, 1998, 279, 54 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. J. Zilker, T. Bieringer, D. Haarer, R.
S. Stein, J. W. Van Egmond and S. G. Kostromine, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 855 CrossRef CAS .B. W. Li, A. Gharavi, Q. Wang and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 927 CrossRef .
  (a) G. S. He, G. C. Xu, P. N. Prasad, B.
A. Reinhardt, J. C. Bhatt and A. G. Dillard, Opt. Lett., 1995, 20, 435 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. E. Ehrlich, X. L. Wu, I.-Y. S. Lee, Z.-Y. Hu, H. Röckel, S. R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Opt.
Lett., 1997, 22, 1843 Search PubMed .
  (a) D. A. Parthenopoulos and P. M. Rentzepis, Science, 1989, 245, 843 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. H. Strickler and W. W. Webb, Opt.
Lett., 1991, 16, 1780 Search PubMed .B. H. Cumpston, S. P. Ananthavel, S. Barlow, D. L. Dyer, J. E. Ehrlich, L. L. Erskine, A. A. Heikal, S. M. Kuebler, I.-Y. S. Lee, D. McCord-Maughon, J. Qin, H. Röckel, M. Rumi, X.-L. Wu, S.
R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Nature (London), 1999, 398, 51 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) W. Denk, J. H. Strickler and W. W. Webb, Science, 1990, 248, 73 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. H. Köhler, J. Cao, W. R. Zipfel, W.
W. Webb and M. R. Hansen, Science, 1997, 276, 2039 CrossRef CAS .M. Albota, D. Beljonne, J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Ehrlich, J.-Y. Fu, A.
A. Heikal, S. E. Hess, T. Kogej, M. D. Levin, S. R. Marder, D. McCord-Maughon, J. W. Perry, H. Röckel, M. Rumi, G. Subramaniam, W. W. Webb, X.-L. Wu and C. Xu, Science, 1998, 281, 1653 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Spangler, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2013 RSC .B. A. Reinhardt, L. L. Brott, S.
J. Clarson, A. G. Dillard, J. C. Bhatt, R. Kannan, L. Yuan, G. S. He and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 1863 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Ehrlich, X. L. Wu, I.-Y. Lee, A. A. Heikal, Z.-Y. Hu, H. Rockel, S.
R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1997, 479, 9 Search PubMed .L. Ventelon, L. Moreaux, J. Mertz and M. Blanchard-Desce, Chem. Commun., 1999, 2055 RSC .
  (a) J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry—Concepts and Perspectives, VCH, Weinheim,  1995, ch. 8 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 89 ; 
  (c) J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1990, 29, 1304 CrossRef .
  (a) M. Irie, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1993, 227, 263 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) B. L. Feringa, W. F. Jager and B. De Lange, Tetrahedron, 1993, 49, 8267 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Whittal, in Photochromism, Molecules and Systems, eds. H.
Durr and H. Bouas-Laurent, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1990, p. 467. Search PubMed .A. Fernández-Acebes and J.-M. Lehn, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 910 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.G. M. Tsivgoulis and J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Eur. J., 1996, 2, 1399 CrossRef CAS .S.-M. Lee, M. Marcaccio, J. A. McCleverty and M.
D. Ward, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 3272 CrossRef CAS .F. Wudl, G. M. Smith and E. J. Hufnagel, J.
Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1970, 1453 RSC .Some selected
reviews on recent applications of TTF derivatives:
  (a) K. B. Simonsen, N. Svenstrup, J. Lau, O. Simonsen, P. Mørk, G. J. Kristensen and J. Becher, Synthesis, 1996, 407 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Otsubo, Y. Aso and K. Takimiya, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 203 CAS ; 
  (c) M. Adam and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 1994, 6, 439 CrossRef ; 
  (d) M. R. Bryce, W. Davenport, L. M. Goldenberg and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 1998, 945 RSC ; 
  (e) T. Jørgensen, T. K. Hansen and J. Becher, Chem.
Soc. Rev., 1994, 41 RSC ; 
  (f) E. Coronado and C. J. Gómez-García, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 273 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) M. R. Bryce, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 11 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) M. R. Bryce, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 589 RSC .M. R. Bryce, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1991, 20, 355 RSC .M. R. Bryce, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 1481 RSC .J. Roncali, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 2307 RSC .
  (a) J. Roncali, M. Giffard, P. Frère, M. Jubault and A. Gorgues, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 689 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Roncali, L. Rasmussen, C. Thobie-Gautier, P. Frère, H. Brisset, M. Sallé, J. Becher, O. Simonsem, T. K. Hansen, A. Benahmed-Gasmi, J. Orduna, J. Garín, M. Jubault and A. Gorgues, Adv.
Mater., 1994, 6, 841 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) E. Elandaloussi, P. Frère, J. Roncali, P. Richomme, M. Jubault and A. Gorgues, Adv.
Mater., 1995, 7, 390 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Elandaloussi, P. Frère and J. Roncali, Chem.
Commun., 1997, 301 RSC ; 
  (c) E. Elandaloussi, P. Frère and J. Roncali, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1996, 37, 6121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) I. Jestin, P. Frère, E. Levillan and J. Roncali, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 134 CrossRef CAS .E. Elandaloussi, P. Frère, A. Benahmed-Gasmi, A. Riou, A. Gorgues and J. Roncali, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 1859 RSC .S. González, N. Martín, L. Sánchez, J.
L. Segura, C. Seoane, I. Fonseca, F. H. Cano, J. Sedó, J. Vidal-Gancedo and C. Rovira, J.
Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 3498 CrossRef CAS .R. Ziessel, Synthesis, 1999, 11, 1839 CrossRef .P.
N. W. Baxter, J. Org. Chem., 2000, 65, 1257 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Beley, J.-P. Collin and J.-P. Sauvage, Inorg.
Chem., 1993, 32, 4539 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Beley, J.-P. Collin, R. Louis, B. Metz and J.-P. Sauvage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 8521 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Bely, S. Chodorowsky, J.-P. Collin and J.-P. Sauvage, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1993, 34, 2932 ; 
  (b) M. Beley, S. Chodorowski-Kimmes, J.-P. Collin and J.-P. Sauvage, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1994, 33, 1775 .S. Chodorowki-Kimmes, M. Beley, J.-P. Collin and J.-P. Sauvage, Tetrahedron Lett., 1996, 37, 2963 CrossRef .J.-P. Collin, P. Lainé, J.-P. Launay, J.-P. Sauvage and A. Sour, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 434 RSC .J.-P. Collin, P. Gaviña, V. Heitz and J.-P. Sauvage, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1998, 1 CrossRef CAS .F. Barigletti, L. Flamigni, V. Balzani, J.-P. Collin, J.-P. Sauvage, A. Sour, E.
C. Constable and A. M. W. C. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 7692 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Beley, S. Chodorowski-Kimmes, J.-P. Collin, P. Lainé and J.-P. Sauvage, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 1775 CrossRef For a review, see
  (b) M. D. Ward, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1995, 121 RSC .A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, Chem.
Commun., 1996, 1707 RSC .R. Ziessel, M. Hissler, A. El-ghayouty and A. Harriman, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 171, 331 CrossRef .A. Khatyr and R. Ziessel, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1999, 40, 5515 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) K. D. Ley, C. E. Whittle, M. D. Bartberger and K. S. Schanze, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 1997, 119, 3423 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. D. Ley and K. S. Schanze, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 171, 287 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. A. Walters, K. D. Ley and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1115 RSC .K. D. Ley, Y. Li, J. V. Johnson, D. H. Powell and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1749 RSC .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1	 

 	Scheme 2	 

 	Scheme 3	 

 	Scheme 4	 

 	Scheme 5	 

 	Scheme 6	 

 	Fig. 1  ‘Segmented polymers’
with tertiary amino groups as part of the main chain.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure of binaphthyl
containing conjugated–non-conjugated block copolymers showing the
conjugated region.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative examples
of polymers containing isolated oligophenylenes and oligo(phenyleneethynylene)s.	 

 	Fig. 4  Selected examples of
polymers containing isolated thiophene-based oligomers.	 

 	Fig. 5  Alternating copolymers
containing isolated oligomers with electron-rich furan and electron-deficient
oxadiazole units.	 

 	Scheme 7	 

 	Scheme 8	 

 	Scheme 9	 

 	Scheme 10	 

 	Fig. 6  Selected examples of
rod–coil block copolymers.	 

 	Scheme 11	 

 	Fig. 7  Oligoarylene-containing
molecular materials for LEDs.	 

 	Fig. 8  n-Oligo(thienylenevinylene)s
end-capped with dendritic chains.	 

 	Fig. 9  Oligothiophene-containing
dendrimer used as multicomponent luminescent material for OLEDs.	 

 	Scheme 12	 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular dyads and
triads bearing conjugated oligomers covalently linked to the electron acceptor
C60 fullerene.	 

 	Scheme 13	 

 	Fig. 11  D–A system
in which a bithiophene acts as spacer between the donor dialkylaniline and
the acceptor C60.	 

 	Fig. 12  DBA systems in which
conjugated oligomers act as molecular wires.	 

 	Fig. 13  Conjugated oligoarylenes
as π-conjugated segments in D–π–A compounds with second
order nonlinear optical applications.	 

 	Scheme 14	 

112	CH3CH2		1100	114
 	 	 	 	 
113	CH3CH2		1300	114
 	 	 	 	 
114	CH3CH2		2300	114
 	 	 	 	 
115	CH3(CH2)2CH2		3800	114
 	 	 	 	 
116	CH3CH2		6200	97
 	 	 	 	 
117			6900	97
 	 	 	 	 
118	CH3CH2		7400	97
 	 	 	 	 
119			1150	109c

 	Scheme 15	 

 	Fig. 14  Oligothiophenes and
oligophenylenes with third-order nonlinear optical properties.	 

 	Scheme 16	 

 	Fig. 15  Functionalized oligoarylenes
which present two-photon absorption.	 

 	Fig. 16  Diarylethenes as
photochromic materials. Reversible electrocyclic interconversion between the
unconjugated (open, o) state and the colored (closed, c)
takes place under irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 17	 

 	Fig. 17  Selected examples
of π-extended TTF analogues containing oligoheteroarylene spacers.	 

 	Scheme 18	 

 	Fig. 18  Ruthenium and osmium
complexes containing oligophenylene bridges.	 

 	Fig. 19  Oligopyridine based
ditopic ligands bridged by alkyne-containing spacers.	 

 	Scheme 19	 

 	Fig. 20  Monodisperse oligo(phenyleneethynylene)
derivatives containing metal–organic sites.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
