Methods of photoelectrode characterization with high spatial and temporal resolution  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE00835B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00835B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2863-2885Methods of photoelectrode characterization with high spatial and temporal resolution

        
          
            Daniel V. 
            Esposito
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jason B. 
            Baxter
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jimmy 
            John
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Nathan S. 
            Lewis
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Thomas P. 
            Moffat
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tadashi 
            Ogitsu
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Glen D. 
            O'Neil
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tuan Anh 
            Pham
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            A. Alec 
            Talin
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Jesus M. 
            Velazquez
          
        
      de and 

        
          
            Brandon C. 
            Wood
          
        
      f
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Columbia University in the City of New York, New York, NY 10027, USA. E-mail: de2300@columbia.edu;   Tel: +1-212-854-2648
bNational Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA
cDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
dDivision of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
eJoint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
fQuantum Simulations Group, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
gSandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94551, USA
Received 
      13th March 2015
    , Accepted 18th June 2015First published on 19th June 2015AbstractMaterials and photoelectrode architectures that are highly efficient, extremely stable, and made from low cost materials are required for commercially viable photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting technology. A key challenge is the heterogeneous nature of real-world materials, which often possess spatial variation in their crystal structure, morphology, and/or composition at the nano-, micro-, or macro-scale. Different structures and compositions can have vastly different properties and can therefore strongly influence the overall performance of the photoelectrode through complex structure–property relationships. A complete understanding of photoelectrode materials would also involve elucidation of processes such as carrier collection and electrochemical charge transfer that occur at very fast time scales. We present herein an overview of a broad suite of experimental and computational tools that can be used to define the structure–property relationships of photoelectrode materials at small dimensions and on fast time scales. A major focus is on in situ scanning-probe measurement (SPM) techniques that possess the ability to measure differences in optical, electronic, catalytic, and physical properties with nano- or micro-scale spatial resolution. In situ ultrafast spectroscopic techniques, used to probe carrier dynamics involved with processes such as carrier generation, recombination, and interfacial charge transport, are also discussed. Complementing all of these experimental techniques are computational atomistic modeling tools, which can be invaluable for interpreting experimental results, aiding in materials discovery, and interrogating PEC processes at length and time scales not currently accessible by experiment. In addition to reviewing the basic capabilities of these experimental and computational techniques, we highlight key opportunities and limitations of applying these tools for the development of PEC materials.

Broader context
Global energy demands are currently around 14 TW, and are forecasted to double by 2050. To date, this energy has been derived from non-renewable fossil fuels, but environmental issues such as climate change have created an urgent need to transition to carbon-free energy sources. Abundant and renewable solar energy is one of the most promising means of meeting society's energy demands in a sustainable manner, but the intermittent nature of sunlight creates significant challenges to achieving high market penetration with conventional photovoltaic technology alone. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting can convert sunlight into storable chemical energy in the form of hydrogen gas (H2), but commercialization of this technology has been hindered by the stability, efficiency, and cost of photoelectrodes. In order to accelerate the development of photoelectrode materials, which are often highly heterogeneous in nature and inherently involve phenomena at multiple time scales, a deeper understanding of PEC processes at small length scales and fast time scales is essential. This article provides a review of a combination of in situ experimental techniques and modeling tools that are well-suited for such studies.

1. Introduction
The generation of hydrogen through photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, whereby light is used to electrochemically split water into molecular hydrogen and oxygen, is a promising approach to producing storable, scalable, and carbon-free renewable energy.1–4 However, no PEC system has been demonstrated to date that can meet the efficiency, stability, and cost targets5 needed for an economically viable PEC technology.6 One of the major barriers to commercialization is the lack of suitable materials to be used in photoelectrodes,2,4 the “engines” of PEC devices that are responsible for absorbing light and using the resulting potential energy difference to drive the water splitting reaction. To perform these functions with high efficiency and durability, photoelectrode materials and architectures are needed that are extremely stable, absorb a significant portion of the solar spectrum, possess high catalytic activity for the hydrogen- and oxygen-evolution reactions (HER and OER, respectively), produce a large photovoltage, exhibit high carrier lifetimes, and are predominantly comprised of earth-abundant elements.
Finding a single material or combination of materials that are capable of meeting all of these requirements is a daunting task. Ever since Fujishima and Honda first demonstrated PEC water splitting with TiO2 in 1972,7 many different classes of semiconductors have been explored as photoelectrode absorbers, including metal oxides, chalcopyrites, chalcogenides, group III–V semiconductors, group V semiconductors (Si), and more.3,8–10 None of the materials investigated thus far have been capable of meeting all of the aforementioned photoelectrode requirements by themselves. However, the opportunity to discover a suitable photoelectrode material or combination of materials is tremendous when one considers that there are ≈800 two-component and ≈104 tri-component combinations of earth-abundant elements,11 and a nearly infinite number of atomic arrangements. The use of composite photoelectrode architectures containing a combination of semiconducting absorber(s), metallic catalysts, and protective insulating layers increases the number of compositional permutations even further.
Due to the sheer number of candidate materials, high-throughput experimental12–16 and computational17,18 screening methods naturally lend themselves as useful tools for identifying promising photoelectrode materials. However, the development process only begins once a new, promising material composition has been identified. Subsequently, realizing the full potential of a material for PEC water splitting requires rigorous downstream optimization and experimentation. Through different synthesis methods and conditions, many parameters can be varied to optimize a material's performance, including crystal phases and orientations, composition, morphology, substrate and co-catalyst selection, dopant distribution, defect engineering, and more. All of these factors can have a huge impact on the overall performance of a photoelectrode. Unfortunately, precise and independent control of these factors is generally not possible. For example, many materials are highly heterogeneous in nature, possessing variation in crystallinity, composition, and/or morphology at the nano-, micro-, and/or macro-scales. Heterogeneous photoelectrodes often result in macro-scale performance that is a complex convolution of the local performance associated with different compositions, structures, and morphologies. Additionally, most fundamental processes involved with PEC energy conversion are dynamic processes taking place over timescales typically ranging from femtoseconds (fs) to microseconds (μs).19
Deconvolving the structure–property relationships in situ with high spatial and temporal resolution is thus important for obtaining an advanced understanding of photoelectrode behavior and then using that knowledge to design better photoelectrodes. The study of photoelectrodes in situ and under real or simulated operating conditions in an electrochemical environment is especially important because the properties and characteristics of a photoelectrode are often intimately coupled to the properties of the liquid-phase electrolyte.20,21 As described in more detail in the review article by Smith et al.,22 the electrolyte can strongly affect the chemical and electronic properties of the surface and space-charge layer of the photoelectrode, and therefore influence catalytic, charge transport, and corrosion processes. Ex situ techniques performed in atmosphere or vacuum can also provide important and complementary information about a photoelectrode material, but cannot substitute for viewing the true physical and chemical state of the material in a photoelectrochemical environment. Fortunately, many experimental and computational tools are well-suited for the measurement of spatially varying properties and/or ultrafast carrier dynamics in a PEC environment. Table 1 lists the major types of experimental techniques that are suitable for in situ analysis of photoelectrodes with high spatial and/or temporal resolution. Table 2, to be discussed in Section 4, provides similar information for atomistic computational tools.
Table 1 Experimental techniques suitable for in situ evaluation of photoelectrodes with high spatial and/or temporal resolution. This list is not exclusive, but intended to highlight key classes of techniques that have already been successfully applied to the study of photoelectrode materials or offer clear opportunities for future research efforts




Technique
Probe type
Key properties measured
Typical resolution
Limitations and challenges




Scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) (conventional)
Optical
Locally generated photocurrent; used to determine local quantum efficiency, minority carrier diffusion lengths, electric field distributions, and more
1–25 μm
Spatial resolution set by Abbe diffraction limit; typically limited to monochromatic light; avoiding high injection conditions and bubble formation






Near field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM)-based SPCM
Optical/physical
Similar capabilities to SPCM, but with higher spatial resolution.
10's nm–1 μm
Spatial resolution set by size of NSOM tip aperture; tip heating; interference; difficult on rough surfaces






Optical spectroscopies (Raman, UV-vis, IR, SFG)
Optical
Chemical, physical, and optical properties of photoelectrode surface
1–25 μm
Spatial resolution set by Abbe diffraction limit; long acquisition times; bubble formation






Ultrafast spectroscopies e.g. transient absorption spectroscopy (TA)
Optical
Lifetimes of electronic and vibrational states, interfacial charge transfer rates, and transient photoconductivity (THz)
sub ps–ns, 100 μm
Long acquisition times; avoiding high injection conditions; different detection systems for <ns, ns–μs, and μs–s






Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM)
Physical/electrochemical (non-contact)
Local catalytic activity and kinetic rate constants; sensitive to local opto-electronic properties in PEC systems; advanced forms of SECM for pH-sensing, corrosion analysis, and more
10's nm–100 μm
Resolution set by tip dimensions and tip–substrate distance; difficult with rough surfaces; bubble formation; challenges with light integration






Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy (E-STM)
Physical/electronic
Atomically resolved physical and electronic structure; video rate imaging possible
Å–nm (atomic resolution possible)
Difficult on rough surfaces; limited scan area size; poorly defined tip geometries, limited electrochemical window for STM tips






Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
Physical/electronic
Surface morphology, conductivity, capacitance, surface potentials, double layer forces, hydration layer structure
Å–5 nm (atomic resolution possible)
Difficult on rough surfaces; limited scan area size; limited electrochemical window for conductive tips




Table 2 Atomistic theoretical tools suitable for investigation of photoelectrode properties and processes with high spatial and/or temporal resolution and under simulated operating conditions




Technique(s)
Method type
Key properties determined
Accessible time/length scales
Limitations and challenges




Density functional theory (DFT) and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD)
Ab initio
Electronic/optical/chemical/mechanical properties, including surface and interface; can provide spectroscopic information (XPS, XAS/XES, Raman/IR); can estimate reaction and diffusion barriers with moderate accuracy; additional improvements possible with corrected exchange–correlation functionals (e.g., hybrid, van der Waals, DFT+U).
∼100 ps and a few nm (a few thousand atoms)
Limited to relatively small length/time scales; no description of electronic/optical excitations; potential accuracy issues, especially for strongly correlated systems and for prediction of electronic levels; results depend on choice of exchange–correlation functional






Time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) and nonadiabatic dynamics
Ab initio
Dynamics of photoexcited electrons; can provide information directly comparable to pump/probe ultrafast measurements.
∼100 fs and a few nm (a few thousand atoms)
Limitations coming from approximations are not always systematic or well understood; limited to very short time scales






GW/Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE)
Ab initio
Accurate computation of electron excitation (optical) spectra, band gaps, and absolute band edges; suitable for quantitative comparison with experiments (e.g., photoemission).
Hundreds of atoms
Computationally expensive; no dynamical/temporal information






Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC)
Ab initio
Very accurate estimates of adsorption energies, reaction barriers, and band gaps; (can be used to augment and benchmark DFT)
Hundreds of atoms
Computationally expensive; extremely challenging to study dynamics






Classical molecular dynamics and reactive force-field methods
Parameterized
Dynamics can be studied at much larger length and time scales than those accessible to DFT; useful for simulating transport and surface diffusion, collective behaviors, and electrolyte dynamics
≈1 ns, millions of atoms
Parameterization and accuracy validation are difficult, particularly for interfaces; barriers and transition states are often inaccurate






Cluster expansion
Ab initio (based on model Hamiltonian)
Thermodynamic stability of bulk and surface alloys, as well as adsorbate configurations; generally based on DFT framework; useful for studying composition of multi-element electrodes
Scalable to 103–106 atoms, depending on cluster size
Assumes model in which atoms are fixed at defined lattice positions; may require many interaction terms; no dynamical/temporal information






Kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC)
Parameterized (based on model Hamiltonian)
Stochastic method to treat mass transport and reaction kinetics across broad length and time scales; can be used to examine surface diffusion- or reaction-limited processes based on DFT-derived barriers
Arbitrarily scalable
Requires prior knowledge of relevant rate-limiting mechanisms and mapping onto lattice model; assumes fixed, well-defined barriers for each discrete reaction or transport step





Table 1 can be split into two broad types of techniques: scanning probe measurement (SPM) techniques used for achieving high spatial resolution, and pump–probe type spectroscopic techniques used for monitoring ultrafast processes with high temporal resolution. Several major uses and benefits of in situ techniques with high spatial and/or temporal resolution are as follows:
(i) Diagnostic – by investigating the spatial variation in properties or performance of a photoelectrode, SPM techniques can be used to locate poorly performing “cold spots” and highly performing “hot spots” on the photoelectrode. Using additional in situ or ex situ characterization, the structural and/or compositional variation that gives rise to the regions of anomalous performance can then be identified. Likewise, fast events like charge-carrier recombination and interfacial charge transfer can be studied to complement SPM techniques by identifying rate-limiting processes. This information can be an important source of feedback for optimization of the design of the photoelectrode.
(ii) Mechanistic – carefully-designed SPM and/or ultrafast spectroscopy measurements can provide a deeper understanding of physical, opto-electronic, and catalytic PEC processes, allowing for further refinement of the computational models used for identifying even better photoelectrode materials.
(iii) Screening – many in situ SPM techniques are well suited for rapid measurement of the properties or performance of large arrays of (typically) millimeter-sized samples for the purpose of high-throughput screening. Generally, high spatial resolution and ultrafast spectroscopy are not needed in these studies, and the reader is referred to other literature on the topic.12,15,16,23–28
The remainder of this paper provides an overview of in situ SPM techniques (Section 2), ultrafast spectroscopy techniques (Section 3), and computational tools (Section 4) that have been used, or have the potential to be used, for in situ investigation photoelectrodes with high spatial and/or temporal resolution. In addition to describing the basic principles behind each class of techniques, the opportunities and challenges for using these methods for in situ studies are discussed. In Section 5, two final topics are covered: (i) coordination of advanced SPM and ultrafast measurements with more common macro-scale PEC characterization techniques, and (ii) simultaneous use of multiple in situ techniques.
2. 
        In situ techniques for evaluation of photoelectrodes with high spatial resolution
This section focuses on in situ scanning-probe measurement (SPM) techniques, broadly defined as techniques in which a probe is scanned across the surface of a sample while the interaction between the probe and surface is recorded as a function of the position of the probe. Depending on the nature of the probe and its interaction with the surface (optical, electronic, force, magnetic, etc.), the properties of the surface can be determined with a spatial resolution that is generally commensurate with the diameter of the probe. For most of the SPM techniques discussed herein, modified or custom-made PEC test cells and samples are often necessary for in situ measurements to be performed. Additionally, sample and test cell requirements are often dependent on the specific SPM technique being employed. The following sections provide some basic information about experimental set-ups and procedures, but the reader is directed towards technique-specific references for more detailed descriptions.
2.1 Scanning photocurrent methods
Scanning-photocurrent microscopy (SPCM), also referred to as light-beam-induced current (LBIC) and optical-beam-induced current (OBIC), is a technique in which a scanning optical probe, typically a laser beam, is used to measure the local variation in sample photocurrent or photovoltage as a function of the beam position on the photoelectrode surface. In most SPCM measurements, a laser beam consisting of monochromatic, collimated light with a high degree of coherency is focused to a small spot on the photoelectrode surface. When used to study materials for PEC or PV applications, the wavelength of light emitted from the laser is usually chosen such that the corresponding photon energy is greater than the band gap of the semiconductor, allowing the focused laser beam to locally generate electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor. When the photoelectrode is tested under appropriate applied bias, the resulting photocurrent or photovoltage can be measured as a function of laser beam position as the laser or sample position is varied with a nano- or micro-positioning system (Fig. 1a). The raw photocurrent or voltage is valuable information by itself, but the method can also been used to determine spatial variation in quantum yield,29–31 minority carrier diffusion length,29,32 electric field distributions,32 photoconductivity, dopant concentrations,32 and more.
 Fig. 1  Schematics of (a) conventional and (b) NSOM-based SPCM set-ups for in situ scanning photocurrent analysis of photoelectrodes for water splitting. Schematics not to scale. Schematics illustrate H2 evolving from a photocathode surface, but identical illustrations could be drawn for photoanodes evolving O2. The light green regions in the figure represent the photon absorption/charge carrier generation volume in the semiconducting photoelectrode. 
In PEC systems, the measured photocurrent is strongly dependent on the optical, electronic, and catalytic properties of the photoelectrode material(s). Assessing the relative contributions from these different properties of the photoelectrode surface can be challenging, but is possible through systematic control of the various operational parameters of SPCM, including but not limited to: the applied potential; the wavelength of the optical excitation; the laser intensity; comparison between photovoltage and photocurrent mode; and the type of electrolyte. For example, varying the applied potential strongly effects catalysis and carrier collection in a photoelectrode, but should have minimal influence on the optical properties of most materials.
The best spatial resolution that can be achieved by conventional far-field SPCM techniques is set by the optical diffraction limit, also referred to as the Abbe diffraction limit. This limit states that the smallest possible light beam diameter is given by d = λ/(2·NA), where λ is the wavelength of incident light and NA = n·sin(θ) is the numerical aperture of the focusing lens.33–35 The value of NA depends on the aperture angle (θ) of the specific lens and on the index of refraction of surrounding medium (n), with NA ≈ 1.5 being the highest value theoretically possible using an oil immersion, high magnification lens.35 For visible light wavelengths, the best resolution based on conventional microscope arrangements is typically ≈500 nm–1 μm.36 To achieve such spatial resolution, short wavelength lasers combined with high NA objectives, often with very small working distances, must be employed.
Due to the optical diffraction limit, spatially resolved SPCM measurements of nano-sized features and phenomena cannot be obtained using conventional SPCM. Fortunately, several optical imaging techniques offer the ability to interrogate samples with resolution better than the Abbe diffraction limit. Far field optical imaging techniques based on photoswitching and saturation of fluorescence have demonstrated resolution less than 30 nm,37–39 but the optical probe itself is still diffraction limited. Another SPM technique capable of breaking the Abbe diffraction limit is near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM),40,41 in which incident light is typically fed through an optical fiber having an aperture at the tip of the fiber (Fig. 1b). Although NSOM is typically used for optical imaging, NSOM probes can also be used for SPCM measurements of photo-active samples. SPCM conducted with an NSOM probe, also known as near field scanning photocurrent microscopy and photoelectrochemical microscopy, has been successfully used to study nanoscale variation in photocurrent in photovoltaic materials,42–44 and analysis of corrosion products.45 NSOM-based SPCM offers similar opportunities for investigation of photoelectrodes at the nanoscale range. In conventional NSOM probes, the size of this aperture is crucial for setting the resolution. In an alternate design, nano-scale metallic tips can be used to transform light from the far field to the near field through the use of surface plasmons.46,47 Although near-field approaches to SPCM such as NSOM possess the ability to resolve nanoscale features, NSOM also presents several challenges in implementation, including limitations on sensitivity, bandwidth, resolution, compatibility with rough surfaces, and sample/cell geometries. Modifying NSOM tips and tools for the in situ SPCM investigation of photoelectrode materials that possess nanoscale features is a challenging but potentially highly rewarding opportunity in the PEC field.
In addition to the challenge of achieving sub-micron spatial resolution, several other limitations are commonly encountered in SPCM, including diffraction-limited spatial resolution; illumination by a non-air mass (AM) 1.5 light source; back-reaction under non-uniform illumination; and bubble formation. Researchers must be especially conscientious of the differences between local illumination by an intense, often-polarized, monochromatic light source and a broad spectrum AM 1.5 light source that is commonly used in macro-scale measurements. Even though the net power of a laser beam used for SPCM is usually set very low, the light intensity at the laser spot on the sample surface can be orders of magnitude larger than that obtained using AM 1.5 illumination. Operating a photoelectrode under high light intensities can result in high carrier injection conditions, resulting in substantially different underlying physics for carrier generation, recombination, and collection than under 1 sun intensity.48 Furthermore, the correspondingly large local photocurrent densities can lead to higher local catalytic overpotentials, significant pH gradients, and the formation of bubbles due to supersaturation of the local electrolyte with the product H2 or O2. Performing SPCM in PEC systems therefore necessitates a careful trade-off between signal-to-noise ratio, resolution, and obtaining photocurrent behavior that is consistent with solar illumination. A better quantitative understanding of the trade-offs, aided by computational modeling, would be of great use for advancing the application of SPCM to studying photoelectrode surfaces.
2.2 Scanning electrochemical microscopy
We provide here a brief introduction to scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM), and detailed monographs covering the fundamentals, experimental details, and advanced applications of SECM are available elsewhere.49–53 In an SECM experiment an ultramicroelectrode (UME) is used as an electrochemical scanning probe. UMEs are typically metallic disks or rings that are embedded in an insulating material (i.e. glass or wax) and have a critical dimension that is usually less than ≈25 μm.49 The UME tip is positioned in close proximity to the substrate, typically within two tip radii, where the tip interacts with the substrate via an electrochemically active redox mediator species. When used to study photocathode or photoanode materials for water splitting, the redox mediator species of interest are H+/H2 and H2O/O2, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2 for a H2-evolving photocathode, one of the most common modes of SECM operation is substrate generation/tip collection mode, whereby H2 is generated from the reduction of protons at the photoelectrode while the UME tip oxidizes the H2 back to H+. This method is implemented by using a bipotentiostat to independently controlling the potentials of the photoelectrode and UME while measuring the current between them. For photoanodes, H2O is oxidized at the photoelectrode and O2 is reduced at the UME. Because the measured UME current is directly proportional to the rate of H2 (or O2) being evolved from the underlying surface, SECM provides a powerful means of mapping out and quantifying differences in H2 (or O2) production across a photoelectrode surface.
 Fig. 2  Schematic side-views of several SECM set-up arrangements that can be used for investigating photoelectrode surfaces. Schematics not to scale. Schematics illustrate H2 evolving from a photocathode surface, but identical illustrations could be drawn for photoanodes evolving O2. The light green regions in the figure represent the photon absorption/charge carrier generation volume in the semiconducting photoelectrode. 
SECM measurements are performed using nano- or micro-positioners, which typically enable precise control of the X-, Y- and Z-positions of the UME with respect to the sample surface. In addition to SECM maps, which usually provide a qualitative picture of relative charge transport rates at the electrode surface by scanning the UME in the XY-plane, quantitative information, such as the values of kinetic rate constants, can be obtained by fitting SECM approach curve measurements in which the UME current is measured as a function of tip/substrate distance.50 In PEC systems, the UME and substrate signals are also highly dependent on the ability of photo-generated minority carriers to reach the surface of the photoelectrode, a process that must precede the catalytic charge-transport step. For this reason, SECM in PEC systems is not only sensitive to the spatial variation in catalytic activity at the electrode/electrolyte interface, but also to the optoelectronic properties of the photoelectrode and illumination conditions associated with the experimental set-up.
The type of light source and the means by which light is introduced into the experimental PEC cell are important for SECM measurements of photoelectrode surfaces. Fig. 2 depicts four different set-ups for PEC SECM – each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Fig. 2a shows a conventional vertically oriented UME being used in conjunction with a light source that illuminates the entire analysis area. While this orientation is fairly straightforward to implement with conventional SECM systems and mimics the uniform illumination of a photoelectrode by sunlight, the arrangement has the drawbacks of partially shadowing the photoelectrode with the UME and more easily supersaturating the electrolyte with the product gas, resulting in gas bubbles that can interfere with SECM measurements. Shadowing by the UME can be especially problematic for approach curves or mapping measurements with very small tip/substrate separation distances, but could be overcome by the use of back illumination of an optically thin photoelectrode,54,55 as shown in Fig. 2b. Alternately, a set-up based on local illumination can be used. For example, in Fig. 2c, a focused laser-beam is combined with a diagonally-mounted conical-shaped UME31 in a set-up that allows for minimization of shadowing effects and background signal arising from the oxidation/reduction of H2 or O2 that would normally diffuse from neighboring illuminated areas. However, this approach is limited to monochromic laser light and could more easily lead to high-level carrier-injection conditions. Fig. 2d illustrates a combined UME/light source consisting of an optical fiber core that has been metallized to form an annular UME at the end of the fiber.12,56–58 This apparatus has been successfully used to screen arrays of photocatalytic materials, but such an arrangement inherently possesses reduced spatial resolution due to the ring-geometry of the UME. Modification of an NSOM tip with a similar geometry to that of Fig. 2d offers an interesting opportunity to obtain nano-scale resolution for both SECM and SPCM.
The spatial resolution of SECM depends strongly on the radius of the exposed UME tip, a, and the distance between the UME and the electrode surface, d. The normalized tip/substrate separation distance, L = d/a, is an important factor because the redox species through which the UME–substrate interaction is mediated can diffuse into or out of the tip/substrate gap. Diffusion of redox active species between the UME and substrate impacts both the spatial resolution and the temporal resolution, so it is generally desirable to minimize the tip/substrate separation distance without actually contacting the surface. UMEs having 1–25 μm diameter tips are routinely employed, and are commercially available, although UME tips as small as 10 nm have been demonstrated.59,60 SECM thus offers exciting opportunities to study photoelectrode materials and architectures with nano-scale heterogeneities, but the complexity of these measurements often increases substantially at the nano scale.61–63 Because SECM is typically operated with tip/substrate separation distances that are approximately 1–2 times the tip radius, operating a nano-scale UME at constant Z-position requires that a sample be extremely flat in order to maintain a constant tip/substrate separation distance. If variations in the height of sample features are large compared to the tip/substrate gap distance, it becomes very difficult to distinguish differences in UME current caused by topology rather than electrochemical activity. When the desired UME tip/substrate separation distance is comparable to the roughness of the sample surface, several advanced versions of SECM may be employed, including scanning-force microscopy,64 hybrid SECM/atomic-force microscopy (AFM),65,66 intermittent-contact SECM,61–63 and electron transfer/ion transfer SECM.67
Although this section has focused on the implementation of SECM for the analysis of the spatial variation of product formation on photoelectrode surfaces, SECM can also be used to investigate local changes in pH68 and corrosion processes,69–74 analyze surface coverage of adsorbed intermediates (surface interrogation SECM),75–79 and measure short-lived intermediates.54,80 When used in conjunction with SPCM, SECM also offers an interesting possibility to semi-quantitatively measure the local Faradaic efficiency of photoelectrodes. For instance, the overall photocurrent for an oxygen-evolving photoanode could be due to a combination of two Faradaic processes – anodic photo-corrosion and oxygen evolution. By appropriate choice of UME tip material and applied electrochemical potentials, the SECM tip can be made to be selective to only the oxygen evolved at the substrate; hence, the light-to-oxygen efficiency can be calculated. SECM, in conjunction with SPCM, can also be used for elucidating the dynamics of photo-generated carriers and to map out the spatial distribution of sites of product generation. For instance, due to the heterogeneity of catalytic sites on the photoelectrode surface, the photo-generation of carriers and their collection at the interface need not happen at the same location but could occur at sites that are distant from each other.31 In such studies, the SECM tip and the SPCM probe can be operated independently to gain additional mechanistic information on the operation of the system of interest.
As SECM is increasingly applied to the study of PEC systems, the use of numerical modeling tools such as finite-element methods to help aid in the interpretation of SECM measurements should be critically pursued, with a foundation provided by similar demonstrations in non-PEC SECM studies.53,81–84
2.3 Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy
Electrochemical scanning-tunneling microscopy (ECSTM) is an SPM technique used to map the local electron density at surfaces with atomic resolution.85 As in conventional STM, ECSTM images are generated by measuring spatial variation in electrical signal due to quantum mechanical tunneling of electrons between a substrate and a nano-scale probe tip. Measurements are typically performed in a three-electrode configuration using a bipotentiostat to control the bias of the tip and substrate relative to a suitable reference electrode.86,87 ECSTM experiments can be undertaken using one of two feedback mechanisms: in constant height mode a fixed tunneling bias voltage is applied between the tip and substrate, while the tunneling current is measured at a fixed tip-sample distance. Alternatively, in constant current mode feedback is used to adjust the voltage applied to the z-axis piezoelectric positioner to move the tip to maintain the specified tunneling current. Constant height mode is typically used for fast scanning of flat surface segments, while constant current mode can be used where the surface topography is less well-defined.88 Detailed accounts of the experimental set-up and control of ECSTM and STM instruments can be found in literature.87,89–91
For small tip–substrate distances (e.g. 1–3 A), the tunneling process reflects the overlap between the electron density of the frontier orbitals of the tip and substrate, while at larger tip–substrate separations the tunneling process can be strongly influenced by the composition and structure of the intervening medium.85 At even larger tip–substrate distances, electron transfer takes place exclusively through electrochemically-mediated processes, whereby Faradaic charge transfer occurs and the STM measurement merges with SECM methods.92–94 When STM is performed in vacuum, tunneling current vs. distance curves can be used to determine the effective work function of the system, while in electrolytes the effective conduction or valence band of the tunneling medium determines the barrier height.95,96 Such barrier-height measurements have been coupled with potential-dependent imaging studies and theoretical calculations to provide the most detailed description yet of the electronic structure of the double-layer ranging from the influence of simple anionic adsorbates to resonant tunneling through redox active sites including metal centers in proteins.96–98 The electrochemical double-layer and surface adsorbates are known to influence the band alignment and photovoltage of the photoelectrode, and ECSTM provides an excellent opportunity to directly measure these effects. In particular, scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) enables the electronic structure of the electrode interface to be examined by varying the tunneling voltage bias in the STM measurement at a fixed tip–substrate separation.85 With suitable alignment of the tip and substrate Fermi levels, current may be channeled into or out of surface states, the conduction band, or the valence band. The measurements record conductance, which is proportional to the local density of states at different electron energies and enables surface states and/or band edge positions to be determined with nanometer scale spatial resolution. This method has been implemented to understand the electronic structure of semiconductor surfaces in vacuum – although care must be taken to evaluate the impact of tip-induced band bending effects.99,100 Limits imposed by electrolyte stability and tip reactivity have hampered the application of STS in electrolytic systems. Nevertheless, the power of the method under ambient laboratory conditions was shown in early studies of n-TiO2 and n-FeS2 in air.101,102 More recently, improvements in tip coating procedures have enabled in situ collection of tunneling spectra from semiconducting passive films formed by anodization of Fe and Cu.103,104
Presently, the biggest challenges of using ECSTM relate to limited knowledge of the structure, composition and stability of the probe tip and underdeveloped insight into tip screening effects that includes the overlap of the respective double layers within the tip–substrate junction. Much of the ECSTM work to date has relied on pattern recognition to interpret the atomic and molecular scale features within images. However, numerous vacuum STM and ECSTM studies show that the tip state plays a significant role in image contrast.105 Not surprisingly, image simulation plays a central role in interpreting vacuum STM data. In contrast, image simulation in ECSTM remains constrained by the absence of tip definition. Tip preparation and coating procedures have been improved with time, although obtaining a predictable yield of tips capable of atomically resolved imaging remains a challenge and little effort has been made to characterize the structural nature of as-formed tips. Tip materials have a limited potential window that is determined by parasitic Faradic processes ranging from corrosion to electrolyte breakdown. For aqueous electrolytes such phenomena limit the tip–substrate bias potential to values less than ±1.5 V and thereby restrict full exploration of the energy states associated with wide band gap materials. In contrast, the larger potential widow associated with non-aqueous electrolytes and ionic liquids will enable more extensive use of STS.106
A significant constraint on ECSTM is that in order to achieve a single tunnel junction, the substrates of interest must be very flat relative to the curvature of the probe tip. For suitably prepared substrates, in situ atomically-resolved imaging of metal and semiconductor electrode surfaces is possible, and with close attention to the operating conditions, potential-dependent surface dynamics such as step motion, surface diffusion, surface alloying, etc., can be followed.107 A variety of means are available for preparing metal and semiconductor surfaces that range from annealing procedures to electropolishing and etching. Two-dimensional (2-D) layered or van der Waals solids, such as transition-metal dichalcogenides, are materials of long-standing interest in photoelectrochemistry, are now the focus of renewed interest in both electronics and energy research.108 Fortuitously, such materials are almost ideal for STM studies, as extended atomically flat regions are easily obtained by mechanical cleavage of the substrate. Beyond the challenges of substrate and tip preparation, ECSTM experiments can also be limited by the mechanical stability of the microscope (vibration) and minimization of thermal drift. In conventional STM microscopes the limited scanning speed of constant tunneling current feedback circuitry and the mechanical stability limit the temporal resolution of STM. However, several video rate ECSTM microscopes are now operational and are capable of tracking the trajectory of mobile adsorbates, phase transitions and related defect dynamics in real time.90,91,107,109
2.4 Atomic force microscopy
One of the most commonly employed SPM techniques is atomic force microscopy (AFM), in which a nanoscale tip is attached to a force-sensing cantilever probe and rastered across a sample surface while the force of the interaction between the tip and the sample is measured.110,111 AFM is capable of accurately measuring surface morphology at nanometer resolution, or more recently, even with atomic resolution. Additionally, variations of AFM measurements based on conductive tips can enable measurements of local conductivity, capacitance, surface potentials, and more.112 Beyond vacuum systems, AFM is widely used in the laboratory ambient. Of particular interest are in situ, in operando studies of immersed interfaces under electrochemical control (EC-AFM).113 EC-AFM has been particularly useful for monitoring changes in morphology of semiconductor surfaces due to corrosion,114,115 including in the photoelectrochemical environment.114,116 The use of EC-AFM to better understand corrosion and other degradation mechanisms of photoelectrodes could be very useful for the PEC field. In situ conductive probe AFM (cp-AFM) has been used to investigate the influence of nano-scale surface defects and morphology on the photoelectrochemical properties of rutile(001) surfaces of n-TiO2,117 and more recently used to study local variation in photocurrent and photo-conductivity of individual CuInSe2/Au nanowire heterostructures.118 Other exciting opportunities to apply in situ AFM techniques towards photoelectrochemistry include in situ patterning and modification of electrode surfaces117,119 and elucidation of the electrolyte double layer structure and its associated charge at electrode surfaces.120–125 Of particular interest are recent AFM studies that have demonstrating the ability to obtain three-dimensional (3D) force maps at a solid–liquid interface that reveal hydration layer structure and dynamics with Angstrom- and sub-minute resolutions, respectively.122,125 When applied to studying a photoelectrode surface, this application of AFM could be invaluable, not only for better understanding electrochemical charge transfer kinetics, but also the affect that charged species in the electrolyte may have on the space charge layer of photoelectrodes. As discussed in Section 5.2, in situ EC-AFM can also be of great use when it is employed simultaneously with other SPM techniques such as SECM.113 For example, the topological information from AFM can serve as valuable feedback when the property measured by another SPM technique, such as SECM, is highly sensitive to the probe–surface separation distance.
2.5 Optical spectroscopy techniques
Unlike conventional electron-based spectroscopies, optical and vibrational spectroscopies such as Raman, infrared (IR), second-harmonic generation (SHG), sum-frequency generation (SFG), photoluminescence (PL), and ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) methods, do not require an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment, and can be readily coupled with electrochemical measurements using cells with appropriately designed windows that allow optical access to the working electrode.126 UV-vis and near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy are particularly useful for spectral assignment of photogenerated species at semiconductor photoelectrodes and for revealing photocarrier transfer/recombination dynamics with high temporal resolution. Such pump–probe methods are discussed in detail in Section 3. Vibrational spectroscopies are well suited for identifying adsorbed molecules, including intermediates, and for providing information regarding the environment around the species of interest.
Among the various vibrational spectroscopies, Raman and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) are particularly useful for in situ studies of photoelectrode surfaces with high lateral spatial resolution, and thus form the focus of this section. Other vibrational spectroscopic techniques such as infrared reflection–absorption spectroscopy (IRAS)127–129 and SFG130–132 are also of great interest due to their ability to probe the molecular structure of solvent and adsorbate molecules at electrode surfaces, but can be limited by low sensitivity, energy restrictions that largely exclude the detection of lower frequency modes characteristic to metal–adsorbate complexes, and surface selection rules that exclude detection of adsorbate intramolecular vibrations that are oriented parallel to the interface. Raman spectroscopy is based on the inelastic scattering of light by a molecule or a solid, with the energy shifts of the scattered photons corresponding to quantized transitions in vibrational levels (molecule) or optical phonons (solids). Because the Raman spectrum originates from vibrational transitions, the Raman peaks are numerous and narrow, which makes Raman spectroscopy suitable for molecular “fingerprinting”, compositional mapping, as well as measurement of crystallographic orientation, disorder, and local strain.133 Unlike its cousin IR spectroscopy, the spectral location of Raman peaks depend on the incident photon energy, and when UV or visible excitation is used, the signals are not affected by water and do not require special ‘window’ materials such as KBr. For these reasons, Raman spectrometers are found in many teaching, research and industrial institutions, where they are routinely used for identification and structural studies of organic and inorganic compounds.134 For in situ water-splitting applications, Raman has the additional advantage in that the excitation source is a laser, and therefore, Raman spectra can be collected simultaneously with SPCM measurements, thus providing an opportunity to interrogate both the chemical and structural nature of active sites in real time. Furthermore, by using excitation energies either above or below the semiconductor band gap, it may be possible to deduce the nature of the surface adsorbates that are formed by PEC processes.
A principal weakness of Raman spectroscopy is the relatively low scattering cross section for inelastic compared to elastic (Rayleigh) scattering, the latter being ∼103–106 times stronger than the former. For most materials, the small cross section for Raman scattering necessitates the use of long sampling times and/or high laser power to obtain acceptable signal-to-noise ratios. However, the Raman signal can be significantly enhanced by coupling the incident and/or scattered light to localized surface plasmons. Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is a well-recognized phenomenon in noble metal nanoparticles and nanostructured surfaces due to collective oscillation of conduction electrons under optical excitation, and has been exploited for a variety of applications, including (electro)catalysis.135–139 When optically excited, the surface plasmons re-emit their energy radiatively (i.e. scattering) at their resonant wavelength or non-radiatively (i.e. absorption) by creating electron–hole pairs. Electromagnetic fields strongly enhanced at nano-protrusions or nano-gaps of a plasmonic material through a localized “antenna” effect cause strongly amplified scattering by adsorbed molecules. The resonant wavelength not only depends on the free electron density and the dielectric constant of the material, but also on the size, geometry, and dielectric constant of the surrounding medium. Because researchers often have control of these parameters, surfaces may be ‘tuned’ to match the excitation source.8 In surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), the Raman signal of surface-adsorbed molecules is enhanced by as much as 1014, enabling single molecule detection.140 The molecular specificity and the rich vibronic information afforded by SERS has enabled numerous recent studies of reaction mechanisms at solid/gas and solid/liquid interfaces.109 Coupled with the intrinsic merits of Raman spectroscopy, SERS allows adsorbate vibrational spectra to be obtained over wider frequency ranges than either IRAS or SFG, and is also characterized by more relaxed surface-selection rules, thus allowing detection of most vibrational modes irrespective of the molecular orientation.
A limitation of SERS is that the substrate morphology and composition play key roles in producing the SERS effect. Researchers often utilize samples with roughened, nano-structured surfaces, which can be prepared by several means including chemical and electrochemical etching, deposition on pre-patterned substrates, and noble metal coating of polystyrene nanospheres dispersed on glass slides (Fig. 3a and b).141,142 Because the majority of electrocatalytically relevant metals such as Pt, Rh or Ni do not efficiently sustain surface plasmons, they are coated as ultrathin layers onto plasmonically active Au or Ag nanostructures. Although the catalyst metal overlayer attenuates a fraction of the plasmon-generated electric field, sufficient intensity penetrates to the metal/electrolyte interface to allow identification of adsorbed species and to reveal their degree of charge transfer.136 An alternate approach was recently used whereby anatase TiO2 flakes were dispersed onto Al2O3 coated plasmonic Ag nanocubes (Fig. 3d). The method was able to identify several reaction intermediates including hydroperoxo (Ti–O–OH), terminal and bridged hydroxo (Ti–OH) and peroxo (Ti–O–O–Ti) intermediates during PEC-based water oxidation.143 This strategy is similar to the shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS), in which Raman scattering is amplified by gold nanoparticles encapsulated with ultrathin silica shells. The latter method can be applied to almost any surface (Fig. 3c). SHINERS has also been used to interrogate metal/electrolyte interfaces.144 Plasmonic nanostructures have been used in a number of studies to enhance the optical absorption close to the electrochemical interface and thus improve PEC efficiency, particularly at longer wavelengths that typically have low inherent absorption of the semiconductor photoelectrode.145–147 Characterizing such hybrid photoelectrodes with Raman spectroscopy is an excellent opportunity to elucidate structure–property relationships in these PEC systems.
 Fig. 3  Strategies for generating localized surface plasmon resonance on photoelectrode surfaces that could be used for SERS characterization: (a) Au nanoparticles embedded in a photoelectrode (after ref. 135); (b) photoelectrode material deposited over Au nanopillars in an “overlayer SERS” configuration (after ref. 136); (c) ultra-thin SiO2 or Al2O3 coated Au nanoparticles deposited over a photoelectrode (after ref. 144); (d) PEC material deposited over Ag nanocubes coated with ultra-thin Al2O3 insulator (after ref. 143). 
2.6 Other SPM techniques

Scanning electrochemical mass spectrometry. 

In situ mass spectrometric measurements, such as differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS), afford chemically specific detection of product, reactant, spectator, or corrosion species at an electrode surface. These techniques have been employed to establish mechanisms and quantify product distributions for electrocatalytic reactions.148–154 Currently, a disadvantage of most of these techniques is the inability to detect non/semi-volatile reaction products. This drawback arises from the low permeability of the porous Teflon membrane, which separates the vacuum inlet from the solution, to these species. A spatially sensitive variant of the technique is of obvious interest in chemically specific local detection of products, viz. H2 and O2 at photoelectrodes during water splitting. Scanning-DEMS (SDEMS), employing a scanning vacuum inlet capillary for mass spectrometric detection, has been demonstrated; however, the spatial resolution is on the order of few hundred microns.155–157 Alternately, the inlet capillary position can be kept constant while the sample is scanned beneath it.152 In both cases, the resolution of scanning electrochemical mass-spectrometry may be improved through the use of modified multi-barrel nano/micro-capillary tips that have been developed for scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM).68,158


pH-sensing microscopy. 
A shared feature of the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions is the consumption or production of protons (H+) or hydroxyls (OH−) and an associated change in the local pH at the electrode surface. Many corrosion processes are also accompanied by pH changes. Hence, local pH measurements can provide valuable insights into the stability and the activity of photoelectrodes. Fluorescence-based pH-sensing typically involves an optically-excited pH-sensitive chromophore whose change in fluorescence is indicative of the change in local pH. Fluorescence has been previously employed to demonstrate macroscale spatial variations in pH during electrocatalytic reactions at surfaces159 and for high throughput screening of electrocatalyst libraries.160 Improved spatial resolution can be realized by the use of a confocal laser-scanning microscope to detect fluorescence.161,162 Alternately, the application of a pH-sensitive tip in a SECM setup can be used to perform pH-sensing microscopy with micro/nano-scale resolution.68


Electron-based in situ SPM techniques. 
One means of improving the resolution of optical SPM techniques is to replace the optical probe with an electron probe, which can be focused to nanometer or better length scales. Besides providing high spatial resolution, electron-based SPM techniques provide rich and detailed information regarding the structure, composition and electronic states of solid surfaces, and have been used for decades to unravel mechanisms of surface catalytic reactions.163 One such electron-based SPM technique is electron-beam-induced current (EBIC), which is similar to SPCM except that an electron beam, rather than optical beam, is used to create electron/hole pairs and generate current in a semiconducting material. EBIC is typically performed in vacuum or gas-phase environment, but it is possible to perform EBIC in liquid solution through use of a special test cell in a scanning-electron microscope (SEM) capable of imaging under ambient pressures.164,165 Efforts are underway to extend vacuum based techniques such as EBIC to probe electrochemical interfaces in situ,166,167 and offer an exciting opportunity to understand PEC processes at the nano-scale. One of the key challenges is to maintain a sufficiently thin liquid electrolyte layer relative to the mean free path of the electrons produced by accelerating voltage in use. For instance if a 30 keV electron beam is employed, the electrolyte layer must be ≈30 nm thick.

3. 
        In situ techniques for evaluation of photoelectrodes with high temporal resolution
Many electronic processes in photoelectrodes, such as photoexcitation, cooling, trapping, recombination, and interfacial transfer of charge carriers, occur on sub-nanosecond time scales, and thus proceed too rapidly to be resolved by electrical measurements.19 Ultrafast spectroscopic techniques can probe optical, electronic, or vibrational signatures on the requisite femtosecond to nanosecond time scale to directly interrogate these physical phenomena. Fig. 4a illustrates the basic concept of a pump–probe measurement, whereby a photoexcitation pump pulse is followed after a controlled time delay by a probe pulse. Fig. 4b and c provides an overview of the different photophysical events in an example TiO2–Pt system, along with an approximation of the relevant time scales for each event. For other materials systems, time scales for recombination and reactions can also be in the sub-nanosecond range. Bench-scale pump–probe methods generally use Ti:sapphire lasers as the light source, with pulse durations that are commonly <50 fs. These pulses can be manipulated using non-linear optics to probe either absorption or emission over a spectral region ranging from the ultraviolet to the far-infrared (terahertz frequencies). The diversity of methods enables measurement of carrier lifetimes, transient photoconductivity, and charge transfer kinetics, among other phenomena. This section primarily focuses on transient absorption spectroscopy (TA), the most widely employed ultrafast method to date. An extensive review of ultrafast carrier dynamics for solar fuels formation has been recently published.19 Although this article has focused on photoelectrode based PEC systems, TA measurements can also be very useful for studying PEC systems based on suspensions of photocatalytic particles, which is the topic of the review article by Ardo et al.168
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of a generic ultrafast pump–probe spectroscopy experiment. (b) Photophysical processes and (c) their approximate time scales for different steps in PEC water splitting for an example system comprising TiO2 nanoparticles decorated with Pt and IrO2 catalytic nanoparticles. Steps include instantaneous photo excitation, (1) carrier cooling and trapping, (2) interphase electron transfer from TiO2 to Pt, (3) geminate recombination, (4) hydrogen evolution reaction on Pt catalyst, (5) O2 evolution on TiO2, (6) O2 evolution on Pt or IrO2, and (7) prospective O2 evolution for next-generation OER catalysts. 
TA probes the change in absorption upon photoexcitation as a function of the pump–probe delay time. Probing band-to-band transitions in the visible region reveals the electron and hole populations, while probing a sample in the IR region provides insight into molecular vibrations and/or conductive free carriers. Standard TA configurations focus the optical probe to ≈300 micron spot size, although optical microscope configurations such as those commonly employed in SPCM measurements can reduce the analysis area to length scales close to the optical diffraction limit. For example, TA measurements have been performed using a scanning focused laser beam to perform transient absorption microscopy (TAM) for imaging micron-sized features on graphene oxide.34 The time resolution is limited by the duration of the laser pulse, often ≈50 fs. The maximum time delay depends on the length of the optical delay line, and is typically several nanoseconds. Alternatively, electrical detection using a pulsed pump and a continuous probe allows measurement above nanosecond time scales, with the maximum time determined by the laser repetition rate. Ultrafast measurements require many laser shots to sample the desired time window with sufficient signal-to-noise ratio. Data collection often requires tens of minutes, and samples must be stable for many turnovers under high photon fluxes. Samples should also return to their ground state before the next laser pulse arrives. As with SPCM techniques, the high photon fluxes commonly employed in ultrafast spectroscopies pose a challenge when extrapolating conclusions drawn from ultrafast spectroscopy to systems operating under standard 1 sun conditions. Pulse durations are short and sparse in time (∼100 fs pulse repeated every millisecond), but the instantaneous power is very high, often resulting in initial photoexcited carrier densities that are 10–1000 times larger than under steady state 1 sun conditions, and which can place the system in the high injection regime.
Most of the early ultrafast spectroscopy studies of electronic materials were performed in air, but recently in situ TA has provided additional insight into charge-carrier dynamics. In situ measurements present new opportunities to probe the photoelectrode–electrolyte interface under applied bias. Additionally, ultrafast spectrometers using optical delay lines to access the fs–ns time window can be stitched together with data from spectrometers using digital delays with a ns–μs window, and with oscilloscope-based detection and continuous probes with μs–s window to provide gap-free TA spectroscopy over timescales from femtoseconds to seconds. In a recent study of hematite (α-Fe2O3), the current–voltage (I–V) characterization under pulsed laser illumination showed the expected improvement in absorbed-photon-to-electron collection efficiency (APCE) under positive applied potentials, but the magnitude of the APCE was significantly lower than under 1 sun conditions because of excessive electron–hole recombination during the initial period of high photoexcited carrier densities.169 Additionally, in situ spectroelectrochemistry was used to assign spectral features to electrons and holes in the visible region and free carriers in the mid-IR, then TA was used to probe the time evolution of these features over fs–μs time windows.169 A feature at 570 nm was assigned to holes, and decayed at a rate that was independent of applied bias, which indicated that the catalytic activity of the electrodes was determined by holes with lifetimes longer than microseconds. This conclusion agrees with that obtained by in situ microsecond TA spectroscopy, which revealed the presence of holes with lifetimes as long as seconds.170 The lifetime of photogenerated holes increased with applied bias; and a linear relationship between TA amplitude at 200 ms and photocurrent indicated the importance of long-lived holes in the photo-oxidation of water by Fe2O3.
Several other ultrafast techniques in addition to TA spectroscopy are of potential interest for investigating PEC materials. Time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy (TRTS) and time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) have been used to measure transient photoconductivity in semiconductors and oxides,171,172 including such relevant materials as Cu2O and BiVO4.173,174 In both of these methods, the conductivity is probed using far-infrared radiation. TRTS provides information on ultrafast (ps–ns) time scales, while TRMC probes the dynamics on ns–μs time scales. Both types of probes are strongly absorbed by water and conductive electrolytes, so in situ experiments are challenging. However, special cell designs utilizing a back-illumination configuration or very thin electrolyte layers in a recirculating scheme to avoid build-up of photoproducts may be effective. Other ultrafast techniques of interest include time-resolved XPS and time-resolved XRD to study the surface and bulk structural changes that result from photoexcitation of the material or an adsorbed sensitizer.175,176 These methods require a synchrotron source, and in situ measurements are likely to be extremely challenging due to the nature of signal detection. Most of the techniques outlined in this paragraph have not been applied extensively for investigations of PEC materials and processes to date, but many opportunities exist to develop new insights through the use of such methods.
4. Modeling and simulation of photoelectrode operation at small length and ultrafast time scales
Computational modeling, particularly when informed and validated by the experimental techniques described in the previous sections, can be employed to offer additional insights into the key processes that underlie operation of PEC photoelectrodes, and ultimately use that knowledge to predict new, high performance PEC materials. Unlike the experimental techniques discussed up to this point, there exist many well-established and readily available computational modeling tools for simulating PEC possesses at sub-nm length scales and fs/ps time scales. While high spatial and temporal resolution are easily obtained with computational tools, the key challenge becomes that of “realistic” modeling of photoelectrodes under conditions that most closely approximate actual device operation.177 In this regard, computational modeling can operate hand-in-hand with in situ experimental characterization techniques, with the latter providing the needed insights into electrode structure, chemistry, and dynamics during operation. Given recent advancements in both high-performance computing and computational algorithms, opportunities for using modeling and simulation as predictive tools for PEC studies are expanding.17,18,178–181 Accordingly, it is becoming increasingly evident that modeling and characterization efforts require tighter integration as PEC research activities move forward.

Fig. 5 illustrates schematically three stages of PEC operation that must be considered for accurate computational modeling of the entire reaction: the initial reaction setup (e.g., surface/interface formation), illumination, and final product formation. Note that the latter two stages generally overlap with the steps in Fig. 4, encompassing photoabsorption, carrier generation and re-equilibration, charge transfer, and chemical reactivity. The first stage involves understanding how a material responds to exposure to the environment.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of various processes and stages contributing to the complete PEC water splitting reaction (green arrow), along with possible computational methods for treating the associated physical or chemical phenomena at different length and time scales. The vertical position on the graph corresponds to the relative length scale of the process, whereas the position of the wedge where it intersects with the green arrow indicates its relative time scale. 
The key challenge in accurately modeling the entire PEC process is that the individual contributing processes in Fig. 5 operate at intrinsically different length and time scales that cannot be treated using a single theoretical method. For instance, carrier generation and mobility usually occur in the fs regime, whereas the catalytic charge-transfer reaction is typically much slower and the recombination/release/photocorrosion steps can be much slower still. Moreover, the results of each stage depend on those of the previous stage: the reaction chemistry and kinetic pathway depends on the instantaneous interfacial structure of the photoexcited electrode surface, which in turn depends on the chemistry of the electrode surface upon electrolyte immersion. This interdependency makes it difficult to predict with any certainty what the outcome will be, since uncertainties in each stage are propagated throughout the reaction. The solution to these difficulties is twofold. First, computational methods that provide different tradeoffs between accuracy and computational expense and that operate at different scales must be combined. Second, the simulations must rely on accurate experimental probes of processes and local structures to provide input and validation to the models and minimize error propagation, particularly during the later stages of the reaction.
Broadly speaking, computational methods can be separated into continuum and atomistic approaches. In general, continuum approaches provide superior flexibility for studying device operation, and are capable of accessing much broader ranges of length and time scales. They are also well suited for examining operation under non-equilibrium conditions and examining the overall kinetics of interdependent reaction stages, which facilitates more direct comparison with experimentally accessible quantities. However, continuum approaches provide little or no information about the atomic-level details of interface structure or chemistry, relying instead on parameterization by atomistic or experimental approaches. On the other hand, atomistic approaches are better suited for understanding mechanisms and chemical interactions, since they treat atoms and molecules explicitly. The disadvantage is that they are limited in the scales of systems that can be accessed, and generally neglect broader features such as microstructure, surface/interface inhomogeneity, interfacial band bending, and variations in electrolyte composition.
In this section, we describe the use of atomistic computational methods to accurately model physiochemical processes in operating PEC systems and better understand the mechanistic details that underlie PEC operation at small length and ultrafast time scales. We do not discuss continuum-based approaches that could be adapted for kinetic modeling of PEC operation; towards this end, there are a number of recent publications and reviews describing the specific application of continuum models to the properties and performance of photoelectrodes.182–188 Nevertheless, it should be emphasized that one of the most pressing current research needs in the PEC community is the development of simulation frameworks that combine the power and accuracy of atomistic approaches with the flexibility of continuum approaches. This would allow for simulation of the kinetics of PEC operation at the system level under “realistic” conditions of varying pH, illumination, bias, and electrolyte composition/concentration. As such unified simulation frameworks become available, the atomistic techniques we describe may be combined with continuum approaches to further bridge the gap between theory and experiment.
4.1 DFT and ground-state techniques
Density functional theory (DFT) in its various flavors has emerged as the primary workhorse of first-principles computational materials science.189 Providing arguably the most favorable tradeoff between computational cost and accuracy, DFT has been applied widely to study the chemistry and electronic structure of photoelectrode materials and their surfaces.181,190 It has also been used extensively to study surface catalytic reactions, particularly in the context of descriptor-based optimization and high-throughput screening of candidate water oxidation and proton reduction electrocatalysts.191–195 Moreover, there are several methods available that can use DFT-derived energetics to directly compute reaction barriers and extract free energy surfaces. These include the nudged elastic band (NEB)196 and metadynamics approaches,197 which have found extensive usage in investigating water redox and dissociation reactions on photocatalyst and photoelectrode materials.198–205
An additional advantage of ground-state techniques such as DFT and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) is that these techniques are also available for simulating spectroscopic quantities that can be compared directly with experimental probes, particularly at PEC interfaces. These include computation of IR/Raman spectra,206–208 as well as XAS/XES209–212 spectra. Methods that require explicit treatment of excited states, such as UV-vis/IR optical spectroscopy, are covered in the next section. These experimental techniques offer a viable pathway for model validation.
Historically, much of the DFT-based work has focused on studying bulk electrodes and their idealized surfaces in vacuum. Recently, there has been growing interest in extending the application of DFT to study interfaces between electrodes and electrolytes, which require large simulation cells that can treat both components on equal footing. This trend can be considered analogous to the adoption of in situ techniques in experimental characterization. Typically, consideration of the liquid electrolyte also requires explicit treatment of atomistic dynamics in an ab initio molecular dynamics scheme (AIMD; alternatively, first-principles MD or DFT-MD), which relies on DFT-computed forces to propagate atomic trajectories. Examining interfaces using DFT is further complicated by a general lack of understanding of how surfaces and surface reconstructions form in solution as compared to their vacuum counterparts. Nevertheless, several groups have adopted AIMD approaches to study the structure and chemistry of semiconductor–water interfaces for PEC applications.198,201,213–225 The presence of semiconductor surfaces often significantly alters the dynamical and chemical properties of water; conversely, the presence of the electrolyte can significantly alter the physiochemical properties of the semiconductor. Accordingly, recent simulations have reported a wide variety of complex chemical processes active at semiconductor surfaces when liquid water is included explicitly, such as water dissociative adsorption,198,201,214,216–218,221,222,224 surface hydroxylation and radical formation,198,201,214,216–219,221,223 unusual changes in the hydrogen-bond network,198,201,213–220 and fast surface proton hopping.198,214–217 It is also possible to assess surface acidity/basicity based on AIMD simulations of water-semiconductor interfaces when water dissociation is active.214,217,226 Collectively, these reports point to the importance of the specific interaction between the electrode and the electrolyte in determining the physiochemical properties of the interface and the associated reaction mechanisms, and highlight the future need for consideration of both species in accurate models of PEC operation.
An alternative to explicit inclusion of the full electrolyte in AIMD simulations is to describe some portion of the electrolyte using an implicit solvation scheme that combines traditional DFT with polarizable continuum models. This approach has long been used in the quantum chemistry community to study ionic and molecular solvation,227 and similar ideas are now beginning to be adapted for solid–liquid interfaces.228–232 Such polarizable continuum-based schemes can also mitigate another critical challenge for realistic simulations of electrode–electrolyte interfaces and catalytic redox electrochemistry—namely, the application of a well-defined voltage bias or photo-bias. Typically, there are two complications associated with an external bias within DFT: first, charge neutrality considerations that prevent accurate determination of a potential reference for a charged system that can be directly compared with experiments; and second, fundamental incompatibilities with the periodic boundary conditions generally employed for simulations of extended crystalline systems. Specific approaches for dealing with these shortcomings have been outlined within the context of the effective screening medium (ESM),231,232 joint DFT (JDFT)233–235 and self-consistent continuum solvation (SCCS)230,236 methodologies. Alternative schemes for defining universal potential references for PEC-relevant reactions in DFT/AIMD have also been proposed.237–239
Implementations of the abovementioned techniques are rather new, and in most cases their application has been confined to metallic electrodes. Nevertheless, they present a promising approach for considering [photo]voltage-dependent electronic, dynamical, and structural effects observed at semiconductor–liquid PEC interfaces during operation. One example is the complex relationship between the structure and dynamics of the electric double layer and the space-charge effect it induces on the charged photoelectrode. They also open up the possibility of directly examining the mechanisms and kinetics of charge-transfer reactions at PEC interfaces under bias. In this latter case, one must be careful to consider the distinction between the more commonly employed constant-charge scheme and the more experimentally relevant constant-potential scheme.240 The recently proposed potentiostat method of Bonnet and Otani232 is an example of a constant-potential scheme that could be implemented directly within AIMD to permit dynamics at a fixed bias that better represents experimental conditions in a PEC cell.
Despite their predictive power, conventional DFT and AIMD have some significant theoretical limitations that are relevant for investigations of PEC materials. One of these is an inability to correctly describe charge localization, particularly in strongly correlated electronic systems. This shortcoming can prove particularly problematic for simulating charge transport within many transition-metal oxides, where conductivity may be driven by a polaronic hopping mechanism rather than direct band transport (e.g., alpha-Fe2O3).190,241–243 In such systems, charge transport is often the rate-limiting process, making accurate theoretical description paramount. To a large extent, this limitation can be overcome by adoption of more advanced exchange–correlation functionals that include some amount of exact Hartree–Fock exchange (so-called hybrid functionals)223,244 or Hubbard corrections (DFT+U).245 The appropriate amount of exact exchange or +U to include is generally system dependent, and can be determined empirically or else directly from ab initio calculations.246–249 In the case of hybrid functionals, the additional computational expense can also significantly limit AIMD simulation times, particularly when applied to solid–liquid interfaces. Second, DFT is inherently a ground-state method, and thus cannot in general provide an accurate description of excited-state properties. For instance, it is well-known that DFT underestimates band gap and cannot quantitatively predict valence and conduction band edge positions.237,250 It also prevents treatment of electronic excited-state dynamics and true photoillumination conditions.177 Accordingly, it is better suited to examining interfaces in the dark, although the next section provides a brief overview of excited-state and beyond-DFT methods that can be incorporated to address this limitation.
Occasionally, it may become necessary to determine quantities such as adsorbate binding energies and dissociation barriers with even higher accuracy than DFT can generally provide (for instance, to be used as inputs in coarse-grained or model-Hamiltonian approaches). In these cases, more advanced methods may be invoked at the cost of additional computational expense. These include higher-order perturbative quantum chemical methods,251,252 as well as quantum Monte Carlo (QMC),253 which solves the electronic wavefunction stochastically. These methods are currently limited in the system sizes they can access and are difficult to implement in a dynamics framework, and have therefore not been widely applied to PEC materials. However, a more realistic use may be for benchmarking DFT calculations on model systems and informing the proper choice of DFT exchange–correlation functionals, or else for systematic refinement of energetics.
4.2 Excited-state and beyond-DFT methods
Proper simulation of the optical excitations associated with photoelectrode illumination or with optical probe techniques requires augmenting ground-state DFT with higher-order methods that consider electronic excited states. An overview of these methods is included in this section, and a more detailed discussion can be found in a recent review by Ping et al.177 In general, excited-state methods carry significantly higher computational expense than ordinary ground-state DFT, and are therefore limited to much smaller systems and time scales. One of the most popular excited-state methods is the extension of the ground-state DFT formalism known as time-dependent DFT (TDDFT),254–256 which relies on full solution of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation within a set of prescribed approximations. TDDFT allows one to simulate oscillator strengths and vertical excitations for all relevant electronic transitions. It can therefore be used to describe the optical absorption spectrum of a model photoelectrode, or to understand how bulk absorption states change at surfaces or interfaces. In addition, TDDFT-based approaches can provide excited-state electron dynamics in the fs regime, which is a useful tool for directly simulating ultrafast pump–probe experiments. Such techniques may enable investigations of charge carrier dynamics that are directly relevant to PEC devices, including interfacial charge transfer between co-catalysts and photoabsorbers, or through semiconductor–insulator–metal junctions. To date, probably the most mature application of TDDFT to photoelectrode materials has been in the context of carrier injection and transport in dye-sensitized TiO2.257–259
For certain semiconductors, TDDFT may be inadequate for accurately predicting photoexcitation spectra.177,256 In these instances, more accurate determination of electronic excitations can be achieved using methods based on many-body perturbation theory and the Green's function formalism.260 The GW approximation is the current state-of-the-art for the calculations of quantities obtained from photoemission spectroscopy measurements (PES, XPS), such as semiconductor band gaps and band edge alignments.261 Similarly, the Bethe–Salpeter (BSE) equation, which employs two-particle Green's functions, provides a reliable approach for describing optical absorption processes that involve electron–hole interactions.262 Historically, these techniques have been considered too expensive for application to PEC interfaces; however, recent algorithmic developments263–265 allows one to apply the GW method to larger system sizes, permitting direct treatment of both the solid electrode and liquid electrolyte.266–270 This opens up opportunities to investigate how local electronic states are altered by the presence of the liquid electrolyte within a formalism that is often more robust than TDDFT, and provides a possible template for comparison with high-resolution experimental probes. As alternatives to the GW/BSE approach, high-level quantum chemistry methods such as Møller–Plesset perturbation theory (MPn),271 coupled cluster theory (CC),272 configuration interaction (CI),273 complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF),274 and complete active space with second-order perturbation theory (CASPT2)275 can be employed to calculate excited-state properties. To date, these approaches have been applied primarily to molecules and nanostructures.276,277 Developments to extend these approaches to study solids are underway; however, further advances are required before they can be used to study PEC interfaces.278,279
Although TDDFT, GW, and BSE techniques can be used to determine the electronic structure of a photoelectrode material upon optical excitation, they do not provide the excited-state dynamics of atoms and ions. To this end, a promising emerging direction involves coupling excited-state electronic dynamics (in particular, TDDFT) with AIMD to investigate the effect of photoexcitation on the nonadiabatic dynamical evolution of the surface atoms and adsorbates.259,280–282 One such implementation was recently applied by the Prezhdo group to study nonadiabatic processes in photoinduced water splitting on GaN,283 and has found similar successes in studies of photocatalytic processes on metal oxides.259 Naturally, the simulation times that can be achieved are limited by the time scale of the electron dynamics (fs regime), but ultrafast responses can be studied. At present, it is unclear under which conditions such nonadiabatic atomic responses can be relevant to the reaction mechanisms on PEC photoelectrodes, but it represents an exciting future research pathway.259
4.3 Coarse-grained, model-Hamiltonian, and force-field approaches
Among the most significant limitations of DFT-based techniques is an inability to access the larger length (beyond a few nm) and time scales (beyond hundreds of ps) required to investigate later reaction stages or to fully describe variations in the electrode microstructure or electrolyte composition. As discussed above, a possible solution is to combine atomistic approaches with continuum approaches. However, in the absence of a unified framework, atomistic approaches that take advantage of coarse graining, simplified model Hamiltonians, and parameterized classical potentials can also push closer to accessing more realistic system sizes and much longer simulation times.
Classical molecular dynamics approaches based on interatomic potentials that are fit to experimental or ab initio-derived properties represent one option for scaling to >μm system sizes and >ns simulation times. These techniques make it possible to account for the full composition and evolution of the liquid electrolyte (even at low ion concentrations or weakly acidic/alkaline conditions, which typically require very large simulations), as well as many features in the electrode microstructure. However, a key difficulty lies in the proper parameterization of the interatomic potentials, which must be valid not only for describing bulk properties of the electrode and electrolyte, but also the interface between the two. By contrast, AIMD is based on first-principles descriptions that are agnostic to the chemical environment. A second obstacle that is particularly relevant to PEC hydrogen or oxygen evolution is the inability of most classical dynamics frameworks to properly treat chemical reactions that involve bond breaking and forming. Currently, the most attractive solution to these difficulties is to use methods based on reactive classical potentials/force fields that are specifically designed to permit bond breaking/forming and are “trained” using data from smaller AIMD runs. In recent years, the ReaxFF technique284 has emerged as the best known reactive force-field method, and has been successfully applied to the study of a few semiconductor–liquid interfaces.285–287 However, additional work on training ReaxFF potentials using AIMD needs to be done in order to improve the transferability and predictive power of such techniques for other photoelectrode materials, particularly given the sensitivity of the potential parameters to the particular surface and electrolyte composition.
Alternatively, one can abandon real-time dynamics in favor of stochastic approaches that offer insight into PEC reaction kinetics and transport processes based on model Hamiltonians. One of the most powerful model-Hamiltonian techniques is kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC), which can take advantage of ab initio-derived reaction and diffusion barriers (e.g., from DFT or QMC) to predict overall reaction kinetics. Techniques based on kMC are attractive because they are extraordinarily flexible and capable of accessing wide ranges of timescales depending on the specific level of spatiotemporal discretization. However, they generally rely on decomposing PEC reactions into well-defined reaction steps, each with a well-defined barrier. Given the inherent complexity and inhomogeneity of semiconductor–electrolyte interfaces, this can be extremely difficult in practice. Nevertheless, when used appropriately, kMC is well suited to offer semi-quantitative descriptions of reaction kinetics and charge transport processes that can be directly compared with experimental probes. For instance, kMC techniques have been used to study charge transport in hematite288 and through grain boundaries in polycrystalline TiO2.289 The latter example illustrates how kMC can be applied to amorphous systems based on an averaged homogeneous description, which presents extraordinary challenges for conventional DFT-based models that rely on actual atomic configurations. Model-Hamiltonian techniques have also been adopted to refine PEC reaction barriers in the presence of the liquid electrolyte. An excellent example is the approach introduced by Santos et al.,290 which uses an Anderson–Newns model in conjunction with ordinary DFT to predict proton abstraction barriers. This same method was recently successfully applied to the catalytic hydrogen evolution on the PEC electrode material MoS2.291
Another issue that can plague DFT studies of photoelectrode surfaces is the complexity in surface structure and atomic arrangement, particularly for alloys, defect- or adsorbate-rich surfaces, and amorphous or polycrystalline electrodes. Similar challenges exist for examining atomic structures at the solid interface between the semiconductor and the catalyst. There is currently no definitive solution to these difficulties, emphasizing the need for high-fidelity experimental characterization to inform atomistic models. Nevertheless, approaches have typically relied on decomposing the material into local building blocks that can be computed explicitly, which are then combined to generate and predict new low-energy structures. This can be done by qualitative observations of local chemical similarities in simplified models,292 or else by using rigorously defined mathematical methodologies. In the latter category, one of the most popular approaches is the cluster expansion method,293 which has been applied successfully to efficiently determine bulk and surface alloy compositions of crystalline photoelectrode materials.294–298 The cluster expansion method relies on mapping the compositional variation onto an Ising-like lattice-gas model Hamiltonian, each “site” of which may be independently occupied (or unoccupied) by a given substitutional species. Accordingly, its accuracy depends on the reliability of the lattice-gas mapping, which is limited to well-defined bulk or surface structures. For instance, it can be adapted to study lattice point defects, but it is not suitable for amorphous materials. The lattice-gas assumption must also be rigorously verified for PEC surfaces in an electrolyte solution, which can be highly dynamic and facilitate large atomic rearrangements.
5. Special topics
5.1 Coordinating high resolution in situ measurements with traditional, macro-scale measurements
Although the in situ experimental techniques discussed in this article can provide valuable information about photoelectrode properties at small length and fast time scales, the experimental conditions for these measurements are often very different from those involved with real device operating conditions. For example, differences in the local and global reaction rates, in addition to differences in the intensity, uniformity, and spectral characteristics of the light source, are common. Hence, results obtained from nano- or micro-scale measurements must be extrapolated with suitable caveats to predict or explain macroscopic photoelectrode performance under AM 1.5 operating conditions. When possible, nano/micro and macro measurements should be performed under similar conditions. Unfortunately, trade-offs are often present between signal-to-noise ratio, resolution, and mimicking realistic PEC device operating conditions. For both nano/micro and macro-scale measurements, data can be collected over a range of operating conditions, such as light intensity or applied potential, to ascertain the sensitivity of the measured differences in behavior to operating conditions and thus gain insight into the validity of direct quantitative comparison between measurements at different length scales.
Scanning-probe measurements are necessarily local measurements, the output of which will naturally vary across the macroscopic surface. The variation in a measured property across a macroscopic sample surface can be quantified by performing the high resolution measurement at multiple microscopic regions, as is commonly done in electron microscopy. Having performed local SPM measurements at multiple locations, variation in the nano or micro-scale signal can be compared with macro-scale measurements. Whenever possible, observations and conclusions drawn from micro- and nano-scale measurements should be cross-checked by the use of more traditional, macro-scale PEC measurements (e.g., using an AM 1.5 light source) and/or computational modeling tools. Detailed descriptions of the standard protocols for commonly employed macro-scale PEC measurements, such as current–voltage characteristics and quantum yield measurements can be found in the literature.299,300
5.2 Combined in situ techniques
All of the SPM techniques in Table 1 can provide valuable information about photoelectrode materials when performed individually, but a much more complete view of photoelectrode operation can be obtained when multiple SPM techniques are combined in the same measurement platform and performed simultaneously.301 Such combined or multifunctional in situ measurement platforms represent a powerful means of obtaining complementary information that can more easily elucidate complex structure–property relationships. Importantly, performing multiple measurements simultaneously ensures that identical experimental conditions are employed for each technique and on the same nano- or microscopic area of the photoelectrode. In contrast, it can be difficult to achieve identical analytical and electrode surface conditions when two or more independent in situ measurements are conducted sequentially, especially if different electrochemical test cells are employed for each technique.
Many examples of combined in situ measurements have been demonstrated for electrochemical or photoelectrochemical systems. The combination of SECM with AFM has been used to correlate nano- or micron-scale variation in (photo)catalytic activity to topological features such as grain boundaries, catalyst particles, and more.113,301,302 Combined AFM/STM enables simultaneous measurements of the force and conductance curves of two impinging double layers in the electrochemical environment, while the natural pairing of Raman mapping and SPCM offers the ability to investigate variations in local photocurrent as a function of the chemical or physical nature of the photoelectrode surface. Other examples of combined in situ measurements that have been reported include SPCM/SECM,12,31,56,58,303 SPCM/shear force topography,45 SECM/AFM,301 and Raman/SPCM,304 SECM/optical microscopy(OM),305,306 ECSTM/SECM,93,94,307 NSOM/fluorescence spectroscopy,308,309 and ECSTM/TERS.310,311 The capabilities of these various multifunctional set-ups are vast, and their usefulness will vary substantially from material to material, making some set-ups better suited than others for investigating certain PEC materials and/or chemistries.
6. Conclusions and future outlook
The continued development of experimental and computational techniques to study photoelectrochemical systems with high spatial and temporal resolution can provide a more complete understanding of fundamental PEC processes and thus aid in the development of commercially viable PEC technology. This review has described several types of experimental and computational tools that are well-suited for achieving these objectives. Particular emphasis has been placed on experimental techniques that can investigate photoelectrode properties in situ, providing valuable information about properties and performance in the photoelectrochemical environment. Scanning probe measurement techniques are especially useful for interrogating photoelectrodes at small length scales, while time resolved pump–probe spectroscopy techniques are well-suited for studying PEC processes at very fast time scales. Atomistic modeling tools provide the ability to unlock mechanisms of PEC processes at the smallest length and fastest time scales, which in many cases are not currently accessible with experimental techniques. When informed by and used in coordination with experimental techniques, computational techniques may offer PEC researchers unique abilities to discover and design photoelectrode materials through an understanding of photoelectrode operation.
Nearly all of the techniques described in this review possess major challenges or limitations in their successful application to PEC systems. Many techniques have inherent limitations on length and time scales that can be described, or are only compatible with certain materials and/or photoelectrode morphologies. Another key challenge in the development of in situ experimental techniques and computational tools for studying PEC systems at small length and fast time scales is their application at operating conditions that are relevant to real-world PEC operation under AM 1.5 illumination. Improvement in hardware, software algorithms, and experimental set-ups germane to current techniques will continue to be important for overcoming these limitations, as will the careful coordination of multiple experimental and computational techniques to bridge length and time scales. Together, these approaches will enable a suite of tools that should significantly accelerate the discovery, design, and optimization of materials for solar-driven water splitting with photoelectrochemical cells.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Eric Miller for the inspiration to compile this review, and the members of the U.S. Department of Energy's Photoelectrochemical Working Group and Task 35 (Renewable Hydrogen) of the International Energy Agency's Hydrogen Implementing Agreement for helpful comments, suggestions, and discussions. DVE acknowledges support from the NIST National Research Council postdoctoral Fellowship Program. JMV and NSL would like to acknowledge the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, a DOE Energy Innovation Hub, supported through the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Award No. DE-SC0004993 and the National Science Foundation Grant CHE-1214152. JMV acknowledges support through a NRC Ford Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. JJ thanks the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation for financial support through its postdoctoral fellowship program in environmental chemistry. JBB acknowledges support from NSF ECCS-1201957 and NSF CBET-1333649. BW and TO acknowledge support from the Fuel Cell Technologies Program within the DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. T.A.P acknowledges support from the Lawrence Fellowship. A portion of this work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Sandia is a multi-program laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, a Lockheed Martin Company, for the U.S. DOE National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. AAT was supported by Science of Precision Multifunctional Nanostructures for Electrical Energy Storage (NEES), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, and Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award DESC0001160. A summary version of this review paper (DOI: 10.2172/1209497), and associated summary tables that will be updated as the field progresses, will be available on the working group website (http://energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/photoelectrochemical-working-group).
References
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Turner, G. Sverdrup, M. K. Mann, P. C. Maness, B. Kroposki, M. Ghirardi, R. J. Evans and D. Blake, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 379–407 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, ECS Interface, 2013, 22, 43–50 CAS .

US DOE Multi-Year Res. Dev. Demonstr. Plan, 2012.
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
E. L. Miller, N. Gaillard, J. Kaneshiro, A. DeAngelis and R. Garland, Int. J. Energy Res., 2010, 34, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .
J. Lee, H. Ye, S. Pan and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 7445–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ye, J. Lee, J. S. Jan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13322–13328 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17509–17513 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. He and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Comb. Sci., 2011, 13, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Gregoire, C. X. Xiang, X. N. Liu, M. Marcin and J. Jin, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2013, 84, 024102 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. Castelli, T. Olsen, S. Datta, D. D. Landis, S. Dahl, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5814–5819 Search PubMed .
J. B. Baxter, C. Richter and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 423–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Acc. Chem. Res., 1990, 23, 176–183 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13061–13078 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Smith, I. D. Sharp, N. Strandwitz and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015 10.1039/C5EE01822F .
A. Minguzzi, D. Battistel, J. Rodríguez-López, A. Vertova, S. Rondinini, A. J. Bard and S. Daniele, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2941–2947 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bhattacharya, H. C. Lee and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9633–9640 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Nam, H. S. Park, H. C. Lee, B. H. Meekins, K. C. Leonard and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2707–2710 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Li, S. Wang, F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16842–16850 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Leonard, K. M. Nam, H. C. Lee, S. H. Kang, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15901–15910 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, H. C. Lee, P. D. Núñez, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4554–4565 RSC .
B. Moralejo, M. A. González, J. Jiménez, V. Parra, O. Martínez, J. Gutiérrez and O. Charro, J. Electron. Mater., 2010, 39, 663–670 CrossRef CAS .
W. Warta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 72, 389–401 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Graham and D. Yu, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 2013, 27, 1330018 CrossRef .
E. Abbe, Arch. Mikrosk. Anat., 1873, 9, 413–418 CrossRef .
R. Kopelman and W. Tan, Science, 1993, 262, 1382–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, G. D. Feke, R. D. Grober and L. P. Ghislain, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 4064–4066 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Guo, L. Li, B. Luk'yanchuk, A. Khan, Z. Liu, Z. Chen and M. Hong, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 218 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kastrup, H. Blom, C. Eggeling and S. Hell, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 178104 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Westphal and S. Hell, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 143903 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Y. Han, S. K. Kim, C. Eggeling and S. W. Hell, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3199–3203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Betzig and J. K. Trautman, Science, 1992, 257, 189–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Harris, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 223A–228A CAS .
C. R. McNeill, H. Frohne, J. L. Holdsworth, J. E. Furst, B. V. King and P. C. Dastoor, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Leite, M. Abashin, H. J. Lezec, A. G. Gianfrancesco, A. A. Talin and N. B. Zhitenev, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 311–316 CrossRef .
M. S. Leite, M. Abashin, H. J. Lezec, A. Gianfrancesco, A. A. Talin and N. B. Zhitenev, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11883–11890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Garfias-Mesias and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2495–2501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, Y. Inouye and P. Verma, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burghard and A. Mews, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5752–5756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 710–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and M. V. Mirkin, Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy, Taylor & Francis, 2nd
edn,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. V. Mirkin, W. Nogala, J. Velmurugan and Y. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21196–21212 RSC .

          A. J. Bard and M. V. Mirkin, Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy, Taylor & Francis,  2001 Search PubMed .
S. Amemiya, A. J. Bard, F. R. F. Fan, M. V. Mirkin and P. R. Unwin, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2008, 1, 95–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bertoncello, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1620 Search PubMed .
H. S. Park, K. C. Leonard and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12093–12102 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bae, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, M. Malizia, A. Kuznetsov, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 650–660 Search PubMed .
N. Casillas, P. James and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L16 CrossRef CAS .
P. James, N. Casillas and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3853 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, H. Ye and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1201–1207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Velmurugan, P. Sun and M. V. Mirkin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 459–464 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun and M. V. V. Mirkin, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6526–6534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Wipf, A. J. Bard and D. E. Tallman, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 1373–1377 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Edwards, A. L. Whitworth and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. McKelvey, M. A. Edwards and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 6334–6337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Pust, M. Salomo, E. Oesterschulze and G. Wittstock, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 105709 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shin, P. J. Hesketh, B. Mizaikoff and C. Kranz, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 4769–4777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wiedemair, B. Balu, J. Moon, D. W. Hess, B. Mizaikoff and C. Kranz, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5260–5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Kececi, J. Velmurugan and M. V. Mirkin, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3606 RSC .
B. P. Nadappuram, K. McKelvey, R. Al Botros, A. W. Colburn and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 8070–8074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Davoodi, J. Pan, C. Leygraf and S. Norgren, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, B21 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eckhard, M. Etienne, A. Schulte and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1793–1797 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Lister and P. J. Pinhero, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2371–2378 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Souto, Y. González-García and S. González, Corros. Sci., 2005, 47, 3312–3323 CrossRef CAS .
N. Casillas, S. J. Charlebois, W. H. Smyrl and H. S. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, L142–L145 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. James, L. F. Garfias-Mesias, P. J. Moyer and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, L64–L66 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rodríguez-López, M. A. Alpuche-Avilés and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16985–16995 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rodríguez-López and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5121–5129 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Rodríguez-López and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17046–17047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Simpson and J. Rodríguez-López, Electrochim. Acta, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2015.04.128 .
B. H. Simpson and J. Rodríguez-López, Anal. Methods, 2015 10.1039/C5AY00503E .
M. Zhou, Y. Yu, K. Hu and M. V. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015 DOI:10.1021/ja512482n .
P. R. Unwin and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 7814–7824 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, M. V. Mirkin, P. R. Unwin and D. Wipf, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 1861–1868 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, P. R. Unwin and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 4924, 4917–4924 CrossRef .
C. J. Slevin, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10851–10859 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Chen, Introduction to Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 2nd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
D. Kolb, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 722–740 CrossRef CAS .

          I. V. Pobelov, C. Li and T. Wandlowski, Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology,  2012, pp. 688–702 Search PubMed .
P. K. Hansma and J. Tersoff, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 61, R1–R23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wilms, M. Kruft, G. Bermes and K. Wandelt, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1999, 70, 3641 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Rost, L. Crama, P. Schakel, E. van Tol, G. B. E. M. van Velzen-Williams, C. F. Overgauw, H. ter Horst, H. Dekker, B. Okhuijsen, M. Seynen, A. Vijftigschild, P. Han, A. J. Katan, K. Schoots, R. Schumm, W. van Loo, T. H. Oosterkamp and J. W. M. Frenken, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76, 053710 CrossRef .
Y. I. Yanson, F. Schenkel and M. J. Rost, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2013, 84, 023702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Mirkin, F. R. Fan and A. J. Bard, Science, 1992, 257, 364–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sklyar, T. H. Treutler, N. Vlachopoulos and G. Wittstock, Surf. Sci., 2005, 597, 181–195 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wolfschmidt, D. Weingarth and U. Stimming, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1533–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Pecina, W. Schmickler, K. Y. Chan and D. J. Henderson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 396, 303–307 CrossRef .
F. C. Simeone, D. M. Kolb, S. Venkatachalam and T. Jacob, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Tao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 4066–4069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, A. M. Kuznetsov, I. G. Medvedev, Q. Chi, T. Albrecht, P. S. Jensen and J. Ulstrup, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2737–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. McEllistrem, G. Haase, D. Chen and R. J. Hamers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 2471–2474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, L. J. Webb, J. R. Heath and N. S. Lewis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 252111 CrossRef .
F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 3761–3766 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 1969–1976 CrossRef CAS .
I. Diez-Perez, A. G. Güell, F. Sanz and P. Gorostiza, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 7325–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Caballero-Briones, J. M. Arte, I. Diez-Perez, P. Gorostiza and F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1028–1036 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mo and E. I. Altman, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10233–10244 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Albrecht, K. Moth-poulsen, J. B. Christensen, J. Hjelm, T. Bjørnholm and J. Ulstrup, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 6574–6575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Giesen, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2001, 68, 1–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Park, B. Jaeckel and B. A. Parkinson, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5334–5340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sharma, R. R. Frontiera, A. I. Henry, E. Ringe and R. P. Van Duyne, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 16–25 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Giessibl, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2003, 75, 949 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Giessibl, Mater. Today, 2005, 8, 32–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Avila and B. Bhushan, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 38–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 276–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Nast, S. Rauscher, H. Jungblut and H.-J. Lewerenz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 442, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lewerenz, M. Aggour, C. Murrell, M. Kanis, H. Jungblut, J. Jakubowicz, P. A. Cox, S. A. Campbell, P. Hoffmann and D. Schmeisser, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E185 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wierzbiński and M. Szklarczyk, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 424, 191–200 CrossRef .
T. Miki and H. Yanagi, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3405–3410 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Economou, S. Mubeen, S. K. Buratto and E. W. McFarland, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3328–3334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Salaita, Y. Wang and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 145–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Hillier, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 18808–18817 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5217–5222 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukuma, Y. Ueda, S. Yoshioka and H. Asakawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 2–5 CrossRef PubMed .
G. B. Kaggwa, P. C. Nalam, J. I. Kilpatrick, N. D. Spencer and S. P. Jarvis, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6589–6594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Kilpatrick, S. H. Loh and S. P. Jarvis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2628–2634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Herruzo, H. Asakawa, T. Fukuma and R. Garcia, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2678–2685 RSC .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, 2nd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .

          M. Osawa, in Near-Field Optics and Surface Plasmon Polaritons, ed. S. Kawata, Springer, Berlin,  2001, vol. 187, pp. 163–187 Search PubMed .
M. Ito, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 329–389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osawa, M. Tsushima, H. Mogami, G. Samjeské and A. Yamakata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4248–4256 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Richmond, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 2693–2724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vidal and A. Tadjeddine, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 1095–1127 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishiyama, T. Imamura and A. Morita, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8447–8470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Ferraro, K. Nakamoto and C. W. Brown, Introductory Raman Spectroscopy, Elsevier,  2003 Search PubMed .

          D. A. Skoog, F. J. Holler and T. A. Niemann, Principles of Instrumental Analysis, Saunders College Publishing,  1998 Search PubMed .
A. J. Haes, C. L. Haynes, A. D. McFarland, G. C. Schatz, R. R. Van Duyne and S. L. Zou, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Yang and S. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19058–19065 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Tian, B. Ren, Y. X. Chen, S. Z. Zou and B. W. Mao, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 3829–3838 RSC .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Campion and P. Kambhampati, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 241–250 RSC .
T. R. Jensen, M. D. Malinsky, C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10549–10556 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Ling, R. X. Yan, S. Lo, D. T. Hoang, C. Liu, M. A. Fardy, S. B. Khan, A. M. Asiri, S. M. Bawaked and P. D. Yang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 132–143 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nature, 2010, 464, 392–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Liu, W. B. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Baltruschat, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 15, 1693–1706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Wonders, T. H. M. Housmans, V. Rosca and M. T. M. Koper, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 1215–1221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gun, S. Bharathi, V. Gutkin, D. Rizkov, A. Voloshenko, R. Shelkov, S. Sladkevich, N. Kyi, M. Rona, Y. Wolanov, M. Koch, S. Mizrahi, P. V. Pridkhochenko, A. Modestov and O. Lev, Isr. J. Chem., 2010, 50, 360–373 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, M. Lu, Q. Zheng, Y. Zhang, H. D. Dewald and H. Chen, Analyst, 2013, 138, 5519–5539 RSC .
J.-P. Grote, A. R. Zeradjanin, S. Cherevko and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2014, 85, 104101 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Topalov, S. Cherevko, A. R. Zeradjanin, J. C. Meier, I. Katsounaros and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 631 RSC .
A. Bharti, P. C. Ma and R. Salgia, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2015, 26, 451–466 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jambunathan and A. C. Hillier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jambunathan, S. Jayaraman and A. C. Hillier, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1856–1863 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Rus, H. Wang, A. E. Legard, N. L. Ritzert, R. B. Van Dover and H. D. Abruña, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2013, 84, 024101 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Ebejer, A. G. Güell, S. C. S. Lai, K. McKelvey, M. E. Snowden and P. R. Unwin, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2013, 6, 329–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Bowyer, J. Xie and R. C. Engstrom, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 2005–2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Reddington, Science, 1998, 280, 1735–1737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Rudd, S. Cannan, E. Bitziou, I. Ciani, A. L. Whitworth and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 6205–6217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Leenheer and H. A. Atwater, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H752–H757 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Somorjai, Chemistry in Two Dimensions: Surfaces, Cornell University Press,  1981 Search PubMed .
J. L. Keddie, P. Meredith, R. A. L. Jones and A. M. Donald, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 2673–2682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thiberge, A. Nechushtan, D. Sprinzak, O. Gileadi, V. Behar, O. Zik, Y. Chowers, S. Michaeli, J. Schlessinger and E. Moses, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 3346–3351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. El Gabaly, M. Grass, A. H. McDaniel, R. L. Farrow, M. A. Linne, Z. Hussain, H. Bluhm, Z. Liu and K. F. McCarty, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12138–12145 RSC .
A. Kolmakov, D. A. Dikin, L. J. Cote, J. X. Huang, M. K. Abyaneh, M. Amati, L. Gregoratti, S. Gunther and M. Kiskinova, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 651–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015 10.1039/C5EE01434D .
Z. Huang, Y. Lin, X. Xiang, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba, K. J. McDonald, K. S. Hagen, K.-S. Choi, B. S. Brunschwig, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill, D. Wang and T. Lian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8923 Search PubMed .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. Ye, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304–6312 Search PubMed .
J. B. Baxter and G. W. Guglietta, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 4342–4368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. U. Jepsen, D. G. Cooke and M. Koch, Laser Photonics Rev., 2011, 5, 124–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, J. C. Brauer, J. E. Moser, E. Thimsen and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7341–7350 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, T. J. Savenije, M. M. May, B. Dam and R. Van De Krol, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2752–2757 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Siefermann, C. D. Pemmaraju, S. Neppl, A. Shavorskiy, A. A. Cordones, J. Vura-Weis, D. S. Slaughter, F. P. Sturm, F. Weise, H. Bluhm, M. L. Strader, H. Cho, M. F. Lin, C. Bacellar, C. Khurmi, J. Guo, G. Coslovich, J. S. Robinson, R. A. Kaindl, R. W. Schoenlein, A. Belkacem, D. M. Neumark, S. R. Leone, D. Nordlund, H. Ogasawara, O. Krupin, J. J. Turner, W. F. Schlotter, M. R. Holmes, M. Messerschmidt, M. P. Minitti, S. Gul, J. Z. Zhang, N. Huse, D. Prendergast and O. Gessner, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2753–2759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Katz, X. Zhang, K. Attenkofer, K. W. Chapman, C. Frandsen, P. Zarzycki, K. M. Rosso, R. W. Falcone, G. A. Waychunas and B. Gilbert, Science, 2012, 337, 1200–1203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ping, D. Rocca and G. Galli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2437–2469 RSC .
A. N. Andriotis and M. Menon, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 125708 CrossRef .
M. D. Bhatt and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10632–10659 RSC .
A. B. Muñoz-Garcia and M. Pavone, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12238–12246 RSC .
I. E. Castelli, D. D. Landis, K. S. Thygesen, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff, T. F. Jaramillo and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9034 Search PubMed .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605 Search PubMed .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922–9935 Search PubMed .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984 Search PubMed .
A. Berger and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, E3328–E3340 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lewerenz, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 3–20 CrossRef .
K. T. Fountaine and H. A. Atwater, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1453–A1461 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Berger, R. A. Segalman and J. Newman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1468–1476 Search PubMed .
J. Hafner, C. Wolverton and G. Ceder, MRS Bull., 2006, 31, 659–668 CrossRef .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2401–2422 RSC .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Skulason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Bjorketun, S. Gudmundsdottir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bajdich, M. García-Mota, A. Vojvodic, J. K. Norskov and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13521–13530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Skúlason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3241–3250 RSC .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901–9904 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laio and M. Parrinello, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 12562–12566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Wood, E. Schwegler, W. I. Choi and T. Ogitsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oviedo, R. Sánchez-de-Armas, M. Á. S. Miguel and J. F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17737–17740 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Muñoz-García and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13600–13603 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shen, Y. A. Small, J. Wang, P. B. Allen, M. V. Fernández-Serra, M. S. Hybertsen and J. T. Muckerman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13695–13704 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, C. Xu, Z. Ren, W. Yang, Z. Ma, D. Dai, H. Fan, T. K. Minton and X. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13366–13373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Q. Zhang, L. Chen, B. Han, G. Ni, J. Wu, D. Garg and H. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21405–21410 CrossRef CAS .
U. Aschauer, Y. He, H. Cheng, S. C. Li, U. Diebold and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1278–1284 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Chen, C. L. Sun and M. Hayashi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18228–18232 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Kimmel, M. Baer, N. G. Petrik, J. Vandevondele, R. Rousseau and C. J. Mundy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 778–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, T. A. Pham, G. Galli and E. Schwegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8944–8951 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wan, L. Spanu, G. A. Galli and F. Gygi, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2013, 9, 4124–4130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Rehr and R. C. Albers, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2000, 72, 621–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Rehr, J. J. Kas, F. D. Vila, M. P. Prange and K. Jorissen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 5503–5513 RSC .
J.-J. Velasco-Velez, C. H. Wu, T. A. Pascal, L. F. Wan, J. Guo, D. Prendergast and M. Salmeron, Science, 2014, 346, 831–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Prendergast and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-M. Liu, C. Zhang, G. Thornton and A. Michaelides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 161415(R) CrossRef .
B. C. Wood, E. Schwegler, W. I. Choi and T. Ogitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15774–15783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tocci and A. Michaelides, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 474–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kharche, M. S. Hybertsen and J. T. Muckerman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12057–12066 RSC .
J. Wang, L. S. Pedroza, A. Poissier and M. V. Fernández-Serra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14382–14389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sumita, C. Hu and Y. Tateyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18529–18537 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng and A. Selloni, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11518–11525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, E. Schwegler and Y. Kanai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8508–8513 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Wood, T. Ogitsu and E. Schwegler, J. Photonics Energy, 2011, 1, 016002 CrossRef .
C. Sun, L.-M. Liu, A. Selloni, G. Q. (Max) Lu and S. C. Smith, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10319 RSC .
J. Cheng, J. Vandevondele and M. Sprik, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5437–5444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng and M. Sprik, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 244108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, M. Sulpizi, J. Vandevondele and M. Sprik, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 636–640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng and M. Sprik, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 880–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tomasi, B. Mennucci and R. Cammi, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2999–3093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mathew, R. Sundararaman, K. Letchworth-Weaver, T. A. Arias and R. G. Hennig, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 084106 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Andreussi, I. Dabo and N. Marzari, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 064102 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Dupont, O. Andreussi and N. Marzari, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 214110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Otani and O. Sugino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 115407 CrossRef .
N. Bonnet, T. Morishita, O. Sugino and M. Otani, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 266101 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Letchworth-Weaver and T. A. Arias, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075140 CrossRef .
S. A. Petrosyan, A. A. Rigos and T. A. Arias, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15436–15444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gunceler, K. Letchworth-Weaver, R. Sundararaman, K. A. Schwarz and T. A. Arias, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2013, 21, 074005 CrossRef .
O. Andreussi and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 245101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng and M. Sprik, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 081406(R) CrossRef .
J. Cheng and M. Sprik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11245–11267 RSC .
J. Cheng, X. Liu, J. A. Kattirtzi, J. VandeVondele and M. Sprik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 12242–12246 CrossRef .
U. Benedikt, W. B. Schneider and A. A. Auer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2712–2724 RSC .
P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 013701 CrossRef .
M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17403–17413 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marsman, J. Paier, A. Stroppa and G. Kresse, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 064201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Anisimov, F. Aryasetiawan and A. I. Liechtenstein, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 767–808 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kulik, M. Cococcioni, D. A. Scherlis and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 103001 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Mosey and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 155123 CrossRef .
N. J. Mosey, P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 014103 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Skone, M. Govoni and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 195112 CrossRef .
V. Stevanovic, S. Lany, D. S. Ginley, W. Tumas and A. Zunger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3706–3714 RSC .
R. J. Bartlett and M. Musiał, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2007, 79, 291–352 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Bartlett and J. F. Stanton, in Rev. Comput. Chem., ed. K. B. Lipkowitz and D. B. Boyd, VCH Publishers, New York,  1994, vol. 5, pp. 65–169 Search PubMed .
W. M. C. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. J. Needs and G. Rajagopal, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2001, 73, 33–83 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adamo and D. Jacquemin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 845–856 RSC .
M. A. L. Marques and E. K. U. Gross, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 427–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Botti, A. Schindlmayr, R. Del Sole and L. Reining, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2007, 70, 357–407 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and A. Selloni, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424002 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Akimov, A. J. Neukirch and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4496–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Onida, L. Reining and A. Rubio, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 601–659 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 5390–5413 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rohlfing and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 4927–4944 CrossRef CAS .
H.-V. Nguyen, T. A. Pham, D. Rocca and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 081101 CrossRef .
T. A. Pham, H.-V. Nguyen, D. Rocca and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 155148 CrossRef .
M. Govoni and G. Galli, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015 DOI:10.1021/ct500958p .
D. Opalka, T. A. Pham, M. Sprik and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 141, 034501 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. Pham, D. Lee, E. Schwegler and G. Galli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17071–17077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Pham, C. Zhang, E. Schwegler and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 060202 CrossRef .
N. Kharche, J. T. Muckerman and M. S. Hybertsen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 176802 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, T. A. Pham, F. Gygi and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 181102 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Bartlett, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1981, 32, 359–401 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. I. Purvis and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 76, 1910–1918 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Shavitt, in Methods of Electronic Structure Theory, ed. H. F. I. Schaefer, Plenum Press, New York,  1977, vol. 3, pp. 189–275 Search PubMed .
B. O. Roos, P. R. Taylor and P. E. M. Siegbahn, Chem. Phys., 1980, 48, 157–173 CrossRef CAS .
K. Andemson, P. Malmqvist, B. Roos, A. J. Sadlej and K. Wolinskit, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 5483–5488 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, M. A. Ratner and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21706–21717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. A. Ratner and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29196–29208 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang and E. A. Carter, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2008, 59, 261–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20795–20805 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Craig, W. R. Duncan and O. V. Prezhdo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 163001 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Isborn and X. Li, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 2415–2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tapavicza, I. Tavernelli and U. Rothlisberger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 023001 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Akimov, J. T. Muckerman and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8682–8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. T. van Duin, S. Dasgupta, F. Lorant and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 9396–9409 CrossRef CAS .
D. Raymand, A. C. T. Van Duin, W. A. Goddard, K. Hermansson and D. Spångberg, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8573–8579 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raju, S. Y. Kim, A. C. T. Van Duin and K. A. Fichthorn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10558–10572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Kim, N. Kumar, P. Persson, J. Sofo, A. C. T. Van Duin and J. D. Kubicki, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7838–7846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kerisit and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 124706 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Wallace and K. P. McKenna, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400078 CrossRef .
E. Santos, A. Lundin, K. Pötting, P. Quaino and W. Schmickler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235436 CrossRef .
W. I. Choi, B. C. Wood, E. Schwegler and T. Ogitsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21772–21777 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Wood, T. Ogitsu and E. Schwegler, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 064705 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wolverton and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 606–609 CrossRef CAS .
S. Curtarolo, G. L. W. Hart, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo, S. Sanvito and O. Levy, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 191–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ferhat and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 075213 CrossRef .
J. C. Thomas, J. M. Millunchick, N. A. Modine and A. Van Der Ven, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 125315 CrossRef .
R. Osorio, J. E. Bernard, S. Froyen and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 11173 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. R. Ludwig, T. Gruhn, C. Felser and J. Windeln, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 174112 CrossRef .
Z. B. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .

          H. N. Dinh and Z. B. Chen, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting Standards, Experimental Methods, and Protocols, Springer, New York,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. Kranz, Analyst, 2014, 139, 336–352 RSC .
J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shi, L. F. Garfias-Mesias and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2011–2016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Wang, H. Wang, X. Xie, S.-L. Zhang, R. Liu and Z.-J. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 3626–3633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, Z. Ding and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 3634–3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Treutler and G. Wittstock, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2923–2932 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guillaume, J. Evju, T. L. Knutson and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, B262–B265 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Lee, F. Guillaume, T. L. Knutson and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, B111–B115 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1365–1373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Sonntag, E. A. Pozzi, N. Jiang, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3125–3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
Global energy demands are currently around 14 TW, and are forecasted to double by 2050. To date, this energy has been derived from non-renewable fossil fuels, but environmental issues such as climate change have created an urgent need to transition to carbon-free energy sources. Abundant and renewable solar energy is one of the most promising means of meeting society's energy demands in a sustainable manner, but the intermittent nature of sunlight creates significant challenges to achieving high market penetration with conventional photovoltaic technology alone. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting can convert sunlight into storable chemical energy in the form of hydrogen gas (H2), but commercialization of this technology has been hindered by the stability, efficiency, and cost of photoelectrodes. In order to accelerate the development of photoelectrode materials, which are often highly heterogeneous in nature and inherently involve phenomena at multiple time scales, a deeper understanding of PEC processes at small length scales and fast time scales is essential. This article provides a review of a combination of in situ experimental techniques and modeling tools that are well-suited for such studies.


Scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) (conventional)	Optical	Locally generated photocurrent; used to determine local quantum efficiency, minority carrier diffusion lengths, electric field distributions, and more	1–25 μm	Spatial resolution set by Abbe diffraction limit; typically limited to monochromatic light; avoiding high injection conditions and bubble formation


Near field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM)-based SPCM	Optical/physical	Similar capabilities to SPCM, but with higher spatial resolution.	10's nm–1 μm	Spatial resolution set by size of NSOM tip aperture; tip heating; interference; difficult on rough surfaces


Optical spectroscopies (Raman, UV-vis, IR, SFG)	Optical	Chemical, physical, and optical properties of photoelectrode surface	1–25 μm	Spatial resolution set by Abbe diffraction limit; long acquisition times; bubble formation


Ultrafast spectroscopies e.g. transient absorption spectroscopy (TA)	Optical	Lifetimes of electronic and vibrational states, interfacial charge transfer rates, and transient photoconductivity (THz)	sub ps–ns, 100 μm	Long acquisition times; avoiding high injection conditions; different detection systems for <ns, ns–μs, and μs–s


Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM)	Physical/electrochemical (non-contact)	Local catalytic activity and kinetic rate constants; sensitive to local opto-electronic properties in PEC systems; advanced forms of SECM for pH-sensing, corrosion analysis, and more	10's nm–100 μm	Resolution set by tip dimensions and tip–substrate distance; difficult with rough surfaces; bubble formation; challenges with light integration


Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy (E-STM)	Physical/electronic	Atomically resolved physical and electronic structure; video rate imaging possible	Å–nm (atomic resolution possible)	Difficult on rough surfaces; limited scan area size; poorly defined tip geometries, limited electrochemical window for STM tips


Atomic force microscopy (AFM)	Physical/electronic	Surface morphology, conductivity, capacitance, surface potentials, double layer forces, hydration layer structure	Å–5 nm (atomic resolution possible)	Difficult on rough surfaces; limited scan area size; limited electrochemical window for conductive tips

Density functional theory (DFT) and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD)	Ab initio	Electronic/optical/chemical/mechanical properties, including surface and interface; can provide spectroscopic information (XPS, XAS/XES, Raman/IR); can estimate reaction and diffusion barriers with moderate accuracy; additional improvements possible with corrected exchange–correlation functionals (e.g., hybrid, van der Waals, DFT+U).	∼100 ps and a few nm (a few thousand atoms)	Limited to relatively small length/time scales; no description of electronic/optical excitations; potential accuracy issues, especially for strongly correlated systems and for prediction of electronic levels; results depend on choice of exchange–correlation functional


Time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) and nonadiabatic dynamics	Ab initio	Dynamics of photoexcited electrons; can provide information directly comparable to pump/probe ultrafast measurements.	∼100 fs and a few nm (a few thousand atoms)	Limitations coming from approximations are not always systematic or well understood; limited to very short time scales


GW/Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE)	Ab initio	Accurate computation of electron excitation (optical) spectra, band gaps, and absolute band edges; suitable for quantitative comparison with experiments (e.g., photoemission).	Hundreds of atoms	Computationally expensive; no dynamical/temporal information


Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC)	Ab initio	Very accurate estimates of adsorption energies, reaction barriers, and band gaps; (can be used to augment and benchmark DFT)	Hundreds of atoms	Computationally expensive; extremely challenging to study dynamics


Classical molecular dynamics and reactive force-field methods	Parameterized	Dynamics can be studied at much larger length and time scales than those accessible to DFT; useful for simulating transport and surface diffusion, collective behaviors, and electrolyte dynamics	≈1 ns, millions of atoms	Parameterization and accuracy validation are difficult, particularly for interfaces; barriers and transition states are often inaccurate


Cluster expansion	Ab initio (based on model Hamiltonian)	Thermodynamic stability of bulk and surface alloys, as well as adsorbate configurations; generally based on DFT framework; useful for studying composition of multi-element electrodes	Scalable to 103–106 atoms, depending on cluster size	Assumes model in which atoms are fixed at defined lattice positions; may require many interaction terms; no dynamical/temporal information


Kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC)	Parameterized (based on model Hamiltonian)	Stochastic method to treat mass transport and reaction kinetics across broad length and time scales; can be used to examine surface diffusion- or reaction-limited processes based on DFT-derived barriers	Arbitrarily scalable	Requires prior knowledge of relevant rate-limiting mechanisms and mapping onto lattice model; assumes fixed, well-defined barriers for each discrete reaction or transport step

 	Fig. 1  Schematics of (a) conventional and (b) NSOM-based SPCM set-ups for in situ scanning photocurrent analysis of photoelectrodes for water splitting. Schematics not to scale. Schematics illustrate H2 evolving from a photocathode surface, but identical illustrations could be drawn for photoanodes evolving O2. The light green regions in the figure represent the photon absorption/charge carrier generation volume in the semiconducting photoelectrode.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic side-views of several SECM set-up arrangements that can be used for investigating photoelectrode surfaces. Schematics not to scale. Schematics illustrate H2 evolving from a photocathode surface, but identical illustrations could be drawn for photoanodes evolving O2. The light green regions in the figure represent the photon absorption/charge carrier generation volume in the semiconducting photoelectrode.	 

 	Fig. 3  Strategies for generating localized surface plasmon resonance on photoelectrode surfaces that could be used for SERS characterization: (a) Au nanoparticles embedded in a photoelectrode (after ref. 135); (b) photoelectrode material deposited over Au nanopillars in an “overlayer SERS” configuration (after ref. 136); (c) ultra-thin SiO2 or Al2O3 coated Au nanoparticles deposited over a photoelectrode (after ref. 144); (d) PEC material deposited over Ag nanocubes coated with ultra-thin Al2O3 insulator (after ref. 143).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of a generic ultrafast pump–probe spectroscopy experiment. (b) Photophysical processes and (c) their approximate time scales for different steps in PEC water splitting for an example system comprising TiO2 nanoparticles decorated with Pt and IrO2 catalytic nanoparticles. Steps include instantaneous photo excitation, (1) carrier cooling and trapping, (2) interphase electron transfer from TiO2 to Pt, (3) geminate recombination, (4) hydrogen evolution reaction on Pt catalyst, (5) O2 evolution on TiO2, (6) O2 evolution on Pt or IrO2, and (7) prospective O2 evolution for next-generation OER catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of various processes and stages contributing to the complete PEC water splitting reaction (green arrow), along with possible computational methods for treating the associated physical or chemical phenomena at different length and time scales. The vertical position on the graph corresponds to the relative length scale of the process, whereas the position of the wedge where it intersects with the green arrow indicates its relative time scale.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
