Oligomeric chain extender-derived anion conducting membrane materials with poly( p -phenylene)-based architecture for fuel cells and water electrolyze ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA10868A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA10868A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9693-9706Oligomeric chain extender-derived anion conducting membrane materials with poly(p-phenylene)-based architecture for fuel cells and water electrolyzers†

        
          
            Min Suc 
            Cha‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ji Eun 
            Park‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Sungjun 
            Kim‡
cd, 
      
        
          
            Sang-Hun 
            Shin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seok Hwan 
            Yang
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            Seung Jae 
            Lee
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            Tae-Ho 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Duk Man 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Soonyong 
            So
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kang Min 
            Oh
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Yung-Eun 
            Sung
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Yong-Hun 
            Cho
          
        
      *cg and 

        
          
            Jang Yong 
            Lee
          
        
      *a
aEnergy Materials Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ljylee@krict.re.kr
bDepartment of Energy and Materials Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul 04620, Republic of Korea
cCenter for Nanoparticle Research, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
dSchool of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea
fDepartment of Advanced Material Engineering, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, 28644, Republic of Korea
gDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Kangwon National University, Samcheok, Gangwon-do 25913, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yhun00@kangwon.ac.kr
Received 
      22nd December 2021
    , Accepted 21st March 2022First published on 23rd March 2022AbstractHerein, we report a series of oligomeric chain extender-derived AEMs (QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA) with increased molecular weights. The QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes showed excellent polymer main-chain stability as well as outstanding hydroxide conductivity, 129 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, which is 1.6 times higher than that of FAA-3, moreover, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA also exhibited remarkable thermally stable rheological properties originating from the main chain structure. Using the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane, we demonstrated that a high performance low platinum group metal (PGM)-loaded AEMFC showed a high specific power of 4.9 W mgPGM−1, which is the highest value among those reported for the state-of-the-art AEMFCs with PGM-based electrodes. In addition, an AEMWE with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane showed a high performance of 4.0 A cm−2 at 1.9 V under 90 °C and durable performance with a low degradation rate of 1.2 mV h−1 for 100 h despite the use of the NiFe catalyst under 80 °C.
Introduction
As the severity of global climate change increases, renewable power generation is growing rapidly, replacing current fossil fuel-based energy with eco-friendly energy worldwide. However, the fluctuating nature of these renewable power sources, such as solar and wind, causes significant technical and economic problems when integrated on a large scale. To address this issue, there is growing interest in the renewable hydrogen cycle, which links renewable energy with hydrogen as a clean energy carrier.1 Water electrolyzers and fuel cells, which generate and utilize hydrogen through a carbon-neutral electrochemical process, play a crucial role in the renewable hydrogen cycle with net-zero carbon emissions.2 Although proton exchange membrane (PEM)-based systems are considered the most promising and mature technology because of their high performance and efficiency,3 their commercial use has stagnated by their high-cost of core materials. In particular, the slow kinetics of oxygen reduction and evolution reactions under acidic environments leads to use of expensive platinum group metal (PGM) catalysts like Pt and IrO2.4,5
Anion exchange membrane (AEM)-based fuel cells (AEMFCs) and electrolyzers (AEMWEs) have attracted attention as a low-cost alternative to the conventional PEM-based systems because of their potential to use less expensive catalytic materials for oxygen-related reactions.6,7 In recent years, intensive research has resulted in the application of AEM materials to membrane-integrated anion-exchange systems, including AEMFCs and AEMWEs, that are capable of operating in alkaline media. To realize high-performance AEM-based energy conversion systems, it is essential to develop AEMs with high ionic conductivity and durability under alkaline and oxidative operating conditions.8,9 However, there are no commercial AEMs to satisfy the above-mentioned requirements. Thus, the development of chemically and mechanically superior AEMs with excellent ionic conductivity remains a major task for the commercial use of AEM-based electrochemical systems.10
Chemical degradation of anion conducting groups via various irreversible reactions, such as Hoffman elimination or nucleophilic substitution by the attack of hydroxyl anions, had been considered as the major pathway for the degradation of AEMs.11 However, recent studies have reported that the backbone structure also has a significant influence on the chemical stability of AEMs.12 In particular, an ether bond adjacent to a benzene ring with a hydrophilic anion conducting group has been identified as the major cause of chemical degradation.13 Therefore, chemically stable backbone structures as well as stable functional groups must be considered in the design of AEM materials. Another critical consideration in the design of AEM materials is their mechanical stability, because a large amount of external force is exerted on the internal membrane during the fabrication of single cells or cell stacks. Moreover, since AEMs are laid under fickle conditions, they continuously experience physical stress during cell operation, which leads to mechanical failure, such as fracture, shrinking, and pinholes in the AEM.
Recently, to improve the chemical and mechanical stability of a membrane, AEM materials with ether-free or partially ether-free poly(phenylene)-based backbones have attracted attention as promising candidates for durable AEMs.14,15 In particular, using poly(p-phenylene)-based multi-block structured ionomers with partially ether-free backbones has been reported as one of the tactical approaches that could compensate for the aforementioned issues associated with AEMs.16 Multi-block-type ion-conducting polymers based on poly(p-phenylene) exhibit a well-developed morphology, which leads to excellent ion-conducting properties. Moreover, their chemical stability can be efficiently increased by eliminating ether bonds in the hydrophilic block where the ion-conducting groups are located. Furthermore, a flexible hydrophobic block with ether bonds prevents the ionomers from becoming too brittle. As mentioned above, in view of the degradation pathways of AEMs, the synthesis of poly(p-phenylene)-based ionomers should be an efficient approach that could increase the chemical and mechanical properties simultaneously. Despite structural advantages, the relatively low molecular weights of poly(p-phenylene)-based ionomers have been regarded as the most critical limiting factor for commercial use.
In this study, we report a series of oligomeric chain extender-derived multi-block-type anion-exchange membrane materials (QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA; w = 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5) with increased molecular weight, and their outstanding AEMFC and AEMWE performances. Typically, chain extenders are widely used in the polymer industry to improve the chemical and mechanical properties of polymer materials. “Chain extenders” refer to low-molecular-weight materials that are inserted between polymer chains to increase the molecular weight or block length. In a previous study, we developed an effective synthetic method to increase the molecular weights of sulfonated poly(p-phenylene)-based multi-block copolymers by introducing a small amount of an oligomeric chain extender with four reaction sites,17,18 which resulted in outstanding ion conductivity, chemical stability, and improved mechanical strength. The weight ratio and molecular weight of the oligomeric chain extender were adjusted to avoid involuntary cross-linking reactions and improve the molecular weight efficiently. In addition, an oligomeric chain extender with identical repeating units to a hydrophobic block was used to inhibit the change in morphology. We investigated the effect of molecular weight on the oxidative stability of the polymer backbone, and proposed potential methods to enhance the chemical stability of anion conducting groups by providing data of a synthesized additional model polymer. Furthermore, the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA-based AEMFC with a low noble metal loading of 0.3 mgPGM cm−2 showed the highest specific power among the state-of-the-art AEMFCs with noble metal catalysts.
Results and discussion
Polymer synthesis
The procedure for the synthesis of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA is shown in Scheme 1. The above hydrophobic oligomer, which was synthesized by the Williamson ether synthesis reaction between 4,4′-dihydroxybenzophenone (4,4′-DHBP) and 4,4′-difluorodiphenyl sulfone (4,4′-DFDPS), was prepared because of its outstanding chemical stability and mechanical properties, which were investigated in our previous studies.16 Considering the effect of the molecular weight of the hydrophobic block on morphology, the number-average molecular weight of the OH-ended hydrophobic oligomer was targeted at 6 kDa.19 The chemical structure and molecular weight of the synthesized OH-terminated hydrophobic oligomer (OH-terminated PSK) were identified by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. A linear hydrophobic oligomer (2Cl-terminated PSK) and an oligomeric chain extender (4Cl-terminated PSK) with two and four reaction sites, respectively, were prepared by aromatic nucleophilic substitution reactions between identical OH-terminated PSK and an end-capper (4-chloro-4′-fluorobenzophenone, CFBP, or 4-fluoro-2′,5′-dichlorobenzophenone, FDCBP) for polymerization. The hydrophobic oligomer and oligomeric chain extender were characterized by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. S1†). The polymer backbones, that is, the poly(p-phenylene)-based multi-block copolymers with the oligomeric chain extender, were prepared by a Ni(0)-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction between 2,5-dichloro-4′-methylbenzophenone (DCMBP) and the hydrophobic oligomers (2Cl-terminated PSK and 4Cl-terminated PSK) to give PP-b-PSK-w, where w is the weight ratio between DCMBP and the Cl-terminated oligomer (w = 1.5, 2.5, or 3.5). Considering the trade-off between the molecular weight and proton conductivity, the weight content ratio between 2Cl-terminated PSK and 4Cl-terminated PSK was set at a value of 9:1, as in a previous study. Linear polymer backbones (LPP-b-PSK-w; w = 2.5, 3.5) were also synthesized to compare the effects of molecular weight on ionomer properties. After the bromination reaction, the proton peak corresponding to CH2Br appeared at 4.2 ppm, indicating the successful synthesis of BrPP-b-PSK-w (bromination degree 75%). The molecular weight of the brominated polymer backbone was evaluated using gel permeation chromatography (GPC). As shown in Table S1,† BrPP-b-PSK-ws with the oligomeric chain extender had higher molecular weights than BrLPP-b-PSK-ws. For instance, BrPP-b-PSK-2.5 showed a weight-average molecular weight (Mw) of over 140 kDa, much higher than that of BrLPP-b-PSK-2.5, while BrPP-b-PSK-3.5 showed 2.8 times higher Mw than that of BrLPP-b-PSK-3.5. Three oligomeric chain extender-derived AEM materials (QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA) and two linear AEM materials without an oligomeric chain extender (QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA) with different ion-exchange capacities (IECs) were obtained via the Menshutkin reaction between the brominated backbones (BrPP-b-PSK-w or BrLPP-b-PSK-w) and trimethylamine. The chemical structures of PP-b-PPK-w, BrPP-b-PSK-w, and QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA were characterized using 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. S2†).
 Scheme 1  Synthetic procedure for QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA. The reaction agent, solvent and conditions for each step (from (i) to (vi)) to synthesize QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA are as follows: (i) K2CO3, DMAc 165 °C for 16 h, (ii) K2CO3, DMAc, 130 °C for 16 h, (iii) NiBr2, TPP, zinc, DMAc, 80 °C for 16 h, (iv) NBS, TCE, 90 °C for 24 h, (v) 45 wt% TMA solution, 25 °C for 24 h, and (vi) immersed in 1 M KOH at room temperature for 24 h. 
Water uptake and ionic conductivity
The water molecules that are absorbed in AEMs play an important role in the development of water channels for the transport of anions, but excessive water absorption significantly reduces the chemical, physical, and mechanical properties of AEMs. Thus, an appropriate degree of water uptake (WU) is required to facilitate ion conduction and maintain adequate physical and mechanical properties for use of the AEMs in membrane-based electrochemical applications. As shown in Fig. 1a, the WU values of the synthesized membranes increased with an increase in temperature. In particular, the QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes showed higher levels of WU (55–67%) than those (27–55%) of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes. Moreover, compared to QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMAs, QPP-b-PSK-w-TMAs exhibited lower levels of WU over the entire temperature range, despite having identical IEC values. The superior dimensional stability and lower water absorption property of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes can be attributed to their higher molecular weights and rigid polymer main chain. Note that the superior water resistance of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA compared to QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA can lead to superior chemical and mechanical stability by preventing hydrolysis and deformation of the membrane in fuel cell and water electrolysis applications. An anisotropic dimensional change, in which the amount of through-plane swelling was greater than that of in-plane swelling, was observed in all of the synthesized membranes, a difference that could stem from alignment of the hydrophilic block in the polymer matrix in the through-plane direction.16 Note that the proportion of in-plane swelling in the total volume change was higher in QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA than in QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA. Moreover, the proportion of in-plane swelling was higher at a higher temperature (60 °C) than at room temperature.
 Fig. 1  (a) Dimensional changes and (b) OH– conductivity of the synthesized membranes and the FAA-3 membrane. 
Typically, dimensional changes in the membrane in the in-plane direction are more related to the durability and performance of a single cell than those in the through-plane direction because a physical variation in the in-plane direction could lead to delamination of the catalyst layer in the membrane-electrode assembly (MEA), as well as to deformation and rupture of the membrane. Moreover, considering that the typical operating temperature of AEMFCs and AEMWEs is over 60 °C, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes could be more suitable solid electrolytes than the QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes. The water absorption properties are closely related to the anion conductivities of the membrane. The anion conductivities of the synthesized membranes were determined under fully hydrated conditions.
The conductivities of the anions (OH− and Cl−) are plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 1b and S3,† respectively. As shown in Fig. 1b, with the exception of the QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA membrane, which had the lowest IEC value, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes exhibited better OH− conductivity than the commercial membrane (FAA-3) over the entire temperature range. In particular, the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane showed outstanding OH− conductivities, as high as 59 and 105 mS cm−1 at room temperature and 60 °C, respectively. Moreover, it showed excellent OH− conductivity, 129 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, a value 1.6 times higher value than that of FAA-3. Further, QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA showed different rates of increase in anion conductivity with increasing temperature. Although both QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA had almost identical IEC values and at room temperature showed almost identical OH− conductivities, the difference in conductivity increased with an increase in temperature, which must result from the dilution effect of the membranes. Thus, although QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA and QLPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA have comparable IECs, the number of ion-conducting groups per unit volume of QLPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA is lower than that of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA under hydrated conditions because of the higher WU and greater dimensional variation, which should have an effect on the increasing difference in conductivity with increasing temperature.
QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA showed superior anion conducting properties to those of FAA-3 despite its having an almost identical IEC, which must stem from morphological differences.20–22 The more efficient phase-separated morphology of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA might be implied by comparison of activation energies on the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3 membranes. Considering that the activation energy is the energy barrier for anion transport on membranes, the difference of activation energy could be interpreted as indirect evidence of differences in morphology among AEMs with identical IEC values. Activation energies of OH− and Cl− anions, calculated using the Arrhenius-type equation, on the membranes are summarized in Table S2.†23 The activation energy of the OH− anion on the FAA-3 membrane was higher than that on the QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA membrane, and both have identical IEC values, which could imply that QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA is composed of more effective and well-connected conducting channels than FAA-3. Moreover, the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane showed a much smaller activation energy of 10.16 kJ mol−1 than the FAA-3 membrane, which would stem from the higher IEC value as well as superior ionic channel network. Activation energies of the Cl− anion on the membranes showed an analogous tendency. Typically, activation energies of the OH− anion were lower than those of the Cl− anion due to higher mobility on all of the membranes. Unlike OH− conductivity, as shown in Fig. S3,† Cl− conductivity could not be dominantly dependent on the water channel network at low temperatures owing to a low mobility related to its bulky ion size and to the shrunken ionic channels, resulting in a little difference of Cl− conductivity at low temperature. However, with an increase in temperature, the ionic channels become expanded enough for the bulky chlorine anions to transfer. The QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA membrane showed lower activation energy for Cl− than the FAA-3 membrane, which was analogous to the activation energies of the OH− anion. The effective and well-connected ionic channels of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes could be the cause of the outstanding anion conductivity of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes. Even more than the molecular weight, the physical and electrochemical studies confirm that QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA is a more feasible membrane material for commercial use in AEMFCs and AEMWEs than QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3. The properties of the synthesized membrane materials and FAA-3 are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Properties of the AEMs synthesized in this study and FAA-3




Sample

 (meq. g−1)

 (meq. g−1)
Water uptake (%)
Dimensional change (%)
OH− conductivity (mS cm−1)


25 °C
60 °C
80 °C
25 °C
60 °C
25 °C
60 °C


Δl
Δt
ΔV
Δl
Δt
ΔV




QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA
1.8
1.7
27 ± 0.2
55 ± 0.4
74 ± 0.7
3
8
16
4
21
31
29 ± 0.1
60 ± 0.2


QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA
2.1
2.0
39 ± 0.5
67 ± 0.8
84 ± 1.2
4
15
25
5
23
36
42 ± 0.1
88 ± 0.3


QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA
2.4
2.3
55 ± 0.7
88 ± 1.1
106 ± 1.5
10
12
36
11
27
57
59 ± 0.1
105 ± 0.3


QLPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA
2.1
2.0
55 ± 0.7
72 ± 1.1
101 ± 1.4
7
16
33
10
24
51
42 ± 0.2
83 ± 0.4


QLPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA
2.3
2.3
67 ± 1.0
95 ± 1.5
130 ± 2.0
14
18
53
21
30
90
60 ± 0.2
97 ± 0.4


FAA-3
2.0
1.9
29 ± 0.5
59 ± 0.7
78 ± 1.1
6
7
20
12
14
43
32 ± 0.1
75 ± 0.3




Rheological and thermal properties
The rheological and thermal properties of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes were evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA). In the experiments, all of the membranes were used in the Cl− form to avoid interference from carbonation. In the DMA test, the storage modulus (E) and loss modulus (E′) were measured as functions of temperature (Fig. S4†). The QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes displayed high values of E′, >4 GPa up to over 150 °C, and a glass transition temperature (Tg) as high as 232 °C, which would facilitate membrane handling during the cell or stack fabrication process. In the thermal stability study, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) combined with TGA was used to investigate the volatile gas released during the solid mass reduction. As shown in Fig. S5,† the TGA curves of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3 showed a slight loss of weight up to 100 °C, resulting from residual water or solvent in the membrane, which corresponded to an increase in E up to 100 °C in the DMA curves. As the temperature increased to 500 °C, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes exhibited two obvious weight loss steps, which corresponded to the decomposition of the ammonium group at around 220 °C and the main-chain scission starting at 330 °C. The weight loss steps were observed at a slightly lower temperature with increasing IEC; however, there were no significant differences in the decomposition temperature.
Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)
Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) was employed to identify the morphology related to nanoscale phase separation between hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties in the synthetic membranes. As displayed in Fig. 2, the random-structured FAA-3 membrane based on poly(arylene ether) with directly attached anion conducting groups did not show clear scattering peaks in the SAXS profile. However, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes showed a distinct ionomer peak at 0.24–0.25 Å−1 that was equivalent to d-spacing values of 2.5–2.6 nm. The SAXS profiles exhibited the distinct phase-separated morphology of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes, which corresponded to the above Cl− conductivity results. The outstanding anion conductivity of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes can be attributed to their well-developed morphological properties. Typically, hydrophilic domains grow larger as the IEC value increases, which is manifested as an increase in the d-spacing value in X-ray scattering. However, despite the difference in IEC values, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes showed almost identical qmax values, which stemmed from the low-humidity experimental conditions. In this study, SAXS experiments were performed under controlled humidity conditions as low as a relative humidity (R.H.) of 20% to investigate the intrinsic morphological properties. Unlike under fully hydrated conditions, because the hydrophilic domains were not sufficiently expanded under low-humidity conditions, the three QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes seemed to show almost identical d-spacing values. However, the intensity of the ionomer peak increased with an increase in the IEC degree. Considering that the scattering intensity in the SAXS profile is caused by the difference in electron density between the phases, the degree of phase separation in the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membrane improved with increasing IEC values. The difference in anion conductivity between QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA and FAA-3 with almost identical IECs could be demonstrated by a morphology study.
 Fig. 2  SAXS profiles of tested AEMs (from top to bottom: QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA, and FAA-3). 
Alkaline stability test
Chemical stability is an essential requirement for long-term operation because AEM-based electrochemical devices operate under alkaline conditions. A well-known two degradation pathway which involves decomposition of ionic groups and polymer main-chain scission affects the chemical degradation of AEMs, the latter is considered to be a much more serious cause of obstructing the commercial use of AEMs because backbone degradation, which leads to a decrease in molecular weight, could directly give rise to a decrease in durability. Alkaline stability via the ex situ accelerated test was evaluated by immersing the membranes in 1 M KOH solution at 80 °C for 500 h. The comparison of the alkaline stability of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes and the FAA-3 membrane was performed by investigating the OH− conductivity, IEC, and mechanical properties of membranes as a function of exposure time in the alkaline solution. As can be seen in Fig. 3a and S6,† FAA-3 showed a rapid decrease in IEC and conductivity, with hydroxide ion conductivity falling to half the initial level after 100 h, moreover, we could not continue the test after 300 h because the FAA membrane was broken into pieces by physical degradation.
 Fig. 3  Alkaline stability test investigated by immersing the synthesized membrane in 1 M KOH solution at 80 °C for 500 h. (a) Residual conductivity of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3. (b) Tensile strength of the synthetic membranes as a function of alkaline exposure time. 
The rapid decrease in conductivity and the deformation of the membrane implied that both of the above degradation pathways had an effect on the degradation of FAA-3. Although the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes did not perfectly retain their initial conductivity and IEC value during the test, all of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes showed relatively outstanding conductivity retention, as high as over 60% of the initial performance even after 500 h. In addition, unlike the FAA-3 membrane, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes recovered their shape without cracks or ruptures even after the twisting and folding tests that followed the soaking test (Fig. S7†), which implies that there was nearly no decrease in molecular weight due to degradation of the polymer main chain in QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA. A decrease in conductivity resulting from detachment of the ammonium cation in QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA was identified by carrying out a chemical stability test of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-Im with imidazolium cations (Scheme S2 and Table S3†), which are chemically more stable than ammonium cations as anion conducting groups under the same conditions.24 As shown in Fig. S8,† the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-Im membrane showed an almost identical hydroxide conductivity, IEC value, and mechanical strength to the initial value even after the 500 h soaking test, which indicates that the decrease in anion conductivity originated from degradation of the anion conducting groups rather than scission of the polymer main chain.
To confirm polymer backbone degradation, the tensile strength of the soaked films was investigated as a function of soaking test time, using a universal testing machine (UTM). We could not use NMR spectroscopy or GPC because the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membrane films did not dissolve in any organic solvent after the test, which might stem from the cross-linking reaction between alkenes or primary alcohols generated by decomposition of benzyl ammonium cations.25,26 As shown in Fig. 3b and S9,† FAA-3 exhibited a rapid reduction in tensile strength and elongation properties from the beginning of the test, whereas QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA did not exhibit any apparent decrease in tensile strength and elongation properties even after 500 h despite the reduction in conductivity, which implied that there was little main-chain degradation in QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA, in agreement with the results of the twisting and folding tests of the membrane. The outstanding main-chain stability of these membranes presumably originates from their rigid and stable poly(p-phenylene)-based hydrophilic block structure as well as the improved molecular weight arising from the introduction of the oligomeric chain extender. As shown in Fig. S10,† even in a soaking test performed under much more severe test conditions (3 M KOH at 80 °C), both QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3 showed trends almost identical to those in the experimental results in 1 M KOH solution at 80 °C. Although QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA showed a decrease in conductivity due to the detachment of the ammonium cation, the scission of the main chain, which is a critical degradation pathway, was not observed in the soaking test. Thus, the chemical stability of AEMs based on QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA can be improved if the chemical resistance of the ion-conducting group is enhanced via various material design strategies, such as the introduction of an alkyl spacer and more stable ion-conducting groups.
AEMFC performance and durability
To demonstrate the applicability of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA AEMs in practical devices, the prepared membranes were incorporated into AEMFCs and AEMWEs and their performances were evaluated. As shown in Fig. 4a, the peak power density (PPD) of the AEMFC increased in the order QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA (0.88 W cm−2) < QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA (1.09 W cm−2) < QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA (1.42 W cm−2) because the ohmic resistance gradually decreased (from 0.114 to 0.059 Ω cm2) as the IEC of the membrane increased (from 1.8 to 2.4 meq. g−1) at 60 °C. This trend is the same regardless of the ionomer type, and the MEAs with QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membranes show much higher cell performance than those with FAA-3 membranes (Fig. S11†). Somewhat unexpectedly, the AEMFC with the QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA membrane showed a rather higher ohmic resistance (0.090 Ω cm−2) than the AEMFC with the FAA-3 membrane (0.072 Ω cm−2), in contrast to the result of conductivity measurements under ex situ conditions (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 4  (a) Single cell polarization curves and (b) Nyquist plots obtained at a current density of 0.1 A cm−2 for AEMFCs using different QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA (w = 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5) or FAA-3 AEMs with the QPC-TMA ionomer.27 The temperature of the cell was maintained at 60 °C. Flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 56 °C) and oxygen (dew point of 58 °C) were 0.8 and 1.0 L min−1 without any back-pressure, respectively. 60 wt% PtRu/C and Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode and cathode, respectively, and the catalyst loadings of both electrodes were fixed at 0.4 mgPGM cm−2. (c) Single-cell polarization curves of the AEMFCs using QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA or FAA-3 AEMs with the QPC ionomer at a higher cell temperature of 75 °C. The flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 69 °C) and oxygen or air (dew point of 73 °C) were 0.8 and 1.0 L min−1, respectively. The back pressure of both reactant gases was adjusted to 1.0 bar. 
This is because the ohmic resistance of the single cell was affected not only by the conductivity of the AEM but also by other factors such as the contact between the electrode and the AEM. However, despite the higher ohmic resistance, the AEMFC with the QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA membrane exhibited much higher performance in the low-voltage region (<0.4 V), where the water management properties of the membrane are important. In particular, the iR-corrected polarization curves of the AEMFCs (Fig. S12†) clearly show that the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membrane with well-developed water channels was more effective for water management in the system than the FAA-3 membrane. Due to its enhanced water transport properties, at a higher cell temperature of 75 °C (Fig. S13†), the AEMFC with QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA exhibited a PPD of 1.59 W cm−2 under 0.0 bar H2–O2 conditions. Moreover, it showed a PPD of more than 1 W cm−2 under H2–air (CO2 free) conditions even without any backpressure. When applying a back pressure of 1.0 bar to both electrodes (Fig. 4c), the PPD of the AEMFC with QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA further increased, to 1.94 W cm−2 under H2–O2 and 1.33 W cm−2 under H2–air (CO2 free) conditions. These rated performances are comparable to that of the best-performing polyaromatic AEMs recently reported (Table S4†).
Furthermore, we additionally prepared the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA-based AEMFC with a low total PGM loading of 0.3 mgPGM cm−2 (0.2 mgPtRu cm−2 for the anode and 0.1 mgPt cm−2 for the cathode) and evaluated its performance under similar operating conditions to other state-of-the-art AEMFCs. As a result, our low-PGM loaded AEMFC showed a PPD of 1.47 W cm−2 equivalent to a specific power of 4.9 W mgPGM−1 (Fig. 4a). To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest specific power among the state-of-the-art AEMFCs with noble metal catalysts (Fig. 4b and Table S4†).27–39 This is because the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane can minimize the mass transport-related issue in the cell by facilitating the back diffusion of water through the membrane based on the well-developed water channels due to its distinct phase separation (Fig. 2).
To demonstrate that the high-performance of the QPP-b-PSK-based AEMFC was due to the improved mass transport process in the system, additional EIS analysis was conducted for the low PGM-loaded AEMFCs with different membranes. Fig. S14† shows the EIS spectra of the low PGM-loaded AEMFCs with two different membranes (QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA and FAA-3) measured at different current densities.
As shown in Fig. S14a and b,† the high frequency semicircles related to the charge transport process within the electrodes of the two AEMFCs were similar to each other because both AEMFCs used the same catalysts and ionomer (Fig. S15†). In contrast, at a current density of 1.0 A cm−2 (Fig. S14b†), the mass transport-related low frequency arc that is noticeable in the FAA-3-based AEMFC did not appear in the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA-based one.
Moreover, the QPP-based AEMFC had a much smaller low frequency arc even at a much higher current density of 2.0 A cm−2 where the FAA-3-based one could not operate (Fig. S14c†). Furthermore, the iR-corrected polarization curve of the two AEMFCs supports (Fig. S16†) that the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA electrolyte membrane is effective in improving mass transfer process in AEMFCs by facilitating water back diffusion through the membrane. After the single cell performance evaluation, the low-PGM loaded AEMFCs with QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA and FAA-3 membranes were operated under 0.3 A cm−2 to confirm the durability of the aryl-ether free QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membranes under in situ conditions (Fig. 5c). The low PGM-loaded AEMFC with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane could stably operate under H2–O2 conditions for 200 h at a degradation rate of 0.48 mV h−1 (Fig. 5c) similar to other state-of-the-art polyaromatic polymer-based AEMFCs.29,30
 Fig. 5  (a) Single-cell polarization of the low-PGM loaded AEMFCs (total PGM loading = 0.3 mgPGM cm−2) using QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA or FAA-3 AEMs with the QPC-TMA ionomer. (Testing conditions are described in the ESI† in section 1.3.2). (b) Comparison of the specific power of PGM-based AEMFCs reported in recent literature and in this work.27,29–31,33–39 The temperature of the cell was maintained at 80 °C. Flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 74 °C) and oxygen (dew point of 78 °C) were 1.0 and 1.0 L min−1 with 1.5 bar back-pressure, respectively. 30 wt% PtRu/C and Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode (0.2 mgPGM cm−2) and cathode (0.1 mgPGM cm−2), respectively. (c) In situ durability of the low-PGM loaded AEMFCs (total PGM loading = 0.3 mgPGM cm−2) tested at a constant current density of 0.3 A cm−2 for 200 h. The temperature of the cell was maintained at 70 °C. Flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 68 °C) and oxygen (dew point of 70 °C) were 0.2 and 0.2 L min−1 without any back-pressure, respectively. The cell voltage was recorded over 200 h of discharging at a constant current density of 0.3 A cm−2. 
AEMWE performance and durability

Fig. 6a presents the polarization curves of the four different AEMWEs using the IrO2 and 40 wt% Pt/C as the anode and cathode catalyst, respectively. The AEMWEs using the synthesized AEMs exhibited much higher WE cell performance as well as lower ohmic and charge-transfer resistances than those using FAA-3. In addition, the AEMWE performance increased in the order QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA (2.10 A cm−2) < QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA (2.36 A cm−2) < QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA (3.02 A cm−2) at 1.9 V. This is attributed to the effect of ohmic resistance, as shown in Fig. 6b. The trends in performance and ohmic resistance are consistent with that in the ionic conductivity of the AEMs. These results indicate that the ionic conductivity of AEMs is an important factor in AEMWE performance. The stability of the four AEMWEs during short-term operation (1 h) was evaluated to determine the AEMs that exhibited durable AEMWE performance, as shown in Fig. 6c. The AEMWEs were evaluated using chronoamperometry at a constant current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for 1 h. Whereas the degradation rate of FAA-3 was 43.3 mV h−1, those of QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA, and QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA were 28.4, 28.4, and 17.7 mV h−1, respectively, which indicates that the synthesized AEMs are more durable than commercial FAA-3 under operating conditions. However, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA showed the lowest degradation rate among the synthesized AEMs, which differs from the ex situ chemical stability results. As shown in Fig. 3, the chemical stability of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA decreased with increasing IEC in the soaking test, but the AEMWE single cell in which the membrane with a higher IEC degree was introduced showed better durability in in situ cell tests. The difference between ex situ and in situ durability tests could result from a difference in the overpotentials of AEMWE single cells caused by the ionic conductivity. Considering that the membrane has a type of resistance that interrupts ion transport, higher ion conductivity of the membrane facilitates the transport of ions, which could decrease the total resistance in a single cell as well as membrane resistance (Fig. 6b), moreover, lower cell resistance leads to a lower operation potential as shown in Fig. 6c. That is, the outstanding ion-conducting property of QPP-b-PSK3.5-TMA gives rise to a lower overpotential at constant current density,40,41 which may improve the durability of the AEMWE single cell with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane. In addition, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA was evaluated at different operating temperatures of 80 and 90 °C to demonstrate its applicability at temperature higher than 70 °C.
 Fig. 6  Performance of AEMWEs with different AEMs (QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA, and commercial FAA-3): (a) polarization curves and (b) Nyquist plots obtained at a constant voltage of 1.9 V for AEMWEs with different AEMs. The IrO2 and 40 wt% Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode and cathode, with catalyst loadings of 2.0 and 0.4 mg cm−2, respectively. (c) Stability test performed at a constant current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for 3600 s. The IrO2 and 40 wt% Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode and cathode, respectively. The catalyst loadings in the anode and cathode were 2.0 and 0.4 mg cm−2. The temperature was maintained at 70 °C. The AEMWEs were operated under the 1 M KOH-feeding method. 
It is well known that the AEMWEs have been widely evaluated at 50–70 °C to maintain ion conductivity and chemical stability. To prove the feasibility for the operation at higher temperature than 70 °C of the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA, the AEMWE performance and durability were examined at 80 and 90 °C. As shown in Fig. 7a, the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA AEMWEs with NiFe-based catalysts exhibited an outstanding performance of 3.75 A cm−2 and 4.0 A cm−2 when they were operated at 80 and 90 °C, respectively.
 Fig. 7  (a) Polarization curves of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA performed at different operating temperatures of 80 and 90 °C (QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA_80 °C and QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA_90 °C). (b) Comparison of cell performances at 1.9 V reported in the literature42–53 and in this work operated under temperatures of 80 and 90 °C. (orange, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA; green, the synthesized AEMs; black, commercial AEMs). Solid circles: iridium-based catalysts; open circles: non-noble metal-based catalysts. (c) Durability tests of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA_80 °C at a constant current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for 100 h. The NiFe with the loading of 1.0 mg cm−2 and 40 wt% Pt/C with the loading of 0.4 mg cm−2 were employed in the anode and cathode, respectively. The AEMWEs were operated under the 1 M KOH-feeding method. 
These performance values were also the highest of all those obtained for AEMWEs using commercial and synthesized AEMs37–48 despite the use of non-noble metal-based catalysts with low catalyst loadings (Fig. 7b and Table S5†). In addition, Fig. 7c showed that the degradation rate of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA at 80 for 100 was 1.2 mV h−1. Furthermore, when the AEMWE was evaluated at 90 °C, the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA showed durable performance with a low degradation rate of 1.9 mV h−1 for 50 h (Fig. S18†). It is the first research on the application of ultra-high temperature of 90 °C showing durable performance.
The AEMWE performances of single cells with QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA and FAA-3 membranes, respectively, were investigated using the pure water feeding method (Fig. S19†). The AEMWE single cell with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane showed higher performance and stability than that with the FAA-3 membrane even under pure water, which implies that the high ionic conductivity of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA could have an effect on cell performance and durability under pure water as well as under 1.0 M KOH solution. These experimental results indicate that the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA is a more efficient and suitable membrane than the commercial one (FAA-3) for AEMWE application under both KOH-fed and water-fed conditions.
Experimental
Fabrication of anion-conducting polymer materials

Materials. 
4,4′-Dihydroxybenzophenone (4,4′-DHBP), 4,4′-difluorodiphenyl sulfone (4,4′-DFDPS), potassium carbonate (K2CO3), anhydrous dimethylacetamide (DMAc), toluene, nickel bromide (NiBr2), triphenylphosphine (TPP), zinc dust, hydrogen chloride in diethyl ether, anhydrous diethyl ether, N-bromosuccinimide (NBS), and ∼45 wt% trimethylamine aqueous solution were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane (TCE) was purchased from TCI (Japan) and used as received. 2,5-Dichloro-4′-methylbenzophenone (DCMBP) and 4-chloro-4′-fluorobenzophenone (CFBP) were synthesized using a previously reported method.15,19 Nickel bromide (NiBr2) was dried under vacuum prior to use. TPP was purified by recrystallization from n-hexane and dried at 40 °C under vacuum. The zinc dust was poured into a beaker containing hydrogen chloride solution in diethyl ether, stirred for 5 min, washed with anhydrous diethyl ether, and dried at 110 °C under vacuum using Abderhalden drying equipment.


Synthesis of OH-terminated PSK. 
4,4′-DHBP, 4,4′-DFDPS, and K2CO3 were dissolved in DMAc. The solution and toluene were placed in a round-bottomed flask, and the reaction mixture was heated to 160 °C in a Dean-Stark trap. After dehydration and removal of toluene for 3 h, the solution temperature was maintained at 165 °C for 16 h. After the end of the reaction, the K2CO3 was removed, and the reaction mixture was poured into methanol. The crude product was washed with hot methanol and hot water and dried in a vacuum oven overnight.


Synthesis of 2Cl-terminated PSK and 4Cl-terminated PSK. 
OH-terminated PSK, CFBP, and K2CO3 were dissolved in DMAc, and the reaction mixture was heated at 130 °C for 16 h. The crude product was washed with hot methanol and hot water and dried in a vacuum oven overnight. 4Cl-terminated PSK was synthesized by replacing CFBP with FDCBP and using the same procedure.


Synthesis of the polymer. 
Zinc, TPP, and NiBr2 were mixed in a fully dried 100 mL three-necked flask provided with a mechanical stirrer. The catalyst mixture was poured into the reaction flask under an inert environment, the flask was then sealed with a septum, and anhydrous DMAc was injected using a syringe. The mixture was heated to 80 °C in an oil bath with continuous stirring. The color of the solution in the flask with the catalyst mixture changed from light brown to reddish brown. After the appearance of the reddish brown color of the catalyst, a mixed solution of DCMBP, 2Cl-terminated PSK, and 4Cl-terminated PSK dissolved in anhydrous DMAc was injected into the flask containing the catalyst mixture using a syringe. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 15 h, and then the solution was poured into ethanol containing 10% hydrochloric acid. After stirring for 3–4 h, the product was filtered, washed with hot methanol and water, and then completely dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven. QLPP-b-PSK-w-TMA was synthesized using the same procedure but without 4Cl-terminated PSK.


Bromination reaction. 
The PP-b-PSK-w copolymer was prepared using a general bromination procedure. The PP-b-PSK-w copolymer (1 g) and 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (20 mL) were placed in a fully dried flask equipped with a magnetic stir bar, a gas inlet, and a cooling condenser. Once all the solid material was dissolved, NBS (1.2 eq. per methyl group) was added to the mixture in five successive portions under an argon atmosphere. Next, the mixture was stirred at 90 °C for 24 h, and the product was precipitated by adding it to methanol. The product was then collected by filtration and dried under vacuum at 80 °C for 24 h. The degree of bromination was determined by 1H NMR spectroscopy.


Quaternization reaction. 
The BrPP-b-PSK-w copolymer (1 g) and DMSO (15 mL) were added to a three-neck flask. When the solution was completely homogeneous, a 45 wt% aqueous solution of trimethylamine or 1-methylimidazole was added slowly. The mixture, which then contained quaternized BrPP-b-PSK-w, was stirred at room temperature for 24 h. The mixture was then poured into deionized (DI) water and the precipitate was separated by filtration and rinsed several times with DI water. The product was dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 24 h.


Membrane preparation. 
The ionomer membranes were prepared by dissolving the synthesized polymers in DMSO. The solutions were first filtered through a syringe filter with a 5 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane, cast onto a clean glass plate using a casting accessory, and dried at 60 °C for 8 h. Next, the membranes were peeled off from the glass plate by immersion in deionized water. The membranes were then stored in a 1 M NaCl aqueous solution before use.

Characterization

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. 
To confirm the chemical structure of the synthesized multi-block copolymers, 1H NMR spectroscopy was performed (Bruker DRX500 spectrometer at 500.13 MHz) in DMSO-d6 (δ = 2.50 ppm) or CDCl3-d1 (δ = 7.28 ppm) as the solvent.


Small-angle X-ray spectroscopy (SAXS). 
To characterize the morphological properties of the membranes, SAXS analysis (PLS-II 3C beamline, Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, PAL) was performed under 20% R.H. at room temperature. The scattering vector was calculated using eqn (1): q = 4π/λ × sin2θ(1)where q is the scattering vector, λ is the wavelength of the Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.542 Å), and 2θ is the scattering angle. The inter-domain space (d) was calculated using eqn (2): d = 2π/qmax.(2)


Mechanical test. 
A UTM (Lloyd Instrument, LR5K, control software NEXYGEN) was used to measure the mechanical properties of the membranes. The test conditions were: wet 10 mm × 70 mm membrane sample with the surface wiped with tissue paper before the experiment; crosshead speed 5 mm min−1. The thickness of the membrane was recorded using a micrometer-scale caliper.


Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). 
To evaluate the thermal properties of the synthetic membranes, a thermogravimetric analyzer (NETZSCH TG 209 F1 Libra) was used, with the sample (20 mg) placed in a platinum pan. TGA runs were performed over the temperature range 20–500 °C at a constant heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under a N2 atmosphere. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS, Agilent 8890 Intelligent GC) coupled with the TGA system was carried out to detect volatile gases produced during heating of the sample on the TGA.


Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA). 
The rheological properties of the synthetic membranes in the Cl− form were investigated using dynamic mechanical analysis (TA Instruments DMA Q800), applying an oscillatory sinusoidal tensile deformation with a frequency of 5 Hz, amplitude of 20 mm, preload force of 0.1 N and a temperature range of 25–300 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. The rheological data are shown as the storage modulus (E′), loss modulus (E′′), and loss tangent (tand = E′/E′′) as a function of temperature (T).


Ion-exchange capacity (IEC) measurement. 
To investigate the IEC (meq. g−1) of the OH− and Cl− ionomers, an automatic titrator (Metrohm 794 Basic Titrino) was used, with Cl− determined by Mohr titration. The membrane in the OH− form was immersed in 100 mL of 0.01 M HCl aqueous solution for 24 h to release the OH− ions. The solutions were then titrated with a standardized NaOH (0.01 M) solution to pH 7. The membrane in the Cl− form was immersed in 100 mL of 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution for 24 h to release Cl− ions. Subsequently, the Cl− ions released from the membrane were titrated using a 0.01 M AgNO3 solution. The weight-based IEC of the Cl− ionomer was calculated using eqn (3): IECClw− (meq. g−1) = CAgNO3 × ΔVAgNO3/Wd or IECOHw− (meq. g−1) = (CHCl × VHCl − CNaOH × ΔVNaOH)/Wd,(3)


Water uptake and dimensional changes. 
The membranes in the Br− form (3 × 3 cm2) were ion-exchanged to the Cl− form by immersion in a 1 M NaCl solution at room temperature for 24 h. The membranes were dried in a vacuum oven, and the weight (Wd), thickness (td), and length (ld) of the dried membranes in the Cl− form were measured. Subsequently, the dried membranes were immersed in DI water for 24 h at 25 °C for complete hydration. The excess water on the membrane surface was then removed by wiping gently with tissue paper, and the weight (Ww), thickness (tw), and length (lw) of the fully hydrated membranes were measured. The volumes of the dry and wet membranes were calculated from their thickness and length. The WU and dimensional changes were calculated using eqn (4)–(7): WU (%) = (Ww − Wd)/Wd × 100%,(4) Δt = (tw − td)/td,(5) Δl = (lw − ld)/ld,(6) Δv = (vw − vd)/vd.(7)


Ionic conductivity measurement. 
To investigate the in-plane hydroxide conductivity, the membrane was mounted in a membrane test system (BT-512, BekkTech). The samples were exposed to a continuous gas flow (500 mL min−1) containing N2 (99.999%) under constant 100% R.H. at 25–80 °C. A constant direct current of 100 mA (ZIVE SP3, WonATech) was applied to the membrane. The ionic resistance of the membrane was measured using a standard 4-probe technique every 30 min until saturation was reached. EIS was conducted at open circuit over the frequency range 0.1–20 kHz, using an impedance analyzer. The conductivities of the samples were calculated using eqn (8): Ionic conductivity (mS cm−1) = l/R × S,(8)where l is the distance between the electrodes, R is the impedance of the membrane, and S is the cross-sectional surface area of the membrane.


Chemical stability test. 
The chemical stability of the membranes was evaluated by soaking them in 1 M KOH solution at 80 °C for 500 h to determine the residual chloride ion conductivity or mechanical durability of the synthesized membranes before and after the experiment. Before measuring the conductivity, the alkaline-exposed membranes were immersed in 1 M NaCl solution for 24 h to facilitate counter-ion-exchange from OH− to Cl−. The methods used in the ionic conductivity measurements and the mechanical tests were the same as those described in the previous section. The prepared membranes were also examined by immersing in a 3 M KOH solution at 80 °C for 100 h, and the changes in membrane properties were measured to detect the alkaline stability of the membrane under high pH conditions using the same procedure as described above.

Electrochemical characterization

MEA fabrication and performance evaluation of AEMFCs. 
The performance and durability of the AEMFC were evaluated using a single-cell test. The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) for the AEMFC was prepared using the catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) method. Prior to the catalyst layer coating process, the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA (w = 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5) membranes and Fumasep FAA-3-50 (Fumatech BWT) membranes were converted into hydroxide forms by immersing them in a 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution for 2 h, followed by rinsing with distilled water (DI water). Pt (nominally 40%) and Ru (nominally 20%) on a carbon black catalyst (60 wt% PtRu/C, Alfa Aesar), and Pt (nominally 60%) on a high-surface-area carbon support catalyst (60 wt% Pt/C, Alfa Aesar) were used as anode and cathode catalysts, respectively. Catalyst slurries were prepared by mixing the catalysts with a quaternized poly(carbazole)-based ionomer (QPC-TMA, 10 wt% ionomer in n-propanol aqueous solution, with ionomer to carbon weight ratio 0.5) in an aqueous solution of isopropyl alcohol.27 To obtain a homogeneous dispersion, each catalyst slurry was ultrasonicated for more than 30 min. The prepared slurries were directly sprayed onto the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3-50 membranes to fabricate the catalyst layers. The catalytic material loading of both electrodes was 0.4 mgPGM(PlatinumGroupMetal) cm−2, and the active area of the MEAs was 5 cm2. Prior to the single-cell application, the CCM was immersed in a 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution for 1 h to convert the quaternized poly(carbazole)-based ionomer into the hydroxide form and was then removed and rinsed with distilled water. Afterwards, the CCM was sandwiched between two gas diffusion layers with a microporous layer (JNT30-A6H, JNTG Co.) without a hot-pressing process.
To evaluate the AEMFC performance of the prepared MEAs, each MEA was inserted between two graphite plates with a one-channel serpentine-type flow field (2.2 cm × 2.3 cm). A single cell was assembled by applying torque (8.5 N m) to each screw of the end plates and was connected to a fuel cell test station (CNL Energy). To compare the AEMFC performance of the MEAs with QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes, humidified hydrogen and oxygen were fed to the anode and cathode at constant flow rates of 0.8 and 1.0 L min−1, respectively. The temperature of the single cell was maintained at 60 °C, and the dew points of the hydrogen and oxygen gases at 56 °C and 58 °C, respectively. The AEMFC performance was evaluated under the above conditions until a stabilized cell voltage was achieved at the corresponding discharge current. To characterize the electrochemical properties of the tested membranes under practical single-cell operating conditions, EIS (Zennium, Zhaner Elekrik) was conducted at 0.1 A cm−2 with an amplitude of 0.01 A cm−2 over the frequency range 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. After the EIS measurement, the AEMFC performance of MEAs with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA and FAA-3 membranes was evaluated at a higher operating temperature (75 °C). The flow rates of hydrogen and oxygen were the same as in the previous test, and the dew points of the reactant gases were adjusted to 69 °C for hydrogen and 73 °C for oxygen. The back pressure of the reactant gases was adjusted to 0.0 bar or 1.0 bar. After evaluation of the AEMFC performance under oxygen conditions, the oxygen gas was replaced with air (CO2-free) to evaluate the AEMFC performance under normal atmospheric conditions.


MEA preparation and performance evaluation of low PGM-loaded AEMFCs. 
The overall process is similar to section 1.3.1 (ESI†), Pt (nominally 20%) and Ru (nominally 10%) on a carbon black catalyst (30 wt% PtRu/C, Alfa Aesar), and Pt (nominally 40%) on a high-surface-area carbon support catalyst (40 wt% Pt/C, Alfa Aesar) were used as anode and cathode catalysts, respectively. Catalyst slurries were prepared by mixing the catalysts with a quaternized poly(carbazole)-based ionomer (QPC-TMA, 10 wt% ionomer in n-propanol aqueous solution, with ionomer to carbon weight ratio 0.4 for the anode and 0.5 for the cathode, respectively) in an aqueous solution of isopropyl alcohol.27 The catalytic material loadings of the anode and cathode were 0.2 mgPtRu cm−2 and 0.1 mgPt cm−2, respectively. The active area of the MEAs was 5 cm2. Prior to the single-cell application, the CCM was immersed in a 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution for 1 h to convert the quaternized poly(carbazole)-based ionomer into the hydroxide form and was then removed and rinsed with DI water. Afterwards, the CCM was sandwiched between two gas diffusion layers with a microporous layer (JNT30-A6H, JNTG Co.) without a hot-pressing process. For comparison with other reported AEMs, the AEMFC performance of low PGM-loaded MEAs with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membranes was evaluated under similar operating conditions to those of other state-of-the-art AEMFCs. The temperature of the cell was maintained at 80 °C. The flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 74 °C) and oxygen or air (dew point of 78 °C) were 1.0 and 1.0 L min−1, respectively. The back pressure of the reactant gases was adjusted to 1.5 bar. After evaluation of the AEMFC performance, the durability test was performed at a cell temperature of 70 °C for the two MEAs with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA and FAA-3-50 membranes. The flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 68 °C) and oxygen or air (dew point of 70 °C) were 0.2 and 0.2 L min−1 without any back pressure, respectively. The cell voltage was recorded over 200 h of discharging at a constant current density of 0.3 A cm−2.


MEA fabrication and performance evaluation of the AEMWE. 
The performance and durability of the AEMWE were evaluated using a single-cell test. The MEA for the AEMWE was prepared using the catalyst-coated substrate (CCS) method. The active area was 5 cm2. At the anode, IrO2 (Alfa Aesar Co., USA) or the electrodeposited NiFe electrode, with a QPC-TMA ionomer content of 20 wt%, was used as the catalyst in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The anode catalyst loadings of IrO2 and NiFe electrodes were 2.0 mgIrO2 cm−2 and 1.0 mgNiFe cm−2, respectively. At the cathode, 40 wt. Pt/C was used as the catalyst in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) with a QPC-TMA ionomer content of 30 wt% and a catalyst loading of 0.4 mg cm−2. The substrates used in the anode and cathode were stainless steel (SUS) and carbon paper, respectively. The cell temperatures were 70, 80, or 90 °C. 1 M KOH solution or DI water preheated to 50 °C was used as the reactant for the AEMWE and was supplied to the anode and the cathode at a flow rate of 1 mL min−1. The AEMWE performance was evaluated by the voltage sweep method using a potentiostat (PGSTAT302N, Metrohm Autolab, Netherlands) over the voltage range 1.35–2.0 V at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. EIS was conducted at a constant voltage of 1.9 V with an amplitude of 5 mV. The AEMWE durability was evaluated using chronoamperometry at a current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for 100 h (50 h for 90 °C). The temperature was maintained at 80 °C (or 90 °C).

Conclusions
In summary, we developed oligomeric chain extender-derived anion conducting polymers, QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA, with increased molecular weight by introducing an oligomeric chain extender. QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA showed excellent electrochemical properties as well as outstanding chemical, physical, mechanical, and morphological properties. Especially, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA showed superb hydroxide conductivity as high as 129 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, which was 1.6 times higher value than that of FAA-3. In the chemical stability test, although QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA showed a decrease of conductivity by detachment of ammonium cations, scission of the main chain that is a critical degradation pathway was not observed due to the rigid backbone structure and high molecular weight. Using the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane, we demonstrated high performance (specific power of 4.9 W mgPGM−1) in a low PGM-loaded AEMFC, which is the highest value among the state-of-the-art AEMFCs with PGM-based electrodes. In addition, AEMWE with the QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA membrane showed a high performance of 4.0 A cm−2 at 1.9 V under 1 M KOH feeding conditions despite the use of a non-noble metal-based catalyst. Furthermore, it exhibited durable performance with a low degradation rate of 1.2 mV h−1 for 100 h at a high temperature of 80 °C under the KOH-feeding method.
Author contributions
M. S. C., J. E. P., and S. K. contributed equally to this work. J. Y. L conceptualized oligomeric chain extender-derived AEM materials, QPP-b-PSK-w-TMAs, and M. S. C. synthesized and characterized all of the polymer materials. J. E. P. and S. K. evaluated AEMWE and AEMFC performances with QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA membranes. S.-H. S. and S. H. Y. synthesized and characterized the monomer and oligomer materials. S. J. L, T.-H. K contributed to the morphology and chemical stability tests. D. M. Y. and S. S. investigated the mechanical and electrochemical properties of the QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA. K. M. O. prepared the membrane-electrode assembly of AEMFCs and Y.-E. S. suggested the AEMWE operating methods. All authors discussed the data and analyzed the results. M. S. C., J. E. P., S. K., Y.-H. C. and J. Y. L. wrote the manuscript. Y.-H. C. and J. Y. L. supervised this work.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the “Carbon to X Project” (2020M3H7A1098227) and the Basic Science Research Program (2019R1D1A3A03103611) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), and the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT) core project (BSF22-112) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT, Republic of Korea.
Notes and references
I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. Velazquez Abad, P. Balcombe, P. E. Dodds, P. Ekins, N. Shah and K. R. Ward, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 463–491 RSC .
Y. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 1250–1270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kusoglu and A. Z. Weber, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 987–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Wang, M. T. Swihart and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 578–589 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dekel, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 158–169 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ramaswamy and S. Mukerjee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11945–11979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. You, K. J. T. Noonan and G. W. Coates, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 100, 101177 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tao, C. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Li and M. D. Guiver, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2001220 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, D. H. Cho, Y. M. Kim, S. J. Moon, J. G. Seong, D. W. Shin, J.-Y. Sohn, J. F. Kim and Y. M. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 275–285 RSC .
W. E. Mustain, M. Chatenet, M. Page and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2805–2838 RSC .
A. D. Mohanty, S. E. Tignor, J. A. Krause, Y.-K. Choe and C. Bae, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 3361–3372 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Choe, C. Fujimoto, K.-S. Lee, L. T. Dalton, K. Ayers, N. J. Henson and Y. S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5675–5682 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Cha, J. Y. Lee, T.-H. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, H. Y. Shin, S.-G. Oh and Y. T. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 530, 73–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Cha, S. W. Jo, S. H. Han, S. H. Hong, S. So, T.-H. Kim, S.-G. Oh, Y. T. Hong and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2019, 413, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hong, M. S. Cha, S.-K. Hong, S.-G. Oh and J. Y. Lee, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17088–17099 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. T. Hong, J. Y. Lee, T. H. Kim, D. M. Yu and S. J. Kim, US Pat., 009975995,  2018 Search PubMed .
S. Choi, S.-H. Shin, D.-H. Lee, G. Doo, D. W. Lee, J. Hyun, S. H. Yang, D. Man Yu, J. Y. Lee and H.-T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2022, 526, 231146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lee, D. M. Yu, T.-H. Kim, S. J. Yoon and Y. T. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 492, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Su, I. A. Cordova, M. A. Yandrasits, M. Lindell, J. Feng, C. Wang and A. Kusoglu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13547–13561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, T. D. Largier, W. Zheng and C. J. Cornelius, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 545, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nwosu, T. P. Pandey, A. M. Herring, S. Seifert and E. B. Coughlin, J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 58, 3446–3455 CrossRef CAS .
R. Epsztein, E. Shaulsky, M. Qin and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 580, 316–326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, B. Lin and F. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 58–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maurya, A. S. Lee, D. Li, E. J. Park, D. P. Leonard, S. Noh, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 436, 226866 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hyun, S. H. Yang, G. Doo, S. Choi, D.-H. Lee, D. W. Lee, J. Kwen, W. Jo, S.-H. Shin, J. Y. Lee and H.-T. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 18546–18556 RSC .
M. S. Cha, J. E. Park, S. Kim, S.-H. Han, S.-H. Shin, S. H. Yang, T.-H. Kim, D. M. Yu, S. So, Y. T. Hong, S. J. Yoon, S.-G. Oh, S. Y. Kang, O.-H. Kim, H. S. Park, B. Bae, Y.-E. Sung, Y.-H. Cho and J. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3633–3645 RSC .
H. Adabi, A. Shakouri, N. U. Hassan, J. R. Varcoe, B. Zulevi, A. Serov, J. R. Regalbuto and W. E. Mustain, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 834–843 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, C. Hu, H. H. Wang, S. P. Kim, H. M. Kim, W. H. Lee, J. Y. Bae, J. H. Park and Y. M. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7710–7718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chen, H. H. Wang, S. P. Kim, H. M. Kim, W. H. Lee, C. Hu, J. Y. Bae, E. S. Sim, Y. C. Chung, J. H. Jang, S. J. Yoo, Y. Zhuang and Y. M. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ul Hassan, M. Mandal, G. Huang, H. A. Firouzjaie, P. A. Kohl and W. E. Mustain, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001986 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhao, B. P. Setzler, S. Rojas-Carbonell, C. Ben Yehuda, A. Amel, M. Page, L. Wang, K. Hu, L. Shi, S. Gottesfeld, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 392–398 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Peng, W. E. Mustain and J. R. Varcoe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1575–1579 RSC .
E. J. Park, S. Maurya, A. S. Lee, D. P. Leonard, D. Li, J. Y. Jeon, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25040–25046 RSC .
M. Mandal, G. Huang, N. U. Hassan, X. Peng, T. Gu, A. H. Brooks-Starks, B. Bahar, W. E. Mustain and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 054501 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, M. Mandal, X. Peng, A. C. Yang-Neyerlin, B. S. Pivovar, W. E. Mustain and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F637–F644 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, H. Peng, Y. Wang, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Peng, Q. Li, M. Hu, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 165–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maurya, S. Noh, I. Matanovic, E. J. Park, C. Narvaez Villarrubia, U. Martinez, J. Han, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3283–3291 RSC .
D. Li, A. R. Motz, C. Bae, C. Fujimoto, G. Yang, F.-Y. Zhang, K. E. Ayers and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3393–3419 RSC .
E. López-Fernández, J. Gil-Rostra, J. P. Espinós, A. R. González-Elipe, A. De Lucas Consuegra and F. Yubero, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6159–6170 CrossRef .
Y. Leng, G. Chen, A. J. Mendoza, T. B. Tighe, M. A. Hickner and C.-Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9054–9057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schauer, J. Hnát, L. Brožová, J. Žitka and K. Bouzek, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 473, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marinkas, I. Struźyńska-Piron, Y. Lee, A. Lim, H. S. Park, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, J. Kim, A. Maljusch, O. Conradi and D. Henkensmeier, Polymer, 2018, 145, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, M.-J. Kim, M. S. Lim, S. Y. Kang, J. K. Kim, S.-H. Oh, M. Her, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 140–148 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cossar, A. Oyarce Barnett, F. Seland and E. A. Baranova, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 814 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, S. Y. Kang, S.-H. Oh, J. K. Kim, M. S. Lim, C.-Y. Ahn, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Tham and D. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 581, 139–149 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fortin, T. Khoza, X. Cao, S. Y. Martinsen, A. Oyarce Barnett and S. Holdcroft, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227814 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Park, S. Y. Lee, T. K. Lee, H.-J. Kim and Y. M. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 611, 118355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Park, J. Yang, J. Lee, M. J. Jang, J. Jeong, W.-S. Choi, Y. Kim, Y. Yin, M. H. Seo, Z. Chen and S. M. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119276 CrossRef CAS .
R. Soni, S. Miyanishi, H. Kuroki and T. Yamaguchi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1053–1058 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen and X. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002285 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10868a‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthetic procedure for QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA. The reaction agent, solvent and conditions for each step (from (i) to (vi)) to synthesize QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA are as follows: (i) K2CO3, DMAc 165 °C for 16 h, (ii) K2CO3, DMAc, 130 °C for 16 h, (iii) NiBr2, TPP, zinc, DMAc, 80 °C for 16 h, (iv) NBS, TCE, 90 °C for 24 h, (v) 45 wt% TMA solution, 25 °C for 24 h, and (vi) immersed in 1 M KOH at room temperature for 24 h.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Dimensional changes and (b) OH– conductivity of the synthesized membranes and the FAA-3 membrane.	 



QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA	1.8	1.7	27 ± 0.2	55 ± 0.4	74 ± 0.7	3	8	16	4	21	31	29 ± 0.1	60 ± 0.2
QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA	2.1	2.0	39 ± 0.5	67 ± 0.8	84 ± 1.2	4	15	25	5	23	36	42 ± 0.1	88 ± 0.3
QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA	2.4	2.3	55 ± 0.7	88 ± 1.1	106 ± 1.5	10	12	36	11	27	57	59 ± 0.1	105 ± 0.3
QLPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA	2.1	2.0	55 ± 0.7	72 ± 1.1	101 ± 1.4	7	16	33	10	24	51	42 ± 0.2	83 ± 0.4
QLPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA	2.3	2.3	67 ± 1.0	95 ± 1.5	130 ± 2.0	14	18	53	21	30	90	60 ± 0.2	97 ± 0.4
FAA-3	2.0	1.9	29 ± 0.5	59 ± 0.7	78 ± 1.1	6	7	20	12	14	43	32 ± 0.1	75 ± 0.3

 	Fig. 2  SAXS profiles of tested AEMs (from top to bottom: QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA, and FAA-3).	 

 	Fig. 3  Alkaline stability test investigated by immersing the synthesized membrane in 1 M KOH solution at 80 °C for 500 h. (a) Residual conductivity of QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA and FAA-3. (b) Tensile strength of the synthetic membranes as a function of alkaline exposure time.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Single cell polarization curves and (b) Nyquist plots obtained at a current density of 0.1 A cm−2 for AEMFCs using different QPP-b-PSK-w-TMA (w = 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5) or FAA-3 AEMs with the QPC-TMA ionomer.27 The temperature of the cell was maintained at 60 °C. Flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 56 °C) and oxygen (dew point of 58 °C) were 0.8 and 1.0 L min−1 without any back-pressure, respectively. 60 wt% PtRu/C and Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode and cathode, respectively, and the catalyst loadings of both electrodes were fixed at 0.4 mgPGM cm−2. (c) Single-cell polarization curves of the AEMFCs using QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA or FAA-3 AEMs with the QPC ionomer at a higher cell temperature of 75 °C. The flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 69 °C) and oxygen or air (dew point of 73 °C) were 0.8 and 1.0 L min−1, respectively. The back pressure of both reactant gases was adjusted to 1.0 bar.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Single-cell polarization of the low-PGM loaded AEMFCs (total PGM loading = 0.3 mgPGM cm−2) using QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA or FAA-3 AEMs with the QPC-TMA ionomer. (Testing conditions are described in the ESI† in section 1.3.2). (b) Comparison of the specific power of PGM-based AEMFCs reported in recent literature and in this work.27,29–31,33–39 The temperature of the cell was maintained at 80 °C. Flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 74 °C) and oxygen (dew point of 78 °C) were 1.0 and 1.0 L min−1 with 1.5 bar back-pressure, respectively. 30 wt% PtRu/C and Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode (0.2 mgPGM cm−2) and cathode (0.1 mgPGM cm−2), respectively. (c) In situ durability of the low-PGM loaded AEMFCs (total PGM loading = 0.3 mgPGM cm−2) tested at a constant current density of 0.3 A cm−2 for 200 h. The temperature of the cell was maintained at 70 °C. Flow rates of humidified hydrogen (dew point of 68 °C) and oxygen (dew point of 70 °C) were 0.2 and 0.2 L min−1 without any back-pressure, respectively. The cell voltage was recorded over 200 h of discharging at a constant current density of 0.3 A cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 6  Performance of AEMWEs with different AEMs (QPP-b-PSK-1.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-2.5-TMA, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA, and commercial FAA-3): (a) polarization curves and (b) Nyquist plots obtained at a constant voltage of 1.9 V for AEMWEs with different AEMs. The IrO2 and 40 wt% Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode and cathode, with catalyst loadings of 2.0 and 0.4 mg cm−2, respectively. (c) Stability test performed at a constant current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for 3600 s. The IrO2 and 40 wt% Pt/C catalysts were used in the anode and cathode, respectively. The catalyst loadings in the anode and cathode were 2.0 and 0.4 mg cm−2. The temperature was maintained at 70 °C. The AEMWEs were operated under the 1 M KOH-feeding method.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Polarization curves of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA performed at different operating temperatures of 80 and 90 °C (QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA_80 °C and QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA_90 °C). (b) Comparison of cell performances at 1.9 V reported in the literature42–53 and in this work operated under temperatures of 80 and 90 °C. (orange, QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA; green, the synthesized AEMs; black, commercial AEMs). Solid circles: iridium-based catalysts; open circles: non-noble metal-based catalysts. (c) Durability tests of QPP-b-PSK-3.5-TMA_80 °C at a constant current density of 1.0 A cm−2 for 100 h. The NiFe with the loading of 1.0 mg cm−2 and 40 wt% Pt/C with the loading of 0.4 mg cm−2 were employed in the anode and cathode, respectively. The AEMWEs were operated under the 1 M KOH-feeding method.	 
q = 4π/λ × sin2θ	(1)
d = 2π/qmax.	(2)
IECClw− (meq. g−1) = CAgNO3 × ΔVAgNO3/Wd or IECOHw− (meq. g−1) = (CHCl × VHCl − CNaOH × ΔVNaOH)/Wd,	(3)
WU (%) = (Ww − Wd)/Wd × 100%,	(4)
Δt = (tw − td)/td,	(5)
Δl = (lw − ld)/ld,	(6)
Δv = (vw − vd)/vd.	(7)
Ionic conductivity (mS cm−1) = l/R × S,	(8)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10868a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
