TiO 2 /ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructure arrays as photo-electrodes with enhanced visible light photoelectrochemical performance  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4RA09456E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4RA09456E
(Communication)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55629-55634TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructure arrays as photo-electrodes with enhanced visible light photoelectrochemical performance
Ayan Sarkar†
a, 
Ashutosh K. Singh†b, 
Gobinda Gopal Khan†*a, 
Debasish Sarkar†c and 
Kalyan Mandalb
aCenter for Research in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, University of Calcutta, Technology Campus, Block JD2, Sector III, Salt Lake City, Kolkata 700 098, India. E-mail: gobinda.gk@gmail.com;  Fax: +91 33 2335 1063;   Tel: +91 33 2335 0067
bDepartment of Condensed Matter Physics and Material Sciences, S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Block JD, Sector III, Salt Lake City, Kolkata 700 098, India
cSolid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, India
Received 
29th August 2014
, Accepted 24th September 2014First published on 26th September 2014AbstractThe present article reports a facile method for preparing the vertically-aligned 1D arrays of a new type of type II n–n TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructures by growing the nano-shell of ZnO on the electrochemically fabricated TiO2 nanotubes core for visible light driven photoelectrochemical applications. The strong interfacial interaction at the type II heterojunction leads to an effective interfacial charge separation and charge transport. The presence of various defects such as surface states, interface states and other defects in the nano-heterostructure enable it for improved visible light photoelectrochemical performance. The presence of such defects has also been confirmed by the UV-vis absorption, cathodoluminescence, and crystallographic studies. The TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructures exhibit strong green luminescence due to the defect transitions. The TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructures photo-electrode show significant enhancement of visible light absorption and it provides a photocurrent density of 0.7 mA cm−2 at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, which is almost 2.7 times that of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructures under dark conditions. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy results demonstrate that the substantially improved photoelectrochemical and photo-switching performance of the nano-heterostructures photoanode is because of the enhancement of interfacial charge transfer and the increase in the charge carrier density caused by the incorporation of the ZnO nano-shell on TiO2 nanotube core.
1. Introduction
One dimensional (1D) core/shell type semiconductor based nano-heterostructures (NHs) with unique morphology and large surface area cause a strong interfacial interaction between the semiconductor counterparts, providing noble physical and chemical properties advantageous for nanoscale electronics, energy conversion/storage, catalysis, spintronics and sensor devices.1–3 Recently, semiconductor NHs with type II band alignment have attracted significant attention as the elementary building blocks for the fabrication of next generation electronics, photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells and photovoltaic devices because of their efficient charge carrier separation and surface charge transport properties.4–6 As the most promising candidates, TiO2 and ZnO have been investigated extensively as key materials for the solar energy conversion devices for PEC cells.7,8 The 1D type II core/shell NHs based on TiO2 and ZnO have been reported with improved PEC properties, arising because of the unique architecture and band alignment. These provide a large interfacial area for the rapid charge carrier separation/injection, better absorption of light and improved charge carrier transport and collection efficiency to the photo-electrode.8–11 However, it is important to study the fundamental properties related to the core/shell NHs, such as the mechanism of type II band alignment, interfacial charge carrier dynamics, the generation of excited charge carrier and their transport through the interface in order to understand the performance of PEC cells for the anticipation of fabrication of energy harvesting devices.
In this backdrop, large-area ordered arrays of 1D TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs have been fabricated by wet chemically coating ZnO nano-shell on the arrays of TiO2 nanotubes (NTs) grown by electrochemical anodization of titanium foil. The visible light driven photoelectrochemical properties of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrode have been demonstrated based on the interfacial type II n–n band configuration between ZnO and TiO2 and the incorporation of various defects such as surface states, interface states and other defects in the NHs, which enable it for improved visible light absorption. The NHs are found to exhibit enhanced visible light photoelectrochemical performance because of the improved interfacial charge separation efficiency, superior charge transportation and increase in the charge carrier density because of the introduction of the ZnO nano-shell on TiO2 NTs core. The NHs photo-electrode shows good photovoltaic properties as a PEC cell for the conversion of solar energy.
2. Experimental procedures
2a. Reagents
Titanium foil (Alfa Aesar, 99.99% pure, 0.25 mm thick), ammonium fluoride (NH4F), formamide (CH3NO) and zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O). All the chemicals used are of analytical grade and have been used without further purification.
2b. Fabrication of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs
Highly ordered arrays of TiO2 NTs were fabricated by anodization of highly pure Ti foil (40 × 60 × 0.25 mm3). Prior to anodization, the Ti foil was thoroughly washed in double de-ionized (DI) water and was cleaned by ultrasonication for 15 minutes with the mixture of ethanol and acetone, followed by rinsing in DI water. Anodization was performed in a two electrode electrochemical cell with Ti foil as the anode and a highly pure Cu foil as the cathode under a constant potential of 25 V, supplied by a regulated dc power supply for 20 hours at 20 °C in a formamide-based electrolyte containing 0.2 M NH4F and 5 vol % DI water. The as-anodized Ti foil was then thoroughly rinsed successively in DI water and acetone, followed by the ultrasonication in ethanol for 10 s to remove the debris and unreacted parts. The sample was then finally rinsed in DI water and dried. The as-prepared sample was annealed in an oxygen environment at 400 °C for 90 minutes to obtain the arrays of TiO2 NTs.
The highly ordered 1D arrays of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs were synthesized by a facile wet chemical route. The ZnO nano-shell layer was fabricated on TiO2 NTs core by dip-coating the TiO2 NTs mask in 0.1 M zinc acetate solution prepared in ethanol. The as-prepared TiO2 NTs sample was dip-coated in the solution and dried, and this process was repeated for four times. Later, the foil was annealed in air at 450 °C for 90 minutes in a tube furnace. During annealing, zinc acetate decomposes to form the ZnO nano-shell layer on the arrays of TiO2 NTs.
2c. Material characterization
The morphology of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs were examined by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL JSM-7600F) and a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM, JEOL JEM 2100). The elemental composition of the as-prepared NHs was analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford Instruments) equipped with the HRTEM. The crystal structure of the sample was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Panalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer) using Cu Kα line (λ = 1.54 Å). HRTEM was also used to study the crystallography and the formation of the interface of the core/shell structure. The optical properties were studied by recording the cathodoluminescence (CL) spectra of the TiO2 NTs, and the NHs using a Gatan MonoCL4 system attached with the FESEM. The CL measurements were performed at room temperature by scanning over 2 × 2 μm2 area with the electron beam accelerated by a potential of 15 kV. The UV-vis spectra of the samples were recorded using Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050 UV/vis spectrometer at room temperature.
2d. Photoelectrochemical measurements
The photoelectrochemical properties of the samples were investigated by using a software controlled conventional three-electrode electrochemical cell (potentiostat AutoLab-30) consisting of the as-prepared samples (TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs) as the working electrode, Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and a Pt wire as the counter electrode and the aqueous solution of 0.5 M Na2SO4 as the electrolyte at room temperature. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was carried out with the same potentiostat under dark and the illumination of visible light (λ > 420 nm). A potential window ranging from 0 to 1 V was used in all the measurements. Photocurrents in 'on' and 'off' cycles were recorded using the same electrochemical workstation and the same illumination source using a potential of 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution within a frequency range of 2 Hz to 100 kHz to prove the charge transfer and recombination processes within the NHs.
3. Results and discussion
3a. Morphology and crystallography
Fig. 1(a) shows the top view FESEM micrograph of the as-prepared ordered arrays of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs grown on Ti substrate. 1D NTs-like morphology of the NHs is clear from the image. It is also evident that the shape and size of the as-grown NHs are regular (inset of Fig. 1(a)). The outer diameter of the tubelike NHs is ∼100 nm with a wall thickness of ∼20 nm. Formation of the NHs has clearly been evidenced from the TEM micrographs as shown in Fig. 1(b), (c) and (e).
 Fig. 1  (a) FESEM and (b and c) TEM images of the as-prepared TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs. (d) SAED pattern of the NHs. The inset of (d) shows the SAED pattern of TiO2. (e) HRTEM image of the interface between TiO2/ZnO core/shell. (f) EDS spectrum and (g) XRD pattern of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs. 
The TEM images demonstrate the coating of ZnO nano-shell on the TiO2 NT core (Fig. 1(b) and (c)). The HRTEM image as shown in Fig. 1(e) vividly illustrates the heterojunction between the TiO2/ZnO core/shell. The HRTEM image (Fig. 1(e)) obtained from the heterojunction reveals that the inter-planar spacing between two crystalline planes are 0.26 and 0.36 nm, which corresponds to the distances between the two (002) planes of the hexagonal ZnO and (101) planes of anatase TiO2, respectively. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (inset of Fig. 1(d)) of the NHs reveals the polycrystalline nature of the sample where the superposition of the diffraction rings is compared with the diffraction spots of the pure TiO2 (inset of Fig. 1(d)). The scattering of the diffraction spots on the different diffraction rings of the NHs is caused by the defects and the stress at heterojunction. The interfacial stress introduces interfacial defects because of the lattice mismatch (see Fig. 1(e)) at the nano-heterojunction. The EDS spectrum (Fig. 1(f)) confirms the presence of Ti, Zn and O in the NHs, whereas the peak for Cu appears because of the Cu grid on which the sample was mounted. The crystallography of the NHs has been further studied by XRD as shown in Fig. 1(g), which again reveals the polycrystalline anatase phase (marked as ‘A’ in Fig. 1(g)) of the as-grown TiO2 NTs. The presence of polycrystalline hexagonal ZnO is also evidenced from the XRD pattern. Here, the peaks for Ti appear because of the Ti substrate underneath the arrays of NHs.
3b. Cathodoluminescence and UV-vis studies
Fig. 2(a) shows the normalized CL spectra of the arrays of pure TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs recorded at room temperature. Pure TiO2 NTs exhibit only the defect related emissions where no band to band or near band edge (NBE) UV emission is observed as usual, as anatase TiO2 is an indirect band gap semiconductor. The broad visible green emission and another sharp orange emission from TiO2 NTs centered around 500 and 625 nm are ascribed to the oxygen vacancy related defects and localized intrinsic defects (like broken bonds/dangling bonds), respectively present in TiO2, which act as the mid band gap trap states.12,13 The TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs exhibit UV emission at 381 nm and two other defect emissions centered around 500 and 625 nm. The weak UV emission from the NHs is associated with the band gap emission from the ZnO nano-shell.14 The strong green emission from the NHs is majorly attributed to the oxygen vacancy (associated with Ti3+) related deep-level defect emissions from the TiO2 NTs.15 Moreover, the surface states, oxygen antisites, zinc interstitial sites and intrinsic defects such as zinc and oxygen vacancies present in the band gap of ZnO nano-shell16–20 strongly contribute to the green emission from NHs. It is evident that the defect related visible green emission from the NHs has been enhanced significantly compared with that of the pure TiO2 NTs, whereas the intensity of the band gap or NBE emission from the ZnO nano-shell on TiO2 NTs is quenched compared with that of the pure ZnO NWs, as also reported by others.6,21 The remarkable enhancement of the defect related radiative recombinations in TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs is consistent with the reports on different similar kinds of semiconductor based NHs.6,21–23
 Fig. 2  The CL (a) and UV-visible (b) spectra of the pristine TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs recorded at room temperature. 
The UV-vis absorption spectra of the pure TiO2 NTs and NHs are shown in Fig. 2(b). In the case of TiO2 NTs, the primary absorption edge appeared in the UV region at about 387 nm. On the other hand, for the TiO2/ZnO NHs, the absorption edge appears both in the visible light (∼400–550 nm) as well as in the UV region where the spectrum becomes broader and shifted. The above observation demonstrates the absorption of the visible light by the NHs, which is probably because of the mid band gap defects.
3c. Photoelectrochemical property
The photoelectrochemical properties of the TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs are investigated considering their performances as photoelectrochemical cells to harvest solar energy. Fig. 3(a) shows the current density versus potential (J–V) curves of the TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photoelectrodes recorded in the dark and under visible white light illumination (λ > 420 nm) at room temperature. The J–V curve of the pure TiO2 NTs shows low current density of 0.09 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1 V. It is also clear that the photoresponse of the pure TiO2 NTs photoanode is very weak, and the current density increases only by 1.3 fold (from 0.09 to 0.12 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl) when the photo-electrode is illuminated by visible light. The TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs show a dark current density of 0.26 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Upon visible light illumination, the current density increases significantly to 0.7 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl. This shows a 2.7 fold increase in the current density of NHs over the measurement performed under the dark condition, indicating the enhanced photoelectrochemical performance of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs over the pristine TiO2 NTs. Fig. 3(b) shows the amperometric J–t curves of the pristine TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photoanodes recorded at a potential of 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl with the illumination ‘on’ and ‘off’. It is evident that the change in current density during the ‘on’ and ‘off’ of the illumination in TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs is very sharp, unlike the pure TiO2 NTs where the on-off switching is very poor, and the current density changes very slowly between the two states. From Fig. 3(b), it is found that TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs have noticeable improvement in the absorption of visible light over the pristine TiO2 NTs. The excellent photoresponse of the NHs photo-electrode to the on-off cycling suggests that the charge transport between the TiO2/ZnO core/shell takes place rapidly. It is evident that the ZnO nano-shell and the TiO2/ZnO interface significantly enhance the visible light absorption efficiency and the charge separation at the interface, which together result in the superior photoelectrochemical properties of the NHs photo-electrode.
 Fig. 3  (a) Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) curves of the pristine TiO2 NTs and the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs in the dark and under illumination. (b) Amperometric J–t curves of the pristine TiO2 NTs and the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrodes measured at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl under visible light on-off cycles. 
The enhanced photoelectrochemical behavior of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs can be better understood based on the n–n type-II, staggered, band alignment between ZnO and TiO2 as shown in Fig. 4(a). The ideal band discontinuity and band bending at equilibrium between n-type TiO2 and n-type ZnO has been drawn on the basis of Anderson's rule (Fig. 4(a)). Here, both the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence-band maximum (VBM) of ZnO lie a little above those of the anatase TiO2 with a small conduction band offset of few eV (≤0.1 eV)24–27 and makes a type-II heterojunction. 1D ZnO is reported to have a work function ranging between 5.2 and 5.3 eV,28,29 whereas anatase TiO2 is reported to have a work function ∼5.1 eV.27,30 As a result, the built-in voltage Vbi (difference between the work functions of TiO2 and ZnO) at the junction is around 0.1 eV or 0.2 eV, which is divided between the ZnO and TiO2 regions [Vbi = Vbi(ZnO) + Vbi(TiO2)]. The small values of Vbi(ZnO) and Vbi(TiO2) suggest that the relative injection of electrons and holes at the heterointerface are almost the same. The contact between Ti substrate and TiO2 is ohmic by nature, as the work function of Ti (4.33 eV) is less than that of the anatase TiO2. Therefore, when the whole nano-heterostructure is subjected to a positive bias, the electrons of the CB of the ZnO can easily enter into the CB of the TiO2, and finally the electrons get collected by the current collector, the Ti metal substrate. As in the case of the TiO2/ZnO NHs, the electrons from both TiO2 and ZnO are contributing, the dark current density for the NHs is naturally much higher than that of the pure TiO2 NTs electrode as observed in this experiment. Moreover, the charge transfers between the electrolyte and ZnO surface via electrochemical reactions because of the surface defects in ZnO also contribute in the dark current.31
 Fig. 4  (a) The approximate electronic band diagram of TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructure grown on metallic Ti substrate under equilibrium conditions with the schematic illustration for the charge separation and transfer in the presence of external bias or excitation. (b) The mechanism of defect transitions and electron transfer under the illumination of visible light. 
However, here the electrochemically synthesized TiO2 NTs are gifted with a large surface area, and therefore the core/shell structure also offers a large interface between the TiO2 core and the ZnO shell. The surface contains a lot of surface states due to incomplete covalent bonds and other effects other than Bloch-state bands. These surface states act as donors and lie in the bulk band gap of TiO2 and ZnO. The large interface also gives rise to a number of interface states23 in the semiconductor band gap near the conduction band edge, resulting from the interfacial stress due to lattice mismatch at the heterojunction.23 Therefore, there is a good possibility of pinning of Fermi level near the conduction band edge. These surface states, interface states and other defect states make NHs sensible to visible light (as also evidenced from the UV-vis absorption spectra), though the constituents of the heterostructures are wide band gap semiconductors. Hence, under the illumination of visible light, only defect related transitions occur rather than the NBE transition, which requires UV excitation. Under the illumination of visible light, electron–hole pairs are generated because of the absorption of light by the surface states, interface states and defect states present in NHs (Fig. 4(b)). Particularly, in ZnO, the absorption of light generates the defect bound excitons instead of ordinary electron–hole pairs. As the width of the ZnO nano-shell is very thin (∼20 nm), it therefore also has a low dielectric constant.32,33 The low dielectric constant gives rise to an exciton binding energy which is much higher than the thermal energy (kT) at room temperature. Hence, thermal energy is quite insufficient to dissociate this zero charge quasi particle into its constituent particles, i.e. electron and hole.34 However, the excitons can readily dissociate into electrons and holes only at the heterojunction interface as the CB minima of TiO2 is lower than that of ZnO (Fig. 4(a)). The dissociation of an exciton provides an electron to the CB of TiO2, and the hole remains in the ZnO side, reducing the recombination probability (Fig. 4(b)). Thus, the electron concentration increases in TiO2 cores. These electrons drift along the TiO2 NTs and get collected by the conducting Ti under the applied positive external voltage leading to the significant enhancement of the photocurrent of the NHs electrode. The holes persisted in the ZnO shell along with the holes that come from TiO2 react with OH− ions coming from the electrolyte to make an OH radical.
The very sharp photo-switching response of the NHs photo-electrode is also observed, as the photogenerated excitons in ZnO rapidly decompose into their constituent particles at the NHs interface resulting in the fast injection of electrons into the CB of TiO2 because of the interfacial band alignment, and thus the heterojunction can reduce the recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs and consequently increase the photocurrent response of the NHs.
The EIS is a powerful technique to investigate various physical parameters like carrier conductivity, charge separation, and recombination processes in the photo-responsive materials. Here, EIS has been performed to study the electrical conductivity and the photogenerated charge separation processes of pristine TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs under dark and visible light illumination conditions, as shown in Fig. 5. The intercept on the real axis in the high frequency range provides the equivalent series resistance (ESR), which includes the inherent resistances of the photoactive material used as the photo-electrode, bulk resistance of electrolyte, and the contact resistance at the interface between the electrolyte and the photoelectrode. Under the illumination of visible light, the magnitudes of the ESR obtained for TiO2 NTs and TiO2–ZnO core/shell NHs electrodes are found to be 6.2 and 5 Ω cm−2, respectively, which indicates the higher electrical conductivity of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs compared to pristine TiO2 NTs. A similar trend is also observed for both the electrodes under dark conditions as well. The radius of the arc in the high frequency region of the EIS spectrum represents the electron transfer resistance at the surface of the electrodes, resulting from the diffusion of electrons.6,35 The arcs of EIS Nyquist plots for both the TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs clearly indicate that charge transfer occurs on the photo-electrodes. From Fig. 5(a), it is evident that the arc radii on EIS plots of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs are smaller than those of the pristine TiO2 NTs under dark conditions, which indicates that the coating of the ZnO nano-shell on the TiO2 NTs core changes the charge distribution of TiO2 resulting in an easier electron transport through the NHs. In Fig. 5(b), the arc radius of the EIS spectra of the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs is also smaller than that of the TiO2 NTs under visible light illumination, which suggests that the ZnO nano-shell leads to a more effective charge separation and a faster interfacial charge transfer, providing an ideal pathway for electron transport to the current collector (Ti).6,36 These EIS results can also be easily understood based on the proposed type-II band alignment discussed earlier. The EIS studies reveal that the introduction of the ZnO nano-shell to the TiO2 NTs core significantly improves the photogenerated charge separation under visible light illumination and helps in the faster electron transport through the NHs photoanode.
 Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of the EIS of pristine TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrodes under dark (a) and visible light illumination (b) conditions recorded over the frequency range from 2 Hz to 100 kHz. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, highly ordered vertically aligned 1D arrays of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs have been successfully prepared over a large surface area by wet chemically growing the ZnO nano-shell on the TiO2 NTs core fabricated by the electrochemical anodization of Ti foil. The TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrode exhibits improved visible light photoelectrochemical and photo-switching performance compared to the pure TiO2 NTs under similar conditions, which is ascribed to the efficient interfacial charge transfer kinetics and the increase in the charge carrier densities under visible light illumination because of the formation of defect states (heterojunction interface states, surface states and other defect states in the NHs). The NHs also show enhanced green luminescence because of the defect related emission of TiO2 and ZnO. These studies suggest that the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrode is promising for enhanced visible light photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical activities.
AcknowledgementsOne of the authors, Gobinda Gopal Khan, is thankful to the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, for providing research support through the ‘INSPIRE Faculty Award’ (IFA12-ENG-09).
Notes and referencesR. Agarwal, Small, 2008, 4, 1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Niu, F. Huang, L. Cui, P. Huang, Y. Yu and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, B. X. Zhao and J. H. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. K. Sung, J. H. Kang, D. M. Jang, Y. Myung, G. B. Jung, H. S. Kim, C. S. Jung, Y. J. Cho, J. Park and C. L. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4553 RSC .K. K. Challa, S. K. Goswami, E. Oh and E. T. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 153111 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Wang, X. Zhan, Y. Wang, M. Safdar, M. Niu, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 073105 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Wang, Y.-Y. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Wu, M. Xu, Z. Peng, X.-G. Gong and G. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Wang, H. Yin, C. Jiang, M. Safdar and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 253109 CrossRef PubMed .D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, H. Zhu, Y. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Tao, S. Hark, X. Xiao and Q. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kurian, H. Seo and H. Jeon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16811 CAS .B. Santara, P. K. Giri, K. Imakita and M. Fujii, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5476 RSC .Y. C. Kong, D. P. Yu, B. Zhang, W. Fang and S. Q. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Shi, J. Chen, Z. Feng, T. Chen, Y. Lian, X. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 693 CAS .S. Ghosh, G. G. Khan, B. Das and K. Mandal, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 123927 CrossRef PubMed .A. F. Kohan, G. Ceder, D. Morgan and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 15019 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Børseth, B. G. Svensson, Y. A. Kuznetsov, P. Klason, X. Q. Zhao and M. Willander, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 262112 CrossRef PubMed .K. Liu, M. Sakurai, M. Liao and M. Aono, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19835 CAS .H. Zeng, G. Duan, Y. Li, S. Yang, X. Xu and W. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 561 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, H. Zhu, Y. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Tao, S. Hark, X. Xiao and Q. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Sarkar, G. G. Khan, A. K. Singh and K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23540 CAS .B. Cheng, G. Wu, Z. Ouyang, X. Su, Y. Xiao and S. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4057 CAS .V. Manthina, J. P. C. Baena, G. Liu and A. G. Agrios, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23864 CAS .D. O. Sscanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798 CrossRef PubMed .M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .F. Meng and Z. A. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 6715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. D. Bai, E. G. Wang, P. X. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1147 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, C. J. Summers and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013111 CrossRef PubMed .G. Xiong, R. Shao, T. C. Droubay, A. G. Joly, K. M. Beck, S. A. Chambers and W. P. Hess, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2133 CrossRef CAS .X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X.-B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. A. Fonoberov and A. A. Balandin, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron., 2006, 1, 19 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Yang, W. Guo, X. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Qi and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. D. Baranovskii, M. Wiemer, A. V. Nenashev, F. Jansson and F. Gebhard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1214 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Rakhi, W. Chen, D. Cha and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Pan, C. H. Chen, K. Zhu and Z. Y. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 235402 CrossRef PubMed .
Footnote† Authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) FESEM and (b and c) TEM images of the as-prepared TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs. (d) SAED pattern of the NHs. The inset of (d) shows the SAED pattern of TiO2. (e) HRTEM image of the interface between TiO2/ZnO core/shell. (f) EDS spectrum and (g) XRD pattern of TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The CL (a) and UV-visible (b) spectra of the pristine TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs recorded at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Current density vs. applied potential (J–V) curves of the pristine TiO2 NTs and the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs in the dark and under illumination. (b) Amperometric J–t curves of the pristine TiO2 NTs and the TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrodes measured at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl under visible light on-off cycles.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The approximate electronic band diagram of TiO2/ZnO core/shell nano-heterostructure grown on metallic Ti substrate under equilibrium conditions with the schematic illustration for the charge separation and transfer in the presence of external bias or excitation. (b) The mechanism of defect transitions and electron transfer under the illumination of visible light.	 

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of the EIS of pristine TiO2 NTs and TiO2/ZnO core/shell NHs photo-electrodes under dark (a) and visible light illumination (b) conditions recorded over the frequency range from 2 Hz to 100 kHz.	 
Footnote
† Authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
