Carbon nanofluidics of rapid water transport for energy applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60253B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60253B
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 565-576Carbon nanofluidics of rapid water transport for energy applications

        
          
            Hyung Gyu 
            Park
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yousung 
            Jung
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Mechanical and Process Engineering, ETH Zürich, Zürich CH-8092, Switzerland. E-mail: parkh@ethz.ch;  Fax: +41 44 632 1672;   Tel: +41 44 632 9460
bGraduate School of Energy, Environment, Water, and Sustainability, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, Korea. E-mail: ysjn@kaist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 42 350 1710;   Tel: +82 42 350 1712
Received 
      14th July 2013
    First published on 18th October 2013AbstractFast transport of water inside nanoscale graphitic surfaces, namely carbon nanotubes and graphene, forms the basis of aqueous carbon nanofluidic phenomena for which there are numerous applications in energy and environmental fields. In this tutorial review, we provide the basic principles of nanofluidics using carbon materials. We also address thermodynamic and structural aspects of favourable water confinement between hydrophobic carbon surfaces. We outline the experimental and theoretical history and consider the current status of ultrafast water transport inside carbon nanotubes, together with recent applications of aqueous carbon nanofluidic phenomena for energy generation and energy storage. We briefly discuss the challenges and opportunities for utilization of fast water transport in the graphitic nanoenvironment as a means to offer a clean and sustainable source of energy technology.
Hyung Gyu Park
Hyung Gyu Park is an Assistant Professor of energy technology in the Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich, where he leads the laboratory of Nanoscience for Energy Technology and Sustainability. He received his PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California, Berkeley, with pioneering research on nanoscale mass transport in carbon nanotubes in collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. His research activities include carbon nanomaterials syntheses, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, energy harvesting and storage, and carbon nanofluidics.
Yousung Jung
Yousung Jung received his PhD in Theoretical Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2005 working with Prof. Martin Head-Gordon studying electronic structure theory. After postdoctoral work with Prof. Rudy Marcus at California Institute of Technology as a Glanville Postdoctoral Fellow, he took up a faculty position at KAIST in 2009. He has been an Associate Professor since 2012, working on theoretical and computational research on catalysis, gas capture and separation, electrochemistry, and carbon nanofluidics. His group is also developing new simulation techniques and quantum chemistry methods.

Key learning points
(1) Basic principles of carbon nanofluidics different from continuum treatment.
(2) Structure–thermodynamics relationship for favourable water confinement in carbon nanotubes.
(3) Experimental status and theoretical interpretations of ultrafast water transport inside carbon nanotubes.
(4) Applications of carbon nanofluidics for energy-efficient desalination technology.
(5) Applications of carbon nanofluidics for energy generation and storage.

1. Introduction
The transport of fluids through nanoscale conduits is essential to our daily life and the life process itself. Water, protons and ions are transported across cellular membranes in a rapid, selective and efficient way through specialized protein channels of nanometer or subnanometer size.1 Transmembrane protein channels1 such as aquaporins (water channels), proton channels, and ion channels that can be thought of as biological nanofluidic channels share several common features in that they are composed of narrow hydrophobic (i.e., water-repelling) pore regions with an optional filter region enriched with charged residues selective of a certain type of ions. To aid their functions and transport timescales, hydrophobic molecular channels often utilize specific hydrogen-bonding networks of water molecules. Although exciting progress has been seen in recent decades, the underlying mechanisms responsible for these fast mass transports, selectivity, gating, and the functional role of hydrophobic pore lining and charged functionalities in these biological nanochannels remain marginally understood due to the biological complexity and associated experimental limitations. Thus, it is important to create simplified and biomimetic synthetic nanochannels that could help clarify the physics of rapid water flow and selective ion permeation at nanoscales.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and the related confinement by graphitic surfaces such as graphene are an excellent playground for understanding the biological nanofluidic phenomena mentioned, namely, rapid yet selective mass transport in hydrophobic environments. A good understanding of the key origins and mechanisms of the nanofluidic phenomena in carbon-based materials could facilitate, numerous applications in various fields, in particular in energy technology applications, the focus of the present review.
Understanding the physics behind the transport behaviour of fluids at nanoscales is essential in the development of energy and clean technologies in the present era of global concern for energy and water sustainability. Future developments in the direction of water purification and desalination, an important branch of clean technology, are likely to incorporate a synthetic membrane as their main constituent. The availability of safe, clean and inexpensive water has emerged as an issue that defines the global problems of our time2 as the water shortage problem is increasing due to population growth, industrialization, contamination of available resources and climate change. One of the key technologies to address this issue is membrane-based wastewater purification and seawater desalination. Available options for membrane technology include reverse osmosis and forward osmosis, the former marking a benchmark in the market and the latter receiving renewed attention from the research community.3 Although the reverse osmosis technology is currently considered as a practical seawater desalination option, the requirement to apply high pressures across the semipermeable membrane in order to extract fresh water raises operational costs and membrane fouling concerns and as a result reverse osmosis is not yet considered entirely sustainable in terms of energy efficiency. From the membrane operational point of view, the forward osmosis option can be attractive for a significantly lower demand of applied pressure that suggests diminished concerns of the operational costs and fouling. In order to increase the energy efficiency and freshwater production, high flux membranes could play a crucial role. Further developments of reverse and forward osmosis for energy and cost-efficient water treatment are reliant on the synthesis and improvement of semipermeable membranes that can selectively and rapidly permeate fresh water. Carbon nanofluidics can provide solutions in these areas.
This tutorial review is intended to cover basic nanofluidic concepts and the underlying principles in carbon-based materials, the current status of experimental observations and theoretical interpretations, and key applications in energy-efficient filtration, energy conversion and energy storage. It is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the basics of nanofluidics, the structural aspects of nanoconfined water in carbon materials, and the basic thermodynamic principles that allow for the filling of carbon nanotubes with water which is probably related to the underlying thermodynamic driving force of all graphene-based nanofluidic phenomena. We then describe the experimental realization of fast mass transport through CNTs and present the theoretical justification for this phenomenon. In Section 3, as an application of fast nanofluidics to the water treatment area, we survey the current status of the filtration technology of energy-efficient (low-pressure, high flux, and ion-selective) membranes. In Section 4, we provide examples in which carbon nanofluidics can generate electricity, i.e., energy conversion from mechanical (fast flow) to electrical (voltage generation). Carbon nanofluidics can also be applied in energy storage in which the intercalation kinetics (fast flow) of charge carriers is important, as described in Section 5. In this section, the mechanism of rapid ion transport in a carbon nanofluidic environment is also briefly described.
2. Principles of carbon nanofluidics
The task of observing and understanding the thermodynamics and kinetics of water flows in the graphitic nanoenvironment of CNTs gives rise to a set of unique fundamental questions. Considering a large length scale mismatch, the first important question concerns the applicability of conventional and well-established continuum fluid theory to the nanofluidic phenomena. In Section 2.1, we describe the basics of nanofluidics. The second question is that it is rather counterintuitive to predict and observe that polar liquid species such as water and aqueous solutions can enter and fill the conduits of the CNT interior. The thermodynamics of water in the graphitic nanotubular environment are described in Section 2.2. The third question is about the dynamics of water under nanoscale confinement of these conduits commensurable with the molecule's own sizes (ca. 0.24 nm). Ultrafast water transport has been predicted and verified, although the detailed and quantitative aspects remain to be further investigated. Section 2.3 deals with these unique water transport phenomena.
2.1 Basics of carbon nanofluidics
Water inside nanotubes has different characteristics to water in the bulk state. Firstly, such an extreme confinement can break the conventional treatment of water as a continuous medium, or a pseudo-particle composed of a chunk of molecules, in discussing mass transport and fluid flow. Extreme confinement would not be a unique property of a water–CNT system, if not for the intuitive expectation that the hydrophobic channel should intrinsically repel water; therefore hydrophobicity is the second trait. The third characteristic may be related to hydrogen bonding, a unique property of water causing anomalous behaviour even in a bulk state. It is known that water in the bulk state exhibits several morphologies depending on the thermodynamic conditions of its surroundings. If somehow this extreme confinement creates a unique thermodynamic condition, the hydrogen bonding of water may adapt itself to the new environment by taking a molecular configuration unseen in the bulk phase. All these characteristics that are not observed in the bulk phase can affect the dynamic behaviour of water molecules in nanoconduits provided by the internal space of CNTs.
The confinement provided by the CNT interior to water could disable the continuum hydrodynamics description that is governed by Navier–Stokes equations and characterized by no consideration of molecular structures.4 In the continuum description, for example, a fluid particle is defined as a volume containing a relatively large number of molecules. Since less than a 1% statistical fluctuation or statistical resolution of a physical property can be obtained for more than ten thousand particles, we may regard this number of molecules as a continuum limit for fluid particles. A sphere containing ten thousand equidistant molecules would have a diameter corresponding to about 25 molecules. Accounting for the size of a water molecule, the diameter of the 10000-molecule sphere will measure about 6 nm. Thus, in order to allow the hypothesis of hydrodynamics to work, a system would need a spatial size of its domain far larger than this size criterion. In the domain considered as the graphitic nanoenvironment of CNTs however, the primary dimension is comparable or smaller than 6 nm, and we enter the domain of nanofluidics, a field that even today is only marginally explored. The natural question to ask is then whether conventional hydrodynamics theory will work in situations where its variables vary appreciably over the molecular length and relaxation time scales, and the answer is most probably NO.
Classical hydrodynamics describes this flow process by introducing a conceptual length scale called slip length (Ls, Fig. 1). A no-slip boundary condition, as typically presumed in macroscale continuum fluid dynamics, demands a fluid close to a solid boundary to obtain the same tangential velocity as the solid. When the tangential velocity of fluid is not the same as that of the solid, it is described as though the fluid slips on the surface. It is this slip boundary condition that helps us describe the non-continuum water transport phenomena in CNTs within the framework of continuum dynamics. For example, Ls may serve as an indicator for the molecular transport interaction between water and CNTs, thereby assisting in capturing the physical process responsible for the flow phenomena.5,6 It serves as a reference to explain enhanced flow rates relative to no-slip Hagen–Poiseuille formalism and is practically used by experimental studies using CNT membranes.5,6
 Fig. 1  Hydrodynamic slip flow profile characterized by slip length, Ls. 
Slip length is defined according to the Navier boundary condition as eqn (1): (1)where n and t denote normal and tangential directions of the wall, vt is the velocity of a fluid tangential to the wall, and vwall is the velocity of the solid wall. The tangential velocity of the fluid relative to the solid, vt,wall − vwall, is denoted as a slip velocity. Larger slip lengths can be related with lower liquid–solid friction. Therefore, very large slip lengths of water flows in CNTs often signify a considerable enhancement in water flow rates. As the size of the nanotube decreases, the dynamics at its surface play an increasingly important role. In investigating the relationship between the slip length and the interfacial properties it is useful to understand the slip length in connection with liquid–solid interface friction. The friction force is linearly proportional to slip velocity as in eqn (2). By definition, the slip length is related to a friction coefficient as eqn (3). Fw = −ALλ (vt,wall − vwall),(2) Ls = μ/λ,(3)where Fw is the total microscopic lateral force acting on the wall surface (i.e., friction), λ is the liquid–solid friction coefficient, AL is the lateral area, and μ is the liquid dynamic viscosity.
An approximation of the Green–Kubo relation can give an expression for the friction coefficient λ: eqn (4).7 (4)where τ is the relaxation time, 〈Fw2〉equ is the rms friction force, and kBT is the reference thermal energy. The relaxation time is written as τ ≈ σ2/D where σ is the scale of molecular diameter and D is the fluid diffusion coefficient. From eqn (3) and (4), the slip length can be estimated as: (5)According to eqn (5), a substantial flow slip implying a weak liquid–solid interaction is expected at high temperatures or on very smooth surfaces (low friction force). For the flow in a circular pipe, the solutions for the velocity (U) and the corresponding volume flow rate (QH–P and Qs for the no-slip Hagen–Poiseuille flow and the slip flow, respectively) in the flow direction, x, with respect to the distance from the center, r, are given by: (6) (7) (8)where p and R represent pressure and pipe radius, respectively. In principle (eqn (7) and (8)), it is expected that the water flow rate is linearly proportional to the pressure forcing, albeit that there is a transition state theory-based prediction of a nonlinear relationship for very large forcing.8 So far, experimental data available for pressure of up to several bars have supported the linear relationship, but careful validation over a wide range of forcing would be interesting.
Prerequisite to the flow of water in such a hydrophobic CNT conduit is a process of capillary filling. Classical hydrodynamics describes the thermodynamics of capillarity by the Kelvin equation (eqn (9)) and the dynamics of a liquid meniscus by the Washburn equation9 (eqn (10)): (9) (10)where p(R) and L are the water vapor pressure near the pore entrance and the imbibing length (at time t) of a capillary of radius R, respectively. po is the bulk saturated pressure of water, Vm is the molar volume of liquid water, and γwv and γwl are the wall–vapor and wall–liquid surface tensions, respectively. Regarding eqn (9)γwl > γwv in a hydrophobic pore, and thus the pore wall prefers to be in contact with vapor. For a given pore of radius R, there exists a vapor pressure p(R) > po where vapor and liquid may coexist in equilibrium near the hydrophobic wall. It is only when the pressure exceeds p(R) that water may condense; otherwise, only vapor can exist inside the pore. As the pore shrinks to a nanometer scale, p(R) increases significantly. Hence, hydration of the hydrophobic pore requires far higher pressure. A sensible counter-argument against the capillarity argument is based on the stochastic behaviour of water molecules around the pore mouth of a narrow CNT, curtailing the definition of a contact angle and lending a rationale to the idea of CNT imbibition of water, which will be discussed in detail in the next section. With regard to the imbibition dynamics on the other hand, the Washburn equation is derived from an outcome of a combination of Hagen–Poiseuille and Young–Laplace equations and so limited to the marching front of a viscous fluid to which no-slip boundary condition is largely applied.
2.2 Physical chemistry of water in carbon nanotubes: structure–thermodynamics relationship
How water behaves inside the hydrophobic nanoconduits is a topic of active debate today. One of the first questions is what happens to water if confined between hydrophobic walls? Hydration of CNTs has long been questioned because water tends to recede and separate the bulk phase from the hydrophobic surfaces by forming a “vapor layer.” For example, this drying transition could bring about attraction between two nonpolar surfaces in water if they are closer than a critical distance, a phenomenon known as hydrophobic collapse.10 An estimated critical length of 100 nm for water at room temperature and atmospheric pressure between two hydrophobic plates has been proposed by Lum et al.10 Abrupt termination of hydrogen bonding on the hydrophobic surface could weaken or even destroy the bonding in very narrow tubes, while some studies suggest that significant water occupancy can be obtained inside the tubes despite the loss of hydrogen bonds.11
The hydrogen bond is useful in explaining water configuration or properties inside CNTs because water molecules form a hydrogen bond mainly via electrostatic interactions. It is well known from the ice rule that each molecule in bulk liquid water is connected to around 3.6 neighbouring molecules by hydrogen bonding. Many results of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations support the assumption that water molecules could take a decreased number of hydrogen bonds in tubular nanoconfinement in order to obtain a configuration adapted to such a narrow nanotube. In an extreme case, for example, the water molecule could lose two hydrogen bonds on average in a very narrow CNT where only a single file of water is allowed as illustrated in Fig. 2.11,12
 Fig. 2  One-dimensional hydrogen-bonded water wires in (6,6) carbon nanotubes formed spontaneously (a) and by an osmotic driving force (b). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 12 © 2005 Annual Reviews, Inc.) 
The first MD investigation on single file water in a 8 Å-wide (6,6) CNT was undertaken by Hummer and colleagues.11 They found counter-intuitively that water molecules occupy the hydrophobic CNT interior spontaneously by taking a single file configuration, allowing only two hydrogen bonds per molecule. This occupancy, interestingly, can undergo fluctuations between filled- and empty states if the water-to-carbon interaction potential is artificially rendered more repelling, hinting that physicochemical alteration of CNTs could influence the spontaneous water imbibition property of CNTs. The latter results also show the significance of the accuracy of force fields used in MD simulations that can change the simulation results so dramatically that even the qualitative picture (or the sign of relative free energy) could change.
The persistent water occupancy reported by experiments and the MD simulations is rather surprising from both energetic and entropic viewpoints. When water molecules in bulk enter the hydrophobic interior of nanotubes, the first event to notice is that water molecules have to break favourable water–water tetrahedral hydrogen bond interactions and create less favourable water–carbon surface interactions inside the CNT. That is, the filling of CNTs with water appears to be energetically unfavourable. Since the confined matter generally has less entropy compared to “unconfined” matter due to reduced configurational space to explore, confined water inside the CNT may be expected to be entropically unfavourable compared to bulk water. In other words, due to the nanoscale nature, the computed observation of spontaneous filling of hydrophobic CNTs with water in all CNT sizes seems to be against intuitive consideration of both internal energy and entropy for confined water.
The mechanism of this unusual stability of water in hydrophobic nanoconfinement has been understood by calculating the free energy of confined water relative to the bulk, and splitting it into enthalpic and entropic components. Hummer et al.11 first suggested the possibility of the entropic origin of favourable free energy for confined water in (6,6) CNTs with 0.8 nm in diameter, since due to the hand-in-hand hydrogen-bonding configuration in a single-file water chain, water molecules can rotate freely around the aligned bonds, increasing the rotational entropy significantly compared to the hindered rotation in tetrahedral bulk water. Water in a single-file chain is also unique compared with bulk water in that the molecules of the chain are tightly bound, with an extended hydrogen-bond life time (5.6 ps compared to 1.0 ps in bulk water), and highly-oriented and aligned with a tube axis with collective flipping directions every 2–3 ns on average.13 By adopting a slight zigzag configuration, the single-file water chain strengthens the hydrogen bonding network.
Pascal et al.14 have expanded the thermodynamic considerations of the single file water chain to CNTs of larger sizes and showed that the favourable thermodynamics of confined water are closely related to the structure of water (in particular hydrogen-bonded structures) in this hydrophobic nanoconfinement (Fig. 3). In particular, for CNTs of 1.1–1.2 nm diameter, water molecules form rigid ice-like pentagons and hexagons that are energetically very stable due to the increased average number of hydrogen bonds compared to bulk at the expense of reduced entropy due to the rigidity of an ice-like water structure (Fig. 4). The net effect is that confined water is more stable than the bulk water that is enthalpically driven. For all other sizes (less than 1.1 nm, and larger than 1.2 nm), however, it is the entropy that drives the favourable free energy (spontaneous filling) although the enthalpy is unfavourable due to the reduced number of hydrogen bonds for these CNT–water systems. The origin of increased entropy for the confined water in these CNTs is in the enhanced rotational and translational degrees of freedom due to less hydrogen bonding (less constraint) and reduced density inside the CNTs. The spontaneous water filling and associated thermodynamics indeed have their origin in the hydrogen bonding ability of water. They showed it by using the coarse-grained water model that is designed to lack hydrogen-bonding ability, which indeed yielded the spontaneous emptying of the nanotube, rather than filling.
 Fig. 3  (a) Equilibrium structures of water confined in CNTs of different size. Only armchair-type CNTs are considered. (b) Infinite nanotubes used in thermodynamic simulations. (c) Relative Helmholtz free energy of confined water compared to bulk water. (d) Comparison of enthalpic vs. entropic contributions to the free energy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © National Academy of Sciences.) 
 Fig. 4  Strong correlation between the average number of hydrogen bonds per confined water molecule and the internal energy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © National Academy of Sciences.) 
More details about various structural aspects of confined water in CNTs have been reviewed elsewhere,15 including the phase diagram of confined water, CNT chirality-dependent water structures, temperature and pressure dependence of the free energy of confined water, etc. Since this tutorial review is about nanofluidics, however, we will limit our discussion to the structure–thermodynamics relationship of confined water as described above, as well as structural aspects of water confinement that are directly relevant to the rapid flow of water in the graphitic nanoenvironment in the next section.
Advanced technology has enabled experimental confirmation of water infiltration of CNTs, beginning with CNTs of relatively large diameter. Shortly after a direct TEM observation of water in a large diameter multiwalled CNT by Naguib et al.,16 Kolesnikov and colleagues17 employed a neutron diffraction technique to provide strong evidence that water does fill the interior of a 1.4 nm-wide (10,10) CNT. It is noticeable that water in this CNT poses a configuration of a single file surrounded by an octagonal “water nanotube” of a square crystal unit. Later, spectroscopic characterization of the endohedral water under CNT nanoconfinement has been enabled by techniques of proton nuclear magnetic resonance,18 infrared vibration quenching,19 and X-ray scattering (Fig. 5).20
 Fig. 5  Experimental verification of water infiltration of CNTs: (a) transmission electron microscopy (reproduced by permission from ref. 16 © American Chemical Society); (b) neutron diffraction (reproduced by permission from ref. 21 © American Physical Society); and (c) 1H nuclear magnetic resonance. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 18 © American Chemical Society.) 
2.3 Ultrafast water transport phenomena: experiments and simulations
In this section, we apply the basic nanofluidic theory described above to the case of ultrafast water transport inside the nanotubes, along with actual experimental measurements and computational observations. If water can reside spontaneously in the CNT interior, how will it diffuse along the nanotube conduit? This question on dynamics could be addressed by considering the shearing interaction between water molecules and graphitic channels, as well as the entrance process of water into the nanotube. Residing in a CNT and driven in an axial direction (e.g., by pressure forcing), each water molecule atop the CNT wall would experience an energy landscape set by the overall potential interaction, which is rather weak because of the hydrophobic interaction, between water molecules and carbon graphitic crystals. It has been shown that the energy landscape can be smoothed as the CNT diameter decreases, known as an “egg carton” analogy.22 Each water molecule right near the CNT wall could then experience less energy consumption to overcome the energy hills and valleys, hinting that atomic-scale smoothness of the wall may reduce the friction exerted on the water flow. Water flow as the result of the balance between friction and driving forces should be faster than the flows through the similarly sized channels of other materials that impart a much “rougher” potential energy landscape, a basic mechanism of water flow enhancement.
The dynamics and enhancement of water transport in CNTs primarily hinge on the hydrogen-bond configurations at various degrees of tubular graphitic nanoconfinements. A single-file water wire could conduct rapidly (ca. 17 H2O per ns at room temperature) in a concerted burst-like motion along the nanotube axis11 if driven by the thermal fluctuation of water molecules at either of the open ends of an ultra-narrow CNT, e.g., 0.8 nm in diameter. When biased by applied pressure drop (ca. 400 bar) in an MD domain the water wire has shown a fast conduction through the nanotube, a speed comparable to the transport rate in aquaporins (4–6 H2O per ns),23 a process later modeled by random walk diffusion.24 In a narrow hydrophilic channel in contrast, water cannot diffuse very fast, possibly because of the strong affinity of water for the wall.25 Beckstein and Sansom26 have pointed to the fact that water molecules can retain the three-dimensional thermal velocity distribution, even though one-dimensional nanoconfinement by a nonpolar conduit increases the self-diffusivity of water.
Although water transport dynamics in wider CNTs is still not well understood at the molecular level, a large number of results from MD and experimental investigations suggest that water can flow in these nanotubes much faster than conventional hydrodynamics theory predicts. Researchers have used the slip length theory as a metric (Qs/QH–P or Ls, see Section 2.1) to describe the water flow rates measured using CNT membranes5,6,27 of which parallel nanotube manifolds enable the direct flow rate measurement in an ensemble average way. By use of a CNT membrane with nanotube pores of around 7 nm, Hinds et al.5 reported greatly enhanced water flow rates per pore. Holt et al.6 have measured water flow enhancement through a CNT membrane with narrower pores of 1.3–2 nm. Their estimated values of slip lengths (and enhancement factors) are 54 μm (Qs/QH–P of 61400)5 and 140–1400 nm (Qs/QH–P of 560–8400).6 A later experiment performed for much wider carbon nanopipes with diameters of 44 nm suggested a slip length of 32–38 nm (Qs/QH–P of 22–24).27 Many simulations, mostly MD, have been performed in order to compare and understand the fast water transport in CNTs. Hanasaki and Nakatani's report (ref. 152 of Park15) is one of the first studies to reveal that water velocity profiles in CNTs are quite flat (plug-like) rather than parabolic (Poiseuille-like), except for a slowdown region very near the CNT wall. The plug-like water velocity profile indicates that wires and layers of water molecules, believed to exist in CNTs of a few nanometers in diameter, could be tightly interconnected by the electrostatic interaction of hydrogen bonding. Tightly connected pairs of water molecules in one dimension may easily transfer energy in a radial direction, and it is the weak interaction between water and carbon that causes quite low friction at the water–CNT interface and so responds semi-concertedly to the forcing applied in the streamwise direction. The ultrafast flow phenomena of water in CNTs have been both confirmed22,28 and re-examined29,30 by later MD simulations. Since most MD simulations employed to study condensed phase systems still use empirical potentials (rather than first principles or ab initio), the quantitative results and conclusions of the MD papers depend heavily on the accuracy of the force field. In particular, for water–CNT or water–graphene systems, the carbon–water interaction potential must be validated carefully since a slight change in the carbon–oxygen interaction potential can change the qualitative picture of water filling vs. water emptying inside the CNTs.11 Other possible sources of discrepancies for MD simulations are the length of the nanotubes, the length of the simulation time and the way the electrostatics are treated (simple truncation vs. periodic Ewald summation technique).
Recently, Falk et al.22 have reported a strong curvature dependence of the friction between water and CNTs. According to their analysis, the friction decreases when water is placed inside narrower CNTs, leading to super-lubricity for sub-1 nm CNTs and single-file water wiring. When water is placed outside CNTs, the friction increases as the curvature gets larger. In a reference case for water on a flat graphene surface, no change in friction was predicted. The predicted flow enhancement is of the order of 103–104 for CNTs of 1–2 nm in diameter and of 101 for CNT diameters of around 50 nm. The fast water flow in narrow CNTs, i.e., 1.6 nm in diameter, has been confirmed by Joseph and Aluru,28 and attributed to hydrophobicity and atomic-level smoothness. On the other hand, based on their MD simulations Thomas and McGaughey29 have proposed a continuum-based model accounting for changes in water viscosity and slip length. Their model predicts a water flow enhancement factor lower than that of Falk et al.22 A very recent MD simulation of water flows through a few micrometer long CNTs also predicts rather lower enhancement factors.30 A clear disparity seems to exist among the MD simulation results in terms of quantitative prediction of the water flow enhancement in CNTs.

Fig. 6 summarizes experimental data and MD predictions to date (refer also to Kannam et al.31 and Fig. 1 and Table 1 therein). The absence of sufficient experimental data means it is questionable which results are more acceptable and how the enhancement factor (or slip length) is related to the nanotube sizes, as shown by the disagreements in the enhancement factor among models and experiments, even though the fast flow phenomenon of water in CNTs is well established. This issue creates the need for referee experimental verifications using various degrees of CNT nanoconfinements. The major obstacle seen today is the limited options for facile manufacturing of CNT nanofluidic platforms such as membranes and nanofluidic channel devices.
 Fig. 6  Water flow enhancement over the Hagen–Poiseuille formalism with respect to the CNT diameter. Comparison among different models and experiments. 
3. Energy efficient filtration
One of the important reasons why CNT membranes have attracted the attention of those carrying out both simulations and experiments lies in their ultrahigh permeability, typically in the range of 105–106 Barrer, which is an attractive property related to energy and cost-efficiency resulting from ultrafast transport in CNTs. CNT membranes can therefore offer a useful platform for advances in the current understanding of nanofluidics and the development of novel nanofiltration membranes for water purification for human consumption and other medical, chemical, and industrial uses.
3.1 Ion permeation and rejection under ultrafast transport for water desalination
The permeation and rejection of ions in a graphitic nanoenvironment are two related processes. They share the same basic mechanisms governing the behaviours of ions in CNTs, and their balance determines selectivity for specific ions. For CNTs of small diameters, the narrow tubular confinement and the hydrated ions can be largely of the same dimension. Although this commensurability could lend a mechanism of size exclusion (or steric hindrance) to a CNT membrane, it has been reported that the exclusion of small ions such as Na+, K+, Cl−, etc. requires CNT diameters of around 0.8 nm.32 As the CNT pores enlarge to more than 1 nm, a free energy penalty associated with the hydration shell of an ion drops to almost negligible values either to show a coherence resonance phenomenon caused by ion blocking of a CNT conduit33 or to permit free ion access.34
If the openings of the nanotubes could be charged electrostatically by chemical functionalization, however, then the electrostatic screening at the CNT mouth could allow for another ion rejection mechanism based on Coulombic repulsion and electroneutrality. Classical Donnan membrane equilibrium theory describes this mechanism very well. Once an aqueous electrolyte contacts a membrane with fixed charges, an electrostatic (Coulombic) force tends to repel co-ions (ions having the same charge sign as the fixed pore charges) from the membrane, while counterions are freely accessible. As a result, charged species in the electrolyte are distributed unequally between the membrane and solution phases, which establishes a potential difference called the Donnan potential and also creates a charge-imbalance region in the electrolyte characterized by Debye length (λD). When a pressure gradient is applied to the membrane–electrolyte system, the Donnan potential tends to exclude co-ions in the electrolyte, whereas the electroneutrality requirement arising from the energetic cost of charge separation drives counterion exclusion as well. The ion rejection coefficient (R) for point-charge ions takes the following expression in accordance with Donnan theory (ref. 36 and references therein): (11)where ci and cmi are the co-ion concentrations in the electrolyte and membrane phases, respectively, cmx is the membrane charge concentration, z is the ion valence, and subscripts i and j indicate co-ions and counterions, respectively. Recalling the relation, ci ∼ λD−2, it can be inferred that the necessary condition for ion exclusion is that the Debye length (the range of ion electrostatic interaction) should be larger than the CNT pore size (diameter). Fornasiero et al.,35,36 have demonstrated the possibility of ion exclusion by membranes of 1–2 nm CNT pores of which opening is functionalized by carboxylic groups (pKa value of 4.5 (ref. 37)). They obtained R greater than 90% for a bulky multivalent anion in a potassium ferricyanide (K3Fe(CN)6) solution and R of 40% for a small monovalent anion in potassium chloride (KCl). The effects of ion concentration and solution pH on the ion rejection fully support the significance of the Donnan-type ion exclusion mechanism and the role of the Debye length with reference to the CNT pore size.
For CNTs with larger diameters, ion permeation can take place more dominantly than rejection. In this case, though, external electric fields applied to CNTs can provide a gated ion transport mechanism, allowing selectivity to the otherwise unselective ion transport. As demonstrated by Majumder et al.,38 functionalization of the CNT mouths and defect sites with bulky moieties can strengthen both electrostatic interaction and steric hindrance between ions and CNT pores, promoting higher selectivity. Incorporation of an electric current or control of a solution pH into the ion transport can also conjugate the selectivity mechanism. Combined control of different physical mechanisms in association with ions and CNTs can allow for application-oriented designing of selectivity via careful balance between ion permeation and rejection.
3.2 Efficiency in water purification and desalination
Nearly frictionless graphitic walls of the CNT pores and electrostatically charged (or physically gated) mouths can create a unique nanoscale environment for ultrafast water flow and meaningful ion selectivity. This rare combination gives rise to a significant advantage of the CNT membranes over traditional membrane materials for energy and cost-efficient ultra-filtration and nanofiltration applications. For example, it has been established that water flux through CNT membranes does not drop by an order of magnitude during the colloidal nanoparticle filtration processes.6 Moreover, Fornasiero et al.35 have verified that ultrafast water permeation is maintained at an enhancement factor of around 1000 during the ion exclusion process of potassium ferricyanide (0.6 mM). This water flow enhancement is nearly the same level as in the transport characterization of pure water (Section 2.3), indicating that the operational cost of the ultra and nanofiltration process could be saved by use of CNT membranes. Corry39 discusses in detail the impact of the electrostatically charged CNT mouths on seawater desalination. Recently, researchers have argued that the seawater desalination process could be operated at much lower cost if forward osmosis is selected instead of reverse osmosis.3 Since the single largest requirement for the forward osmosis membrane is simply the maximum water permeation capacity, in view of cost efficiency it is envisaged that the ultra-permeable CNT membranes could make in future a significant impact on the forward osmosis-based seawater desalination process. To realize this vision, the manufacturing challenge for scale enlargement must be overcome.
4. Energy generation
Whether the fast flow (mechanical energy) of water or polar liquids in the graphitic nanoenvironments can be converted to electrical energy is an extremely interesting subject both academically and for practical applications. The potential electric current and voltage generation in graphitic materials immersed in flowing liquids was first predicted theoretically in 2001 by Kral and Shapiro for metallic carbon nanotubes.40 Since then, many experiments have reported the voltage generation phenomena in which the detailed results differ in the geometry of graphitic surfaces (flows inside of and outside of CNTs, flows under graphene), flowing liquids (mostly water) with and without ions, and the device configuration.
In their 2001 paper Kral and Shapiro initially proposed two mechanisms as the underlying principles of voltage creation. The first mechanism is the momentum transfer from the flowing liquid molecules to the acoustic phonons in the nanotubes dragging the free charge carriers, an effect similar to the phonon driving of electrons in thermoelectric power generation (Fig. 7). The second proposal was the direct scattering of the free carriers by the fluctuating Coulombic fields of the flowing molecules and ions in the liquid. The authors, however, noted that the latter direct scattering mechanism induces a current that is five orders of magnitude smaller than that created by the former non-equilibrium phonon dragging.40
 Fig. 7  The flowing solvent molecules denoted as an arrow and pairs of circles create a phonon wind in the nanotube, which then drags the free charge carriers in the nanotube, generating electricity. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 40 © American Physical Society.) 
The first experimental realization of energy harvesting using carbon nanofluidics appeared in 2003 by Ghosh et al. in an experiment with the flow of liquid outside single-walled carbon nanotube bundles in the 1-dimensional nanotube direction.41 For example, for pure water flowing at 1.8 mm s−1, the induced voltage was 2.7 mV for a sample length of 1 mm, which then increased by fourfold with the addition of ions, e.g., 1.2 M HCl solution. Notably, the experiments showed a nearly logarithmic response of the voltage to the flow velocity, a strong dependence on the polarity of the liquid as well as the ion concentration, but a weak dependence on the viscosity of the liquid. A significant dependence of the induced voltage on the flow velocity suggested that the fast flow of water (and other liquids) along the graphitic surfaces is the key component of the energy harvesting through the graphitic nanofluidics. Liu et al.42 have showed that multiwalled CNTs vertically aligned along the flow direction produced ∼30 mV in aqueous solution of 1 M NaCl at a flow velocity of 0.5 mm s−1. Again, nonlinear voltage–velocity response was observed. In a stick–slip model, Persson et al.43 suggested that the drifting adsorbed ions generate a voltage via electronic friction with the free electrons inside the nanotube.
The flow of common gases such as argon, nitrogen, and oxygen over carbon nanotubes have also been shown to generate voltage and current at the speed of a few m s−1, which can be used in gas flow sensors and energy conversion devices.44 The fundamental mechanism, however, was suggested to be different in the gas flow-induced voltage generation from the liquid flow-induced voltage generation. In the case of gas flow, the pressure difference along the streamlines generates a temperature gradient across the sample, which then produces the measured voltage due to the Seebeck effects.
The weak coupling between water dipoles and carbon nanotubes has been discussed for some time. In particular, for a single-file water chain confined in (6,6) single-walled (SW)CNTs, the electrostatic field of the water dipoles polarized the nanotubes and induced a charge distribution on the nanotube surface. Yuan and Zhao48 estimated a voltage difference of 17.2 mV between two ends of the SWCNT due to the charge redistribution arising from the interactions between the water dipole chains and charge carriers in the tube. However, these predictions and interpretations assume the single-chain of confined water molecules in a model (6,6) CNT that may not be directly applicable to the experimental CNT sizes of 1–2 nm. Zhao et al.49 observed the voltages generated due to the flow of water inside the metallic SWCNT, but a much smaller signal was detected in the semiconducting SWCNT devices, due to the lower density of free charge carriers in semi-conducting SWCNTs.
The flow-induced voltage generation was also recently suggested for graphene. A flow of acidic water (0.6 M HCl solution) over graphene film on an Si/SiO2 substrate generated voltage of ∼20 mV (Fig. 8a).45 With the help of molecular dynamics simulations, it was interpreted that the coupling of adsorbed ions (such as Cl−) with the free charges in graphene induced the power generation. The key supporting data for the latter interpretation were the “saturation effect” of the surface ion drifting velocity as well as the induced voltage as a function of the flow velocity. However, this mechanism requires the presence and transport of ions in the flow that drag the charge carriers in graphene and would differ from other measurements where polar liquids without ions also produced the electricity in nanotube-based graphitic surfaces.41 The claim of voltage generation for water flowing under acidic conditions in between graphene by Dhiman et al.45 was, however, questioned by Yin et al.47 who claimed instead that the observed voltage was due to the interaction of ions in solution with the electrodes connected to graphene, not really caused by the intrinsic nanofluidic transport phenomenon (Fig. 9). To eliminate the possibility of electrode contact with the solution, more recently, Lee et al.46 have modified the experimental set-up and showed that the voltage was indeed generated even without the electrode–solution interaction, reiterating the intrinsic energy harvesting capability of graphene surfaces under water flow (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  Two experimental set-ups that report the generation of electricity due to the fast flow on the graphene surface. (a) A schematic of energy harvesting through water flow on the graphene surface in ionic solution (HCl in this case). (Reproduced by permission from ref. 45 © American Chemical Society) (b) flow-induced voltage generation in non-ionic liquids such as water and pyridine. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 46 © American Institute of Physics.) This experimental set-up avoids the exposure of the electrode to the solution, a proposition considered in Yin et al.47 
 Fig. 9  A schematic that illustrates the voltage generation by an electrolyte on graphene is due to the exposed electrode–solution interaction, not caused by intrinsic graphene-flow interactions. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 47 © American Chemical Society.) 
Although there seem to be some remaining questions that require further scrutiny and clarification regarding energy harvesting under graphitic surfaces using water flow, the majority of experiments show the possibility of converting carbon nanofluidic transport phenomena into electrical energy, mainly due to the fast flow of liquid. The key issue here must be the mechanism by which the voltage is generated, which is still unclear. Careful design of the experimental set-up and proper use of molecular simulation techniques would be undoubtedly helpful to reconcile an apparent controversy for power generation by the water–graphene system and provide insights. This concept of voltage generation using nanofluidics in graphitic confinement in an ambient environment may have many applications, such as in sensors, energy harvesting devices, or miniature-scale energy generators for medical uses.
The fast flow rate inside the channel may also be utilized in nanofluidic reverse electro-dialysis, whose key driving force is the free energy of mixing that forces ion diffusion.51 In the presence of a pressure gradient in an ionic fluidic channel the ions are forced to flow through the channel (Fig. 10a). If the inner surface of a fluidic channel is also charged, an electrical double layer forms and the advection of ions creates streaming currents and streaming potential, a phenomenon known as electro-kinetic energy conversion from mechanical (pressure) to electrical (potential). The hydrodynamic slip at the surface of a nanofluidic channel can enhance the electro-kinetic energy conversion substantially, the maximum energy conversion efficiency theoretically approaching 100% when the slip length approaches infinity. For the experimental slip length of carbon nanotubes (e.g., 300 nm), the theoretical efficiency would exceed 70% (Fig. 10c).51 Although this prediction has not yet been measured experimentally, highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surfaces have been suggested as a testing ground (Fig. 11).51
 Fig. 10  (a) Pressure-driven and (b) electric field-driven electro-kinetic energy conversion in nanofluidic channels in which carriers move along with the flowing ions. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 50 © American Chemical Society.) (c) The energy conversion efficiency is enhanced substantially as a function of slip-length for different channel heights. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 51 © Institute of Physics.) 
 Fig. 11  Slip-enhanced electro-kinetic energy conversion using graphitic channels. (a) Vertically aligned carbon nanotubes. (b) A nanoslit formed between cleaved surfaces of highly pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). (Reproduced by permission from ref. 51 © Institute of Physics.) 
5. Energy storage
Graphitic materials have been used in energy storage applications, i.e., batteries and electrochemical capacitors, in which the benefits of using graphitic materials typically arise from the high surface area and electrical conductance of these carbon materials. Indeed there are excellent reviews on the latter subjects.52 Here we focus on a rather different aspect of energy storage using a graphitic nanoenvironment that originates from the fast flow of liquids or ions.
Fast transport of ions is important in energy storage devices as they determine power capability when utilizing storage energies. For these applications, to maximize fast fluid kinetics under the graphitic surface, it is essential to fabricate materials in an orderly aligned fashion. For example, Futaba et al. fabricated a macroscopic bulk form of CNT material exploiting the liquid-induced collapse properties of SWCNT forests that are densely packed and vertically aligned so that ions can diffuse efficiently in supercapacitor applications (Fig. 12).53 The results indicated that the so-called densely packed “SWCNT solid” has a superior power delivery ability compared to activated carbon.
Rapid proton transport has implications for potential energy applications, such as in solar water splitting and fuel cell membrane applications. Protons in aqueous solution hop between water molecules through a Grotthuss mechanism in which the charge defects are displaced instead of the individual protons. One can thus imagine that the orientation of a water hydrogen-bonded network would be important to facilitate the proton transport. Indeed, the water molecules inside the CNTs are well oriented as their special characteristic is the single file of oriented water, and hence the proton mobility is enhanced as compared to bulk water by a factor of about 40.55 The latter difference in the proton transport rate between the bulk and confined water inside the CNT is due to the different transfer mechanism:54 in the conventional Grotthuss mechanism in bulk water, proton transfer occurs via an “Eigen–Zundel–Eigen” mechanism, but when confined in a one-dimensional channel, proton transfer occurs via a “Zundel–Zundel” mechanism, hence much more efficiently with a low barrier (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 12  Supercapacitor electrodes made of activated carbon versus carbon nanotubes. (a) A schematic comparison of the ion diffusion in activation carbon (blue) and the SWCNT solid (red) material. (b) Capacitance as a function of discharge current density for activated carbon (blue) and SWCNT solid (red). (Reproduced by permission from ref. 53 © Nature Publishing Group.) 
6. Conclusions and perspectives of ultrafast water transport
Among many novel properties explored at the nanoscale, the transport of water, protons, and ions are relatively recently observed phenomena and known as nanofluidics. In particular, graphitic surfaces such as carbon nanotubes and graphene offer a unique combination of atomic smoothness and hydrophobicity that synergistically yields a fast rate of mass transport. Experimental realization of the first measurements for unusually rapid water transport was only made in 2005 and 2006, which was then followed by extensive theoretical and experimental investigations for the fundamental research and possible applications, including those related to energy and the environment.
 Fig. 13  Snapshots of the empirical valence bond simulations for the proton transport in a (6,6) CNT, indicating the “Zundel–Zundel” mechanism. (a) Zundel at t = −0.17 ps (b) H3O7+ at t = 0.03 ps, and (c) Zundel at t = 0.05 ps. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 54 © American Chemical Society.) 
In this tutorial we have covered the basic principles, features and current developments of carbon nanofluidics, the use of carbon nanomaterials (carbon nanotubes primarily and including graphene when appropriate) to show the advantages of nanofluidic phenomena for ultrafast water transport, several applications of the carbon nanofluidics in energy-efficient filtration technology, energy generation and energy storage, where the rate of water or ion transport plays a crucial role in enhancing the performance of the corresponding devices. As described in this brief tutorial, however, a comprehensive understanding of the nanofluidic phenomena themselves for carbon based nanomaterials is still lacking, creating great challenges for the technology applications, perhaps due partly to the relatively young age of the field and also to the difficulty in obtaining experimental details and interpretations. Undoubtedly, however, these challenges for further understanding and utilization of nanofluidic devices also mean great opportunities in the fields of energy, environment, water and sustainability.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from EEWS and NRF Korea (Integrated Water Technology), Swiss National Science Foundation (Contract 200021-137964), and Strategic Korean-Swiss Cooperative Program in Science and Technology (FY2010).
References

          B. Hille, Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, Sinauer, Sunderland,  2001 Search PubMed .
R. P. Schwarzenbach, B. I. Escher, K. Fenner, T. B. Hofstetter, C. A. Johnson, U. von Gunten and B. Wehrli, Science, 2006, 313, 1072–1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. K. Batchelor, An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University Press,  1967 Search PubMed .
M. Majumder, N. Chopra, R. Andrews and B. J. Hinds, Nature, 2005, 438, 44 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Holt, H. G. Park, Y. M. Wang, M. Stadermann, A. B. Artyukhin, C. P. Grigoropoulos, A. Noy and O. Bakajin, Science, 2006, 312, 1034–1037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sendner, D. Horinek, L. Bocquet and R. R. Netz, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10768–10781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Babu and S. P. Sathian, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 194509 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Whitby and N. Quirke, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 87–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lum, D. Chandler and J. D. Weeks, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4570–4577 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hummer, J. C. Rasaiah and J. P. Noworyta, Nature, 2001, 414, 188–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Rasaiah, S. Garde and G. Hummer, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2008, 59, 713–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pomes and B. Roux, Biophys. J., 1998, 75, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Pascal, W. A. Goddard and Y. Jung, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 11794–11798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. G. Park, PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley,  2007 Search PubMed .
N. Naguib, H. Ye, Y. Gogotsi, A. G. Yazicioglu, C. M. Megaridis and M. Yoshimura, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2237–2243 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Kolesnikov, J. M. Zanotti, C. K. Loong, P. Thiyagarajan, A. P. Moravsky, R. O. Loutfy and C. J. Burnham, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 035503 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, J. L. Herberg, G. Mogilevsky, H.-J. Wang, M. Stadermann, J. K. Holt and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1902–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Kazachkin, Y. Nishimura, H. A. Witek, S. Irle and E. Borguet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8191–8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Paineau, P.-A. Albouy, S. Rouzière, A. Orecchini, S. Rols and P. Launois, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1751–1756 CAS .
A. I. Kolesnikov, J.-M. Zanotti, C.-K. Loong, P. Thiyagarajan, A. P. Moravsky, R. O. Loutfy and C. J. Burnham, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 035503 CrossRef .
K. Falk, F. Sedlmeier, L. Joly, R. R. Netz and L. Bocquet, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4067–4073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kalra, S. Garde and G. Hummer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 10175–10180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Waghe, J. C. Rasaiah and G. Hummer, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 10789 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan and A. Majumdar, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 848–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Beckstein and M. S. P. Sansom, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 7063–7068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Whitby, L. Cagnon, M. Thanou and N. Quirke, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2632–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Joseph and N. R. Aluru, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 452–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Thomas and A. J. H. McGaughey, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2788–2793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Walther, K. Ritos, E. R. Cruz-Chu, C. M. Megaridis and P. Koumoutsakos, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1910–1914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kannam, B. D. Todd, J. S. Hansen and P. J. David, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 094701 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Corry, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 1427–1434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lee, W. Choi, J. H. Han and M. S. Strano, Science, 2010, 329, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Liu, J. He, J. Y. Tang, H. Liu, P. Pang, D. Cao, P. Krstic, S. Joseph, S. Lindsay and C. Nuckolls, Science, 2010, 327, 64–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fornasiero, J. B. In, S. Kim, H. G. Park, Y. Wang, C. P. Grigoropoulos, A. Noy and O. Bakajin, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14848–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fornasiero, H. G. Park, J. K. Holt, M. Stadermann, C. P. Grigoropoulos, A. Noy and O. Bakajin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17250–17255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Wong, E. Joselevich, A. T. Wooley, C. L. Cheung and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1998, 394, 52–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Majumder, X. Zhan, R. Andrews and B. J. Hinds, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8624–8631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Corry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 751–759 CAS .
P. Kral and M. Shapiro, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 131–134 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, A. K. Sood and N. Kumar, Science, 2003, 299, 1042–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Liu, L. M. Dai and J. W. Baur, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 064312 CrossRef .
B. N. J. Persson, U. Tartaglino, E. Tosatti and H. Ueba, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 235410 CrossRef .
A. K. Sood and S. Ghosh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 086601 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dhiman, F. Yavari, X. Mi, H. Gullapalli, Y. F. Shi, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3123–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, Y. Jung, S. Kim and C. S. Han, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 063116 CrossRef .
J. Yin, Z. H. Zhang, X. M. Li, J. X. Zhou and W. L. Guo, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1736–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Z. Yuan and Y. P. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6374–6376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zhao, L. Song, K. Deng, Z. Liu, Z. X. Zhang, Y. L. Yang, C. Wang, H. F. Yang, A. Z. Jin, Q. Luo, C. Z. Gu, S. S. Xie and L. F. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1772–1776 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. J. van der Heyden, D. J. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2232–2237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Ren and D. Stein, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 195707 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, Y. X. Peng, T. Y. Yan, S. Li, A. L. Li and G. A. Voth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11395–11397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dellago, M. M. Naor and G. Hummer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 105902 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Hyung Gyu Park
	Hyung Gyu Park is an Assistant Professor of energy technology in the Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich, where he leads the laboratory of Nanoscience for Energy Technology and Sustainability. He received his PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California, Berkeley, with pioneering research on nanoscale mass transport in carbon nanotubes in collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. His research activities include carbon nanomaterials syntheses, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, energy harvesting and storage, and carbon nanofluidics.

Yousung Jung
	Yousung Jung received his PhD in Theoretical Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2005 working with Prof. Martin Head-Gordon studying electronic structure theory. After postdoctoral work with Prof. Rudy Marcus at California Institute of Technology as a Glanville Postdoctoral Fellow, he took up a faculty position at KAIST in 2009. He has been an Associate Professor since 2012, working on theoretical and computational research on catalysis, gas capture and separation, electrochemistry, and carbon nanofluidics. His group is also developing new simulation techniques and quantum chemistry methods.

Key learning points
(1) Basic principles of carbon nanofluidics different from continuum treatment.
(2) Structure–thermodynamics relationship for favourable water confinement in carbon nanotubes.
(3) Experimental status and theoretical interpretations of ultrafast water transport inside carbon nanotubes.
(4) Applications of carbon nanofluidics for energy-efficient desalination technology.
(5) Applications of carbon nanofluidics for energy generation and storage.


 	Fig. 1  Hydrodynamic slip flow profile characterized by slip length, Ls.	 
	(1)
Fw = −ALλ (vt,wall − vwall),	(2)
Ls = μ/λ,	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 2  One-dimensional hydrogen-bonded water wires in (6,6) carbon nanotubes formed spontaneously (a) and by an osmotic driving force (b). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 12 © 2005 Annual Reviews, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Equilibrium structures of water confined in CNTs of different size. Only armchair-type CNTs are considered. (b) Infinite nanotubes used in thermodynamic simulations. (c) Relative Helmholtz free energy of confined water compared to bulk water. (d) Comparison of enthalpic vs. entropic contributions to the free energy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © National Academy of Sciences.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Strong correlation between the average number of hydrogen bonds per confined water molecule and the internal energy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © National Academy of Sciences.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Experimental verification of water infiltration of CNTs: (a) transmission electron microscopy (reproduced by permission from ref. 16 © American Chemical Society); (b) neutron diffraction (reproduced by permission from ref. 21 © American Physical Society); and (c) 1H nuclear magnetic resonance. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 18 © American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Water flow enhancement over the Hagen–Poiseuille formalism with respect to the CNT diameter. Comparison among different models and experiments.	 
	(11)

 	Fig. 7  The flowing solvent molecules denoted as an arrow and pairs of circles create a phonon wind in the nanotube, which then drags the free charge carriers in the nanotube, generating electricity. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 40 © American Physical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Two experimental set-ups that report the generation of electricity due to the fast flow on the graphene surface. (a) A schematic of energy harvesting through water flow on the graphene surface in ionic solution (HCl in this case). (Reproduced by permission from ref. 45 © American Chemical Society) (b) flow-induced voltage generation in non-ionic liquids such as water and pyridine. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 46 © American Institute of Physics.) This experimental set-up avoids the exposure of the electrode to the solution, a proposition considered in Yin et al.47	 

 	Fig. 9  A schematic that illustrates the voltage generation by an electrolyte on graphene is due to the exposed electrode–solution interaction, not caused by intrinsic graphene-flow interactions. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 47 © American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Pressure-driven and (b) electric field-driven electro-kinetic energy conversion in nanofluidic channels in which carriers move along with the flowing ions. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 50 © American Chemical Society.) (c) The energy conversion efficiency is enhanced substantially as a function of slip-length for different channel heights. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 51 © Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Slip-enhanced electro-kinetic energy conversion using graphitic channels. (a) Vertically aligned carbon nanotubes. (b) A nanoslit formed between cleaved surfaces of highly pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). (Reproduced by permission from ref. 51 © Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Supercapacitor electrodes made of activated carbon versus carbon nanotubes. (a) A schematic comparison of the ion diffusion in activation carbon (blue) and the SWCNT solid (red) material. (b) Capacitance as a function of discharge current density for activated carbon (blue) and SWCNT solid (red). (Reproduced by permission from ref. 53 © Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 13  Snapshots of the empirical valence bond simulations for the proton transport in a (6,6) CNT, indicating the “Zundel–Zundel” mechanism. (a) Zundel at t = −0.17 ps (b) H3O7+ at t = 0.03 ps, and (c) Zundel at t = 0.05 ps. (Reproduced by permission from ref. 54 © American Chemical Society.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
