Current status and future developments in preparation and application of colloidal crystals  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60078E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60078E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7774-7800Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCurrent status and future developments in preparation and application of colloidal crystals
Hailin Cong

*ab, 
Bing Yu

*ab, 
Jianguo Tang

ab, 
Zejing Li

a and 
Xuesong Liu

a
aCollege of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China
bLaboratory for New Fiber Materials and Modern Textile, Growing Base for State Key Laboratory, Qingdao University, China. E-mail: hailincong@yahoo.com
Received 
26th February 2013
First published on 9th July 2013AbstractColloidal crystals (CCs) are ordered arrays of monodisperse colloidal particles. Because of the presence of a periodic superlattice of colloids and voids, CCs bear many unique structures and fascinating properties which are distinctly different from those of standard crystals with atoms, ions or molecules as repeating subunits. The research on CCs has surprisingly blossomed during recent decades, and many practical materials based on CCs with potential applications in photonic devices, material science and biomedical engineering have been generated. In this review, we give a systematic, balanced and comprehensive summary of the main aspects of CCs related to their preparation and application, and propose perspectives for the future developments of CCs.Hailin CongHailin Cong received his PhD from Peking University in 2004 with Prof. Weixiao Cao. After completing a Postdoctoral Fellowship at University of California, Davis, he joined the Qingdao University in 2009 as a Distinguished Professor. His current research interests lie in the synthesis and application of advanced micro-nano materials. He received The Natural Science Award from Ministry of Education of China (2007). He has acted as a Member of the Editorial Board of Nanoscience & Nanotechnology since 2008, Vice Chair of the Editorial Committee of China International Nanoscience and Technology Symposium since 2009, and a Member of the Editorial Board of Integrated Ferroelectrics since 2012.Bing YuBing Yu received her PhD from Peking University in 2006 with Prof. Huwei Liu. After completing a Postdoctoral Fellowship at University of Wyoming, she joined the Qingdao University in 2009 as an Associate Professor. Her current research interests lie in the microfabrication of bionic materials and coating materials.Jianguo TangJianguo Tang received his PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2000, after which he worked with Prof. Dr Hans-Werner Schmidt at University Bayreuth as a Visiting Professor (2001), followed by two years as a Research Fellow at Colorado State University with Prof. Dr L. A. Belfiore (2002–2003). He is the director of the institute of hybrid materials at Qingdao University. His research interests lie in hybrid functional materials of polymers with metal ions, metallic nanoparticles, and nanocarbon materials, especially concerned about the interface interaction and modifications.Zejing LiZejing Li received his BA in Chemistry from Qingdao University in 2012. He is pursuing his MS in Materials Chemistry, studying in the Cong laboratory. His research focuses on macroporous and nanostructured materials.Xuesong LiuXuesong Liu received his BA in Chemistry from Binzhou University in 2011. He is pursuing his MS in Materials Chemistry, studying in the Cong laboratory. His research focuses on synthesis of monodisperse colloids and particles.
1. Introduction
A colloidal crystal is an ordered array or packing of monodisperse colloidal particles. Gem opals are natural colloidal crystals (Fig. 1), which are made from the ordered deposition of spherical silica particles after years of siliceous sedimentation and compression under hydrostatic and gravitational forces.1 Therefore, people often call man-made colloidal crystals synthetic opals. The origins of colloidal crystals can be traced back to the crystallization of some plant viruses such as tobacco mosaic virus and tomato bushy stunt virus, and the formation of tactoids from some thixotropic sols such as Schiller layers in iron oxide sol and bentonite sol, which are supposed to be due to the ordering of monodisperse organic and inorganic particles.2–4 The array and packing of the real crystals made from ions, atoms and molecules are hardly observed because the size of these crystalline elements are usually at the angstrom scale. This brings difficulty to the study of crystallography. But in colloidal crystals, the crystalline elements at the lattice site are micrometer and submicrometer scale colloids. The array and packing of them can be observed conveniently by optical and electron microscopes, and can be used as a model for the research of crystallography.5,6
 Fig. 1  Optical and SEM images of natural colloidal crystals of gem opals to show structural colors (a) and packing structures (b). 
The monodisperse spherical colloids usually adopt face-centered cubic close (fcc) packing to form colloidal crystals with ∼26 vol% voids in the structure.7–9 Therefore, the formed colloidal crystals can be used as templates to prepare macroporous materials. A lot of macroporous materials including inorganic, organic, metallic and ceramic have been successfully made through this technology.10–12 The obtained macroporous materials, often called inverse opals, are exact inverse replicas of colloidal crystals, therefore they maintain the lattice structures of the templates, and light with a wavelength matching the lattice distances will undergo Bragg diffraction to form structural colors (Fig. 1a) and photonic band gaps (PBGs).13–15 It is believed that the band gap characteristics of colloidal crystals and corresponding macroporous materials will play an important role in photonic crystal designs and techniques.16–18 Additionally, colloidal crystal arrays can be employed as masks for colloidal lithography to fabricate ordered surfaces with desired morphologies and patterns, and these surfaces may find important applications in controlling cell and crystal growth, fabricating biosensors and chemical sensors, and making microelectronic and optoelectronic devices.19–21 Moreover, the bionic studies of colloidal crystals have lead to the birth of a lot of bio-inspired materials with special optical, mechanical, and cell-mimetic functions.22–24 For their unique structures and novel properties, CCs have attracted great attention from chemists, physicists, materials scientists and even biologists in the past ten years.
2. Classification
Colloidal crystals can be classified into three categories, namely one-dimensional (1D) colloidal crystal arrays, and two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) colloidal crystals according to the space structures. They also can be divided into mono, binary and polynary colloidal crystals according to colloidal compositions. This section focuses mainly on the structural classification of colloidal crystals and gives brief introductions of some other classifications of colloidal crystals.
2.1. One-dimensional colloidal crystals arrays (1D CCAs/colloid strings)
One-dimensional colloidal crystals refer to one-dimensional chain structure formed by colloids. Due to isotropic gravitational pull of the van der Waals force, it is not possible for the colloidal spheres in the colloidal solution to grow in a preferential growth direction, and it is difficult for them to self-assemble to form a stable one-dimensional colloidal crystal. Even in the liquid surface layer of colloids, for the surface tension effects between the spheres, it is easy to form a two-dimensional layered structure on the smooth substrate, but still difficult to form a chain of one-dimensional colloidal crystals. However, one-dimensional colloidal crystals can be formed on the substrate modified by special processes; for example, a surface relief grating is a commonly used substrate in the preparation of a one-dimensional colloidal crystals.25,26 Recently, Yang and co-workers reported a Langmuir–Blodgett technique to assemble 1D colloid strings (Fig. 2).27 However, the substrate hydrophobicity still influenced the resulting patterns.
 Fig. 2  Langmuir–Blodgett technique for the assembly of 1D colloidal crystal arrays: (a) illustration of assembling 1D colloidal crystal arrays from a 2D particle monolayer by Langmuir–Blodgett technique, and colloidal particle strings are produced at the contact line formed by the intersection of the vertical substrate with the plane of a floating colloidal-particle monolayer; (b) SEM image of a 1D colloidal crystal array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
2.2. Two-dimensional colloidal crystals (2D CCs)
Two-dimensional colloidal crystals are made up of a single layer of an ordered arrangement of colloids (Fig. 3).28 It has a monolayer ordered crystal structure, bringing peculiar properties and practical application advantages that are different from three-dimensional colloidal crystals.29 For example, 2D colloidal crystals have been employed as masks or templates for colloidal lithography, which is recognized as a facile, inexpensive, and repeatable micro-nanofabrication technique. 2D colloidal crystals can be self-assembled using solvent evaporation, spin-coating and Langmuir–Blodgett techniques. Many improvements on self-assembly methods have been made to get 2D colloidal crystals with tolerable defect densities over large area.21 For instance, Liu and Xie reported an electric field-induced self-assembly that could be used to achieve a large area of 2D colloidal crystal with high level of perfection.30 Additionally, patterned 2D colloidal crystals can be fabricated using transfer printing, and template-directed and surface-induced assembly methods. These patterns have found important applications in fabricating bio- and chemical sensors, and making microelectronic and optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of 2D colloidal crystals: (a) planar view; (b) section view. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
2.3. Three-dimensional colloidal crystals (3D CCs)
Three-dimensional colloidal crystals have a multilayer ordered crystal structure (Fig. 4).28,31 Self-assembled 3D colloidal crystals are mostly face centered cubic close-packed (fcc), because fcc structure is the thermodynamically stable position with minimum free energy.32–34 There are about 26 vol% voids among the fcc packing of colloids, which can be used to fill all kinds of materials such as organic monomers and prepolymers, inorganic precursors and salts, and metallic and ceramic nanoparticles. Therefore, 3D colloidal crystals are widely used as templates to prepare porous materials or inverse opals with well-ordered periodicity and interconnected pore systems. The obtained 3D ordered macroporous (3DOM) products are of interest for numerous applications such as sensors and photonic crystals.35,36 3D colloidal crystals can be self-assembled using solvent evaporation, filtration, centrifugation, dipping, spin-coating, spray-coating, and Langmuir–Blodgett techniques.37 Fewer defects, larger monocrystalline area and better controlled thickness are always important objectives for the fabrication of high quality 3D colloidal crystals. Many efforts have been made to reduce defects, distortions, and domain boundaries that naturally appear in 3D colloidal crystals. For example, Jiang and Yang reported a scalable doctor blade coating method for the fabrication of highly ordered 3D colloidal crystals.38 Additionally, patterned 3D colloidal crystals can be fabricated using printing, template-directed and surface-induced assembly methods. For instance, Song et al. fabricated large-scale patterned 3D colloidal crystals by common ink-jet printing. These patterns will be promising for a wealth of practical applications in photonic devices, optical circuits and others.39
 Fig. 4  SEM images of 3D colloidal crystals: (a) section view; (b) tilt view (inset shows an illustration of face centered cubic packing). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
2.4. Binary colloidal crystals (BCCs)
Binary colloidal crystals are made from two different kinds of colloids (Fig. 5).6 A relatively simple type of binary colloidal crystals is usually assembled using large colloids and small ones. From Fig. 5a, we can see that ratio of large particles (L) to small particles (S) is 1:2, which is the LS2 structure. Correspondingly, Fig. 5b shows the LS structure. Since being first discovered from a sample of a Brazilian gem opal in 1978 by Sanders,40 binary colloidal crystals have attracted widespread attention. Co-assembly is a relatively simple method to fabricate binary colloidal crystals, and the obtained binary structures depend heavily on the diameter ratio and volume fraction of the two kinds of spheres. Recently, Cho et al. presented a novel route to controllably fabricate BCCs based on plasma-electron coirradiation of polystyrene (PS) colloidal monolayers followed by thermal decomposition and deposition.41 It is believed that BCCs are of great significance for the bottom-up assembly of complicated ordered superstructures and clusters.42
 Fig. 5  SEM images of binary colloidal crystals form ∼190 nm small (S) and ∼380 nm large (L) colloids: (a) LS2 structure; (b) LS structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
2.5. Other colloidal crystals
Besides the mono and binary colloidal crystals described above, there are polynary colloidal crystals. For example, Huang et al. constructed a ternary colloidal crystal consisting of 150, 240, and 700 nm colloids via a template-assisted electric-field-induced assembly (TAEFIA) technique (Fig. 6a and b).43 In addition to closely packed colloidal crystals, non-close-packed (ncp) colloidal crystals have also been prepared successfully using etching, transfer printing, template-directed assembly, and spin-coating methods. For instance, Ye and co-workers fabricated ncp colloidal crystals by the plasma etching of closely packed PS colloidal crystals (Fig. 6c and d).44 Moreover, colloidal crystals of nonspherical colloids have also been made from anisotropic particles such as nanocubes, nanocaps, and Janus particles. Fig. 6e and f show a cubic colloidal crystal is obtained from surface modified silver nanocubes through assembly, while the unmodified silver nanocubes assemble randomly.45
 Fig. 6  SEM images of other types of colloidal crystals: (a) low and (b) high magnification images of ternary colloidal crystals consisting of 150, 240, and 700 nm colloids; (c) 845 nm and (d) 530 nm non-close-packed colloidal crystals formed after plasma etching a 1000 nm closely packed colloidal crystal monolayer for 4 and 7 min, respectively; (e) unmodified silver nanocubes for reference and (f) cubic colloidal crystals made from 6-side surface modified silver nanocubes (inset shows the number of faces on each cube that are rendered hydrophobic). Parts (a) and (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. Parts (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. Parts (e) and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 45, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Preparation of CCs
3.1. Synthesis of monodisperse colloidal particles
Monodisperse colloidal particles are considered to be the basic building blocks for preparation of colloidal crystals.46 A rich variety of chemical approaches are available for producing colloidal particles that are monodisperse in size. The best synthesized and most commonly used monodisperse colloidal particles are inorganic silica spheres prepared via Stober method and polymeric latex beads prepared through emulsion polymerization. Fig. 7 shows two transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of such colloidal samples: ∼200 nm silica spheres and ∼400 nm polystyrene beads.
 Fig. 7  TEM images of two representative colloidal systems that can be readily synthesized as monodisperse samples at large quantities: (a) ∼200 nm silica spheres prepared by Stober method; (b) ∼400 nm polystyrene beads prepared by emulsion polymerization. 
3.1.1. Synthesis of monodisperse polymer colloids. Monodisperse polymer colloids such as polystyrene (PS) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) have been produced in large quantities by using a number of approaches such as emulsion polymerization, dispersion polymerization, seeding polymerization, swelling polymerization and suspension polymerization.47,48 For example, Chen and Chen synthesized monodisperse polystyrene microspheres (1.1–5.2 μm) by dispersion polymerization in ethanol/iso-propanol media.49 Choe and co-workers synthesized monodisperse PMMA microspheres (1.4–2.0 μm) through a surfactant-free emulsion polymerization in methanol-enriched aqueous medium.50 As reported recently, microfluidic chips coupled with an online UV photo-polymerization system can also be used to prepare monodisperse polymer colloids such as poly(pentaerythritol triacrylate) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) microspheres (Fig. 8).51
 Fig. 8  Synthesis of monodisperse PEG microspheres by microfluidic method: (a) illustration of the T-junction microfluidic chip equipped with an online UV photo-polymerization system; (b) and (c) PEG prepolymer beads formed in microfluidic channels at 1:5 and 2:5 PEG prepolymer–silicon oil flow rate ratios, respectively; (d) obtained PEG microspheres after online UV photo-polymerization. 

3.1.2. Synthesis of monodisperse inorganic colloids. Inorganic particles are usually synthesized via precipitation reactions. In 1968, Stober and Fink applied this reaction to the hydrolysis of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) in ethanol at high pH and found an extremely useful procedure for the synthesis of monodisperse silica colloids with a diameter from 50 nm to 2 μm.52 This method was later improved by many others,53,54 and now seems to be the simplest and most effective route to monodisperse silica spheres.46 Using precipitation reactions, monodisperse spheres of other inorganic materials such as titania,55 zinc oxide,56 zinc sulphide,57 zinc selenide,58 cadmium sulphide,59 gold,60 silver,61 and palladium62 have been synthesized successfully. For example, Tanaka et al. prepared monodisperse titania spheres (380–960 nm) by the hydrolysis and condensation of titanium tetraisopropoxide in methanol/acetonitrile co-solvent.63 Chang et al. synthesized monodisperse zinc oxide colloidal spheres by the hydrolysis of zinc acetate dihydrate in diethylene glycol.64 Cui and co-workers prepared monodisperse palladium spheres by decomposing palladium acetate in the mixture solution of dimethyl sulfoxide and ethanol.65
3.1.3. Synthesis of nonspherical particles. In recent years, monodisperse nonspherical particles with novel structures and properties have attracted considerable attention for colloidal crystal constructions.66–68 Monodisperse nonspherical particles can be synthesized by a few methods such as spray drying, lithography, microfluidics, and chemical approaches.69–72 Many kinds of nonspherical particles with different shapes such as mushroom, ellipsoid, tetrahedron, corpuscle, rod, cube, peanut, dumbbell and Janus have been prepared.73–78 For example, Weitz et al. synthesized a variety of uniform polystyrene particle shapes, including “rod”, “cone”, “triangle”, and “diamond”, by making use of the crosslinking forces in a seeding polymerization technique.79 Kuijk et al. presented a modified Stober method to get monodisperse rodlike silica colloids with tunable aspect ratios.80 Wang et al. synthesized monodisperse toroidal polysulfone particles by controlled solidification of the polymer solution in a microfluidic device.81 Langille and co-workers prepared uniform gold particles with octahedral, cubic, and trisoctahedral shapes through a seed-mediated synthesis method using silver ions and halides as accessory ingredients, and ascorbic acid as reductant (Fig. 9).82
 Fig. 9  SEM images of uniform nonspherical gold particles obtained through a seed-mediated synthesis method at different reductant concentrations: (a) {111}-faceted octahedra formed at 0.5 mM reductant concentration; (b) {100}-faceted cubes formed at 2.0 mM reductant concentration; (c) high-index faceted trisoctahedra formed at 10.0 mM reductant concentration (insets show the illustrations of the particle shapes). Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 

3.1.4. Synthesis of other functional particles. Besides the uniform solid spherical and nonspherical colloidal particles described above, there are many other monodisperse functional particles such as hollow spheres and porous colloids that can also be used for colloidal crystal fabrications.83,84 For example, Wu et al. synthesized monodisperse hollow silica spheres using in situ hydrolysis of TEOS in a polystyrene dispersion polymerization system, where the formation of silica shells and dissolution of the polystyrene core particles occurred in the same medium.85 Zhang et al. fabricated monodisperse photocatalytic porous zinc oxide spheres by a soluble-starch-assisted precipitation method.86 Tang and co-workers reported a simple approach for the one-step synthesis of superparamagnetic monodisperse porous magnetite hollow spheres based on the hydrothermal treatment of iron chloride, citrate, polyacrylamide and urea.87 Additionally, a lot of uniform alloy and hybrid functional particles such as silver/gold alloy colloids and CdS quantum dot/polymer hybrid microspheres have been synthesized successfully, which have shown novel properties in their colloidal crystal forms.88–90
3.2. Colloidal crystallization
3.2.1. Crystallization mechanism. Self-assembly refers to the specific structural units such as atoms, molecules, and colloidal particles combining with each other spontaneously through certain non-chemical bonds. In cases where interparticle forces such as entropic, van der Waals, steric, gravity, capillary and dipolar forces are sufficiently balanced in a colloidal system, self-assembly can occur to form colloidal crystallization.91 For example, monodisperse spheres can spontaneously form close packed colloidal crystal arrays if their free volume is restricted below a certain level and all the interparticle forces are balanced to discourage random aggregation.92,93 Fig. 10 demonstrates a balanced colloidal crystallization system induced by capillary force, where the crystallization will be affected by the rates of water evaporation and free motion of colloids along the meniscus, which are determined by the temperature in the dipping deposition.28
 Fig. 10  Crystallization mechanism of colloids in a dipping deposition method: (a) illustration of a balanced self-assembly colloidal crystallization system induced by capillary force, and affected by the rates of water evaporation and free motion of colloids along the meniscus; (b) and (c) SEM images of the colloidal crystals assembled at 25 °C and 50 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 

3.2.2. Self-assembly of 2D and 3D CCs. As illustrated in Fig. 11, 2D colloidal crystals are usually fabricated using air–liquid interface assembly, evaporation deposition and electrophoretic deposition methods, while 3D colloidal crystals are often assembled via sedimentation, dipping deposition and slit filling methods.46,94,95 Other self-assembly methods can also be used to produce both close-packed and non-close packed arrays by altering particle characteristics, such as the size disparity, surface charge, geometry, composition, or a combination of these factors.91 Many different techniques, including LB technique,96 floating packing,97,98 vortical surface method,99 vertical deposition,100,101 spin coating,102,103 electric-field assisted convective assembly,104 air-pulse-drive assembly,105 and isothermal heating evaporation induced assembly,106 have been used to fabricate colloidal crystals with fewer defects and larger crystalline domains.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of typical methods used for assembling 2D and 3D colloidal crystals. 2D colloidal crystals: (a) air–liquid interface assembly; (b) evaporation deposition; (c) electrophoretic deposition. 3D Colloidal crystals: (d) sedimentation; (e) dipping deposition; (f) slit filling. Parts (a), (b) and (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2000, Wiley-VCH. Parts (d), (e) and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2000, Elsevier. 

3.2.3. Self-assembly of binary CCs. Binary colloidal crystals with long-range order have been fabricated from the self-assembly approach.107–109 By embedding particles of another size scale in the colloidal crystal (CC) structure, heterogeneous binary structures can be fabricated.109 For example, Li et al. fabricated large-area (>10 cm2) monolayer BCCs of differently sized polystyrene spheres based on ethanol-assisted self-assembly at the air/water interface.110 Zhao and co-workers found that binary colloidal crystals can be fabricated in a non-close packed pattern through an improved convective self-assembly method, and the presence of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) sol in the self-assembly system was found to play a significant role in the resultant structures.111 By varying both number and size ratios between large (L) and small (S) spheres, different packing configurations such as LS, LS2, LS3, LS4, LS5, LS6, LS8, and LS13 have been achieved.91 Ionic colloidal crystals of oppositely charged particles have also been fabricated by varying the surface charge of colloidal spheres in salt-containing suspensions.112
3.2.4. Self-assembly of other CCs. The packing patterns of obtained colloidal crystals are also affected by the shapes of colloidal particles. Many novel packing structures in colloidal crystals have been realized through self-assembly of nonspherical particles.113–116 For example, in the evaporation deposition process, gold or silver nanocubes produce tetragonal arrays. However, when nanorods are used, smectic and nematic liquid-crystal-like structures are obtained.117,118 Additionally, colloidal quasicrystals have also been obtained from the self-assembly of colloidal inorganic particles of different sizes (Fig. 12).119 The discovery of colloidal quasicrystals changed our view of ordered binary colloidal arrays as periodic structures and introduced new long-range ordered phases lacking any translational symmetry.
 Fig. 12  Dodecagonal colloidal quasicrystals self-assembled from spherical particles: (a) TEM image of a colloidal quasicrystal self-assembled from 13.4 nm Fe2O3 and 5 nm Au colloids (inset shows a selected-area electron diffraction pattern with non-crystallographic 12-fold rotational symmetry measured from a ∼6 mm2 domain); (b) magnified view of a dodecagonal nanoparticle quasicrystal; (c) dodecagonal colloidal quasicrystal self-assembled from 9 nm PbS and 3 nm Pd colloids (inset shows a fast-Fourier-transform pattern with non-crystallographic 12-fold rotational symmetry). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. 

3.3. Guided assembly
By guidance from internal, external and interfacial forces or confinements in the self-assembly, colloidal crystals with specific microstructures and patterns have be achieved. Herein, we will discuss several representative methodologies in the guided assembly of colloidal crystals.
3.3.1. Patterned surface guided assembly. Topologically patterned surfaces have been employed as templates to assemble colloidal crystals.120 For example, Pan et al. reported using photopatterned polyethylene glycol microwell arrays for the digital assembly of highly ordered colloids in their liquid dispersion (Fig. 13).121 Recently, an alternate dry manual assembly process was developed in which colloids were placed into patterned substrates by mechanical rubbing.122 Patterned charge or wettability can also be used to guide the assembly.123–125 For instance, Fudouzi et al. assembled microsized colloidal particles on electrostatic regions patterned through ion beam irradiation.126 Park and Choi assembled colloidal micropatterns by the wetting/dewetting of suspensions on chemically patterned polydimethylsiloxane.127 Yang and co-workers reported the guided assembly of negatively charged poly(styrene sulphate) spheres on stamped positively charged polyelectrolyte layers.128
 Fig. 13  SEM images of digital colloidal crystal arrays formed in the 1 × 1 μm² PEG microwells using different polystyrene colloid concentrations: (a) 1 and (b) 2 colloids (0.5–1 mg ml−1 colloid concentrations at 0.1 μm s−1 pulling speed); (c) 1 and (d) 2 lines of colloids (1.5–3 mg ml−1 at 0.1 μm s−1 pulling speed where the arrows indicate pulling directions in the dipping deposition). Reproduced with permission from ref. 121, Copyright 2009, IOP publishing. 

3.3.2. External field guided assembly. External fields such as magnetic, electric and optical fields can be used for the guided assembly of colloidal crystals. In the presence of magnetic fields, magnetic colloidal particles can be easily guided to form ordered patterns.129 For example, Bibette et al. found magnetic colloids with asymmetric dumbbell shapes assembled into left-handed or right-handed helical chains under the influence of magnetic fields.130 Erb et al. fabricated two-tone and flower colloidal arrays by assembling a mixture of diamagnetic and paramagnetic spherical particles within a magnetized ferrofluid (Fig. 14).131 It should be noted that even nonmagnetic colloids can be guided by a magnetic field through a magnetic hole effect, if the colloids are immersed in a magnetic fluid.132 In the presence of alternative or biaxial electric fields, the nucleation of colloidal crystals and growth of microwires assembled from colloidal particles can be induced.133–136 Additionally, the trapping and transportation of colloidal sphere containing droplets can be manipulated with electrode arrays embedded in microchips.137 A low-intensity laser can be used to excite surface plasmon polaritons at metal–dielectric interfaces, and thus can be employed to trap or guide the transportation of colloidal particles under the influence of optical forces.138 Recently, Dholakia and co-workers reported the extended organization of silica microspheres using laser guidance.139 Moreover, a combination of electric and optical fields such as optoelectrofluidic control can also be employed for guided assembly of colloidal crystals.140
 Fig. 14  Fluorescent images of structure formation in a mixture of diamagnetic and paramagnetic spherical particles within a magnetized ferrofluid: (a) two-tone structures formed from 0.21 μm (red) non-magnetic particles and 2.7 μm paramagnetic core particles and 1 μm (green) non-magnetic particles; (b) flower structures formed from 1.0 μm (red) non-magnetic particles and 2.7 μm paramagnetic core particles and 9.9 μm (green) non-magnetic particles. Each panel includes an illustration of the assembled structure and a magnified view of one of the assembled structures (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 131, Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. 

3.3.3. Emulsion guided assembly. At the surface of emulsion droplets, colloidal spheres can assemble themselves to form spherical shells, which are often called colloidosomes (Fig. 15).141 Typical colloidosomes generated by emulsification are polydisperse due to the size distribution of the emulsion droplets. However, microfluidic chips equipped with T-junction channels can be used to assemble monodisperse colloidosomes around emulsion droplets or even gas bubbles.142–144 For example, Kumacheva et al. reported a microfluidic approach to assemble colloidosomes at gas–liquid interfaces.145 Temperature sensitive colloidosomes with controllable shell permeability can be formed using poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm) microgel particles as scaffolds in emulsification systems.146 Additionally, densely packed colloidal or composite clusters can be formed when colloidal spheres or colloids of different sizes and materials are confined within each emulsion droplet.147–149
 Fig. 15  Colloidosomes formed by emulsion guided assembly: (a) SEM images of a dried 10 μm colloidosome composed of 0.9 μm polystyrene spheres, and the colloidosome is formed in an oil droplet dispersed in a water phase; (b) and (c) close-ups of (a) and (b), respectively. The arrow points to one of the 0.15 μm holes that define the permeability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2002, AAAS. 

3.3.4. Other guided assembly methods. Non-ionic surfactants and nematic liquid crystals can be used to guide the assembly of colloids to form strings, micelles, clusters or anisotropic networks,150–154 which may be further engaged as “cornerstones” for the assembly of even more complex structures.155,156 Nanotubes, nanofibers or even fibroblast cells can also be used to form confinement arrays of colloids.157–160 Additionally, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) has been found to be a powerful and versatile tool to create ordered extended structures of colloidal particles.161,162 For example, Croker et al. reported a DNA mediated colloidal crystallization by grafting a certain density of designed DNA onto monodisperse polystyrene particles.163 Braun and co-workers presented the guided assembly of DNA-functionalized polystyrene colloids on stamped DNA patterns via a hybridization process.164
4. Structures of CCs
4.1. Array patterns
As shown in Fig. 2, the array pattern of colloids in one-dimensional colloidal crystals is usually closely packed string or chain like.27 Recently, Meseguer et al. reported that a non-close-packed zigzag pattern was formed in a nanotube-guided assembly of colloidal crystal wires.158 Monodisperse colloids can form hexagonal (Fig. 16a) and square array patterns (Fig. 16b) in 2D and 3D colloidal crystals.6 In self-assembled 2D colloidal crystals, close-packed hexagonal arrays are the most often encountered patterns, because it is the thermodynamically stable structure with minimum free energy.21 Therefore, special assembly methods have to be used to obtain a large area of square arrays in 2D colloidal crystals. For example, Xia et al. adopted substrates with pyramidal cavities and V-shaped grooves to guide the growth of square arrays.165 Cao et al. prepared large area of square arrays by adding surfactants to reduce capillary forces in colloidal crystallization, because high capillary forces will be favourable to arrange the particles closely to produce less interspaced hexagonal arrays.28 However, in self-assembled 3D colloidal crystals, both the hexagonal and square array patterns are very common, because the hexagonal and square arrays correspond to the (111) and (100) crystal planes of the most often encountered fcc packing, respectively.6 Additionally, the close-packed hexagonal and square arrays can be modified to non-close-packed array patterns by plasma etching or soft lithography.44,166 In binary colloidal crystals, different array patterns such as LS, LS2, LS3, LS4, LS5, LS6, LS8, and LS13 have been achieved by varying both number and size ratios between large (L) and small (S) spheres.91,167–172 Interestingly, there are isomeric arrays in some binary array patterns. For example, there are two isomeric array patterns, namely LS3-1 and LS3-2 types in binary colloidal crystals formed by a co-deposition method. The former is where the L and S particles are both in a hexagonal array (Fig. 16c), and the latter is where the S particles are in a hexagonal array but the L particles are in a square array (Fig. 16d).6
 Fig. 16  SEM images of array patterns for colloidal crystals and BCCs. Colloidal crystals: (a) hexagonal array; (b) square array. BCCs: (c) LS3-1 array; (d) LS3-2 array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
4.2. Packing modes
As shown in Fig. 17a–d, although monodisperse colloids can form hexagonal closed packing (hcp) and face-centered cubic closed (fcc) packing with equal void ratios of ∼26 vol%, most self-assembled 3D colloidal crystals adopt fcc packing, because fcc structure is the thermodynamic stable packing mode with minimum free energy.32–34 Compared with fcc packing, body-centered cubic (bcc) packing has a void ratio of ∼31 vol%, therefore it is a “less” or non-closed packing mode which can be fabricated using self-assembly of a shrinkable hydrogel or soft spheres (Fig. 17e and f).6,173,174 Recently, Wiley et al. fabricated a chiral colloidal crystal packing with six right-handed helical strands using nanotube-guided assembly (Fig. 17g and h).157 In binary colloidal crystals, crystal packing modes of ZnS (Fig. 17i and j), NaCl (Fig. 17k and l), CsCl, NiAs, CuAu, AlB2, MgZn2, MgNi2, Cu3Au, Fe4C, CaCu5, CaB6, and NaZn13 structures have been assembled successfully by varying crystallite sizes and compositions and modifying the surface charges of the colloidal particles.6,91,112,175–178
 Fig. 17  Packing modes for colloidal crystals and BCCs. Colloidal crystals: (a) and (b) illustrations and SEM images of hcp packing; (c) and (d) illustration and SEM image of fcc packing; (e) and (f) illustration and SEM images of bcc packing; (g) and (h) illustration and SEM image of chiral packing. BCCs: (i) and (j) illustration and AFM image of ZnS packing; (k) and (l) illustration and AFM image of NaCl packing. Parts (a)–(d) and (i)–(l) reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. Parts (g) and (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
4.3. Defects
As shown in Fig. 18, intrinsic defects such as cracks, grain boundaries, vacancy and interstitial defects may readily form during the self-assembly of colloidal crystals.28 The unwanted intrinsic defects are formed due to size variation, free motion, aggregation, conglutination, multilayer sedimentation, dislocation and stacking fault of colloids.96–100 Therefore, a great deal of effort has been made on fabricating large areas of perfect colloidal crystals without the presence of intrinsic defects.18,101–106
 Fig. 18  Intrinsic defects of self-assembled colloidal crystals: (a) vacancy defect pointed by arrow; (b) interstitial defect; (c) crack defect due to stacking fault; (d) grain boundary defect due to dislocation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
However, as the research about colloidal crystals developed, scientists realized gradually that the introduction of some artificially engineered defects to colloidal crystals is of great benefit in tuning the optical properties of colloidal crystals. The artificially engineered defects can be divided into point-defect, line-defect, planar-defect, and hetero body-defect (Fig. 19).179–182 Such artificial defects embedded in colloidal crystals can serve as photonic dopants, which is important for the fabrication of functional photonic devices such as optical waveguides, filters, splitters, reflectors, couplers, switches, microlasers and photonic crystals.183 For example, point-defects can be used as microcavities to trap or localize photons.184 Line-defects can act as optical waveguides and photonic crystal fibers to direct the low-loss and sharp-bent propagation of photons.185,186 Planar- and hetero body-defects can serve as slab waveguides, optical filters and reflectors to make optical and photoelectric devices.187,188 Different microfabrication techniques such as multiphoton polymerization, optical lithography, e-beam lithography, imprinting, spin coating and chemical vapor deposition can be nicely employed to generate artificial defects within colloidal crystals.189–192
 Fig. 19  Artificially engineered defects of self-assembled colloidal crystals: (a) point-defect; (b) line-defect; (c) planar-defect; (d) hetero body-defect. Part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2005, Elsevier. Part (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 180, Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. Part (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright 2006, Elsevier. Part (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 182, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
5. Intrinsic properties of CCs
5.1. Optical properties
The beautiful colors of natural gem opals and pachyrhynchus argus are not produced from pigments but from the ordered packing of small particles.1,193 The diffraction and scattering of light by the microstructures of these species tell us that nature made use of colloidal crystals long ago. The colors generated by the microstructures are called structural colors, which are important not only in nature but also for the understanding of photonic crystals.194–197 Brilliant structural colors produced by the interaction of light with periodic microstructures in the living world have aroused scientific interest for a long time.198–200 In natural opals and man-made colloidal crystals, the periodic packing of colloids causes Bragg diffraction of visible light, and thus generates structural colors and photonic band gaps (Fig. 20a and b),24,201–203 in which electromagnetic waves with energies within these band gaps are prohibited from propagating through the colloidal crystals.204–206 The formation of photonic band gaps is a result of periodic arrangement of dielectric materials, i.e., air voids and colloids in colloidal crystals.13–15,207 If the dielectric constant contrast of the constituent materials is large enough, a complete photonic band gap (cPBG) will be formed, which means the band gap is open for all directions and allows one to control the flow of light omnidirectionally.16–18 It should be noted that in most colloidal crystals, because monodisperse colloids are usually made from polymer or silica which has a very small dielectric constant contrast with air, the cPBG is rarely generated. However, colloidal crystals have been used as templates to infiltrate materials with high dielectric constants, therefore providing a simple and inexpensive approach to fabricate photonic crystals with cPBGs.35,36,208,209 Additionally, thin film interference can also occur in colloidal crystal thin films and cause them to show structural colors different from the Bragg diffraction (Fig. 20c and d).24,210 The optical properties of colloidal crystals are highly sensitive to structures, components and incidence angles, which have been used to fabricate a lot of functional and intelligent materials such as tunable band-gap materials, environment (pH, temperature, ionic and stress etc.) sensitive materials, photonic papers and color changeable coatings.23,211–215
 Fig. 20  Optical phenomena occurred in colloidal crystals: (a) illustration of Bragg diffraction, where m is the order of diffraction, λ is the wavelength of the diffraction peak, dhkl is the spacing between (hkl) planes, θ is the angle of incidence, and n is the average refractive index of the colloidal crystal; (b) Bragg diffraction occurred in 380 nm polystyrene colloidal crystal lattice (inset) which leads to a band gap at 459 nm and a corresponding structural color of blue; (c) illustration of thin film interference, where m is an arbitrary integer coefficient, λ is the wavelength of the constructive interference peak, t is the film thickness, θ is the angle of incidence, n is the average refractive index of the colloidal crystal, and nsubstrate is the refractive index of the substrate; (d) thin film interference occurred in a 380 nm polystyrene colloidal crystal bilayer thin film (inset) which leads to a structural color of orange. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210, Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society. 
5.2. Other properties
In nature, many biological surfaces such as lotus leaves and butterfly wings are superhydrophobic because of their complicated composition and surface nanostructures.216,217 The surface nanostructures of colloidal crystals can provide large surface roughness, which can endow colloidal crystals with many other properties such as high hydrophobicity and antifogging.15,218,219 For example, Jiang et al. found the water contact angles of colloidal crystal films prepared from monodisperse polystyrene sphere solutions with diameters from 225 to 605 nm were larger than 120°, showing highly hydrophobic character.220 Yang and co-workers assembled colloidal crystals into an artificial compound-eye structure via soft lithography, and found it had novel antifogging properties.221 For having ordered voids in structures, colloidal crystals are often used as masks and templates to fabricate nanostructure arrays and ordered macroporous materials.8,11 Additionally, through chemical and physical modifications, colloidal crystals with many new properties have been fabricated and applied in different areas such as electronic/plasmonic devices, energy storage and conversion materials, and biomedical engineering.222,223
6. Modification of CCs
6.1. Surface functionalization
The surface chemical composition of monodisperse colloids plays critical roles on the resultant performance of colloidal crystals. Surface functionalization includes the introduction of functional groups and formation of core–shell composite coating structures on colloids.15,224–227 Functional groups such as –NH2, –COOH, –OH, –SH, –SO3H, –Br, and –CHCH2 can be introduced via emulsion copolymerization for polymeric colloids and silane coupling reaction or thiol monolayer assembly for inorganic colloids.228–232 The introduced functional groups can not only change the surface charge, stability, hydrophobicity and biocompatibility of the formed colloidal crystals, but also provide useful sites for the formation of core–shell composite structures.233–237 For example, Xia et al. demonstrated that polystyrene beads terminated in amine groups could be directly coated with uniform shells of amorphous silica using a modified Stober method, and the band gaps of the formed colloidal crystals could be conveniently changed by controlling the thickness of silica shells.238 Yang et al. prepared CdS-nanoparticle/block-copolymer composite shells on silica spheres using a surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) combined with a gas/solid reaction. The composite spheres exhibited strong red photoluminescence and could be used to fabricate fluorescent colloidal crystals.239 Moreover, the layer-by-layer self-assembly technique can also be used to prepare functional composite coatings on colloids, from which advanced colloidal crystalline arrays with tunable properties can be created.240–242
6.2. Crosslinking
Most of the colloidal crystals are very fragile because the particles pack together without chemical bonds and the ordered packing of the particles can be easily disassembled in water or solvents, especially under ultrasonic washing conditions. Therefore the stability of the colloidal crystals is an important property for the materials or devices made from them. Crosslinking modification of colloidal crystals enables a sudden increase in mechanical properties.243–245 For example, Zhao and Wang improved colloidal crystal stability by infiltration silica precursor to create a crosslinked network in the interstitial spaces around the self-assembled silica spheres.246 Cao and Cong prepared stable colloidal crystals by infiltration thermosetting agents into the interstices of colloidal particles.247 Recently, Yu and co-workers synthesized photosensitive diazonium-substituted polystyrene colloids and obtained stable photo-crosslinked micropatterns of colloidal crystals by photolithography.248 Sawada and Kanai reported that a loosely packed colloidal crystal crosslinked by a polymer gel could homogeneously shrink and convert into a crack-free opal film with tunable band gaps.249 Additionally, crosslinked hydrogel spheres can be used to fabricate non-close-packed colloidal crystals.173,250
6.3. Etching
Etching 2D close-packed colloidal crystals chemically with oxygen plasma is one of the most effective methods to make 2D non-close-packed (ncp) colloidal crystals.251 During etching, the colloidal spheres are reduced in size while conserving their position, and thereby the interspaces increased. The diameters, interspaces, and surface compositions of colloidal spheres can be controlled by etching conditions.44 Moreover, the shapes and morphologies of colloidal spheres can be altered by anisotropic reactive ion etching (RIE) and electron beam irradiation.252–255 For example, Xia et al. prepared hierarchical nanoparticle pattern arrays via anisotropic RIE method.256 Cho et al. reported a morphology-controlled etching approach based on electron irradiation to obtain network-like and star-like nanoarrays (Fig. 21).257 The optical properties and wettability of colloidal crystals can be tailored gradually by etching.21,218 Additionally, 3D colloidal crystals can also be etched by RIE or hyperthermal neutral beam to fabricate nonspherical colloidal particles arrays with long range order. During the process, the upper layer in the colloidal crystals acted as a mask for the lower layer and resulted in anisotropic etching.258,259 It should be noted that silica-based colloidal crystals can also be etched by hydrofluoric acid to create non-close-packed 3D structures.260
 Fig. 21  Field-emission SEM images of polystyrene colloidal monolayers after electron irradiation and subsequent heating for: (a) 0 h; (b) 1 h; (c) 2 h; (d) 4 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
6.4. Electron beam lithography
Electron beam lithography (EBL) is an attractive lithographic technique for direct modification of colloidal crystals chemically and fabrication of arbitrary nanostructures smaller than 50 nm with high accuracy.261,262 EBL has been applied to structuring poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) colloidal crystals because PMMA degrades to liquid monomers under electron beam exposure.263 For example, Ferrand et al. created intentional defects with different shapes on PMMA colloidal crystals using EBL, and they controlled the defect depths from 0.4 to 2 μm by varying the electron acceleration voltages.264 Lopez et al. introduced micrometer-sized extrinsic defects in PMMA/SiO2 composite colloidal crystals, and they found the selectively formed defects can allow further growth and processing, leading to 3D buried structures.265 The facile fabrication of these patterned defect surfaces makes EBL an excellent candidate for defect engineering of colloidal crystals.179 Similarly, direct writing with a pulsed femtosecond laser or focused ion beam has been employed to create microcavities or defects on the surface of silica colloidal crystals.266–268
6.5. Other modification methods
Recently, Yang et al. developed a physical hot pressing approach to modify the shape of polymeric colloids from spherical to nonspherical in colloidal crystals (Fig. 22a and b), and the band gap properties of the hot pressed colloidal crystals were improved.269 Zhao et al. prepared nonspherical silica spheres with nodules on their surface by combining chemical surface modification of colloidal crystals together with a physical annealing process (Fig. 22c and d).270 Other methods such as multi-photon photopolymerization, soft lithography, composition and infiltration have also been applied to the modification of colloidal crystals.271–275 For example, by infiltrating functional materials such as dyes, ferroelectrics, liquid crystals and hydrogels into the ordered packing of colloids to form composites, the structural colors and photonic band gaps of colloidal crystals can be tuned.13–15
 Fig. 22  SEM images of physically and chemically modified colloidal crystals: (a) and (b) nonspherical polystyrene colloidal crystals formed by hot pressing (insets show the illustrations of the dodecahedra particle shapes and (111) crystal planes); (c) surface modified silica colloidal crystals after silica growth and annealing; (d) obtained nonspherical silica spheres with nodules on their surface after disassembly of the modified colloidal crystals. Parts (a) and (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. Parts (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 270, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. 
7. Applications of CCs
7.1. Macroporous materials from 3D CCs
As illustrated in Fig. 23, for having ∼26 vol% voids in the fcc packing of monodisperse spherical colloids, colloidal crystals have been used as sacrificial templates to fabricate three dimensional ordered macroporous (3DOM) materials.12,31,276–278 Solid, liquid or gas phase precursors can be infiltrated into colloidal crystal templates via different methods such as liquid-phase infiltration, co-deposition, chemical deposition, vapour deposition, electrodeposition and surface functionalization.279–284 The templates can subsequently be removed by sintering or solvent extracting to acquire the macroporous network, in which the spherical voids are highly ordered, periodic and interconnected via the small interstitial channels.285 Compared with macroporous materials fabricated using other techniques such as emulsion templating and foaming methods, the obtained macroporous products from colloidal crystal templates, often called inverse opals, are exact inverse replicas of colloidal crystals, and thus they not only maintain the optical properties of colloidal crystals, but also have the special 3DOM structures.11
 Fig. 23  Templating property of colloidal crystals for fabrication of macroporous materials: (a) illustrations of a co-deposition process to infiltrate inorganic materials into polymeric colloidal crystal templates, and a sintering or solvent extracting process to remove the templates; (b) SEM image of polymeric colloidal crystal templates filled with inorganic materials; (c) SEM image of formed inorganic macroporous materials after removing the templates by sintering. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
A lot of 3DOM materials including inorganic, organic, metallic and ceramic have been successfully made through this technology, which have potential applications in making photonic crystals, sensors, solar cells, electrodes, fuel cells, catalysts, absorbents and drug release materials.286–296 For example, Kanamura et al. prepared highly patterned cylindrical Ni–Sn alloy anodes with 3DOM structure for lithium batteries using colloidal crystals as templates. The coulombic efficiency of the prepared anodes was more than 99% with excellent cycle stabilities.297 Deng et al. fabricated magnetic 3DOM siliceous materials by infiltration of silica precursors and magnetite nanoparticles into PMMA colloidal crystals. The formed magnetic 3DOM materials achieved a fast and efficient removal of microcystin in water.298 Zhao et al. prepared 3DOM materials of Ce1−xZrxO2 using colloidal crystals as templates and cerium nitrate and zirconium oxide chloride as raw materials. For having ordered microstructures with open interconnected macropores, it showed much higher catalytic activity for diesel soot combustion than the corresponding disordered macroporous catalysts.299
3DOM materials with hierarchical porosity have drawn a lot of attention for having well-defined mesoporous walls in the macroporous skeletons.300–304 These mesopores are usually introduced through the addition of an amphiphilic block polymer, surfactant, or small silica colloidal particles to the infiltration of colloidal crystal templates.11,289 For instance, Zhang et al. created hierarchically structured 3DOM catalysts of Au/CeO2Co3O4 via a colloidal crystal template assisted precursor thermal decomposition method. For having additional surface area from the mesoporous structures, the catalysts showed superior catalytic conversion, selectivity, and stability for CO preferential oxidation in H2-rich gases, making them potentially applicable in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells.305 Tsapatsis et al. prepared microporous zeolite crystals with ordered mesoporosity by the replication of colloidal crystals composed of size-tunable silica nanoparticles.306 Moon and co-workers produced meso-/macroporous inverse opal carbon balls using spherical colloidal crystal templates made in emulsion droplets (Fig. 24).307 Additionally, less ordered macroporous materials with fewer interconnections may be obtained if the ordered structures of the colloidal crystal templates are disturbed by an improper infiltration ratio or filler size.9,12
 Fig. 24  Porous carbon balls from spherical colloidal crystal templates: (a) SEM image of macroporous inverse opal carbon balls using spherical colloidal crystal templates made in emulsion droplets; (b) SEM image of meso-macroporous inverse opal carbon balls using spherical colloidal crystal templates made in emulsion droplets; (c) magnified SEM image of (b); (d) TEM image of the mesoporous walls. Reproduced with permission from ref. 307, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
7.2. Nanostructure materials from 2D CCs
Colloidal lithography, which generally employs 2D or monolayer colloidal crystals as the lithographic masks, has shown great potential for the fabrication of ordered nanostructure materials such as nanoparticle arrays, nanotip arrays, nanowire arrays, nanobowl arrays, nanovoid arrays, nanopore arrays, nanohole arrays, nanogrid arrays, nanowell arrays, nanopillar arrays, nanodot arrays, nanoring arrays and nanonets.21,308–311 Various colloidal lithography techniques such as colloidal-crystal-assisted deposition, evaporation, etching, dewetting and imprinting have been established.8,312–317 Compared with other nanofabrication techniques such as photolithography and scanning probe lithography methods to make nanostructure materials, colloidal lithography has been proven to be a flexible and cost-effective technique to fabricate nanostructure arrays with long-range order.8,21,46 For example, Cao and Cong developed a colloidal crystal mask-assisted electroless deposition process to fabricate copper nanogrid patterns (Fig. 25).19 Qi et al. fabricated silver sulphide nanonets based on a floating colloidal crystal monolayer (CCM) mask at a gas/liquid interface for materials deposition via interfacial reactions.318 Asoh et al. reported a selected electrochemical etching of aluminium foils through physical colloidal crystal masks, and the hexagonally ordered pattern of masks was transferred to the aluminium substrate successfully.319 Xia et al. combined colloidal crystal mask-assisted imprinting and etching techniques together to fabricate mesoscopic gold and silver rings.320 Yang and co-workers reported a colloidal crystal mask-assisted dewetting method to build up polyvinyl alcohol nanoring arrays from uneven evaporation of solvents.321
 Fig. 25  Masking property of colloidal crystals for fabrication of nanostructure materials: (a) illustration of a colloidal crystal mask-assisted electroless deposition process to fabricate copper nanogrid patterns; (b) SEM image of polystyrene colloidal crystal masks; (c) SEM image of deposited copper through the masks; (d) SEM image of formed copper nanogrid patterns after removing the masks by tetrahydrofuran extraction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. 
The obtained nanostructure materials via colloidal lithography have been applied in many fields such as optics, photonics, sensors and microelectronic engineering.7,322–325 For example, Jiang et al. fabricated wafer-scale periodic metallic nanopyramid arrays using non-close-packed monolayer colloidal crystals as masks. The nanopyramid arrays showed stable surface enhancements for Raman scattering from benzenethiol molecules adsorbed at the metal surfaces.326 Zhou et al. prepared 2D ZnO nanosheets with an ordered hexagonal pore periodicity via a colloidal crystal-assisted electrochemical deposition method. The ZnO nanosheets have potential applications including high-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells, nanofilters, photonic devices, and catalysts.327 Yang et al. reported the fabrication of superhydrophobic silicon cone arrays using reactive ion etching (RIE) with monolayer silica colloidal crystals as masks. They also showed that the surface roughness of the obtained silicon cones can be managed by varying the etching duration (Fig. 26).328 Wang and Zhang succeeded in fabricating heterogeneous binary arrays of metallic nanoparticles by stepwise changing the incidence angles of metal vapor beams in a colloidal crystal-assisted deposition. The stepwise angle-resolved colloidal lithography is independent of the sphere sizes of colloidal masks and the chemical nature of materials deposited, while it shows a profound dependence on the registry of colloidal masks with respect to the incident vapor beam and the incidence angle. The resulting heterogeneous binary arrays have promising applications in microelectronics.329 Additionally, nanostructure materials fabricated by colloidal lithography also provide platforms for studying bioscience and biomedical engineering. For instance, sensors made from noble metal nanostructure arrays are effective in detecting mutations in DNA sequences by surface enhanced Raman scattering.330 Biochips made from patterned nanostructure materials can regulate biological responses.331
 Fig. 26  Fabrication of silicon cone arrays using RIE with monolayer silica colloidal crystals as masks: (a) illustration of the colloidal lithography procedure; (b), (c) and (d) cross section SEM images of silicon microstructure arrays obtained after etching for 0 s, 175 s and 300 s, respectively (insets show the top-view SEM images of relevant ordered structure arrays). Reproduced with permission from ref. 328, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
7.3. Band gap materials
7.3.1. Photonic crystals. Although crystalline arrays of colloidal spheres are not expected to exhibit full band gaps due to having relatively low dielectric contracts, colloidal crystals have received significant attention because they can act as not only colloidal photonic crystals themselves but also templates for fabricating 3DOM photonic crystals with complete photonic band gaps (cPBGs).46,332–334 Both the colloidal photonic crystals and 3DOM photonic crystals have important applications in guiding the movement of photons, controlling light emission and amplification, and building optical devices and sensors, which are expected to play a key role in next generation information technology.17 By using infiltration materials with high dielectric constants and removing colloidal crystal templates, 3DOM photonic crystals with cPBGs can be formed.18,335 For example, John et al. produced macroporous photonic crystals with a complete band gap centred on 1.46 μm by growing silicon inside silica colloidal crystal templates and removing the templates using etching.35 Moreover, the band gap properties of colloidal photonic crystals can be improved or tuned by physical and chemical modification methods.14–16,336 For instance, Clays et al. applied a blown film extrusion technique to the modification of polystyrene colloidal crystals. They found that the morphology of the colloidal particles could be predictably changed from a sphere into an oblate spheroid with a specified aspect ratio by the extent of the blown film extrusion. Therefore, the concomitant photonic band gap properties can be tuned in a convenient way.337 Zhu et al. immobilized colloidal crystals within a poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) hydrogel matrix. They found that the photonic band gaps of the samples can be tuned anywhere within the visible spectrum by simply varying the colloidal crystal concentration or stretching.338 Gu and co-workers synthesized monodisperse nigrosine-doped polymer spheres and assembled them into colloidal photonic crystals. They found that nigrosine dye in colloids can efficiently depress light scattering and eliminate the iridescent effect inside the photonic crystals.339
7.3.2. Optical devices. Based on the photonic band gap properties of colloidal crystals, a lot of optical devices such as waveguides, filters, splitters, reflectors, couplers, switches, microlasers and photonic papers have been built.18,183,340–342 Among these, the latest achievement is the demonstration of low-threshold lasing realized in sandwiched colloidal crystals with light emitting layers or dye-doped 3DOM photonic crystals.343–345 For example, Furumi et al. developed a flexible colloidal crystal laser device using low-threshold optical excitation. As shown in Fig. 27, the laser-cavity structure consisted of an intermediate light emitting layer containing a fluorescent dye sandwiched between a pair of polymeric colloidal crystal films. The low-threshold lasing action could be realized by the successful confinement of photons emitted from the intermediate light emitting layer in the laser-cavity structure.346 Kim and co-workers realized a low-threshold lasing in dye-doped 3DOM photonic crystals using colloidal crystals as templates. Due to the enhanced refractive index contrast, the laser device exhibited higher reflectivity.347
 Fig. 27  Flexible polymer colloidal crystal lasers with a light-emitting planar defect: (a) illustration of colloidal crystal laser device, in which a light-emitting planar defect of Rhodamine/PEG-DA is sandwiched between a pair of colloidal crystal films of PS particles stabilized in PDMS elastomer, and the left-hand picture represents a cross-sectional SEM image of the magnified light-emitting planar defect between the PS/PDMS colloidal crystal films; (b) changes in emission intensity at the laser-oscillation wavelength of around 610 nm and the emission spectral linewidth for the colloidal crystal laser device as a function of excitation energy of 512 nm light from an Nd:YAG laser beam; (c) a photograph of the laser action of the flexible polymer colloidal crystal laser device fabricated on PET sheets caused by optical excitation above the threshold pulse energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 346, Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH. 

7.3.3. Sensors. In the last decade, much attention has been devoted to the use of self assembled colloidal crystals as sensors because the structural colors and photonic band gaps of colloidal crystals are highly sensitive to structure and component variations.348,349 By employing colloidal crystal/polymer composite systems or inverse opals made from colloidal crystals, sensors for different stimuli such as pH, temperature, humidity, force, ionic strength, and organic vapors have been developed.350–356 For example, Endo et al. prepared a colorimetric chemical sensor by embedding colloidal crystals in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer. When a sample solution such as benzene, toluene, or xylene, capable of swelling the elastomer matrix, was applied to the surface of this colloidal crystal sensor, the lattice constant and thus the wavelength of the Bragg diffracted light was increased. Therefore, the sensor can be used to monitor volatile organic compounds in environments.357 Similarly, based on the swell-caused coloration mechanism, Asher et al. developed a 2D colloidal crystal sensing material for the visual detection of amphiphilic molecules in water by embedding a monolayer of polystyrene spheres in a PNIPAAm based hydrogel film. The sensor was sensitive and could detect ∼0.1 mM concentrations of surfactants in water.358 Hupp et al. fabricated metal organic framework (MOF)-containing composite colloidal crystals for gas sensing, and shifts in colloidal crystal band gaps were observed upon gas sorption by the microporous MOF.359 Additionally, colloidal crystals have been used as biosensors for biomolecule detection. For instance, Takeoka and co-workers developed a colorimetric glucose-sensing system that is composed of glucose-responsive hydrogel particles confined in an inverse opal polymer membrane made from colloidal crystal templates. The systems could detect the glucose concentration between 5.0 and 8.0 mM.360 Asher et al. fabricated glucose biosensors by embedding colloidal crystals in functional hydrogel matrices. Exposing the sensor to a synthetic tear containing 1–100 μM glucose could lead to a shift in band gap positions of the colloidal crystals based on the volume change of the matrices. The sensor had a great potential to serve as ocular chips or diagnostic contact lenses for patients with diabetes mellitus.361 Moreover, in some cases, colloidal crystal-based sensors are ideal for real-life bio-sensing devices because they can be applied in biologic fluids with high ionic strength to detect physiologically relevant concentrations.17,362,363 Many colloidal crystal-based sensors are suitable for naked eye detection technologies as they have strong structural colors in the visible light range.13,14
7.4. Bionic materials
In the biological world, many animals including neon tetra, hercules beetles, paradise whiptails, blue damselfish, and tortoise beetles have variable structural colors in response to environmental stimuli due to interference of light on their ordered body microstructures, which is essential to the camouflage, predation, communication, and reproductive behaviors of the species.22,23,364–367 For instance, the blue damselfish normally displays a structural color of blue, produced by the interference of light on periodically stacked microstructures of reflecting plates in skin cells. Under stressful conditions, the fish changes its blue coloration rapidly to ultraviolet, triggered by the simultaneous spacing variation of adjoining reflecting plates, to evade its pursuers.368 While the hercules beetle alters color by varying the amount of water in the cuticle and thereby the thickness variation of the thin skin films is responsible for the interference color.369 By using the thin film interference phenomenon occurring in monolayer or bilayer ordered arrays of polystyrene spheres, a colloidal crystal-based bionic film with variable structure colors, simulating the coloration mechanism of neon tetra or blue damselfish, was realized (Fig. 28).24 Cao and Cong fabricated a circular stairlike bionic film of polystyrene colloidal crystals by a evaporation deposition method. The film simulated the iridescent colors of peacock tail feathers vividly.210 Recently, Kolle et al. mimicked the colorful wing scale structure of the papilio blumei butterfly through a combination of layer deposition techniques including colloidal self-assembly, sputtering and atomic layer deposition using colloidal crystals as masks.370 Inspired by the natural antireflective structures of moth eyes, Jiang and co-workers fabricated bionic coatings consisting of nipple arrays on silicon and gallium antimonide via a colloidal crystal-assisted etching process. The bionic coatings had excellent broadband antireflection properties and thermal stabilities.371,372 Additionally, bionic materials with microlens arrays that mimic brittlestars’ light collection structures had been fabricated based on colloidal crystals.22
 Fig. 28  Bionic colloidal crystal thin films inspired by neon tetra: (a) photos and illustration of the variable structural color in neon tetra; (b) optical image of bilayer colloidal bionic films before swelling; (c) optical image of bilayer colloidal bionic films after swelling; (d) optical image of bilayer colloidal bionic films after evaporation of swelling agent; (e) SEM image of (d); (f) detail of the marked region of (e); (g) detail of the marked region of (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright 2011, Optical Society of America. 
7.5. Energy storage and conversion materials
Due to possessing special optical, templating and masking properties, colloidal crystals have been applied to energy storage and conversion materials such as solar cells, fuel cells, lithium batteries, and supercapacitors.296,302,373,374 Colloidal crystals have been used to fabricate wavelength selective concentrators, antireflection coatings, and light harvesting photoelectrodes for efficient output of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and poly-silicon solar cells.11,375,376 For example, Song et al. developed a wavelength-selective colloidal crystal concentrator which could selectively converge useful light and filter out unnecessary light for DSSC based on its photonic band gap properties. The application of the colloidal crystal concentrator could effectively improve the output power of the DSSC by more than 5 times.377 Corma et al. developed a quasi-fractal colloidal crystal-based photoelectrode to localize photons in a very broad optical spectral range for DSSC. The photoelectrode could harvest photons very efficiently from the ultraviolet and the visible regions of the solar spectrum.378 Lee et al. fabricated an inverse opal TiO2 photoelectrode for DSSC using colloidal crystals as templates. The photoelectrode with ordered porous structures and large surface areas showed high photon-to-current conversion efficiency.379 Recently, Sun and co-workers developed an antireflection colloidal crystal coating for poly-silicon solar cells. The coating of self-assembled silica nanospheres exhibited excellent antireflection properties in the UV and NIR wavelength regions, and as a result, the overall conversion efficiency of the solar cells was increased from 11% to 12.3%.380 It should be noted that some antireflection coatings for solar cells can be fabricated by using a colloidal crystal-assisted etching process.321
The templating properties of colloidal crystals have been used to fabricate 3DOM electrodes, catalyst supports and membranes for lithium batteries, supercapacitors, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) and direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs).381–385 For example, Caruso et al. produced hierarchically porous LiFePO4 electrode materials for high power lithium ion batteries using colloidal crystals as templates. The meso-macroporous electrodes offered both high surface areas and improved access to the active LiFePO4 material, and hence the batteries were able to obtain good discharge capacities of 160 mA h g−1, which was close to the theoretical capacity.294 Frank et al. synthesized Ni–NiO core–shell inverse opal electrodes for supercapacitors using a colloidal crystal template-assisted electrochemical approach. The electrodes achieved excellent electrical and ionic conductivity throughout the 3DOM structure, and thereby the supercapacitors displayed pseudo-capacitor behaviour, good rate capability and cycling performance.386 Sun et al. prepared 3DOM La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 (LSM)/yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) composite cathodes for SOFCs using the colloidal crystal templating method combined with a fast firing technique. Benefiting from the 3DOM architecture, the obtained cathodes presented very high electrocatalytic activities with low polarization resistances at intermediate temperatures.387 Yamada et al. prepared a highly active Pt catalyst for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells and DMFCs using porous carbon as the catalyst support, which was synthesized by a colloidal crystal templating method. The monodisperse 3D interconnected porous structure not only provided a large effective surface area to improve catalytic activity greatly, but also facilitated smooth mass transportation to give rise to high limiting currents.388 Kanamura and co-workers fabricated a 3DOM silica composite membrane including binary poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulphonic acid) (PAMPS)–sulphonated poly(1,4-phenylene ether ether sulphone) (SPEES) polymer electrolyte for DMFC. The proton/methanol selectivity of the composite membrane was about ten times higher than that of the traditionally used Nafion membrane due to the formation of PAMPS–SPEES core–shell structures in the 3DOM pores.389
7.6. Biomedical engineering
In the biomedical engineering field, colloidal crystals have been used as supports for immunoassay, chips for disease diagnosis, and scaffolds for cell culture and tissue engineering.390–393 For example, Gu et al. developed a new kind of suspension array for multiplexed immunoassay using silica colloidal crystal beads as coding carriers. The colloidal crystal beads were more sensitive than glass beads and planar carriers because the colloidal carrier codes are derived from the structural color, and could find applications in genomics, drug screening and clinical diagnosis (Fig. 29).394 Kuo and co-workers fabricated heparin-conjugated scaffolds with a pore structure of inverted colloidal crystals using a templating method. They applied the scaffolds for cartilage regeneration, and found that the ordered pores in the heparinized inverted colloidal crystal constructs could favor the chondrocyte culture to regenerate a uniform distribution of cartilage.395 They also successfully applied a similar scaffold with induced pluripotent stem cells to nerve tissue engineering.396 Recently, Jang et al. reported that a Prussian blue-decorated 3DOM carbon made from colloidal crystals could be used as a highly effective adsorbent for targeting internalized radionuclides in the human body. As it has a large specific area and pore volume, the material is effective for the removal of 133Cs with a maximum adsorption capacity of 40.07 mmol g−1, which is about 30 and 200 times higher than that of commercialized medicine Radiogardase® and bulk Prussian blue, respectively.293
 Fig. 29  Encoded colloidal crystal supports for protein multiplexed immunoassay: (a) illustration of the multiplexed assay; (b) reflection and (c) fluorescence microscope images of silica colloidal crystal beads after incubation with an analyte containing FITC-tagged goat antihuman IgG and FITC-tagged goat antimouse IgG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 394, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
7.7. Other applications
Colloidal crystals can also be employed as a low cost approach to fabricate microlens or photonic arrays for improving the extraction efficiency of light emitting diodes (LEDs).17,397,398 For example, Wei et al. improved the light output power of GaN-based LEDs greatly using silica microlens arrays generated via colloidal lithography. The microlens arrays reduced the reflection at the LED/air interface and enhanced the photo escape cone.399 Additionally, functional defects embedded in colloidal crystals can be used for DNA recognition and polypeptide biodegradation studies.400,401 Colloidal crystals composed of Janus particles can be used as templates to synthesize catalysts for catalytic membrane reactors.402 Moreover, other functional materials with special morphologies and novel properties such as opal balls, photonic chains, nanostar arrays, nanoprism superlattices and multipodal nanoparticles have been fabricated facilely based on colloidal crystals.403–407
8. Concluding remarks and perspectives
A recent high resolution panoramic image of the main aspects of colloidal crystals has been given in this review. Despite facing a few critical challenges, colloidal crystals, as ordered arrays of monodisperse colloidal particles, are growing fast in the current stage of development. For scientists to explore them in the future, they must bear in mind that the availability of monodisperse colloidal particles with materials other than silica and polymer is still far from enough. Concrete efforts must be devoted to increasing the production yield by searching for more powerful synthetic methods and more efficient purification strategies, especially for the synthesis of uniform anisotropic colloids of different materials. Recent advancements in template-based synthesis and colloidal-molecule synthesis have provided the means for controlling the particle morphology for almost any material. Meanwhile, the large scale defect control and engineering in an assembly of colloidal crystals are still far from perfect and precise. There’s plenty of room for future improvements via theoretical simulation and the development of new techniques for particle manipulation. Recent studies have shown that using an appropriate guided assembly method and chemically modified colloids, the formation of intrinsic defects in colloidal crystals can be greatly reduced. Single colloid manipulation can be expected as an ultimate frontier to realize precise defect control and engineering in colloidal crystals. Additionally, the relationship between the intrinsic properties of colloidal crystals and specially assembled or engineered structures is still far from being fully understood, especially for the optical properties of colloidal crystals associated with complex defects, nonspherical components and polynary constructs. Many details about the behaviour difference between arrays of isotropic and anisotropic colloids remain unexplored. Recent developments in simulation approaches have provided a basis for further experimental exploration. Guided assembly and chemical modification are expected to be the main concerns in structure and performance design of colloidal crystals in the next decade. Finally, the application of colloidal crystals needs shifting from potentiality to actuality. Collaborative efforts from chemists, physicists, materials scientists and biologists are particularly desirable in this process. Through multidisciplinary endeavors, more and more well-designed sensors, biochips, functional materials, photonic and microelectronic devices with fascinating properties based on colloidal crystals will emerge soon and hold great promise for the future.
AcknowledgementsThis work is financially supported by the National Key Basic Research Development Program of China (973 special preliminary study plan, 2012CB722705), the Natural Science Foundation of China (21004035, 21005042), the Fok Ying Tong Education Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (131045), the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2010BQ020), and the Promotive Research Fund for Excellent Young and Middle-aged Scientists of Shandong Province (BS2010CL014).
Notes and referencesJ. V. Sanders, Nature, 1964, 204, 1151 CrossRef .W. M. Stanley, Am. J. Bot., 1937, 24, 59 CrossRef CAS .I. Langmuir, J. Chem. Phys., 1938, 6, 873 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Bernal and I. Fankuchen, J. Gen. Physiol., 1941, 25, 111 CrossRef CAS .A. Imhof and D. J. Pine, Nature, 1997, 389, 948 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1695 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610 RSC .L. Qi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1054 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 278, 423 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Dinsmore, M. F. Hsu, M. G. Nikolaides, M. Marquez, A. R. Bausch and D. A. Weitz, Science, 2002, 298, 1006 CrossRef CAS .A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763 RSC .H. Cong and B. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 131 CrossRef CAS .O. Sato, S. Kubo and Z. Z. Gu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1 CrossRef CAS .C. I. Aguirre, E. Reguera and A. Stein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2565 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14113 RSC .G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotsch and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2528 RSC .J. F. Galisteo-lopez, M. Lbistate, R. Sapienza, L. S. Froufe-Perez, A. Blanco and C. Lopez, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 30 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yan, L. Wang and X. S. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3695 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1821 CrossRef CAS .J. Aizenberg, A. J. Black and G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 1999, 398, 495 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4249 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhang, Y. Ma and L. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 251 RSC .Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Gu, C. Zhu and Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3297 RSC .H. Cong, B. Yu and X. S. Zhao, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 12799 CrossRef CAS .Y. H. Ye, S. Badilescu and V. V. Truong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 872 CrossRef CAS .D. K. Yi, E. M. Seo and D. Y. Kim, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 5321 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Tao, J. Huang and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8177 CrossRef CAS .J. Li and Y. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2581 CrossRef CAS .R. G. Xie and X. Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4976 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, Solid State Sci., 2006, 8, 1056 CrossRef CAS .B. You, N. Wen, L. Shi, L. Wu and J. Zi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3594 RSC .O. D. Velev, T. A. Jede, R. F. Lobo and A. M. Lenhoff, Nature, 1997, 389, 447 CrossRef CAS .B. T. Holland, C. F. Blanford and A. Stein, Science, 1998, 281, 538 CrossRef CAS .A. Blanco, E. Chomski, S. Grabtchak, M. Ibisate, S. John, S. W. Leonard, C. Lopez, F. Meseguer, H. Miguez, J. P. Mondia, G. A. Ozin, O. Toader and H. M. van Driel, Nature, 2000, 405, 437 CrossRef CAS .Y. A. Vlasov, X. Z. Bo, J. C. Sturm and D. J. Norris, Nature, 2001, 414, 289 CrossRef CAS .S. Guldin, S. Huttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tetreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang and P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13173 CrossRef CAS .L. Cui, Y. Li, J. Wang, E. Tian, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5499 CAS .J. V. Sanders and M. J. Murray, Nature, 1978, 275, 201 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Kim, Y. Li, E. J. Lee and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2334 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Cho, G. R. Yi, J. M. Lim, S. H. Kim, V. N. Manoharan, D. J. Pine and S. M. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15968 CrossRef CAS .X. Huang, J. Zhou, M. Fu, B. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Zhao, Z. Yang, Q. Xie and L. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8695 CrossRef CAS .L. Yan, K. Wang, J. Wu and L. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11241 CrossRef CAS .M. Rycenga, J. M. McLellan and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2416 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia, B. Gates, Y. Yin and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 693 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Kim, Y. G. Joe and K. D. Suh, Colloid Polym. Sci., 1999, 277, 252 CAS .Q. Zhang, Y. Han, W. C. Wang, T. Song and J. Chang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 62 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Chen and C. Y. Chen, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 1377 CAS .S. E. Shim, K. Kim, S. Oh and S. Choe, Macromol. Res., 2004, 12, 240 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong, Advanced in Nanoscience and Technology, Trans Tech Publications, Zurich,  2012 Search PubMed .W. Stober and A. Fink, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62 CrossRef .G. H. Bogush, M. A. Tracy and C. F. Zukoskiiv, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 104, 95 CrossRef CAS .Y. Masuda, M. Itoh, T. Yonezawa and K. Koumoto, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 4155 CrossRef CAS .S. Eiden-Assmann, J. Widoniak and G. Maret, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 6 CrossRef CAS .S. Xua, Z. H. Li, Q. Wang, L. J. Caoa, T. M. Hea and G. T. Zou, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 465, 56 CrossRef .J. Luo, D. Qu, A. Tikhonov, J. Bohn and S. A. Asher, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 345, 131 CrossRef CAS .H. Z. Zhong, Z. X. Wei, M. F. Ye, Y. Yan, Y. Zhou, Y. Q. Ding, C. H. Yang and Y. F. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9008 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Li, J. X. Li, G. D. Li, D. P. Liu and J. S. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8754 CrossRef CAS .L. Polavarapu and Q. H. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 185606 CrossRef .K. P. Velikov, G. E. Zegers and A. V. Blaaderen, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 1384 CrossRef CAS .Z. Q. Yang and K. J. Klabunde, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 1016 CrossRef CAS .S. Tanaka, D. Nogami, N. Tsuda and Y. Miyake, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 334, 188 CrossRef CAS .E. W. Seelig, B. Tang, A. Yamilov, H. Cao and R. P. H. Chang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 80, 257 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Wang, S. He, Z. M. Cui and L. Guo, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 1574 CrossRef CAS .S. Shi, L. M. Zhou, T. Wang, L. N. Bian, Y. T. Tang and S. I. Kuroda, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 120, 501 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Liddell and C. J. Summers, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 274, 103 CrossRef CAS .F. Ma, S. Wang, L. Smith and N. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4334 CrossRef CAS .C. Ohm, N. Kapernaum, D. Nonnenmacher, F. Giesselmann, C. Serra and R. Zentel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5305 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Choi, S. Hwang, J. M. Jeong, S. M. Kang, J. Kim and C. S. Lee, Biomedical Engineering Letters, 2012, 2, 95 CrossRef .C. H. Chen, A. R. Abate, D. Lee, E. M. Terentjev and D. Weitz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3201 CrossRef CAS .Z. Li, X. Wei and T. Ngai, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1322 RSC .C. H. Park, N. Chung and J. Lee, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 361, 423 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Rolland, B. W. Maynor, L. E. Euliss, A. E. Exner, G. M. Denison and J. M. DeSimone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10096 CrossRef CAS .T. Tanaka, M. Okayama, Y. Kitayama, Y. Kagawa and M. Okubo, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7843 CrossRef CAS .I. D. Hosein and C. M. Liddell, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8810 CrossRef CAS .J. Parvole, I. Chaduc, K. Ako, O. Spalla, A. Thill, S. Ravaine, E. Duguet, M. Lansalot and E. B. Lami, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7009 CrossRef CAS .D. Kim, J. Heo, M. Kim, Y. W. Lee and S. W. Han, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 468, 245 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Kim, R. J. Larsen and D. A. Weitz, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2005 CrossRef CAS .A. Kuijk, A. V. Blaaderen and A. Imhof, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2346 CrossRef CAS .B. G. Wang, H. C. Shum and D. Weitz, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 641 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Langille, M. L. Personick, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14542 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Deng, M. Chen, S. X. Zhou, B. You and L. M. Wu, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6403 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Cai, Y. J. Tang, Y. T. Wang and Y. J. Cao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 10 CrossRef CAS .M. Chen, L. M. Wu, S. X. Zhou and B. You, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 801 CrossRef CAS .G. K. Zhang, X. Shen and Y. Q. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7145 CAS .W. Cheng, K. B. Tang, Y. X. Qi, J. Sheng and Z. P. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1799 RSC .Q. B. Zhang, J. P. Xie, J. Liang and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1387 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, G. Y. Chen, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4098 CrossRef CAS .Q. Shao, C. Yang, L. Jiang, J. He, S. Li and B. Jiang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 751 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, D. P. Josephson and A. Stein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 360 CrossRef CAS .Y. K. Koh, C. H. Yip, Y. M. Chiang and C. C. Wong, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5245 CrossRef CAS .F. Marlow, Muldarisnur, P. Sharifi, R. Brinkmann and C. Memdive, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6212 CrossRef CAS .O. D. Velev and A. M. Lenhoff, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 5, 56 CrossRef CAS .X. Ye and L. Qi, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 608 CrossRef CAS .M. Bardosova, M. E. Pemble, I. M. Povey and R. H. Tredgold, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3104 CrossRef CAS .Y. Fu, Z. Jin, G. Liu and Y. Yin, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1744 CrossRef CAS .A. Wang, S. L. Chen and P. Dong, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1586 CrossRef CAS .F. Pan, J. Zhang, C. Cai and T. Wang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7101 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, X. Luo, X. Yan and G. Zhu, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5204 CrossRef CAS .Z. Cai, J. Teng, D. Xia and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9970 CAS .Y. G. Ko, D. H. Shin, G. S. LEE and U. S. Choi, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 385, 188 CrossRef CAS .P. Colson, R. Cloots and C. Henrist, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12800 CrossRef CAS .J. Kleinert, S. Kim and O. D. Velev, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10380 CrossRef CAS .T. Kanai, T. Sawada, A. Toyotama and K. Kitamura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 25 CrossRef CAS .S. Wong, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15589 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Wang and H. Mohwald, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 244 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, S. Ahl, Q. Li, M. Kreiter, T. Neumann, K. Burkert, W. Knoll and U. Jonas, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 981 RSC .Y. Wan, Z. Cai, L. Xia, L. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Li and X. S. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 2078 CrossRef CAS .Z. Dai, Y. Li, G. Duan, L. Jia and W. Cai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6706 CrossRef CAS .Z. Cai, J. Teng, Y. Wan and X. S. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 380, 42 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Leunissen, C. G. Christova, A. P. Hynninen, C. P. Royall, A. i. Campbell, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij and A. van Blaaderen, Nature, 2005, 437, 235 CrossRef CAS .I. D. Hosein, S. H. Lee and C. M. Liddell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3085 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, Y. Qian and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3226 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, S. A. Delo and A. Stein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6666 CrossRef CAS .E. P. Lewandowski, J. A. Bernate, A. Tseng, P. C. Searson and K. J. Strebe, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 886 RSC .T. Ming, X. Kou, H. Chen, T. Wang, H. L. Tam, K. W. Cheah, J. Y. Chen and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9685 CrossRef CAS .B. Pietrobon, M. McEachran and V. Kitaev, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 21 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, X. Ye, J. Chen and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2009, 461, 964 CrossRef CAS .M. Rycenga, P. H. C. Camargo and Y. Xia, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1129 RSC .H. Cong, A. Revzin and T. Pan, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 075307 CrossRef .N. N. Khanh and K. B. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14228 CrossRef CAS .H. Zheng, M. F. Rubner and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 4505 CrossRef CAS .Z. Z. Gu and A. Fujishima, O Sato, Angew. Chem., 2002, 114, 2171 CrossRef .W. Sun, F. Jia, Z. Sun, J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 8018 CrossRef CAS .H. Fudouzi, M. Kobayashi and N. Shinya, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7648 CrossRef CAS .W. M. Choi and O. O. Park, Colloids Surf., A, 2006, 277, 131 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Zhu, X. Li, X. Zhang, T. Wang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17936 CrossRef CAS .J. Ge and Y. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5041 RSC .D. Zerrouki, J. Baudry, D. Pine, P. Chaikin and J. Bibette, Nature, 2008, 455, 380 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Erb, H. S. Son, B. Samanta, V. M. Rotello and B. B. Yellen, Nature, 2009, 457, 999 CrossRef CAS .A. T. Skjeltorp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 51, 2306 CrossRef CAS .K. D. Hermanson, S. O. Lumsdon, J. P. Williams, E. W. Kaler and O. D. Velev, Science, 2001, 294, 1082 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Bhatt and O. D. Velev, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 467 CrossRef CAS .K. Q. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, Nature, 2004, 429, 739 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Leunissen, H. R. Vutukuri and A. van Blaaderen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3116 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Millman, K. H. Bhatt, B. G. Prevo and O. D. Velev, Nat. Mater., 2004, 4, 98 CrossRef .M. Righini, A. S. Zelenina, C. Girard and R. Quidant, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 477 CrossRef CAS .V. Garces-Chavez, R. Quidant, P. J. Reece, G. Badenes, L. Torner and K. Dholakia, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 085417 CrossRef .H. Hwang, Y. H. Park and J. K. Park, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6010 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Dinsmore, M. F. Hsu, M. G. Nikolaides, M. Marquez, A. R. Bausch and D. A. Weitz, Science, 2002, 298, 1006 CrossRef CAS .G. R. Yi, T. Thorsen, V. N. Manoharan, M. J. Hwang, S. J. Jeon, D. J. Pine, S. R. Quake and S. M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1300 CrossRef CAS .Z. Nie, S. Xu, M. Seo, P. C. Lewis and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8058 CrossRef CAS .W. Drenckhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5245 CrossRef CAS .J. I. Park, Z. Nie, A. Kumachev, A. I. Abdelrahman, B. P. Binks, H. A. Stone and E. Kumacheva, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 5404 CrossRef .J. W. Kim, A. Fernandez-Nieves, N. Dan, A. S. Utada, M. Marquez and D. A. Weitz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2876 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Kraft, W. S. Vlug, C. M. van Kats, A. van Blaaderen, A. Imhof and W. K. Kegel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1182 CrossRef CAS .D. Zerrouki, B. Rotenberg, S. Abramson, J. Baudry, C. Goubault, F. Leal-Calderon, D. J. Pine and J. Bibette, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 57 CrossRef CAS .S. Korkut, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12196 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Sharma, G. Kumaraswamy, I. Ly and O. Mondain-Monval, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 3423 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Warren, F. J. Disalvo and U. Wiesner, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 156 CrossRef CAS .L. Carbone, L. Manna and C. Sonnichsen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4282 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Hermans, M. A. C. Broeren, N. Gomopoulos, P. van der Schoot, M. H. P. van Genderen, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, G. Fytas and E. W. Meijer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 721 CrossRef CAS .I. Musevic, M. Skarabot, U. Tkalec, M. Ravnik and S. Zumer, Science, 2006, 313, 954 CrossRef CAS .U. Ognysta, A. Nych, V. Nazarenko, M. Skarabot and I. Musevic, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12092 CrossRef CAS .C. P. Lapointe, T. G. Mason and I. I. Smalyukh, Science, 2009, 326, 1083 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, X. Badel, J. Linnros and J. B. Wiley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3268 CrossRef CAS .M. Tymczenko, L. F. Marsal, T. Trifonov, I. Rodriguez, F. Ramiro-Manzano, J. Pallares, A. Rodriguez, R. Alcubilla and F. Meseguer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2315 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Lim, J. H. Moon, G. R. Yi, C. J. Heo and S. M. Yang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3445 CrossRef CAS .V. K. Kodali, W. Roos, J. P. Spatz and J. E. Curtis, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 337 RSC .C. M. Sato, A. Srinivasan and B. R. Ratna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8508 CrossRef .P. L. Biancaniello, A. J. Kim and J. C. Croker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 058302 CrossRef .A. J. Kim, P. L. Biancaniello and J. C. Croker, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1991 CrossRef CAS .M. H. S. Shyr, D. P. Wernette, P. Wiltzius, Y. Lu and P. V. Braun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8234 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yin, Z. Y. Li and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 622 CrossRef CAS .X. Yan, J. Yao, G. Lu, X. Li, J. Zhang, K. Han and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7688 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Velikov, C. G. Christova, R. P. A. Dullens and A. van Blaaderen, Science, 2002, 296, 106 CrossRef CAS .P. Kumnorkaew and J. F. Gilchrist, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6070 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Li, Z. Cai, H. L. Li, X. S. Zhao and Q. Li, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6753 CrossRef CAS .N. V. Dziomkina, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 342, 8 CrossRef CAS .A. Emoto, E. Uchida and T. F. Emoto, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 396, 189 CrossRef CAS .V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 75 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Z. Gu, J. Hartmann and H. Mohwald, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5268 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, S. Zhang, H. Chen, Z. Z. Gu and Z. Lu, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 299, 54 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Kalsin, M. Fialkowski, M. Paszewski, S. K. Smuokov, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2006, 312, 420 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O’Brien and C. B. Muarry, Nature, 2006, 439, 55 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, C. B. Muarry and S. O’Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3620 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lou, D. Li and Q. Meng, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4160 CrossRef CAS .F. Jonsson, C. M. S. Torres, J. Seekamp, M. Schniedergers, A. Tiedemann, J. Ye and R. Zentel, Microelectron. Eng., 2005, 78–79, 429 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yan, Z. Zhou, X. S. Zhao and S. J. Chua, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1917 CrossRef CAS .P. Messe, S. Reculusa, K. Clays and S. Ravaine, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 422, 251 CrossRef .Q. Yan, L. K. Teh, Q. Shao, C. C. Wong and Y. M. Chiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1796 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade and J. N. Winn, Photonic crystals: Molding the flow of light, Princeton University Press, Princeton,  1995 Search PubMed .Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. S. Song and S. Noda, Nature, 2003, 425, 944 CrossRef CAS .M. Tokushima, H. Kosaka, A. Tomita and H. Yamada, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 952 CrossRef CAS .F. Benabid, J. C. Knight, G. Antonopoulos and P. St. J. Russell, Science, 2002, 298, 399 CrossRef CAS .Z. Cai, Y. J. Liu, J. Teng and X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5562 CAS .E. Istrate and E. H. Sargent, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2002, 4, S242 CrossRef CAS .W. Dai, H. Wang and S. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 083514 CrossRef .R. Xie, T. Sekiguchi, D. Li, D. Yang and M. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1107 CrossRef CAS .F. Fleischhaker, A. C. Arsenault, V. Kitaev, F. C. Peiris, G. von Freymann, I. Manners, R. Zentel and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9318 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yan, Z. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3069 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Parker, V. L. Welch, D. Driver and N. Martini, Nature, 2003, 426, 786 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Protas and N. H. Patel, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 2008, 24, 425 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Parker and H. E. Townley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 347 CrossRef CAS .E. R. Dufresne, H. Noh, V. Saranathan, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Cao and R. O. Prum, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1792 RSC .K. U. Jeong, J. H. Jang, C. Y. Koh, M. J. Graham, K. Y. Jin, S. J. Park, C. Nah, M. H. Lee, S. Z. D. Cheng and E. L. Thomas, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1956 RSC .P. Vukusic, Phys. World, 2007, 35 Search PubMed .J. Huang, X. Wang and Z. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2325 CrossRef CAS .C. Blum, A. P. Mosk, I. S. Nikolaev, V. Subramaniam and W. L. Vos, Small, 2008, 4, 492 CrossRef CAS .T. Yasuda, K. Nishikawa and S. Furukawa, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 92, 1122 CrossRef CAS .M. Agrawal, D. Fischer, S. Gupta, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, A. Pich, E. Lidorikis and M. Stamm, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16389 CAS .S. A. Asher, J. M. Weissman, A. Tikhonov, R. D. Coalson and R. Kesavamoorthy, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2004, 69, 066619 CrossRef .E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059 CrossRef CAS .S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486 CrossRef CAS .F. Scotognella, D. P. Puzzo, A. Monguzzi, D. S. Wiersma, D. Maschke, R. Tubino and G. A. Ozin, Small, 2009, 5, 2048 CrossRef CAS .P. H. C. Camargo, Z. Y. Li and Y. Xia, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1215 RSC .C. Lopez, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1679 CrossRef CAS .G. I. N. Waterhouse and M. R. Waterland, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 356 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8049 CrossRef CAS .D. Wang, J. Li, C. T. Chan, V. Salgueirino-Maceira, L. M. Liz-Marzan, S. Romanov and F. Caruso, Small, 2004, 1, 122 CrossRef .J. H. Holtz and S. A. Asher, Nature, 1997, 389, 829 CrossRef CAS .T. Kanai, D. Lee, H. C. Shum and D. A. Weitz, Small, 2010, 6, 807 CrossRef CAS .H. Fudouzi and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 892 CrossRef CAS .V. Shklover, L. Braginsky and H. Hofmann, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2006, 26, 142 CrossRef CAS .Q. Cong, G. Chen, Y. Fang and L. Ren, J. Bionics Eng., 2004, 1, 249 Search PubMed .W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Shiu, C. W. Kuo, P. Chen and C. Y. Mou, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 561 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, Y. Wen, J. Hu, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 219 CrossRef CAS .H. Ge, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 1539 CrossRef CAS .X. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Ozin, K. Hou, B. V. Lotsch, L. Cademartiri, D. P. Puzzo, F. Scotognella, A. Ghadimi and J. Thomson, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 12 CrossRef CAS .O. D. Velev and S. Gupta, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1897 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Wen, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2262 RSC .T. J. Yao, C. X. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Li, X. L. Chen, J. Wu, J. H. Zhang, K. Yu and B. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065304 CrossRef .Y. Li, X. J. Huang, S. H. Heo, C. C. Li, Y. K. Choi, W. P. Cai and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2169 CrossRef CAS .S. Yang, W. Cai, J. Yang and H. Zeng, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8287 CrossRef CAS .T. Chen, G. Chen, S. Xing, T. Wu and H. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3826 CrossRef CAS .T. S. Deng, J. Y. Zhang, K. T. Zhu, Q. F. Zhang and J. L. Wu, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 356, 104 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Sperling and W. j. Parak, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2010, 368, 1333 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong, J. Chen and W. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 263, 665 CrossRef CAS .B. Luo, X. J. Song, F. Zhang, A. Xia, W. L. Yang, J. H. Hu and C. C. Wang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1674 CrossRef CAS .Y. Y. Liu, H. Chen and K. Ishizu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1168 CrossRef CAS .J. Hu, S. Zhou, Y. Sun, X. Fang and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4356 RSC .L. Xu, J. X. Wang, Y. L. Song and L. Jaing, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3554 CrossRef CAS .Z. F. Liu, T. Ding, G. Zhang, K. Song, K. Clays and C. H. Tung, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10519 CrossRef CAS .K. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Cui and B. Yang, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2003, 288, 380 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, J. McLellan and X. Xia, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3464 CrossRef CAS .T. Cui, J. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Cui, W. Chen, F. Xu, Z. Wang, K. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 481 CrossRef CAS .H. Nakamura, M. Ishii, A. Tsukigase, M. Harada and H. Nakano, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1268 CrossRef CAS .H. Cong, M. Zhang and W. Cao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 734 CrossRef CAS .D. Wang, A. L. Rogach and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2724 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Asher, K. W. Kimble and J. P. Walker, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7501 CrossRef CAS .W. Wohlleben, F. W. Bartels, M. Boyle and R. J. Leyrer, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5627 CrossRef CAS .E. Tian, L. Cui, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 509 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8538 CAS .H. Cong and W. Cao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 582 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Wang, B. Yu, H. L. Cong, Y. Zhao and W. W. Wang, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2012, 135, 103 CrossRef CAS .T. Kanai and T. Sawada, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13315 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Lyon, Z. Meng, N. Singh, C. D. Sorrell and A. S. John, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 865 RSC .A. Plettl, F. Enderle, M. Saitner, A. Manzke, C. Pfahler, S. Wiedemann and P. Ziemann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3279 CrossRef CAS .C. Cong, W. C. Junus, Z. Shen and T. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 1324 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Tan, C. H. Sow, K. Y. Lim, F. C. Cheong, G. L. Chong, A. T. S. Wee and C. K. Ong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18575 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujimura, T. Tamura, T. Itoh, C. Haginoya, Y. Komori and T. Koda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1478 CrossRef CAS .T. van Dillen, A. van Blaaderen and A. Polman, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 40 CrossRef CAS .D. Xia, Z. Ku, D. Li and S. R. J. Brueck, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1847 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, E. J. Lee, W. Cai, K. Y. Kim and S. O. Cho, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1108 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Choi, H. K. Yu, S. G. Jang and S. M. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7019 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Cho, G. R. Yi, J. H. Moon, D. C. Kim, B. J. Lee and S. M. Yang, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10700 CrossRef .R. Fenollosa and F. Meseguer, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1282 CrossRef CAS .A. del Campo and E. Arzt, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 911 CrossRef CAS .V. Nandwana, C. Subramani, Y. C. Yeh, B. Yang, S. Dickert, M. D. Barnes, M. T. Tuominen and V. M. Rotello, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16859 RSC .S. G. Romanov, P. Ferrand, M. Egen, R. Zentel, J. Ahopelto, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmuller, A. L. Rogach and C. M. Sotomayor Torres, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 701 CrossRef CAS .P. Ferrand, M. Egen, R. Zentel, J. Seekamp, S. G. Romanov and C. M. Sotomayor Torres, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 5289 CrossRef CAS .B. H. Juarez, D. Golmayo, P. A. Postigo and C. Lopez, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1732 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, P. R. Herman, V. Kitaev, S. Wong and G. A. Ozin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 141106 CrossRef .W. Cai and R. Piestun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 111112 CrossRef .L. A. Woldering, A. M. Otter, B. H. Husken and W. L. Vos, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5717 CrossRef CAS .Z. Q. Sun, X. Chen, J. H. Zhang, Z. M. Chen, K. Zhang, X. Yan, Y. F. Wang, W. Z. Yu and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8987 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, L. Xia, G. Li, S. Ravaine and X. S. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4725 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Taton and D. J. Norris, Nature, 2002, 416, 685 CrossRef CAS .X. Yan, J. Yao, G. Lu, X. Chen, K. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10510 CrossRef CAS .O. L. Pursiainen, J. J. Baumberg, H. Winkler, B. Viel, P. Spahn and T. Ruhl, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 9553 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yamada, M. Ishii, T. Nakamura and K. Yano, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10044 CrossRef CAS .C. I. Aguirre, E. Reguera and A. Stein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3257 CAS .R. Fu, Z. Li, Y. Liang, F. Li, F. Xu and D. Wu, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 171 CrossRef CAS .X. S. Zhao, F. Su, Q. Yan, W. Guo, X. Y. Bao, L. Lv and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 637 RSC .H. Miguez, F. Meseguer, C. Lopez, A. Mifsud, J. S. Moya and L. Vazquez, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6009 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, D. Ge, Y. Ding and J. Zhao, J. Porous Mater., 2012, 19, 1023 CrossRef CAS .C. Li and L. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2388 CrossRef CAS .C. Lu, L. Qi, H. Cong, X. Wang, J. Yang, L. Yang, D. Zhang, J. Ma and W. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5218 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Z. Sun, J. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Chen, S. Zhu and B. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 325, 567 CrossRef CAS .M. Heim, S. Reculusa, S. Ravaine and A. Kuhn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 538 CrossRef CAS .T. S. Eagleton and P. C. Searson, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5027 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4717 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhou, Q. Yan, F. Su and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2569 RSC .F. Su, X. S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Zeng, Z. Zhou and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20200 CrossRef CAS .C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696 CrossRef CAS .N. D. Petkovich and A. Stein, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3721 RSC .X. Zhang, W. Yan, H. Yang, B. Liu and H. Li, Polymer, 2008, 49, 5446 CrossRef CAS .K. Nishikawa, K. Dokko, K. Kinoshita, S. W. Woo and K. Kanamura, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 726 CrossRef CAS .M. Sadakane, K. Sasaki, H. Kunioku, B. Ohtani, R. Abe and W. Ueda, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1811 RSC .J. Y. Hong, W. K. Oh, K. Y. Shin, O. S. Kwon, S. Son and J. Jang, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 5056 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2895 CrossRef CAS .L. Gonzalez-Urbina, K. Baert, B. Kolaric, J. Perez-Moreno and K. Clays, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2268 CrossRef CAS .A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13 CAS .S. W. Woo, N. Okada, M. Kotobuki, K. Sasajima, H. Munakata, K. Kajihara and K. Kanamura, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8030 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, Y. Cai, Y. Deng, Z. Sun, D. Gu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 130, 26 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, G. Jiang, A. Duan, J. Zheng, S. Chen and R. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 457 RSC .O. Sel, D. Kuang, M. Thommes and B. Smarsly, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2311 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Woo, K. Dokko, H. Nakano and K. Kanamura, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1674 RSC .C. H. Huang, Q. Zhang, T. C. Chou, C. M. Chen, D. S. Su and R. A. Doong, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 563 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, M. Li, J. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 9425 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, M. Fu, J. Wang, D. He and Y. Wang, Opt. Mater., 2012, 34, 1758 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, B. Liu, Q. Wang, C. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu, P. Jing, W. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Catal., 2012, 296, 65 CrossRef CAS .W. Fan, M. A. Snyder, S. Kumar, P. S. Lee, W. C. Yoo, A. V. McCormick, R. L. Penn, A. Stein and M. Tsapatsis, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 984 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kim, C. Y. Cho, J. H. Kang, Y. S. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10543 CrossRef CAS .P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3955 CrossRef CAS .P. Jiang and M. J. McFarland, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3710 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, T. Gang, X. Yan, X. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Sun, K. Zhang, B. Zhao and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 924 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang, D. Y. Wang and H. Mohwald, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 127 CrossRef CAS .S. Ono, A. Oide and H. Asoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2898 CrossRef CAS .M. Retsch, M. Tamm, N. Bocchio, N. Horn, R. Forch, U. Jonas and M. Kreiter, Small, 2009, 5, 2105 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Lee, K. C. Bantz, N. C. Lindquist, S. H. Oh and C. L. Haynes, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13685 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Li, K. L. Lusker, J. J. Yu and J. C. Garno, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2023 CrossRef CAS .T. Q. Wang, X. Li, J. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Ren, X. M. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. F. Zhu, Z. H. Wang, F. Han, X. Z. Wang and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 152 RSC .Y. F. Li, J. H. Zhang, S. J. Zhu, H. P. Dong, F. Jia, Z. H. Wang, Z. Q. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. B. Li, W. Q. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4731 CAS .C. Li, Q. Hong and L. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 476 CrossRef CAS .H. Asoh, K. Nakamura and S. Ono, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 83 CrossRef CAS .J. M. McLellan, M. Geissler and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10830 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, Z. Chen, N. Fu, G. Lu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1413 CrossRef CAS .X. X. Zhang, D. F. Liu, L. H. Zhang, W. L. Li, M. Gao, W. J. Ma, Y. Ren, Q. S. Zeng, Z. Q. Niu, W. Y. Zhou and S. S. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 962 RSC .H. K. Choi, M. H. Kim, S. H. Im and O. O. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1594 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Zhou and D. Gall, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 516, 433 CrossRef CAS .C. Bae, H. Shin, J. Moon and M. M. Sung, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1085 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Sun, N. C. Linn and P. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4551 CrossRef CAS .M. Fu, J. Zhou, Q. Xiao, B. Li, R. Zong, W. Chen and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1001 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Ren, X. Li, X. Zhang, D. Zhu, T. Wang, T. Tian and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7375 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5616 CrossRef CAS .S. Mahajan, J. Richardson, T. Brown and P. N. Bartlett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15589 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Weibel, W. R. DiLuzio and G. M. Whitesides, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2007, 5, 209 CrossRef CAS .T. Kanai, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 120, 87 CrossRef CAS .V. L. Colvin, MRS Bull., 2011, 26, 637 CrossRef .R. C. Schroden, M. Al-Daous, C. F. Blanford and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3305 CrossRef CAS .R. G. Shimmin, R. Vajtai, R. W. Siegel and P. V. Braun, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2102 CrossRef CAS .K. Ueno, J. Sakamoto, Y. Takeoka and M. Watanabe, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4778 RSC .T. Ding, Z. F. Liu, K. Song, K. Clays and C. H. Tung, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10218 CrossRef CAS .C. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Bao, P. Zhao, H. Jiang, L. Peng, X. Yang and C. Li, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 915 RSC .S. Zhang, X. W. Zhao, H. Xu, R. Zhu and Z. Z. Gu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 316, 168 CrossRef CAS .H. Yamada, T. Nakamura, Y. Yamada and K. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4134 CrossRef CAS .H. Fudouzi and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 9653 CrossRef CAS .Z. Y. Xie, L. G. Sun, G. Z. Han and Z. Z. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3601 CrossRef CAS .S. Furumi, T. Kanai and T. Sawada, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3815 CAS .S. Furumi, H. Fudouzi and T. Sawada, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21519 RSC .J. R. Lawrence, Y. Ying, P. Jiang and S. H. Foulger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 300 CrossRef CAS .S. Furumi, H. Fudouzi, H. T. Miyazaki and Y. Sakka, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2067 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Kim, S. H. Kim, W. C. Jeong and S. M. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4993 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Hoi, X. Chen, V. S. Kumar, S. Homhuan, C. H. Sow and A. A. Bettiol, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2847 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, J. Wang, L. Yang and Y. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3258 CrossRef CAS .J. Shin, P. V. Braun and W. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 150, 183 CrossRef CAS .J. Huang, X. Hu, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang and G. Li, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2007, 286, 113 Search PubMed .H. Xu, K. D. Cao, H. B. Ding, Q. F. Zhong, H. C. Gu, Z. Y. Xie, Y. J. Zhao and Z. Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6752 CAS .T. Cassagneau and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1837 CrossRef CAS .J. Xie, H. Wang, Y. Lin, Y. Zhou and Y. Wu, Ceram. Int., 2012, 10, 190 Search PubMed .X. Xu, A. V. Goponenko and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3113 CrossRef CAS .Z. Pan, J. Ma, J. Yan, M. Zhou and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2018 RSC .T. Endo, Y. Yanagida and T. Hatsuzawa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 125, 589 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Zhang, N. Smith and S. A. Asher, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 6416 CrossRef CAS .G. Lu, O. K. Farha, L. E. Kreno, P. M. Schoenecker, K. S. Walton, R. P. V. Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4449 CrossRef CAS .M. Honda, K. Kataoka, T. Seki and Y. Takeoka, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8349 CrossRef CAS .V. L. Alexeev, S. Das, D. N. Finegold and S. A. Asher, Clin. Chem., 2004, 50, 2353 CAS .S. A. Asher, S. F. Peteu, C. E. Reese, M. X. Lin and D. Finegold, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373, 632 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Sharma, T. Jana, R. Kesavamoorthy, L. Shi, M. A. Virji, D. Finegold and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2971 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Mathger, M. F. Land, U. E. Siebeck and N. J. Marshall, J. Exp. Biol., 2003, 206, 3607 CrossRef CAS .F. Liu, B. Q. Dong, X. H. Liu, Y. M. Zheng and J. Zi, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 16183 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Vigneron, J. M. Pasteels, D. M. Windsor, Z. Vertesy, M. Rassart, T. Seldrum, J. Dumont, O. Deparis, V. Lousse, L. P. Biro, D. Ertz and V. Welch, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2007, 76, 031907 CrossRef .M. Rassart, J. F. Colomer, T. Tabarrant and J. P. Vigneron, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 033014 CrossRef .N. Oshima and R. Fujii, Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton, 1987, 8, 85 CrossRef .H. E. Hinton and G. M. Jarman, Nature, 1972, 238, 160 CrossRef .M. Kolle, P. M. S. Cunha, M. R. J. Scherer, F. Huang, P. Vukusic, S. Mahajan, J. J. Baumberg and U. Steiner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 511 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Sun, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 061112 CrossRef .W. L. Min, A. P. Betancourt, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 141109 CrossRef .E. Haugan, H. Granlund, J. Gjessing and E. S. Marstein, Energy Proc., 2011, 10, 292 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Bosco, K. Sasaki, M. Sadakane, W. Ueda and J. G. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 966 CrossRef CAS .M. Wang and X. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 357 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Shin, J. H. Kang, W. M. Jin, J. H. Park, Y. S. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 856 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhai, L. Jiang, Y. Song and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2650 RSC .F. Ramiro-Manzano, P. Atienzar, I. Rodriguez, F. Meseguer, H. Garcia and A. Corma, Chem. Commun., 2007, 242 RSC .Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094 CrossRef CAS .C. K. Huang, H. H. Lin, J. Y. Chen, K. W. Sun and W. L. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2540 CrossRef CAS .K. Kanamura, T. Mitsui and H. Munakata, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4845 CrossRef CAS .H. Munakata, M. Otani, Y. Katsuki and K. Kanamura, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 1855 CrossRef CAS .Y. An, S. J. Skinner and D. W. McComb, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 248 RSC .G. S. Chai, I. S. Shin and J. S. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2057 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Ahn and D. Wang, Solid State Sci., 2011, 13, 1612 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Kim, S. H. Kang, K. Zhu, J. Y. kim, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5214 RSC .N. Zhang, J. Li, W. Li, D. Ni and K. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 802 RSC .H. Yamada, T. Hirai, I. Moriguchi and T. Kudo, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 538 CrossRef CAS .H. Munakata, K. Sasajima and K. Kanamura, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 226 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, S. Wang, J. W. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4918 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Nichols, J. Cortiella, J. Lee, J. A. Niles, M. Cuddihy, S. Wang, J. Bielitzki, A. Cantu, R. Mlcak, E. Valdivia, R. Yancy, M. L. McClure and N. A. Kotov, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 1071 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Kuo and C. C. Lin, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 103, 595 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Zhao, X. W. Zhao, B. C. Tang, W. Y. Xu, J. Li, J. Hu and Z. Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 976 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, C. Sun, J. Li, R. Zhu and Z. Gu, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 1598 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Kuo and Y. T. Tsai, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 82, 616 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Kuo and C. W. Chen, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 102, 789 CrossRef CAS .Y. K. Ee, R. A. Arif, N. Tansu, P. Kumnorkaew and J. Gilchrist, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 221107 CrossRef .T. B. Wei, K. Wu, Y. Chen, J. Yu, Q. Yan, Y. Y. Zhang, R. Duan, J. Wang, Y. Zeng and J. M. Li, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2012, 33, 857 CrossRef CAS .T. Wei, K. Wu, D. Lan, Q. Yan, Y. Chen, C. Du, J. Wang, Y. Zeng and J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 211111 CrossRef .A. C. Arsenault, F. Fleischhaker, G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev, H. Miguez, A. Mihi, N. Tetreault, E. Vekris, I. Manners, S. Aitchison, D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2779 CrossRef CAS .F. Fleischhaker, A. C. Arsenault, F. C. Peiris, V. Kitaev, I. Manners, R. Zentel and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2387 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Song and I. Kretzschmar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1747 CAS .V. Rastogi, S. Melle, O. G. Calderon, A. A. Garcia, M. Marquez and O. D. Velev, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4263 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Hu, L. He and Y. D. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3747 CrossRef CAS .T. Huang, Q. Zhao, J. Xiao and L. Qi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4707 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Young, M. R. Jones, J. Zhang, R. J. Macfarlane, R. Esquivel-Sirvent, R. J. Nap, J. Wu, G. C. Schatz, B. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 2240 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, W. C. Yoo, M. B. Beernink and A. Stein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18548 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Hailin Cong	Hailin Cong received his PhD from Peking University in 2004 with Prof. Weixiao Cao. After completing a Postdoctoral Fellowship at University of California, Davis, he joined the Qingdao University in 2009 as a Distinguished Professor. His current research interests lie in the synthesis and application of advanced micro-nano materials. He received The Natural Science Award from Ministry of Education of China (2007). He has acted as a Member of the Editorial Board of Nanoscience & Nanotechnology since 2008, Vice Chair of the Editorial Committee of China International Nanoscience and Technology Symposium since 2009, and a Member of the Editorial Board of Integrated Ferroelectrics since 2012.
Bing Yu	Bing Yu received her PhD from Peking University in 2006 with Prof. Huwei Liu. After completing a Postdoctoral Fellowship at University of Wyoming, she joined the Qingdao University in 2009 as an Associate Professor. Her current research interests lie in the microfabrication of bionic materials and coating materials.
Jianguo Tang	Jianguo Tang received his PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2000, after which he worked with Prof. Dr Hans-Werner Schmidt at University Bayreuth as a Visiting Professor (2001), followed by two years as a Research Fellow at Colorado State University with Prof. Dr L. A. Belfiore (2002–2003). He is the director of the institute of hybrid materials at Qingdao University. His research interests lie in hybrid functional materials of polymers with metal ions, metallic nanoparticles, and nanocarbon materials, especially concerned about the interface interaction and modifications.
Zejing Li	Zejing Li received his BA in Chemistry from Qingdao University in 2012. He is pursuing his MS in Materials Chemistry, studying in the Cong laboratory. His research focuses on macroporous and nanostructured materials.
Xuesong Liu	Xuesong Liu received his BA in Chemistry from Binzhou University in 2011. He is pursuing his MS in Materials Chemistry, studying in the Cong laboratory. His research focuses on synthesis of monodisperse colloids and particles.

 	Fig. 1  Optical and SEM images of natural colloidal crystals of gem opals to show structural colors (a) and packing structures (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  Langmuir–Blodgett technique for the assembly of 1D colloidal crystal arrays: (a) illustration of assembling 1D colloidal crystal arrays from a 2D particle monolayer by Langmuir–Blodgett technique, and colloidal particle strings are produced at the contact line formed by the intersection of the vertical substrate with the plane of a floating colloidal-particle monolayer; (b) SEM image of a 1D colloidal crystal array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of 2D colloidal crystals: (a) planar view; (b) section view. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of 3D colloidal crystals: (a) section view; (b) tilt view (inset shows an illustration of face centered cubic packing). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of binary colloidal crystals form ∼190 nm small (S) and ∼380 nm large (L) colloids: (a) LS2 structure; (b) LS structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of other types of colloidal crystals: (a) low and (b) high magnification images of ternary colloidal crystals consisting of 150, 240, and 700 nm colloids; (c) 845 nm and (d) 530 nm non-close-packed colloidal crystals formed after plasma etching a 1000 nm closely packed colloidal crystal monolayer for 4 and 7 min, respectively; (e) unmodified silver nanocubes for reference and (f) cubic colloidal crystals made from 6-side surface modified silver nanocubes (inset shows the number of faces on each cube that are rendered hydrophobic). Parts (a) and (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. Parts (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. Parts (e) and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 45, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of two representative colloidal systems that can be readily synthesized as monodisperse samples at large quantities: (a) ∼200 nm silica spheres prepared by Stober method; (b) ∼400 nm polystyrene beads prepared by emulsion polymerization.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis of monodisperse PEG microspheres by microfluidic method: (a) illustration of the T-junction microfluidic chip equipped with an online UV photo-polymerization system; (b) and (c) PEG prepolymer beads formed in microfluidic channels at 1:5 and 2:5 PEG prepolymer–silicon oil flow rate ratios, respectively; (d) obtained PEG microspheres after online UV photo-polymerization.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of uniform nonspherical gold particles obtained through a seed-mediated synthesis method at different reductant concentrations: (a) {111}-faceted octahedra formed at 0.5 mM reductant concentration; (b) {100}-faceted cubes formed at 2.0 mM reductant concentration; (c) high-index faceted trisoctahedra formed at 10.0 mM reductant concentration (insets show the illustrations of the particle shapes). Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Crystallization mechanism of colloids in a dipping deposition method: (a) illustration of a balanced self-assembly colloidal crystallization system induced by capillary force, and affected by the rates of water evaporation and free motion of colloids along the meniscus; (b) and (c) SEM images of the colloidal crystals assembled at 25 °C and 50 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of typical methods used for assembling 2D and 3D colloidal crystals. 2D colloidal crystals: (a) air–liquid interface assembly; (b) evaporation deposition; (c) electrophoretic deposition. 3D Colloidal crystals: (d) sedimentation; (e) dipping deposition; (f) slit filling. Parts (a), (b) and (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2000, Wiley-VCH. Parts (d), (e) and (f) reproduced with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2000, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Dodecagonal colloidal quasicrystals self-assembled from spherical particles: (a) TEM image of a colloidal quasicrystal self-assembled from 13.4 nm Fe2O3 and 5 nm Au colloids (inset shows a selected-area electron diffraction pattern with non-crystallographic 12-fold rotational symmetry measured from a ∼6 mm2 domain); (b) magnified view of a dodecagonal nanoparticle quasicrystal; (c) dodecagonal colloidal quasicrystal self-assembled from 9 nm PbS and 3 nm Pd colloids (inset shows a fast-Fourier-transform pattern with non-crystallographic 12-fold rotational symmetry). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of digital colloidal crystal arrays formed in the 1 × 1 μm² PEG microwells using different polystyrene colloid concentrations: (a) 1 and (b) 2 colloids (0.5–1 mg ml−1 colloid concentrations at 0.1 μm s−1 pulling speed); (c) 1 and (d) 2 lines of colloids (1.5–3 mg ml−1 at 0.1 μm s−1 pulling speed where the arrows indicate pulling directions in the dipping deposition). Reproduced with permission from ref. 121, Copyright 2009, IOP publishing.	 

 	Fig. 14  Fluorescent images of structure formation in a mixture of diamagnetic and paramagnetic spherical particles within a magnetized ferrofluid: (a) two-tone structures formed from 0.21 μm (red) non-magnetic particles and 2.7 μm paramagnetic core particles and 1 μm (green) non-magnetic particles; (b) flower structures formed from 1.0 μm (red) non-magnetic particles and 2.7 μm paramagnetic core particles and 9.9 μm (green) non-magnetic particles. Each panel includes an illustration of the assembled structure and a magnified view of one of the assembled structures (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 131, Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  Colloidosomes formed by emulsion guided assembly: (a) SEM images of a dried 10 μm colloidosome composed of 0.9 μm polystyrene spheres, and the colloidosome is formed in an oil droplet dispersed in a water phase; (b) and (c) close-ups of (a) and (b), respectively. The arrow points to one of the 0.15 μm holes that define the permeability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2002, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of array patterns for colloidal crystals and BCCs. Colloidal crystals: (a) hexagonal array; (b) square array. BCCs: (c) LS3-1 array; (d) LS3-2 array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Packing modes for colloidal crystals and BCCs. Colloidal crystals: (a) and (b) illustrations and SEM images of hcp packing; (c) and (d) illustration and SEM image of fcc packing; (e) and (f) illustration and SEM images of bcc packing; (g) and (h) illustration and SEM image of chiral packing. BCCs: (i) and (j) illustration and AFM image of ZnS packing; (k) and (l) illustration and AFM image of NaCl packing. Parts (a)–(d) and (i)–(l) reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. Parts (g) and (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Intrinsic defects of self-assembled colloidal crystals: (a) vacancy defect pointed by arrow; (b) interstitial defect; (c) crack defect due to stacking fault; (d) grain boundary defect due to dislocation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Artificially engineered defects of self-assembled colloidal crystals: (a) point-defect; (b) line-defect; (c) planar-defect; (d) hetero body-defect. Part (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2005, Elsevier. Part (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 180, Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. Part (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 181, Copyright 2006, Elsevier. Part (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 182, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Optical phenomena occurred in colloidal crystals: (a) illustration of Bragg diffraction, where m is the order of diffraction, λ is the wavelength of the diffraction peak, dhkl is the spacing between (hkl) planes, θ is the angle of incidence, and n is the average refractive index of the colloidal crystal; (b) Bragg diffraction occurred in 380 nm polystyrene colloidal crystal lattice (inset) which leads to a band gap at 459 nm and a corresponding structural color of blue; (c) illustration of thin film interference, where m is an arbitrary integer coefficient, λ is the wavelength of the constructive interference peak, t is the film thickness, θ is the angle of incidence, n is the average refractive index of the colloidal crystal, and nsubstrate is the refractive index of the substrate; (d) thin film interference occurred in a 380 nm polystyrene colloidal crystal bilayer thin film (inset) which leads to a structural color of orange. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210, Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Field-emission SEM images of polystyrene colloidal monolayers after electron irradiation and subsequent heating for: (a) 0 h; (b) 1 h; (c) 2 h; (d) 4 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM images of physically and chemically modified colloidal crystals: (a) and (b) nonspherical polystyrene colloidal crystals formed by hot pressing (insets show the illustrations of the dodecahedra particle shapes and (111) crystal planes); (c) surface modified silica colloidal crystals after silica growth and annealing; (d) obtained nonspherical silica spheres with nodules on their surface after disassembly of the modified colloidal crystals. Parts (a) and (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. Parts (c) and (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 270, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  Templating property of colloidal crystals for fabrication of macroporous materials: (a) illustrations of a co-deposition process to infiltrate inorganic materials into polymeric colloidal crystal templates, and a sintering or solvent extracting process to remove the templates; (b) SEM image of polymeric colloidal crystal templates filled with inorganic materials; (c) SEM image of formed inorganic macroporous materials after removing the templates by sintering. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  Porous carbon balls from spherical colloidal crystal templates: (a) SEM image of macroporous inverse opal carbon balls using spherical colloidal crystal templates made in emulsion droplets; (b) SEM image of meso-macroporous inverse opal carbon balls using spherical colloidal crystal templates made in emulsion droplets; (c) magnified SEM image of (b); (d) TEM image of the mesoporous walls. Reproduced with permission from ref. 307, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Masking property of colloidal crystals for fabrication of nanostructure materials: (a) illustration of a colloidal crystal mask-assisted electroless deposition process to fabricate copper nanogrid patterns; (b) SEM image of polystyrene colloidal crystal masks; (c) SEM image of deposited copper through the masks; (d) SEM image of formed copper nanogrid patterns after removing the masks by tetrahydrofuran extraction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  Fabrication of silicon cone arrays using RIE with monolayer silica colloidal crystals as masks: (a) illustration of the colloidal lithography procedure; (b), (c) and (d) cross section SEM images of silicon microstructure arrays obtained after etching for 0 s, 175 s and 300 s, respectively (insets show the top-view SEM images of relevant ordered structure arrays). Reproduced with permission from ref. 328, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Flexible polymer colloidal crystal lasers with a light-emitting planar defect: (a) illustration of colloidal crystal laser device, in which a light-emitting planar defect of Rhodamine/PEG-DA is sandwiched between a pair of colloidal crystal films of PS particles stabilized in PDMS elastomer, and the left-hand picture represents a cross-sectional SEM image of the magnified light-emitting planar defect between the PS/PDMS colloidal crystal films; (b) changes in emission intensity at the laser-oscillation wavelength of around 610 nm and the emission spectral linewidth for the colloidal crystal laser device as a function of excitation energy of 512 nm light from an Nd:YAG laser beam; (c) a photograph of the laser action of the flexible polymer colloidal crystal laser device fabricated on PET sheets caused by optical excitation above the threshold pulse energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 346, Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  Bionic colloidal crystal thin films inspired by neon tetra: (a) photos and illustration of the variable structural color in neon tetra; (b) optical image of bilayer colloidal bionic films before swelling; (c) optical image of bilayer colloidal bionic films after swelling; (d) optical image of bilayer colloidal bionic films after evaporation of swelling agent; (e) SEM image of (d); (f) detail of the marked region of (e); (g) detail of the marked region of (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright 2011, Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 29  Encoded colloidal crystal supports for protein multiplexed immunoassay: (a) illustration of the multiplexed assay; (b) reflection and (c) fluorescence microscope images of silica colloidal crystal beads after incubation with an analyte containing FITC-tagged goat antihuman IgG and FITC-tagged goat antimouse IgG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 394, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
