Smart, stretchable and wearable supercapacitors: prospects and challenges  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CE02510A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CE02510A
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4218-4235Smart, stretchable and wearable supercapacitors: prospects and challenges

        
          
            Yu 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanbing 
            Yang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shasha 
            Chen
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Quan 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: yuanquan@whu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st December 2015
    , Accepted 5th February 2016First published on 5th February 2016AbstractAmong the various energy storage systems, supercapacitors are considered to be the most promising alternative to batteries due to their high power density, long cycle life and fast charge–discharge process. Especially, flexible electrochemical supercapacitors with their unique advantages such as flexibility, shape-conformability, and light weight are attracting ever-increasing attention to meet the current requirements for portable and wearable electric devices in modern energy storage markets. In this perspective, we summarize the most recent progress in flexible all-solid supercapacitors from the point of view of flexible electrode materials. Various flexible electrode materials like carbon nanotubes, graphene, and pseudo capacitive materials are discussed and their performance is comprehensively analyzed. In addition, an overview of the latest progress in strategies to improve the energy and power density is discussed. Further research targets in multifunctional integrated systems and challenges in realizing idealized flexible energy storage systems are also proposed.Yu ZhengYu Zheng is presently an undergraduate student at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. She is currently working in Prof. Quan Yuan's group. Her research interest is focused on the development of flexible all-solid supercapacitors as energy storage devices.Yanbing YangYanbing Yang is currently a PhD candidate at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. Her research interests are mainly focused on the controlled growth of carbon nanotube sponges, synthesis of hierarchical porous materials and exploring their applications in energy storage systems, such as supercapacitors and lithium batteries.Shasha ChenShasha Chen is currently a graduate student at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. Her research interest is mainly focused on developing flexible lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors based on carbon nanotubes.Quan YuanQuan Yuan is currently a full professor in the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences at Wuhan University. She received her BS degree (2004) from Wuhan University, China, and her PhD (2009) in Inorganic Chemistry from Peking University, China. Later, she performed postdoctoral research (2009–2012) at the University of Florida. Her research interests involve the controlled synthesis of functional nanomaterials and investigating their corresponding biomedical applications. Up till now, Prof. Yuan has won many awards such as the National Top 100 Doctoral Thesis (2011) and Excellent Young Scientist Foundation of NSFC (2014). Currently, she has published 46 high-quality papers on journals like Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., J. Am. Chem. Soc., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., etc.
1. Introduction
Serious climate change and decreasing availability of fossil fuels have compelled people to search for renewable energy production techniques and resources.1,2 As a result, one solution to solve this problem is the development of efficient electrochemical energy storage systems with high energy and power characteristics to fulfill the requirements for inexpensive, flexible, light-weight and environmentally friendly energy storage devices.3–21 Supercapacitors (SCs), also known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors, are considered to hold the most promise for mobile energy storage technology because of their advantages such as ultrafast power supply, high energy density and long cycle life.22–25Fig. 1 illustrates the ‘Ragone plot’ of specific power versus specific energy for various energy storage devices.24 In comparison with other energy storage devices, SCs exhibit the highest specific power and appropriate energy density, making them powerful alternative candidates for batteries in the energy storage field.
 Fig. 1  Ragone plot of specific power versus specific energy for various energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. 
More recently, accompanied with the development of portable and wearable electronic devices for specific applications such as bendable smart phones, flexible wireless sensors and wearable biomedical devices, great interests has been aroused in flexible energy storage equipment.26–36 Flexible all-solid state SCs, because of their outstanding advantages like ultra-flexibility, small size, light weight, and ease of operation,37–41 hold great promise as a new kind of flexible energy storage systems for applications in hybrid electric vehicles, memory backup systems, and portable electronic devices.42 In addition, the ability to withstand a wide range of high tensile strain conditions like bending, folding and even twisting makes SCs particularly suitable for wearable electronics, which can be operated at various situations without performance degradation.43 Up to now, considerable attempts have been made to fabricate flexible SCs with multiple geometries including planar, fiber and wire-shape to obtain multi-functional integrated systems and micro-scale devices.44–49
In general, the performance of a supercapacitor mainly depends on several key components including the electrode, electrolyte, and device configuration.24,50,51 Current research on flexible SCs has achieved great advances from the aspect of electrode materials including carbon nanotubes, graphene, transition metal oxides, conductive polymers and their combined composites. Here, we give a brief summary of the recent progress in flexible SCs. First we review the electrode materials of flexible SCs, and further a comprehensive study of the performance and storage mechanism is discussed. An analysis of the strategies to improve the electrochemical storage performance of flexible SCs is given. Finally, we introduce the future challenges and opportunities that flexible SCs might face. The latest development of multifunctional systems which combine energy conversion and storage into one unit is discussed.
2. Flexible devices
Flexible SCs is an emerging field in the area of energy storage wherein circuits can be built on flexible substrates. The designed configuration has the capacity to accommodate large levels of strain while maintaining superior electronic performance.43,71 In comparison with conventional SCs, flexible SCs hold great promise to act as storage units in portable devices and wearable electronics.4,9,10,72–81 The excellent performance comes from their unique advantages, such as the ability to withstand a wide range of strain, shape diversity and light weight.37–41 The key to fabricate flexible SCs lies in the electrode materials which have good electrical and mechanical properties.52–71 Typically, the current reported flexible electrode materials (Fig. 2) include carbon nanotubes, graphene, transitional metal oxides, conductive polymers as well as their combined composites. Other than the flexible electrode materials, a soft substrate82–84 is another important component needed to provide the shape variable support. The integration of flexible electrode materials into various flexible substrates, such as plastic, textile, sponge and paper, has been widely reported.85–94
 Fig. 2  Structure models of typical flexible electrode materials: (a) carbon nanotubes (CNTs), (b) graphene, (c) pseudo-capacitors, (d) conducting polymers, (e) composite materials. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3. Flexible electrode materials
3.1. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
CNTs, due to their good electrical conductivity (104–105 S cm−1), high specific surface area (1240–2200 m2 g−1), unique porous structure, and superior mechanical and thermal stability have attracted a great deal of attention as supercapacitor electrodes.95–104 Moreover, their high aspect ratio and open tubular network make them excellent electrode materials for flexible SCs.100,105 Niu et al.13 fabricated highly integrated stretchable SCs based on buckled single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) films. These buckled SWCNT film electrodes (Fig. 3a) were synthesized by combining directly grown SWNT network films with a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate with enhanced pre-strain. Given that the ability of enduring strain is a function of the wavelength of the buckled structure, a large pre-strain applied to the PDMS substrate will form a smaller wavelength of the buckled structure. Thus, by increasing the pre-strain of PDMS, they fabricated the buckled SWCNT film electrodes, whose periodic buckling wavelength is about 1.1 μm which is smaller than other reported buckled SWCNT film electrodes (2 μm). These electrodes can be stretched under a strain of 140% without a significant change of resistance (Fig. 3b). Using the H2SO4-PVA gel as both an electrolyte and separator, the capacitance retention of the prepared integrated highly stretchable SWNT film supercapacitor almost remains unchanged even under 120% strain during the charge/discharge process.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of preparing a buckled SWCNT film on PDMS. (b) The normalized sheet resistance of SWCNT films on PDMS with and without buckled structure at different strain levels and buckled SWCNT film after 10 times stretching at different strain levels, where R0 is the resistance of the unstretched SWCNT films and R is the resistance of the SWCNT films at different strain levels. (a, b) Reproduce with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Optical images of as-prepared SWCNT films spread on self-healing substrates in a circuit with an LED bulb. (c1) the original; (c2) after cutting; (c3) after healing. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of the device under bending (an inward ∼45° bending angle) and after healing for different times. (e) Capacitance retention of the devices before cutting and after the 5th healing after 1000 cycles under a current density of 5 A g−1. (f) Schematic representation of self-healing capabilities of electrical conductivity of as-prepared SWCNT films spread on self-healing substrates. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Despite the superior flexibility of integrated devices, the electrode materials become susceptible to structure fractures under bending or during charge and discharge processes when subjected to practical applications.106–110 Thus, it should be of scientific and technological importance to explore robust supercapacitors with the capability of managing mechanical damage. Polymer flexible substrates may possibly undergo mechanical damage caused by deformation or incident cutting. Self-healing materials, which can repair the internal or external damage that they have experienced, promised their applications for developing functional devices with robust mechanical flexibility and excellent stability.111–126 Wang et al.91 reported a mechanical and electrical self-healing supercapacitor (Fig. 3c) by spreading SWNT films onto self-healing substrates. The self-healing composites are composed of supermolecular network supported hierarchical flower-like TiO2 nanostructures, whose lateral movement can bring the fracture surfaces into contact with each other in the event of cutting or breakage (Fig. 3f). Moreover, the existence of a PVP-H2SO4 gel electrolyte with self-adhering performance enhances the self-healing efficiency. As a result, the as-prepared supercapacitors exhibit excellent electrochemical storage (Fig. 3d) and self-healing performance, and the specific capacitance (Fig. 3e) can be restored up to 85.7% of its original value even after the 5th cutting.
3.2. Graphene
Graphene is composed of a single layer of hexagonally arranged sp2 hybridized carbon atoms. Its unprecedented physical and chemical properties such as superior electronic conductivity, thermal conductivity, mechanical and chemical stability, unique two-dimensional (2D) morphology and ultrahigh surface area (2630 m2 g−1)127–132 forecast its enticing potential as a significant material for flexible SCs. Niu et al.132 developed all-solid-state flexible ultrathin micro-supercapacitors (Fig. 4a and b) based on lateral ultrathin reduced graphene oxide (rGO) interdigitated microelectrodes on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate. The Au electrode acts as the current collector and the phosphoric acid/polyvinyl alcohol (H3PO4/PVA) gel serves as the electrolyte. These ultrathin rGO micro-patterned electrodes enhanced the ability of the H3PO4/PVA gel to infiltrate into the layers of rGO micro-patterned electrodes due to the shortened diffusion path lengths, leading to more effective utilization of the electrochemical surface area of graphene layers. The resulting devices achieved a much higher specific capacitance (Fig. 4c) of 285 F g−1 than conventional SCs (86 F g−1). Furthermore, the columbic efficiency is nearly 98%, resulting from the perfectly linear charge/discharge curve (Fig. 4d) of the obtained micro-supercapacitor at a constant current of 1 A g−1.
 Fig. 4  (a) Optical images of rGO patterns on PET with Au film. (b) Optical images of micro-supercapacitors on PET. (c) The specific capacitance of the rGO micro-supercapacitor and conventional supercapacitor at different scan rates. (d) Typical galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the micro-supercapacitor at 1 A g−1. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic illustration of a wire-shaped supercapacitor fabricated from two twined GF@3D-Gs with polyelectrolyte. (f) Photos of the textile embedded with two GF@3D-G fiber supercapacitors (ca. 2 cm in length for each of them) in flat and bending state, respectively. (g) CV curves of two GF@3D-G fiber supercapacitors as the textile in flat (f1) and bending (f2) states with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The strong π–π interaction between each component always leads to the aggregation of graphene nanosheets, thus the claimed large surface area cannot be fully utilized.133 To overcome the over-stacking problem of graphene sheets, three-dimensional (3D) porous graphene has been developed to make high performance supercapacitors.134–138 As illustrated in Fig. 4e, Meng et al.139 fabricated a unique all-graphene core-sheath fiber-based electrochemical supercapacitor in which a core of flexible graphene fiber (GF) is covered with a sheath of 3D graphene network (denoted as GF@3D-G). The flexible GF is synthesized by integrating the graphene sheets into macroscopic ensembles, which possess the common mechanical flexibility characteristics of a fiber. As a result, the assembled fiber SCs can be conveniently woven into textile for wearable electronics (Fig. 4f and g). A specific capacitance of 30–40 μF g−1 is obtained even under cycling bending and releasing for 500 cycles.
3.3. Pseudo-capacitors
Generally, a SC is divided into an electrical double-layer capacitor (EDLC) and a pseudo-capacitor according to the charge storage mechanism. Typically, the capacitance of an EDLC comes from the pure electrostatic charge accumulated at the electrode/electrolyte interface, which is strongly dependent on the effective surface area of the electrode materials that is accessible to the electrolyte ions. Therefore, various carbon-based materials with high surface area such as active carbon, carbon particles, CNTs, graphene and their composites are most widely used as EDLCs. Pseudo-capacitors, on the other hand, use fast and reversible faradic processes of the redox-active materials based on transitional metal oxides as well as electronically conducting polymers for charge storage. Pseudo-capacitors have been extensively studied in the past few decades because their specific capacitance far exceeds that of EDLCs.140–143 Yang et al.144 reported edge-oriented MoS2 thin films grown on Mo substrates serving as a flexible electrode with a high area capacitance of 12.5 mF cm−2 (Fig. 5a and b). Among the metal oxides, MnO2 has been widely recognized as one of the most attractive electrode materials for SCs in terms of its high theoretical specific capacitance (1400 F g−1), low cost, natural abundance, and environmental compatibility.145 Lu et al.146 fabricated a solid-state SC with high flexibility by using hybrid WO3−x@Au@MnO2 core–shell nanowires (NWs) on flexible carbon fabric as electrodes (Fig. 5c). The flexible device can operate under bending conditions even at an angle of 180° without significant electrochemical performance degradation (Fig. 5d and e). By this way, the as-synthesized pseudo-capacitor overcomes the intrinsic low mass loading of MnO2, resulting in a high specific capacitance of 1195 F g−1 at a current density of 0.75 A g−1. Furthermore, the as-fabricated supercapacitor exhibits excellent long-term cycling stability, high power density (30.6 kW kg−1) and energy density (106.4 W h kg−1).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process and photographs of the flexible electrodes of the edge-oriented MoS2 film. (b) Photographs of the flexible electrodes. The left photograph shows the visible difference between the Mo oxide (dark color) and MoS2 (gray color). The right photograph shows the flexibility of the edge-oriented MoS2 film. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the fabrication process for WO3−x@Au@MnO2 NWs. (d) Optical photographs of the as-fabricated solid-state supercapacitor device. The bottom images demonstrate the high flexibility of the as-prepared device. (e) CV curves of a WO3−x@Au@MnO2 supercapacitor at different curvatures of 0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, and 180° between 0 and 3 V. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the smart supercapacitor of the PANI/CNTs films. (g) Dependence of specific capacitance on stretched cycle number at a strain of 100%. C0 and C correspond to the specific capacitances before and after bending or stretching, respectively. The inset shows the photographs of a supercapacitor before and after bending and stretching. (f, g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.4. Conducting polymers
Conducting polymers have attracted significant research interest as flexible SCs due to their relatively high theoretical capacities ranging from 100 to 140 mA h g−1.147,148 The advantages of environmental compatibility, wide voltage window, remarkable storage capacity/reversibility, and adjustable redox activity also contribute to the wide attention.149–153 The widely investigated conducting polymers including polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI) and polythiophene (PTP) are promising candidates for manufacturing smart flexible SCs. It has been reported that some of the conducting polymers are sensitive to external environmental stimuli including temperature, pH, ion strength, solvent, and ligand interaction.155,156 Different stimuli conditions can induce different colors, making them highly suitable as electrode materials for SCs and other smart energy devices. For example, Chen et al.154 developed smart SCs by depositing the conducting polymer polyaniline (PANI) onto aligned CNT sheet electrodes (Fig. 5f). The capacitance achieved was 308.4 F g−1 and the SCs can be operated at a strain of up to 100% for 200 cycles (Fig. 5g). The color change can be immediately observed by our naked eyes at the same time during the stretching and recovering.
However, direct utilization of bulk conducting polymers as electrode materials suffered from a limited stability during cycling and caused electrochemical performance fading.147,157,158 Thus, research efforts with conducting polymers for supercapacitor applications are nowadays developed towards their hybrid composites with various types of carbon materials with high stability.
3.5. Composites
Pure carbon material based flexible SCs usually exhibit high power density but relatively low energy density and specific capacitance arising from the limited charge accumulation on the electrode surface.159,160 While pseudo-capacitance resulting from the fast and reversible faradic process of redox-active materials may provide much higher specific capacitances and energy density.92 For developing high-capacitance supercapacitors, the composite electrodes which consist of carbon materials and pseudocapacitive active components have received great interest due to their significant improvements in both energy density and power density. Choi et al.161 reported a MWNT/MnO2 composite yarn supercapacitor obtained by depositing MnO2 onto a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) yarn which is synthesized by twisting MWNT sheets. The micrometer diameter yarn electrode simultaneously served as the conductive pathway, flexible substrate and current collector. Effective electron delivery between the active material MnO2 and uniaxial aligned CNT bundles of yarn is realized, resulting in a high specific capacitance value of 25.4 F cm−3 (Fig. 6a), energy and average power densities (3.52 mW h cm−3 and 127 mW cm−3, respectively). Because of the mechanical flexibility properties of the composite yarn electrodes, there was no significant capacitance drop even after the 1000th bending cycle at a bending angle of 90° (Fig. 6c). Furthermore, the flexible yarn electrode was woven into commercial textile for application as a smart cloth (Fig. 6b). Other than the commonly used electrochemical active materials, a MOF is another choice to serve as a supercapacitor electrode. Cao et al.162 reported a flexible electrode material (Fig. 6d and e) obtained by wrapping porous reduced graphene oxide (rGO) onto Mo containing MOF derived MoO3. They fabricated all-solid-state, flexible supercapacitor devices by using a rGO/MoO3 composite as the electrode, a Au film-coated poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate as the flexible current collector, and a H2SO4/poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) gel electrolyte as the solid electrolyte. The device showed a capacitance retention of 80% after 5000 cycles at a high current density of 2 A g−1 (Fig. 6f) and a maximum energy density of 14 W h kg−1 at a power density of 500 W kg−1. Owing to its large specific capacitance (1340 F g−1), high electrical conductivity and suitable working window, vanadium nitride (VN) is considered as a promising pseudo-capacitive candidate for next-generation high performance SCs.163 Xiao et al.164 designed a high performance all-solid-state flexible SC with flexible freestanding mesoporous VN nanowires (MVNNs)/CNT hybrid electrodes. The whole weight of the device (including the electrodes, separator and electrolyte) was only 15 mg, resulting in a high volume capacitance of 7.9 F cm−3.
 Fig. 6  (a) Volumetric capacitance of all-solid-state CMY electrode as a function of scan rate. (b) Optical image of hand-made CMY textile consisting of 15 yarns. Inset: A CMY electrode woven into a commercial textile (scale bar represents 1 mm). (c) Comparison of CV plots of solid-state CMY supercapacitor before and after the 1000th bending test. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of the configuration of the all-solid-state flexible supercapacitor device fabricated with rGO/MoO3 composite. (e) CV curves of the device under different bending status. Inset: Photograph of a bent device (L = 4.3 cm). (f) Cycling performance measured by charging and discharging the device at 2 A g−1 for 5000 cycles. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Hybrid composites based on conducting polymers and carbon materials have also been extensively studied as flexible SCs. Yu et al.165 developed a solid-state supercapacitor device with remarkable flexibility, which could be stretched to a large strain of 50% without decreasing its conductivity. The device was assembled by depositing a layer of polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers on the water surface assisted synthesized MWCNT/PDMS film to form the PANI/MWCNT/PDMS film electrode. The electrode exhibited a benchmark specific gravimetric capacitance of 1023 F g−1 and an area capacitance of 481 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Moreover, the as-fabricated SC exhibited 95% capacitance retention after 500 cycles during the dynamic stretching and releasing process. And the maximum energy density of the device is 0.15 mW h cm−3 (11 W h kg−1) at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. Recently, a similar super-elastic supercapacitor based on two aligned carbon nanotube (CNT)/polyaniline (PANI) composite sheets was designed by Zhang et al.44 It can be stretched to a large strain of 400% without performance degradation. As illustrated in Fig. 7, a relatively high specific capacitance of approximately 79.4 F g−1 is well maintained after stretching at a strain of 300% for 5000 cycles and 100.8 F g−1 after bending for 5000 cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1. The specific capacitance of the flexible SCs can be maintained by 95.8% at a stretching speed as high as 30 mm s−1. To achieve the development of flexible electrodes for SCs with different configurations, Liu et al.166 coated the microscale porous reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/cellulose fiber (rGO/CF) composite paper with PANI to develop two kinds of SCs with a compact design and nanostructured configuration. A high specific capacitance of 464 F g−1 is achieved for the PANI-rGO/CF composite paper when used as a supercapacitor electrode.
 Fig. 7  (a) Dependence of specific capacitance on cycle number of CNT/PANI elastic fiber electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1. (b) Dependence of specific capacitance on stretching speed of CNT/PANI elastic fiber electrodes. C0 and C correspond to specific capacitances at 0 and the other strain, respectively. (c, d) Photographs of the elastic fiber electrode used to power a light emission diode before and after stretching by a load, respectively. (e) Photograph of an elastic fiber electrode before and after stretching by 100%, 200%, 300%, 400%, and 500%. (a–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4. Strategies to improve the performance of supercapacitors
4.1. Asymmetric SCs
Besides improving the specific capacitance of the electrode, the energy density (E) of flexible SCs can also be increased by maximizing the cell voltage (V) according to the equation: E = 0.5CV2.167 For this purpose, a promising strategy is to develop an all-solid-state asymmetric SC by coupling different positive and negative electrode materials with well-separated potential windows to obtain a high operation voltage. Typically, nanostructured carbon-containing materials were used as Faradic electrodes (energy source) and a suitable carbon material served as the capacitance electrode (power source). Such a device can effectively make use of the different potential windows of the two electrodes to provide a maximum operation voltage up to 2 V, and hence significantly enhance the device energy density.167 Chen et al.168 constructed an asymmetric SC (Fig. 8a) containing a 3D bacterial cellulose pellicle (p-BC) nanofiber network coated MnO2 (p-BC@MnO2) as the positive electrode and a nitrogen-doped p-BC (p-BC/N) nanomaterial as the negative electrode. The optimized device can be reversibly charged/discharged at a potential window of 2.0 V (Fig. 8b) in an aqueous electrolyte, reaching a considerably high energy density of 32.91 W h kg−1 and a maximum power density of 284.63 kW kg−1. Meanwhile, the hybrid supercapacitor exhibits good cycling stability with 95.4% specific capacitance retention after 2000 cycles.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of the asymmetric supercapacitor (p-BC@MnO2-2 h//p-BC/N-5 M) with p-BC@MnO2-2 h as the positive electrode and p-BC/N-5 M as the negative electrode in 1.0 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. (b) CV curves of different operation voltages at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Electrochemical performance of the single-layer β-Co(OH)2 all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor in comparison with previously reported asymmetric supercapacitors. (d) Cycle performance of the single-layer β-Co(OH)2 all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor measured at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1; the inset shows the corresponding CV curves. (c, d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) CV curves of rGO/MWCNT fiber and MoS2-rGO/MWCNT fiber based asymmetric supercapacitors at cell voltages of 0.8, 1, 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 V. Inset: Optical image of a fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor on glass slide. (f) Plot of energy density versus power density for fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor and those of MoS2-rGO/MWCNT, rGO/MWCNT, and bare MWCNT fiber-based symmetric supercapacitors. (e, f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To improve the specific capacitance, various materials, such as metal hydroxides, have been investigated as cathodes in asymmetric supercapacitors.24,169 Among them, β-Co(OH)2 is one of the most promising candidates owing to its high theoretical capacitance of 3460 F g−1 and natural abundance.170 Gao et al.167 fabricated a novel cathode with β-Co(OH)2 single layers with a five-atom layer thickness. This kind of structure not only features a shorter ion diffusion path but also provides 100% exposed hydrogen atoms to serve as the electroactive sites, thus favoring Faradic redox reactions. Benefiting from these features, an all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor fabricated from single-layer β-Co(OH)2 as the cathode and N-doped graphene as the anode displayed a high energy density of 98.9 W h kg−1 at an exceptional power density (Fig. 8c) of 17981 W kg−1, which is comparable to that of lithium-ion batteries. Furthermore, this integrated asymmetric supercapacitor achieves an excellent cycling life and a 93.2% capacity retention after 10000 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 8d). Owing to their unique electrochemical properties, two dimensional (2D) nanosheets of transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, particularly MoS2)171,172 have been shown to be attractive anodes for asymmetric SCs.173 Recently, Sun et al.174 incorporated MoS2 and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanosheets into MWCNT fibers to fabricate solid-state, asymmetric supercapacitors (Fig. 8e) by using MoS2-rGO/MWCNT and rGO/MWCNT fibers as the anode and cathode, respectively. The resulting extremely flexible asymmetric supercapacitor demonstrates a much higher energy density and power density than symmetric SCs and can be operated in a wide potential window of 1.4 V (Fig. 8f). Furthermore, both the volumetric capacitance and coulombic efficiency are steady even under repeated bending for 7000 cycles.
4.2. Series SCs
In general, the working potential window and energy storage capacity of a single SC is limited to meet practical applications. As a result, assembling several SCs in series, or in parallel, into one integrated unit would be a simple and viable way to improve the overall output potential and current. As a proof of concept, Niu et al.175 integrated four highly compressible all-solid-state SCs (Fig. 9a–d) into one unit in series by using PANI-SWNT sponge as electrodes, PVA/H2SO4 as a solid electrolyte, Au films on poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrates as current collectors, and filter paper as a separator. This resulting integrated SC unit was powerful enough to light up a red light-emitting diode (LED) when fully charged and displayed a good compression tolerant ability (Fig. 9e–h). The CV curve of such four devices in series exhibited an enhanced potential range of 0–3.2 V, which is four times that of a single supercapacitor (Fig. 9i). It is also reflected by the charge/discharge curve, where the charge potential can reach up to 3.2 V (Fig. 9j). For eliminating inactive ingredients such as binders and current collectors, Xiao et al.164 fabricated flexible freestanding mesoporous VN nanowires (MVNNs)/CNT hybrid electrodes and obtained high performance all-solid-state flexible SCs. Three devices were connected in series or parallel to test the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at the same current (0.5 mA). The three devices connected in series exhibited a charge/discharge voltage of 2.1 V with almost the same discharge time as a single device. Furthermore, the discharge time of the three devices connected in parallel was about 2.5 times larger than that of a single device, which approached the theoretical factor 3, confirming to the theorem of series and parallel connections of capacitors. To demonstrate the flexibility and foldability of the series SCs, Liu et al.166 prepared four SC units based on PANI-rGO/CF composite paper in series to light a red LED. The all-solid-state SCs could stably light the LED when they were twisted and folded simultaneously, which have potential applications in future wearable or printable electronics.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of an all-solid-state integrated supercapacitor based on PANI–SWCNTs–sponge. (b–d) Real-time optical images of a supercapacitor showing the compressing and recovering process. (e) Au film patterns on PET substrates for assembling four supercapacitors into one unit in series. (f–h) Real-time optical images of the resulting four-supercapacitor group showing the compressing and recovering process. The galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the four-supercapacitor group and a single supercapacitor at 0.4 A g−1. (i) The CV curves of the four-supercapacitor group and a single supercapacitor at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (j) The charge/discharge curve of the four-supercapacitor group and a single supercapacitor. (a–j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.3. Micro-SCs
Current research on SCs has focused on their applications for portable/wearable electronics, which stimulated the development of miniaturized energy storage devices. As one type of newly developed miniaturized electrochemical energy-storage devices, micro-SCs can offer power densities that are much larger than those of conventional batteries and SCs because of their fast responses to ions and electrons.176 Besides, miniaturized energy storage devices integrated into a chip would potentially increase the density of devices with different functionalities and reduce overall chip design complexity by eliminating intricate interconnects in bulk-sized energy storage devices.177 Recent work has illustrated that high performance micro-scale SCs can be fabricated onto a chip using different active materials and designs, such as CNTs, graphene sheets, activated carbons, and conductive polymers.178–187 Meng et al.176 fabricated an ultrathin flexible all-solid-state SC (Fig. 10b) based on a leaf formed nanocomposite structure of polypyrrole (PPy)-decorated nanoporous gold (NPG) as both the electrode support and current collector (Fig. 10a). The total thickness of the supercapacitor is less than one micrometer. Because of the fast responses to ions and electrons, this symmetric SC thus produced a large specific capacitance (270 F g−1) at a current density of 0.6 A g−1. And it showed a power density of 296 kW kg−1, an energy density of 27 W h kg−1, and exhibited almost identical performance at various curvatures (Fig. 10c–g), suggesting its wide application potential in powering wearable/miniaturized electronics.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the ultrathin NPG-PPy/PVA/NPG-PPy flexible solid state supercapacitor. (b) Digital pictures of macroscopic NPG-PPy thin membrane. (c) Response of a single NPG-PPy120s supercapacitor at different curvatures from 0 to 4 cm−1. (d–f) Digital images of an all-solid-state supercapacitor device at different bending states. (g) LED lighting demonstration, powered by three pieces of supercapacitors in series. (a–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Continuous carbon nanotube yarn can be fabricated by means of dry and wet spinning methods, which greatly promotes the development of fiber shaped micro-supercapacitors. Meng et al.188 developed a high-performance yarn micro-supercapacitor with single-walled carbon nanotubes and activated carbon electrodes. The combination of single-walled carbon nanotubes and activated carbon provides the yarn micro-supercapacitors with more effective area for ion transportation and energy storage. The specific volumetric capacitance reaches 48.5 F cm−3, corresponding to a gravimetric capacitance of 74.6 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Besides, the energy density is 3.7 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 45.7 mW cm−3. The device shows high stability with a capacitance retention of 98.5% after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. Such four micro-supercapacitors with high capacitance, energy density and cycling stability were also connected together in parallel and in series configurations (Fig. 11a–d), thus the current and potential range of the yarn micro-SCs were enlarged. Different from the planar micro-SCs on one-chip, flexible fiber-shaped SCs show incomparable advantages that they can be directly used as flexible, wearable and embedded device units.163 Sun et al.189 synthesized graphene/CNT composite fibers to fabricate a wire-shaped micro-SC with a specific capacitance of up to 31.50 F g−1 (4.97 mF cm−2 or 27.1 μF cm−1), much higher than that of a bare CNT fiber based supercapacitor (5.83 F g−1, 0.90 cm−2 or 5.1 μF cm−1) under the same testing conditions. Moreover, the graphene/CNT composite fibers were flexible and tough, and they could be easily woven into a piece of cotton fabric. Two composite fibers served as conducting wires to connect a blue light emitting diode (LED) lamp with a direct-current power (Fig. 11e and f). The lamp could be stably operated without any fatigue in the illumination after 5000 bending cycles.
 Fig. 11  (a–d) The electrochemical performance of the yarn micro-supercapacitors in series and parallel. (a) Four units in parallel (insert image is the parallel connection diagram of supercapacitors). (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the unit and parallel circuit. (c) Four units in series (insert image is the in series connection diagram of supercapacitors). (d) Cyclic voltammograms of the unit and in series circuit. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Photographs of graphene/CNT composite fibers being woven into a flexible cotton fabric to make up the word “Fudan”. The inserted image shows the “F” at a higher magnification. (f) Photographs of a blue light emission diode lamp connected to a direct-current circuit with two graphene/CNT composite fibers with length of ∼1.5 cm as conducting wires. The voltage was set to 3 V. (e, f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
As shown in Fig. 12, micro SCs have a relatively higher power density compared with other SCs. Also, it is clearly seen that the energy density is inferior to those of other reported SCs because of the miniaturized structure. It is hopeful to improve the supercapacitor performance by developing a complex and optimized structure, enlarging the stack density or surface area. Alternatively, the performance of the micro SCs can be improved by controlling the composition of the hierarchical nanomaterials as electrodes and ionic liquid or organic based polymers as electrolytes, and optimizing the electrode pattern into interdigitated 2D microscale or semi-3D devices. Another promising approach is to directly integrate or couple micro SCs with micro-batteries to achieve high energy and power densities. Moreover, there is great hope that integration of green materials such as biomaterials and new functions could further expand their applications for the fabrication of green micro SCs. Thus as one type of newly developed miniaturized electrochemical energy-storage devices, micro-SCs can offer several orders of magnitude higher power density than conventional SCs, long cycle life and large rate capability, and they are environmentally-friendly as well.
 Fig. 12  Energy and power densities of various SCs. 
4.4. Electrolytes
In spite of the electrode materials that significantly influence the SC performance, the electrolyte is another important factor that should be considered to obtain high performance SCs. Specifically, the electrolyte involves liquid and solid-state forms. Because a liquid electrolyte based SC configuration suffers from possible leakage of harmful electrolytes and undesired dislocation of the electrode position during stretching, solid-state electrolytes are preferred in flexible SCs owing to their advantages in terms of compactness, reliability, and freedom from leakage.86,174,188
Gel electrolytes are actually quasi-solid-state electrolytes which are composed of a polymeric framework, an organic/aqueous solvent as the dispersion medium and a supporting electrolytic salt/acid/alkali. They possess high physical flexibility, desirable electrochemical properties, excellent mechanical integrity and high ionic conductivity of ∼10−4 to 10−1 S cm−1 under ambient conditions.192 However, most hydrogel polymer electrolytes which were employed in flexible SCs, such as PVA-H2SO4 and H3PO4 systems, are merely a blended solution which usually cause harm to the structural integrity and mechanical strength.56,193 To address this problem, Wang et al.194 synthesized a chemically crosslinked PVA-H2SO4 hydrogel film, which differs from the laminated configuration of conventional SCs. The conducting PANI was in situ embedded in the PVA-H2SO4 hydrogel film to serve as electrode materials, constructing an integrated flexible SC. With this novel configuration, the prototype-integrated SC can sustain up to 300% stretching and a large areal capacitance (488 mF cm−2) is obtained at the same time.
Ionic liquids, which are known as room temperature molten salts, are attractive candidates for electrolytes in flexible SCs because of their high conductivity, semi-solid state, thermal stability and flexiblity.195 Balducci et al.196 reported that using carbide derived carbon as an electrode material and EMI/TFSI ionic liquid (EMI = 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium, TFSI= bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) as an electrolyte, a high capacitance of 160 F g−1 was obtained at 60 °C and the cell voltage can be extended to 3.5 V. However, current ionic conducting gels are brittle and cannot exhibit pressure-dependent performance in energy storage devices. Liu et al.197 prepared a self-healing hydrogel system which consists of four components: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (EMIMCl), hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), chitosan (CS) and water. The specific electrode capacitance can be tuned by compressive pressure, which demonstrated a significant improvement in the specific capacitance from 43 F g−1 to 98 F g−1 with the strain less than 20%, and then increased to 134 F g−1 with a slightly lower rate. This pressure-dependent electrochemical property is due to the supramolecular structure of these materials, which makes them quite suitable for versatile flexible energy devices and platforms for pressure sensors.
5. Outlook and future challenges
The prospect of flexible supercapacitors
Integrated systems which could be stretched or folded as an integrated unit have been developed extensively in recent years because they overcame the limitation of the conventional stretchable SC configuration wherein two electrodes have to move relative to the separator under strains13 (Fig. 13). All-solid-state integrated SCs are favored over their liquid counterparts for the consideration of encapsulation and safety since it is possible for them to avoid the leakage of harmful electrolytes and undesired dislocation of the electrode position during stretching.198 Niu et al.13 achieved highly stretchable integrated supercapacitors by using SWCNT films as electrodes and H2SO4-polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) gel as both the electrolyte and separator. The as-prepared stretchable supercapacitor exhibits nearly stable performance even under the strain of 120%, which is remarkably larger than other stretchable batteries and supercapacitors with conventional structures. Liu et al.166 also fabricated another kind of all-solid-state integrated SC based on PANI-rGO/CF composite paper. The calculated specific capacitance of the composite paper is about 224 F g−1, and the paper capacitor maintained a value of 89% with respect to the maximum capacity after 1000 cycles. There was only a very slight difference in the CV curves when the composite paper was rolled up and folded, indicating a good recycling stability.
 Fig. 13  Prospect of flexible supercapacitors: (a) integrated system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Multifunctional system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Lithium-ion battery and SCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Solar cell and SCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
One drawback associated with supercapacitors is that their voltage often significantly decreases once they begin to discharge as power sources, which greatly affects the smooth operation of the electronic/optoelectronic devices.190,191 To achieve a voltage-stabilizing supercapacitor system, Liu et al.191 integrated a SnO2-based memristor (which is the fourth circuit element and has observable effects in resistance switching memory) with a PCBM-based supercapacitor to design a novel M-S integrated device. When it was charged to 1 V, a stable discharging curve is obtained for the integrated device at about 0.8 V for as long as 200 s, while only about 0.11 V potential drop was observed. Meanwhile for a single supercapacitor, once discharging, the voltage drops dramatically from 0.86 V to 0.3 V within the measured discharging time (200 s). Importantly, to demonstrate the real application of the integrated M–S system as stabilized energy units, they also attempted to control a commercial red LED by using the as-designed M–S system. For a single supercapacitor, it can be observed that the brightness of a lighted LED decreased very fast and then fully disappeared within 100 s during the continuous discharging process. Meanwhile for the M–S integrated system with voltage-stabilizing ability, the LED was found to be still lighted after 100 s, confirming the voltage stabilizing features of the memristor–supercapacitor system.
Recently, a great demand for high-performance multifunctional integrated systems has arisen because of the maximum functionality of these integrated systems with respect to conventional devices with a single function. Considerable research efforts have been made to integrate different functional units into single multifunctional systems such as integrated energy-storage devices, photodetector-supercapacitor nanosystems198 and hydrogen generation-supercapacitors.199 Chen et al.156 developed a smart SC by depositing polyaniline (PANI) onto aligned CNT sheet electrodes, which can sense the level of stored energy and reflect the changes by chromatic transition between yellow, green and blue that can be directly observed by the naked eye (Fig. 14a). In this respect, it can be directly observed by the color changes to determine whether the energy has been consumed before a device stops working in practical applications. Recently, integrated photodetectors are of great importance due to their specific applications including environmental monitoring, biosensing and in situ monitoring of medical therapy.200 Wang et al.201 successfully prepared a microscale flexible asymmetric supercapacitor using Co3O4 nanowires on titanium wire as the positive electrode and graphene on carbon fibers as the negative electrode, forming a flexible energy-storage device and photodetector (Fig. 14b). This multifunctional system improved the energy storage and power delivery (at least by 1860%) by enlarging the potential window from 0–0.6 V to 0–1.5 V. In addition, the integrated flexible fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor exhibits excellent response to white light.
 Fig. 14  (a) Reversible chromatic transition of a smart supercapacitor based PANI/CNT electrode during a charging–discharging process (a1–a5) from 1 V to −1 V and UV-vis spectra (a6) of the positive electrode corresponding to the states at (a1–a5). Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Electrochemical performance of integrated asymmetric supercapacitor and the photodetector: (1) photographs of the fiber-based all-solid-state flexible asymmetric supercapacitor at different bending states; (2) CV curves obtained at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 at different bending states; (3) schematic illustration of the integrated system. Current response of the photodetector powered by the flexible asymmetric fiber supercapacitor (4) illuminated under different incident light intensities, and (5) at different bending states under a light intensity of 40 mW cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The increasing energy and power requirement for next generation flexible electronics stimulates more and more efforts to explore new integrated devices to simultaneously realize energy conversion and storage that meet the critical requirement of being self-powered in the future.202–206 However, how to realize both high energy and high power densities in one device still remains a challenge. Zhang et al.207 fabricated a novel fiber-shaped hybrid energy storage device (FESD) by twisting CNT/ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) and CNT/Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) or CNT/LiMn2O4 (LMO) hybrid fibers together, resulting in an integrated system (Fig. 15a) with a lithium-ion battery (LIB) and SC to obtain both high energy and power densities. The LIB and supercapacitor segments can be effectively operated together to achieve a whole charge–discharge process (Fig. 15b and e). This fiber-based multifunctional device exhibited high power densities up to around 1 W cm−3 and a high energy density of 50 mW h cm−3, which far exceeded the electrochemical storage performance of other energy devices. Moreover, the devices were also wearable as they can be woven into various flexible textiles, such as a knitted sweater (Fig. 15f) and a glove (Fig. 15g). As a demonstration, the resulting glove can effective power five light-emitting diodes, indicating its potential for future wearable smart textiles. To simultaneously convert solar energy to electric storage energy, Zhang et al.208 presented an integrated polymer solar cell and an electrochemical SC to a novel, all-solid-state, flexible “energy fiber” which can realize the functions of photovoltaic conversion (PC) and energy storage (ES) (Fig. 16b). This “energy fiber” (Fig. 16a) has also been realized on the basis of titania nanotube-modified Ti wires and aligned MWCNT sheets which served as two separate electrodes. The integrated system exhibits slight performance degradation (less than 10%) after bending for 1000 cycles (Fig. 16e), which opens a new avenue for future photoelectronics and electronics.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the constitution of the LIB and supercapacitor segments of the FESD. (b) Cyclic performance of the LIB and supercapacitor segments. (c, d) Photographs of an FESD before and after bending, respectively. (e) The charge and discharge curves of an FESD before and after bending for 500 and 1000 cycles. (f) Photograph of the FESD woven into a knitted sweater as the symbol “19-05”. (g) Photograph of the FESD woven into a glove to power five light-emitting diodes. (a–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure of all-solid-state, coaxial and integrated fiber shaped device. The left and right sections correspond to the PC and ES parts, respectively. (b) Schematic diagram shows the circuit connection state in the process of charging and discharging. (c) Cyclic voltammograms at increasing scan rates from 100 to 5000 mV s−1. (d) “Energy fibers” being bent into circles. (e) Change of the entire photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of the “energy fiber” under bending for 1000 cycles. η0 and η correspond to the entire efficiency before and after bending. (a–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

Table 1 shows the comparison of various SCs, which illustrates that flexible SCs based on EDLC materials (CNTs and graphene) possess higher power density but lower energy density and specific capacitances than those of pseudo-capacitors resulting from their different charge storage mechanisms. Composite electrodes which were constituted by highly conductive carbon nanomaterials and pseudocapacitive materials as well as the asymmetric configuration derived from a Faradic electrode and capacitance electrode combined the advantages of both the two materials, which can achieve both high energy and power density. Series SCs assembled by several SCs together enlarged the working potential and current, making them more suitable to meet practical application. To meet the requirement for miniature devices, micro-SCs can provide short ion diffusion paths and high diffusion rates, resulting in higher power densities. Although a lot of electrode materials have been fabricated, the energy and power densities still need to be improved. Flexible integrated energy storage systems composed of flexible SCs and batteries could be a hopeful solution. Furthermore, the discovery of novel electrode materials with high specific surface area, short ion-transfer path and continuous pore network could also improve the overall performance of flexible SCs.
Table 1 Comparison of the electrochemical performance of representative SCs




Material
Maximum power density (kW kg−1)
Maximum specific capacitances (F g−1)
Maximum energy density (W h kg−1)
Ref.




CNTs
164
135
41

100



Graphene
776.8
273.1
150.9

134



5.0
186
6.5

88



Pseudo
30.6
1195
106.4

146



3.75
145
16

141



Composites
500
404
14

162



Asymmetric
284.63
256.74
32.91

168



22.7
560
33.71

92



Series
1.5
216
8

175



Micro
296
270
27

176



332.5
946
53.4

180





State-of-the-art SCs have achieved great advancements in recent years. Despite this, current wearable SCs are still far away from satisfying the requirements for wearable electronics, and much effort should be made to further improve them for practical applications. Although SCs exhibit high power densities, the energy density is the main obstacle for their widespread applications. Conducting polymers and metal oxides with high capacity have been combined with porous carbon nano-architectures to obtain high performance capacity electrodes. Optimizing the electrode architecture or cell configuration is an efficient strategy to obtain SCs with high energy density. Another alternative to improve the SC performance is developing hybrid energy storage systems. For example, the combination of a SC with a Li-ion battery results in an energy storage system with high power and energy densities. With the same energy consumption, in comparison with that of conventional electric devices, wearable SCs have the unique properties of being light weight, miniaturized and flexible. Wearable supercapacitors could be directly worn on the human body and work stably under complex deformation when they are used in practical applications, such as bending, folding and even stretching. To summarize, although many problems need to be addressed in flexible SCs in terms of material, structure and properties, they represent a new family of energy storage systems based on the excellent properties of being flexible and having fast charge–discharge abilities, which may change our life in the near future.
6. Conclusions
In this perspective, the most recent advances in smart, stretchable and wearable supercapacitors are summarized systematically, including flexible devices, various flexible electrode materials and the strategies to improve the performance of supercapacitors. An improved understanding of the current achievements in integrated and multifunctional systems has also been introduced to show the prospects of flexible supercapacitors. Although great progress has been made, many challenges still exist and need to be overcome. For instance, since each flexible electrode material has its own strength and shortcomings, new electrode materials with a high specific surface area, short ion-transfer path and continuous pore network are still needed to be explored depending on the specific requirements. Moreover, as aforementioned, integrated systems and smart multifunctional energy storage devices are still needed to be developed to fulfill the current requirements. Future research should consider more work to conquer the current drawbacks and expedite the advent of new generations of flexible and wearable electronic devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51272186, 21422105). Q. Yuan thanks the Large-scale Instrument and Equipment Sharing Foundation of Wuhan University.
Notes and references
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C. K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Sun, W. M. Choi, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yoon, A. J. Baca, S. I. Park, P. Elvikis, J. B. Geddes, L. Li 3rd, R. H. Kim, J. Xiao, S. Wang, T. H. Kim, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, J. A. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo, P. M. Ferreira, Y. Huang, A. Rockett and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Gaikwad, A. M. Zamarayeva, J. Rousseau, H. Chu, I. Derin and D. A. Steingart, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, W. Zheng, Z. Yue, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, G. Shin, Y. J. Kang, W. Kim and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Yu, C. Masarapu, J. Rong, B. Wei and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hu, M. Pasta, F. L. Mantia, L. Cui, S. Jeong, H. D. Deshazer, J. W. Choi, S. M. Han and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, T. Gu and B. Wei, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yue, C. Wang, X. Ding and G. G. Wallace, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 68, 18 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Niu, H. B. Dong, B. W. Zhu, J. Z. Li, H. H. Hng, W. Y. Zhou, X. D. Chen and S. S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Wang, Z. Yue, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9008 CAS .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307 CAS .
Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, T. Ma, R. Tang, Q. Cheng, X. Wang, D. Krishnaraju, R. Panat, C. K. Chan, H. Yu and H. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3140 Search PubMed .
X. W. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. F. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie and B. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2014, 22, 3592 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113 CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, X. Niu, Z. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shin, M. Y. Bae, H. J. Lee, S. K. Hong, C. H. Yoon, G. Zi, J. A. Rogers and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng and Z. Wu, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 3227 RSC .
G. Shin, C. H. Yoon, M. Y. Bae, Y. C. Kim, S. K. Hong, J. A. Rogers and J. S. Ha, Small, 2011, 7, 1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Mannsfeld, B. C. Tee, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. V. Chen, S. Barman, B. V. Muir, A. N. Sokolov, C. Reese and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. Izadi-Najafabadi, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yu, Z. Wang, H. Yu and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 141912 CrossRef .
D. J. Lipomi, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. Tee, S. L. Hellstrom, J. A. Lee, C. H. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Son, J. Lee, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, J. E. Lee, C. Song, S. J. Kim, D. J. Lee, S. W. Jun, S. Yang, M. Park, J. Shin, K. Do, M. Lee, K. Kang, C. S. Hwang, N. Lu, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and S. Jayaraman, MRS Bull., 2003, 28, 585 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307 CAS .
Y. Cheng and J. Liu, Mater. Res. Lett., 2013, 1, 175 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, T. Zhai, H. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, S. Xie, Y. Ling, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Q. Meng, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei and M. Miao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kang, H. Chun, C.-H. Han and W. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 065401 CrossRef PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors, Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, H. P. Wu, Y. N. Meng and Z. X. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Deng, X. Li, Z. Yang, S. He, X. Chen, G. Guan, J. Ren and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, T. Huang, B. Zheng, Y. Han, X. Zhao, K. Gopalsamy, H. Sun and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 Search PubMed .
Q. Meng, K. Wang, W. Guo, J. Fang, Z. Wei and X. She, Small, 2014, 10, 3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, L. Li, C. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cai, L. Qiu, Y. Wang, X. Zhu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 9 Search PubMed .
L. J. Pan, G. H. Yu, D. Y. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. T. Zhao, N. Liu, H. L. Wang, B. C. K. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. N. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, L. Pan, B. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Z. Bao and G. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6086 CAS .
B. D. Gate, Science, 2009, 323, 1566 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Nyholm, G. Nystrom, A. Mihranyan and M. Stromme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751 CAS .
N. S. Liu, W. Z. Ma, J. Y. Tao, X. H. Zhang, J. Su, L. Y. Li, C. X. Yang, Y. H. Gao, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, W. Y. Bai, G. Z. Guan, Y. Zhang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Cheng, S. T. Lu, H. B. Zhang, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Yu, L. B. Hu, N. A. Liu, H. L. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. A. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Niu, L. L. Liu, L. Zhang, Q. Shao, W. Y. Zhou, X. D. Chen and S. S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Yu, L. B. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. L. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. McDonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. N. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. W. Zhu, H. X. Ji, S. Murali, Y. P. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng and Y. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bo, W. Zhu, W. Ma, Z. Wen, X. Shuai, J. Chen, J. Yan, Z. Wang, K. Cen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Z. Niu, L. Zhang and X. Chen, Small, 2014, 10, 2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yin, Z. Q. Niu and X. D. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, J. A. Lee, A. Y. Choi, Y. T. Kim, X. Lepró, M. D. Lima, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Meng, H. Wu, Y. Meng, K. Xie, Z. Wei and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wagner and S. Bauer, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 207 CrossRef .
L. Xiao, Z. Chen, C. Feng, L. Liu, Z. Q. Bai, Y. Wang, L. Qian, Y. Y. Zhang, Q. Q. Li, K. L. Jiang and S. S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Khang, H. Q. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2006, 311, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, J. H. Ahn, W. M. Choi, H. S. Kim, T. H. Kim, J. Z. Song, Y. G. Y. Huang, Z. J. Liu, C. Lu and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2008, 320, 507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, Y. Noguchi, K. Hata, T. Fukushima, T. Aida and T. Someya, Science, 2008, 321, 1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ramuz, B. C. K. Tee, J. B. H. Tok and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu and F. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Filiatrault, G. C. Porteous, R. S. Carmichael, G. J. E. Davidson and T. B. Carmichael, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L. F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, P. Zhao, X. M. Zhou, H. P. Wu and Z. X. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16373 RSC .
W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi, L. Hu, X. Xie, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Zang, C. Y. Cao, Y. Y. Feng, J. Liu and X. H. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Meng, C. H. Liu, L. Z. Chen, C. H. Hu and S. S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, D. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng, Z. L. Wang and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jost, C. R. Perez, J. K. McDonough, V. Presser, M. Heon, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5060 CAS .
L. B. Hu, W. Chen, X. Xie, N. A. Liu, Y. Yang, H. Wu, Y. Yao, M. Pasta, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. W. Zhu, W. C. Jiang, Y. Yang, W. R. Leow, H. Wang and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Yuan, X. Xiao, T. P. Ding, J. W. Zhong, X. H. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Hu, Y. H. Huang, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Niu, W. Y. Zhou, J. Chen, G. X. Feng, H. Li, Y. S. Hu, W. J. Ma, H. B. Dong, J. Z. Li and S. S. Xie, Small, 2013, 9, 518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Niu, E. K. Sichel, R. Hoch, D. Moy and H. Tennent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 1480 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frackowiak, K. Jurewicz, S. Delpeux and F. Beguin, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 822 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bordjiba and L. H. D. M. Mohamedi, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 815 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kang, H. Chung, C. H. Han and W. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 065401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cao and B. B. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3183 CAS .
Z. Zhang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, M. Yu, Y. Tong and K. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 505 CAS .
Y.-K. Hsu, Y.-C. Chen, Y.-G. Lin, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3383 RSC .
V. T. Le, H. Kim, A. Ghosh, J. Kim, J. Chang, Q. A. Vu, D. T. Pham, J.-H. Lee, S.-W. Kim and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520 RSC .
E. Raymundo-Pinero, M. Cadek, M. Wachtler and F. Beguin, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, Y. K. Hsu, Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Lin, Y. Y. Horng, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7124 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Bian, A. H. Yu and H. Q. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 266 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, N. Yi, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Hager, P. Greil, C. Leyens, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kakuta, Y. Takashima, M. Nakahata, M. Otsubo, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Wang, Y. H. Xue, J. Ding, L. F. Feng, X. G. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Jin, C. L. Mangun, D. S. Stradley, J. S. Moore, N. R. Sottos and S. R. White, Polymer, 2012, 53, 581 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Amamoto, J. Kamada, H. Otsuka, A. Takahara and K. Matyjaszewski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Blaiszik, S. L. B. Kramer, S. C. Olugebefola, J. S. Moore, N. R. Sottos and S. R. White, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 179 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Blaiszik, S. L. B. Kramer, M. E. Grady, D. A. McIlroy, J. S. Moore, N. R. Sottos and S. R. White, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Habault, H. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7244 RSC .
H. Kuroki, I. Tokarev, D. Nykypanchuk, E. Zhulina and S. Minko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4593 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Li and J. Q. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wang, X. J. Liu, F. Zhou and W. M. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2324 RSC .
X. Wang, F. Liu, X. W. Zheng and J. Q. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Cong, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3357 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Zhang, D. H. Xu, X. Z. Yan, J. Z. Chen, S. Y. Dong, B. Zheng and F. H. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, N. Liu, R. Allen, J. B.-H. Tok, Y. P. Wu, F. Zhang, Y. S. Chen and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146 RSC .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Niu, L. Zhang, L. L. Liu, B. W. Zhu, H. B. Dong and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, K. Wang, Y. J. Zhang and Z. X. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yuan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549 RSC .
Y. N. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. P. Zhang, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Yuan, B. Gao, L. F. Shen, S. D. Yang, L. Hao, X. J. Lu, F. Zhang, L. J. Zhang and X. G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 529 RSC .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Lei, N. Christov and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1866 CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. C. Qin, D. Weng, Q. F. Xiao, Y. T. Peng, X. L. Wang, H. X. Li, F. Wei and Y. F. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3420 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. L. Fei, G. D. Ruan, C. S. Xiang and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, T. Zhai, X. Lu, X. Chen, S. Xie, W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhao, L. Zhang and Y. Tong, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 64 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Lu, T. Zhai, X. H. Zhang, Y. Q. Shen, L. Y. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. H. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. X. Tong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi and M. Morita, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 44 CAS .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520 RSC .
S. L. Candelaria, Y. Shao, W. Zhou, X. Li, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. Li and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 195 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797 RSC .
S. Liu, S. Sun and X.-Z. You, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2037 RSC .
X. Sun, T. Chen, S. Huang, L. Li and H. Peng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4244 RSC .
H. Wei, X. Yan, S. Wu, Z. Luo, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25052 CAS .
X. L. Chen, H. J. Lin, P. N. Chen, G. Z. Guan, J. Deng and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nyholm, G. Nyström, A. Mihranyan and M. Strømme, Adv. Mater., 2013, 23, 3751 Search PubMed .
M. Mastragostino, C. Arbizzani and F. Soavi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 812 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. Lu, H. Zhang, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, J. A. Lee, A. Y. Choi, Y. T. Kim, X. Lepró, M. D. Lima, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cao, B. Zheng, W. H. Shi, J. Yang, Z. X. Fan, Z. M. Luo, X. H. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Wang, X. H. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. X. Tong and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, X. Peng, H. Y. Jin, T. Q. Li, C. C. Zhang, B. Gao, B. Hu, K. F. Huo and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Yu, Y. F. Zhang, Y. X. Zeng, M.-S. Balogun, K. C. Mai, Z. S. Zhang, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Liu, Z. Q. Niu, L. Zhang, W. Y. Zhou, X. D. Chen and S. S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. H. Sun, F. C. Lei, L. Liang, J. W. Liu, W. T. Bi, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, Q.-F. Guan and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Yuan, L. Yang, L. R. Hou, L. F. Shen, X. G. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7883 CAS .
C. Z. Yuan, X. G. Zhang, L. R. Hou, L. F. Shen, D. K. Li, F. Zhang, C. G. Fan and J. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10809 RSC .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934 RSC .
L. J. Cao, S. B. Yang, W. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. J. Gong, L. L. Ma, G. Shi, S. D. Lei, Y. H. Zhang, S. T. Zhang, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2013, 9, 2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Z. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Niu, W. Y. Zhou, X. D. Chen, J. Chen and S. S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Meng and Y. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. H. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. W. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. S. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. M. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Z. Wu, L. L. Peng, C. W. Lin, S. L. Hu, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. He, W. J. Chen, J. Yuan Zhou, X. D. Li, P. Y. Tang, Z. X. Zhang, J. C. Fu and E. Q. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 210 CAS .
C. W. Shen, X. H. Wang, W. F. Zhang and F. Y. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10465 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun and X. Y. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 924 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Xue, F. W. Li, J. Zhu, H. Song, M. N. Zhang and T. B. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1284 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, W. J. Zou, B. G. Quan, A. F. Yu, H. P. Wu, P. Jiang and Z. X. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1068 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Meng, H. P. Wu, Y. N. Meng, K. Xie, Z. X. Wei and Z. X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, J. Deng, X. L. Chen, Z. B. Yang, J. Ren and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, B. Y. Liu, X. F. Wang, X. H. Wu, W. N. Zhao, Z. M. Xu, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55 CAS .
L. Yuan, X.-H. Lu, X. Xiao, T. Zhai, J. Dai, F. Zhang, B. Hu, X. Wang, L. Gong, J. Chen, C. Hu, Y. Tong, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Li, X. Z. Sun, Q. H. Meng, Y. W. Ma and Z. X. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, F. Wu, L. Li, B. Xu, X. Qiu and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5184 CAS .
A. Balducci, R. Dugas, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, D. Plee, M. Mastragostino and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 922 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, D. B. Wu, H. L. Wang and Q. G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Wang, B. Liu, Q. F. Wang, W. F. Song, X. J. Hou, D. Chen, Y. B. Cheng and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Xia, J. S. Luo, Z. Y. Zeng, C. Guan, Y. Q. Zhang, J. P. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 981 Search PubMed .
Q. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Yang, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 6549 CrossRef .
X. F. Wang, B. Liu, R. Liu, Q. F. Wang, X. J. Hou, D. Chen, R. M. Wang and G. Z. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Murakami, N. Kawashima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3346 RSC .
Z. Yang, L. Li, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 954 RSC .
W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wee, T. Salim, Y. M. Lam, S. G. Mhaisalkar and M. Srinivasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 413 CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. L. Cheng, W. Weng, J. Ren, X. Fang, Y. S. Jiang, P. N. Chen, Z. T. Zhang, Y. G. Wang and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Zhang, X. L. Chen, P. N. Chen, G. Z. Guan, L. B. Qiu, H. J. Lin, Z. B. Yang, W. Y. Bai, Y. F. Luo and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Yu Zheng	Yu Zheng is presently an undergraduate student at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. She is currently working in Prof. Quan Yuan's group. Her research interest is focused on the development of flexible all-solid supercapacitors as energy storage devices.
Yanbing Yang	Yanbing Yang is currently a PhD candidate at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. Her research interests are mainly focused on the controlled growth of carbon nanotube sponges, synthesis of hierarchical porous materials and exploring their applications in energy storage systems, such as supercapacitors and lithium batteries.
Shasha Chen	Shasha Chen is currently a graduate student at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. Her research interest is mainly focused on developing flexible lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors based on carbon nanotubes.
Quan Yuan	Quan Yuan is currently a full professor in the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences at Wuhan University. She received her BS degree (2004) from Wuhan University, China, and her PhD (2009) in Inorganic Chemistry from Peking University, China. Later, she performed postdoctoral research (2009–2012) at the University of Florida. Her research interests involve the controlled synthesis of functional nanomaterials and investigating their corresponding biomedical applications. Up till now, Prof. Yuan has won many awards such as the National Top 100 Doctoral Thesis (2011) and Excellent Young Scientist Foundation of NSFC (2014). Currently, she has published 46 high-quality papers on journals like Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., J. Am. Chem. Soc., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., etc.

 	Fig. 1  Ragone plot of specific power versus specific energy for various energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure models of typical flexible electrode materials: (a) carbon nanotubes (CNTs), (b) graphene, (c) pseudo-capacitors, (d) conducting polymers, (e) composite materials. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of preparing a buckled SWCNT film on PDMS. (b) The normalized sheet resistance of SWCNT films on PDMS with and without buckled structure at different strain levels and buckled SWCNT film after 10 times stretching at different strain levels, where R0 is the resistance of the unstretched SWCNT films and R is the resistance of the SWCNT films at different strain levels. (a, b) Reproduce with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Optical images of as-prepared SWCNT films spread on self-healing substrates in a circuit with an LED bulb. (c1) the original; (c2) after cutting; (c3) after healing. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of the device under bending (an inward ∼45° bending angle) and after healing for different times. (e) Capacitance retention of the devices before cutting and after the 5th healing after 1000 cycles under a current density of 5 A g−1. (f) Schematic representation of self-healing capabilities of electrical conductivity of as-prepared SWCNT films spread on self-healing substrates. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Optical images of rGO patterns on PET with Au film. (b) Optical images of micro-supercapacitors on PET. (c) The specific capacitance of the rGO micro-supercapacitor and conventional supercapacitor at different scan rates. (d) Typical galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the micro-supercapacitor at 1 A g−1. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic illustration of a wire-shaped supercapacitor fabricated from two twined GF@3D-Gs with polyelectrolyte. (f) Photos of the textile embedded with two GF@3D-G fiber supercapacitors (ca. 2 cm in length for each of them) in flat and bending state, respectively. (g) CV curves of two GF@3D-G fiber supercapacitors as the textile in flat (f1) and bending (f2) states with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process and photographs of the flexible electrodes of the edge-oriented MoS2 film. (b) Photographs of the flexible electrodes. The left photograph shows the visible difference between the Mo oxide (dark color) and MoS2 (gray color). The right photograph shows the flexibility of the edge-oriented MoS2 film. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the fabrication process for WO3−x@Au@MnO2 NWs. (d) Optical photographs of the as-fabricated solid-state supercapacitor device. The bottom images demonstrate the high flexibility of the as-prepared device. (e) CV curves of a WO3−x@Au@MnO2 supercapacitor at different curvatures of 0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, and 180° between 0 and 3 V. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the smart supercapacitor of the PANI/CNTs films. (g) Dependence of specific capacitance on stretched cycle number at a strain of 100%. C0 and C correspond to the specific capacitances before and after bending or stretching, respectively. The inset shows the photographs of a supercapacitor before and after bending and stretching. (f, g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Volumetric capacitance of all-solid-state CMY electrode as a function of scan rate. (b) Optical image of hand-made CMY textile consisting of 15 yarns. Inset: A CMY electrode woven into a commercial textile (scale bar represents 1 mm). (c) Comparison of CV plots of solid-state CMY supercapacitor before and after the 1000th bending test. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of the configuration of the all-solid-state flexible supercapacitor device fabricated with rGO/MoO3 composite. (e) CV curves of the device under different bending status. Inset: Photograph of a bent device (L = 4.3 cm). (f) Cycling performance measured by charging and discharging the device at 2 A g−1 for 5000 cycles. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Dependence of specific capacitance on cycle number of CNT/PANI elastic fiber electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1. (b) Dependence of specific capacitance on stretching speed of CNT/PANI elastic fiber electrodes. C0 and C correspond to specific capacitances at 0 and the other strain, respectively. (c, d) Photographs of the elastic fiber electrode used to power a light emission diode before and after stretching by a load, respectively. (e) Photograph of an elastic fiber electrode before and after stretching by 100%, 200%, 300%, 400%, and 500%. (a–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of the asymmetric supercapacitor (p-BC@MnO2-2 h//p-BC/N-5 M) with p-BC@MnO2-2 h as the positive electrode and p-BC/N-5 M as the negative electrode in 1.0 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. (b) CV curves of different operation voltages at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (a, b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Electrochemical performance of the single-layer β-Co(OH)2 all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor in comparison with previously reported asymmetric supercapacitors. (d) Cycle performance of the single-layer β-Co(OH)2 all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor measured at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1; the inset shows the corresponding CV curves. (c, d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) CV curves of rGO/MWCNT fiber and MoS2-rGO/MWCNT fiber based asymmetric supercapacitors at cell voltages of 0.8, 1, 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 V. Inset: Optical image of a fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor on glass slide. (f) Plot of energy density versus power density for fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor and those of MoS2-rGO/MWCNT, rGO/MWCNT, and bare MWCNT fiber-based symmetric supercapacitors. (e, f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of an all-solid-state integrated supercapacitor based on PANI–SWCNTs–sponge. (b–d) Real-time optical images of a supercapacitor showing the compressing and recovering process. (e) Au film patterns on PET substrates for assembling four supercapacitors into one unit in series. (f–h) Real-time optical images of the resulting four-supercapacitor group showing the compressing and recovering process. The galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the four-supercapacitor group and a single supercapacitor at 0.4 A g−1. (i) The CV curves of the four-supercapacitor group and a single supercapacitor at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (j) The charge/discharge curve of the four-supercapacitor group and a single supercapacitor. (a–j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the ultrathin NPG-PPy/PVA/NPG-PPy flexible solid state supercapacitor. (b) Digital pictures of macroscopic NPG-PPy thin membrane. (c) Response of a single NPG-PPy120s supercapacitor at different curvatures from 0 to 4 cm−1. (d–f) Digital images of an all-solid-state supercapacitor device at different bending states. (g) LED lighting demonstration, powered by three pieces of supercapacitors in series. (a–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–d) The electrochemical performance of the yarn micro-supercapacitors in series and parallel. (a) Four units in parallel (insert image is the parallel connection diagram of supercapacitors). (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the unit and parallel circuit. (c) Four units in series (insert image is the in series connection diagram of supercapacitors). (d) Cyclic voltammograms of the unit and in series circuit. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Photographs of graphene/CNT composite fibers being woven into a flexible cotton fabric to make up the word “Fudan”. The inserted image shows the “F” at a higher magnification. (f) Photographs of a blue light emission diode lamp connected to a direct-current circuit with two graphene/CNT composite fibers with length of ∼1.5 cm as conducting wires. The voltage was set to 3 V. (e, f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  Energy and power densities of various SCs.	 

 	Fig. 13  Prospect of flexible supercapacitors: (a) integrated system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Multifunctional system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Lithium-ion battery and SCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Solar cell and SCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Reversible chromatic transition of a smart supercapacitor based PANI/CNT electrode during a charging–discharging process (a1–a5) from 1 V to −1 V and UV-vis spectra (a6) of the positive electrode corresponding to the states at (a1–a5). Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Electrochemical performance of integrated asymmetric supercapacitor and the photodetector: (1) photographs of the fiber-based all-solid-state flexible asymmetric supercapacitor at different bending states; (2) CV curves obtained at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 at different bending states; (3) schematic illustration of the integrated system. Current response of the photodetector powered by the flexible asymmetric fiber supercapacitor (4) illuminated under different incident light intensities, and (5) at different bending states under a light intensity of 40 mW cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the constitution of the LIB and supercapacitor segments of the FESD. (b) Cyclic performance of the LIB and supercapacitor segments. (c, d) Photographs of an FESD before and after bending, respectively. (e) The charge and discharge curves of an FESD before and after bending for 500 and 1000 cycles. (f) Photograph of the FESD woven into a knitted sweater as the symbol “19-05”. (g) Photograph of the FESD woven into a glove to power five light-emitting diodes. (a–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure of all-solid-state, coaxial and integrated fiber shaped device. The left and right sections correspond to the PC and ES parts, respectively. (b) Schematic diagram shows the circuit connection state in the process of charging and discharging. (c) Cyclic voltammograms at increasing scan rates from 100 to 5000 mV s−1. (d) “Energy fibers” being bent into circles. (e) Change of the entire photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of the “energy fiber” under bending for 1000 cycles. η0 and η correspond to the entire efficiency before and after bending. (a–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

CNTs	164	135	41	
100

Graphene	776.8	273.1	150.9	
134

5.0	186	6.5	
88

Pseudo	30.6	1195	106.4	
146

3.75	145	16	
141

Composites	500	404	14	
162

Asymmetric	284.63	256.74	32.91	
168

22.7	560	33.71	
92

Series	1.5	216	8	
175

Micro	296	270	27	
176

332.5	946	53.4	
180


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
