Solar fuels and feedstocks: the quest for renewable black gold  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03300F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03300F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1402-1419Solar fuels and feedstocks: the quest for renewable black gold

        
          
            Hannah J. 
            Sayre
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Tian
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minjung 
            Son
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Stephanie M. 
            Hart
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Liu
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Daniela M. 
            Arias-Rotondo
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Barry P. 
            Rand
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Gabriela S. 
            Schlau-Cohen
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Gregory D. 
            Scholes
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. E-mail: gscholes@princeton.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
dDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
eDepartment of Chemistry, Kalamazoo College, Kalamazoo, MI, USA
Received 
      16th October 2020
    , Accepted 22nd January 2021First published on 22nd January 2021AbstractPhotocatalysis for organic synthesis is a tool capable of C–C, C–O and C–N bond transformations. This technology has the potential to transform the chemical manufacturing industry and support growing demand for chemical feedstocks. Compared to traditional catalysis, photocatalysis can access alternative reaction pathways that lower the overall energy requirement and operate at or near ambient conditions. A key challenge is the delivery of photoenergy at the scale required for rapid and efficient operation of the catalyst. The development of efficient, broad-spectrum light harvesting devices that funnel light energy to a catalyst, along with catalyst design to selectively enable high-energy reactions, are necessary steps towards solar fuels and feedstocks. This perspective highlights some recent advances in photocatalysis and advocates for expanding the scope of photocatalysis for large-scale industrial applications.
Hannah J. Sayre
Hannah Sayre is the Lead Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellow of BioLEC, an Energy Frontier Research Center. Hannah became interested in photochemistry while pursuing a bachelor's degree at the University of Cincinnati. In 2012, Hannah joined the research group of Dr Karen Brewer at Virginia Tech where she investigated supramolecular photocatalysts. Hannah completed a PhD in Chemistry, developing red-light activated photocatalysis, with Dr Claudia Turro at The Ohio State University in 2018. Hannah's current research interests include molecular modifications to photocatalysts that increase light absorption and limit charge recombination.
Lei Tian
Lei Tian is currently a fourth-year graduate student in Scholes group at Princeton University. Lei's interest in photocatalysis originated from his undergraduate research experience in Peking University where he worked on developing methodologies of photoinitiated radical polymerization using organocobalt complexes under the supervisorship of Dr Xuefeng Fu. After joining Scholes group, he continued to learn more about photochemistry using pump–probe transient absorption spectroscopy. His current projects involve mechanistic studies of homogeneous metallaphotocatalytic reactions catalyzed by the merger of iridium photocatalysts and various first-row transition metal complexes.
Minjung Son
Minjung Son received a BS (2013) and MS (2015) in Chemistry from Yonsei University, South Korea. She obtained her PhD in Chemistry from the Massachusetts of Institute of Technology in 2020. Under the supervision of Prof. Gabriela Schlau-Cohen, she elucidated the photophysical mechanisms of photosynthetic light harvesting in green plants using ultrafast multidimensional spectroscopy. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Her current research focuses on understanding and controlling the photophysical properties of solar cell materials and exciton-polaritons towards higher-efficiency optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices using ultrafast spectroscopy and microscopy.
Stephanie M. Hart
Stephanie M. Hart is a graduate student in the Gabriela Schlau-Cohen's lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She received her bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from the Univeristy of Minnesota. Her research interests pertain to using ultrafast spectroscopy to study energy transfer dynamics in biomimetic and biohybrid light-harvesting systems.
Xiao Liu
Xiao Liu received his PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor in 2018. He is currently a postdoctoral research associate in the Department of Electrical Engineering at Princeton University working with Professor Barry P. Rand. His research focuses on developing organic and hybrid optoelectronic components and materials for the application of photovoltaics, sensing, and photocatalysis.
Gregory D. Scholes
Greg Scholes is the William S. Tod Professor of Chemistry at Princeton University. Originally from Melbourne, Australia, he undertook postdoctoral training at Imperial College London and University of California Berkeley. He started his independent career at the University of Toronto (2000–2014). Dr Scholes is the Director of an Energy Frontier Research Center (BioLEC), Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, Co-Director in the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research program Bioinspired Solar Energy, and a Professorial Fellow at the University of Melbourne. Current research concerns working out design principles for directing and regulating light-initiated energy flow in man-made and natural systems.

Broader context
The energy of the sun is more than sufficient to meet human needs and development of solar energy technology should address energy use beyond electricity generation. Photocatalysis offers a way to harness the energy of light to drive chemical reactions. This Perspective highlights some of the recent advances in photocatalysis and advocates for the further evolution of photocatalysis to meet the needs of chemical manufacturing. Photocatalysis has the potential to reduce the energy required for feedstock chemical production and to transform waste into valuable feedstocks. The improved selectivity of photocatalysts compared with conventional catalysts will decrease energy consumed in production. Photocatalyzed polymer upcycling and lignin depolymerization would produce high-value feedstocks from waste. The development of efficient photocatalysts with high quantum yields and broad-spectrum absorption and the design of large-scale photocatalysis systems are necessary to meet manufacturing needs.

Introduction
Every aspect of modern society is dependent on chemical manufacturing. The ubiquity of chemical products, from the dye in our clothing to the packaging for our food and medical supplies, makes it easy to overlook their energy costs. Chemical manufacturing accounts for 25% of the global GDP and the bulk of feedstock chemicals and fuels are extracted from oil, gas and coal.1,2 The use of fossil fuels is increasing at a greater rate for chemical manufacturing than for any other industry, and is expected to exceed transportation demands by 2050.3
Energy-intensive processes are required to generate the molecular components of modern society; nearly equal amounts of fossil fuels are consumed to generate the high temperatures and pressures needed for synthetic reactions as are transformed into the end products.2–4 Reducing the dependency on fossil fuels as both fuel and raw material in generating everyday chemicals is therefore an important goal for reducing the environmental impact of the entire industry. Indeed, production of feedstock chemicals and fuels from biomass with minimized environmental impact has been a long-time aim, but technology has not yet emerged to make alternative fuels and feedstocks competitive with petrochemicals.2–6
All fossil fuels originate from biomass, which was converted to coal, oil, and natural gas over millions of years of geological processing.7 Catalytic systems that break down biomass and convert small molecules to feedstock chemicals and fuels could bypass the long-term carbon cycle and expand the scope of renewable resources. Although ethanol is currently produced from biomass on an industrial scale, competition for agricultural resources to produce either food or fuel can lead to food insecurity.8 Lignocellulose is an appealing source for aromatic feedstocks and can be obtained from waste, but requires further development for industrial application.9–12
Solar energy is arguably the most important renewable energy resource available to humanity.13 The annual insolation received within the United States based on Global Horizontal Irradiation varies between 1200 and 2200 kW h m−2.14 Chemical manufacturing in the United States consumed 2858 trillion BTU (8.4 × 1011 kW h) for fuel and power in 2018.1 Direct solar energy conversion at 100% efficiency would require an area of 700 km,2 approximately the size of Singapore, to meet the annual chemical manufacturing energy demand.
Solar manufacturing, the application of solar-powered photochemistry to the industrial synthesis of chemicals, has the potential to support the growing demand for chemical products by lowering the process energy requirements, provide synthetically feasible approaches to obtain feedstocks from alternative sources, and transform the process energy input from heat and pressure to light. Photocatalysis frequently accesses alternative reaction pathways with improved selectivity and yields compared to traditional catalysts.15 Although industrial standards vary by region and chemical product, energy-saving technology is in demand across the manufacturing sector.3,16 This Perspective highlights the advances made in photocatalysis to address the issues of both energy-intensive reaction conditions and the limited availability of synthetic routes to high-volume products that use non-petrochemical feedstocks.

Fig. 1 shows the photon flux vs. photon energy of the ASTM G-173 solar spectrum.17 While several spectral dips arise from the absorption of water vapor, O2, O3, and CO2 in the atmosphere, the overall increase of photon flux is monotonic as photon energy decreases from 4 to 1 eV (100 to 25 kcal mol−1). Solar irradiation possesses sufficient energy to break many of the molecular bonds on Earth, but high activation energies prevent decomposition and preserve our existence. The photons in the red and near infrared regions are abundant but provide insufficient energy to drive reactions that are thermodynamically uphill – that is, where the products are less stable than the reactants – by more than about 50 kcal mol−1 or 2 eV. Inspired by the way in which photosynthesis combines the energy of multiple photons to actuate redox states, multiphoton processes can enable chemical reactions that are otherwise prohibitively disfavored at equilibrium.
 Fig. 1  Photon flux vs. photon energy of the ASTM G-173 solar spectrum.17 
The term “photocatalysis” is broadly applied to systems that capture energy from light and use that energy to drive reactions. Light-capture techniques include molecular photosensitizers, solar panel materials, quantum dots, and dye-sensitized solar cells. The ideal light-capturing system efficiently absorbs light over a broad spectrum and funnels energy or electrons to a catalyst.18 The relevant excited state of a molecular photosensitizer must be thermodynamically capable of either energy or electron transfer and must be sufficiently long-lived to engage in such reactions: at least in the nanosecond time regime for diffusion-limited processes.19,20 The roles of light absorption and catalysis might be performed by a single species, the photocatalyst, or two separate moieties, the photosensitizer and the catalyst.21–25
Inspired by photosynthesis, photocatalysis was originally developed for water splitting and CO2 reduction, two thermodynamically uphill reactions.26–31 Early photocatalytic systems employed a molecular photosensitizer, typically [Ru(bpy)3]2+, to undergo photoinitiated electron transfer to a proton reduction catalyst.26,27,32,33 Around the same time, the first reports of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ used as a photocatalyst in organic synthesis appeared.34–36 Photocatalyzed activation of a C–H bond was first observed as unintentional carbonylation of benzene solvent.37 Advances in molecular photocatalysis include the ability to activate catalysts via energy transfer,38–40 access strongly reducing potentials,23,41–43 and incorporate proton-coupled electron transfer.44,45
Solar manufacturing
Photocatalysis provides a means to conduct reactions that typically require harsh conditions under ambient pressure and at room temperature, often with improved selectivity for specific products. The reaction scope of photocatalysis has expanded immensely since it was first employed in organic synthesis and now includes C–C and C–heteroatom (O, N, and halogens, among others) bond forming reactions.15,46–48 Photocatalysis is already routinely applied to pharmaceutical manufacturing,49 and in principle can be extended to other chemical products to meet the needs of the chemical manufacturing industry. The development of solar manufacturing for a broad range of chemicals would have a tremendous impact on energy resources and the environment. The reaction scale and environmental impact of industrial N2 fixation, polymer synthesis, and agrochemicals far exceed pharmaceutical manufacturing and require low-cost manufacturing technology (Fig. 2).2 The primary challenges for the actualization of solar manufacturing are (1) the development of efficient and stable light harvesters and photocatalysts for high energy bond activation and (2) the design and implementation of photochemical reactors for high-volume chemical production. Industrial scale photoredox chemistry is dominated by homogenous molecular catalysts including iridium and ruthenium based transition metal complexes, echoing trends in laboratory scale usage over the last decade.15,50–53 Molecular photocatalysts are more efficient than heterogenous catalysts in terms of both photon and mass transport.54 Nonetheless, photocatalysis strategies suffer from the costs associated with precious metal-based catalysts and limited scalability due to the need for illumination in reaction vessels.55–57 Recent work has demonstrated the use of non-metallic catalysts with efficiencies comparable to the commonly used iridium and ruthenium catalysts, thus offering more cost-effective synthesis routes.58,59 Development of photocatalysts with visible-range absorption as well as larger absorption cross-sections has assisted the efficiency of reactions under illumination constraints, paving the way for greater reaction scalability.60–62 Flow chemistry based reactor design also has the potential to improve reaction efficiency through enhanced illumination of the homogenous catalyst.56,63,64
 Fig. 2  Qualitative depiction of manufacturing scale and cost of chemicals for various applications. The top 70 energy-consuming chemical products, based on reaction scale and conditions, are provided by the U.S. Department of Energy.2 Photocatalysis has been primarily employed in medicinal chemistry and artificial photosynthesis. Further innovation of solar manufacturing for agrochemicals, plastics and ammonia is necessary to meet the global demand. 
The energy of light harnessed by photocatalytic systems can overcome prohibitive activation energies, drive thermodynamically uphill reactions,65 and selectively catalyze one of many reaction pathways.66 Enzymes selectively catalyze one reaction pathway by simultaneously lowering the activation energy for the desired product and increasing the energy barrier for other possible reaction paths, inhibiting side product formation.67 Photocatalysis can also provide product selectivity by overcoming the activation energy for one reaction pathway and bypassing alternative product reactions. For example, the Meerwein reaction for olefin arylation, important for synthesis of stilbenes used as dyes,68 was plagued by low product yields (20–40%) and formation of multiple side products for over 70 years.69 Selective photocatalytic olefin arylation with yields up to 94% and no detectable byproducts was reported in 2012.66 Ideal comparisons between conventional and photocatalysis and between multiple photocatalyzed reactions should include analysis of the quantum yields; that is, mole product per mole photon.70–72 Although quantum yields are frequently unreported in organic synthesis, we recommend quantum yield as the appropriate metric to benchmark photocatalyst efficiency.
The applications and mechanisms of photocatalysis are expansive. To elaborate the potential role of photocatalysis in decreasing the energy cost for chemical manufacturing, we here provide a few vignettes of the transformations that photocatalysis can accomplish, with a special focus on the reaction classes of potential industrial interest enabled by photocatalysis.
Non-petrochemical feedstocks
Polymer upcycling and depolymerization of lignin are alternative sources of feedstock chemicals that currently offer opportunities for further research development.73–75 Polymer upcycling, or chemical recycling, is the depolymerization of plastics into monomeric units. Polymer upcycling has a dual benefit of waste management and as an alternative source of feedstock chemicals.76,77 Currently, most polymer recycling produces low grade plastics and the growing demand for high quality polymers coincides with growing fossil fuel demand.3 Polymer upcycling is an essential step in producing high-quality recycled plastics. Polymers have been chemically recycled via heterogeneous catalysis,78 but photocatalyzed polymer upcycling has not yet been reported. Photocatalyzed polymer upcycling would provide a method to store solar energy in the form of feedstock chemicals.
Lignin, the biopolymer that gives rigidity to plants, is a highly abundant agricultural waste product.75,79,80 Lignin depolymerization produces methoxy-substituted phenol monomers that can be utilized as bio-sourced feedstocks.11 However, monomer arrangement in lignin is complex and the polymer structure varies from one plant species to another.81,82 Reaction conditions requiring stoichiometric quantities of acid, polymer complexity, and difficulty separating multiple products have limited industrial adoption of lignin feedstock.10 Selective bond cleavage was recently demonstrated in photocatalyzed lignin depolymerization, enabling facile monomer extraction.83
General mechanism of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis
Although detailed mechanistic pictures differ from reaction to reaction, they share certain common features or elementary steps. Here we focus on the one-photon initiated mechanisms that prevail in photocatalysis. Other strategies recently proposed based on the input of multiple photons84 either simultaneously85 or sequentially23,86,87 are beyond the scope of this article.
In general, homogenous photocatalysis starts with a light absorption event to generate an electronically excited chromophore that can engage in either electron/hole or energy transfer to a suitable acceptor. These processes lead to the formation of reactive species that can engage in elementary steps to form the desired products. Alternatively, the electron/hole or energy transfer may activate a secondary catalyst, which can either generate or trap transient radical species, thus directing the synthetic output.88 In solution, these transfer steps are usually kinetically controlled by bimolecular diffusion between the chromophores and substrates, which sets a lower limit for the excited-state lifetime of the chromophore, which must persist in solution for at least several nanoseconds.89
In heterogenous photocatalysis, substrates are usually adsorbed onto the surface of the solid-state photocatalysts prior to light absorption. Subsequent photoexcitation leads to the formation of the electrons and holes in the photocatalysts, which can either recombine back to the ground state or diffuse to substrate-bound active sites. The diffusion of these charge carriers within the solid-state materials usually proceeds faster than diffusion in solution due to their smaller masses as well as less bath fluctuation in the consistently arranged crystal lattice. The oxidized/reduced substrates can undergo either elementary bond-forming/bond-breaking steps supported by the surface of the photocatalysts or desorption that carries the favorable thermodynamic driving forces from solid state to the solution phase. Unlike thermally-activated catalysts, such as zeolites,90 heterogenous photocatalysts do not require heating and often operate at a mild temperature between 20 and 80 °C, favoring both exothermic adsorption of the reactants and desorption of the products with negligible thermal activation. Chalcogenides (oxides and sulfides), e.g. TiO2, ZnS, Fe2O3, are often used for heterogeneous photocatalysis. Recyclability and easy synthesis of the catalysts significantly reduce cost, an important factor for industrial-scale processes.91–94 Several reactions, including dehydrogenation as well as partial and total oxidation, have been demonstrated. Industrial-scale water detoxification, gas pollutant removal, solar fuel production, etc. would benefit from heterogeneous photocatalysis, due to its low energy consumption.
Consideration of a free energy landscape that describes reaction intermediates and deactivation paths may be useful for the rational design of photocatalytic systems. Hydroamidation is an important reaction used in the production of several biologically active compounds.95,96 Photocatalytic hydroamidation utilizes photoinitiated proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) to enable the direct homolysis of a strong amide N–H bond, leading to productive C–N bond formation (Fig. 3).97 Spectroscopic studies provide insight into the intricate mechanism of this reaction.98 The free energy landscape for photocatalyzed hydroamidation in Fig. 3 qualitatively depicts free energy wells of reaction intermediates based on spectroscopically determined rate constants. In this reaction, three unproductive pathways compete with the forward reaction: excited state relaxation, charge recombination, and a hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) side reaction.
 Fig. 3  Photocatalytic hydroamidation upon blue-light excitation reaction mechanism and free energy landscapes based on the spectroscopically determined mechanism.97,98 Free energy landscapes show potential energy wells for the forward reaction of interest as well as deactivating pathways and side reactions. The free energy of the initial reaction components, R, is increased upon photon absorption, generating R*, from which product P formation is thermodynamically downhill. 
Minimizing the loss of photon energy to competitive unproductive paths is a current opportunity to improve quantum yield and shorten reaction times. Although the specific steps in which photon energy is be lost can be unique to individual reaction mechanisms, excited state relaxation and charge recombination are common to all photoredox reactions. It is important to consider all deactivation pathways to improve photocatalyst efficiency.
C–C bond formation
The formation of C–C bonds is central to organic chemistry. The majority of the photocatalytic transformations to generate C–C bonds are proposed to be mediated by carbon radicals generated via homogenous photoredox catalysis approaches.88,99
C(sp3)–C(sp3)/C(sp3)–C(sp2) coupling
Early photocatalytic C(sp3)–C(sp3) coupling relied on amine coupling partners. Representative examples are the redox-neutral photochemical coupling of imines100 or α-amino C–H (Fig. 4A)101 with benzylic and allylic C–H bonds. The proposed photoactivation mode is the reductive quenching of the photosensitizer by the amine substrate, giving an amine radical cation that can subsequently undergo fast deprotonation to yield an α-aminoalkyl radical, poised for radical C–C cross-coupling. Enantioselectivity can also be realized by either bifunctional chiral Ir(III)-type photocatalysis102 or dual photoredox and chiral ionic Brønsted acid catalysis.103 Photoactivation has also been applied to C(sp3)–C(sp2) coupling with amine substrates such as tertiary amines104 and inexpensive α-amino acids.105
 Fig. 4  Redox-neutral photocatalytic with C(sp3) radical intermediates. (A) C(sp3)–C(sp3) coupling between α-amino C–H allylic C–H initiated by blue-light excitation.101 (B) C(sp3)–C(sp2) coupling between cyclohexane and aryl bromide upon 390 nm excitation.106 
Recent breakthroughs in cross-coupling catalysis enable the use of coupling partners with substrates other than amines.106–110 For instance, the coupling of aryl C(sp2)–H bond with benzylic106 and allylic107 C(sp3)–H bonds was successfully accomplished based on a dual photoredox and thiol organocatalytic protocol. More specifically, a transiently formed thiyl radical (generated by PCET oxidation of a thiol organocatalyst with an excited state photosensitizer) can engage in hydrogen atom abstraction from weak benzylic and allylic C(sp3)–H bonds, allowing for a radical coupling mechanism. Successful C(sp3)–C(sp2) coupling based on the use of pre-functionalized C(sp3) substrates that enable the photocatalytic generation of alkyl radicals, such as alkyl trifluoroborates109 and alkyl potassium bis(catecholato) silicates,111 have also been developed. Strategic use of non-functionalized alkyl bromide substrates was made possible by incorporating stoichiometric tris(trimethylsilyl)silane for the in situ photochemical generation of silyl radicals and subsequent halogen abstraction of alkyl bromides to give alkyl radicals preceding carbon–carbon coupling.112 Photocatalytic coupling between an aryl C(sp2) and non-functionalized strong aliphatic C(sp3)–H bonds proceeds through a C(sp3) radical intermediate, proposed to be generated via hydrogen atom abstraction by a decatungstate photooxidant (Fig. 4B).113 A consecutive two-photon absorption process to forge C(sp3)–C(sp2) bonds between aliphatic substrates and aryl chloroformate has also been reported.86 In the proposed mechanism, the first photon initiates the photooxidation of Ni(II)(CO2R)(Cl) to Ni(III). The second photon brings the Ni(III) intermediate to its excited state that undergoes Ni–Cl homolysis to generate chlorine radicals that eventually abstract hydrogen from aliphatic substrates, yielding aliphatic C(sp3) radicals. The synthetic power of generating C(sp3) radicals with photoexcitation is further demonstrated by engaging sunlight-mediated gold-catalyzed coupling with 1-iodoalkynes to forge C(sp3)–C(sp) bond using amines as the C(sp3) source.114 Broad substrate scope with respect to both coupling partners was realized, including multi-substituted amines and iodoalkynes with electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups.
C(sp2)–C(sp2) coupling
C(sp2) radicals are usually less stable than C(sp3) radicals; as a result, generation of C(sp2) radicals requires harsher conditions or a more complex pre-functionalized structure. Taking inspiration from the Meerwein arylation addition reaction,115 one approach to the photochemical generation of C(sp2) radicals is based on the photoreduction of aryldiazonium salts, resulting in the release of nitrogen and concomitant generation of aryl radicals.88 The aryl radicals can then be used to forge C(sp2)–C(sp2/sp) bonds with other unsaturated carbon sources such as unfunctionalized arenes (Fig. 5A),116 heteroarenes,117 alkenes, enones, and alkynes in good yields.66,118 A consecutive two-photon approach to generate aryl radicals directly from aryl bromides and chlorides and C(sp2)–C(sp2) coupling with substituted pyrroles was achieved using perylenebisimides (PDI) (Fig. 5B).23 The first photon initiates the photoreduction of PDI by sacrificial reagents to generate an intermediate PDI radical anion. The singly-reduced PDI, a strong photoreductant, then absorbs another photon and accomplishes the reduction of aryl bromides and chlorides that subsequently releases halide anions to give aryl radicals.
 Fig. 5  Photocatalytic C(sp2)–C(sp2) coupling (A) via photoreduction of aryldiazonium salts116 with visible light and (B) photoreduction of aryl halides upon 455 nm excitation.23 
C–N bond formation
Reactions that can forge a C–N bond are particularly relevant for the pharmaceutical industry, as over half of the top 100 best-selling drugs in the US have at least one C–N bond in their structure.119 It is, then, not surprising that much research effort has been focused on these reactions. However, C–N bond formation is less relevant than C–C and C–O formation for the production of fuels and feedstocks and is not discussed in detail herein. Amination of arene C(sp2)–H bonds, including protected phenols, haloarenes and nitrogen heteroaromatics, was realized using acridinium as a photooxidant with O2 as the sacrificial electron acceptor (Fig. 6A).120 Direct cyanation of arene C(sp2)–H bonds was reported under similar conditions.121 Intramolecular coupling between an amide and ketone (Fig. 3) is initiated by an Ir(III) photooxidant.97 Thermal, palladium-catalyzed C–N cross-couplings developed by Buchwald and Hartwig122,123 have been applied in industrial settings. More recently, Buchwald and MacMillan reported a photocatalyzed alternative to prepare anilines (Fig. 6B).124
 Fig. 6  Photocatalyzed C–N bond formation (A) with acridinium as a photooxidant upon 455 nm excitation120 and (B) with blue-light excitation of an Ir(III) photosensitizer to produce anilines.124 
Selective oxidation of alcohols, arenes, and alkanes
Selective oxidation of molecules with several different functional groups poses great challenges for fine chemical manufacturing. Industrial oxidation of alcohols, for example, employs stoichiometric quantities of energy-intensive oxidants such as chromates, permanganates, and organic peroxides to reach satisfactory yields and selectivity (specifically avoiding over-oxidation).125 Exploitation of photocatalytic approaches would allow for not only milder and greener conditions that require lower energy input but also better selectivity for accomplishing these oxidative transformations.
Alcohol axidation
Partial oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and/or ketones via heterogenous photocatalysis is a well-studied reaction. TiO2-based photocatalysts with UV light irradiation are powerful oxidants, which lowers their chemical selectivity towards partially oxidized products.126,127 By sensitizing TiO2 with CdS quantum dots, the oxidizing power in the active sites is minimized.128–130 As a result, high selectivity was realized, enabling the partial oxidation of benzylic alcohols to aldehydes (Fig. 7A).129 Moreover, the replacement of TiO2 with other types of semiconductors such as metal sulfides,131–133 bismuth-containing semiconductors,134,135 and metal-free graphitic carbon nitrides136–138 due to their milder oxidizing power, also leads to improved selectivity and yields. Selective oxidation of alcohols via homogenous photocatalysis takes advantage of the high redox power on the excited state of the photocatalyst to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide anion radical, hydrogen peroxide, or singlet oxygen, which have many applications in oxidative organic reactions.139,140 Photocatalysts based on metals such as Ir, Cu, Pt, and a functionalized porphyrinic metal organic framework (MOF) were reported to show oxidative reactivity for benzylic and allylic alcohols.139–142 In 2018, a metal-free catalyst, fluorenone, was reported to achieve photocatalytic oxidation of aliphatic, heteroaromatic, and alicyclic alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes or ketones using oxygen as the oxidant (Fig. 7B).130 A superoxide anion radical intermediate was proposed.
 Fig. 7  Photocatalyzed oxidation of alcohols (A) with visible-light (>420 nm) excitation of CdS nanoparticles on TiO2,129 (B) with fluorenone as an organic photocatalyst with blue-light excitation.130 (C) A hydrophobic surface on TiO2 minimized a phenol oxidation side reaction upon UV (>320 nm) irradiation.149 
Arene oxidation
The cumene–phenol process that chemical industries use to produce phenol from benzene has an energy cost of five billion kW h per year in the United States.2 Photochemical hydroxylation of benzene to phenol is a promising strategy to help decrease the cost of this transformation. The difficulty with this approach is selectivity, as phenol is thermodynamically easier to oxidize than benzene.143 In photocatalytic systems, semiconductors have been used as light absorbers as well as the platform that supports the oxidation processes,144–147 combined with a variety of oxidants, such as nitrogen oxides, molecular oxygen, or H2O2. Selectivity and activity could not be simultaneously optimized until it was realized that further oxidation of phenol could be avoided by accelerating the desorption of phenol.148 Guided by this idea, the surface of TiO2 was silylated to make it hydrophobic, leading to the enhancement of both activity and selectivity (Fig. 7C).149
Selective oxidation of primary C(sp3)–H bonds has great potential in applied chemistry to produce value-added products from natural petroleum.150 One such example is the oxidation of toluene to benzaldehyde, which was reported using TiO2 as a photocatalyst under UV irradiation, albeit with poor performances.151 Blocking the active sites on the TiO2 surface with less active WO3 lead to increased selectivity and activity152 Further improvement of the photocatalytic performance for this transformation was achieved by replacing TiO2 with cadmium based153 and bismuth-based materials.154,155 Another reaction of industrial interest is the partial oxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanol and cyclohexanone. Satisfactory reaction performance with minimum over oxidation was realized using a similar strategy as the photocatalytic hydroxylation of benzene. The surface of TiO2 was modified with trimethylsilane (HSi(CH3)3) to increase its hydrophobicity, as this leads to fast desorption of partially oxidized products.156 Other types of semiconductors such as bismuth-containing157 or metal-free semiconductors158,159 with certain degrees of hybridization across categories also demonstrated promising activity and selectivity for this transformation.
Alkane oxidation – homogeneous photocatalysis
Homogeneous photocatalytic oxidation of alkanes can be categorized as a C(sp3)–H functionalization reaction. A large portion of C(sp3)–H functionalization has been discussed in the C(sp3)–C(sp3/sp2) coupling section. In terms of the coupling with heteroatoms, benzylic C(sp3)–H functionalization to form C–N and C–O bonds has been achieved via visible light photoredox catalysis.160,161 When subjected to different coupling partners (water versus secondary amines), benzylic C(sp3)–H bonds can be selectively oxidized to the corresponding carbonyl or alpha-aminated compounds using an iridium photooxidant (Fig. 8A).161 This species was proposed to oxidize the benzylic substrates after photoexcitation, leading to formation of a benzylic alpha cation which is then attacked by a nucleophile such as water or tertiary amines. Another important oxidative transformation for alkanes is dehydrogenation to produce alkenes, which serve as one of the central functional groups in organic synthesis, valued in both industrial162,163 and laboratory transformations.164–168 A homogenous dual photocatalytic strategy was recently demonstrated.169,170 Tetra-n-butylammonium decatungstate (TBADT) was used to photochemically abstract a hydrogen atom from alkanes to yield C(sp3) centered radicals. Taking inspiration from the hydrogen-evolving bio-cofactor adenosyl cobalamin fragment, a cobaloxime co-catalyst was added to suppress the bimolecular radical coupling side-reactions by abstracting the highly labile hydrogen atoms adjacent to the C(sp3) radicals upon their generation to give the desired alkene products. Proof-of-concept experiments in which cyclooctane and cyclopentane were reduced to give the corresponding ene products demonstrated the practicality of the proposed cooperative HAT mechanism (Fig. 8B).170
 Fig. 8  Photocatalytic direct oxidation of alkanes: (A) oxidation of C–H bonds into C–O/N bonds by an Ir(III) photocatalyst upon blue-light excitation,161 and (B) alkane dehydrogenation to olefin with TBADT photosensitizer and cobaloxime catalyst upon UV excitation.170 
Enzyme catalysis
Biocatalysis, which uses nature-derived catalysts such as enzymes or whole cells, is an emerging alternative to traditional metal or organocatalysis in chemical synthesis, offering high catalytic rate under environment-friendly conditions with unparalleled specificity.171,172 However, the narrow substrate scope resulting from the high specificity of substrate–enzyme interactions has been a hurdle in expanding the use of enzymes to non-natural chemical reactions.173 Several different approaches have been utilized to overcome this limitation. First, developments in protein engineering techniques enabled optimization of the properties of enzymes in a targeted manner.174–178 In parallel, efforts have been devoted to chemoenzymatic catalysis strategies that combine the selectivity of biocatalysis with the reactivity of chemocatalysis.179–181 This includes development of artificial metalloenzymes that combine the versatility of homogeneous transition metal catalysts and the specificity of the enzymatic protein scaffold, which has been improved upon by directed evolution methods.182–184 However, challenges in reconciling the vastly different reaction conditions for biocatalysts and chemical catalysts have limited the repertoire of chemo-biocatalysis to a narrow class of reactions.185,186
With the recent resurgence of interest in photoredox catalysis and its higher compatibility with enzyme-controlled reactions, the merger of (chemo-)biocatalysis with photocatalysis, i.e. photobiocatalysis, is being increasingly explored as a potential solution to the aforementioned limitations. Although typical enzyme function is thermally activated, several known enzymes exhibit native light-driven reactivity. These include protochlorophyllide-reductases responsible for chlorophyll biosynthesis,187,188 photolyases that drive DNA repair,189,190 and photodecarboxylases that catalyze conversion of fatty acids to alkenes and alkanes.191,192 While these native systems offer some degree of variability, they generally operate by either direct or indirect excitation of the cofactor or substrate in order to initiate photochemistry. This mechanistic diversity is extended in the case of synthetic photobiocatalysis routes and includes electron transfer mediated cofactor regeneration, formation of catalytic intermediates in reaction cascades, and enhanced catalytic ability for light-driven enzyme promiscuity.
In the most common application of photobiocatalysis, the prohibitively expensive cofactor of oxidoreductases, such as NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+, is regenerated with photocatalysis to enhance the efficiency of native biocatalytic reactions.193 The reaction proceeds by using photocatalytically generated redox equivalents (formed outside the protein) to drive biocatalytic conversion.194,195 Here, a photosensitizer accepts electrons from a sacrificial electron donor, and the subsequent direct or mediated electron transfer regenerates the cofactor (Fig. 9A).196 A wide range of photosensitizers have been utilized in this approach including transition metals, quantum dots, molecular dyes, and flavins.197 Examples of successful photoactivation have been reported for a range of oxidoreductases such as (de)hydrogenases, nitrogenases, cytochrome P450s, and flavin-dependent enzymes, which catalyze reactions including hydrogenation, hydroxylation, and Baeyer–Villiger oxidation.197
 Fig. 9  Mechanisms of photobiocatalysis. (A) Light-assisted regeneration of enzyme cofactors. (B) Formation of photobiocatalytic reaction cascades. (C) Non-natural reactions enabled by promiscuous enzymes and photocatalysis. 
Another approach for combining photocatalysis and (chemo-)biocatalysis is by forming reaction cascades, where the photocatalytic step directly contributes to the formation of the product, unlike in the previous approach. Here the photocatalytic step and biocatalytic step (or vice versa) are sequential, resulting in formation of an intermediate species that serves as the substrate for the final step (Fig. 9B). This leads to a reaction scheme in some cases allowing for one-pot synthetic routes.198,199 Although only few examples have been reported thus far, improved yields and enantioselectivity were achieved in isomerization/reduction of olefins,200 C–H functionalization,201,202 and synthesis of 1,3-mercaptoalkanol.203 The complexity of this method has also been extended to multi-enzyme cascades allowing for a cofactor regeneration step in the case of isobutanol generation and water oxidation (Fig. 9).204,205
Non-native enzyme catalysis
Photocatalysis can be coupled with catalytically promiscuous enzymes to power novel, non-natural functions beyond their native roles expanding the applications of photobiocatalysis (Fig. 9C). Among the most commonly utilized classes of enzymes with catalytic promiscuity are hydrolases due to their high stability in organic solvents and lack of need for cofactors.206 The first example of merging non-natural activity of hydrolases with photocatalysis was reported for wheat germ lipase combined with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ under fluorescence lamp illumination, which enabled one-pot, enantioselective synthesis of indolone.207
Oxidoreductases are another class of enzymes shown to be capable of unlocking unprecedented non-natural reactivities. The catalytic activity of oxidoreductases depends on cofactors in their redox-active center, such as metal ions or complexes, amino acid residues, and organic molecules like nicotinamide (NAD(P)) and flavin (FMN, FAD) derivatives.208 Photoexcitation of nicotinamide and flavin cofactors within the active site results in formation of novel radical intermediates, which enables challenging organic transformations with high enantioselectivity due to the specificity of the enzymatic scaffold. In one example with nicotinamide-dependent ketoreductases (KREDs), the radical intermediate served as a chiral hydrogen atom source for dehalogenation of lactones.209 A similar mechanism was utilized in a series of flavin (FMN)-dependent “ene”-reductases (EREDs) to grant access to enantioselective reductive cyclization of chloroamides to produce lactams.210 In both cases, mechanistic studies revealed that the radical intermediate was produced via formation of an electron donor–acceptor (EDA) complex between the substrate and the cofactor within the active site. The EDA complex subsequently undergoes a single-electron transfer event upon photoexcitation into the charge transfer band. A more recent example demonstrated that EREDs can also catalyze redox-neutral radical cyclizations to produce enantioenriched oxindoles, a C–C bond forming reaction.211 Unlike in previous work,210 where flavin hydroquinone (FMNhq) was the reactive state of cofactor that was photoexcited within an EDA complex, light irradiation directly prepares a semiquinone state of flavin (FMNsq) without the involvement of an EDA complex.
Exogenous photocatalysts in the active site of enzymes have also been explored. This approach takes advantage of the enhanced reactivity brought about by hydrogen bonding interactions that take place between the substrate and the active site, known as “enzymatic redox activation”.212 These interactions are thought to tune the reduction potential of the substrate, thereby enhancing the efficiency of photocatalytic cycles. Initial investigations reported increased catalytic efficiency of xanthene-based photocatalysts, Rose Bengal and Eosin Y, and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ in the active sites of nicotinamide-213 and flavin-dependent214 enzymes, respectively.
Future directions
Research investment in photocatalysis for feedstock chemicals and fuels has the potential to evolve the chemical manufacturing industry to meet growing demand with minimized environmental impact. Photocatalysis is an immensely powerful approach toward chemical transformations. Artificial photosynthesis, photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, and photocatalysis in pharmaceutical manufacturing have tremendously benefitted from photocatalysis research.215–217
To meet the needs of chemical manufacturing, cost and scale must be addressed. Chemical feedstocks are produced at immense scale with negligible profit margin.16 Chemical feedstock manufacturing typically passes petrochemical feedstocks over zeolite catalysts at elevated temperature and pressure at refineries that have been in operation for decades. The long-term benefits of solar manufacturing must be superior to traditional methods. Maximizing the efficiency and recoverability of photocatalysts and utilizing waste rather than petrochemicals as feedstocks can mitigate the costs of solar manufacturing. However, because feedstock chemicals are essentially sold at production cost, innovation of cost structure is needed to develop and install solar manufacturing. Policy incentives that favor low-carbon industry and that support repurposing biowaste and single-use plastics would make photocatalysis an appealing alternative to petrochemical feedstock production.
Expanding the scope of photocatalysis to chemical manufacturing would lessen the process fuel requirement and increase the accessibility of alternative feedstock sources. Photocatalysts can selectively access high-energy intermediates, negating the high temperature and pressure reaction conditions of many traditional catalysts, often with improved yields. Improved selectivity likely corresponds with a greater product output per energy input ratio. Photon quantum yields must be reported for photocatalyzed reactions to benchmark efficiency.
Selective depolymerization of lignin and synthetic polymers provides alternative feedstock sources. Further photocatalysis development for aromatic demethoxylation and phenol reduction would transform lignin monomers into benzene, toluene, and xylene (BTX), some of the most energy-intensive petrochemical feedstocks. Photocatalyzed coupling of small molecules to produce longer chain hydrocarbons would provide solar fuels that are compatible with current infrastructure.
Ongoing challenges to photocatalysis include efficient, broad-spectrum light absorption, rapid decay of excited states, charge recombination following excited state oxidation or reduction, and achieving selective catalysis at highly oxidizing and highly reducing thermodynamic potentials.
The activity of a number of common photocatalysts and photosensitizers is limited by a small absorption cross section.89 One emerging strategy to overcome this limitation is to couple natural photosynthetic systems into the catalytic system. The large absorption cross sections of natural photosynthetic systems brought about by the large number of the light-harvesting pigments therein enable higher-efficiency photon capture and, in turn, catalysis of chemical transformations.218 Photosynthetic light-harvesting systems and isolated photosynthetic pigments have been successfully used to photosensitize a number of reactions including hydrogen evolution, glucoside biosynthesis, cyclization, and polymerization.219–226 Progress in developing these platforms for biohybrid photoredox chemistry has the potential to serve as a route for efficient generation of value-added products.227–229 Photosynthetic light-harvesting complexes could be utilized to enhance photocatalysis via photon capture and subsequent energy transfer, similar to fluorophore-based energy transfer mediated catalysis.230
Increasing excited-state lifetimes of earth abundant photocatalysts is important for the development of industrial-scale photocatalysis. Rigid, multi-dentate ligands are typically necessary with first-row transition metal photocatalysts to achieve the nanosecond to microsecond excited states lifetimes required for bimolecular processes.231,232 Another approach to extend excited-state lifetimes is to use donor–acceptor ligands that promote formation of a charge-separated excited state.233–236 Detailed knowledge of the photophysics of a photosensitizer is important for molecular modifications. Guided by excited-state coherence data, synthetic modifications to an Fe(II) photosensitizer increased the excited-state lifetime by twentyfold.237
Charge recombination following photoinitiated oxidation or reduction of substrate limits reaction quantum yields. Charge recombination is usually diffusion-limited and can be faster than the forward charge transfer process.238 Appendage of electron-donor and acceptor ligands to molecular photosensitizers can slow the rate of recombination.239,240
Achieving selective bond activations at strongly reducing and strongly oxidizing potentials will broaden the scope of photocatalysis. Electrode-primed photoredox catalysis, the photoexcitation of electrochemically reduced catalysts, demonstrates selectivity at strongly reducing potentials.41,241,242 A similar approach may be applied to bond activations at highly oxidizing potentials.243,244
Addressing the massive scale needed for solar manufacturing requires transdisciplinary efforts that combine photocatalysis with forward-looking engineering to advance photoreactor designs and optimize solar energy harvesting. Coupling solar concentration technology with photoreactors, for example, allows for small and controllable reactor size for chemical handling while simultaneously maximizing solar collection. Several different concentrator concepts have been considered for use in the detoxification of chemically contaminated water.245 Tubular flow photoreactors are often mounted on the focal line of a parabolic trough reflective surface that collect and concentrate solar irradiation, which increases the number of photons per reaction volume. The tube reactor helps sustain pressure and flow levels required by circulation systems for photocatalytic wastewater treatment. Although solar water treatments have made significant progress in research and industrial application, other solar catalytic technologies remain less developed. More efforts are required in both fundamental science and engineering to achieve efficient and cost-effective solar manufacturing.
The greatest challenges for actualizing solar manufacturing are maximizing light absorption, minimizing excited state relaxation and charge recombination deactivation processes, and achieving higher energy bond activations without losing selectivity. Catalyst cost and ease of recovery are essential considerations. Given the trajectory of research discoveries in the field, we envision solar manufacturing building on the fundamental science of photocatalysis to sustainably meet the growing demand for chemical products.
Author contributions
The introduction, and non-petrochemical feedstocks were written by HJS. General mechanisms for photocatalysis were written by LT, XL, and HJS. Hydrocarbon oxidation, C–C, and C–N bond formation review by LT. Enzyme catalysis review by MS and SMH. Future directions were written by HJS, SMH, and XL. Fig. 1 by XL and HJS. Concept for Fig. 2 by DMAR and photos by HJS. Fig. 3 by HJS and edited by DMAR. Fig. 4–8 by LT and edited by DMAR. Fig. 9 by MS. All authors read and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Prof. Robert Knowles and Dr Victoria Cleave for editing assistance, Drs Braddock Sandoval and Bryan Kudisch for editing the Enzyme Catalysis section, and Ian Perry for TBADT structure. This work was supported as part of BioLEC, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award #DE-SC0019370.
Notes and references
Guide to the Business of Chemistry, American Chemistry Council, Washington, DC, 2019.

          J. Cresko, Bandwidth Study on Energy Use and Potential Energy Saving Opportunities in U.S. Chemical Manufacturing, Report DOE/EE-1229, U.S. Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Washington, DC, 2015.

          F. Birol, The Future of Petrochemicals: Towards more sustainable plastics and fertilizers, International Energy Agency, Paris,  2018 Search PubMed .

          A. M. Bazzanella and F. Ausfelder,Technology Study: Low carbon energy and feedstock for the European chemical industry, DECHEMA, Frankfurt,  2017 Search PubMed .

          R. D. Perlack, L. L. Wright, A. F. Turhollow, R. L. Graham, B. J. Stokes and D. C. Erbach, Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply, Report DOE/GO-102005-2135, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC, 2005.
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Carbon Cycling and Biosequestration: Integrating Biology and Climate Through Systems Science, Report DOE/SC-108, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC, 2008.

          P. W. Gallagher, W. C. Yee and H. S. Baumes, 2015 Energy Balance for the Corn-Ethanol Industry, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, 2015.
J. J. Hu, Q. G. Zhang and D. J. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 247, 1181–1183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Azadi, O. R. Inderwildi, R. Farnood and D. A. King, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 506–523 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Tuck, E. Perez, I. T. Horvath, R. A. Sheldon and M. Poliakoff, Science, 2012, 337, 695–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Isikgor and C. R. Becer, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4497–4559 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Solargis, Solar resource map of USA, Global Solar Atlas 2.0, The World Bank, 2014.
J. Twilton, C. Le, P. Zhang, M. H. Shaw, R. W. Evans and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0052 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Birol, Energy Technology Perspectives, International Energy Agency, Paris,  2020 Search PubMed .

          J. Adkins
          Standard Tables for Reference Solar Spectral Irradiances: Direct Normal and Hemispherical on 37° Tilted Surface, G173-03, American Society for Testing and Materials, West Conshohocken, PA,  2012 Search PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artero and J. M. Saveant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3808–3814 RSC .

          M. Natali and F. Scandola, in Applied Photochemistry, ed. G. Bergamini and S. Silvi, Springer International Publishing, Switzerland,  2016 Search PubMed .

          V. Balzani and F. Scandola, Supramolecular Photochemistry, Ellis Horwood Limited, Chichester, West Sussex, England,  1991 Search PubMed .
M. S. Lowry, J. I. Goldsmith, J. D. Slinker, R. Rohl, R. A. Pascal, G. G. Malliaras and S. Bernhard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5712–5719 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ghosh, T. Ghosh, J. I. Bardagi and B. Konig, Science, 2014, 346, 725–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9268–9274 RSC .
T. J. Whittemore, C. Xue, J. Huang, J. C. Gallucci and C. Turro, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 180–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lehn and J. P. Sauvage, Nouv. J. Chim., 1977, 1, 449–451 CAS .
M. Kirch, J. M. Lehn and J. P. Sauvage, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1979, 62, 1345–1384 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Corredor, M. J. Rivero, C. M. Rangel, F. Gloaguen and I. Ortiz, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 3049–3063 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Windle and R. N. Perutz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2562–2570 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moradpour, E. Amouyal, P. Keller and H. Kagan, Nouv. J. Chim., 1978, 2, 547–549 CAS .
P. Keller, A. Moradpour, E. Amouyal and H. B. Kagan, Nouv. J. Chim., 1980, 4, 377–384 CAS .
D. M. Hedstrand, W. H. Kruizinga and R. M. Kellogg, Tetrahedron Lett., 1978, 19, 1255–1258 CrossRef .
H. Cano-Yelo and A. Deronzier, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1984, 1093–1098,  10.1039/P29840001093 .
G. Pandey, G. Kumaraswamy and A. Krishna, Tetrahedron Lett., 1987, 28, 2649–2652 CrossRef CAS .
R. Eisenberg, Isr. J. Chem., 2017, 57, 932–936 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, N. A. Till, B. Kudisch, D. W. C. MacMillan and G. D. Scholes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4555–4559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Strieth-Kalthoff, M. J. James, M. Teders, L. Pitzer and F. Glorius, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7190–7202 RSC .
F. Strieth-Kalthoff, C. Henkel, M. Teders, A. Kahnt, W. Knolle, A. Gomez-Suarez, K. Dirian, W. Alex, K. Bergander, C. G. Daniliuc, B. Abel, D. M. Guldi and F. Glorius, Chem, 2019, 5, 2183–2194 CAS .
H. Kim, H. Kim, T. H. Lambert and S. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2087–2092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. MacKenzie, L. Wang, N. P. R. Onuska, O. F. Williams, K. Begam, A. M. Moran, B. D. Dunietz and D. A. Nicewicz, Nature, 2020, 580, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zeman, S. Kim, F. Zhang and K. S. Schanze, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2204–2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Zhao and W. J. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2591–2608 RSC .
E. C. Gentry and R. R. Knowles, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1546–1556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Nicewicz and D. W. C. MacMillan, Science, 2008, 322, 77–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Yoon, M. A. Ischay and J. N. Du, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 527–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. R. Narayanam and C. R. J. Stephenson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 102–113 RSC .
K. C. Harper, E. G. Moschetta, S. V. Bordawekar and S. J. Wittenberger, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 109–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. C. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. H. Grubbs, Organometallic Chemistry in Industry: A Practical Approach, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2020 Search PubMed .
C. A. Huff, R. D. Cohen, K. D. Dykstra, E. Streckfuss, D. A. DiRocco and S. W. Krska, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 6980–6987 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Hsieh, C. W. Coley, L. M. Baumgartner, K. F. Jensen and R. I. Robinson, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2018, 22, 542–550 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Thomson, A.-L. Lee and F. Vilela, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2020, 16, 1495–1549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Noel, Photochemical Processes in Continuous-flow Reactors: From Engineering Principles to Chemical Applications, World Scientific Publishing Europe Ltd, London, UK,  2017 Search PubMed .
C. Sambiagio and T. Noel, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 92–106 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. M. Crisenza and P. Melchiorre, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 803 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Joshi-Pangu, F. Levesque, H. G. Roth, S. F. Oliver, L. C. Campeau, D. Nicewicz and D. A. DiRocco, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 7244–7249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bogdos, E. Pinard and J. A. Murphy, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2018, 14, 2035–2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Pearson, C. H. Lim, B. G. McCarthy, C. B. Musgrave and G. M. Miyake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11399–11407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, R. M. Pearson, C. H. Lim, S. M. Sartor, M. D. Ryan, H. S. Yang, N. H. Damrauer and G. M. Miyake, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 10962–10968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Konig and M. Akita, Science of synthesis, Photocatalysis in organic synthesis,  2019 Search PubMed .
D. Cambie, C. Bottecchia, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noel, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10276–10341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Plutschack, B. Pieber, K. Gilmore and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11796–11893 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Musacchio, B. C. Lainhart, X. Zhang, S. G. Naguib, T. C. Sherwood and R. R. Knowles, Science, 2017, 355, 727–730 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schroll, D. P. Hari and B. Konig, ChemistryOpen, 2012, 1, 130–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Vogeli and T. J. Erb, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2018, 47, 94–100 CrossRef PubMed .

          Z. Ziaullah and H. P. V. Rupasinghe, in Applications of NMR Spectroscopy, ed. A. ur-Rahman and M. I. Choudhary, Bentham Science Publishers,  2015, pp. 3–92,  DOI:10.1016/B978-1-60805-999-7.50001-X .
J. Christian and S. Rondestvedt, Org. React., 1976, 24, 225–259 Search PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 158–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Braslavsky, A. M. Braun, A. E. Cassano, A. V. Emeline, M. I. Litter, L. Palmisano, V. N. Parmon and N. Serpone, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 1215 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .

          P. Britt, G. Coates and K. Winey, Roundtable on Chemical Upcycling of Polymers, U.S. Department of Energy,  2019 Search PubMed .

Nat. Catal.,  2019, 2, 945–946.

          J. J. Bozell, J. E. Holladay, D. Johnson and J. F. White, Top Value-Added Chemicals from Biomass, Report PNNL-16983, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 2007.
I. Vollmer, M. J. F. Jenks, M. C. P. Roelands, R. J. White, T. van Harmelen, P. de Wild, G. P. van der Laan, F. Meirer, J. T. F. Keurentjes and B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15402–15423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Coates and Y. Getzler, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 501–516 CrossRef CAS .
L. O. Mark, M. C. Cendejas and I. Hermans, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5808–5836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Ragauskas, G. T. Beckham, M. J. Biddy, R. Chandra, F. Chen, M. F. Davis, B. H. Davison, R. A. Dixon, P. Gilna, M. Keller, P. Langan, A. K. Naskar, J. N. Saddler, T. J. Tschaplinski, G. A. Tuskan and C. E. Wyman, Science, 2014, 344, 709–719 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Lim, S. Yusup, A. C. M. Loy, S. Samsuri, S. S. K. Ho, A. S. A. Manaf, S. S. Lam, B. L. F. Chin, M. N. Acda, P. Unrean and E. Rianawati, Waste Biomass Valor., 2020 DOI:10.1007/s12649-020-01307-8 .
Z. H. Sun, B. Fridrich, A. de Santi, S. Elangovan and K. Barta, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 614–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vanholme, B. Demedts, K. Morreel, J. Ralph and W. Boerjan, Plant Physiol., 2010, 153, 895–905 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Nguyen, P. R. D. Murray and R. R. Knowles, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 800–805 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marchini, A. Gualandi, L. Mengozzi, P. Franchi, M. Lucarini, P. G. Cozzi, V. Balzani and P. Ceroni, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 8071–8076 RSC .
H. N. Li, Y. Yang, C. He, L. Zeng and C. Y. Duan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 422–430 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. G. Ackerman, J. I. M. Alvarado and A. G. Doyle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14059–14063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Majek, U. Faltermeier, B. Dick, R. Perez-Ruiz and A. Jacobi von Wangelin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15496–15501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Marzo, S. K. Pagire, O. Reiser and B. Konig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10034–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Arias-Rotondo and J. K. McCusker, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5803–5820 RSC .
T. P. Vispute, H. Zhang, A. Sanna, R. Xiao and G. W. Huber, Science, 2010, 330, 1222–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Herrmann, Catal. Today, 1999, 53, 115–129 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tan, F. F. Abdi and Y. H. Ng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1255–1271 RSC .
S. N. Ahmed and W. Haider, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 342001 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. Ibhadon and P. Fitzpatrick, Catalysts, 2013, 3, 189–218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, M. Arndt, K. Gooßen, H. Heydt and L. J. Gooßen, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2596–2697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, O. D. Engl, J. S. Bandar, E. D. Chant and S. L. Buchwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6672–6675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Miller, G. J. Choi, H. S. Orbe and R. R. Knowles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13492–13495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ruccolo, Y. Z. Qin, C. Schnedermann and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14926–14937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, H. M. Jin and A. S. K. Hashmi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5193–5203 RSC .
D. Hager and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16986–16989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xuan, T. T. Zeng, Z. J. Feng, Q. H. Deng, J. R. Chen, L. Q. Lu, W. J. Xiao and H. Alper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1625–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Wang, J. Qin, X. D. Shen, R. Riedel, K. Harms and E. Meggers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 685–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Uraguchi, N. Kinoshita, T. Kizu and T. Ooi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13768–13771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. McNally, C. K. Prier and D. W. C. MacMillan, Science, 2011, 334, 1114–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Zuo and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5257–5260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qvortrup, D. A. Rankic and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 626–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Cuthbertson and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2015, 519, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Shields and A. G. Doyle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12719–12722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Tellis, D. N. Primer and G. A. Molander, Science, 2014, 345, 433–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Heitz, J. C. Tellis and G. A. Molander, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12715–12718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Leveque, L. Chenneberg, V. Corce, J. P. Goddard, C. Ollivier and L. Fensterbank, Org. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 462–465 RSC .
P. Zhang, C. Le and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8084–8087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. B. Perry, T. F. Brewer, P. J. Sarver, D. M. Schultz, D. A. DiRocco and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2018, 560, 70–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, S. Shi, T. Zhang, N. Mehrkens, M. Rudolph and A. S. K. Hashmi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6046–6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Heinrich, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 821–833 Search PubMed .
D. Kalyani, K. B. McMurtrey, S. R. Neufeldt and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18566–18569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Hari, P. Schroll and B. Konig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2958–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, C. M. Huang, J. J. Guo, C. Q. Zeng, Y. Zhang and S. Y. Yu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15158–15166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. McGrath, M. Brichacek and J. T. Njardarson, J. Chem. Educ., 2010, 87, 1348–1349 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Romero, K. A. Margrey, N. E. Tay and D. A. Nicewicz, Science, 2015, 349, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. McManus and D. A. Nicewicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2880–2883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ruiz-Castillo, D. G. Blackmond and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3085–3092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Hartwig, Synlett, 1997, 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Corcoran, M. T. Pirnot, S. Lin, S. D. Dreher, D. A. DiRocco, I. W. Davies, S. L. Buchwald and D. W. C. MacMillan, Science, 2016, 353, 279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ciriminna, V. Pandarus, F. Beland, Y. J. Xu and M. Pagliaro, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2015, 19, 1554–1558 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liang and T. J. Liu, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 1986, 33, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
G. Palmisano, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro, V. Loddo and L. Palmisano, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2007, 349, 964–970 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, W. Y. Ouyang, M. Ojeda, E. Kuna, O. Chernyayeva, D. Lisovytskiy, S. De, R. Luque and A. M. Balu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Li, J. G. Wang, Y. Men and Z. F. Bian, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schilling, D. Riemer, Y. Zhang, N. Hatami and S. Das, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5425–5430 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Xie, X. Dai, S. G. Meng, X. L. Fu and S. F. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 245, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Meng, X. J. Ye, X. F. Ning, M. L. Xie, X. L. Fu and S. F. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 356–368 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, X. J. Ye, S. G. Meng, X. L. Fu and S. F. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 384, 161–174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, F. Qin, Z. P. Yang, X. M. Cui, J. F. Wang and L. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3513–3521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Unsworth, B. Coulson, V. Chechik and R. E. Douthwaite, J. Catal., 2017, 354, 152–159 CrossRef CAS .
F. Z. Su, S. C. Mathew, G. Lipner, X. Z. Fu, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16299–16301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, R. B. N. Baig, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3637–3640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Li, R. H. Liu, S. Y. Lian, Y. Liu, H. Huang and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3289–3297 RSC .
Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302–11336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, K. Yang, X. Z. Fu and R. S. Yuan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3760–3766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Chen, Z. U. Wang, H. W. Wang, J. L. Lu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2035–2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ischay and T. P. Yoon, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2012, 3359–3372 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Tang, L. N. Song, P. Chen, J. He, C. T. Au and S. F. Yin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 379–388 CrossRef CAS .
P. Devaraji, N. K. Sathu and C. S. Gopinath, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2844–2853 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuzawa, M. Aoki, K. Otake, T. Hattori, H. Itoh and H. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25376–25387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Zheng, B. B. Huang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079–9087 RSC .
Y. Ide, N. Nakamura, H. Hattori, R. Ogino, M. Ogawa, M. Sadakane and T. Sano, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11531–11533 RSC .
Y. Shiraishi, N. Saito and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12820–12822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, J. Yi, J. Shim, J. Lee and W. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 102, 132–139 CrossRef CAS .
F. Recupero and C. Punta, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3800–3842 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ouidri and H. Khalaf, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 207, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, Catal. Sci., 2013, 3, 2270–2277 RSC .
J. He, L. Chen, D. Ding, Y. K. Yang, C. T. Au and S. F. Yin, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Yuan, S. L. Fan, H. X. Zhou, Z. X. Ding, S. Lin, Z. H. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, C. Xu, L. Wu, X. X. Wang and X. Z. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Chen, Q. Yuan, J. He, C. T. Au and S. F. Yin, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1274–1277 RSC .
A. R. Almeida, J. T. Carneiro, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, J. Catal., 2010, 273, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henriquez, H. D. Mansilla, A. M. Martinez-de la Cruz, J. Freer and D. Contreras, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 252–262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhang, L. L. Hu, C. Zhu, J. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Catal. Sci., 2016, 6, 7252–7258 RSC .
R. H. Liu, H. Huang, H. T. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhong, Y. Y. Li, S. Zhang and Z. H. Kang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pandey, S. Pal and R. Laha, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5146–5149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pandey, R. Laha and D. Singh, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 7161–7171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cerruti, HYLE, 1999, 5, 3–41 CAS .

          Y. V. Kissin, in Alkene Polymerization Reactions with Transition Metal Catalysts, ed. Y. V. Kissin,  2007, vol. 173, pp. 419–522 Search PubMed .
R. H. Grubbs, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 7117–7140 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Schrock and A. H. Hoveyda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4592–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 42–56 RSC .

          A. Maercker, Organic Reactions,  2011, pp. 270–490 DOI:10.1002/0471264180.or014.03 .

          M. Edmonds and A. Abell, Modern Carbonyl Olefination: Methods and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
J. G. West and E. J. Sorensen, Isr. J. Chem., 2017, 57, 259–269 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. West, D. Huang and E. J. Sorensen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10093 CrossRef PubMed .
U. T. Bornscheuer, G. W. Huisman, R. J. Kazlauskas, S. Lutz, J. C. Moore and K. Robins, Nature, 2012, 485, 185–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sheldon and J. M. Woodley, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 801–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Reetz, Chem. Rec., 2016, 16, 2449–2459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Arnold, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4143–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Bolon, C. A. Voigt and S. L. Mayo, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 125–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Hammer, G. Kubik, E. Watkins, S. Huang, H. Minges and F. H. Arnold, Science, 2017, 358, 215–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. J. Kan, R. D. Lewis, K. Chen and F. H. Arnold, Science, 2016, 354, 1048–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Turner, Trends Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 474–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Köhler, Y. M. Wilson, M. Dürrenberger, D. Ghislieri, E. Churakova, T. Quinto, L. Knörr, D. Häussinger, F. Hollmann and N. J. Turner, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 93–99 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Rudroff, M. D. Mihovilovic, H. Gröger, R. Snajdrova, H. Iding and U. T. Bornscheuer, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 12–22 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, H. Ren and H. Zhao, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol., 2018, 53, 115–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bos and G. Roelfes, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2014, 19, 135–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Davis and T. R. Ward, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1120–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schwizer, Y. Okamoto, T. Heinisch, Y. Gu, M. M. Pellizzoni, V. Lebrun, R. Reuter, V. Köhler, J. C. Lewis and T. R. Ward, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 142–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Köhler and N. J. Turner, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 450–464 RSC .
O. Verho and J.-E. Bäckvall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3996–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Archipowa, R. J. Kutta, D. J. Heyes and N. S. Scrutton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2682–2686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Menon, P. A. Davison, C. N. Hunter, N. S. Scrutton and D. J. Heyes, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285, 2113–2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Carell, L. T. Burgdorf, L. M. Kundu and M. Cichon, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2001, 5, 491–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Wang and D. Zhong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 11933–11949 RSC .
M. M. E. Huijbers, W. Zhang, F. Tonin and F. Hollmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13648–13651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Villabona-Monsalve, O. Varnavski, B. A. Palfey and T. Goodson III, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14562–14566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taglieber, F. Schulz, F. Hollmann, M. Rusek and M. T. Reetz, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 565–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim and C. B. Park, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2019, 49, 122–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang and F. Hollmann, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7281–7289 RSC .
L. Schmermund, V. Jurkaš, F. F. Özgen, G. D. Barone, H. C. Büchsenschütz, C. K. Winkler, S. Schmidt, R. Kourist and W. Kroutil, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4115–4144 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. S. Choi, S. K. Kuk and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7958–7985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gandomkar, A. Żądło-Dobrowolska and W. Kroutil, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 225–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Schrittwieser, S. Velikogne, M. L. Hall and W. Kroutil, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 270–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Litman, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and J. F. Hartwig, Nature, 2018, 560, 355–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Betori, C. M. May and K. A. Scheidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16490–16494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, E. F. Fueyo, F. Hollmann, L. L. Martin, M. Pesic, R. Wardenga, M. Höhne and S. Schmidt, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 80–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lauder, A. Toscani, Y. Qi, J. Lim, S. J. Charnock, K. Korah and D. Castagnolo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5803–5807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, H. Hamby, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2201–2204 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, E. Fernández-Fueyo, Y. Ni, M. van Schie, J. Gacs, R. Renirie, R. Wever, F. G. Mutti, D. Rother and M. Alcalde, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 55–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. López-Iglesias and V. Gotor-Fernández, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 743–759 CrossRef .
X. Ding, C. L. Dong, Z. Guan and Y. H. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 118–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Younus, Biocatalysis, Springer,  2019, pp. 39–55 Search PubMed .
M. A. Emmanuel, N. R. Greenberg, D. G. Oblinsky and T. K. Hyster, Nature, 2016, 540, 414–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Biegasiewicz, S. J. Cooper, X. Gao, D. G. Oblinsky, J. H. Kim, S. E. Garfinkle, L. A. Joyce, B. A. Sandoval, G. D. Scholes and T. K. Hyster, Science, 2019, 364, 1166–1169 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Black, K. F. Biegasiewicz, A. J. Meichan, D. G. Oblinsky, B. Kudisch, G. D. Scholes and T. K. Hyster, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 71–75 CrossRef .
B. A. Sandoval and T. K. Hyster, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2020, 55, 45–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Biegasiewicz, S. J. Cooper, M. A. Emmanuel, D. C. Miller and T. K. Hyster, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 770–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Sandoval, S. I. Kurtoic, M. M. Chung, K. F. Biegasiewicz and T. K. Hyster, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8714–8718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Xue, R. P. Chen, C. Z. Yan, P. Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, W. J. Zhang, S. Y. Yang and Z. Jin, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1229–1249 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Douglas, M. J. Sevrin and C. R. J. Stephenson, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 1134–1147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ihara, H. Nishihara, K. S. Yoon, O. Lenz, B. Friedrich, H. Nakamoto, K. Kojima, D. Honma, T. Kamachi and I. Okura, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 676–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yacoby, S. Pochekailov, H. Toporik, M. L. Ghirardi, P. W. King and S. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 9396–9401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Grimme, C. E. Lubner, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6308–6309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Utschig, S. C. Silver, K. L. Mulfort and D. M. Tiede, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16334–16337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Utschig, N. M. Dimitrijevic, O. G. Poluektov, S. D. Chemerisov, K. L. Mulfort and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Mellor, A. Z. Nielsen, M. Burow, M. S. Motawia, D. Jakubauskas, B. L. Møller and P. E. Jensen, ACS Chem. Biol., 2016, 11, 1862–1869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Guo, D.-C. Yang, Z. Guan and Y.-H. He, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 1888–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shanmugam, J. Xu and C. Boyer, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1341–1349 RSC .
A. Z. Nielsen, S. B. Mellor, K. Vavitsas, A. J. Wlodarczyk, T. Gnanasekaran, M. Perestrello Ramos, H. de Jesus, B. C. King, K. Bakowski and P. E. Jensen, Plant J., 2016, 87, 87–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. n. Lassen, A. Z. Nielsen, B. Ziersen, T. Gnanasekaran, B. L. Møller and P. E. Jensen, ACS Synth. Biol., 2014, 3, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Mellor, K. Vavitsas, A. Z. Nielsen and P. E. Jensen, Photosynth. Res., 2017, 134, 329–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Lu, B. Pattengale, Q. H. Liu, S. Z. Yang, W. X. Shi, S. Z. Li, J. Huang and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13719–13725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Hockin, C. F. Li, N. Robertson and E. Zysman-Colman, Catal. Sci., 2019, 9, 889–915 RSC .
T. Mandal, S. Das and S. De Sarkar, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2019, 361, 3200–3209 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 22–36 RSC .
H. Imahori, D. M. Guldi, K. Tamaki, Y. Yoshida, C. P. Luo, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6617–6628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Suneesh and K. R. Gopidas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1606–1614 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Paulus, S. L. Adelman, L. L. Jamula and J. K. McCusker, Nature, 2020, 582, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. El-Khouly, O. Ito, P. M. Smith and F. D’Souza, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2004, 5, 79–104 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Manbeck, E. Fujita and J. J. Concepcion, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11536–11549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer, F. N. Castellano and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 11815–11816 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. W. Cowper, C. P. Chernowsky, O. P. Williams and Z. K. Wickens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2093–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Glaser, C. Kerzig and O. S. Wenger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10266–10284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christensen, B. T. Phelan, S. Chaudhuri, A. Acharya, V. S. Batista and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5290–5299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, K. Hirose and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 2855–2861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Fendrich, A. Quaranta, M. Orlandi, M. Bettonte and A. Miotello, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 118 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Hannah J. Sayre
	Hannah Sayre is the Lead Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellow of BioLEC, an Energy Frontier Research Center. Hannah became interested in photochemistry while pursuing a bachelor's degree at the University of Cincinnati. In 2012, Hannah joined the research group of Dr Karen Brewer at Virginia Tech where she investigated supramolecular photocatalysts. Hannah completed a PhD in Chemistry, developing red-light activated photocatalysis, with Dr Claudia Turro at The Ohio State University in 2018. Hannah's current research interests include molecular modifications to photocatalysts that increase light absorption and limit charge recombination.

Lei Tian
	Lei Tian is currently a fourth-year graduate student in Scholes group at Princeton University. Lei's interest in photocatalysis originated from his undergraduate research experience in Peking University where he worked on developing methodologies of photoinitiated radical polymerization using organocobalt complexes under the supervisorship of Dr Xuefeng Fu. After joining Scholes group, he continued to learn more about photochemistry using pump–probe transient absorption spectroscopy. His current projects involve mechanistic studies of homogeneous metallaphotocatalytic reactions catalyzed by the merger of iridium photocatalysts and various first-row transition metal complexes.

Minjung Son
	Minjung Son received a BS (2013) and MS (2015) in Chemistry from Yonsei University, South Korea. She obtained her PhD in Chemistry from the Massachusetts of Institute of Technology in 2020. Under the supervision of Prof. Gabriela Schlau-Cohen, she elucidated the photophysical mechanisms of photosynthetic light harvesting in green plants using ultrafast multidimensional spectroscopy. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Her current research focuses on understanding and controlling the photophysical properties of solar cell materials and exciton-polaritons towards higher-efficiency optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices using ultrafast spectroscopy and microscopy.

Stephanie M. Hart
	Stephanie M. Hart is a graduate student in the Gabriela Schlau-Cohen's lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She received her bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering from the Univeristy of Minnesota. Her research interests pertain to using ultrafast spectroscopy to study energy transfer dynamics in biomimetic and biohybrid light-harvesting systems.

Xiao Liu
	Xiao Liu received his PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor in 2018. He is currently a postdoctoral research associate in the Department of Electrical Engineering at Princeton University working with Professor Barry P. Rand. His research focuses on developing organic and hybrid optoelectronic components and materials for the application of photovoltaics, sensing, and photocatalysis.

Gregory D. Scholes
	Greg Scholes is the William S. Tod Professor of Chemistry at Princeton University. Originally from Melbourne, Australia, he undertook postdoctoral training at Imperial College London and University of California Berkeley. He started his independent career at the University of Toronto (2000–2014). Dr Scholes is the Director of an Energy Frontier Research Center (BioLEC), Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, Co-Director in the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research program Bioinspired Solar Energy, and a Professorial Fellow at the University of Melbourne. Current research concerns working out design principles for directing and regulating light-initiated energy flow in man-made and natural systems.

Broader context
The energy of the sun is more than sufficient to meet human needs and development of solar energy technology should address energy use beyond electricity generation. Photocatalysis offers a way to harness the energy of light to drive chemical reactions. This Perspective highlights some of the recent advances in photocatalysis and advocates for the further evolution of photocatalysis to meet the needs of chemical manufacturing. Photocatalysis has the potential to reduce the energy required for feedstock chemical production and to transform waste into valuable feedstocks. The improved selectivity of photocatalysts compared with conventional catalysts will decrease energy consumed in production. Photocatalyzed polymer upcycling and lignin depolymerization would produce high-value feedstocks from waste. The development of efficient photocatalysts with high quantum yields and broad-spectrum absorption and the design of large-scale photocatalysis systems are necessary to meet manufacturing needs.


 	Fig. 1  Photon flux vs. photon energy of the ASTM G-173 solar spectrum.17	 

 	Fig. 2  Qualitative depiction of manufacturing scale and cost of chemicals for various applications. The top 70 energy-consuming chemical products, based on reaction scale and conditions, are provided by the U.S. Department of Energy.2 Photocatalysis has been primarily employed in medicinal chemistry and artificial photosynthesis. Further innovation of solar manufacturing for agrochemicals, plastics and ammonia is necessary to meet the global demand.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photocatalytic hydroamidation upon blue-light excitation reaction mechanism and free energy landscapes based on the spectroscopically determined mechanism.97,98 Free energy landscapes show potential energy wells for the forward reaction of interest as well as deactivating pathways and side reactions. The free energy of the initial reaction components, R, is increased upon photon absorption, generating R*, from which product P formation is thermodynamically downhill.	 

 	Fig. 4  Redox-neutral photocatalytic with C(sp3) radical intermediates. (A) C(sp3)–C(sp3) coupling between α-amino C–H allylic C–H initiated by blue-light excitation.101 (B) C(sp3)–C(sp2) coupling between cyclohexane and aryl bromide upon 390 nm excitation.106	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocatalytic C(sp2)–C(sp2) coupling (A) via photoreduction of aryldiazonium salts116 with visible light and (B) photoreduction of aryl halides upon 455 nm excitation.23	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocatalyzed C–N bond formation (A) with acridinium as a photooxidant upon 455 nm excitation120 and (B) with blue-light excitation of an Ir(III) photosensitizer to produce anilines.124	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocatalyzed oxidation of alcohols (A) with visible-light (>420 nm) excitation of CdS nanoparticles on TiO2,129 (B) with fluorenone as an organic photocatalyst with blue-light excitation.130 (C) A hydrophobic surface on TiO2 minimized a phenol oxidation side reaction upon UV (>320 nm) irradiation.149	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic direct oxidation of alkanes: (A) oxidation of C–H bonds into C–O/N bonds by an Ir(III) photocatalyst upon blue-light excitation,161 and (B) alkane dehydrogenation to olefin with TBADT photosensitizer and cobaloxime catalyst upon UV excitation.170	 

 	Fig. 9  Mechanisms of photobiocatalysis. (A) Light-assisted regeneration of enzyme cofactors. (B) Formation of photobiocatalytic reaction cascades. (C) Non-natural reactions enabled by promiscuous enzymes and photocatalysis.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
