Metal-containing organic compounds for memory and data storage applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00569J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00569J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 1926-1982Metal-containing organic compounds for memory and data storage applications

        
          
            Hong 
            Lian†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Xiaozhe 
            Cheng†
acd, 
      
        
          
            Haotian 
            Hao†
c, 
      
        
          
            Jinba 
            Han†
c, 
      
        
          
            Mei-Tung 
            Lau
          
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Zikang 
            Li
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Zhi 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Qingchen 
            Dong
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Wai-Yeung 
            Wong
          
          
        
      *de
aMOE Key Laboratory of Advanced Display and System Applications, Shanghai University, 149 Yanchang Road, Jingan District, Shanghai 200072, China
bSchool of Mechanical & Electronic Engineering and Automation, Shanghai University, 99 Shangda Road, Baoshan District, Shanghai 200444, China. E-mail: qcdong@shu.edu.cn
cMOE Key Laboratory of Interface Science and Engineering in Advanced Materials, Taiyuan University of Technology, 79 Yingze West Street, Taiyuan, 030024, China
dDepartment of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: wai-yeung.wong@polyu.edu.hk
eThe Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China
fSchool of Chemistry and Materials Science, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha 410128, China. E-mail: zhouzhi@hunau.edu.cn
Received 
      22nd July 2021
    First published on 27th January 2022AbstractWith the upcoming trend of Big Data era, some new types of memory technologies have emerged as substitutes for the traditional Si-based semiconductor memory devices, which are encountering severe scaling down technical obstacles. In particular, the resistance random access memory (RRAM) and magnetic random access memory (MRAM) hold great promise for the in-memory computing, which are regarded as the optimal strategy and pathway to solve the von Neumann bottleneck by high-throughput in situ data processing. As far as the active materials in RRAM and MRAM are concerned, organic semiconducting materials have shown increasing application perspectives in memory devices due to their rich structural diversity and solution processability. With the introduction of metal elements into the backbone of molecules, some new properties and phenomena will emerge accordingly. Consequently, the RRAM and MRAM devices based on metal-containing organic compounds (including the small molecular metal complexes, metallopolymers, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and organic–inorganic–hybrid perovskites (OIHPs)) have been widely explored and attracted intense attention. In this review, we highlight the fundamentals of RRAM and MRAM, as well as the research progress of the applications of metal-containing organic compounds in both RRAM and MRAM. Finally, we discuss the challenges and future directions for the research of organic RRAM and MRAM.
From left to right: Haotian Hao, Hong Lian, Xiaozhe Cheng, Jinba Han
Hong Lian (the second from left) received his MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Qingchen Dong in 2018 at TYUT. He is currently a PhD student in Prof. Dong's group, majoring in the Materials Science and Engineering. His research interests focus on device engineering and device physics of organic optoelectronics and memristors. Xiaozhe Cheng (the second from right) received his MS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from TYUT in 2020. He is currently a PhD student of TYUT under the guidance of Prof. Qingchen Dong. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of functional metallopolymers for memory devices and artificial neuromorphic computing. Haotian Hao (the first from left) received his BS degree from TYUT in 2015 and is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Qingchen Dong at TYUT. He is now focusing on the synthesis of organic/metallo-organic spin materials for application in spintronic devices. Jinba Han (the first from right) is now a graduate student of TYUT under the supervision of Prof. Qingchen Dong. His research mainly focuses on the design and synthesis of small molecules for application in data storage.
From left to right: Mei-Tung Lau and Zikang Li
Mei-Tung Lau (left) received her BSc degree from Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU) in 2017 and is currently pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). She is working on a project of developing metallopolymers for various electronic applications. Zikang Li received his BSc degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU) and PolyU in 2018 and is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong at PolyU. He now focuses on the design and synthesis of bimetallic complexes and nanoparticles for applications in magnetism and catalysis.
Zhi Zhou
Zhi Zhou obtained his PhD in 2013 from Central South University of China, and then visited Eindhoven University of Technology and Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands as a postdoctoral researcher. He joined Hunan Agricultural University (HAU) in 2014 and is currently the leader of Chemistry Subject in HAU and the director of Hunan Optical Agricultural Engineering Technology Research Center. His research interests include luminescent materials and devices and their applications in agriculture. He has published more than 80 papers and authorized more than 40 China patents.
Qingchen Dong
Qingchen Dong obtained her PhD degree under the tutelage of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong in 2012 at Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU). She also worked at Caltech with Prof. H. B. Gray from 2010 to 2011. She joined Taiyuan University of Technology (TYUT) from 2012 to 2021 and she now works at Shanghai University (SHU) as a full-time Professor. Her research involves the design and synthesis of functional organic and metallo-organic compounds for applications in data storage, artificial synapse and neuromorphic computing, optoelectronics, etc.
Wai-Yeung Wong
Wai-Yeung Wong obtained his PhD degree in 1995 from the University of Hong Kong. He did postdoctoral works at Texas A&M University in 1996 and University of Cambridge in 1997. He joined HKBU from 1998 to 2016 and he now works as Chair Professor of Chemical Technology and Dean of Faculty of Applied Science and Textiles at PolyU. Among his awards are the RSC Chemistry of the Transition Metals Award, FACS Distinguished Young Chemist Award, State Natural Science Award from China and RGC Senior Research Fellow Award. His research focuses on synthetic inorganic/organometallic chemistry, especially aiming at developing metal–organic molecules and polymers for organic optoelectronics and metal-based nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Memory and storage of data are very crucial for modern computing systems. The design specifications for memory (volatile data storage, fast, expensive) and storage (non-volatile data storage, slow, inexpensive) are different, and they often have different data access standards and protocols.1 The achievement of information storage in current memory devices is mainly based on the presence or absence of charges in a typical capacitor, which represents logic “1” state or “0” state, respectively. The volatile and non-volatile data storage devices are usually hierarchized in the traditional computing systems to realize an optimum balance between cost and performance.2 The volatile static random access memory (SRAM) and dynamic random access memory (DRAM) in the main memory play the crucial role in the memory hierarchy, while the magnetic hard disk drives (HDDs) are mainly used outside of the microprocessor for non-volatile data storage in the past five decades.3,4
It is reported that the total amount of global digital information will reach up to 100 ZB by 2023 with the arrival of the Big Data era.5 The high-density storage and high-speed processing of a large number of data are inevitable, which enables researchers to explore a new computer system with blurred boundary between memory and storage to overcome the so-called von Neumann bottleneck.6 Because the computation and memory in the traditional von Neumann computer is separated, more energy and time are needed for the data access and process. Furthermore, the physical limitation of miniaturizing silicon-based integrated circuits (ICs) and the heat dissipation problem also dramatically restrain the development of traditional von Neumann computer.7 Recently, the computing at the site where data are stored, referred to as the in-memory computing, has been regarded as the optimal strategy and pathway to solve the von Neumann bottleneck by high-throughput in situ data processing. To achieve the in-memory computing, a new “universal memory” device that can be integrated into the processor chip and operate at high speed with high-density and non-volatile storage capabilities is highly desired.8 However, the flash memories have some fatal limitations, such as low endurance, the need for high voltage supply and slow write speed. Fortunately, microelectronic engineers, physicists, and chemists have devoted numerous efforts to developing new types of non-volatile memory devices, which can easily be integrated on-chip with the microprocessor cores because they use a different set of materials and require different device fabrication technologies from flash.9 For example, for resistance random access memory (RRAM), ferroelectric random access memory (FeRAM), and magnetic random access memory (MRAM), these new emerging devices with novel working principles can store information using new types of physical mechanisms that do not rely on storing charge on a capacitor as is the case for SRAM, DRAM and flash. They are very promising to address the above issues, which definitely will exert a revolutionary impact in the fields of information, semiconductor, artificial intelligence.10
As far as the active materials in the above new memory devices are concerned, traditional Si semiconductors are not suitable, which have been substituted by some novel advanced functional materials, such as 2D materials, organic materials and carbon materials. To date, some works related to 2D materials for application in RRAM devices have been briefly discussed in the recent review.11 Although 2D materials or carbon materials-based RRAM devices have exhibited excellent performances in memories, the intrinsic structural defects and non-adjustable structure and bandgap restrict their further development in large-area fabrication and light-controlled memories. With the rapid development of Internet of Things technique, the information storage components require advanced research on flexible memories because the memory is the fundamental component of all modern electronic systems to act as code storage, data storage, static or dynamic memory.12 Therefore, the organic semiconducting materials have shown increasing application perspectives in memory devices due to their rich structural diversity and solution processability. Among these, the metal-containing organic semiconducting materials have been widely explored for their uses in the information memory system.
Generally speaking, metal-containing organic compounds can be divided into two types: small molecular metal complexes and metallopolymers.13 With the introduction of metal elements into the backbone of molecules, some new properties and phenomena will emerge accordingly. Besides, due to the easy adjustability of the molecular structures of the organic segments as well as the metal centers, a huge number of metal-containing compounds can therefore be synthesized, which exhibit diverse structures and properties.14 These compounds have been widely used as the emissive and photovoltaic materials, optical limiters, macromolecular catalysts, artificial enzymes and stimuli-responsive materials.13 More recently, with the upcoming trend of Big Data era, some new types of memory technologies have emerged as substitutes for the traditional Si-based semiconductor memory devices, which are encountering severe scaling down technical obstacles. Fortunately, metal-containing organic compounds have shown excellent application potential due to their rich structure–property relationships, film-forming property and solution processability.15 Especially, the RRAM and MRAM devices based on organic compounds have attracted intense attention. RRAM devices with very simple device structures hold the merits of fast writing, reading, and erasing of data during device operation, low energy consumption and high switching endurance. By modifying the structures of both molecules and devices, different data storage behaviors (flash, write-once-ready-many times (WORM), SRAM and DRAM.) can be achieved with high storage capacity.16 MRAM is a potential candidate for the next-generation universal memory technology with high density, high-speed access time, and non-volatile characteristics. With the rapid development of spintronics, all-electric manipulated MRAM devices have been achieved which allow them to be integrated with the present complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology. Different types of MRAM devices based on organic materials have already been explored such as spin valves (SVs), bit patterned media (BPM), magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs), spin transfer torque magnetic RAM (STT-MRAM) and spin orbital torque magnetic RAM (SOT-MRAM), which allows the fabrication of MRAM in a large area at low cost.17 Especially for the BPM, patterned NPs over large area can be achieved with metallopolymer as the precursor on various substrates owing to the good film-forming property of metallopolymers.18 In this review, the fundamentals of RRAM and MRAM, as well as the research progress of the applications of metal-containing organic compounds in both RRAM and MRAM will be discussed.
2. Classification of memory devices
To better understand the application of metal-containing organic compounds in memories, a brief introduction to the classification of memories is indispensable. According to the different media used in the actual storage process, memory can be roughly divided into three storage categories: optical, magnetic and electronic memories (see Fig. 1).19 The optical and magnetic memory data storage systems have been unable to meet people's requirements for information storage because of the limit of operation speed and storage capacity. On the contrary, electronic memories are likely to be a good alternative to the optical and magnetic memories due to their good processability, miniaturized dimension, fast operating speed and excellent switching ability. The electronic memories can be categorized into volatile and non-volatile types. Volatile memories (i.e. SRAM and DRAM) can only store data when a power supply is on but lose the stored data once the electrical power supply is removed.20 Non-volatile memory refers to the devices which can preserve the data even if no power is supplied. With the fast development of microelectronics, the present non-volatile memories include RRAM,21,22 FeRAM,23 MRAM,24 phase change random access memory (PcRAM),25 and flash memory.26,27 In contrast to the current memory technologies based on storing/releasing the charge carriers in three-terminal transistor structured device, these newer technologies are based on electrical bistability (ON and OFF states) of materials arising from the changes in certain intrinsic properties, such as magnetism, polarity, phase state, ferroelectricity and conductivity, in response to the applied electric field.28–30 In particular, due to the advantages of good scalability, fast program/read speed, low power consumption and large capacity for data storage, RRAM has emerged as a very promising candidate for high-performance storage systems.31,32 The RRAM devices with two-terminal metal–insulator–metal structure are resistor-based memories which can be integrated directly into the processors with low thermal budget at low cost, unlike the capacitor type memories and transistor-type memories that are based on basic CMOS logic circuits.33 This article mainly reviews the progress made towards the uses of metal-containing organic compounds (including the small molecular metal complexes), metallopolymers, MOFs and OIHPs in RRAM and MRAM since they are now considered to be promising candidates for the next generation non-volatile memory devices. The progress of other types of memories can be found in some of the recent reviews.34–38
 Fig. 1  Classification of memory devices. 
3. Structure and principle of RRAM
3.1 Device structure of RRAM
Accompanying the dimension shrinkage campaign of transistors as predicted by Moore's Law since the 1960s, four types of new memories, namely, MRAM, PcRAM, FeRAM, and RRAM have emerged in the new century and are listed as promising candidates for the next-generation information storage technology by the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS).39 Particularly, RRAM that has a simple electrode/insulator/electrode sandwich-like structure, as shown in Fig. 2(a), distinguishes itself extraordinary with versatile ranges of material selection and abundant possible switching mechanisms for flexible implementation. Al, Au, Ag, Cu, ITO, p-type or n-type Si are usually selected as the electrode materials.40,41 With the urgent demand of high storage capacity, two-terminal (rather than three-terminals of transistors) structure with excellent miniaturization potential of several to tens of nanometers also enables RRAM to be readily integrated into crossbar arrays with three-dimensional stacking architecture for the highest possible storage density.37 As shown in Fig. 2(b), the basic memory cells are integrated into a 6 (word line) × 6 (bit line) cross-point memory array, in which bit-lines and word-lines cross each other perpendicularly and the active memory layers are sandwiched between them. Each memory cell can be specifically identified by its x and y coordinates. The crossbar memory arrays are also two terminal devices, which can be stacked to form multi-layer 3D memories to further boost the data storage density. A schematic diagram of a 3 (stacked layer) × 6 (word line) × 6 (bit line) stacked memory device is shown in Fig. 2(c).
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the structure of RRAM device: (a) masked type, (b) crossed type and (c) stacked type (3 (stacked layer) × 6 (word line) × 6 (bit line)). 
3.2 Electrical behaviors and performance parameters of RRAM
As above mentioned, the electrical switching characteristics of RRAM devices can be classified into volatile and non-volatile types, according to the ability to retain information. By varying the composition, conformation or charged state of the insulating layer, the non-volatile switching is often categorized into three types based on the current–voltage (I–V) curves: WORM, unipolar, and bipolar switching behaviors (Fig. 3).38 In WORM-type memory devices, the electrical switching from high resistive state (HRS) to low resistive state (LRS) is irreversible, namely the original state cannot be recovered. Both unipolar and bipolar memory systems display electrically reversible switching behavior, only differing in the voltage polarity to write and erase (same for unipolar memory devices but different for bipolar memory devices).42 RRAM can achieve fast writing, reading, and erasing of data during operations due to the prompt resistive switching (a few nanoseconds) and the low energy consumption (sub-pico Joule).43 More recently, exploration of the application of RRAM in the neural synapses or to perform logic-in-memory operations has gathered wide research attention to address the long lasting von Neumann bottleneck problems and accomplish science-fiction (sci-fi) scenarios in human daily life.
 Fig. 3  The electrical switching of organic resistive memory: (a) WORM resistive switch, (b) reversible unipolar switch, and (c) bipolar switch. 
To evaluate the performance of organic RRAM, the following basic parameters should be considered and characterized: (i) ION/IOFF current ratio, which determines whether the applied voltage can distinguish the “0” logic state and “1” logic state.9 Usually, a factor of 10 is satisfactory for data memory and access, however, a higher value is crucial for the device to operate with minimal misreading error. (ii) Threshold voltage (Vth) which refers to the switching voltage of memory devices including write voltage (VSET), and rewrite voltage (VRESET).22 (iii) Switching (write and erase) and read time, which manifest the operating speed of RRAM devices. The switching and read time in the magnitude of 1 μs are highly essential for the modern memory devices. (iv) Retention ability for non-volatile RRAM, which refers to the ability of memory devices to retain the data in them. A data retention time longer than 10 years is necessary for universal non-volatile memory. (v) Rectification ability for memory arrays, which means the ability to overwhelm the inherent sneak current that commonly existed in the cross-bar array structured memory devices.44 (vi) Programming (or write-multiple read-erase-multiple read (WRER)) cycle, which refers to the times of repeatable write and read operations, is vital for the application of RRAM in the ICs. (vii) Cycling endurance ability (stability under voltage stress). (viii) Stability under read pulses. (ix) Long-term stability (lifetime of the RRAM devices). (x) Data-storage capacity, which refers to the data storage density of devices per unit area. (xi) Power consumption and cost.45
3.3 Switching mechanism of RRAM devices
Since researchers from HP Labs proposed a RRAM memory device with the structure of Pt/TiO2/Pt in 2008, numerous research works have been dedicated to clarifying the physical mechanism of electrical switching phenomena associated with memory devices.45 Although some mechanisms are still a matter of debate, there is a broad consensus on the conductivity-switching mechanism in the academic world. Nowadays, the mainstream conductivity-switching mechanisms for the organic RRAM devices include charge transfer (CT), filamentary conduction, conformational change, space charge limited current (SCLC), redox mechanism and tunneling effect mechanism. Next, these mechanisms will be summarized and discussed in detail.

3.3.1 CT mechanism. 
CT is a process occurring in the electron donor–acceptor (D–A) system, during which the charges from donor moieties partially transfer to acceptors under the stimuli of an external electric field, thus promoting the transportation of charge carriers over the molecular skeleton and leading to a sharp change in resistance or conductivity (i.e. HRS-to-LRS transition) (Fig. 4).46 The CT process can normally be verified and analyzed by the methods of density functional theory (DFT) calculations, UV-vis absorption spectra, in situ fluorescence spectra and transmission electron microscope (TEM) images.47–50 Usually, the CT process in a typical D–A system is closely related to the strength and arrangement of D/A units as well as the conjugation length of molecules. By tuning the electron-donating or electron-accepting ability of D–A systems, the resistive behaviors of the corresponding memory devices can be manipulated.51 The CT mechanism is the most common charge conduction mechanism for compounds with electron D–A structure. The stability of charge-separated state as formed in the CT process determines the memory characteristic of the devices, namely volatile or non-volatile. Generally, D–A systems with large or modest dipole moment facilitate the formation of a stable charge-separated state and thus achieve non-volatile memory behaviors (such as WORM and flash), while those with small dipole moment cannot stabilize the charge-separated state and result in the volatile memory characteristic (such as DRAM or SRAM).12
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the charge transfer mechanism. 


3.3.2 Filamentary conduction mechanism. 
Filamentary conduction refers to the electrical conduction by filaments as formed in the memory devices. It has been found that there are two types of filaments for organic RRAM devices: one is the carbon-rich conducting filaments formed by the Joule heating-induced local degradation of organic compounds; the other one is the metallic filament as a result of the migration of electrodes through the organic layer.52 The flow of ON state current for filamentary conduction is highly localized to a small fraction of the device area. When the filaments connect both electrodes by applying an external voltage, the memory device switches to the LRS with a remarkably increased conductivity. However, the conductive filament will be gradually oxidized into cations again (for metal filaments) or decomposed under intensified Joule heating effect (for carbon-rich filaments) and the conductivity of device will be decreased to its initial state after further applying a reverse voltage, as depicted in Fig. 5. The voltage switching regime is associated with the electrode thickness, film thickness and filament forming atmosphere. The device performance can then be optimized by adjusting these parameters. The concomitant drawback of filamentary conduction is the severe current leakage caused by the filament effect.53,54 Although considerable progress has been made in the filamentary conduction in the recent years, there are still many controversies in the conductive filament and the role of the top and the bottom electrodes.55
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the formation and rupture of (a) carbon-rich conductive filaments Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Metal conductive filaments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. 


3.3.3 Conformational change mechanism. 
Conformational change mechanism, also called the phase change mechanism, refers to the electrically induced conformational changes in molecules or molecular bundles.56,57 Such a mechanism is widely observed in polymers containing carbazole (Cz) groups or other planar-conjugated moieties, such as poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (PVK) derivatives, which can cause the variation of conductivity in different conformation structures.41 As shown in Fig. 6, the Cz groups in the side chains of PVCz can transfer from a disordered orientation to an ordered π–π stacking under the stimuli of an external electric field. At the beginning, the Cz groups in a disordered orientation show HRS property, and thus charge transport through the conjugated system is limited, leading to low conductivity. Upon application of an external electric field, the Cz groups transform to the ordered face-to-face conformation, facilitating the transition from HRS to LRS as a result of the formation of more conductive paths. Methods such as DFT theoretical calculations, UV-vis absorption spectra, cyclic voltammograms (CV), in situ fluorescence spectra, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, TEM images and Raman spectra, could be utilized to deeply understand the conformational change mechanism.
 Fig. 6  (a) The fluorescence emission spectra of PVCz in different states, (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of PVCz in different states and (c) schematic diagram for conformational change of PVCz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright © 2010, Elsevier B.V. 


3.3.4 Space charge and trap mechanism. 
If the interface between electrode and trap free polymer is ohmic, the accumulation of carriers near the electrode builds up a space charge channel. The total charge injected into the active layer is restricted due to the mutual repulsion between individual charges, and the resulting current is named SCLC.58 The SCLC is mainly originated from the electrode injection of the charge carriers, accumulation of mobile ions at the electrode interfaces and ionized dopants at the interfacial depletion regions. Charge trapping effect refers to the trapping process of charge carriers from the electrodes into the trapping centers, which usually arises from the metal nanoparticles (NPs) and electron acceptors (such as carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, organic electron-withdrawing moieties). The device can switch from HRS to LRS when all the trap sites are filled with charge carriers under a certain external electric field. Apart from the traps in the bulk materials, the interface traps also play an important role in the charge injection into the material and carrier mobility. It has been reported that many organic materials exhibit the electrical switching behavior associated with space charges and traps.59


3.3.5 Redox mechanism. 
Redox mechanism refers to the resistive switching phenomenon of a memory device as a result of electrochemical redox reaction of active materials under the application of an electric field. Mostly, the redox mechanism is related to the redox reaction of metal atoms, especially for the transition metal atoms, leading to the change of molecular conductivity due to the transmission of electrons between the reduction and oxidation states of metal atoms.60 The ferrocene (Fc) moiety is mostly used as the functional group for the introduction of conduction channel based on redox reaction due to its well-known reversible redox reaction. If the metal atoms have various valences or there are more metal species in the molecular backbone, multi-level resistive states are expected to achieve. For analyzing the redox mechanism in a memory device, the CV data are needed to give the experimental proof.61


3.3.6 Tunneling effect mechanism. 
For organic thin film-based RRAM devices, the tunneling effect mechanism can also occur when the electrode contact is ohmic. If the film thickness is less than 10 nm and the applied electric field is high enough to overcome the potential barrier, the electrons can tunnel into the other side of the potential barrier to change the conductance state from HRS to LRS.

4. Basic knowledge of MRAM
MRAM, as another new type of non-volatile memory, has also received extensive attention in the past two decades.62–66 In a reasonably designed MRAM, the signal from the giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect is sufficiently large, such that each bit may be read nondestructively and provide the advantages of higher speed operation (1000 times faster write times than flash and 10000 times faster data access times than HDD) and lower electrical power consumption.62,66
4.1 Introduction of MRAM
MRAM is an emerging attractive solid-state memory, which can create and store the identifiable binary information of “1” and “0” by manipulating the magnetic property of active materials. MRAM not only combines the advantages of the fast writing and reading of the SRAM, the high density of DRAM and the non-volatile property of flash memory, but also has the characteristics of low power consumption, high radioresistance and long data storage lifetime.62,63
At the early stage of information age, IBM launched the first commercial magnetic HDD “IBM 350 RAMAC” with the storage capacity of only 5 MB in 1956.64 Later in 1973, IBM introduced the Winchester HDD “IBM 3340” into the computer system, where the removable read and write heads were sealed. This kind of structure pined the basic framework of current HDD architecture. Then IBM in 1991 produced magnetoresistive read heads and launched the first 3.5 inches HDD “0663-E12” with a GB-level storage capacity, and this size has been the standard size of modern HDDs. After that, IBM launched the “Titan” MRAM HDD in 1997 based on the giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect, which increased the storage density by eight times and sparked the development trend of HDD with smaller size and larger capacity. Before the year of 2005, magnetic recording mainly took the approach of longitudinal magnetic recording whose the storage capacity limit was 200 GB in−2. In 2007, Hitachi launched the first TB-level HDD “7 K 1000” based on the perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR) mode, which is the mark of the upcoming era of the TB-level storage capacity. Since Freescale Semiconductor in 2006 produced the first commercial STT-MRAM HDD with 180 nm process, many companies such as Everspin, Samsung and IBM have also started to make efforts to develop STT-MRAM, the size of which has been decreased to 22 nm but the storage capacity boosted to the GB level. More recently, SOT-MRAM and other new magnetic data storage technologies have been explored by scientists in the laboratories, which will significantly change the information storage and computing technologies and bring the advanced MRAM technology into a brighter future.65
4.2 Working mechanisms of MRAM

4.2.1 The reading mechanism of MRAM. 
Charge and spin are the intrinsic properties of electrons, which are usually considered as separate properties. In classical electronics, charges of electrons are manipulated by electric fields to transmit information and are stored in a capacitor to save it. Since the discovery of GMR in the late 1980s, people learned that charge transport could also be efficiently controlled by magnetization, which thus established a new subject, that is, spin electronics or spintronics. In magnetic recording, magnetic fields have been used to read or write the information stored on the magnetization. The recent expansion of hard-disk recording owes much to the development of spintronics. Spin of electrons usually has spin-up (magnetic quantum number ms = 1/2) and spin-down (ms = −1/2) states controlled separately by external magnetic or electric fields.66 Based on the studies of spin electrons, the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR), GMR and tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) effects have been explored for magnetic materials and show attractive application perspectives in information storage and computing.
4.2.1.1 AMR effect. 
AMR effect refers to the phenomenon that the magnetoresistance (MR) varies with the change of the angle between the internal magnetic field and the current flow direction in ferromagnetic materials, originating from the density of states (DOS) and spin-dependent scattering anisotropy that are induced by spin–orbit coupling (SOC).67 AMR effect is sensitive to the direction. Specifically speaking, the MR of the ferromagnetic materials will drop to the minimum value when the angle is 90° and reaches up to the maximum value when the angle is 0°.68 Early magnetic read heads were mainly fabricated based on the AMR effect, but the MR value (1–2%) is at least one order of magnitude smaller than GMR or TMR effect. However, tunneling AMR (TAMR) and ballistic AMR have also been investigated in recent years, which provide new research directions for spintronics.69,70
4.2.1.2 GMR effect. 
GMR effect was independently discovered by the groups of Albert Fert and Peter Grünberg in 1988. They fabricated nanoscale iron and chromium interphase (Fe/Cr) devices and observed an obvious phenomenon of the transition between high and low MR by applying an external magnetic field to the devices, and this is the so-called GMR effect.71 This kind of devices are named as spin valves, which are featured by a nonferromagnetic (NFM) layer sandwiched between two ferromagnetic (FM) layers.72 For the FM layers, the one whose magnetic moment is more susceptible to the external magnetic field is called the free layer, while the one with a fixed magnetic moment is called the pinned layer or reference layer. The NFM layer acts as the barrier layer. The GMR effect is specifically referred to the case that when the magnetization directions of two adjacent FM layers are in the antiparallel state, the total resistance of the SV is much larger than that in the parallel state. Thus, the high and low MR can be used to represent the binary information “0” and “1” in data storage. Based on the discovery and research of GMR effect, both Albert Fert and Peter Grünberg were awarded the 2007 Nobel prize in physics.
The GMR effect is mainly determined by spin-dependent scattering, which can occur both inside the FM layer and at the interface of FM and NFM layers.62,73 The two-fluid model as proposed by Sir Neville Mott in 1936 is usually adopted to explain the GMR effect (Fig. 7) as follows: an electric current can be considered as two spin channels that propagate independently. Therefore, the total resistance is equivalent to the shunt resistance of the spin-up and the spin-down channels. The spin states of electrons in these two channels are different, and are also subjected to different scattering effect under an external magnetic field. When the spin direction of electrons is parallel to the magnetization direction in the FM layer, the total MR value is the smallest (denoted as “r”); and the largest MR (denoted as “R”) occurs when the spin direction of electrons is antiparallel to the magnetization direction.74,75Rp and Rap refer to the total MR when the magnetization directions of the two FM layers are parallel and antiparallel, respectively, and can be expressed by eqn (1) and (2), respectively. (1) (2)Then, the value of GMR can be expressed by: (3)It can be seen that the greater the difference between R and r is, the higher the GMR will be.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the two-fluid model based on spin-dependent scattering in the spin valves at (a) parallel and (c) antiparallel state. (b) and (d) are simplified diagrams of the corresponding circuit in (a) and (c), respectively. 
4.2.1.3 TMR effect. 
The discovery and research of the GMR effect have promoted the development of MRAM, however, the MR ratio at room temperature is still weak (generally below 20%) until the appearance of the TMR effect. The core structure that produces the TMR effect is FM layer/barrier layer/FM layer, which is MTJ.
The TMR effect correlates to the mechanism of spin-dependent tunneling. Before the explanation of spin-dependent tunneling, the different transport behaviors of spin electrons in the NFM and FM materials need to be understood first. It can be seen from Fig. 8(a) that the DOS of the spin-up electrons is equal to that of the spin-down electrons in NFM material, resulting in no net magnetic moment. Hence, the conductive electrons present a nonpolarized state in the NFM material and the spin-up and spin-down electrons contribute equally to the resistance. However, the situation is different in the FM materials. The energy bands of different spin-state electrons have a relative displacement and become asymmetric due to the exchange interaction of electrons (Fig. 8(b)), namely the exchange splitting. Exchange splitting makes the DOS of spins that are parallel to the magnetization direction in the FM layer larger than that of the antiparallel state at the Fermi level, and their difference can be determined by the spin polarization (P) formula (eqn (4)): (4)where N is proportional to the DOS at the Fermi level, the subscript up and down means spin-up and spin-down states. From eqn (4), we can see that the P of electrons in the NFM materials equals zero because the spin-up and spin-down electrons have the same DOS. For general FM materials such as iron, cobalt and nickel, their P is between 0 and 100%. FM materials with high spin polarizability are beneficial to the TMR effect, especially for the half-metal materials, the P value of which is close to 100%, meaning that the electrons in one spin state have a continuous band at the Fermi level, whereas those in the other spin state have an energy band gap at the same level, e.g. La0.66Sr0.33MnO3 (LSMO).76
 Fig. 8  The distribution diagram of DOS of spin up and spin down electrons in (a) nonferromagnetic and (b) ferromagnetic materials. Principle of spin dependent tunneling at (c) parallel and (d) antiparallel state, respectively. N(E) represents the value of DOS, and the direction of the external magnetic field is downward. 
The TMR effect can be clarified through the Julliere model, which was proposed by M. Julliere as early as 1975 to explain the low-temperature TMR phenomenon as observed in the MTJ of Fe/GeO/Co.77 Julliere model assumes that the spin directions of electrons remain unchanged during the tunneling process. As shown in Fig. 8(c and d), if the magnetization directions of the two FM layers are parallel, the electrons injected into the majority (minority) bands of one FM layer will enter into the majority (minority) bands of the other FM layer via the tunneling effect. However, the situation is just on the contrary when the magnetization directions of two FM layers are antiparallel, i.e. the electrons from the majority (minority) bands of one FM layer will enter into the minority (majority) bands of the other one. Therefore, the scattering of electrons and MR in the former situation is smaller than the latter one due to the tunneling effect.78 The TMR ratio can be expressed by the spin polarizabilities P1 and P2 of the two FM layers through the Julliere formula (as shown in eqn (5)):4 (5)Considering that the P of the injected carriers decreases with an increase in distance (d) between the injector and the detector, the Julliere formula can be further modified as: (6)where λs is the spin diffusion length, and d is the distance between the injector and the detector.79
Although the TMR effect was discovered earlier than the GMR effect, its development was restricted by the preparation technology of nanoscale insulating layer at that time. Until 1994, people produced a MTJ with the room temperature TMR ratio of 18% by using alumina as the barrier layer.80 In 2001, Mathon and Umerski proposed a Fe/MgO/Fe-based MTJ having the TMR ratio of more than 1000% by first-principle calculations.81 Then, in 2008, Ohno's group got the MTJ with the TMR ratio up to 604% at room temperature.82


4.2.2 The writing mechanism of MRAM. 
The above discussed MR effects (AMR, GMR and TMR) are usually applied in MRAM as the reading mechanism, while at the very beginning, the mostly adopted writing mode is by modulating the magnetization alignment of the FM electrodes by an external magnetic field. However, the external magnetic field generated from conductors will inevitably cause an interference signal, which leads to a major energy consumption and the complicated structure design of MRAM, and thus limits the further development and extensive application of MRAM.83 Fortunately, with the development of spintronics, STT and SOT effects have been disclosed and studied in depth, STT- and SOT-based MRAMs have now been explored and achieved the all-electric fast writing and reading of information with a low power consumption.
4.2.2.1 Mechanism of STT-MRAM. 
In 1996, J. C. Slonczewski and L. Berger predicted that the STT effect-spin-polarized current will drive and manipulate the magnetic moments according to the law of conservation of angular momentum.2,84 This can be explained by the following vector equation of Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) with the damping term and STT term: (7)where m and mp are the magnetic moment of the free layer and the pinned layer, respectively. Ms is the saturation magnetization of the free layer, Heff is the instantaneous effective field, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ0 is the permeability of vacuum, α is the Gilbert damping parameter, h is the reduced Planck constant, J is the current density, P is the spin polarization and tF is the thickness of the free layer. The first term on the right of the eqn (7) describes the precession of the magnetization under the effective external magnetic field. The second term is the Gilbert damping term showing the relaxation process, which corresponds to the red line in Fig. 9(a).85 The last term represents the STT (the green line in Fig. 9(a)) which competes with the Gilbert damping torque. The magnetic moment will be reversed when the STT overcomes the Gilbert damping torque.83
 Fig. 9  (a) The influence of STT on the precession of the magnetization. (b) and (c) Spin transfer torque magnetization switching. The three layers from left to right are pinned layer (yellow), tunnel barrier layer (blue) and free layer (red), respectively, and the green dotted line represents the spin transfer torque. 
In 1999, the Myers group experimentally confirmed that the STT effect induced by the spin-polarized current can regulate the magnetic moment through angular momentum exchange by modulating the direction of the pulse current.86 STT effect reveals the interaction between the magnetic moment and spin-polarized currents, attributed to the angular momentum exchange between the spin magnetic moment and the free electrons passing through the MTJ. The working mechanism of magnetization switching by STT is shown in Fig. 9(b and c). After passing through the pinned layer, the electrons with the same spin direction as the magnetization in the pinned layer mainly remained there and form the spin-polarized current that exerts STT on the magnetization of the free layer, causing the magnetization of the free layer to be parallel to that of the pinned layer (Fig. 9(b)). Then, the electrons having the same direction of spin with the magnetization in the free layer are allowed to pass through the MTJ. However, the electrons with opposite spin direction are reflected and injected into the free layer, transferring torque to the magnetic moment of the free layer and causing magnetization directions of the free layer to be antiparallel to the pinned layer (Fig. 9(c)).63
Freescale Semiconductor produced the first commercial STT-MRAM in 2006, and the STT-MRAM has been now industrialized. However, unlike the separated writing and reading paths in SOT-MRAM, the writing and reading paths of STT-MRAM are the same, which will inevitably cause the signal interference. Moreover, the critical switching current density of STT-MRAM is still high as compared to SOT-MRAM.
4.2.2.2 Mechanism of SOT-MRAM. 
In addition to the spin motion, electrons also make a circular motion around the nucleus, viz. the orbital motion. The interaction between spin and orbital motions is called SOC which causes the spin–orbit coupling magnetic field (Bso). Hence, the energy (Eso) of electrons near the nucleus can be expressed as: (8)where mspin is the spin magnetic moment, Z is the atomic number, a0 is the lattice constant, μ0 and μB are the permeability of vacuum and Bohr magneton, respectively. It can be learnt from the above equation that the SOC magnetic field is proportional to Z4. Organic compounds are usually composed of light elements such as C, H, O, N, so the SOC of which is relatively weak. Therefore, the spin scattering length (λs) and spin relaxation time (τ) of electrons of organic compounds are much longer, allowing organic compounds as the NFM materials to be applied in organic SVs (OSVs). The spin current generated based on the SOC will also affect the adjacent FM layer by the SOT effect, which lays the foundation of all-electric manipulated SOT-MRAM. For the origin of SOT, scientists currently attribute it to the spin Hall effect and/or Rashba effect.87
Spin Hall effect was first proposed by the theoretical physicists Mikhail Dyakonov and Vladimir Perel in 1971.88 Then, the Awschalom group in 2004 confirmed the existence of the spin Hall effect by experiment.89 They observed the spin accumulation near the edges of GaAs thin film using Kerr rotation microscopy and proved that this phenomenon was caused by the spin Hall effect. Several years later, Buhrman group etched out a perpendicular type MTJ (CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB) on a β-Ta strip to fabricate a three-terminal spin Hall effect device. The electric current with different directions in the Ta layer can change the magnetic moment orientation of the adjacent CoFeB layer so that the MR switching can be realized.90Fig. 10 shows a SOT-MRAM device based on the spin Hall effect with the Hall cross shaped structure. The core mechanism of SOT-MRAM is that the spin-up and spin-down electrons are divided and deflected to the opposite directions in the heavy metal with strong SOC effect, generating a pure spin current that can regulate the local magnetic moment of the adjacent FM layer to write and read the information. In addition, the polarized direction of spin current is perpendicular to both the injected electric current and the pure spin current. One of the significant advantages of SOT-MRAM is that the writing and reading paths are separated, which not only prevents the barrier layer from being broken down, but also improves the information stability and reduces the energy consumption.87
 Fig. 10  Illustration of a SOT-MRAM device with the Hall cross shape. The up and down arrows indicate the equilibrium magnetization states of the FeCoB layers, and the white arrow represents the current pulse. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright © 2014, American Institute of Physics. 
The Rashba effect is mainly concerned about the splitting of electronic energy bands at the interface of symmetry breaking films or inversion asymmetric crystals due to the SOC effect, leading to the fact that the spin angular momentum of the conducting electrons preferentially relaxes along a certain direction and thus forms a spin polarized current. Then, the spin current can be injected into the FM layer through exchange coupling and spin diffusion, and the magnetization direction of the FM material is changed due to the SOT effect.91,92

4.3 Basic storage cell of MRAM
According to the device configuration and material properties, the basic storage cells of MRAM can be grouped into three types: SV, MTJ, and BPM.

4.3.1 SV & MTJ. 
A SV is made by stacking FM layers and NFM layers alternately. The most classic structure of SV is FM1 layer (free layer)/NFM layer (spacer layer)/FM2 layer (pinned layer)/antiferromagnetic layer (AFM layer) as shown in Fig. 11(a).66 The AFM layer has an exchange bias effect on the adjacent FM2 layer so that the magnetization direction of FM2 layer will not be easily varied with the change of the external magnetic field, while the corresponding magnetization direction of FM1 layer can be changed by the external magnetic field. The AFM layer can be removed if the coercivity (Hc) values of FM1 and FM2 layers differ greatly and the pinned layer is relatively insensitive to the external magnetic field (Fig. 11(b)), which will result in the shift of hysteresis loop compared to the device with AFM layer.93
 Fig. 11  Structure schematic of (a) classic spin valve, (b) simplified spin valve, and (c) magnetic tunnel junction. (d) Structure schematic of the perpendicular magnetization magnetic tunnel junction. 
The structure of MTJ based on the TMR effect is very similar to that of the SVs, which also possesses a sandwich-like structure (Fig. 11(c)).94 The main difference is that the intermediate layer of MTJ is so-called the barrier layer with a high potential barrier, such as AlOx and MgO. More recently, some organic complexes were also used as the barrier layer in MTJ, enriching the materials source of barrier layers.95 The barrier layer should be as thin as 1–2 nm for the tunneling of electrons. The way of regulating MR in MTJ is similar to that in SVs, that is by modulating the magnetic moment of the two FM layers. Generally, the TMR ratio is higher than the GMR ratio by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude. The basic storage cells of STT-MRAM and SOT-MRAM are mostly MTJ-type. In 2005, Seagate had announced the commercialization of MTJ-based MRAM.77
In the early stage, most MTJ is based on the in-plane magnetic anisotropy. This will cause the magnetic vortex phenomenon and decrease the thermal stability of MTJ, which severely limits the increase of storage density. However, if the FM layers of perpendicular magnetic anisotropy are introduced into the MTJ, the magnetic vortex and thermal stability problems can be effectively resolved (Fig. 11(d)). As mentioned before, organic compounds as the intermediate layer have been widely used in OSVs due to the weak SOC effect. The weak electron spin scattering of organic semiconductors allows the spin relaxation time (τ) and spin diffusion length (λs) of the transporting electrons to be very long.93 The thickness of the FM and NFM layers also should be as thin as possible. Especially for the NFM layer, the thickness should be less than the spin diffusion length to increase the MR effect and reduce the demagnetizing field. However, up to now, there are only several reports on the application of organic semiconductors as the barrier layers in MTJ.


4.3.2 BPM. 
BPM, which is composed of an array of magnetic recording bits, is a perpendicular magnetic recording system. Each bit of BPM can be used to write binary information. Fig. 12(a and b) show the bit patterned dot array and line array, respectively. BPM has a high signal-to-noise ratio due to the lack of transition noise band and erasure band.96 The ferromagnetic alloy NPs (such as L10-FePt or CoPt NPs and SmCox) are often used as the storage media for BPM.
 Fig. 12  Bit patterned (a) dot array and (b) line array of storage media. 
From a typical hysteresis loop of FM materials, some key parameters such as Hc, saturation magnetization (Ms), remanence (Mr) and squareness (R) can be obtained. For the parameter of coercivity, too small value of Hc is not conducive for the long-term storage of data in memory, but too large Hc is not practicable for writing data; the direction of remanence (±Mr) can be used to represent the binary information “1” and “0”; the squareness R can be expressed by the following eqn (9), a large value of R is beneficial for information storage. (9)Since the size of NPs can significantly influence the magnetic property, that is, FM materials would show superparamagnetic property if the size is down to the critical nanoscale size. This can be demonstrated by the Néel–Arrhenius (N–A) eqn (10). τ = τ0·exp(Ea/kBT)(10)where Ea = KuV represents the energy required to maintain the magnetic moment (Ku is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant, V is the volume of the recording unit), kBT represents the thermal disturbance energy that destabilizes the magnetic moment (kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature), τ is the measured time related to the applied frequency (f = 1/τ) and τ0 denotes the jump attempt time of the NPs magnetic moments between opposite magnetization directions.97 When V is small enough, each recording unit will become superparamagnetic, meaning that a small thermal disturbance (kBT) can overcome KuV and cause the flip of magnetic moment, which results in the loss of data. Therefore, an ideal FM nanomaterial for application of ultra-high density data storage should possess a large Ku and high Curie temperature (Tc) to maintain its ferromagnetic property at extremely small scale. Bimetallic alloys composed of 3d magnetic elements and 5d (or 4d) elements, such as FePt, FePd, CoPt and Co3Pt, have attracted wide research interest in the field of magnetic data storage, as a consequence of their high thermal stability due to the spin–orbit coupling and hybridization of 3d and 5d electrons. L10-FePt NPs are a very promising candidate for ultra-high density magnetic recording media because it has a large Ku up to 6.6–10 × 107 erg cm−3 with high thermal stability and the superparamagnetic critical size as low as 2.8–3.3 nm.98 L10-FePt NPs, in which Fe atomic layer and Pt atomic layer are alternately arranged layer by layer along the [001] direction, are chemically ordered face-centered tetragonal (fct) phase which are usually generated from the transformation of less ordered face-centered cubic (fcc) phase by annealing. However, the undesirable defects such as agglomeration, sintering, and broad particle size distribution are inevitably concomitant with this method due to the fact that the elements Fe and Pt are originally present in separate compounds which have different onset decomposition temperatures. Then, some researchers explored a series of FePt-containing organometallic complexes (either small molecules or polymers) as single-source precursors to directly synthesize L10 (fct) phase FePt NPs. Especially for the FePt-containing metallopolymers, the fabrication of L10-FePt NPs-based BPM have been achieved by nanoimprint lithography (NIL) through solution processing technology which will be discussed in section 6.

5 Application of metal-containing materials in RRAM
A brief introduction to the basic principles of RRAM and MRAM is given in the above sections. In this section, we will focus on the application of metal-containing materials in RRAM. Metal-containing materials include metal complexes, metallopolymers, metal NPs-doped polymers, MOFs and OIHPs. By introducing the metal elements into the side chain and/or backbone of the molecules, metal complexes and metallopolymers are endowed with novel and special optical, electronic and magnetic properties due to the rich electronic structures of metal centers and ligands, allowing them to exhibit versatile application. For example, metal complexes and metallopolymers with reversible redox properties are of interest for nano-electronics, electrocatalysis, information storage, nanopatterning, sensing, and also as responsive surfaces and capsules, active components of photonic crystal displays, emissive and photovoltaic materials, optical limiters and artificial enzymes.99–104 More recently, metal-containing materials in the application of RRAM have also received a great deal of attention due to their easily adjustable structure and reversible redox processes that are favorable to the generation of electrical bistates or multistates.
5.1 RRAM devices based on small-molecule organometallic complexes
Small-molecule organometallic complexes are an important class of organic optical and electronic materials which have been successfully applied in flexible display devices due to their rich and well-defined structures, excellent optoelectronic properties, light weight, and low energy consumption. To date, many small-molecule organometallic complexes have also been explored and applied into resistive memory devices. Metal complexes usually consist of transition metals with well-defined coordination structures and surrounding ligands. The interactions between metal ions and ligands allow the physiochemical properties to be easily manipulated by varying the metal species and valence state as well as the molecular structure of ligand, thus facilitating the formation of binary or multi-level electronic states for resistive memories. For example, the multiple redox states of metal atoms and metal-to-ligand CT (MLCT) processes can significantly influence the resistive switching behaviors of the resulting memory devices. In the following subsections, a systematic overview is provided for the application of various small-molecule organometallic complexes in RRAM, including gold (Au)-containing complexes, platinum (Pt)-containing complexes, nickel (Ni)-containing complexes, ruthenium (Ru)-containing complexes, iron (Fe)-containing complexes, chromium (Cr)-containing complexes, rare earth (RE) complexes, with an emphasis on the modulation or control of the switching properties by the metal elements (Schemes 1 and 2 and Table 1).
 Scheme 1  Chemical structures of metal-organic complexes (S1–S34) for RRAM. 
 Scheme 2  Chemical structures of metal-organic complexes (S35–S46) for RRAM. 
 Scheme 3  Chemical structures of metallopolymers (P1–P29) for RRAM. 
 Scheme 4  Chemical structures of metallopolymers (P30–P45) for RRAM. 
Table 1 Summary of RRAM based on organometallic complexes




Complexes
Metal
Memory type
Threshold voltage (V)
ON/OFF ratio
Mechanism
Ref.





S1

Au
—
+16.5
102
Conductive filament

106




S2

Au
SRAM
+2.5, −2.6
105
CT

107




S3

Au
SRAM
+1.54, +2.64
1/103/107
Charge traps

108




S4

Au
SRAM
+1.5
105
Charge traps

109




S5

Au
SRAM
+1.5
105
Charge traps

109




S6

Au
Flash/WORM
−0.5, +3.7
103
CT, conductive filament

105









−3.0, +4.0
103












−2.8, −4.1
1/10/105







S7

Pt
WORM
+3.5
105
CT

110




S13

Pt
SRAM
+3.4
105
CT

111




S18

Ni
WORM
+2.1, +3.1
1/104/107
Charge traps, CT

112




S19

Ni
WORM
+3.1
104
Charge traps

112




S20

Ni
WORM
+3.5
105
Charge traps

112




S21

Fe
Flash
−2.8, +2.8
105
Redox reaction

114




S22

Fe
Flash
−1.9, +2.1
103
Redox reaction

115




S23

Fe
Flash
−1.6, +1.5
106
Charge traps

116




S24

Fe
Flash
−1.6, +3
103
Redox reaction

113




S25

Fe
WORM
+1.8, +3.1
1/103/108
Charge traps, conductive filaments

117




S26

Ru
Erasable random access
−1.4, +1.0
103
Redox reaction

118




S27

Ru
Flash
−0.5, +0.5
105
Redox reaction

119




S28

Ru
Flash
−0.5, +0.5
105
Redox reaction

119




S29

Ru
Flash
−2.0, +2
104
Redox reaction

119




S30

Cr
Flash
−4.8, +4.6
104
—

122




S31

Cr
Flash
−2.2, +2.8
106
—

122




S32

Cr
WORM
+1.2
1.5 × 102
—

122




S33

Cr
WORM
+2.8
20
—

122




S34

Cr
—
—
—
—

122




S35

Sm
—
+7
102
CT

123




S36

Eu
—
+7
102
CT

123




S37

Gd
—
+7
102
CT

123




S38

Rh
Flash
−2.05, +2.75
103
—

124




S39

Ir
Flash
−2.5, +3.3
102
CT

125




S40

Co
Flash
−0.6, +2.6
103
CT

126




S42

Cu
—
+1.4 or +1.5
—
CT

127




S44

Al
WORM
+3.6
104
—

128






5.1.1 Au-Containing complexes. 
Au-Containing complexes have recently drawn much research attention for application in organic memory devices due to their relatively high chemical stability, environmental benignancy, and favorable photoluminescence properties.105 For instance, Stoliar et al. in 2015 firstly reported a neutral gold dithiolene complex [Au(Et-thiazdt)2] (S1), which behaves as an organic narrow-gap Mott insulator and exhibits a resistive switching as a result of the insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) under electric pulses.106 When electric pulses with the amplitude higher than E = 4Eth were applied, S1 showed a non-volatile reversible resistive switching with an ION/IOFF ratio over 100. The electrical switching mechanism is closely related to the Mott insulator character. When the external applied electric field is higher than the threshold avalanche breakdown field, the avalanche breakdown will occur and induce the collapse of the original Mott insulating state at the local scale, and then activate the formation of a granular conductive filament formed by metallic and super-insulating domains. This work also represents the first example of a molecular compound for Mott memories, which opens a new avenue for the development of high-performance Mott memories by introducing organometallic complexes.
Alkynylgold(III) complexes are another type of Au-containing complexes with interesting photophysical and electrochemical properties. Yam's group reported a series of alkynylgold(III) complexes and applied them in organic RRAM in the past several years. For example, in 2015, they reported an organic resistive memory device based on bis-cyclometalated alkynylgold(III) complex [Au(tBuC^N^CtBu)(CC–C6H4N(C6H5)2-p)] (tBuHC^N^CHtBu = 2,6-bis(4-tert-butylphenyl)pyridine) (S2).107 The ITO/S2/Al device showed the typical binary SRAM-type memory behavior with relatively low operating voltage (2.2–2.8V), high ION/IOFF ratio (>105), good stability, and long retention time (>104 s) (see Fig. 13(a and b)). Moreover, it was found that this gold(III)-based memory device could both work in the positive and negative bias. The memory mechanism is mainly ascribed to the stable charge-separated state as formed by the electron transfer from the electron-donating diphenylamino substituent of the phenylalkynyl moiety to the electron-accepting moiety of tBuC^N^CtBu under an electric field. However, when the triphenylamine (TPA) moiety in complex S2 was replaced by the electron-accepting unit of benzophosphole oxide (S3), the memory device of ITO/S3/Al exhibited a ternary SRAM-type memory behavior with a low threshold voltage (Vth1 = 1.54 and Vth2 = 2.64 V), high switching current ratio (IOFF/ION1/ION2 = 1/103/107), and long retention time (7.5 × 103 s) (see Fig. 13(c and d)).108 The CV results reveal that the ternary memory behavior is originated from the presence of two independent charge-trapping sites provided by the tBuC^N^CtBu ligand and the benzophosphole oxide moiety of S3, which possess different electron-withdrawing ability and would impede the mobility of the charge carriers in a stepwise manner. This work demonstrates that a high ternary memory performance could be achieved through facile introduction of an electron-accepting moiety into the cyclometalated Au(III) complex, which thus promotes the data storage capacity from 2n to 3n. More recently, the same group reported a series of trinuclear alkynylgold(I) complexes with N-alkyl substituted triindole ligands.109 These complexes can be self-assembled into spherical nanostructures in aqueous THF solution through π–π stacking interactions and hydrophobic-hydrophobic interactions of the triindole moieties upon solvent modulation. Then the memory devices based on Au(I) complexes (S4 and S5) were fabricated by solution-processing technology, which displayed the binary SRAM-type memory behavior similar to complex S2, with low switching voltage (Vth = 1.5 V), high ION/IOFF current ratio (105), long retention time (>104 s) and excellent stability. The low operating voltage is desirable for the low-power memory device. It is speculated that the triindole units can act as charge traps, which facilitate the formation of the electrical bistability and lead to the resistive switching behaviors of the devices. Substituting the peripheral unit from isocyanide (S4) to NHC ligand (S5) shows no obvious change in the memory behavior, suggesting the significance of the triindole core in governing the memory properties.
 Fig. 13  (a and b) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S2/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c and d) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S3/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Further to the research work of the above alkynylgold complexes in resistive memory, in 2017, Lu and co-workers reported an alkynyl-containing coumarin Au(III) complex S6, which exhibited the flash-type memory behavior at a low compliance current instead of the WORM-type as discussed above.105 However, when a high compliance current (10−2 A) was applied, the switching characteristic changed from flash-type binary memory behavior to WORM-type ternary one. Therefore, by judiciously incorporating the coumarin moieties into alkynylgold(III) system, the electronic properties can be finely tuned and the first example of flash-type memory based on alkynylgold(III) complex was realized. The flash switching mechanism was explained tentatively by the CT process between the 2,6-bis(benzi-midazol-2′-yl)pyridine (bzpy) ligand and alkynyl moieties, while the ternary WORM memory behavior was attributed to the CT process and the tunneling process of conductive filaments as formed from the penetration of Al electrode into the active layer. The above research works demonstrate that Au(III) and Au(I) organometallic complexes hold great application perspective for future flexible organic RRAM devices with low power consumption and high storage capacity. The above series of works by Yam et al. provide us with a guidance on the application of Au-containing complexes in RRAM. However, the exact role of Au element in regulating memory behaviors is still challenging and requires a deeper study.


5.1.2 Pt-Containing complexes. 
Due to the effects of metal–ligand interactions such as MLCT, metal–metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MMLCT), ligand-to-ligand charge transfer (LLCT), Pt-based D–A complexes can also display binary or multi-level electrical stabilities and have been applied in organic RRAM system. In 2017, Yam and co-workers reported a series of luminescent cyclometalated N^C^N [N^C^N = 1,3-bis(N-alkylbenzimidazol-2′-yl)benzene] platinum(II) alkynyl and carbazolyl complexes S7–S12.110 Complex S7 was then utilized to fabricate the memory device ITO/S7/Al, which showed the binary WORM-type switching behavior with a moderately low operating voltage (+3.5 V), high ION/IOFF ratio (>105) and long retention time (>104 s), and are comparable to the above Au(III) system. The electric switching effect of S7 based memory devices could be attributed to the CT between the D and A moieties. In the same year, Yam's group also reported a series of amphiphilic Pt(II) complexes (S13–S17) with tridentate N-donor ligands, which can be self-assembled in aqueous media through the formation of Pt⋯Pt and π–π stacking interactions.111 Among these, complex S13 showed a fast, reversible vapochromic and vapoluminescent response and high selectivity toward alcohol and water vapors due to the alteration in Pt⋯Pt and π–π stacking distances. Thus, rapid writing and erasure of information can be realized by controlling a jet or a stream of alcohol vapor flow (see Fig. 14(a)). Moreover, a resistive memory device based on complex S13 (ITO/S13/Al) was fabricated through solution spin-coating technology, showing binary WORM-type memory behavior with a high ION/IOFF ratio and excellent stability (see Fig. 14(b–e)). The CT process under an external electric field is believed to be the main contribution to the resistance switching phenomenon. So, due to the metal–ligand interactions as well as the intermolecular Pt⋯Pt and π–π stacking interactions, the Pt-containing complexes are also a class of promising functional materials for application in high performance organic RRAM.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photographic images of the reversible color changes associated with the vapochromic phenomenon, vapoluminescent phenomenon, and fast writing and erasure application in S13 solid and thin film states. Responsive times and cycle numbers for reversible vapoluminescent property of S13 when exposed to (b) methanol and water vapors and (c) methanol vapor and vacuum alternately. (d and e) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S13/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 


5.1.3 Ni-Containing complexes. 
Due to their unique and rich photophysical and electrochemical properties, a variety of metal porphyrins and their derivatives have been developed and applied in solar cells, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic field effect transistors (OFETs), and biomedicine. More recently, researchers have attempted to explore the application of inexpensive metal porphyrin-based compounds in the data memory system. Especially for graphene-like, 2D d–π conjugated porphyrins with the d8 Ni(II) metal center and D3h symmetry, they show potential application in RRAMs due to their conjugation facilitating carrier transportation. For instance, Yam et al. reported a solution-processable push–pull type of Ni(II) porphyrin complexes (S18) by tailoring the substituents at β-positions.112 By comparing with the push only (S19) and pull only (S20) Ni(II) porphyrin complexes, the memory behavior of push–pull type Ni(II) porphyrin complex based memory device (ITO/S18/Al) changes from the binary to the ternary WORM, as shown in Fig. 15. The charge trap of the Ni(II) porphyrin core and the CT process from the β-2-methylthiophenyl moieties to the porphyrin core and the charge-trapping states contributed by the porphyrin core were supposed to be responsible for the ternary memory behavior. This work demonstrates that incorporation of a push–pull system in the porphyrin core is an effective strategy to accomplish the ternary memory behavior, which provides inspirational insight and guiding principles to developing novel organic materials with multi-level memory behaviors.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic image of memory device structure. (b and c) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S18/Al device. (d) The bar chart of threshold voltage of “ON1” and “ON2” among 20 devices. (e and f) I–V curves of the ITO/S19 and S20/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH. 


5.1.4 Fe-Containing complexes. 
Incorporation of the Fe element is usually achieved by introducing Fc moiety into the molecular framework. Due to the stable 18 π-electron configuration and well-defined reversible redox property of Fc  solution processability as well as high thermal stability, the Fc-containing organometallic complexes with superb electron-transfer ability have been widely used in memory devices.113
As early as 2007, Kim et al. reported a ferrocene-cored-conjugated dendrimer (S21) and the two-terminal memory device based on S21 was fabricated.114 The I–V–R characteristic curves of device ITO/S21/LiF/Al showed an obvious non-volatile electrical bistability, resulting from the CT from the Fc to the conjugated dendron moiety. In order to explore low-cost non-volatile organic memory devices based on small molecules from the spin-coating fabrication process, Lee et al. in 2012 first reported a stable non-volatile rewritable flash-type memory device by using Fc-attached reduced graphene oxide (rGO) (S22) as the active layer through simple solution processing.115 From the I–V curves of the ITO/S22/Al device, it can be seen clearly that the electrical switching behavior of ferrocenylphenylamine with rGO is symmetric, dipolar, stable, and reproducible. The memory mechanism of this device is related to the redox reaction of Fc under an electric field. Besides, the excellent WRER cycles and retention time allow this device to hold outstanding application potential for non-volatile RRAM devices. Layer-by-layer assembly (LBL) method provides diverse opportunities to prepare functional nanoscale thin films with adjustable thickness on various substrates of different sizes and shapes. In 2012, Cho et al. fabricated the multilayers of cationic poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH)/anionic iron(III) phthalocyanine-4,4′,4′′,4′′′-tetrasulfonic acid (S23) on a Pt electrode by using an electrostatic LBL assembly method (see Fig. 16(a)).116 The nanostructures and resistive switching properties of the multilayers can be tailored easily by controlling the concentration of solutions, parameters of spin-coating and the number of assembled layers. The electrical measurement results of PAH/S23-based memory devices indicate that PAH/S23 multilayers possess voltage polarity-dependent non-volatile resistance switching behavior (see Fig. 16(b and c)). This memory characteristic is determined to be caused by the charge capture and release of the redox sites of metallic center and phthalocyanine ring of S23. Importantly, the memory performance can be further enhanced by an additional insertion of insulating layers (2 nm in thickness for each layer) between adjacent complex S23 layers with a high ION/IOFF ratio of 106 and a relatively low operating voltage of VRESET = +1.5 V and VSET = −1.6 V, respectively. This is because that the insulating layers can effectively decrease the leakage current flow in the ON and OFF states and consequently lower the power consumption.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematics for the LBL assembly of PAH and S23. (b) I–V curves of the Pt/(PAH/S23)n/Ag devices. (c) Retention time of a device with 20 bilayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In 2019, by introducing the redox-active Fc into a pyrene-containing conjugated molecular backbone, Lu and co-workers synthesized an organometallic complex S24.113 By employing the electric-field-induced electrochemical redox reaction of Fc, the memory device (Al/S24/ITO) showed an excellent rewritable flash-type binary memory behavior with low write/erase voltages, high ION/IOFF ratio, and good reproducibility, which are desirable for low-power-consuming electronics. To further explore nontoxic, nonpolluting, distortion-tolerable, and biodegradable active materials for flexible memory electronics, Lu's group designed and synthesized a stable thin film of tannic acid (TA)–Fe(III) coordination complex S25, which are prepared by a one-step self-assembly of TA and ferric chloride hexahydrate in aqueous solution.117 All the S25-based memory devices either on the ITO glass or various flexible substrates such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyimide (PI), grapefruit leaf, and printing paper. showed the stable non-volatile ternary WORM-type memory behavior. The resistance switching mechanism is mainly attributed to charge trapping and filamentary conduction due to the electrochemical reduction of Al3+ penetrated from the Al electrode. Therefore, due to the excellent reversible redox property, introduction of Fe element can modulate the electrical, optical, and physical properties and thus effectively increase the conductivity of organic compounds, which will significantly influence the memory behaviors of the resultant memory devices.


5.1.5 Ru-Containing complexes. 
In the past few years, attributable to their unique octahedral geometrical structure, tunable photophysical, photochemical and electrochemical properties, stable and accessible oxidation states from Ru(I) to Ru(IV), and good solubility, Ru complexes have been widely used in different electronic devices, i.e. light emitting diodes (LEDs) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Recently, application of Ru complexes in organic data memory has gradually received more and more attention. In 2008, Das and co-workers synthesized a new bis(2,2′-bipyridyl)(triazolopyridyl)ruthenium(II) complex S26 and investigated the resistive memory behavior of Ru complexes for the first time.118 The device ITO/S26/Al exhibited rewritable flash-type random-access memory behavior with low operating threshold voltages (VSET = −1.3 and VRESET = +1.0 V) and high ION/IOFF ratio (103). The resistance switching mechanism is mainly due to the electron accepting nature of the Ru center, which will be reduced when the applied bias is increased to the reduction potential of the Ru complex and the charge carrier transport through the molecules is enhanced. The reduced Ru complex is then oxidized and returns to the OFF state by applying the reverse voltage. To address the issues of low switching speed, insufficient reproducibility, stability, endurance, and scalability of the present organic resistive memory devices, Venkatesan et al. in 2017 reported a series of memristive devices based on aromatic azopyridyl Ru complexes (S27–S29) with different counter anions.119 As shown in Fig. 17(a and b), two types of devices were fabricated, one of which has the ITO top electrode, and the other one uses Au NPs for interface engineering to lower the charge injection barrier. Both of the two types of devices displayed the flash-type memory behavior with excellent endurance (∼1012 cycles), high reproducibility (∼350 devices), fast switching (≤30 ns), and high stability (>106 s) (see Fig. 17(c and d)). It can be seen from the I–V curves that the introduction of the NPs layer in the device can significantly reduce the threshold voltage (from ∼4 V to ∼0.5 V for S28). The resistance switching phenomenon is mainly caused by the ligand redox process under the applied bias voltage. The presence of NPs has no influence on the operation mechanism of the devices but only decreases the charge injection barriers. In addition, the counter anions of the complexes also have a great impact on the memory behaviors of the devices. Compared with the large-sized anions (e.g. BPh4−), the use of small-sized anions (e.g. Cl− and PF6−) can probably reduce the threshold voltage and increase the switching current ratio (see Fig. 17(e and f)). Therefore, a strategy of combining the molecular redox processes and counterion displacement can effectively manipulate the resistive memory behaviors of Ru-based complexes.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the device ITO/S27–S29/Al device. (b) AFM-image of the topography of a planar ITO-bottom electrode (top panel) and an ITO electrode covered with sputtered Au NPs (bottom panel). (c) I–V curves of the 321 devices with planar electrodes (device A). (d) I–V curves of the 50 devices with NP electrodes (device B). (e) Effect of counterions in device A. (f) Effect of counterions in device B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 


5.1.6 Cr-Containing complexes. 
Due to the scarcity and high price of precious metals, the earth-abundant and economical transition metal complexes (TMCs) have been widely explored and attracted extensive attention in the recent years.120 For example, Cr(III) complexes have recently regained interest of researchers for the data memory devices due to their d3 electron configuration and special magnetic, redox, and photophysical properties.121 In 2018, Roy et al. reported a series of homoleptic and heteroleptic polypyridyl Cr(III) complexes by varying the bidentate diamine ligands, [Cr(N-N)2(N-N′)]X3, where N-N = 1,10-phenanthroline, N-N′ = 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine, 3,4,7,8-tetramethyl-1,10-phenanthroline, 5,6-dibromo-1,10-phenanthroline or 4,4--bis(methoxycarbonyl)-2,2--bipyridine, X = CF3SO3− or PF6− counter anion (S30–S34).122 The memory devices based on these solution-processable Cr(III) complexes (Al/S30–S34/Al) were fabricated by the facile spin-coating technology, and the structure–memory performance relationship was then systematically investigated. The I–V curves of the devices based on S30 and S31 show a reversible and stable bipolar flash-type switching characteristic with the high ION/IOFF ratios of 104 and 106, respectively (see Fig. 18(a and b)). The WORM-type memory behaviors can be observed in the I–V curves of S32 and S33-based devices, showing ION/IOFF ratios of only 150 and 20, respectively (see Fig. 18(c and d)). In contrast to S30 and S31, the WORM electrical behaviors of S32 and S33 can be attributed to their irreversible oxidation in the presence of the destabilizing electron-withdrawing substituents on the diimine ligand, and the low ION/IOFF ratios are probably due to the more extensive delocalization of hole carriers over the electron-rich phenanthroline ligands of S32 and S33. Notably, the homoleptic complex S34 shows almost no resistance switching phenomenon, because the hole carriers can be evenly delocalized over the three identical diamine ligands (see Fig. 18(e)). The memory device based on the classical homoleptic Ru(II) complex [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) was also fabricated and tested, exhibiting poor memory performance similar to that of S34 (see Fig. 18(f)). This demonstrates that unsymmetrical coordination configuration of metal complexes can significantly influence the memory behavior, and thus the switching characteristics can be easily manipulated by modifying the ligands of metal complexes. However, it remains unclear whether the heteroleptic coordination configuration for other TMCs is more efficient than the homoleptic one in realizing high-performance resistive memory.
 Fig. 18  
I–V curves of the devices of (a) Al/S30/Al, (b) Al/S31/Al, (c) Al/S32/Al, (d) Al/S33/Al, (e) Al/S34/Al and (f) Al/[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2/Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright © 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.1.7 Other metal-containing complexes. 
Rare earth (RE) complexes with narrow optical bandgaps show rich emission characteristics and have been widely used in electroluminescent devices as phosphors for a long time. Recently, it is found that RE complexes can also act as a type of materials with the function of resistive switching. In 2006, Ma et al. disclosed the electrical memory behaviors of Sm(III) (S35), Eu(III) (S36), and Gd(III) (S37) RE complexes.123 With dopants of S35–S37 as the electron acceptors (electron transport layers) and PVK host as the electron donor (hole transport layer), a series of multilayer devices ITO/PEDOT/PVK:S35–S37/LiF/Ca/Ag were fabricated, which showed electrical bistability and repeatable resistive memory behaviors. Besides, more than 106 WRER cycles were accomplished in ambient conditions with high stability. The addition of PEDOT and LiF layers can significantly improve the read and write stability of the devices, but the threshold voltages of these devices were also increased (7 V). It is concluded that this bistable resistance switching memory behavior is mainly attributed to an electrical-field-induced CT between PVK and RE complexes. This work provides a new pathway of preparing active materials for organic memory devices by simply doping RE organic complexes into suitable conducting polymers.
In 2012, Goswami and coworkers reported a diradical rhodium(III) complex [RhIII(L˙−)2(L)] CF3SO3 with three aromatic azopyridyl ligands.124 The device based on S38 ([RhIII(L˙−)2(L)]CF3SO3, L = 2-(4-chlorophenylazo)pyridine) (Au/S38/Au) reveals a flash-type memory behavior with low threshold voltages (−2.05 and +2.75 V) and high ION/IOFF switching ratio (103) (Fig. 19). It is discovered that no electrical switching phenomenon was observed when free azopyridyl ligand was used as the active layer, while switching and memory phenomenon can be achieved from the free radical ligand coordinated Rh(III) complex. The resistance switching process is deduced to originate from the shifting of electrode Fermi levels with the applied potential and their alignment with the donor and acceptor orbitals of the materials. Although the ION/IOFF switching ratio is not as high as those of the available devices, the advantages of low area, decreased power consumption and fast operation speed of this device allow it to be potentially used for RAM and ROM. In addition to Rh(III) complexes, Goswami et al. also reported two diradical 2-(arylazo)pyridine coordinated Ir(III) complexes ([IrIII(L˙−)2(L)]BF4) in 2014.125 The memory device based on complex S39 with the chlorinated ligand (Au/S39/Au) was investigated in detail, showing bipolar memristive behaviors with high repeatability and sustainability. The satisfactory measurement result of the WRER cycles in pulse mode verifies the admirable application prospect of Ir(III) complex S39 for RAM system. The memory mechanism is preliminarily attributed to the redox dynamics which are metal independent and controlled entirely by the ligands. The thin film of S39 acts as a channel between the electrodes in a particular redox state, which form local cells with the electrodes during the redox transitions and enable electron transfer. The control measures of the local cells and their position in the voltage sweep process can further optimize the devices.
 Fig. 19  (a) Molecular view of the complex S38. (b and c) Cross-sectional view and I–V curves of the Au/S38/Au device. (d and e) Input applied voltage sequence and output current responses during the write–read–erase–read cycle of the device. (f) Retention time of the ON and OFF state of the Au/S38/Au device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
It is known that the rich and tunable redox properties of TMCs can facilitate the modulation of the switching behaviors of resistive memory devices. In 2017, Zhong and co-workers reported the application of a Co(II) bis-terpyridine complex decorated with two TPA motifs (S40) as an active layer in resistive memory, displaying a high ION/IOFF ratio (>103) and low threshold voltage (−0.6 and +2.6 V).126 In contrast, the device based on the Co(II) complex without TPA groups (S41) shows the ill-defined memory behavior due to the rough and crystalline surface morphology. It was concluded that the memory behavior of the ITO/S41/Au device is likely originated from the CT process, and the introduction of TPA motifs is conducive to the formation of a uniform and amorphous surface, which is of great significance for reducing the threshold voltage of the device and improving the memory performance. Therefore, the structural modification of organic ligands is an effective pathway to improve the film morphology and resistance memory performance of metal complexes.
Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato) aluminum (Alq3) as excellent organic semiconductors with special optical and electronic properties have been widely applied in various electronic devices. In 2015, Abbas et al. reported a surface-type two-terminal memory device based on CuPc (S42) and H2Pc with Cu and Ag as electrodes.127 The gap between Ag and Cu electrodes was in the range of 30–40 μm. It was found that the device displayed a non-volatile memory behavior, and its Vth value increased as the gap between the metal electrodes increased. The memory mechanism can be attributed to the electric-field-induced CT of electrons from CuPc (donor) to H2Pc (acceptor). More recently, Yam et al. rationally designed and synthesized a new type of Alq3-based complexes (S43–S46) by introducing the photochromic dithienylethene units with different peripheral heterocycles into the Alq3 framework, all of which demonstrate good photoinduced cyclization.128 Among these complexes, the resistive memory devices based on S44 were successfully fabricated by solution process. The I–V characteristics of the memory devices indicate that closed-form of complex S44 shows a stable electrical switching phenomenon after photoirradiation, while the open-form isomer (without photoirradiation) exhibits only a gradual increase in current with no abrupt increase. The reason for the different memory behaviors of devices without and after exposure to UV light is that the energy barrier between the work function of ITO and the HOMO level of the active layer as well as the HOMO–LUMO energy gap after light irradiation are significantly decreased. This is the first example of Alq3-based resistive memory devices in addition to the versatile application of Alq3 in organic electronics.
It can be learnt from the above discussion that the performance of RRAM based on these small-molecule organometallic complexes is largely related to the special optical, electronic and magnetic properties of the metal elements. To further enhance the performance of RRAM, the exploration of universal design principles of small-molecule organometallic complexes and the selection of cheaper metal core should be taken into consideration.

5.2 RRAM devices based on metallopolymers
Beyond small-molecule organometallic complexes, metallopolymers are another main type of metal-containing organic materials for application in RRAM. Compared with metal doping or blended polymer systems, metallopolymers can avoid the problem of phase separation to a large extent, thereby decreasing the leakage current. Metallopolymers with different metal centers located in side chain and/or backbone of the polymers display a diversity of structures and properties, thus leading to versatile applications. For example, metallopolymers with reversible redox properties are of interest for nano-electronics, electrocatalysis, information storage, sensing, OLEDs and photovoltaic devices. Recently, by taking advantages of the novel redox and CT properties as well as the easy adjustability of the molecular structure, metallopolymers have shown brilliant application prospects in the field of resistive memory.129–131 So far, a number of metallopolymer-based memory devices have been reported, including europium (Eu)-containing metallopolymers, Fe-containing metallopolymers, iridium (Ir)-containing metallopolymers, Pt-containing metallopolymers, cobalt (Co)-containing metallopolymers, Cu-containing metallopolymers, Ru-containing metallopolymers and zinc (Zn)-containing metallopolymers, which will be summarized and discussed in the following section (Schemes 3 and 4 and Table 2).
Table 2 Summary of RRAM based on metallopolymers




Complexes
Metal
Memory type
Threshold voltage (V)
ON/OFF ratio
Mechanism
Ref.





P1

Eu
Flash
−2.0, +4.0
104
CT

132




P2

Eu
Flash
−2.8, +4.4
105
CT

133




P3

Eu
WORM
+4
2 × 102
CT

134




P4

Eu
WORM
+3
4 × 104
CT

135




P5

Eu
WORM
+3
106
CT

136




P6

Fe
Flash
−1.9, +1.4
103
Redox mechanism

61




P7

Fe
—
−2.0, +3.0
10
Redox mechanism

137




P8

Fe
—
+2.0
103
Conductive filaments

138




P9

Fe
Flash
−3.0, +1.5
103
CT

139




P10

Fe
Flash
−3.2, +1.4
103
CT

140




P11

Fe
Flash
−1.0, +2.0
103–104
Redox mechanism

141




P12

Fe
Flash
−0.7, +3.0
102
Redox mechanism

141




P13

Fe
Flash
−0.5, +3.2
102
Redox mechanism

141




P14

Fe
WORM
−2.0
102
Redox mechanism

141




P15

Fe
Flash
−0.6, +3.0
103–104
Redox mechanism

142




P16

Fe
Flash
−0.5, +3.2
102
Redox mechanism

142




P17

Fe
Flash
−2.5, +3.7
102
Redox mechanism

142




P18

Fe
WORM
−1.89
102
Redox mechanism

143




P19

Fe
WORM
+1.54
0.8 × 102
Redox mechanism

143




P20

Fe
Flash
−2, +2
104
Redox reaction

144




P21

Ir
Flash
−1.6, +2.8
105
CT

147




P22

Ir
Flash
−0.9, +3.4
103
CT

147




P23

Ir
Flash
−1.1, +3.8
103
CT

147




P24

Ir
Flash
−1.2, +4.1
103
CT

148




P25

Ir
Flash
−1.4, +3.7
103
CT

148




P26

Ir
Flash
−0.55, −1.15, +2.5
1/101.5/104.5
CT

41




P27

Pt
Flash
−2.6, +3.0
103
CT

149




P28

Pt
Flash
−1.6, +2.88
103
CT

149




P29

Pt
Flash
−1.5, +4.1
103
CT

150




P30

Co
Flash
−5.0, +4.5
102
Redox mechanism

152




P31

Co
Flash
—
<10
Redox mechanism

152




P32

Co
WORM
+2.7, +3.4
1/103/106
CT, conductive filaments

153




P33

Cu
WORM
+2.5
106
Conductive filaments

154




P34

Cu
WORM
−1.8, −3.5
1/102/105
CT, Charge trapping

155




P35

Ru
Flash
−4.3, 3.4
102–103
CT

156




P36

Ru
Flash
—
<15
CT

156




P37

Ru
—
+2
4
Conductive filaments

157




P38

Zn
DRAM
−3.9, +3.9
108
CT

158




P39

Zn
WORM
−4.2, +4.6
108
CT

159




P40

Zn
SRAM
−3.3, +3.2
106
CT

160




P41

Na
Flash
+2.8
105
Ionic migration

161




P42

Ca
Flash
+3.8
104
Ionic migration

161




P43

Pr8
WORM
+2.7
106
Charge trapping

162




P44

Ni
WORM
−1.5, +2.8
1/103/107
TFLC and SCLC models, GBLC model

163




P45

Ni
WORM
−1.6, +2.8
1/104/108



163






5.2.1 Eu-Containing metallopolymers. 
In 2005, Kang et al. reported the first Eu(III)-containing polymer poly[N-vinylcarbazole-co-Eu(vinylbenzoate)(2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone)2 phenanthroline] (P1) for application in resistive memory devices.132 The current density–voltage (J–V) curve shows that polymer P1 has a non-volatile rewritable memory behavior with a high ION/IOFF ratio of 104 (Fig. 20(a)). The resistance switching mechanism of P1 was assigned to the electric field-induced formation and dissociation of charge-transfer state between Cz motifs and Eu(III) complex. Then, in 2006, the same group synthesized a nonconjugated copolymer P2 containing Cz moieties (donor), 1,3,4-oxadiazole (Ox) groups (acceptor), and dangled Eu(III) complexes in the side chain.133 Compared to P1, the memory device based on P2 (ITO/P2/Al) shows better and excellent memory performance with a high switching current ratio of 105, a response time close to 1.5 μs, high WRER cycles of more than 106, and a retention time of longer than 8 h (Fig. 20(b and c)). It was proved that the CT process between the D and A units leads to the memory behavior of the device through molecular simulation. Besides, the Ox component acts as a mediator, which promotes the transfer of carriers from the respective HOMOs and LUMOs of the Cz and Eu components, so that the device has a faster switching time due to the reduced internal energy barriers and accelerated hole transport. The extremely large dipole moment of Ox is conducive to the maintenance of the separated charges and improves the retention time and stability of the memory device (Fig. 20(d and e)). The ethyl acrylate spacer between the Cz group and the polymer backbone causes a less regioregular conformation of the Cz groups, which increases the operation voltage and switching current ratio.
 Fig. 20  (a) I–V curves, (b) ON and OFF state on 1 V read pulses (the inset shows the pulses used for the measurement) of the ITO/P2/Al device. (c) Transient response of switching time from ON to OFF state (the inset shows the corresponding circuit used in the measurement). (d) The HOMO and LUMO levels and (e) energy levels for components (Cz, Ox and Eu) in P2 (the inset shows the plausible electronic processes induced by an electric field). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society. 
Afterwards, Kang and co-workers synthesized polymers P3–P5 containing the electron-donating fluorene motifs and dangling electron-accepting units of Eu(III) complex.134–136 All the devices based on P3–P5 displayed WORM-type memory behaviors with a mechanism of CT process between fluorene motifs and Eu(III) complexes. The electron-accepting ability of the Eu(III) complex in the polymer plays a key role in the memory behavior of devices. For P3, with 2-thenoyltrifluoro-acetone as the chelating ligand, its memory devices show a higher threshold voltage of 4 V and lower ION/IOFF current ratio of 2 × 102. In contrast, the devices based on P4 and P5 with dibenzoylmethanate as the chelating ligands exhibit high ION/IOFF current ratios of 104 and 106, respectively. The low conductivity state of these devices is dominated by the charge injection controlled current, whereas the high conductivity state is controlled by the SCLC current. These results indicate that the introduction of Eu complexes can effectively modulate the resistive behaviors by acting as the electron acceptor and promoting the CT process.


5.2.2 Fe-Containing metallopolymers. 
As mentioned in the above section, the Fc moiety is usually adopted for introducing the Fe element into the molecular backbone due to its excellent redox characteristic. By incorporating Fc and its derivatives into conjugated polymers either in the side chain or the main chain, a diversity of Fe-containing metallopolymers were explored for organic RRAM system with respectable performances.
In 2007, Choi et al. first reported the organic electrical memory based on the conjugated Fc-containing polymer P6, which showed good non-volatile bipolar resistive memory function as a result of the redox reaction of Fc groups.61 The endurance of P6-based memory device was determined by the WRER cycles in pulse mode, showing a high stability with an ION/IOFF ratio of up to 103. Moreover, it was found that the retention time for P6 device was longer than 7 h, originating from the unique property of Fc's stable redox activity where ferrocenium ion can maintain its oxidized state. Then in 2016, Li et al. reported a memristor based on terpyridyl-iron polymer P7 for simulating the functions of synapse.137 The I–V curves of Ta/viologen diperchlorate [EV(ClO4)2]/P7/ITO structured devices indicate that the device resistance can be manipulated continuously by voltage stimulation, like that of the non-linear transmission characteristics of biological synapses (Fig. 21(a and b)). The memristive behavior was attributed to the redox characteristics of the terpyridyl-iron polymer and viologen species. Essential synaptic plasticity and learning behaviors, such as nonlinear transmission characteristics, potentiation and depression of the synaptic weight, spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), spike-rate-dependent plasticity (STRP), short-term memory and long-term memory (STM/LTM) of human brains, are also emulated by using this memristor, which shows the possibility of using organic RRAM for constructing the neuromorphic information storage and processing systems (Fig. 21(c–f)). More recently, Wong et al. also reported a new D–A type Fc-containing conjugated polymer P8 through the copolymerization of 1,1′-diiodoferrocene and diethynyl-substituted TPA ligand.138 The Ag/P8/Pt memristors with crossbar structures were fabricated, which exhibited obvious resistive-switching characteristics with decent ION/IOFF ratio and retention time. The resistive-switching behavior can be ascribed to the formation of conductive filaments due to the penetration of Ag electrode under an electric field. Importantly, the emulation of the biological response of the human brain has also been successfully realized, especially for the STM and paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) behaviors. The above works illustrate the potential applications of memristor devices based on these metallopolymers in the brain-inspired devices and systems in the future.
 Fig. 21  (a) I–V curves of the ITO/EV(ClO4)2 + PEO/P7/Ta memristor showing non-linear transmission behavior similar to that of a biological synapse. The inset shows the schematic image of the memristor. (b) Device current in response to a series of positive and negative voltage stimulations showing the respective potentiation and depression of the synaptic weight. Evolution of the device (c) current and (d) current change with 10 voltage pulse stimulations at different frequencies. (e) The profiles of the pre-synaptic and post-synaptic spikes consisting of a voltage pulse pair with the amplitude, duration and separation of 3 V, 10 ms, 2 s and −2 V, 10 ms, 2 s respectively. (f) Change of the synaptic weight with the relative timing of the pre-synaptic and post-presynaptic spike-pair application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from the metallopolymers with Fe element located in the main chain, various polymers with Fc moiety grafted in the side chain have also been developed. For instance, Wu et al. reported a soluble Fe-containing polymer by chemically grafting the Fc groups onto the side chain of the parent polymer of polyimide compound (hexafluoroisopropyl bis(phthalicdianhydride)/4-(bis(4-aminophenyl)methyl)) phenol (6FDA/DHTM) (P9).139 The P9-based device (ITO/P9/Au) showed the rewritable non-volatile flash-type memory behavior with the ION/IOFF current ratio of about 103. The storage mechanism is primarily attributed to the CT process between 6FDA and Fc moieties, which are typical electron acceptors and electron donors, respectively. However, the counterpart without Fc groups shows no resistive-switching phenomenon, indicating that Fc units play a critical factor in achieving the electrical bistability of the device. Then in 2018, the same group designed and synthesized another Fe-containing polymer (P10) similar to P9, simply by replacing the DHTM units with the flexible 4,4′-diaminodiphenyl ether (4,4′-ODA) and 4,4′-diamino-4′′-ferrocenyltriphenylamine (DAFcTPA) moieties.140 The P10-based memory device also showed the flash-type resistive-switching behavior, with performance superior to that of P9 based device. This is because that the combination of TPA and Fc can act as the electron donor with enhanced electron-donating ability and hole transport capabilities. Besides, the non-volatile memory characteristic of P10 is suggested to result from the electron-excitation-accompanied conformation twist, which provides an energy barrier and stabilizes the CT state. In 2015, Wong's group designed and synthesized four new conjugated Fe-containing poly(fluorenylethnylene)s (P11–P14) with TPA, Cz, or thiophene moieties in the polymeric backbone and Fc groups as pendants.141 The I–V curves indicate that P11–P13 based devices showed flash-type memory behaviors, while P14-based device displayed a typical WORM memory behavior. This suggests that the memory properties can be easily tuned by modifying the molecular structures of the active polymeric backbones. The CT process due to the reversible redox properties of Fc groups is proved to be the dominated memory mechanism. Afterwards, we reported a series of non-conjugated Fc-containing polymers P15–P17 with flash memory behaviors.142 All memory devices based on polymers P15–P17 exhibited bipolar flash-type resistive-switching characteristics with high stability and reproductivity. Among them, P15-based device showed the highest switching current ratio of 103–104 and the lowest OFF switch voltage of 2.5 V due to the large free volume and significant conformational freedom of TPA units. The favorable intrachain π–π stacking of planar benzothiazole (BT) unit allows P16 based device to be easily switched to a highly conductive state through a slight conformational change at a low ON switch voltage of −0.5 V. Due to the rigid molecular skeleton of P17, the highest ON threshold voltage of −2.5 V is required to switch the memory device to a highly conductive state. More recently, Dong et al. further reported two Fc-containing porphyrin-based polymers P18 and P19, showing a typical WORM memory behavior with a moderate ION/IOFF current ratio.143 It is shown that the conjugated backbone of the polymer can increase the transport of carriers and adjust the threshold voltage of the device. In 2019, to achieve the multi-level information storage, Chen et al. synthesized a conjugated polymer (P20) by introducing redox-active moieties of TPA and Fc as pendants onto the polyfluorene skeleton through the Suzuki coupling polymerization and “Click” chemistry.144 Due to the triple oxidation properties of P20, the device ITO/P20/Pt displayed exciting quaternary resistive-switching characteristic with a relatively low ION/IOFF current ratio but high retention time. The continuous oxidation of TPA and Fc groups is determined to be the key factor for the multi-level memory behavior. Then the decimal arithmetic operations as well as simple Boolean logic operations based on the P20 device are also accomplished, providing insights into the development of high-performance intelligent computing beyond the conventional von Neumann paradigm.
In 2017, Guan and co-workers designed and synthesized Fc-terminated hyperbranched polyimide (HBPI-Fc).145 The memory device shows excellent irreversible bipolar non-volatile WORM-type memory character with a relatively low Vth and high ION/IOFF ratio (104). By analyzing the I–V curves, it can be learnt that the bipolar electrical transition behavior of the devices was mainly controlled by the trap-limited SCLC and filamentary conduction mechanism, resulting from the trap sites of the electrophilic imide rings and nucleophilic Fc moieties.


5.2.3 Ir-containing metallopolymers. 
Polymers that contain phosphorescent Ir(III) complexes are a class of well-known electroluminescent materials for application in OLEDs.146 Like the above Fc moiety, Ir(III) complexes can also be introduced into the main-chain or side-chain of polymers. In the last decade, a number of Ir-containing polymers have been explored and shown to hold promise for application in polymer memory devices. For example, in 2011, Huang et al. reported a series of polyfluorenes containing different Ir(III) complexes in the main chain (P21–P23) (Fig. 22(a)), all of which showed stable non-volatile flash-type memory behaviors due to the CT process between the 9,9′-dioctylfluorene moieties (D) and cationic Ir(III) complex moieties (A) in the metallopolymers under an applied electric field (Fig. 22(b)).147P21-based device displayed a low threshold voltage (VSET = −1.6 V, VRESET = 2.9 V) and the highest ION/IOFF ratio (>105) as compared to those of P22- and P23-based devices. This can be explained by the highest dipole moment of P21 (5.37 D) than the value of 4.13 and 3.64 D for P22 and P23, respectively, because a larger dipole moment is beneficial for the stabilization of CT state. Besides, the higher electron affinity of Ir(III) complexes in P21 than P22 and P23 can also facilitate the formation of stable CT state. Hence, the memory behavior of metallopolymers can be facilely adjusted by changing the metal center and ligand structure (Fig. 22(c)). In the following years, Huang and co-workers designed and synthesized metallopolymers P24 and P25 by introducing Ir(III) complexes into the side chain of the polycarbazole and polyfluorene, respectively.148 Both P24- and P25-based devices (ITO/polymer/Al) exhibited a flash-type memory behavior as a result of the CT process between polycarbazole or polyfluorene (D) and Ir(III) complexes (A). Moreover, due to the small bandgap of P24, the memory device of which showed a relatively low Vth. To further improve the storage capacity of the polymer memory device, in 2012, Huang's group further explored a new on-chain Ir(III) complex (P26) by introducing electroactive pendant chromophore Cz groups into a D–A system containing Cz (D) and Ir(III) complex (A).41 The ITO/P26/Al device showed an excellent ternary memory behavior with a low threshold voltage and good stability, which is attributed to the conformational transition mechanism of the Cz group and the CT mechanism between the D and A groups. This work provides valuable guidelines for the future molecular design of materials with the function of ternary or multi-level data storage.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of the ITO/P21 or P22 or P23/Al device and polymer skeleton with different metal-complex units. (b) Memory mechanism of the device. (c) The design principle of polymers containing metal complexes for memory devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright © 2011, Wiley-VCH. 


5.2.4 Pt-Containing metallopolymers. 
Based on the previous research works on the polymer resistive memory devices with Ir-containing metallopolymers as active materials, in 2012, Huang et al. firstly reported two conjugated Pt-containing polymers (P27 and P28) by grafting Pt(II) complexes onto the side chain of polymer backbones of polyfluorene and copolymer of polyfluorene-co-polycarbazole, respectively.149 The devices based on P27 and P28 showed the excellent non-volatile flash-type memory behavior with high switching ION/IOFF ratio (>103) and good stability. According to the DFT calculations, it can be learnt that the CT process occurs from the HOMO of polyfluorene moieties to the LUMO+1 of Pt(II) complex moieties (Fig. 23(a–d)). The continuous molecular electrostatic potential over the whole main-chain and side-chain of polymer constructs a conducting channel for the migration of charge carriers along the polymer main-chain and between the main-chain and side-chain. The threshold voltage of the device can be adjusted by changing the group of the conjugated backbone structure (Fig. 23(e and d)). Moreover, the Vth value of P28-based device is lower than that of P27 as a result of the small bandgap of P28. In the same year, Huang and co-workers also reported a new polymer with Pt(II) complexes in the main chain of the polymer (P29).150 The P29-based device (ITO/P29/Al) also exhibited a flash-type memory behavior with a high switching ION/IOFF ratio and moderate low Vth through the similar CT mechanism as above.
 Fig. 23  (a and b) The HOMO, LUMO, and LUMO+1 energy levels of model oligomers and ESP surfaces of P27. (c and d) The HOMO, LUMO, and LUMO+1 energy levels of model oligomers and ESP surfaces of P28. (e) Molecular simulation of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels for P27 and P28 along with the work function of the electrodes. (f) Memory mechanism of the devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Clearly, the device performance of RRAM based on Pt-containing metallopolymers can be significantly improved due to their favorably good redox reversibility and excellent electron affinity capacity, which renders Pt-containing metallopolymers the ideal storage materials for realizing binary or multi-level memory behaviors. Meanwhile, Pt-containing metallopolymers can be easily processed via a solution process, avoiding the problem of phase separation due to the poor compatibility in the mixed system of the metal species and polymers.


5.2.5 Co-Containing metallopolymers. 
It has been demonstrated that the conjugation length of the organic main chain in the polymer has a significant effect on the charge transport property of polymers.151 Meanwhile, the interaction between the metal center and the organic main chain plays a critical role in the conductivity of metallopolymers. In 2017, Higuchi et al. reported the synthesis of Co(III)-containing conjugated polymer (P30) and non-conjugated polymer (P31) with an azo-aromatic backbone and the fabrication of their memristive devices.152 From the I–V curves, it can be observed that both P30 and P31 based devices exhibited bistable memory behaviors resulting from the redox reaction of Co center under the applied bias. Notably, the switching ION/IOFF ratio of the P30 based device is 100 times higher than that of P31. Moreover, when the applied voltage increases, the P30 device shows better controllability in limiting the leakage current than the P31 device. This is because that the conjugated matrix around Co atom is beneficial for the carrier transport, which thus reduces the amount of heat generated at the junction. The leakage current control is one of the pivotal challenges in the development of state-of-the-art electronic devices. In the same year, Lu and co-workers reported a series of hyperbranched Co(II)-containing copolymers with different ligand ratios.153 The electrical measurement results of memory devices demonstrate that the device based on P32 with the ligand ratio of 50:50 holds the non-volatile ternary memory character with the IHRS/IIRS/ILRS ratio of 1:103:106. Interestingly, P32-based device also showed the thermoresponsive memory behavior, in which it can switch between HRS and LRS in the heating–cooling process (Fig. 24(a and b)). The reason for the thermoresponsive memory behavior is that the breaking and formation of conductive filaments is controlled by the reversible MLCT transition of the copolymer, which occurs during the partial metal–ligand dissociation and regeneration of the metal–ligand interactions in the heating–cooling process (Fig. 24(c–h)). During the heating process, the conductive filaments in the film may be broken and the device returns to a low conductivity state. The significant advances of Co-containing metallopolymers in RRAM manifest the fact that the introduction of Co elements is not only effective in realizing multi-level storage, but also has developed a new way to induce resistive switching. This will offer new insights for memristor-based sense-storage-calculation integrated technology.
 Fig. 24  (a) I–V curves of the ITO/P32/Al device. (b) Memory behavior of the device under heating and cooling. (c–e) AFM surface images and the corresponding cross-sectional profiles (f–h) of P32 on ITO substrates (c) at r.t., (d) at heating, and (e) cooling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 


5.2.6 Cu-Containing metallopolymers. 
Copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and derivatives have many excellent photoelectronic properties due to its two-dimensional centrosymmetric conjugated electronic structure, which allows them to hold an attractive application perspective in RRAM. In 2008, Ree et al. fabricated a resistive memory device based on a soluble and thermally-stable hyperbranched copper phthalocyanine (HCuPc) polymer (P33), which showed a programmable non-volatile WORM-type memory behavior.154 The P33-based device can undergo a transition from a high conductivity state to a low conductivity state under a positive or negative voltage sweep with the ION/IOFF ratio up to 4.2 × 106. Once the device was switched to the OFF state, it will not return to the ON state after turning off the power or applying an opposite bias. The resistive-switching phenomenon of P33-based device can be ascribed to the breakdown of conductive filaments as formed by the HCuPc active layer under the applied electric field. To achieve high density storage for polymer memory devices, in 2015, Lu et al. demonstrated a novel metallopolymer P34 by introducing the Cu(II) complex into the side chain of the polymer with azobenzene-pyridine group in the backbone.155 With the existence of metal complex in the molecular skeleton, the memory behavior of the resultant polymer changed from binary to ternary. The ternary memory behavior is attributed to the electron transition of the azopyridine moiety and MLCT process. After the Cu atoms in P34 were replaced by Pd atoms, the ternary memory behavior remains, further verifying the feasibility and effectiveness of the strategy of introducing metal complex into polymer for ternary memory materials.


5.2.7 Ru-Containing metallopolymers. 
Due to the stable and accessible oxidation states from Ru(I) to Ru(IV), Ru-containing metallopolymers are quite competitive for application in RRAM. In 2015, Yao et al. first reported a dinuclear Ru-containing polymer (P35) and a mononuclear Ru-containing polymer (P36) by the low-cost electropolymerization of the corresponding diruthenium and monoruthenium complexes, affording adhesive films in situ on electrodes.156 From the I–V curves, it is learnt that P35-based device (ITO/P35/Al) showed a much better flash-type memory performance than P36-based one. The key factor for this difference is the relatively higher HOMO energy level and the lower LUMO energy level and thus a narrower bandgap (0.84 eV) of P35 than that of P36 (2.15 eV). The Ru ions and terpyridyl ligands would lower the HOMO energy level and upgrade the LUMO energy level, respectively. The memory mechanism of P35 is attributed to the CT process from the tetraphenylbenzidine donor to the tppz (2,3,5,6-tetrakis(2-pyridyl)pyrazine) acceptor. In 2020, to discover the effects of metal center on ligand field stabilization energy, bandgap, and configuration of molecules, Bandyopadhyay et al. designed and synthesized a new Ru(II)-hybrid polymer with hexadentate Schiff base ligand (P37).157 The P37-based device (ITO/P37/Al) showed a bipolar non-volatile resistive-switching behavior, resulting from the redox reaction between CT complexes of Ru ion and ligand. Moreover, the bandgap of P37 was also decreased because the bigger size of central metal ion Ru(II) enabled a better overlap of molecular orbitals of central metal ion and ligand, allowing the LRS as a pristine state of the device.


5.2.8 Zn-Containing metallopolymers. 
Due to the special optical and electronic properties of polyimides and porphyrins, in 2016, Liou et al. synthesized a solution-processable D–A structured Zn porphyrin-containing PIs P38.158 The polymeric memory devices based on P38 (ITO/P38/Al or Au) were fabricated, which showed the volatile DRAM-type memory behavior. To explore the influence of the spacer between D and A moieties as well as the metal center in the memory properties, less conjugated metallopolymer P39 and metal-free polymers were also synthesized.159 It can be seen from the I–V curves of memory device that P39 exhibited the WORM-type memory behavior with a retention time longer than 3 h. The resistive-switching mechanism of P38 and P39 is ascribed to follow the CT process between electron-donating metal porphyrin moieties and electron-accepting ligands. However, metal-free polymers did not show any memory characteristic under an applied voltage. This result implies that the linker between the D and A units can significantly affect the memory behavior and retention time of the device, and the metal ion is necessary to induce CT by an external electric field for the transition between HRS and LRS. To further explore the influence of Zn ion on the memory effect of porphyrinated PIs, Wu et al. designed and synthesized a solution-processable Zn porphyrin-containing PIs with shorter spacer (P40).160 It turned out that P40-based device showed the volatile SRAM-type memory behavior, while the counterpart without Zn element exhibited the non-volatile WORM-type memory character. This is because the metal ions are suggested to form an internal electrode and act as a bridge facilitating the CT process, consequently triggering the WORM/SRAM conversion. The above works demonstrate that introduction of metal complexes can significantly affect the resistive-switching behaviors and performances of polymeric memory devices.


5.2.9 Other metal-containing metallopolymers. 
In 2010, Lee et al. investigated the switching behaviors of polyfluorene derivatives with and without main group metal ions (Na+ and Ca2+).161 It was found that inserting metal ions into the polymers (P41 and P42) had no substantial influence on the basic memory behavior, but can significantly shorten the response time due to the formation of current paths by the metal ions dispersed randomly in the polymer. However, the Vth of P41-based device is lower than that of P42, which can be ascribed to the looser bonding of Na+ and ethylene oxide in P41 than the Ca2+ and ethylene oxide in P42. Both P41 and P42 show area independence in the LRS, indicating that the local current flow is assisted by metal ions.
Recently, by changing the ratio of monomers, Ling et al. reported a series of novel conjugated Pr-containing polymers (PFPh(BipyPr)n) (P43) with fluorene, phthalimide and bipyridine moieties in the main chain through the coordination reaction and palladium-catalyzed Suzuki coupling polycondensation.162 It was discovered that the memory characteristic is strongly dependent on the loading content of Pr(III) complex. For example, the Pr-containing polymer with 2.9 mol% of Pr(III) complex showed a WORM-type memory behavior with a low threshold voltage (1.68 V) and quite low ION/IOFF ratio of only 10. Increasing the content of Pr(III) complex to 4.8 mol% resulted in an increase of the ION/IOFF ratio to 103 and a slight increase of the writing voltage (1.88 V). The ION/IOFF current ratio was found to rush further to 106 and 105 when the Pr(III) content was raised to 5.4 and 7.5 mol%, respectively. This is because the introduction of Pr(III) metal ions can enhance the interchain interaction and modify the LUMO level and bandgap of the resulting polymer. The memory mechanism of these Pr(III)-containing polymers is presumably due to the trap effect of the electron-deficient Pr(III) complexes and the CT process between electron-donating fluorene moieties and electron-accepting phthalimide moieties.
In 2017, Lu et al. demonstrated ternary WORM-type RRAM devices with 1D d–π conjugated Ni(II) polymers P44 and P45 as the active layer for the first time.163 The Vth1 of the P44-based device is generally smaller than that of the P45-based device, whereas the Vth2 of P44 is larger than that of P45. At room temperature, all the fabricated devices can maintain their memory state for three months, or work at 150 °C for at least 10000 s due to the high melting points as a result of the strong interchain interaction, indicating the superior long-term environmental stability of the as-fabricated RRAM devices than those previously reported devices. To establish a common structure–property relationship for RRAM devices with 1D d–π conjugated Ni(II) polymers P44 and P45 as active materials, the grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) spectra were measured to investigate the morphology of the active layers. The results showed that P44 film is orderly arranged and has higher crystallinity than P45. The memory switching mechanism is attributed to the trap-filled limited current (TFLC) and SCLC models at a low electric field strength and grain boundary limited current (GBLC) model at a high electric field strength.
Generally speaking, metallopolymers have emerged as one of the most promising candidates for RRAM application owing to their superior optical and electronic properties. The multiple redox states of metal atoms and MLCT processes can significantly influence the resistive switching behaviors of the resulting memory devices. Additionally, the device performance should also be possibly associated with the metal elements of metallopolymers, but the specific role of many metal atoms is still unclear, which needs to be further clarified.

5.3 RRAM devices based on metal NPs doped polymers
Organic polymer materials can also be used as organic carriers for metal NPs in resistive memories. Usually, the switching ratio and tolerance of organic thin films are significantly different from inorganic thin films, and the organic/inorganic hybrid system, such as the introduction of metal NPs, can combine the common advantages of the two materials to improve the performance of memory devices. At present, several metal NPs, such as Au, Ag, and Cu, have been used to construct metal-polymer nanocomposites for the exploration of novel and high-performance RRAM devices. In this section, the recent progress of the above metal NPs doped in different types of polymers for application in RRAM devices is critically reviewed.
As early as in 2004, Yang et al. reported a solution-processable two-terminal memory device based on the active layer of 1-dodecanethiol-protected Au NPs (Au-DT NPs)-doped polystyrene (PS) with 8-hydroxyquinoline (8HQ) as electron donor (Al/Au-DT + 8HQ + PS/Al).164 The memory device showed a programmable non-volatile binary memory character with a high ION/IOFF ratio of 105 and the nanosecond-scale response time. The conductivity transition mechanism is attributed to the CT process between the electron-donating 8HQ and the electron-accepting Au-DT moieties and electron tunneling effect under an applied electric field. PS only plays as an inert matrix for Au-DT NPs and 8HQ with no effect in the electronic transition. This work opens up an innovative avenue for developing RRAM devices with a new class of nanocomposite active materials. Afterwards, Yang et al. further developed a RRAM device based on polyaniline nanofiber/Au NPs, showing a non-volatile bistable memory behavior.165 The electrical transition mechanism is due to an electric-field-induced CT between polyaniline nanofibers and Au NPs. Moreover, they also found that the device can only be turned on once and the device exhibited an ohmic behavior in the ON state (LRS) when the diameter of Au NPs is larger than 20 nm, indicating that the NP size can affect the resistance-switching behaviors of the devices. Recently, Padma et al. studied the effects of Au, Al, and Hg electrodes on the electrical switching properties of memory devices based on Au NPs and Cu phthalocyanine thin film (Fig. 25(a)).166 It was discovered that devices with Au and Al electrodes showed a WORM-type memory behavior with low Vth of around 1 V, while the devices with Hg electrodes exhibited a rewritable flash-type memory behavior with Vth of 2 V (Fig. 25(b and c)). The conducting mechanism was determined to be primarily by the Fowler–Nordheim (FN) tunneling in high voltages and by direct tunneling at low voltages due to the trap states on Au NPs. Furthermore, the different memory behaviors were ascribed to the different work function of electrodes and thus distinct charge injection barrier at the top electrode/active layer and trap state Au NPs/active layer junctions. The study shows that memory behavior of RRAM devices can be regulated by adjusting the work function of the top electrode and the doping NPs which act as traps in the active layer. In 2018, Roy and co-workers reported a WORM-type RRAM device based on the biodegradable alkali lignin with embedded Au NPs (Fig. 25(d and e)).167 The ultra-thin polylactic acid (PLA) film, as a skin-inspired substrate, endows the devices with good mechanical flexibility and biodegradability (Fig. 25(f)). This work provides a new idea for the development of biodegradable electronic devices with renewable and environmental-friendly materials.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of devices with AuNP, I–V curves of the device (b) with AuNP and (c) without AuNP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Digital image of peeling off device from the SiO2 substrate. (e) Digital image of the memory pasted on the arm. (f) The Al/Au NPs:lignin/Al memory device's switching voltage and ON/OFF ratio under different bending diameter: no bending, 30 mm, 40 mm and 50 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. 
Apart from the Au NPs, Ag nanomaterials have also been used in RRAM devices by doping them into organic conductive polymers. For example, in 2010, Kim et al. reported memory devices based on Ag NPs embedded-polymethyl methacrylate (Ag-PMMA) by solution spin-coating technique.168 High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) studies proved the existence and microstructure of Ag NPs in the Ag-PMMA layer (Fig. 26(a)). The device Al/Ag-PMMA/ITO showed a stable flash-type resistive behavior with ION/IOFF ratio of 4 × 103 and endurance cycles of 7 × 104 (Fig. 26(b)), due to the charge trap effect of Ag NPs. In 2018, Tunhoo and co-workers investigated the influence of the concentration of Ag NPs on the memory performance by changing the doping amount of Ag NPs in PVK.169 According to the I–V curves of the memory device ((ITO/PVK:Ag NPs)/Al), it can be seen that the device shows a lower threshold voltage and a larger switching current ratio when the amount of Ag NPs is at the optimal concentration of 6 wt% (Fig. 26(c and d)). Recently, Huang et al. proposed a method to adjust the switching voltage of the memory device by sandwiching Ag NPs between wrinkle reduced graphene oxide (w-rGO) and PMMA layer to modify the roughness of rGO.170 The device based on the resulting smooth-surface rGO (s-rGO) (s-rGO/PMMA/Al) exhibited a WORM-type non-volatile memory behavior with improved performance (ultra-low Vth of 0.9 V, high ION/IOFF ratio of 103, and desirable long retention time over 104 s) as compared to the one with w-rGO. (Fig. 26(e)). The reason for the improvement of performance is the formation of carbon-rich filaments in PMMA induced by the Ag NPs surface. More recently, Huang's group also demonstrated a flexible transparent memory device with Ag NPs doped polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) as active layer and Ag nanowires (NWs) as electrodes.171 The as-fabricated device (PVA/Ag NWs/Ag NPs-PVP/Ag NWs) exhibited a DRAM-type memory behavior with ultra-high ION/IOFF ratio of 108 and an ultra-low switching voltage of about 0.7 V. The SCLC conducting mode is determined to be the dominated mechanism for the memory behavior. This work opens up a new avenue for the fabrication of high-performance transparent-flexible DRAM devices for application in wearable electronics.
 Fig. 26  (a) HRTEM image of the Ag-PMMA. (b) I–V curves of the Al/Ag-PMMA/ITO device. The inset presents the I–V curves of the Al/PMMA/ITO reference device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2010, American Institute of Physics. (c) I–V curves of the ITO/PVK:Ag NPs/Al device with different Ag NPs concentrations. (d) The influence of Ag NPs concentration on the ON/OFF current ratio and SET-ON voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. (e) I–V curves of s-rGO/PMMA/Al, w-rGO/PMMA/Al, and w-rGO/Ag NPs/PMMA/Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic image of the fabrication process memory devices. (g) I–V curves of devices. (h) The cumulative probability of all operative cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright © 2015, Elsevier B.V. 
In 2015, Kim et al. reported a flexible polymeric memory device based on the Cu2O NPs doped PIs by in situ reaction of polyamic acid (PAA) and the Cu electrode (Fig. 26(f)).172 Since this reaction occurs near the electrode, the Cu2O NPs only exist near the electrode of the memory device, which can reduce the electromagnetic interference between parallel electrodes. The device Al/PI-Cu2O/Cu showed a WORM-type switching behavior with high thermal stability and repeatability under flat and bending conditions (Fig. 26(g and h)). Compared with other devices, the fabricated memory devices showed a high device yield of 86% with good memory performance. The operation mechanism of Al/PI-Cu2O/Cu devices is attributed to the SCLC with trap sites and the filamentary conduction models.
As discussed above, the performances of RRAM devices based on metal NPs doped polymers have achieved tremendous improvements in the past two decades thanks to the rapid development of functional metal NPs and the state-of-the-art device engineering. The electrical transition mechanisms for RRAM devices based on metal NPs doped polymers are mainly attributed to the CT between organic materials and metal NPs, the formation of carbon-rich filaments in organic materials or the SCLC model as induced by trap sites of metal NPs. Considering the fact that optimal device performance and resistance switching mechanism are significantly dependent on materials properties, the challenges imposed by such strategy is evident. Moreover, only a few metals such as Au, Ag and Cu are currently used for doping in RRAM, and it is crucial to further explore the application and working mechanisms of more different metal NPs or multi-metal NPs doped polymers in RRAM. Such investigations still have a long way to go, but should increasingly become a focus of RRAM research field in the future.
5.4 RRAM devices based on MOFs
MOFs are a class of hybrid organic–inorganic materials with highly crystallized multi-porous structure as formed by strong coordination bonding of metal centers and organic ligands. In MOFs, the arrangement of organic ligands and metal ions or clusters has directionality and different framework pore structures, thus exhibiting different adsorption properties, optical properties, and electromagnetic properties. Due to the exceptional advantages of high porosity and ultra-high specific surface area, low density and light weight, adjustable pore size, structural diversity as well as high thermal and chemical stability, MOFs have already been extensively applied in the areas of gas adsorption, storage, and separation, catalysis, and sensing.173–175 More recently, the application of MOFs in electronic devices has attracted great interest of researchers due to their regular channels, cooperative interaction between organic bridging ligands and metal centers and the communication between guest molecules and MOF hosts.176,177
In 2014, Grzybowski et al. reported for the first time a rewritable memristor with modest volatility based on millimeter-sized single-crystal Rb-CD-MOF (where CD = β-cyclodextrin) (Fig. 27(a and b)).178 The device can be electrically switched between HRS and LRS when an ionic electrolyte RbOH is loaded into Rb-CD-MOF crystals. This is because the conductivity of the material depends on the amount of current that has passed through the sub-nanometer channel of Rb-CD-MOF as formed by the mobile hydroxyl ions. Moreover, the MOF/Ag interface can passivate the anode by the Ag(OH)/AgOx layer resulting from the oxidation of Ag anode with hydroxyl ions under positive potentials, which thus limits the further oxidation of anode and LRS current of the device. No memristance is observed when polycrystalline MOF pellet and Au electrode are used instead of a single crystal of MOF and Ag electrode. In the same year, Li et al. reported a memory device based on a resistance-switchable indium MOF material (RSMOF-1) with the sandwiched structure of W/RSMOF-1/Pt, which exhibited a resistive switching behavior with excellent reproducibility, low power consumption and long retention time.176 Experimental results and theoretical simulations suggest that the resistive-switching behavior of the memory device is achieved by the guest water molecules through electric-field-controlled hydrogen-bonding interactions with the amine-tethered nanochannels of RSMOF-1, that is, initial LRS will change to HRS when most of the bridging hydrogen bonds are aligned in the c-axis direction. Due to the host–guest interactions of MOFs by absorbing small molecules, the resistance-switching characteristic can be chemically manipulated, exhibiting the potential for application in neuromorphic computing system depending on chemically mediated processes. Taking this point into account, Chen et al. reported a series of alcohol vapor-modulated multi-level memory devices based on zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) film both on Si (Ag/ZIF-8/Si) and flexible PET (Ag/ZIF-8/PET) substrates (Fig. 27(c)).177 The devices showed an obvious non-volatile resistance-switching behavior in air with a high ION/IOFF ratio of 107 and high repeatability due to the formation of Ag NPs in the ZIF-8 insulator and the electron hopping effect between Ag NPs. However, the HRS resistance of the ZIF-8-based devices decreased dramatically as the device was operated under methanol vapor and the corresponding ION/IOFF current ratio was reduced to 104 (Fig. 27(d)). This chemical responsiveness can be attributed to the ordered arrangement of the guest (alcohol) molecules along the c-axis of ZIF-8 crystal by hydrogen bonding under an applied electric field. Hence, by combining the electrical and chemical stimuli strategies, multi-level data storage can be achieved for the construction of functional synapses and smart devices. In 2016, Redel et al. also found that inclusion of Fc molecules into ZIF-8 can improve the resistance-switching performance of the corresponding memory device, presumably due to its well-defined redox active property and high mobility of Fe(II) ion.179 In 2019, Chen et al. reported the synthesis of Au(Ag) NPs embedded Cd-based MOF composites (Au(Ag) NPs@MOF) by photoreduction method and the fabrication of memory devices based on Au(Ag) NPs@MOF.180 The I–V curves indicated that the devices based on the Au(Ag)NPs@MOF composite materials showed the typical electrical hysteresis behaviors for information binary memory. Among them, the device ITO/Au NP@2/Ag (2 = {[Cd(tib)(Tdc)]·(DMA)3}) has the highest ION/IOFF current ratio of 104, due to the better dispersion of Au NPs in the MOF matrix and thereby the higher electron tunneling efficiency. The memory behavior of the device may be attributed to the conformational transition between CdO4N3 pentagonal bipyramid and CdO2N3 trigonal bipyramid and the electric-field-induced CT of Au(Ag) NPs@MOF composite upon an external electric field. More recently, Chen et al. reported a self-rectifying non-volatile RRAM device based on single-crystal MOF material FJU-23-H2O ({[ZnL(H2O)]3(H2O)4}n, H2L = 5-triazole isophthalicacid), which shows an ultralow threshold of 0.2 V, a high ION/IOFF ratio of 105, and a high rectification ratio of 105.44 The resistive-switching behavior of FJU-23-H2O based device is attributed to the voltage-gated proton-conducting effect induced by the short-range helix hydrogen-bonded chain segments along the c axis. The applied voltage can switch the hydrogen bond pathway for proton transport and then increase the ON/OFF ratio of the device, while the rectifying effect of the device is originated from the chiral proton channels. This is the first example of a single material showing both rectifying and resistive-switching effects.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) cyclic voltammetry analysis of the Ag/Rb-CD-MOF/Ag devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright © 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration and morphology of the ZIF-8-based memory devices. (d) I–V curves of the Ag/ZIF-8/Si device in saturated methanol vapor (dashed line) and air (rigid line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
To construct a liquid-free and flexible MOF thin film for practical wearable data storage application, Li et al. reported the direct deposition of a high-quality MOF thin film of HKUST-1 (Cu3(BTC)2, BTC = benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid) on flexible Au-coated PET substrate by the liquid phase epitaxy method.181 The flexible memory devices based on the HKUST-1 nanofilm (Au/HKUST-1/Au) showed an uniform and reproducible resistance switching behavior under the stain of up to 2.8% over a wide temperature range of −70 to 70 °C (Fig. 28(a–d)). It is believed that the resistive-switching behavior is caused by the conductive filaments as formed through the migration of Cu2+ in HKUST-1 into the electrode/HKUST interfaces under an electric field. The excellent electrical bistability, mechanical flexibility and high environmental stability allow this HKUST-1 based flexible device to show an exciting application prospect in future wearable electronic devices (Fig. 28(e and f)). In 2017, Lee et al. also reported a flexible RRAM device by spin-coating a solution of ZIF-8 onto the flexible Au-coated PET substrate.182 The device with the structure of Au/ZIF-8/Al exhibited an erasable and rewritable dipolar flash-type memory behavior with good stability in both bending and non-bending conditions. The memory behavior can be explained by the redox-active behavior of the conjugated organic linkers and reduction of Zn ions, which enables electrons to transport along the redox-induced conduction path of the aromatic rings. In 2018, Li and co-workers developed a stretchable RRAM device based on MOF material MIL-53 utilizing the liquid phase self-assembly approach, with poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) containing conductive liquid metal (GaInSn) as the flexible electrode.183 The electric field-induced generation and migration of the Ga3+ ion, which results in the formation of fluidic and highly conducting filaments across the MOF matrix, is determined to be the main contribution of the resistive-switching behavior. This uniform and reproducible resistive-switching effect can sustain at the stretching strain of 10%, allowing the device to hold great application potential in stretchable memory device and wearable electronics in the future.
 Fig. 28  
I–V curves of the Au/HKUST-1/Au/PET flexible device (a) at the flat state and (b) during the dynamic bending test with the bending rates ranging from 0.25 to 2 mm s−1. (c) The HRS and LRS resistances, and (d) the set and reset voltages as a function of the bending radius or strain level of the Au/HKUST-1/Au/PET flexible device. (e) I–V curves and (f) endurance performance of the device at the strain level of about 2.0% over 300 consecutive cycles (the inset shows the histogram and Gaussian fitting curves of the distribution of the set and reset voltages). Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
5.5 RRAM devices based on OIHPs
As an emerging new class of active materials, the low-temperature solution-treated OIHPs have excellent optical and electronic properties, such as tunable optical band gap, high carrier mobility, and ion migration ability, allowing them to be broadly used in solar cells, photodetectors, memory devices, and so on.184,185 OIHPs are usually represented by the chemical formula of ABX3, in which A = methylammonium (MA+ or CH3NH3+), B = Pb2+ or Sn2+, and X = Cl−, Br−, or I−.186 In comparison to the inorganic rigid perovskites, OIHPs also hold the merits of low-temperature processibility and flexibility, allowing them applicable for the wearable electronics.
In 2015, Wang et al. firstly reported the RRAM device based on OIHPs with the sandwiched structure of FTO/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/Au, which exhibited a remarkable bipolar non-volatile resistance-switching behavior with small operating voltages (VSET = 0.8 V, VRESET = −0.6 V) and a long retention time (>104 s).187 The resistance-switching behavior of the device was found to be caused by the trap-controlled SCLC mechanism. In 2016, Zou et al. demonstrated a series of CH3NH3PbClxI3−x based memory devices with different metal electrodes through solution processing method.188 It was disclosed that different metal electrodes can significantly change the memory performance (Fig. 29(a and b)). The devices with electrochemically active metals such as Ag, Cu, Ti, Zn, and Al showed a typical memristive behavior, while that with inert metal Au only exhibited the electrical characteristics of a resistor (Fig. 29(c)). Notably, the Al-based memory device also displayed instantaneous switching phenomenon with a low switching voltage and an ultra-high ION/IOFF ratio up to 109 by inserting a compact TiO2 layer between the electrode and perovskite layer, which represents the highest value among all reported RRAM devices so far. The operation mechanism of these devices based on the electrochemically active metal electrodes is attributed to the formation and rupture of metallic filaments in the hybrid perovskite layer as a result of the penetration of metal ions from the electrode. This work demonstrates that the memory performance of OIHPs-based RRAM devices can be changed dramatically by simply modifying the electrodes.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of the memory device. (b) I–V curves of the FTO/perovskite/M–Au and M–Ag/devices. (c) I–V curves of M–Ag, M–Cu, M–Ti, M–Zn and M–Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2016, Jang and co-workers reported a solution-processed RRAM device based on CH3NH3PbI3 with the structure of Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt, which exhibited an erasable and rewritable flash-type memory behavior with an ultra-low threshold voltage (VSET = 0.13 V) and a high ION/IOFF ratio (106).189 The resistance-switching behavior of device results from the formation of Ag filaments through Ag migration from the electrode. Interestingly, by applying different compliance current, four different LRS states can be achieved for multi-level data storage. However, the endurance for resistive switching is declined with the lower compliance current which needs to be further addressed by optimizing the film morphology or device structure. More recently, Kang et al. developed the OIHPs-based RRAM devices (Au/CH3NH3PbI3/Au) by means of a simple single-step spin-coating method, which showed a typical unipolar memory behavior with a high ION/IOFF ratio (up to 108), relatively low threshold voltages (VSET = 1.16 V, VRESET = 0.46 V), large endurance cycles (>103), and long retention time (>104 s) (Fig. 30(a–f)).190 From the cross-sectional SEM image of a Au/MAPbI3/Au device (Fig. 30b), we can identify that Au electrodes are clearly separated by a compact MAPbI3 film. Therefore, the unique unipolar memory character of such device could be ascribed to the formation and rupture of conducting paths composed of iodine anion vacancies by Joule heating instead of the electric field. Importantly, integration of the above device in an 8 × 8 cross-bar array architecture gave a high yield of up to 94% with uniform memory cell characteristics, and the cross-talk interference phenomenon can be effectively lessened by employing the 1D-1R scheme (Fig. 30(g and f)).
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic image of the fabrication process for the Au/MAPbI3/Au memory device in 8 × 8 cross-bar array architecture. (b and c) The cross-sectional SEM image and I–V curves of the device. (d) The ON/OFF ratio is plotted as a function of voltage. (e and f) The endurance test and retention test of the device. (g and h) The color map plots of the resistance distribution of the 64 memory cells in the LRS and HRS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
To address the notorious problem of instability of the electronic devices based on OIHP materials, researchers have explored various strategies to suppress the interaction of OIHPs-based RRAM memory devices with air and moisture. For example, in 2016, Nair et al. successfully fabricated a series of non-volatile RRAM devices using the hybrid perovskite material in the NP form (FTO/CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx/Ag, where x = 0, 0.46, 1.03), which contains octylammonium halides as the capping agent. The long alkyl chain of octylammonium halides endows the OIHPs outstanding air and moisture stability and good solution processability.191 The I–V curves indicate that these devices showed bipolar and bistable resistive-switching behaviors with low switching voltages. Surprisingly, it is found that the operating voltage of the devices decreased with the increase of the chloride content, while the ION/IOFF ratio, retention capability, and endurance of the devices were enhanced. This is because that the band gap and defect density of the OIHPs-based NPs will increase with an increase in its chloride content. The defects and grain boundaries between NPs provide alternative paths for electron conduction in addition to the formation of filaments, which facilitate the carrier transport in SCLC mode. Besides, the devices showed excellent stability with no considerable degradation in the programmed states even after six months. Later on, Lee et al. fabricated CH3NH3PbI3-based memory devices with high stability by inserting the solution-processed ZnO and atomic-layer-deposited AlOx passivation layers, respectively.192 Due to the encapsulation with a thin film of metal oxide layer, the device can maintain reliable performance for 30 days under ambient condition, while the one without the passivation layer degraded rapidly in 3 days. More recently, Choi et al. also demonstrated a CH3NH3PbI3-based memory device with long-term stability by depositing a 20 nm-thick ZnO passivation layer through on-axis and facing-target sputtered (FTS) techniques.193 As compared to the devices without ZnO layer, the air stability of the devices with the ZnO passivation layer elongated from 60 days to 3 months under ambient conditions. Apart from inserting metal oxide passivation layers, the introduction of additives can also improve the stability of the OIHPs-based RRAM devices. In 2019, Leu et al. reported a ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/CH3NH3PbI3/PMMA/Al memory device, showing a stable bipolar resistive-switching character.194 It is found that introduction of potassium iodide (KI) as an additive can improve the quality of the MAPbI3 film and PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3 interface, leading to the enhanced ION/IOFF ratio, retention capability, and endurance of the devices. Cao and co-workers prepared a flexible and long-term stable polymeric OIHPs-based RRAM device by partially replacing methylamine ion (MA+) with polyvinylammonium iodide (PVAm·HI).195 The PVAm can act as nucleation sites and crystallization template for the growth of MAPbI3 crystals, which thus can modify the microscopic structure of perovskites. Besides, it can be observed obviously from the cross-sectional SEM image of the device that the PVAm-modified OIHPs film has a uniform thickness of 400 nm without pinholes (Fig. 31b). By optimizing the content of PVAm, the memory device showed a remarkable enhancement with the ION/IOFF ratio up to 105, a low SET voltage of 0.45 V and striking long-term stability under ambient conditions (retaining the stable memory behavior after one-year exposure to the humid and thermal ambient environment) (Fig. 31(c and d)). The conduction mechanism of this device is mainly attributed to the formation of conduction paths by iodide vacancies along the polymeric grain boundaries, which allows the carriers flowing by trap-to-trap hopping.
 Fig. 31  (a and b) Schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image of the ITO/MAPbI3:PVAm·HI/Al device. (c and d) I–V curves and currents in LRS and HRS and the corresponding ON/OFF ratio of the memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Perovskite memory devices that use organic–inorganic lead halide semiconductors as active layers have exhibited great potential for the performance improvement of RRAM devices in the past several years. However, the risk for poor chemical stability, unacceptable environmental toxicity, obvious deficiency, and low memory reliability still impede their commercialization. Furthermore, fabricating lead-free OIHPs with good memory properties remains difficult. Hence, substantial efforts are still needed to explore high-quality environmental-friendly OIHPs-based active layers by modifying the chemical structure of OIHPs and interface engineering.
6. Application of metal-containing organic compounds in MRAM
Metal-containing organic compounds not only have been widely applied in RRAM but also in MRAM. Owing to their flexible structural adjustability, metal-containing organic compounds show better energy level alignment with FM electrodes, which may potentially lead to a more efficient spin injection.196 Besides, the solution processability of metal-containing organic compounds is conducive to forming ultrathin and uniform films for OSVs and MTJs, or patterned films for BPM. In this section, we will review the applications of metal-containing organic compounds in OSVs/MTJs and BPM, respectively.
6.1 OSV & MTJ based on metal-containing organic compounds
With the rapid development of organic electronics, a growing number of organic semiconductors have been explored and applied in semiconductor field. More recently, Alq3 (marked as M1 in Scheme 5), metallophthalocyanine (MPc), perovskites and MOFs as NFM layers have been used in spintronics, i.e. OSVs. The representative parameters of the SVs and MTJ devices based on metal-containing organic compounds are compared in Table 3.
 Scheme 5  Chemical structures of metal–organic complexes (M1–M20) for MRAM. 
Table 3 Comparison of the representative parameters of the SVs and MTJ devices based on metal-containing organic compounds




Complexes
Device structure
MR

λ
s


τ
s

Ref.




Alq3
Co/Alq3/LSMO
40% (11 K)
45 nm (4.2 K)
—

198



Co/Alq3/Ni
—
3–7 nm (100 K)
1 s (100 K)

199



Co/AlOx/Alq3/LSMO
22% (100 K)
—
—

200



Co/Alq3/LPCMO
440% (10 K)
—
45 ps (10 K)

201







MPc
Co/AlOx/F16CuPc/Ni80Fe20
4% (r.t.)
180 nm



196



Perovskite
Co/AlOx/MAPbCl3−xIx/Ni80Fe20
0.57% (10 K)
61 ± 7 nm (r.t.)
1.5 ns (r.t.)

203



Co/MAPbBr3/LSMO
25% (10 K)
220 nm (10 K)
936 ± 23 ps (10 K)

204



Co/MAPbBr3/LSMO
25% (10 K)
221 ± 18 nm (10 K)
802 ± 32 ps (10 K)

205



Co/MAPbI3/LSMO
5% (10 K)
108 ± 11 nm (10 K)
356 ± 22 ps (10 K)

205



Co/FAPbBr3/LSMO
16% (10 K)
231 ± 12 nm (10 K)
788 ± 26 ps (10 K)

205



MOF
Co/Cu3(HHTP)2/LSMO
25% (10 K)
—
—

206






6.1.1 OSVs & MTJs based on Alq3. 
Alq3 is a distinguished small-molecule metal complex used in optoelectronics. It can be deposited as thin films easily and integrated with a variety of electrodes.197–201 The spintronic device based on Alq3 film provides a large spin filtering effect via the Alq3/FM spinterface as evidenced by two-photon photoemission spectroscopies.201 In 2004, Alq3 was firstly introduced into OSV by Xiong et al. They designed and manufactured an OSV with the configuration of Co (3.5 nm)/Alq3 (130 nm)/LSMO (100 nm), showing a more significant GMR effect (40%) than metallic SVs at 11 K, which was contributed by the nature of Alq3 having weak spin–orbit interaction.198 This work indicates that π-conjugated organic semiconductor Alq3 is beneficial for the injection, transport and detection of the spin-polarized carrier and thus can be successfully applied to SVs, which also initiates the application of organic semiconductors in MRAM.
Then, in 2007, a work about the nanowire OSV consisting of Co (500 nm)/Alq3 (26 or 33 nm)/Ni (500 nm) was reported by Pramanik et al. The nanowire OSVs were prepared in an anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane with 50 nm well-ordered hexagonal pores. Typical MR traces of the nanowire OSVs at different temperatures indicate that the spin relaxation times have no independence with temperature (below 100 K). The spin relaxation times of the nanowire OSVs are also exceedingly long, ranging from a few milliseconds to a second, which should be caused by the weak spin–orbit interaction of Alq3. The long spin relaxation times are dominated by the Elliott-Yafet spin relaxation mechanism where the spin relaxation rate has an inverse dependence on the carrier mobility.199 This work creatively fabricated nanowire OSVs by employing AAO template-assisted strategy and proposed a feasible method to obtain high-density rays in OSVs. Notably, the spin relaxation time as measured for the nanowire OSVs is up to 1s, which is among the longest spin relaxation time as reported in any system at that time.
After that, Prezioso et al. reported an OSV with the layered structure of Co (40 nm)/AlOx (2 nm)/Alq3 (120–250 nm)/LSMO (20 nm), which achieved the electrically controlled MR. The layer of AlOx acts as the tunnel barrier and also enhances the interface quality. The MR ratio reaches up to 22% at 100 K (Fig. 32(a)). It is found that MR of the device is changeable among a set of multi-level non-volatile states, which endows the device of high storage capacity (Fig. 32(b)). The primary function is also carried out, indicating that this device is reversibly activated or deactivated with an applied voltage bias. Moreover, when a sequence of write–read–erase voltage pulses were executed to modulate the MR signal, these Alq3 based OSVs can present controllable multistate resistive switching behavior. The multi-level switching and non-volatile behavior can be ascribed to the trapping–detrapping effects of Alq3.200
 Fig. 32  (a) The MR loop of 250 nm-thick device. Inset: Spin valve device scheme. (b) Write(W)–read(R)–erase(E) cycles performed on a 125 nm-thick Alq3 layer device. The resistive state of the device was retained after the application of a 0 V voltage bias, which proves its non-volatility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright © 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
More recently, in 2019, Shen et al. substituted the classical LSMO ferromagnetic electrode with (La2/3Pr1/3)5/8Ca3/8MnO3 (LPCMO) to prepare the device of Co (10 nm)/Alq3 (60 nm)/LPCMO (60 nm). LPCMO is well known for its pronounced electronic phase separation (EPS) between the ferromagnetic metallic (FMM) phase and antiferromagnetic charge ordered insulating (COI) phase. Then, the MR response of this OSV can be tuned by controlling the EPS state of the manganite layer under a pre-set magnetic field (Bpre). The results show that an MR ratio as high as 440% can be reached at 10 K, which has not been observed in similar OSV devices using the traditional LSMO electrode. The electrical Hanle effect, which is the characteristic of the spin injection, was also found in this device. This work proposes a new idea that integration of the manganite complex and spin flip mechanism can realize logic switching.201


6.1.2 OSVs & MTJs based on MPc. 
MPc is a kind of stable planar small molecule, which has been widely studied in photodynamic therapy and photo-functional electronic devices. Lately, MPc compounds have also been applied in molecular spintronics due to their high stability and electron transport mobility under ambient conditions, as well as the better energy alignment with FM electrodes than most organic semiconductors.
In 2016, the Hueso group manufactured an air-stable fluorinated copper phthalocyanine-based OSV (F16CuPc, M2 in Scheme 5) with the device structure of Co (11 nm)/AlOx (1.5 nm)/F16CuPc (15–180 nm)/Ni80Fe20 (11 nm). They prepared and compared F16CuPc layers through the low temperature (LT) deposition at 100 K and room temperature (RT) deposition. Fig. 33(a) clearly shows that the structural change from polycrystalline to amorphous according to different depositions, resulting in a smoother morphology (root-mean-square roughness = 0.212 nm) and a smaller electron transport mobility (0.9 × 10−3 cm2 V s−1, Fig. 33(b)) in the amorphous films prepared by LT deposition. Fig. 33(c) shows the AFM images of F16CuPc films made by RT deposition and LT deposition, respectively, indicating that the surface morphology of F16CuPc film deposited at LT is smoother than that fabricated at RT. As a result, a considerable MR response (>4%) and an exceptionally long spin diffusion length (up to 180 nm) that may be the longest value in OSVs at that time have been observed at room temperature. Moreover, they successfully obtained four different MR states by combining the magnetic field and light irradiation, as seen from Fig. 33(d), allowing it to achieve a 2-bit storage.196
 Fig. 33  (a) X-ray diffraction measurements and (b) the transfer curves of F16CuPc thin films deposited by RT deposition and LT deposition. (c) AFM images of 90 nm thick F16CuPc films made by RT deposition and LT deposition. (d) The demonstration of four different resistance states through controllable switching of light irradiation and magnetic field in the same device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
In 2018, Banerjee and Pal prepared an all-organic dual SV by layer-by-layer (LBL) technique as illustrated in Fig. 34. A dual SV is often considered as two SVs in series and can achieve multi-stage storage. Here, manganese and cobalt phthalocyanines (MnPc (M3) and CoPc (M4)) are selected as spin-selective layers, and CuPc (M5) is introduced as a spacer. Magnetization vectors of MnPc and CoPc can be aligned with the assistance of an external magnetic field and then immobilized through an electrostatic binding process with a polycation layer, resulting in the formation of single molecule magnets (SMMs). The dual SV exhibits four configurations, namely C(↑↑↑), C(↑↑↓), C(↑↓↓), and C(↑↓↑), which correspond to the dependence of four well-separated resistive-states with the thickness of each layer and is suitable for the construction of a 2-bit logic system.202
 Fig. 34  (a) Schematic representation of Pc-based dual SVs with four possible configurations, namely C(↑↑↑), C(↑↑↓), C(↑↓↓), and C(↑↓↑), respectively. (b) LBL deposition process with anisotropic magnetic moment pointing perpendicular to the substrate. (c) I–V characteristics of dual SVs depending on the thickness of each layer. The arrows represent magnetization vectors of the SMMs, and the subscripts denote the number of LbL layers of the deposited films. Inset: Current at 2 V for the four different configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


6.1.3 OSVs & MTJs based on OIHPs. 
Since OIHPs possess tunable bandgap, high carrier mobility and ion mobility, as described in Section 5.5, some recent studies show that OIHPs can also be used to construct OSVs. In 2019, Gao et al. prepared a perovskite-based SV with the structure of Co/AlOx (2 nm)/MAPbCl3−xIx (160 nm)/Ni80Fe20 (Py), (MA is methylammonium). The deposited AlOx thin layer is used to prevent the oxidation of Co layer and improve the quality of the adjacent perovskite layer. Moreover, the AlOx thin layer as a tunneling barrier can address the resistance mismatch problem. Although the final MR ratio of this SV is only 0.57% at 10 K, this is the first attempt to apply a perovskite compound in spintronics. The essential model of the injection, transport, and detection of spin polarized carrier is also successfully established in this perovskite-based SV. These results demonstrate that perovskites have promising application perspectives in spintronics.203
In the same year, Vardeny group studied the spin-polarized carrier injection of MAPbBr3-based SV. The GMRmax ratio at 10 K is 25%, indicating an effective spin injection of MAPbBr3-based SV. The spin lifetime and spin diffusion length are measured to be as large as 936 ± 23 ps and 220 nm, respectively.204 The same group also manufactured SVs based on MAPbI3, MAPbBr3 and FAPbBr3 (FA is formamidnium) to study the influence of diverse organic cations and inorganic sublattices on the SVs in another work (Fig. 35(a)). We can learn from Fig. 35(b) that the GMRmax decreases with the increase of the thickness of the perovskite interlayer, and the spin diffusion length obtained from the eqn (6) reduces with the increase of temperature for all devices (Fig. 35(c)). The spin relaxation time of perovskites can be extracted from the quenching responses (Fig. 35(d–f)). It is deduced that the spin transport in OIHPs is mainly determined by halogen atoms rather than organic cations. Thus, the authors predicted that the SOC interaction dominates the spin properties in OIHPs and MAGeCl3 with weak SOC should facilitate the spin transport.205 These works provide some preliminary insights on the relationship between the composition of OIHPs and performance of OSVs, which is useful for the design and achievement of OIHPs based high-performance OSVs.
 Fig. 35  (a) Schematic diagram of SV based on perovskites. (b) The fittings of the GMRmax responses for the three perovskite-based SVs, plotted against the perovskite interlayer film thickness. (c) Temperature dependence of spin diffusion length for the three OIHPs. (d–f) The GMR quenching with the increment of vertical magnetic field in MAPbBr3, MAPbI3, and FAPbBr3 based SVs at 10 K, where the solid lines are the fitting lines and the spin lifetime (τs) in each graph is extracted from the fitting of the Hanle response. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


6.1.4 OSVs & MTJs based on MOFs. 
As described in Section 5.4, MOFs are porous coordination polymers in which metal atoms are connected by organic linkers. Very recently, 2D conductive metal–organic frameworks (2D c-MOFs) featured with high conductivity and large charge mobility have emerged as a fascinating platform for various electronic applications. 2D c-MOFs are constructed by planar conjugated aromatic cores and square-planar metal-complex linkages MX4 (M = Co, Ni, Cu; X = NH, O, S).206–208 The noteworthy and unique work that 2D c-MOFs applied on spintronics was reported by Jin and Chen in 2019. The as-prepared 2D c-MOFs compound (Cu3(HHTP)2, marked as M6 in Scheme 5) was synthesized through LBL deposition as a highly crystalline and oriented thin film with tunable thickness (Fig. 36(a)). The MR ratio of the Cu3(HHTP)2 based OSV (Co (50 nm)/Cu3(HHTP)2 (100 nm)/LSMO (50 nm)) reaches up to 25% at 10 K (Fig. 36(b and c)).206 This work demonstrates that 2D c-MOFs can be a very promising candidate for OSVs, which will promote further exploration of MOFs-based spintronics.
 Fig. 36  (a) Schematic illustration for the LBL growth procedure of Cu3(HHTP)2 film on functionalized substrate STO. (b) The cross-sectional SEM image of the prepared MOF-device. (c) The MR loop for the prepared OSV at 10 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
In summary, from the classical small molecules Alq3 and MPc to the emerging OIHPs and 2D c-MOFs, metal-containing organic compounds run through the whole development process of OSVs and MTJs. These materials exhibit some novel spintronic effects and hold great application potential in MRAM, however, some common problems still exist. For example, it is difficult to obtain high MR and stable spin transport performance at room temperature, and OSVs and MTJs based on the above materials need to be further optimized for practical applications.

6.2 BPM
BPM, another type of MRAM, can store one single bit of information in an individual magnetic island with the easy axis of magnetization out-of-plane.209 Nowadays, BPM prepared from ferromagnetic alloy NPs (such as L10-FePt, L10-CoPt, and SmCox) provides a promising approach for the next generation ultra-high density magnetic data recording system. As referred in Section 4.3.2, depending on the advantages of large magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant (6.6–10 × 107 erg cm−3), high thermal stability and small superparamagnetic critical size (2.8–3.3 nm), L10-FePt NPs have been regarded as the propitious candidate for BPM, which has inspired many scientists to explore the facile synthesis of L10-FePt NPs and fast fabrication of the L10-FePt NPs based BPM at low cost. Up to now, two common solution-processed tactics have been developed for the preparation of L10-FePt NPs based BPM, one is by self-assembly, and the other one is by NIL. Next, these two L10-FePt-based BPM fabrication approaches and applications of L10-FePt-based BPM will be discussed in detail in this section.

6.2.1 L10-FePt-based BPM by self-assembly. 
In 2000, Sun et al. successfully prepared monodisperse FePt NPs through reducing Pt(acac)2 (acac = acetylacetonate) with 1,2-hexadecanediol and pyrolyzing Fe(CO)5 in high-temperature solutions. The reduction and decomposition were initiated together with the assistance of oleic acid and oleyl amine to stabilize the monodisperse FePt colloids and prevent oxidation during the whole course. Thus, chemically disordered fcc FePt NPs could be obtained and then were transformed into L10-FePt NPs by thermal annealing. It can be learnt from the XRD spectra that the temperature of transforming fcc FePt NPs into L10-FePt NPs is around 600 °C. The static write/read tester was used for the recording experiments, exhibiting high reliability of L10-FePt NPs in magnetic recording.210 This work provides a simple method for the fabrication of self-assembled ferromagnetic FePt NPs (3–10 nm) that support stable magnetization reversal at room temperature, which could be used as BPM for magnetic recording. In 2006, the same group reported the synthesis of fcc FePt nanotubes with the average size of 3–9 nm initially. Then in a mixture of benzyl ether and octadecene, simultaneous decomposition of Fe(CO)5 and reduction of Pt(acac)2 without polyol as the reducing agent were carried out. They controlled the addition sequence of stabilizers (oleic acid first and then oleyl amine) and heating temperature (205 °C) during the synthetic progress, resulting in the self-assembly of fcc FePt nanocubes into textured superlattice arrays. The as-prepared fcc FePt nanocubes with amorphous morphology were then transformed into fct FePt nanocubes with the coercivity of 22 kOe by thermal annealing (675 °C). Ordered nanocube superlattice array was obtained from the evaporation of the carrier hexane solvent.211 This work proves that the texture of self-assembled arrays of L10-FePt NPs could be readily regulated by controlling the particle shape, and also provides a convenient approach for the preparation of magnetically aligned BPM.
Unfortunately, some side effects such as sintering and agglomeration are difficult to avoid during the post-annealing treatment at high temperature for the above self-assembly method. Therefore, some researchers used the template-assisted method to direct the assembly of FePt NPs. For example, Huskens et al. selected adsorbates such as aminobutylphosphonic acid (ABP), phosphonoundecanoic acid (PNDA) and poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI) to functionalize the Al2O3 substrates, which could bind the FePt NPs via ligand exchange with oleic acid and oleyl amine. The substrates were patterned by microcontact printing using ABP as the ink, allowing the self-assembly of local fcc FePt NPs (Fig. 37(a)). Then, patterned fcc FePt NPs were transformed into patterned fct phase by thermal annealing. However, the coercivity of these FePt NPs is as small as below 450 Oe (Fig. 37(b)).212 In another work, Dong et al. incorporated FePt and MnO nanocrystals into NaCl-type binary nanocrystal superlattice (BNSL) (Fig. 37(c)) to avoid the sintering and agglomeration of FePt NPs in the thermal annealing (650 °C) step, resulting in the production of 2D long-range-ordered L10-FePt arrays. The MnO nanocrystals play the role of isolating FePt NPs. The coercivity of as-prepared ferromagnetic films is up to 5 kOe at room temperature (Fig. 37(d)).213 Their work provides a new way of fabricating ordered ferromagnetic nanocrystal arrays for high-density data storage applications.
 Fig. 37  (a) FePt NPs assembled on the Al2O3 substrate that were patterned with ABP by microcontact printing. Inset: AFM image of the sample at the pattern boundary. (b) Hysteresis loops in-plane field of FePt NPs assembled on ABP-modified Al2O3 substrate after annealing. (c) TEM image of FePt-MnO BNSL membranes after being thermally annealed. Inset: The top-right and bottom-right illustrations are the magnified TEM view and the SAED pattern, respectively. (d) Hysteresis loops of FePt-MnO BNSL membranes before and after annealing. The slight warps pointed by arrows arising from the soft magnetic components. (a) and (b) were reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright © 2010, MDPI. (c) and (d) were reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Polymers containing Fe and Pt have also attracted extensive research attention in constructing L10-FePt based BPM by self-assembly, showing a good potential in preparing monodisperse FePt NPs. Amphiphilic polymers M7 and bimetallic block copolymers (BCPs) M8 were synthesized and their magnetic properties were studied. M7 consists of a long amphiphilic tail and a Fe, Pt-containing conjugated group. After one-pot pyrolysis at 800 °C for 1 h under an Ar/H2 atmosphere, L10-FePt NPs with Hc of 9.6 kOe and Ms of 12.5 emu g−1 can be obtained.214 Arrays of FePt NPs were prepared from bimetallic BCPs M8 templating, presenting phase-separated cylindrical or spherical FePt-containing nanodomains. After pyrolysis of the bulk samples at 800 °C, L10-FePt NPs with average particle sizes of 4–8 nm were obtained. Coercivity of 8.69 kOe was measured, showing the ferromagnetic nature of fct-FePt NPs.215 Therefore, metallopolymers containing both Fe and Pt elements are excellent candidates for the generation of chemically ordered L10-FePt NPs through one-step pyrolysis without any post treatment.


6.2.2 L10-FePt based BPM by NIL. 
As mentioned above, the original materials (i.e. Pt(acac)2, Fe(CO)5.) which contain Fe and Pt atoms have different onset decomposition temperatures, would unavoidably result in some defects such as sintering, agglomeration and broad size distribution. Moreover, the self-assembly method is not suitable for the fabrication of nanopatterned arrays with long ordered range (i.e.M7 and M8). Hence, many scientists started to explore single-source FePt-containing precursors and emerging lithographic methods for the fabrication of L10-FePt NPs with long range ordered nanoarrays. It is well known that NIL is a powerful and cheap method for high-throughput patterning with high resolution, offering sub-5 nm patterning resolution over very large areas. In the past decade, Wong's group made many achievements on the synthesis of L10-FePt NPs from FePt-containing heterobimetallic polymers and Fe or Pt containing monometallic polymer precursors, as well as the nanopatterning of L10-FePt NPs by NIL. In 2012, a distinguished polymer M9 was synthesized through bromination, Wittig reaction and Sonogashira coupling, exhibiting an excellent solubility in common organic solvents and a good film-forming property. The monomers containing each of the Fe and Pt atoms are arranged alternately in the polymer, which is conducive to the formation of L10 NPs after annealing. By combining the advantages of NIL, nanoimprinted nanoline and nanodot array patterns of polymer M9 were generated in one step at low-cost and in large area. The detailed nanoimprinting procedures of M9 are illustrated in Fig. 38(a). Firstly, a silicon substrate was rinsed with acetone followed by deionized water coupled with sonication. Then, a saturated solution of M9 in chloroform was drop-cast onto the substrate. A stamp made of PDMS was then used to imprint patterns onto the substrate with a constant and uniform force. The PDMS nanoimprint stamps used in such study include a line array nanopattern with periodicity (feature size) of 640 nm (350 nm) and a dot array nanopattern with periodicity (feature size) of 500 nm (250 nm). Exposing the sample to ultraviolet radiation (25 mW cm−2, 391 nm) for 5 min presumably cross-linked the metallopolymer and transformed the FePt-containing polymer with low molecular weight into one with higher molecular weight. The chloroform solvent was evaporated in this step and left the mixed-metal polymer in the solid phase. Then, the PDMS mask was lifted from the substrate surface and a negative copy of the pattern was replicated to the FePt-based polymer on the sample surface. Next, the sample was dry etched with reactive ion etching (RIE) to remove any residue in the trenches. This process takes advantage of the solubility of metallopolymers and imprints the polymer directly in the liquid phase, thereby eliminating the prior step of spinning and patterning the photoresist and the subsequent step of etching/lift-off of the FePt thin film. The metallopolymers were patterned at the nanoscale with high accuracy by the imprinting approach. Fig. 38(b and c) show the SEM images of the imprinted polymer M9 with nanoscale line and dot array patterns. Measurements of the line array periodicities and widths show high conformity of the final pattern to the imprint mold. The nanopatterned polymer can then be annealed at 800 °C to generate L10-FePt-NPs-based nanoline and nanodot arrays showing excellent pattern retention. The average size of the resulting L10-FePt alloy NPs is around 4.6 nm with a narrow size distribution and the nanopatterned arrays possess a room-temperature coercivity as large as 14 kOe. The magnetic force microscopy (MFM) images of the nanodot patterns indicate that the magnetization directions of the patterned L10-FePt NPs can be adjusted to show “up” or “down” by controlling an external magnetic field, implying that the combination of metallopolymers and NIL has great promise as a new platform for BPM and next-generation nanoscale ultra-high-density magnetic data storage devices (Fig. 38(d and e)).18
 Fig. 38  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of large-area nanostructures from the FePt-based metallopolymer M9 by NIL. SEM images of the nanoimprinted line array pattern (b) and dot array pattern (c) of FePt NPs after pyrolysis. MFM images of the nanoimprinted dot array pattern of FePt NPs field-annealed in the −Z direction (d) and +Z direction (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
To overcome the limitations (e.g. poor solubility which is not suitable for nanopatterning, synthetic difficulty) of heterobimetallic polymers, the facile generation of L10-FePt NPs with a narrow size distribution (average size ∼4.9 nm) was reported by blending two individual Fe-containing (M10) and Pt-containing (M11) homopolymers with the equiatomic ratio of Fe and Pt, followed by controlled pyrolysis of the resulting polymer blend to give L10-FePt NPs. High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images indicate that the (111) and (001) d-spacings of these NPs are 0.221 nm and 0.373 nm, respectively, which agree with the literature values. Then, nanoimprinting the mixture of M10 and M11 produced nanodot array pattern through NIL by PDMS which can also be shown in the 3D AFM and MFM images, and the coercivity of the nanodot array pattern is close to 0.38 T, which is satisfactory for practical data storage system at room temperature because the data can be manipulated easily by an external alternating magnetic field with a magnetic field strength realizable in typical magnetic data storage systems.216
In 2017, by grafting Fc with a freely-rotating O-bridge, a soluble FePt-containing polymer M12 was synthesized. By taking M12 as the single-source precursor, L10-FePt NPs are formed by thermal annealing under an Ar/H2 (v/v = 95/5) atmosphere. It is worth noting that Ar/H2 atmosphere facilitates the formation of higher-ordered NPs with a smaller average particle size (12.7 nm) compared to the results using pure Ar. The room-temperature coercivity of the L10-FePt NPs reaches up to 36 kOe, which is sufficiently large for non-volatile ultra-high density magnetic data storage applications. Nanoline and nanodot arrays of M12 from PDMS were also fabricated by NIL, whose profile and size can be observed clearly from the 3D AFM images. The MFM image of nanodot array illustrates a nanopattern of magnetization with the same periodicity as that in the corresponding AFM image.96
Another solution-processable precursor was synthesized through dehydrohalogenation, forming a copolymer M13 with a functional bimetallic fragment on the side chains. After pyrolysis of M13, the stoichiometry of Fe and Pt atoms in L10-FePt NPs is nearly close to 1:1, and the coercivity of L10-FePt NPs is 7.2 kOe. TEM shows the spherical L10-FePt NPs that are embedded in the carbon matrix. After pyrolysis of the patterned array, the featured nanoline structures from PDMS were retained in the 3D AFM image. The organic skeleton was decomposed and the L10-FePt NPs were formed in situ, showing the approach to be potentially useful for fabricating BPM recording media.217 The effect of pyrolysis temperature on the size and magnetic properties of the L10-FePt NPs from the pyrolysis of bimetallic M14 and M15 was also investigated by Wong's group. With higher pyrolysis temperature, smaller NPs with larger coercivity were obtained. This could be attributed to the improved crystallinity within each NP, which is a function of the pyrolysis temperature.218
Similarly, L10 CoPt NPs have also been synthesized by the one-step decomposition of heterobimetallic CoPt-containing metallopolymer (M16) or a blend of Co-containing and Pt-containing homopolymers M17 and M11.219,220 Their nanodot patterns were fabricated by hard AAO nanodot mold, showing high fidelity and conformity of the nanodot patterns. The largest coercivity of the as-prepared L10 CoPt NPs is 0.54 T at 300 K. The successful preparation of magnetic nanodot arrays from heterobimetallic CoPt-containing metallopolymer denotes that these polymers hold great application potential in data storage.
More recently, FePt-containing small molecular complexes (M18, M19 and M20) were also designed and synthesized for the preparation of L10-FePt NPs and their nanopatterns by NIL. The rigid coplanar metallic cores and the surrounding flexible tails of complex M18 with hemiphasmidic structure induce spontaneous arrangements to form the highly ordered negative morphology replicated from the soft template. The dendritic functional group of M18 can effectively weaken the molecular interactions, which is beneficial for decreasing the particle size (an average size of 9.5 nm). The saturated moment at the applied magnetic field up to 6.5 T is 25.3 emu g−1 and the coercivity is 10.6 kOe at room temperature. Afterwards, M18 was successfully nanopatterned to line, hexagonal pillar and hole arrays on silicon substrates by NIL with a soft PDMS template.221
Then, by combining the top-down NIL and bottom-up self-assembly methods, the randomly oriented molecules of complexes M19 and M20 can form highly ordered nanorod aggregates through self-assembly in the grooves of PDMS stamp. By pyrolysis, the self-assembled nanorods of ferromagnetic FePt and FePd NPs were generated accordingly, and the disordered/arrayed morphology and magnetism of ferromagnetic FePt NPs are shown in Fig. 39. As expected, the patterns before and after pyrolysis agree well with the pre-defined structure of the PDMS stamp, and the distinct magnetization signals are also consistent with the related magnetic islands in the AFM images.222 This strategy opens a new avenue on the precise control of patterns and holds good potential for magnetic data recording.
 Fig. 39  (a) Illustration of the NIL of self-assembly and the formation of nanorods in the mold cavity. Disordered patterns derived from the pyrolysis of the self-assembled nanorods of M19 in (b) SEM image, (c) AFM image, and (d) MFM image. Line-oriented patterns of M19 after annealing in (e) SEM image, (f) AFM image, and (g) MFM image. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright © 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
This section reviews the fabrication of L10-FePt-based BPM from the Fe and/or Pt-containing precursors by the convenient self-assembly and NIL methods, respectively. The former method is easy to operate at low cost but prone to encounter the problems of sintering, agglomeration and broad size distribution, while the latter one can avoid these problems and provide high-quality BPM in a large area. However, it still needs more efforts to further improve the resolution and lower the cost of L10-FePt-based BPM. One promising strategy is via the bottom-up smart self-assembly of block copolymers bearing Fe and Pt atoms, which can reach to the extremely high resolution with periodicity smaller than 5 nm without resorting to any sophisticated equipment. Moreover, achievement of the write and read of information in a single bit is highly required for the practical application of L10-FePt-based BPM (Table 4).
Table 4 Pivotal parameters of L10-FePt NPs as synthesized from metal-containing organic precursors




Organometallic precursor
Average size (nm)
Coercivity (kOe)
Ref.





M9

4.6
14

18




M10 & M11

4.9
3.8

216




M12

12.7
36

96




M13

7.4
7.2

217




M14

11.3
0.097

218




M15

6.3
0.6

218




M18

9.5
10.6

221




M19

16.2
4.9

222






7. Conclusions and perspectives
To conclude, the fundamentals of RRAM and MRAM, as well as the advancements in both RRAM and MRAM devices based on metal-containing organic compounds over the last decade, including metal complexes, metallopolymers, metal NPs-doped polymers, MOFs, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, have been discussed in this review. Metal-containing organic compounds are endowed with superior optical, electronic and magnetic properties due to the rich electronic and spintronic structures as well as the various interactions between metal centers and ligands, allowing them to exhibit desired electrical switching behaviors with low operational voltage, large ION/IOFF ratio, long retention time and good stability. Besides, due to the good solution processability, atomic level mixing and stoichiometric control over composition of metallopolymers, nanopatterned magnetic structures can be achieved on various substrates for application in ultra-high density MRAM at low cost. Noteworthy, owing to the superior optical and electronic properties of metal-containing organic compounds, memory devices based on metal-containing organic compounds allows the application in-memory computing and neuromorphic computing. Logic operation is performed by inputting one electrical pulse and one optical signal. Additionally, controlling neuronal activity via light signals has a higher spatiotemporal resolution than that afforded by the traditional electrical and chemical reaction-based manipulation. Therefore, metal-containing organic compounds will provide more possibilities for RRAM in IoT application.
Although considerable progress in RRAM and MRAM devices based on metal-containing organic compounds has been made in recent years, there still exists many problems and formidable challenges to overcome for practical applications in the future. Herein, we outline several future challenges and directions in RRAM and MRAM, respectively, which provide some suggestions to researchers working in related disciplines. For RRAM, (1) the electronic interactions of metal center and organic backbone, which play a significant role in the optical, electronic and magnetic properties of the materials, is still not clear and under-explored yet. Future research should be devoted to the intrinsic switching mechanisms of organic memory devices, which will help us to rationally design the materials with desired features, thereby realizing high-density, low power consumption and stable memory devices; (2) metal ions will benefit the transmission of information between the presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane of biological synapses. Attempts at superior memory behaviors and functional neuron networks achieved by adjusting metal elements and backbone of the molecules will further broaden the prospects of RRAM devices; (3) the interface effects of the devices are critical to the performance and reproducibility of memory devices. It can be improved by choosing suitable dopant of NPs and optimizing the composition of metal-containing organic compounds, which will also be an important research topic for RRAM; (4) there is an urgent need but it is still a significant challenge to use metal-containing organic compounds in resistive memory, which is due to their solution processability and high polarity. Exploration and development of novel compounds with better solubility and new manufacturing technologies is necessary for obtaining high-quality thin films, which improve the uniformity and reproducibility of RRAM and MRAM devices; (5) organic MRAM devices with the bit size below 10 nm cannot easily be accomplished by the top-down methods (i.e. etching and NIL), which is expected to be solved via the bottom-up approach, such as the template effect of molecular framework and in situ self-assembly of metal-containing block copolymers, which can thus achieve the storage capacity of Tb in−2 level; (6) the all-electric manipulated STT- and SOT-based MRAM devices from metal-containing organic compounds have not been studied yet, which is very desirable for modern stable, fast, low power, non-volatile memory industry. Because the CMOS technology is approaching to its physical limit, resulting in severe static power dissipation problem; (7) theoretical calculations of metal-containing organic compounds-based RRAM and MRAM devices before experimentally fabricating them will be very helpful to guide the further materials design and device optimization.
Overall, by introducing different metal elements into the side chain and/or backbone of the molecules, memory behavior of devices based on these metal-containing organic compounds can be facially modulated. Therefore, further research of RRAM and MRAM devices based on metal-containing organic compounds might lead to great progress and provide an outlook for the future innovations in active layer materials for application in green electronics, degradable devices, secure information storage systems and neuromorphic computing.
Abbreviations

4,4′-ODA4,4′-Diaminodiphenyl ether
6FDAHexafluoroisopropyl bis(phthalicdianhydride)
8HQ8-Hydroxyquinoline
AAOAnodized aluminum oxide
ABPAminobutylphosphonic acid
AFM layerAntiferromagnetic layer
Alq3Tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato) aluminum
AMRAnisotropic magnetoresistance
BCPsBlock copolymers
BNSLBinary nanocrystal superlattice
BPMBit patterned media
BTBenzothiazole
CMOSComplementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
COICharge ordered insulating
CoPcCobalt phthalocyanine
CTCharge transfer
CuPcCopper phthalocyanine
CVCyclic voltammetry
CzCarbazole
D–ADonor–acceptor
DAFcTPA4,4′-Diamino-4′′-ferrocenyltriphenylamine
DFTDensity functional theory
DHTM4-(Bis(4-aminophenyl)methyl)phenol
DOSDensity of states
DRAMDynamic random access memory
DSSCsDye-sensitized solar cells
EPSElectronic phase separation
F16CuPcFluorinated copper phthalocyanine
FAFormamidnium
FcFerrocene
fccFace-centered cubic
fctFace-centered tetragonal
FeRAMFerroelectric random access memory
FMFerromagnetic
FMMFerromagnetic metallic
FNFowler–Nordheim
FTSFacing-target sputtered
GBLCGrain boundary limited current
GISAXSGrazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GMRGiant magnetoresistance
HBPI-FcFerrocene-terminated hyperbranched polyimide
HCuPcHyperbranched copper phthalocyanine
HDDsHard disk drives
HRSHigh resistive state
HRTEMHigh-resolution TEM
ICsIntegrated circuits
IMTInsulator-to-metal transition
ITRSInternational Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors
KIPotassium iodide
LBLLayer-by-layer assembly
LEDsLight emitting diodes
LLCTLigand-to-ligand charge transfer
LLGLandau-Lifshitz-Gilbert
LPCMO(La2/3Pr1/3)5/8Ca3/8MnO3
LRSLow resistive state
LSMOLa0.66Sr0.33MnO3
LTLow temperature
LTMLong-term memory
MAMethylammonium
MFMMagnetic force microscopy
MLCTMetal-to-ligand charge transfer
MMLCTMetal–metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MnPcManganese phthalocyanine
MOFsMetal–organic frameworks
MPcMetallophthalocyanine
MRMagnetoresistance
MRAMMagnetic random access memory
MTJsMagnetic tunnel junctions
N-ANéel-Arrhenius
NFMNonferromagnetic
NILNanoimprint lithography
NPsNanoparticles
NWsNanowires
OFETsOrganic field effect transistors
OIHPsOrganic–inorganic-hybrid perovskites
OLEDsOrganic light-emitting diodes
OSVsOrganic spin valves
PAAPolyamic acid
PAHPoly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PcRAMPhase change random access memory
PDMSPoly(dimethyl siloxane)
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate
PEIPoly(ethyleneimine)
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PIPolyimide
PLAPolylactic acid
PMMAPolymethyl methacrylate
PMRPerpendicular magnetic recording
PNDAPhosphonoundecanoic acid
PPFPaired-pulse facilitation
PSPolystyrene
PVAm·HIPolyvinylammonium iodide
PVKPoly(N-vinylcarbazole)
PVPPoly(vinyl pyrrolidone)
RERare earth
RIEReactive ion etching
RRAMResistance random access memory
RTRoom temperature
SCLCSpace charge limited current
SMMsSingle molecule magnets
SOCSpin–orbit coupling
SOT-MRAMSpin orbital torque magnetic random access memory
SRAMStatic random access memory
s-rGOSmooth-surface rGO
STDPSpike-timing-dependent plasticity
STMShort-term memory
STRPSpike-rate-dependent plasticity
STT-MRAMSpin transfer torque magnetic random access memory
SVsSpin valves
TAMRTunneling anisotropic magnetoresistance
TEMTransmission electron microscope
TFLCTrap-filled limited current
TMCsTransition metal complexes
TMRTunneling magnetoresistance
TPATriphenylamine
WORMWrite-once-ready-many times
WRERWrite-multiple read-erase-multiple read
w-rGOWrinkle reduced graphene oxide
XRDX-ray diffraction
ZIF-8Zeolitic imidazolate framework

Symbols


α
Gilbert damping parameter

α
0
Lattice constant

B
pre
Pre-set magnetic field

B
so
Spin–orbit coupling magnetic field

d
Distance between the injector and detector

h
Reduced Planck constant

H
c
Coercivity

H
eff
Instantaneous effective field

I–VCurrent–voltage

J
Current density

k
B
Boltzmann constant

K
u
Magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant

λ
s
Spin diffusion length

m
Magnetic moment of the free layer

m
p
Magnetic moment of the pinned layer

M
r
Remanence

m
s
Magnetic quantum number

m
spin
Spin magnetic moment

M
s
Saturation magnetization

P
Spin polarization

γ
Gyromagnetic ratio

R
ap
Antiparallel MR

R
p
Parallel MR

τ
Spin relaxation time

T
c
Curie temperature

μ
B
Bohr magneton

μ
0
Permeability of vacuum

V
Volume of the recording unit

V
RESET
Rewrite voltage

V
SET
Write voltage

V
th
Threshold voltage

Z
Atomic number

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.: 62174116, 61774109, 52073242 and 51974123). This work was also supported by the start-up fund from Shanghai University. W.-Y. W. thanks the financial support from the Science, Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality (JCYJ20180507183413211), the RGC Senior Research Fellowship Scheme (SRFS2021-5S01), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (PolyU 15307321), Hong Kong Polytechnic University (1-ZE1C) and Miss Clarea Au for the Endowed Professorship in Energy (847S). Z. Z. also thanks the Distinguished Youth Foundation of Hunan Province (Grant No. 2020JJ2018), Hunan Hundred Talents Program, Key R & D projects in Hunan Province (2020WK2016) and Hunan High Level Talent Gathering Project (2019RS1077 and 2020RC5007) for the financial support.
References
A. D. Kent and D. C. Worledge, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 187–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Slonczewski, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1996, 159, L1–L7 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stiles and A. Zangwill, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 014407 CrossRef .
Z. J. Ruan and Z. Li, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 764–778 RSC .
C. L. Philip Chen and C.-Y. Zhang, Inf. Sci., 2014, 275, 314–347 CrossRef .
W. A. Wulf and S. A. McKee, Comput. Architect. News, 1995, 23, 20–24 CrossRef .
X. Huang, C. Liu, Y.-G. Jiang and P. Zhou, Chin. Phys. B, 2020, 29, 078504 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Zidan, J. P. Strachan and W. D. Lu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 22–29 CrossRef .
K. Roy, A. Jaiswal and P. Panda, Nature, 2019, 575, 607–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, S. Goswami and T. Venkatesan, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 021303 CAS .
M. M. Rehman, H. M. M. U. Rehman, J. Z. Gul, W. Y. Kim, K. S. Karimov and N. Ahmed, Sci. Technol., Adv. Mater., 2020, 21, 147–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou and V. A. L. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5425–5449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Z. Meng, C.-L. Ho, H. Guo, W. Yang, I. Manners, L. Xu and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4934–4953 RSC .
J.-C. Eloi, L. Chabanne, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Astruc and A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 558–636 RSC .
J.-H. Wu and G.-S. Liou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15988–15994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Salahuddin, K. Ni and S. Datta, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 442–450 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, G. Li, C.-L. Ho, M. Faisal, C.-W. Leung, P. W.-T. Pong, K. Liu, B.-Z. Tang, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1034–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Nguyen, R. A. Jones and B. J. Holliday, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 377, 237–258 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-D. Ling, D.-J. Liaw, C. Zhu, D. S.-H. Chan, E.-T. Kang and K.-G. Neoh, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 917–978 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Lee, H. Bae, H. Seong, D.-I. Lee, H. Park, Y. J. Choi, S.-G. Im, S. O. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7306–7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Han, Q. V. Le, J. Choi, H. Kim, S. G. Kim, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, T. L. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8155–8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. P. de Araujo, J. D. Cuchiaro, L. D. McMillan, M. C. Scott and J. F. Scott, Nature, 1995, 374, 627–629 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nishimura, T. Hirai, A. Koganei, T. Ikeda, K. Okano, Y. Sekiguchi and Y. Osada, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 5246–5249 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Chong, L. P. Shi, R. Zhao, P. K. Tan, J. M. Li, H. K. Lee, X. S. Miao, A. Y. Du and C. H. Tung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 122114 CrossRef .
R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli and A. Visconti, Proc. IEEE, 2003, 91, 489–502 CrossRef .
P. Pavan, R. Bez, P. Olivo and E. Zanoni, Proc. IEEE, 1997, 85, 1248–1271 CrossRef CAS .
N. Setter, D. Damjanovic, L. Eng, G. Fox, S. Gevorgian, S. Hong, A. Kingon, H. Kohlstedt, N. Y. Park, G. B. Stephenson, I. Stolitchnov, A. K. Taganstev, D. V. Taylor, T. Yamada and S. Streiffer, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 051606 CrossRef .
D. Astruc, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2020, 30, 111–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hudgens and B. Johnson, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 829–832 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tehrani, J. M. Slaughter, E. Chen, M. Durlam, J. Shi and M. DeHerren, IEEE Trans. Magn., 1999, 35, 2814–2819 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Li, X. Xia, Q. Xu, J. Ge and J. Lu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 685–689 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. P. Wong and S. Salahuddin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 191–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, S. Gao, C. Chen, C. Song and F. Zeng, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2014, 83, 1–59 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Q. Qian, X. Zhu, Y. Li, M. Zhang, J. Li, C. Ma, H. Li, J. Lu and Q. Zhang, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 995–1033 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Mao, R. Yi, S.-T. Han, V. A. L. Roy and Y. Zhou, Small, 2018, 14, 1703126 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-P. Lin, S.-J. Liu, T. Gong, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 570–606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Yi, J. Shang, G. Liu and R.-W. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1531–1565 RSC .
J. S. Meena, S. M. Sze, U. Chand and T.-Y. Tseng, Nano. Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 526 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, K. Kim, D. M. Kim, W. Kwon, J. Choi and M. Ree, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 765–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Liu, P. Wang, Q. Zhao, H.-Y. Yang, J. Wong, H.-B. Sun, X.-C. Dong, W.-P. Lin and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2901–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-F. Gu, J.-H. He, D.-Y. Chen, H.-L. Dong, Y.-Y. Li, H. Li, Q.-F. Xu and J.-M. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5968–5973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Tsai, F. Xiong, E. Pop and M. Shim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5360–5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yao, L. Pan, L. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Lin, Y. Ye, Z Zhang, S. Xiang and B. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Waser, R. Dittmann, G. Staikov and K. Szot, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2632–2663 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chu, J. Ouyang, J.-H. Tseng and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1440–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Li, R. C. Fang, A. M. Zheng, Y. Y. Chu, X. Tao, H. H. Xu, S. J. Ding and Y. Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15643–15654 RSC .
Q. D. Ling, F. C. Chang, Y. Song, C. X. Zhu, D. J. Liaw, D. S. H. Chan, E. T. Kang and K. G. Neoh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8732–8733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. L. Liu, Y. Chen, K. G. Neoh, Y. X. Li, C. X. Zhu, E. S. Tok and E. T. Kang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10304–10311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Lai, K. Ohshimizu, W. Y. Lee, J. C. Hsu, T. Higashihara, M. Ueda and W. C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14502–14508 RSC .
C. L. Liu and W. C. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2169–2174 RSC .
S. L. Lim, Q. Ling, E. Y. H. Teo, C. X. Zhu, D. S. H. Chan, E.-T. Kang and K. G. Neoh, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5148–5157 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jana, S. Roy, R. Panja, M. Dutta, S. Z. Rahaman, R. Mahapatra and S. Maikap, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 188 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Waser and M. Aono, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 833–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Yen, C. Shan, L. Wang, P. Xu, M. Zhou and H.-L. Wang, Polymers, 2017, 9, 25 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Han, Q. V. Le, J. Choi, H. Kim, S. G. Kim, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, T. L. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8155–8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-H. Xie, Q.-D. Ling, X.-Y. Hou and W. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2120–2121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lee and Y. Chen, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cho, S. Song, Y. Ji, T.-W. Kim and T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2806–2829 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, B. Gao, J. Tang, H. Qian and H. Wu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 011301 CAS .
T.-L. Choi, K.-H. Lee, W.-J. Joo, S. Lee, T.-W. Lee and M. Y. Chae, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9842–9843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Parkin, X. Jiang, C. Kaiser, A. Panchula, K. Roche and M. Samant, Proc. IEEE, 2003, 91, 661–680 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawahara, K. Ito, R. Takemura and H. Ohno, Microelectron. Reliab., 2012, 52, 613–627 CrossRef .
D. Weller and A. Moser, IEEE Trans. Magn., 1999, 35, 4423–4439 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Rybkina, A. G. Rybkin, I. I. Klimovskikh, P. N. Skirdkov, K. A. Zvezdin, A. K. Zvezdin and A. M. Shikin, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 165201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Wolf, D. D. Awschalom, R. A. Buhrman, J. M. Daughton, S. von. Molnar, M. L. Roukes, A. Y. Chtchelkanova and D. M. Treger, Science, 2001, 294, 1488–1495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Zhao, L. Ding, J.-S. HuangFu, J.-Y. Zhang and G.-H. Yu, Rare Met., 2013, 32, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Malozemoff, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 6080–6083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Chen, J. F. Feng, Z. C. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Y. Zhong, C. Song, L. Jin, B. Zhang, F. Li, M. Jiang, Y. Z. Tan, X. J. Zhou, G. Y. Shi, X. F. Zhou, X. D. Han, S. C. Mao, Y. H. Chen, X. F. Han and F. Pan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schöneberg, F. Otte, N. Néel, A. Weismann, Y. Mokrousov, J. Kröger, R. Berndt and S. Heinze, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1450–1454 CrossRef PubMed .
M. N. Baibich, J. M. Broto, A. Fert, F. N. V. Dau, F. Petroff, P. Etienne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 61, 2472–2475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Liu, X. T. Zhu, S. S. Ding, R. J. Li and W. P. Hu, Prog. Chem., 2019, 31, 1199–1212 Search PubMed .
S. Parkin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 1641–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. F. Mott, Proc. R. Soc. A, 1936, 156, 368–382 CAS .
S. M. Thompson, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 093001 CrossRef .
R. A. de Groot, F. M. Mueller, P. G. V. Engen and K. H. J. Buschow, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 50, 2024–2027 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chappert, A. Fert and F. N. V. Dau, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 813–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Szulczewski, Top. Curr. Chem., 2011, 312, 275–302 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Roundy, D. Nemirovsky, V. Kagalovsky and M. E. Raikh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 226601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyazaki and N. Tezuka, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1995, 139, L231–L234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mathon and A. Umerski, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 220403 CrossRef .
S. Ikeda, J. Hayakawa, Y. Ashizawa, Y. M. Lee, K. Miura, H. Hasegawa, M. Tsunoda, F. Matsukura and H. Ohno, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 082508 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Peng, L. Wang, L. Chang and Y. Zhang, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2016, 46, 107306 Search PubMed .
L. Berger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 9353–9358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Rantschler, R. D. McMichael, A. Castillo, A. J. Shapiro, W. F. Egelhoff Jr., B. B. Maranville, D. Pulugurtha, A. P. Chen and L. M. Connors, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 033911 CrossRef .
E. B. Myers, D. C. Ralph, J. A. Katine, R. N. Louie and R. A. Buhrman, Science, 1999, 285, 867–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cubukcu, O. Boulle, M. Drouard, K. Garello, C. O. Avci, I. M. Miron, J. Langer, B. Ocker, P. Gambardella and G. Gaudin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 042406 CrossRef .
M. I. Dyakonov and V. I. Perel, Phys. Lett. A, 1971, 35, 459–460 CrossRef .
Y. K. Kato, R. C. Myers, A. C. Gossard and D. D. Awschalom, Science, 2004, 306, 1910–1913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, C.-F. Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph and R. A. Buhrman, Science, 2012, 336, 555–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Miron, G. Gaudin, S. Auffret, B. Rodmacq, A. Schuhl, S. Pizzini, J. Vogel and P. Gambardella, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 230–234 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Manchon, H. C. Koo, J. Nitta, S. M. Frolov and R. A. Duine, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 871–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, E. Ehrenfreund and Z. V. Vardeny, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1781–1793 RSC .
J. S. Moodera, L. R. Kinder, T. M. Wong and R. Meservey, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 3273–3276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Barraud, K. Bouzehouane, C. Deranlot, D. J. Kim, R. Rakshit, S. Shi, J. Arabski, M. Bowen, E. Beaurepaire, S. Boukari, F. Petroff, P. Seneor and R. Mattana, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 16694–16699 RSC .
Z. Meng, G. Li, H.-F. Wong, S.-M. Ng, S.-C. Yiu, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 731–738 RSC .
M. A. Almessiere, Y. Slimani, H. Güngüneş, A. Baykal, S. V. Trukhanov and A. V. Trukhanov, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 24 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Weller, A. Moser, L. Folks, M. E. Best, W. Lee, M. F. Toney, M. Schwickert, J.-U. Thiele and M. F. Doerner, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2000, 36, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mera, M. Gallei, S. Bernard and E. Ionescu, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 468–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zha, H. D. Thaker, R. R. Maddikeri, S. P. Gido, M. T. Tuominen and G. N. Tew, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14534–14541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Scheid, D. Stock, T. Winter, T. Gutmann, C. Dietz and M. Gallei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2187–2196 RSC .
R. H. Staff, M. Gallei, M. Mazurowski, M. Rehahn, R. Berger, K. Landfester and D. Crespy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9042–9049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-J. Zhou and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2541–2566 RSC .
Y. Lu, N. Yeung, N. Sieracki and N. M. Marshall, Nature, 2009, 460, 855–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Y. Fang, J. Jiang, Y. Ji, Y. Li, J. Zheng, Q. Xu and J. Lu, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1790–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Stoliar, P. Diener, J. Tranchant, B. Corraze, B. Brière, V. Ta-Phuoc, N. Bellec, M. Fourmigué, D. Lorcy, E. Janod and L. Cario, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2983–2988 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Au, D. Wu and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4654–4657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-Y. Hong, C.-T. Poon and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6368–6371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-Y. Hong and V. W.-W. Yam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2616–2624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-K. Chan, M. Ng, Y.-C. Wong, M.-Y. Chan, W.-T. Wong and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10750–10761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Chen, Y. Ai, E. Y.-H. Hong, A. K.-W. Chan and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13858–13866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chan, S.-H. Lee, C.-T. Poon, M. Ng and V. W.-W. Yam, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 164–167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Li, M. Zhang, C. Ma, H. Li, J. Lu and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40332–40338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Kim, W. J. Joo, E. S. Song, H. J. Kim, J. Kim, C. Park, H. L. Lee and C. Kim, Synth. Met., 2007, 157, 640–643 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jin, J. Lee, E. Lee, E. Hwang and H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4235–4237 RSC .
B. Koo, H. Baek and J. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1091–1099 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Sun, Y.-Y. Zhao, J. Zhou, X.-F. Cheng, J.-H. He and J.-M. Lu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 4808–4813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pradhan and S. Das, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1209–1211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goswami, A. J. Matula, S. P. Rath, S. Hedström, S. Saha, M. Annamalai, D. Sengupta, A. Patra, S. Ghosh, H. Jani, S. Sarkar, M. R. Motapothula, C. A. Nijhuis, J. Martin, S. Goswami, V. S. Batista and T. Venkatesan, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 1216–1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Wenger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13522–13533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Otto, M. Dorn, C. Forster, M. Bauer, M. Seitz and K. Heinze, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 359, 102–111 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kandasamy, G. Ramar, L. Zhou, S. T. Han, S. Venkatesh, S. C. Cheng, Z. Xu, C. C. Ko and V. A. L. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1445–1450 RSC .
J. Fang, H. You, J. Chen, J. Lin and D. Ma, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 3701–3704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Paul, U. Rana, S. Goswami, T. K. Mondal and S. Goswami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6520–6523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, D. Sengupta, N. D. Paul, T. K. Mondal and S. Goswami, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 6103–6111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Tang, T. G. Sun, J. Y. Shao, Z. L. Gong and Y. W. Zhong, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11925–11928 RSC .
K. S. Karimov, Z. Ahmad, F. Touati, M. Mahroof-Tahir, M. Muqeet Rehman and S. Zameer Abbas, Chin. Phys. B, 2015, 24, 116102 CrossRef .
C.-L. Wong, M. Ng, E. Y.-H. Hong, Y.-C. Wong, M.-Y. Chan and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12193–12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 319, 180–195 CrossRef CAS .
A. Winter and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5311–5357 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Astruc and A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 558–636 RSC .
Q. Ling, Y. Song, S. J. Ding, C. Zhu, D. S. H. Chan, D. L. Kwong, E. T. Kang and K. G. Neoh, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-D. Ling, W. Wang, Y. Song, C.-X. Zhu, D. S.-H. Chan, E.-T. Kang and K.-G. Neoh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23995–24001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Q.-D. Ling, S.-L. Lim, Y.-P. Tan, C. Zhu, D. S. H. Chan, E.-T. Kang and K.-G. Neoh, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 401–406 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Tan, Q. D. Ling, Y. H. Teo Eric, Y. Song, S. L. Lim, G. Q. L. Patrick, E. T. Kang, C. Zhu and D. S. H. Chan, MRS Proc., 2006, 937, 0937-M0910-0929 Search PubMed .
Y. Song, Y. P. Tan, E. Y. H. Teo, C. Zhu, D. S. H. Chan, Q. D. Ling, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 084508 CrossRef .
X. Yang, C. Wang, J. Shang, C. Zhang, H. Tan, X. Yi, L. Pan, W. Zhang, F. Fan, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, G. Liu and R.-W. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25179–25184 RSC .
M. Zhang, C. Ma, D. Du, J. Xiang, S. Yao, E. Hu, S. Liu, Y. Tong, W.-Y. Wong and Q. Zhao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000841 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tian, S. Qi, F. Chen, L. Shi, W. Hu and D. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 203302 CrossRef .
R. Hao, N. Jia, G. Tian, S. Qi, L. Shi, X. Wang and D. Wu, Mater. Des., 2018, 139, 298–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiang, T.-K. Wang, Q. Zhao, W. Huang, C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 921–928 RSC .
J. Xiang, X. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Zhao, C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11348–11355 RSC .
X. Cheng, A. Mohammed, H. Lian, Z. Zhong, H. Guo, Q. Dong and V. A. L. Roy, J. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 892, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, F. Fan, W. Xue, G. Liu, Y. Fu, X. Zhuang, X. H. Xu, J. Gu, R. W. Li and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, H. Yao, Y. Song, S. Zhu, H. Yu and S. Guan, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 146, 210–218 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, S.-J. Liu and W. Huang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 794–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Liu, Z.-H. Lin, Q. Zhao, Y. Ma, H.-F. Shi, M.-D. Yi, Q.-D. Ling, Q.-L. Fan, C.-X. Zhu, E.-T. Kang and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 979–985 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Liu, W.-P. Lin, M.-D. Yi, W.-J. Xu, C. Tang, Q. Zhao, S.-H. Ye, X.-M. Liu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22964–22970 RSC .
P. Wang, S.-J. Liu, Z.-H. Lin, X.-C. Dong, Q. Zhao, W.-P. Lin, M.-D. Yi, S.-H. Ye, C.-X. Zhu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9576–9583 RSC .
W. Lin, H. Sun, S. Liu, H. Yang, S. Ye, W. Xu, Q. Zhao, X. Liu and W. Huang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 2472–2478 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Nguyen, R. A. Jones and B. J. Holliday, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 4359–4367 RSC .
A. Bandyopadhyay, S. Sahu and M. Higuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1168–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Li, J. He, Y. Ji, Y. Li, Q. Xu, J. Zheng and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32930–32938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, S.-H. Hong, S. H. Cho, S. Park, S.-M. Park, O. Kim and M. Ree, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1766–1771 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, H. X. Chen, F. Zhou, H. Li, H. Dong, Y. Y. Li, Z. J. Hu, Q. F. Xu and J. M. Lu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7659–7664 RSC .
B.-B. Cui, Z. Mao, Y. Chen, Y.-W. Zhong, G. Yu, C. Zhan and J. Yao, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1308–1315 RSC .
D. Oberoi, P. Dagar, U. Shankar, S. Sahu and A. Bandyopadhyay, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 3048–3058 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Tsai, C.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Lin, C.-L. Tsai, H.-J. Yen, H.-C. You and G.-S. Liou, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2780–2784 RSC .
C.-L. Tsai, K. Sudhir, K. Reddy, C.-Y. Yeh, C.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Lin, H.-J. Yen, M.-C. Tsai and G.-S. Liou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 88531–88537 RSC .
Q. U. Khan, N. Jia, G. Tian, S. Qi and D. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9153–9161 CrossRef CAS .
T.-W. Kim, S.-H. Oh, J. Lee, H. Choi, G. Wang, J. Park, D.-Y. Kim, H. Hwang and T. Lee, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, H. Liu, W. Wang, E. Yang, H. Zhen and Q. Ling, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 18384–18391 RSC .
X.-F. Cheng, E.-B. Shi, X. Hou, J. Shu, J.-H. He, H. Li, Q.-F. Xu, N.-J. Li, D.-Y. Chen and J.-M. Lu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700107 CrossRef .
J. Ouyang, C.-W. Chu, C. R. Szmanda, L. Ma and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 918–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Tseng, J. Huang, J. Ouyang, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1077–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Padma, C. A. Betty, S. Samanta and A. Nigam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5768–5778 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, S.-T. Han, S. Venkatesh, Q. Sun, H. Peng, Y. Zhou, C. Yeung, R. K. Y. Li and V. A. L. Roy, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 382–388 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Kim, J. H. Jung, T. W. Kim and D. I. Son, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 253301 CrossRef .
K. Onlaor, T. Thiwawong and B. Tunhoo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 880–886 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mao, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Ban, Y. Ding, T. Sun, Y. Yin, Z. Liu, J. Liu and W. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800503 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Y. Chen, H. Mao, Y. Wu, Z. Zhou, T. Jiang, Z. Tian, J. Liu, F. Xiu and W. Huang, Org. Electron., 2020, 82, 105708 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Choi, J.-K. Kim, H. Seong, M.-S. Jang and Y.-H. Kim, Org. Electron., 2015, 27, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC .
K.-B. Wang, Q. Xun and Q. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100025 CrossRef .
L. Pan, G. Liu, H. Li, S. Meng, L. Han, J. Shang, B. Chen, A. E. Plateroprats, W. Lu and X. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17477–17483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, W. Shi, W. Zhang, J. Yu, B. K. Chandran, C. Cui, B. Zhu, Z. Liu, B. Li, C. Xu, Z. Xu, S. Li, W. Huang, F. Huo and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8884–8888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yoon, S. C. Warren and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4437–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Nminibapiel, P. Shrestha, J. Liu, W. Guo, P. G. Weidler, H. Baumgart, C. Wöll and E. Redel, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, W. Wu, X. Shen, Q. Liu, Y. He, K. Song, H. Li and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47073–47082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, Z. Ji, X. Yi, X. Zhu, X. Chen, J. Shang, G. Liu and R.-W. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2677–2685 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Park and J.-S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 21045–21049 RSC .
X. Yi, Z. Yu, X. Niu, J. Shang, G. Mao, T. Yin, H. Yang, W. Xue, P. Dhanapal, S. Qu, G. Liu and R.-W. Li, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800655 CrossRef .
N. Wang, K. Zhao, T. Ding, W. Liu, A. S. Ahmed, Z. Wang, M. Tian, X. W. Sun and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700522 CrossRef .
J. Choi, J. S. Han, K. Hong, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704002 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, D. Yang, C. Wu, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 106, 100580 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170–6175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, M. Peng, X. Yu, X. Cai, S. Chen, H. Hu, B. X. Chen, X. Gao, B. Dong and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1375–1381 RSC .
J. Choi, S. Park, J. Lee, K. Hong, D. H. Kim, C. W. Moon, G. D. Park, J. Suh, J. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung, N. G. Park, S. Han, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6562–6567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, H. Ahn, Y. Song, W. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Yoo and T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804841 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Muthu, S. Agarwal, A. Vijayan, P. Hazra, K. B. Jinesh and V. C. Nair, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600092 CrossRef .
B. Hwang and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 673 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Yoo, S. V. N. Pammi, K. Y. Kim, T.-V. Dang, J.-H. Eom, Y. Choi and S.-G. Yoon, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 811, 151999 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Shih, H.-T. Wu, W. L. Tsai and C. C. Leu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 783, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Y. Han, J. Zhou, W. Zuo, X. Gao, L. Han, X. Pang, L. Zhang, Y. Liu and S. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35914–35923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, A. Bedoya-Pinto, Z. Mao, M. Gobbi, W. Yan, Y. Guo, A. Atxabal, R. Llopis, G. Yu, Y. Liu, A. Chuvilin, F. Casanova and L. E. Hueso, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2609–2615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, F. Tai, H. Lian, B. Zhao, Z. Zhong, Z. Chen, J. Tang and F. R. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2875–2882 RSC .
Z. H. Xiong, D. Wu, Z. V. Vardeny and J. Shi, Nature, 2004, 427, 821–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pramanik, C.-G. Stefanita, S. Patibandla, S. Bandyopadhyay, K. Garre, N. Harth and M. Cahay, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 216–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Prezioso, A. Riminucci, I. Bergenti, P. Graziosi, D. Brunel and V. A. Dediu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1371–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, Q. Shi, T. Miao, Q. Li, P. Cai, H. Liu, H. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Zhu, Y. Yu, L. Deng, W. Wang, L. Yin, D. Sun, X.-G. Zhang and J. Shen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3877 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Banerjee and A. J. Pal, Small, 2018, 14, 1801510 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Feng, Z. Li, T. Li, Y. Xiong, L. Cao and X. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4422–4428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Liu, R. McLaughlin, Y. Zhai, S. R. Vardeny, X. Liu, S. McGill, D. Semenov, H. Guo, R. Tsuchikawa, V. V. Deshpande, D. Sun and Z. V. Vardeny, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 129 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Liu, H. Guo, D. Sun and Z. V. Vardeny, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, X. Wang, Y. Li, C. Zheng, B. Zhang, C. Di, F. Li, C. Jin, W. Mi, L. Chen and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, T. Zhang and X. Feng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6189–6235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, A. C. Hinckley, Z. Huang, D. Feng, A. A. Yakovenko, M. Lee, S. Chen, X. Zou and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14533–14537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Streubel, P. Fischer, F. Kronast, V. P. Kravchuk, D. D. Sheka, Y. Gaididei, O. G. Schmidt and D. Makarov, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 363001 CrossRef .
S. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989–1992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, J. Kim, J. P. Liu, H. Fan and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7132–7133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yildirim, T. Gang, S. Kinge, D. N. Reinhoudt, D. H. Blank, W. G. van der Wiel, G. Rijnders and J. Huskens, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 1162–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dong, J. Chen, X. Ye, J. M. Kikkawa and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13296–13299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Meng, Z. Wei, K. Fu, L. Lv, Z.-Q. Yu and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 892, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Yiu, A. Nunns, C.-L. Ho, J. H.-L. Ngai, Z. Meng, G. Li, J. Gwyther, G. R. Whittell, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 3176–3186 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, G. Li, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung, P. W.-T. Pong, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Meng, G. Li, S.-M. Ng, H.-F. Wong, S.-C. Yiu, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung and W.-Y. Wong, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 4467–4475 RSC .
Q. Dong, G. Li, H. Wang, P. W.-T. Pong, C.-W. Leung, I. Manners, C.-L. Ho, H. Li and W.-Y. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 734–741 RSC .
Q. Dong, W. Qu, W. Liang, K. Guo, H. Xue, Y. Guo, Z. Meng, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung and W.-Y. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7068–7074 RSC .
T. Gong, Z. Gao, W. Bian, F. Tai, W. Liang, W. Liang, Q. Dong and C. Dong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 819, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Meng, C.-L. Ho, H.-F. Wong, Z.-Q. Yu, N. Zhu, G. Li, C.-W. Leung and W.-Y. Wong, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 566–576 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Meng, G. Li, S.-C. Yiu, N. Zhu, Z.-Q. Yu, C.-W. Leung, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11521–11526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These people contribute equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

From left to right: Haotian Hao, Hong Lian, Xiaozhe Cheng, Jinba Han
	Hong Lian (the second from left) received his MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Qingchen Dong in 2018 at TYUT. He is currently a PhD student in Prof. Dong's group, majoring in the Materials Science and Engineering. His research interests focus on device engineering and device physics of organic optoelectronics and memristors. Xiaozhe Cheng (the second from right) received his MS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from TYUT in 2020. He is currently a PhD student of TYUT under the guidance of Prof. Qingchen Dong. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of functional metallopolymers for memory devices and artificial neuromorphic computing. Haotian Hao (the first from left) received his BS degree from TYUT in 2015 and is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Qingchen Dong at TYUT. He is now focusing on the synthesis of organic/metallo-organic spin materials for application in spintronic devices. Jinba Han (the first from right) is now a graduate student of TYUT under the supervision of Prof. Qingchen Dong. His research mainly focuses on the design and synthesis of small molecules for application in data storage.

From left to right: Mei-Tung Lau and Zikang Li
	Mei-Tung Lau (left) received her BSc degree from Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU) in 2017 and is currently pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). She is working on a project of developing metallopolymers for various electronic applications. Zikang Li received his BSc degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU) and PolyU in 2018 and is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong at PolyU. He now focuses on the design and synthesis of bimetallic complexes and nanoparticles for applications in magnetism and catalysis.

Zhi Zhou
	Zhi Zhou obtained his PhD in 2013 from Central South University of China, and then visited Eindhoven University of Technology and Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands as a postdoctoral researcher. He joined Hunan Agricultural University (HAU) in 2014 and is currently the leader of Chemistry Subject in HAU and the director of Hunan Optical Agricultural Engineering Technology Research Center. His research interests include luminescent materials and devices and their applications in agriculture. He has published more than 80 papers and authorized more than 40 China patents.

Qingchen Dong
	Qingchen Dong obtained her PhD degree under the tutelage of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong in 2012 at Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU). She also worked at Caltech with Prof. H. B. Gray from 2010 to 2011. She joined Taiyuan University of Technology (TYUT) from 2012 to 2021 and she now works at Shanghai University (SHU) as a full-time Professor. Her research involves the design and synthesis of functional organic and metallo-organic compounds for applications in data storage, artificial synapse and neuromorphic computing, optoelectronics, etc.

Wai-Yeung Wong
	Wai-Yeung Wong obtained his PhD degree in 1995 from the University of Hong Kong. He did postdoctoral works at Texas A&M University in 1996 and University of Cambridge in 1997. He joined HKBU from 1998 to 2016 and he now works as Chair Professor of Chemical Technology and Dean of Faculty of Applied Science and Textiles at PolyU. Among his awards are the RSC Chemistry of the Transition Metals Award, FACS Distinguished Young Chemist Award, State Natural Science Award from China and RGC Senior Research Fellow Award. His research focuses on synthetic inorganic/organometallic chemistry, especially aiming at developing metal–organic molecules and polymers for organic optoelectronics and metal-based nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Classification of memory devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the structure of RRAM device: (a) masked type, (b) crossed type and (c) stacked type (3 (stacked layer) × 6 (word line) × 6 (bit line)).	 

 	Fig. 3  The electrical switching of organic resistive memory: (a) WORM resistive switch, (b) reversible unipolar switch, and (c) bipolar switch.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the charge transfer mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the formation and rupture of (a) carbon-rich conductive filaments Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Metal conductive filaments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The fluorescence emission spectra of PVCz in different states, (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of PVCz in different states and (c) schematic diagram for conformational change of PVCz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright © 2010, Elsevier B.V.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the two-fluid model based on spin-dependent scattering in the spin valves at (a) parallel and (c) antiparallel state. (b) and (d) are simplified diagrams of the corresponding circuit in (a) and (c), respectively.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 8  The distribution diagram of DOS of spin up and spin down electrons in (a) nonferromagnetic and (b) ferromagnetic materials. Principle of spin dependent tunneling at (c) parallel and (d) antiparallel state, respectively. N(E) represents the value of DOS, and the direction of the external magnetic field is downward.	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 9  (a) The influence of STT on the precession of the magnetization. (b) and (c) Spin transfer torque magnetization switching. The three layers from left to right are pinned layer (yellow), tunnel barrier layer (blue) and free layer (red), respectively, and the green dotted line represents the spin transfer torque.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 10  Illustration of a SOT-MRAM device with the Hall cross shape. The up and down arrows indicate the equilibrium magnetization states of the FeCoB layers, and the white arrow represents the current pulse. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright © 2014, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure schematic of (a) classic spin valve, (b) simplified spin valve, and (c) magnetic tunnel junction. (d) Structure schematic of the perpendicular magnetization magnetic tunnel junction.	 

 	Fig. 12  Bit patterned (a) dot array and (b) line array of storage media.	 
	(9)
τ = τ0·exp(Ea/kBT)	(10)

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structures of metal-organic complexes (S1–S34) for RRAM.	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structures of metal-organic complexes (S35–S46) for RRAM.	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical structures of metallopolymers (P1–P29) for RRAM.	 

 	Scheme 4  Chemical structures of metallopolymers (P30–P45) for RRAM.	 


S1
	Au	—	+16.5	102	Conductive filament	
106


S2
	Au	SRAM	+2.5, −2.6	105	CT	
107


S3
	Au	SRAM	+1.54, +2.64	1/103/107	Charge traps	
108


S4
	Au	SRAM	+1.5	105	Charge traps	
109


S5
	Au	SRAM	+1.5	105	Charge traps	
109


S6
	Au	Flash/WORM	−0.5, +3.7	103	CT, conductive filament	
105


	
	
	−3.0, +4.0	103	
	


	
	
	−2.8, −4.1	1/10/105	
	


S7
	Pt	WORM	+3.5	105	CT	
110


S13
	Pt	SRAM	+3.4	105	CT	
111


S18
	Ni	WORM	+2.1, +3.1	1/104/107	Charge traps, CT	
112


S19
	Ni	WORM	+3.1	104	Charge traps	
112


S20
	Ni	WORM	+3.5	105	Charge traps	
112


S21
	Fe	Flash	−2.8, +2.8	105	Redox reaction	
114


S22
	Fe	Flash	−1.9, +2.1	103	Redox reaction	
115


S23
	Fe	Flash	−1.6, +1.5	106	Charge traps	
116


S24
	Fe	Flash	−1.6, +3	103	Redox reaction	
113


S25
	Fe	WORM	+1.8, +3.1	1/103/108	Charge traps, conductive filaments	
117


S26
	Ru	Erasable random access	−1.4, +1.0	103	Redox reaction	
118


S27
	Ru	Flash	−0.5, +0.5	105	Redox reaction	
119


S28
	Ru	Flash	−0.5, +0.5	105	Redox reaction	
119


S29
	Ru	Flash	−2.0, +2	104	Redox reaction	
119


S30
	Cr	Flash	−4.8, +4.6	104	—	
122


S31
	Cr	Flash	−2.2, +2.8	106	—	
122


S32
	Cr	WORM	+1.2	1.5 × 102	—	
122


S33
	Cr	WORM	+2.8	20	—	
122


S34
	Cr	—	—	—	—	
122


S35
	Sm	—	+7	102	CT	
123


S36
	Eu	—	+7	102	CT	
123


S37
	Gd	—	+7	102	CT	
123


S38
	Rh	Flash	−2.05, +2.75	103	—	
124


S39
	Ir	Flash	−2.5, +3.3	102	CT	
125


S40
	Co	Flash	−0.6, +2.6	103	CT	
126


S42
	Cu	—	+1.4 or +1.5	—	CT	
127


S44
	Al	WORM	+3.6	104	—	
128


 	Fig. 13  (a and b) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S2/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c and d) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S3/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photographic images of the reversible color changes associated with the vapochromic phenomenon, vapoluminescent phenomenon, and fast writing and erasure application in S13 solid and thin film states. Responsive times and cycle numbers for reversible vapoluminescent property of S13 when exposed to (b) methanol and water vapors and (c) methanol vapor and vacuum alternately. (d and e) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S13/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic image of memory device structure. (b and c) I–V curves and retention time of the ITO/S18/Al device. (d) The bar chart of threshold voltage of “ON1” and “ON2” among 20 devices. (e and f) I–V curves of the ITO/S19 and S20/Al device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematics for the LBL assembly of PAH and S23. (b) I–V curves of the Pt/(PAH/S23)n/Ag devices. (c) Retention time of a device with 20 bilayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of the device ITO/S27–S29/Al device. (b) AFM-image of the topography of a planar ITO-bottom electrode (top panel) and an ITO electrode covered with sputtered Au NPs (bottom panel). (c) I–V curves of the 321 devices with planar electrodes (device A). (d) I–V curves of the 50 devices with NP electrodes (device B). (e) Effect of counterions in device A. (f) Effect of counterions in device B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  
I–V curves of the devices of (a) Al/S30/Al, (b) Al/S31/Al, (c) Al/S32/Al, (d) Al/S33/Al, (e) Al/S34/Al and (f) Al/[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2/Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright © 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Molecular view of the complex S38. (b and c) Cross-sectional view and I–V curves of the Au/S38/Au device. (d and e) Input applied voltage sequence and output current responses during the write–read–erase–read cycle of the device. (f) Retention time of the ON and OFF state of the Au/S38/Au device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 


P1
	Eu	Flash	−2.0, +4.0	104	CT	
132


P2
	Eu	Flash	−2.8, +4.4	105	CT	
133


P3
	Eu	WORM	+4	2 × 102	CT	
134


P4
	Eu	WORM	+3	4 × 104	CT	
135


P5
	Eu	WORM	+3	106	CT	
136


P6
	Fe	Flash	−1.9, +1.4	103	Redox mechanism	
61


P7
	Fe	—	−2.0, +3.0	10	Redox mechanism	
137


P8
	Fe	—	+2.0	103	Conductive filaments	
138


P9
	Fe	Flash	−3.0, +1.5	103	CT	
139


P10
	Fe	Flash	−3.2, +1.4	103	CT	
140


P11
	Fe	Flash	−1.0, +2.0	103–104	Redox mechanism	
141


P12
	Fe	Flash	−0.7, +3.0	102	Redox mechanism	
141


P13
	Fe	Flash	−0.5, +3.2	102	Redox mechanism	
141


P14
	Fe	WORM	−2.0	102	Redox mechanism	
141


P15
	Fe	Flash	−0.6, +3.0	103–104	Redox mechanism	
142


P16
	Fe	Flash	−0.5, +3.2	102	Redox mechanism	
142


P17
	Fe	Flash	−2.5, +3.7	102	Redox mechanism	
142


P18
	Fe	WORM	−1.89	102	Redox mechanism	
143


P19
	Fe	WORM	+1.54	0.8 × 102	Redox mechanism	
143


P20
	Fe	Flash	−2, +2	104	Redox reaction	
144


P21
	Ir	Flash	−1.6, +2.8	105	CT	
147


P22
	Ir	Flash	−0.9, +3.4	103	CT	
147


P23
	Ir	Flash	−1.1, +3.8	103	CT	
147


P24
	Ir	Flash	−1.2, +4.1	103	CT	
148


P25
	Ir	Flash	−1.4, +3.7	103	CT	
148


P26
	Ir	Flash	−0.55, −1.15, +2.5	1/101.5/104.5	CT	
41


P27
	Pt	Flash	−2.6, +3.0	103	CT	
149


P28
	Pt	Flash	−1.6, +2.88	103	CT	
149


P29
	Pt	Flash	−1.5, +4.1	103	CT	
150


P30
	Co	Flash	−5.0, +4.5	102	Redox mechanism	
152


P31
	Co	Flash	—	<10	Redox mechanism	
152


P32
	Co	WORM	+2.7, +3.4	1/103/106	CT, conductive filaments	
153


P33
	Cu	WORM	+2.5	106	Conductive filaments	
154


P34
	Cu	WORM	−1.8, −3.5	1/102/105	CT, Charge trapping	
155


P35
	Ru	Flash	−4.3, 3.4	102–103	CT	
156


P36
	Ru	Flash	—	<15	CT	
156


P37
	Ru	—	+2	4	Conductive filaments	
157


P38
	Zn	DRAM	−3.9, +3.9	108	CT	
158


P39
	Zn	WORM	−4.2, +4.6	108	CT	
159


P40
	Zn	SRAM	−3.3, +3.2	106	CT	
160


P41
	Na	Flash	+2.8	105	Ionic migration	
161


P42
	Ca	Flash	+3.8	104	Ionic migration	
161


P43
	Pr8	WORM	+2.7	106	Charge trapping	
162


P44
	Ni	WORM	−1.5, +2.8	1/103/107	TFLC and SCLC models, GBLC model	
163


P45
	Ni	WORM	−1.6, +2.8	1/104/108	
	
163


 	Fig. 20  (a) I–V curves, (b) ON and OFF state on 1 V read pulses (the inset shows the pulses used for the measurement) of the ITO/P2/Al device. (c) Transient response of switching time from ON to OFF state (the inset shows the corresponding circuit used in the measurement). (d) The HOMO and LUMO levels and (e) energy levels for components (Cz, Ox and Eu) in P2 (the inset shows the plausible electronic processes induced by an electric field). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) I–V curves of the ITO/EV(ClO4)2 + PEO/P7/Ta memristor showing non-linear transmission behavior similar to that of a biological synapse. The inset shows the schematic image of the memristor. (b) Device current in response to a series of positive and negative voltage stimulations showing the respective potentiation and depression of the synaptic weight. Evolution of the device (c) current and (d) current change with 10 voltage pulse stimulations at different frequencies. (e) The profiles of the pre-synaptic and post-synaptic spikes consisting of a voltage pulse pair with the amplitude, duration and separation of 3 V, 10 ms, 2 s and −2 V, 10 ms, 2 s respectively. (f) Change of the synaptic weight with the relative timing of the pre-synaptic and post-presynaptic spike-pair application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic of the ITO/P21 or P22 or P23/Al device and polymer skeleton with different metal-complex units. (b) Memory mechanism of the device. (c) The design principle of polymers containing metal complexes for memory devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright © 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a and b) The HOMO, LUMO, and LUMO+1 energy levels of model oligomers and ESP surfaces of P27. (c and d) The HOMO, LUMO, and LUMO+1 energy levels of model oligomers and ESP surfaces of P28. (e) Molecular simulation of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels for P27 and P28 along with the work function of the electrodes. (f) Memory mechanism of the devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright © 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) I–V curves of the ITO/P32/Al device. (b) Memory behavior of the device under heating and cooling. (c–e) AFM surface images and the corresponding cross-sectional profiles (f–h) of P32 on ITO substrates (c) at r.t., (d) at heating, and (e) cooling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of devices with AuNP, I–V curves of the device (b) with AuNP and (c) without AuNP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Digital image of peeling off device from the SiO2 substrate. (e) Digital image of the memory pasted on the arm. (f) The Al/Au NPs:lignin/Al memory device's switching voltage and ON/OFF ratio under different bending diameter: no bending, 30 mm, 40 mm and 50 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) HRTEM image of the Ag-PMMA. (b) I–V curves of the Al/Ag-PMMA/ITO device. The inset presents the I–V curves of the Al/PMMA/ITO reference device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2010, American Institute of Physics. (c) I–V curves of the ITO/PVK:Ag NPs/Al device with different Ag NPs concentrations. (d) The influence of Ag NPs concentration on the ON/OFF current ratio and SET-ON voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. (e) I–V curves of s-rGO/PMMA/Al, w-rGO/PMMA/Al, and w-rGO/Ag NPs/PMMA/Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic image of the fabrication process memory devices. (g) I–V curves of devices. (h) The cumulative probability of all operative cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright © 2015, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) cyclic voltammetry analysis of the Ag/Rb-CD-MOF/Ag devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright © 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration and morphology of the ZIF-8-based memory devices. (d) I–V curves of the Ag/ZIF-8/Si device in saturated methanol vapor (dashed line) and air (rigid line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  
I–V curves of the Au/HKUST-1/Au/PET flexible device (a) at the flat state and (b) during the dynamic bending test with the bending rates ranging from 0.25 to 2 mm s−1. (c) The HRS and LRS resistances, and (d) the set and reset voltages as a function of the bending radius or strain level of the Au/HKUST-1/Au/PET flexible device. (e) I–V curves and (f) endurance performance of the device at the strain level of about 2.0% over 300 consecutive cycles (the inset shows the histogram and Gaussian fitting curves of the distribution of the set and reset voltages). Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic of the memory device. (b) I–V curves of the FTO/perovskite/M–Au and M–Ag/devices. (c) I–V curves of M–Ag, M–Cu, M–Ti, M–Zn and M–Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright © 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic image of the fabrication process for the Au/MAPbI3/Au memory device in 8 × 8 cross-bar array architecture. (b and c) The cross-sectional SEM image and I–V curves of the device. (d) The ON/OFF ratio is plotted as a function of voltage. (e and f) The endurance test and retention test of the device. (g and h) The color map plots of the resistance distribution of the 64 memory cells in the LRS and HRS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a and b) Schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image of the ITO/MAPbI3:PVAm·HI/Al device. (c and d) I–V curves and currents in LRS and HRS and the corresponding ON/OFF ratio of the memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright © 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 5  Chemical structures of metal–organic complexes (M1–M20) for MRAM.	 

Alq3	Co/Alq3/LSMO	40% (11 K)	45 nm (4.2 K)	—	
198

Co/Alq3/Ni	—	3–7 nm (100 K)	1 s (100 K)	
199

Co/AlOx/Alq3/LSMO	22% (100 K)	—	—	
200

Co/Alq3/LPCMO	440% (10 K)	—	45 ps (10 K)	
201



MPc	Co/AlOx/F16CuPc/Ni80Fe20	4% (r.t.)	180 nm	
	
196

Perovskite	Co/AlOx/MAPbCl3−xIx/Ni80Fe20	0.57% (10 K)	61 ± 7 nm (r.t.)	1.5 ns (r.t.)	
203

Co/MAPbBr3/LSMO	25% (10 K)	220 nm (10 K)	936 ± 23 ps (10 K)	
204

Co/MAPbBr3/LSMO	25% (10 K)	221 ± 18 nm (10 K)	802 ± 32 ps (10 K)	
205

Co/MAPbI3/LSMO	5% (10 K)	108 ± 11 nm (10 K)	356 ± 22 ps (10 K)	
205

Co/FAPbBr3/LSMO	16% (10 K)	231 ± 12 nm (10 K)	788 ± 26 ps (10 K)	
205

MOF	Co/Cu3(HHTP)2/LSMO	25% (10 K)	—	—	
206


 	Fig. 32  (a) The MR loop of 250 nm-thick device. Inset: Spin valve device scheme. (b) Write(W)–read(R)–erase(E) cycles performed on a 125 nm-thick Alq3 layer device. The resistive state of the device was retained after the application of a 0 V voltage bias, which proves its non-volatility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright © 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) X-ray diffraction measurements and (b) the transfer curves of F16CuPc thin films deposited by RT deposition and LT deposition. (c) AFM images of 90 nm thick F16CuPc films made by RT deposition and LT deposition. (d) The demonstration of four different resistance states through controllable switching of light irradiation and magnetic field in the same device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Schematic representation of Pc-based dual SVs with four possible configurations, namely C(↑↑↑), C(↑↑↓), C(↑↓↓), and C(↑↓↑), respectively. (b) LBL deposition process with anisotropic magnetic moment pointing perpendicular to the substrate. (c) I–V characteristics of dual SVs depending on the thickness of each layer. The arrows represent magnetization vectors of the SMMs, and the subscripts denote the number of LbL layers of the deposited films. Inset: Current at 2 V for the four different configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Schematic diagram of SV based on perovskites. (b) The fittings of the GMRmax responses for the three perovskite-based SVs, plotted against the perovskite interlayer film thickness. (c) Temperature dependence of spin diffusion length for the three OIHPs. (d–f) The GMR quenching with the increment of vertical magnetic field in MAPbBr3, MAPbI3, and FAPbBr3 based SVs at 10 K, where the solid lines are the fitting lines and the spin lifetime (τs) in each graph is extracted from the fitting of the Hanle response. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Schematic illustration for the LBL growth procedure of Cu3(HHTP)2 film on functionalized substrate STO. (b) The cross-sectional SEM image of the prepared MOF-device. (c) The MR loop for the prepared OSV at 10 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) FePt NPs assembled on the Al2O3 substrate that were patterned with ABP by microcontact printing. Inset: AFM image of the sample at the pattern boundary. (b) Hysteresis loops in-plane field of FePt NPs assembled on ABP-modified Al2O3 substrate after annealing. (c) TEM image of FePt-MnO BNSL membranes after being thermally annealed. Inset: The top-right and bottom-right illustrations are the magnified TEM view and the SAED pattern, respectively. (d) Hysteresis loops of FePt-MnO BNSL membranes before and after annealing. The slight warps pointed by arrows arising from the soft magnetic components. (a) and (b) were reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright © 2010, MDPI. (c) and (d) were reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of large-area nanostructures from the FePt-based metallopolymer M9 by NIL. SEM images of the nanoimprinted line array pattern (b) and dot array pattern (c) of FePt NPs after pyrolysis. MFM images of the nanoimprinted dot array pattern of FePt NPs field-annealed in the −Z direction (d) and +Z direction (e). Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Illustration of the NIL of self-assembly and the formation of nanorods in the mold cavity. Disordered patterns derived from the pyrolysis of the self-assembled nanorods of M19 in (b) SEM image, (c) AFM image, and (d) MFM image. Line-oriented patterns of M19 after annealing in (e) SEM image, (f) AFM image, and (g) MFM image. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright © 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 


M9
	4.6	14	
18


M10 & M11
	4.9	3.8	
216


M12
	12.7	36	
96


M13
	7.4	7.2	
217


M14
	11.3	0.097	
218


M15
	6.3	0.6	
218


M18
	9.5	10.6	
221


M19
	16.2	4.9	
222

4,4′-ODA	4,4′-Diaminodiphenyl ether
6FDA	Hexafluoroisopropyl bis(phthalicdianhydride)
8HQ	8-Hydroxyquinoline
AAO	Anodized aluminum oxide
ABP	Aminobutylphosphonic acid
AFM layer	Antiferromagnetic layer
Alq3	Tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato) aluminum
AMR	Anisotropic magnetoresistance
BCPs	Block copolymers
BNSL	Binary nanocrystal superlattice
BPM	Bit patterned media
BT	Benzothiazole
CMOS	Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
COI	Charge ordered insulating
CoPc	Cobalt phthalocyanine
CT	Charge transfer
CuPc	Copper phthalocyanine
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
Cz	Carbazole
D–A	Donor–acceptor
DAFcTPA	4,4′-Diamino-4′′-ferrocenyltriphenylamine
DFT	Density functional theory
DHTM	4-(Bis(4-aminophenyl)methyl)phenol
DOS	Density of states
DRAM	Dynamic random access memory
DSSCs	Dye-sensitized solar cells
EPS	Electronic phase separation
F16CuPc	Fluorinated copper phthalocyanine
FA	Formamidnium
Fc	Ferrocene
fcc	Face-centered cubic
fct	Face-centered tetragonal
FeRAM	Ferroelectric random access memory
FM	Ferromagnetic
FMM	Ferromagnetic metallic
FN	Fowler–Nordheim
FTS	Facing-target sputtered
GBLC	Grain boundary limited current
GISAXS	Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GMR	Giant magnetoresistance
HBPI-Fc	Ferrocene-terminated hyperbranched polyimide
HCuPc	Hyperbranched copper phthalocyanine
HDDs	Hard disk drives
HRS	High resistive state
HRTEM	High-resolution TEM
ICs	Integrated circuits
IMT	Insulator-to-metal transition
ITRS	International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors
KI	Potassium iodide
LBL	Layer-by-layer assembly
LEDs	Light emitting diodes
LLCT	Ligand-to-ligand charge transfer
LLG	Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert
LPCMO	(La2/3Pr1/3)5/8Ca3/8MnO3
LRS	Low resistive state
LSMO	La0.66Sr0.33MnO3
LT	Low temperature
LTM	Long-term memory
MA	Methylammonium
MFM	Magnetic force microscopy
MLCT	Metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MMLCT	Metal–metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MnPc	Manganese phthalocyanine
MOFs	Metal–organic frameworks
MPc	Metallophthalocyanine
MR	Magnetoresistance
MRAM	Magnetic random access memory
MTJs	Magnetic tunnel junctions
N-A	Néel-Arrhenius
NFM	Nonferromagnetic
NIL	Nanoimprint lithography
NPs	Nanoparticles
NWs	Nanowires
OFETs	Organic field effect transistors
OIHPs	Organic–inorganic-hybrid perovskites
OLEDs	Organic light-emitting diodes
OSVs	Organic spin valves
PAA	Polyamic acid
PAH	Poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PcRAM	Phase change random access memory
PDMS	Poly(dimethyl siloxane)
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate
PEI	Poly(ethyleneimine)
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PI	Polyimide
PLA	Polylactic acid
PMMA	Polymethyl methacrylate
PMR	Perpendicular magnetic recording
PNDA	Phosphonoundecanoic acid
PPF	Paired-pulse facilitation
PS	Polystyrene
PVAm·HI	Polyvinylammonium iodide
PVK	Poly(N-vinylcarbazole)
PVP	Poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)
RE	Rare earth
RIE	Reactive ion etching
RRAM	Resistance random access memory
RT	Room temperature
SCLC	Space charge limited current
SMMs	Single molecule magnets
SOC	Spin–orbit coupling
SOT-MRAM	Spin orbital torque magnetic random access memory
SRAM	Static random access memory
s-rGO	Smooth-surface rGO
STDP	Spike-timing-dependent plasticity
STM	Short-term memory
STRP	Spike-rate-dependent plasticity
STT-MRAM	Spin transfer torque magnetic random access memory
SVs	Spin valves
TAMR	Tunneling anisotropic magnetoresistance
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
TFLC	Trap-filled limited current
TMCs	Transition metal complexes
TMR	Tunneling magnetoresistance
TPA	Triphenylamine
WORM	Write-once-ready-many times
WRER	Write-multiple read-erase-multiple read
w-rGO	Wrinkle reduced graphene oxide
XRD	X-ray diffraction
ZIF-8	Zeolitic imidazolate framework

α
	Gilbert damping parameter

α
0
	Lattice constant

B
pre
	Pre-set magnetic field

B
so
	Spin–orbit coupling magnetic field

d
	Distance between the injector and detector

h
	Reduced Planck constant

H
c
	Coercivity

H
eff
	Instantaneous effective field

I–V	Current–voltage

J
	Current density

k
B
	Boltzmann constant

K
u
	Magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant

λ
s
	Spin diffusion length

m
	Magnetic moment of the free layer

m
p
	Magnetic moment of the pinned layer

M
r
	Remanence

m
s
	Magnetic quantum number

m
spin
	Spin magnetic moment

M
s
	Saturation magnetization

P
	Spin polarization

γ
	Gyromagnetic ratio

R
ap
	Antiparallel MR

R
p
	Parallel MR

τ
	Spin relaxation time

T
c
	Curie temperature

μ
B
	Bohr magneton

μ
0
	Permeability of vacuum

V
	Volume of the recording unit

V
RESET
	Rewrite voltage

V
SET
	Write voltage

V
th
	Threshold voltage

Z
	Atomic number
Footnote
† These people contribute equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
