Progress in internal/external stimuli responsive fluorescent carbon nanoparticles for theranostic and sensing applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TB03323K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TB03323K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 1149-1178Progress in internal/external stimuli responsive fluorescent carbon nanoparticles for theranostic and sensing applications

        
          
            Zihnil Adha Islamy 
            Mazrad†
a, 
      
        
          
            Kyueui 
            Lee†
b, 
      
        
          
            Ari 
            Chae
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Insik 
            In
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Haeshin 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Sung Young 
            Park
          
          
        
      *ad
aDepartment of Chemical & Biological Engineering and Department of IT Convergence, Korea National University of Transportation, Chungju 380-702, Republic of Korea. E-mail: parkchem@ut.ac.kr
bDepartment of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: haeshin@kaist.ac.kr
cDepartment of Polymer Science and Engineering, Korea National University of Transportation, Chungju 380-702, Republic of Korea
dDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Korea National University of Transportation, Chungju 380-702, Republic of Korea
Received 
      26th December 2017
    , Accepted 24th January 2018First published on 24th January 2018AbstractIn the past decade, fluorescent carbon nanoparticles (FNPs) prepared from natural resources and biomaterials have been attractive due to their various properties, such as unique optical properties, great biocompatibility, water dispersion, and facile surface functionalization. Depending on the properties of the carbon sources and the subsequent carbonization processes, internal/external stimuli responsive carbon nanoparticles have been generated that are useful for theranostic and sensing applications. In this review, we highlight the recent developments in the use of FNPs in nanomedicine in great detail, particularly for FNPs responding to internal stimuli, including redox, pH, and enzymes, and external stimuli, including temperature, light, and magnetic fields, for drug delivery and sensing applications. Furthermore, we hope to provide insight that could stimulate further research aiming for unparalleled useful applications. As a result, there are many possibilities that can be explored from this smart material.
Zihnil Adha Islamy Mazrad
Zihnil Adha Islamy Mazrad is currently a post-Master student in Prof. Sung Young Park's group, Functional Biomaterial Lab, Department of Chemistry and Biological Engineering at Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. She received her BSc in 2014 from the Department of Chemistry, Institut Teknologi Bandung (ITB), Indonesia, and her MSc in 2017 from KNUT. Currently, her research is focused on the synthesis and application of functionalized fluorescent carbon nanomaterials for selective sensing and killing of bacteria via photothermal therapy.
Kyueui Lee
Dr Kyueui Lee joined Prof. Haeshin Lee's group in 2012, studying as a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Chemistry, KAIST. He received his PhD degree in Chemistry from KAIST in 2017. Currently, he has been researching in Prof. Phillip B. Messersmith's group as a visiting scholar in the Department of Materials Sciences & Engineering and Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, since 2016. His research interest is biologically inspired carbon nanomaterials.
Ari Chae
Ari Chae is currently a Master's candidate in the Department of IT Convergence (BK21 PLUS), Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. She received her BS in 2016 from Polymer Science & Engineering, KNUT and pursued research in Prof. Insik In's group, Functional Nanomaterial Lab. Her recent research topic is the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide with functional polymer composites through noncovalent interactions, fluorescent water soluble carbon quantum dots, photocatalysis with dopamine-derivatized titanium dioxide N-doped carbon core shell nanoparticles, and boron nitride surface functionalization using surfactant chemistry.
Insik In
Dr Insik In is a Professor in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering and the Department of IT Convergence (BK21 PLUS), Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. Dr In received his PhD in Chemistry from Korea Advanced Science and Technology, South Korea, in 2003. Before joining KNUT, he was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow in the University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA. His group research activities include the synthesis and performance optimization of functional nanomaterials which can be exploited for future IT and BT applications. Dr In's research group is working on the development of functional nanomaterials with various compositions and morphologies that include soluble graphene/polymer assembly, fluorescent carbon quantum dots, and stable black phosphorus/perovskite quantum dots.
Haeshin Lee
Dr Haeshin Lee started his Professor carrier in 2009 at the Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea. Dr Lee received his PhD degree from Biomedical Engineering Department, Northwestern University, in 2007. Before joining KAIST, Dr Lee was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow in the department of Chemical Engineering, Koch Institute for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Dr Haeshin Lee invented the first material-independent surface chemistry named ‘polydopamine’ in 2007, and this study has been cited more than 3800 times as of November 2017. Also, more than 2500 times annual citations of his bio-adhesive studies have demonstrated that his research is widely recognized. His group research activities are focused on mussel-inspired technology which can be exploited for surface modification, superhydrophobic surface engineering, biomedical substrates, catechol-functionalized hydrogels, and biologically inspired carbon nanomaterials.
Sung Young Park
Dr Sung Young Park is a Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biological Engineering and the Department of IT Convergence (BK21 PLUS), Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. Dr Park received his PhD from the Department of Material Chemistry in Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST) in 2005. Before joining KNUT, he was appointed to several positions including postdoctoral fellow in the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). His group research activities include the synthesis of multifunctional fluorescent carbon nanomaterials which can be applied in future medical applications including drug delivery systems, biosensors and antifouling. Dr Park's research group is working at diagnostic nanomedicine, multifunctional hybrid nanomaterials, theranostic nanoparticle and surface chemistry based new strategies for the imaging and therapy of cancer cells, sensing of different biological molecules and bacterial detection.
1. Introduction
Although numerous therapeutic materials accompanied by sensing capabilities have been explored, most of them have displayed unsatisfactory performance in theranostic and sensing applications. Therefore, further development of materials for applications in sensing and theranostics remains a challenging task. Recently, there has been rapid research growth in the areas of nanoscience and nanotechnology. During the past decade, nanoparticles (NPs) that exhibit a certain degree of intelligence including unique physical properties,1–4 optical properties,5–8 ease of synthesis,9,10 biocompatibility,2 and customizability have been investigated. There is increasing optimism that engineered NPs will bring significant advances in chemistry, engineering, and biomedical sciences, particularly with sensing and theranostic applications.
Recently, medical research has focused on NP-based theranostics for severe diseases such as cancer, HIV-AIDS, and diabetes. Up to now, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has confirmed several first generation diagnostic or therapeutic NP-based products for clinical uses.11 In terms of biosensing, the first biosensor was designed by Clark and Lyons (1962) to measure glucose in biological samples, utilizing the strategy of electrochemical detection of oxygen or hydrogen peroxide with immobilized glucose oxidase electrodes.12 Since then, incredible progress with various types of biosensors has been made, such as enzyme and tissue-based sensors, immunosensors, and DNA biosensors.13 Some success, at least in part, has also been reported for biosensors for the early stage detection of several diseases. For this purpose, functionalized NPs play important roles in sensing broad-range targets, such as cations, anions, and small molecules.
Although several diagnosis systems and therapies have been widely explored, most of them fail to eradicate the disease due to adverse toxicities such as various inferior pharmacokinetics and uncontrollable side effects. To solve this problem, scientists should consider nano-medical science for effective diagnosis, to prevent the recurrence of disease, to achieve better disease targeting, and to ensure lower toxicity to normal cells. The therapeutic efficacy can be enhanced by delivering the therapeutic payload/drug into the proximity sites without resulting in undesired effects based on the strong encapsulation of payload/drug. Considering the internal/external biological status can answer the previous challenge in theranostic design because stimuli such as redox, pH, enzymes, thiol, glucose, cholesterol, and nitric acid can trigger better spatially and temporally controllable features for activated sensing and release of the loaded cargoes.
As part of the new generation of NPs, fluorescent carbon nanoparticles (FNPs) offer great potential for theranostic and sensing applications due to their tunable properties. The design of nanocarrier-based FNPs sensitive to exogenous or endogenous stimuli may represent an attractive alternative to targeted drug delivery. Presently, the broad range of applicable materials allow for stimuli responsivity that triggers drug release at the right place and time, where the design of stimuli-responsive FNP systems improves drug delivery systems guided by bioimaging. Although in vivo proof-of-concept studies have been reported, none of them has been investigated at a clinical level. However, the ability of functionalized FNP systems to respond to internal variations in pH, redox potential, and enzyme concentration means that intracellular detection is straightforward to achieve, and issues related to externally applied stimuli will eventually be improved due to positive results. In this review, we will summarize the recent progress in FNP research and development, from their definition to applications, challenges and opportunities in theranostics and sensing.
2. What are FNPs?
2.1 Overview of FNPs
Carbon is an atom that exists in all forms of organic life, with important roles in the development of nanomaterials, from three to one-dimensional carbon boards. To date, carbon-based nanomaterials have continued to encourage scientists to explore their use in overcoming the previous limitation. Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles (FNPs) are one of the carbon-based nanomaterial derivatives, also known as carbon dots, CDs, and C-dots, that have recently attracted growing attention in various fields (Fig. 1). Compared with traditional carbon-based nanomaterials, FNPs have outstanding features, such as good conductivity, high chemical stability, excitation-dependent multicolor emission, good cell permeability, low toxicity, and environmental friendliness, and are easier to synthesize and functionalize; therefore, they are of great potential use in many industries.14–18 In addition, most of the carboxyl groups on the surface of FNPs allow for high solubility in water and great biocompatibility properties.19,20
 Fig. 1  Overview of the sources, synthesis methods and applications of fluorescent carbon nanoparticles. 
Historically, in 2004, Scrivens et al. first isolated FNPs during electrophoresis fractionation from crude soot as short, tubular, carbon-based nanomaterials.21 At that time, this invention did not receive much attention until a breakthrough study from Sun's group two years after the initial finding. They produced multicolor emission FNPs based on size dependence via laser ablation with nanoscale carbon particles in aggregates.22 Subsequently, FNPs were prepared from numerous resources, such as synthetic polymers and biomaterials from natural resources, and their potential functionalization was assessed. With extraordinary properties, including tunable photoluminescence properties, biocompatibility, custom surface modification, and simple and versatile synthetic routes, they cover a broad area of applications, such as chemistry, engineering, and biomedical science (Fig. 2), and have particularly remarkable results in theranostic and biosensor applications, including the sensing of intracellular/extracellular molecules and bacteria.
 Fig. 2  Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles with various unique properties. 
2.2 Chemical structures and surface functionalization of FNPs
Structurally, FNPs have a carbogenic core with surface functional groups and are less than 10 nm in size. Noticeably, the quasi-spherical, zero-dimensional carbon nanoparticles mostly demonstrate an amorphous and/or nanocrystalline structure, with the prominent existence of sp2 hybridized carbons, that can be solved using X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. FNPs typically display poor crystallinity and more defects when compared to graphene quantum dots (GQDs). However, FNPs have lattice spacing that is consistent with graphitic, diamond, or graphene structures.23,24 To characterize FNPs’ morphology, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is regularly used to determine the distribution of size and the average size,24 and atomic force microscopy (AFM) is used to determine height information. Raman spectra for FNPs mostly show two broad peaks at around 1300 cm−1 and 1580 cm−1 attributed to the disordered D band of the sp3 defects and the G band due to the vibration of the sp2 carbon which can be used to estimate the degree of graphitization and crystallization of FNPs using relative intensities (ID/IG) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  FNPs’ structural characterization. (a) XRD and (b) Raman spectra (adapted from ref. 16 with Copyright © 1999–2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., all rights reserved). (c) TEM image and (d) HRTEM image (adapted from ref. 24 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society), with scale bars as indicated. 
The FNPs are fundamentally composed of C, H, and O elements, where the specific preparation and initial precursor can dramatically influence the FNPs’ surface structure. FNPs are typically terminated by carboxylic acid and oxygenic moieties (5–50 wt%) at their surface. In addition, oxidative treatment using strong acids is a simple and very effective means to introduce carbonyl and carboxyl groups on the surface of FNPs, imparting greater water solubility and providing potential for further functionalization in comparison with other carbon nanomaterials.25 Very often, surface-passivating agents also act as functionalizing agents, where the physical properties of the FNPs are modified together with their fluorescence properties. Thus, there is no need for additional modification steps in the later stages of synthesis. So far, there are numerous reports of functionalizing FNPs via surface structure alterations that enhance water-solubility, improve biocompatibility and target-labeling, increase sensitivity, and decrease toxicity. The abundant functional groups existing on their surfaces enable modification with other materials through N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) or 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl-aminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) chemistry.26 FNPs can be functionalized with appropriate with ligands to achieve targeting for the labeling of aberrant cells through interactions between the ligand and receptor. In 2015, FNPs targeting C6 glioma cells were prepared together with the initial precursor for carbonization without conjugation.27 For nanomedicine, this was an important advance in generating effective FNP based therapies for clinical applications. To achieve this goal, therapeutic moieties have been used to functionalize FNPs using several techniques. As a drug delivery system (DDS), some stimuli-responsive compartments, such as redox, pH, and temperature, can act as controllable sites in FNPs, enabling therapeutic efficacy and delivery of the therapeutic payload/drug to cancer sites, without undesired side effects, aiming for strong encapsulation of the payload/drug before reaching the cancer site. Researchers have successfully functionalized FNPs with metal nanoparticles, such as Au, Cu, TiO2, and Ag, creating multifunctional photocatalysts that generate H2 from water-splitting under visible light. Moreover, metal NP–FNP electrodes have been employed as potential photosensitizers in solar cells, showing current density larger than that of pristine metal electrodes under visible light illumination.28,29 In other words, elemental doping has great potential because of the fascinating photoluminescence properties that are modulated by the energy gap and electron transfer. To date, heteroatoms N, S, Si, P, B, Ga, SE, Mg, Cu, Zn, Ru, Mn, and halogens have been utilized for various FNP applications.30–36
2.3 Optical properties of FNPs
Due to the specific structures of FNPs, they generally have optical absorption in the UV to near-infrared (NIR) region. For example, FNPs crosslinked with polydopamine (FNPs–pDA) had an absorption maximum at 280 nm, with intense and characteristically broad absorption between the visible range and the NIR (600–1000 nm) that was similar to that observed for photothermal (PTT) and hyperthermal agents.18 Carbonized materials often contain a mixture of sp2 and sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, where the number and spatial distribution of double bonds and sites of delocalized electrons impart optoelectronic properties. Following recent research, one unique FNP characteristic is excitation-dependent photoluminescence, influenced by size uniformity and the core- and surface-related emissions. Remarkably, the maximum excitation band indicates the mirror symmetry of the maximum emission band, where a bigger Stokes shift and narrower full-width-at-half-maximum confirm weak self-absorption and low energy loss.37 Quantum yield (QY) becomes an important parameter when investigating the photoluminescence of FNPs, where naked FNPs display low QY. However, with the modification of reaction conditions, so as to include elemental doping, passivation, or hybridization, QY can be increased.16,17,23,30–36 For instance, surface functionalization with para-substituted anilines and carbon polymers (PEG, PEI) generated FNPs with new energy levels, higher fluorescence intensity, and high QY.16,23 Besides single doping techniques, co-doping such as nitrogen–sulfur and phosphorus doping with NaH2PO4 solution could tune the fluorescence emission of FNPs and enhance their PL intensity as well as QY.36 By selecting specific synthesis routes, the surface functionalization of FNPs can result in tunable light emission that can be used for various different purposes in optical science research. In particular, other than normal or down-converted photoluminescence, FNPs can be quenched efficiently by either electron donor or electron acceptor molecules, indicative of the excellent electron transfer properties of FNPs.
3. FNPs derived from natural materials and polymers
3.1 FNPs from natural products
Generally, there are two strategies to produce FNPs (i.e., carbon dots). One is a bottom-up approach in which small molecules become nanosize particles triggered by the condensation reaction during the conventional carbonization process, such as in the hydrothermal route or microwave synthesis.38,39 The second is a top-down approach, which uses a variety of natural compounds as a carbon source, usually carbonizing the natural products by applying strong oxidizing acids, such as sulfuric acid or nitric acid.40,41 Understanding the color patterns observed in nature may possibly open up a wide number of diverse sources of applicable materials, like differently colored fluorescent materials. After the discovery of FNPs, further developments have been made aiming for the ecological synthesis of FNPs from various natural resources by adopting the top-down method. These green FNPs can be defined as carbon quantum dots synthesized using ‘green precursors’ as a source of carbon, where the term ‘green precursors’ refers to substances that are either naturally occurring or are derivatives of renewable natural products or processes. Therefore, considerable efforts have been focused on the synthesis of biocompatible photoluminescent FNPs using various natural resources as precursors, including orange,42 banana,43 coffee grounds,44 food waste,45 mango,46 and Curcuma longa,47 among many others (Fig. 4). In the bottom-up method, the reaction proceeds with verified carbon sources, making it easier to predict the final product or at least presume the functionality of the FNPs. However, in contrast to the FNPs generated using the bottom-up approach, the chemical structure of green FNPs is generally difficult to define due to the intrinsic chemical ambiguity in the carbonization of the natural sources. This limits the precise control of the physicochemical characteristics of the FNPs and is directly related to practical applications. Nonetheless, the chemical mechanisms involved in carbon dot formation from natural sources (i.e., the top-down approach) still remain unclear. There have been several attempts to elucidate the chemical processes that natural FNP sources (especially polysaccharides) undergo during the carbonization process. Until now, it has been widely accepted that FNPs from polysaccharides are generated through a partial depolymerization and dehydration process, resulting in the formation of sp2 carbon structures like hydroxymethylfurfural, and finally polycondensation followed by carbonization.48,49 However, most research concerns the main carbon sources (i.e., polysaccharides), even though trace amounts of phenolic compounds (e.g., ferulic acid) exist in the various natural polysaccharide derivatives that have already been used as carbon dot precursors.50,51 Lee et al. recently reported that the widespread phenolic molecules that are ester-linked to natural polysaccharides play a significant role in carbonization. The hydrophobic phenolic sites unavoidably created by ferulic acids along polysaccharide backbones function as catalytic cores facilitating carbon dot generation during the carbonization process.40 The origin of this facilitating role is its molecular structure, where relatively hydrophobic phenolic sites are likely to drag the dehydrated polysaccharides having sp2 CC bonds through non-covalent interactions. Even a trace amount of ferulic acid (only 0.4 wt%) doubly increased the number of FNPs originating from natural polysaccharides, demonstrating the catalytic role of phenolic compounds in carbon dot generation.
 Fig. 4  FNPs from natural resources and their properties. Adapted from ref. 22 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 FNPs from bioinspired derivatives
Phenolic compounds not only facilitate fluorescent carbon nanoparticle (FNP) production during the carbonization reaction, but they can also self-polymerize to produce FNPs. One well-known phenolic molecule is catechol, which has an additional hydroxyl group in comparison to phenol. Catechol is known to have an adhesive functional group that is widely found in animals that require a gluing agent for their survival. For example, insects have adopted the representative catecholic molecule dopamine as an oxidative crosslinker for the hardening of mandibles functioning as teeth.52 Additionally, the marine mussel secretes strings composed of 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA), a catecholic compound used to stick its body to rock surfaces.53 In fact, these catecholic compounds, especially dopamine, have adhesive properties at the molecular scale, enabling multifunctional coating regardless of the type of substrate.54 The chemical mechanisms involved in the self-polymerization of dopamine are well-described in current polydopamine review papers. In brief, it starts with indole formation followed by chemical crosslinking and/or physical stacking. If this occurs in a solution-state with stirring, the three-dimensional growth of dopamine occurs, resulting in polydopamine nanoparticles.55 The as-developed multifunctional polydopamine nanoparticles have served various purposes in various fields, including applications in radical-scavenging, anti-cancer drug delivery, and photothermal therapy.55–57 However, polydopamine nanoparticles are relatively structurally disordered, with fluorescence inefficient for use in bioimaging or sensing applications.
Later on, Yu et al. demonstrated the practical utility of polydopamine as a fluorescent substance using carbonization.58 The carbonization process achieved through thermal treatment of polydopamine nanoparticles results in highly ordered graphene-like structures that have typical D and G peaks in Raman spectroscopy. In fact, the polydopamine-derived graphene-like materials have fairly good conductivity, as observed for graphene, demonstrating that effective carbonization of polydopamine allows for highly ordered chemical structures.59 The polydopamine-derived graphene-like structure was applied to stretchable transparent electrodes. As graphene usually has fluorescence properties when it becomes nanosized dots, carbonized polydopamine nanoparticles are also likely to exhibit fluorescence. Kim et al. recently reported polydopamine-based fluorescent FNPs.23 To carbonize polydopamine particles, they applied a conventional acid treatment method where polydopamine nanoparticles were exposed to a sulfuric acid solution (36 N) for 10 minutes followed by neutralization with water and sodium hydroxide (4 N). According to the UV-vis data, the absorption wavelength of polydopamine was broadened toward a red-shift after carbonization, indicating that the internal molecular structure was transformed to an ordered state (composed of an sp2 carbon network) compared to the natural polydopamine nanoparticles in which sp3 carbon networks dominate. Moreover, the distinctive G and D bands were confirmed in the Raman spectrum of carbonized polydopamine nanoparticles, where natural polydopamine nanoparticles were not detected, suggestive of a highly organized sp2 and sp3 hybridized carbon network. This results in fluorescence in carbonized polydopamine nanoparticles, exhibiting a wide emission range from approximately 350 to 550 nm, depending on the projected excitation wavelengths at 300, 340, 380, 420, and 460 nm. The advantage of these catecholic FNPs is the surface functionality by which diamine-terminated oligomeric poly(ethylene glycol) can be easily attached to the polydopamine surface. PEGylated polydopamine nanoparticles overcome the practical limitations of carbonized polydopamine, such as poor colloidal stability and passivation of strong emission due to the surface ionic state.22
Mussel-inspired catechol chemistry is not only used for self-polymerization and production of polydopamine carbon nanoparticles, but it also serves as a functionalization tool for previously manufactured FNPs. Consequently, dopamine with its primary amine functional group was added to FNPs functionalized with carboxyl groups. By applying the EDC/NHS chemistry, the catechol group of dopamine effectively adhered to the FNP surface, easily providing catechol functionality (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Water-resistance and sticky properties in mussel foot proteins: DOPA (3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) and Lys (lysine). (b) Mussel-inspired polydopamine nanoparticle formation followed by carbonization resulting in multifunctional FNPs (carbon dots). 
3.3 Polymer based FNPs
As one of the FNP derivatives, polymer dots (PDs) have attracted a great deal of interest from academia and industry due to their low toxicity, biocompatibility, photostability, and scalability. PDs have unique morphological features relative to other FNPs because they typically have a core–shell structure composed of an inner carbon core and an outer polymer shell in which polymer chains extend into the solvent media. The presence of the outer polymer shell allows for functionalization without any post-treatment, including surface passivation and functionalization. Therefore, in the recent decades, a series of PDs have been shown to be novel and efficient probes for use as catalysts, and in detection, sensing, and safe biological applications. Additionally, PDs themselves are self-passivated due to the presence of the outer polymer shell and therefore do not require surface passivation to exhibit a comparable QY. More importantly, most PDs do not have widely tunable fluorescence emissions although multicolor fluorescence emissions can be achieved.60 PDs exhibit several important characteristics, including high brightness, fast emission rate, excellent photostability, and non-bleaching and nontoxic features, that present a novel opportunity for use in versatile bioimaging and analytical applications.61,62 In this section, we highlight highly water-dispersible PDs based on Pluronic F-127, hyaluronic acid (HA), polydopamine (pDA), and polyNIPAM (PNIPAM) (Fig. 6). Interestingly, with different initial design methods, every PD has unique optical and photoluminescence behavior and morphological transformations. First, preparation of Pluronic based-PDs in an aqueous solution with sulfuric acid exhibited concentration-modulated multicolor fluorescence emission from blue to red even at a constant excitation wavelength, owing to the aggregation-mediated reconstruction of surface energy traps.16 Second, controlling carbonization time with acid treatment can provide HA-based PDs which possess unique characteristics. The prepared HA-based PDs depending on dehydration time showed an outstanding in vitro and in vivo feature for controlled cancer targeted delivery and as diagnostic tools.17 Third, with different acid (H2SO4) treatment time, the PDs from PNIPAM showed different properties with tunable lower critical solution temperature (LCST) in a biosensor based on a fluorescence on–off system.63 Without further surface modification, we can control the temperature-responsive behaviors of the PDs prepared from PNIPAM by modifying the carbonization time; indeed, after 1 h of acid treatment, the PDs lost their LCST behavior. Fourth, when pDA was treated with a strong acid (H2SO4) for 1 min, the PDs not only demonstrated excitation-dependent fluorescence emission but also exhibited NIR-responsive photothermal conversion properties that can be useful for hyperthermal killing in medical applications. Additionally, PDs functionalized with PTT agents, such as PANI and IR825, show enhanced photothermal conversion abilities.23,64 The recent role of PDs in the design and development of multifunctional carbon nanomaterials has fascinated the scientific community as new FNP systems for a variety of future medical applications can be developed.
 Fig. 6  A variety of polymer based FNPs with unique features. 
4. Theranostic application of FNPs
4.1 Internal stimuli-responsive FNPs as theranostic systems

4.1.1 Overview of the internal cancer condition. 
Although several anticancer diagnosis systems and therapies have been widely explored, most of them fail to effectively eradicate cancer cells due to adverse toxicities, such as various inferior pharmacokinetics and uncontrollable drug release at the target site. To solve this problem, nanomedical science is being considered to treat metastases, further prevent their recurrence, achieve better tumor targeting, and ensure lower toxicity to normal cells. One strategy to enhance therapeutic efficacy is to deliver the therapeutic payload/drug into the proximity cancer sites without resulting in undesired effects, aiming for strong encapsulation of the therapeutic payload/drug before reaching the cancer site. Drug delivery systems (DDSs) rely on the intrinsic physical and biological properties of specific environments to control drug delivery and release, which comes with certain limitations. The local disease environment may be very heterogeneous and might be dependent on the patient state. Therefore, it is not a simple task to artificially control the exact effect that the environment will have on release kinetics or drug dosing after administration. Actively triggered systems are probably most useful in enhancing the therapeutic effect of a DDS and in treating diseases for which modulation of drug levels in real time (i.e., control of dosing) is important.
During the past several decades, stimuli-responsive nanoparticle-based DDSs have provided an answer to the challenge that the microenvironment of cancer presents and have been tested in vivo and in vitro. Generally, the intracellular pH of normal cells is ∼7.2–7.4 and that of endosomes is ∼5; however, the extracellular pH of tumor cells is ∼6.5–6.9.65,66 Additionally, the cells contain an important non-protein thiol, namely glutathione (GSH), which plays an important role in regulating cellular processes, such as cell differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. In tumor cells, GSH concentration is ∼2–10 mM, which is at least four times higher than that found in normal cells.67,68 Considering the differences between the cell types, a smart material for a DDS can be developed in the form of a biological stimuli-responsive system. Internal stimuli correspond to physiological signals including acid-, redox potential- (glutathione (GSH)), and enzyme-based signals. Recently, FNPs have been explored for use as trackable in vivo drug delivery vehicles together with a stimuli-responsive compartment for multifunctional imaging-guided therapy platforms, showing excellent potential for clinical applications. An important advantage of FNPs as a cellular delivery vehicle is the possibility to combine the transport of the molecular cargo with imaging—by employing the luminescence properties of the FNPs—thus enabling assessment of the effectiveness of delivery (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Internal environment-triggered drug release from FNP nanocarriers in cancer cells. 


4.1.2 Redox-responsive FNPs. 
Redox-sensitive nanoparticles are potential vehicles that have been greatly developed owing to the presence of a unique and intrinsic redox gradient difference. As a material containing thiol groups for reducing agents, the cytosolic GSH concentration in many tumor cells is higher than in normal tissue leading the GSH to become a popular stimulus-parameter in redox-responsive drug carrier for delivery to cancer sites. From the demand for simultaneous drug delivery and bioimaging effects, numerous studies used organic dye or fluorophore conjugation and/or staining in a redox-sensitive matrix to measure cellular uptake properties. Lately, clinical applications request simple and effective theranostic systems where one single particle can be offered for drug delivery and bioimaging, looking towards redox-sensitive vehicles for answers. Therefore, we firstly focused the discussion on FNPs containing disulfide bonds that have been proven stable in external environments with low reduction levels, with cleavage to thiol groups from the higher GSH concentration inside the cell triggering drug release guided by the bioimaging system. We illustrate the endocytosis mechanisms occurring in the cell with redox-responsive FNPs.
Two years ago, FNPs were developed for the detection of intracellular redox states and they were prepared by sequentially assembling polymer/microwave-assisted FNPs with a citric acid multilayer shell on mesoporous silica nanoparticles with different crosslinking densities of disulfide bonds (FNPs-CN).69 By controlling the crosslinking density of disulfide bonds by varying the thiol functionalization degree of the polymers, the FNPs-CN response to GSH concentration was controlled depending on the crosslinking density of FNPs-CN while the responsive concentration of GSH varied, making it available for detecting intracellular GSH concentrations in various cells. The aggregation of FNPs results in this system being weakly fluorescent. However, with the addition of GSH, the photoluminescence intensity is significantly enhanced.70 This may be attributed to GSH-triggered cleavage of disulfide bond linkers71 in the polymer/FNPs multilayer shell resulting in the dilution of FNPs from the aggregated form. Regarding cellular uptake, HeLa cells incubated with FNPs-CN for 24 h showed bright blue fluorescence spanning the entire cytoplasm. Using cells treated with various crosslinking densities, the intracellular GSH concentration (cytoplasm) of HeLa cells was approximated at 13–16 × 10−3 M. In addition, the in vitro cell assays confirmed the feasibility of using nanosensors for detecting GSH concentrations in different cells. Despite being limited to sensing the cellular redox state, this could lead to a potential nanosensor that detects GSH concentrations found in cancer cells and normal cells for drug delivery or as a therapeutic carrier in a DDS.
With the introduction of the drug carrier matrix, the carboxyl-abundant FNPs prepared by hydrothermal polymerization were found to have great potential for redox-responsive drug release at tumor sites and real-time imaging to monitor cellular behavior during cancer treatment. The FNPs contained doxorubicin (DOX) as a model drug and were grafted via disulfide bonds onto the shell of mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs), creating MSNs-SS-FNPs/DOX. The cumulative DOX release observed significantly increased to ∼70% in 10 mM phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH 5 within 24 h. In addition, at an excitation wavelength of 561 nm, the red fluorescence localizing in the nucleus in confocal images reflected both the released DOX and the MSNs-SS-FNPs/DOX nanocomposites, indicative of the therapeutic potential to kill cancer cells.72 In another case, mesoporous carbon nanoparticles (MCNs) were capped by novel FNPs, with glutathione-mediated controlled release of DOX and enhanced solubility. HA was integrated into the system to achieve favorable cellular uptake using the CD44 receptor. The capping mechanism involves the blockage of MCN pores via electrostatic attraction between DOX-SS-MCNs and HA–FNPs. The loading capacity was ∼28.4% at pH 8.5 and rapidly decreased to ∼6.9% at pH 4.5. The HA–FNPs displayed fluorescence quenching after capping with MCNPs. However, in the presence of 20 mM GSH, fluorescence intensity was recovered because of the stripping of the FNP system from the MCNs, as shown by in vitro bioimaging of HeLa cells.73
By delivering strands of genetic material, RNA-interference (RNAi) agents, such as small-interfering RNA (siRNA) and micro-RNA (miRNA), have strong potential as therapeutic agents for the treatment of a broad range of diseases, such as malignancies, infections, autoimmune diseases, and neurological diseases that are associated with undesirable gene expression.74 However, in mammalian cells, RNAi agents disturb the activation of double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase and cause nonspecific inhibition of protein translation to generate cell apoptosis.75–77 In 2016, a novel redox-sensitive nanoagent was synthesized using the Michael addition process with carbonized polyethyleneimine (PEI) and N,N′-bis(acryloyl)cystamine (BAC) to generate reducible PEI–FNPs (rPEI–FNPs). In order to improve tumor targeting, folate was conjugated to the outermost rPEI–FNPs/siRNA complex to form fc-rPEI–FNPs/siRNA multifunctional nanoagents (Fig. 8). The mechanism of action in cancer cells, in brief, involves the breakdown of disulfide linkages between the PEI molecules by glutathione, followed by siRNA release into the cytosol after the theranostics. In an in vivo study, the H460 tumor in nude mice reduced in size at day 7 and 10 after treatment in the fc-rPEI–FNPs/pooled siRNA-treated group compared with PBS-treated controls. Bioimaging properties were demonstrated by blue emission accumulated in the lung region, implicating the utility of the fluorescence properties of FNPs.78
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of preparation of siRNA nanocarriers based on functionalized FNPs. Adapted with permission78 with Copyright © 2016, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
In another system, a new class of redox-sensitive nanoparticles designed to sense intracellular GSH levels were prepared from gold nanoparticle (GNP)-capped FNPs. The FNPs directly wrap around the GNPs through their carboxylate surface functionality in order to form a stable aqueous dispersion of nanohybrids. Due to the quenching ability of GNPs, the fluorescence of FNPs was mostly lost. Because of GSH's unique steric-structure and multi-dentate anchoring ability,79 GSH can scavenge GNPs resulting in the release of FNPs from the GNPs, simultaneously inducing the recovery of the fluorescence signal of FNPs, this is because the FNP location become far from the surfaces of the GNP quenchers. In cancer cell imaging, functionalized FNPs with GNPs resulted in the selective detection of cancerous cells using the intracellular GSH-mediated fluorescence switching technique.80


4.1.3 pH-responsive FNPs. 
Cancerous cells maintain rapid cell division through glycolysis and as a result, lactic acid accumulates around them at high concentrations, reducing the pH level compared with the extracellular environment. In light of this, the engineering of smart nanocarriers to control pH-sensitive drug release has become a prominent challenge for cancer therapy. One category of pH-responsive nanovehicles involves functionalized FNPs containing pH-responsive linkers or functional groups that are designed to monitor drug release only after endocytosis.
A facile hydrothermal method was used to synthesize a nitrogen-rich FNP-based pH sensor (N-FNPs) using melamine and triethanolamine as carbon and nitrogen sources. In this system, the protonation and deprotonation of O- and N-rich groups was responsible for the pH sensitivity of the FNPs, and the pH-sensitive photoinduced electron transfer (PET) of aniline to the N-FNPs is shown in Fig. 9.81 The photoluminescence properties of N-FNPs change depending on the pH of the surrounding aqueous solution. At a high pH value, PET from the aniline to the N-FNPs generates the aniline lone pair, leading to a decrease in the photoluminescence properties. In contrast, PET cannot occur at low pH, resulting in the locally excited state restoration or “turn-on” of fluorescence. At pH 5.0, there is a possibility that the basic external environment induces H+ transport to live cells, increasing intracellular acidity. Cellular uptake results in the localization of the N-FNPs to the membrane and the cytoplasm of T24 cells, labeling the cells with significant N-FNP-mediated blue fluorescence. Regarding intracellular pH sensing, the fluorescence brightness of T24 cells becomes notably weaker as the pH is increased.82 In more recent work, another pH-responsive FNP platform was discovered through modification of FNPs with N- and P-doping. The energy level positions of N- and P-related groups were influenced by the pH of the medium, resulting in differences in fluorescence color. In addition, the N-doped FNPs from heparin have high drug loading capacity due to chemical group-mediated surface properties. Drugs on the surface of N-doped FNPs can be released at a much faster rate in an acidic environment than in a neutral environment. In vitro investigations of cellular uptake confirmed that doped FNPs can be internalized by A549 cells and pass through the cytoplasm to enter the cell nuclei and release DOX, due to the acidic pH-triggered release from vesicles.83 Therefore, inorganic element-doped FNPs harbor potential for future use as pH-sensitive, cancer-sensing nanovehicles in a DDS.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Schematic representation of the N-FNP synthesis process and the possible pH-responsive luminescence mechanism. (c) Laser confocal fluorescence images of T24 cells after incubation with N-FNPs (0.2 mg mL−1) and immobilization at pH 5.0 (i), 7.0 (ii), and 9.0 (iii). Adapted with permission from ref. 82 with Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V. 
In another example of pH-responsive FNPs, FNPs–HA containing diols were functionalized with boronic acid (BA) through a pH sensitive linker to develop the cytotoxic synergistic effects of chemotherapeutic drugs guided bioimaging system via fluorescent properties of FNPs.84–88 The boronate ester complex was localized on the shell of the FNP core, along with the mitochondrial targeting agents and paclitaxel (PTX) loaded in the β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) cavity. At pH 7.4, the PTX forms a strong complex with the inside of the β-CD cavity; however, the cleavage of boronate ester linkages at pH 5 releases PTX from the FNPs, lessening FNPs’ hydrophobicity. This demonstrates that pH-controllable PTX dissociation from β-CD and HA causes a faster release of PTX in acidic conditions than at normal physiological pH. This resulted in great biocompatibility under physiological pH but noticeably moderate to mild cytotoxicity towards cancer cells, with ∼80% cell death at pH 5.0 with simultaneous NIR irradiation. Moreover, with the excitation being dependent on the fluorescence emission wavelength confirmed that the matrix could be used as a bioimaging probe to track FNPs’ performance inside the cell (Fig. 10).26
 Fig. 10  FNP-based PTX delivery. (a) Schematic representation of FNP-based PTX delivery, internally controlled through the acidic microenvironment response and externally controlled via photothermal NIR regulation. (b) In vitro release profile of HA–FNPs–β-CD–PTX in PBS buffer at pH 7.4, 6.0, and 5.0 before and (c) after NIR irradiation. Adapted with permission26 with Copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
Fluorescent porous carbon nanocapsules (FPC-NCs) that have FNPs buried in the porous carbon nanotubes were combined with DOX through chemical functionalization of oxygen rich or hydroxyl groups and π rings on FNPs surfaces for potential utility as pH-responsive drug carriers. Owing to their surface capacities, the DOX loading capacity reached 1335 mg g−1, marking them as efficient vehicles to transport and release the drug to kill tumor cells. At physiological pH, positive charges from DOX have strong electrostatic interactions with the protonated negative charges at the carboxylate surface of the FNPs, resulting in only 38.1% DOX release. With the pH-sensitive surface carboxylic acid in the FNP carrier and the amine group on the DOX molecules, this system can release 68.1% of DOX at pH 5.0 after 120 h, due to the complete protonation of DOX amine groups, while carboxylic acid groups dissociate less to carboxylate with negative charges. As a result, the reduced negative charge from the FNP nanocarrier weakened the drug–carrier electrostatic interaction and DOX was released easily from the fluorescent porous carbon nanocapsules at pH 5.0 than at pH 7.4. DOX release was further enhanced under NIR irradiation as changes in water temperature weaken the drug–carrier interaction. In vitro confocal imaging has been used to investigate the accumulation of the nanosystem in DU145 human prostate cancer cells in multicolor forms, with size dependent fluorescent FNPs observed inside the carbon shell (Fig. 11).89
 Fig. 11  (a) Multifunctional porous fluorescent carbon nanoparticles (P-FNPs-NCs). (b) Laser scanning confocal microscopy images of DU145 human prostate cancer cells incubated with drug-free P-FNPs-NCs at a final concentration of 0.5 μg mL−1 for 12 h at 37 °C obtained under different λex of (i) 405 nm; (ii) 488 nm; (iii) 561 nm. Adapted with permission89 with Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V. 
Passivated FNPs of citric acid that were synthesized by thermal pyrolysis were linked to a cisplatin(IV) prodrug through an axial carboxyl group and connected to an RGD peptide90–92via a benzoic-imine bond for tumor extracellular microenvironment pH triggered delivery to cancer cells. The pH-responsive FNP carriers (FNPs–RGD–Pt(IV)–PEG), at physiological pH 7.4, had great biocompatibility with MDA-MB-231 cells, while at pH 6.8, they had higher cytotoxicity that resulted in ∼55% cell death, indicative of drug release. Conversely, the FNP system incubated with MCF-7 cells showed no obvious changes at different pH values due to the low-level expression of integrin αvβ3. In the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line, at physiological pH, the FNPs–RGD–Pt(IV)–PEG displayed only mild multicolor fluorescence characteristics as the benzoic-imine bond did not hydrolyze at pH 7.4. However, in the tumor extracellular environment (pH 6.8) hydrolyzation resulted in MDA-MB-231 cells exhibiting stronger blue, green, and red fluorescence under different excitation wavelengths (405, 488, and 543 nm respectively) (Fig. 12).93 In addition, the COO– groups on the surfaces of FNPs can electrostatically interacts with the cationic aminopropyl group of functionalized MSNs which can be act as pH-controllable drug capping nanocarrier. When COO– groups on the FNPs are transformed to protonated groups (COOH) upon changing the pH value, the cap of the MSNs opens and separates from the surface of modified MSNs, leading to drug release. At pH 5.0, steady release has been achieved for over 8 h, which is not possible at pH 7.4 due to ionic complex formation between the drug-loaded MSNs and the cap (i.e., FNPs), indicating that the drug delivery system might be long-lived and continuous at a mildly acidic pH.94 Xiaogang and Qu et al. reported remarkable cell internalization distributed mainly in lysosomes due to the fluorescence properties of the FNP system that is beneficial for the release of DOX because of pH-responsiveness in cancer cells.95
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation describing the preparation of FNP(CD)-based drug nanocarriers with pH-tumor triggered targeting properties and the drug delivery process. (b) Confocal images of (i and ii) MDA-MB-231 and (iii and iv) MCF-7 cells upon treatment with FNPs–RGD–Pt(IV)–PEG at pH (i and iii) 7.4 and (ii and iv) 6.8 at 37 °C under excitation wavelengths of 405, 488, and 543 nm. Adapted with permission93 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 


4.1.4 Enzyme-responsive FNPs. 
The expression profiles of specific enzymes in cancer or inflammation, including hyaluronidase (HAase), phospholipases, or glycosidases, have been explored in investigations of enzyme-mediated drug release by exploiting the extracellular or intracellular enzymes of cancer cells. Given the accumulation properties of HA in specific cancer sites by the cell surface glycoprotein CD44, HAase has been extensively used in enzyme responsive nanocarriers for specific tumor sites.96–99 It has been reported that HA can be degraded through cleavage of its internal β-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine bonds and dominate many malignant tumors due to higher expression levels in cancer cells than in normal cells.100,101 It is of obvious importance to develop a theranostic fluorescent probe-based evaluation of the HAase level, and subsequently, assess the potential for in vivo drug delivery, cancer diagnosis, and therapy.102
For example, FNPs can be surface functionalized with positively charged PEI, followed by reaction with HA-conjugated DOX via electrostatic interactions, generating P-FNPs/HA–DOX that has a negligible fluorescence signal because of Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET).103,104 The presence of high HAase levels in cancer cells recovers the fluorescence properties, and therefore HA is gradually degraded into tetrasaccharides or small fragments, resulting in release of DOX for drug delivery. At low concentrations of free DOX (0.5–2.5 μg mL−1), the nanoprobe can more effectively kill HeLa cancer cells than at higher concentrations (50 μg mL−1). The P-FNPs/HA–DOX incubated with HeLa cells clearly demonstrated the enzyme-responsive FNPs’ cancer targetable ability based on the fluorescence signals observed in the blue and red channels with confocal microscopy.105
Another example of enzyme-responsive FNPs comes from HAase combined with a redox-sensitive nanocarrier. Carbonized enzyme-responsive self-targeting HA (FNPsHA) was integrated into the disulfide bond-modified MSN surface as a multifunctional antitumor DDS (MSN-SS-FNPHA). The use of the HA structure in the FNP core provides a cleavable site for use as a drug nanocarrier. After cleavage of HA in the tumor environment, where there is a high concentration of GSH and HAase, the trapped DOX inside MSNs can be released and induce antitumor activity inside the cell. Using this approach, systemic administration of the FNP nanocarriers resulted in ∼70% DOX activity in A549 lung cancer cells. This indicates that the cell-internalized FNPs emitted blue, green, and red fluorescence under excitation, which was not found with healthy NIH-3T3 fibroblast cells as the system more easily responds to the receptors that are overexpressed in A549 tumor cells than in the receptor-negative NIH-3T3 cells.106 Additionally, the glycosidase enzyme has been reported to be important as a biomarker due to different concentration levels in healthy and diseased cells. Glycosidase enzyme deficiencies are directly correlated with Gaucher and Parkinson's disease, whereas overexpression is found in ovarian cancers. Recently, Tang et al. (2017) applied β-galactosidase sensitive β-cyclodextrin-modified FNPs for the in vitro high-quality visualization of cancer cells based on glycosidase levels.107p-Nitrophenol (NP) was used to selectively associate with the FNPs’ β-CD cavity via host–guest recognition, resulting in highly efficient fluorescence quenching using the FNP system. At specific glycosidase levels, the NP substrate can hydrolyze glycoconjugates and continue the quenching process through NP self-assembly (Fig. 13). As a glycosidase derivative, β-galactosidase activity changed the fluorescence of the nanoprobe with a low detection limit of 0.6 U L−1. The activity of glycosidase enzymes towards the FNP system was dependent on the glycosyl units.107 Following this, Yongsheng Zhou et al. (2016) reported that the pH-sensitive zwitterionic surfaces (charged functional groups of COO− and –HN+(Me)2) of fluorescent MSNs supported enzyme cleavage activities (Fig. 14).108 The zwitterion layer provides positive charges at a pH lower than 6.8 and can be switched from 7.4 to 6.8, confirming tuning of the surface potential. An advantage of the FNPs–MSN system in tumor tissues is the strengthening of the cellular membrane interaction to facilitate cellular uptake via negative charges at the cell surface. With the system, protein absorption rose from 10% at pH 7.4 to 80% at pH 6.8, indicating enhanced tumor accumulation based on pH. Enzyme triggered cargo release was achieved by filling the MSN holes with biodegradable and biocompatible polycaprolactone (PCL). The burst release profile of DOX and esterase at low pH indicates the necessity of both of them in this system. For drug tracking, the persistent blue fluorescence of FNPs–MSN effectively demonstrated the monitoring of preloaded drugs and labeling of target cells through a switchable surface property (charge neutrality at pH 7.4 and a positive charge at pH 6.8).108
 Fig. 13  (a) The universal detection strategy for glycosidase activity based on β-cyclodextrin (β-CD)-modified FNPs (carbon quantum dots), taking β-Gal as an example. (b) Fluorescence images of OVCAR3 cells in different conditions: (i) OVCAR3 cells only, (ii) treated OVCAR3 cells, (iii) treated OVCAR3 cells followed by incubation with NPGal (200.0 μM) for 30 min, and (iv) treated OVCAR3 cells first incubated with D-galactal (400.0 μM) for 30 min and then incubated with NPGal (200.0 μM) for 30 min. Scale bar, 20 μm. Adapted with permission107 with Copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
 Fig. 14  Preparation of FNP-based MSN nanocarriers with the GSH/HAase-tumor triggered targeting property. Adapted with permission from ref. 108 with Copyright © 1999–2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Tyrosinase is a significant oxidizing agent that controls melanin production in humans.109 When tyrosinase is highly secreted through the human skin, it results in chloasma, which is dark discoloration. If tyrosinase activity is not sufficient in albinism disorder, photocarcinogenesis can be promoted. Thus, development of a sensitive sensor that identifies tyrosinase activity is essential for medical purposes. In fact, phenolic molecules have been well-known as effective tyrosinase inhibitors since they were discovered as tyrosinase substrates.110 Using this principle, Chai et al. developed a fluorometric assay for tyrosinase detection by means of dopamine-functionalized FNPs.111 The oxidized form of dopamine functionalized FNPs (i.e., quinone-based carbon dots) resulted in fluorescence quenching via intraparticle, photoinduced electron transfer. Since the conversion of catechol to quinone is achieved by the activity of tyrosinase, the highly sensitive tyrosinase assay can be realized using these specialized FNPs. The assay displayed a linear detection range of up to 800 U L−1, with a detection limit of 7.0 U L−1, showing high sensitivity.


4.1.5 Cancer cell targeting of FNPs. 
In contrast, the targeting activity of FNPs can be categorized as being actively or passively achieved. In passive targeting, the FNPs enter the target organ through the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect due to their small size. Active targeting is achieved by incorporating a cell-specific ligand in the FNP nanocarrier system, typically along with the therapeutic agent. In this part of the review, we focus on active targeting based on the functionalization of FNPs with special cell-targeting ligands, such as HA, folic acid (FA), and RGD. In detail, HA is a natural macromolecule that is located in the extracellular matrix and is known to specifically bind to the CD44 receptor on cancer cell surfaces.17 RGD is a tripeptide composed of L-arginine, glycine, and L-aspartic acid, possessing glioma-targeting capabilities through binding with αvβ3 integrin on immature endothelial cells.90–92 For example, D-glucose and L-aspartic acid used as starting materials were successfully carbonized by simple thermolysis for self-targeting in in vivo imaging.27 FNPs-Asp not only exhibited tunable full-color emission but also showed high selectivity and enrichment in C6 glioma brain cells, without the aid of any extra targeting molecules. When FNPs-Asp was injected through the mouse tail vein, in vivo fluorescence images revealed high contrast FNPs-Asp biodistribution 15 min after injection.27 The functionalization of FNPs with transferrin and folate receptors of FA for cell-type specific imaging has also been reported. Prasad and co-workers were the first to use transferrin-functionalized FNPs for the in vitro imaging of HeLa cells.112 In addition, FA-conjugated FNPs were also developed a few years ago. For example, Park and co-workers (2016) reported the use of FA and lipophilic triphenylphosphonium (TPP) cations to target to mitochondrial membranes while the FNPs were conjugated to a photothermal dye IR825, resulting in stronger fluorescence in KB cells than in MDCK cells and reaching maximum accumulation.113 Our group reported the carbonization of HA using a simple 1 minute acid treatment for self-targeting bioimaging applications.17 The carbonization time was used to control the targeting ability of HA which is lost if the hydration is conducted for longer than 10 min because of the HA degradation process. Therefore, the FNPs–HA is a promising bioimaging agent for fluorescence imaging applications with cellular uptake demonstrated in vitro and in vivo. In addition, as a fluorescent probe, silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) constitute a chemically and mechanically stable matrix while retaining the required biocompatibility and enabling robust emitters. These nanoparticles are traditionally made from silicon alkoxides (3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane (APTES) and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS)) by hydrolysis, condensation, and hydrothermal synthesis methods. In the next example, functionalized SiNPs were integrated with HA to further partial carbonization, resulting in cancer-specific targeting demonstrated by high quantitative accumulation of nanosensors in breast and cervical cancer cell lines of ∼42% in comparison with the healthy MDCK cell line (20%).64 In another case, FNPs–HA was functionalized with another chemical that controls pH-based linkage of the drug PTX in the β-CD cavity for specific targeting of cancer cells, without early release and the generation of unwanted effects in non-target organs. Regarding in vitro cytotoxicity, a higher level of cell death in MDA-MB-231 cancer cells than in MDCK healthy cells confirmed the targeting efficiency required for delivery of the complexed PTX (a chemotherapeutic) and regulated burst release at specific sites.26

4.2 External stimuli-responsive FNPs as theranostic systems

4.2.1 Overview of external stimuli-responsive nanoparticles. 
Understanding the effect that the drug amount has on targeting to the desired site is important. Twice the amount of a drug will not necessarily have twice the effect, and both desirable and undesirable effects should be considered. Less rigorous studies can still be of considerable scientific value, but it should be understood that such studies indicate that a given therapy could work, not that it will. Irrespective of the manner in which they will be triggered, the design of triggerable DDSs must take into account whether they will be administered locally or systemically. So far, many internal stimuli-responsive nanovehicles have been demonstrated as effective drug nanocarriers. However, it could not make them stop to explore numerous challenges in utilizing disease environment conditions. As a result, external stimuli-controlled drug release that is triggered by temperature, light, or ultrasound has been designed to control the spatial location of drug release. Over the past decade, drug delivery events have been triggered by external energy sources or other triggers at the desired time, location, and/or dose. In this section, we discuss drug-delivery systems that take advantage of externally applied stimuli, including temperature changes, magnetic fields, and light fields.
As an overview, thermoresponsive polymers with LCST in aqueous solution are frequently functionalized with the luminescent FNPs and/or are directly used as a precursor material to endow thermoresponsive FNP properties. Next, light is another attractive stimulus for the construction of stimuli-responsive drug nanocarriers, as this approach enables remote and spatiotemporal drug release by tuning the wavelength, energy, and site of irradiation. Among the nanomaterials being used for medical applications, the intrinsic properties of magnetic nanoparticles have utility for tracking through radiology and magnetic resonance (MRI imaging) and drug delivery. In this section, we discuss drug-delivery systems that take advantage of externally applied stimuli, including temperature changes, magnetic fields, and light fields (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Illustration of external stimuli-responsive FNP nanocarriers. 


4.2.2 Thermoresponsive FNPs. 
Thermoresponsivity typically involves a nonlinear, sharp change in the properties of the nanocarrier in response to variation in the surrounding temperature to trigger drug release. Generally, thermosensitive nanocarriers retain their load at body temperature (∼37 °C) and rapidly deliver the drug within a locally heated tumor (∼40–42 °C) to counteract rapid blood-passage time and washout from the tumor.114 Thermoresponsive systems are generally liposomes, polymer micelles, or nanoparticles (usually poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide), PNIPAM) that exhibit a lower critical solution temperature.114 For liposomes, thermoresponsivity usually arises from phase transition of the constituent lipids and the associated conformational variations in the lipid bilayers. In vivo, heat is generally applied by using temperature-controlled water sacks, radiofrequency oscillators, or miniature annular-phased array microwave applicators. In the past few years, research has focused on rapid and quantitative drug-release performance, while in the past decade, the studies investigate functionalized FNPs as thermosensitive nanovehicles for drug delivery to cancer cells using temperature as a stimulus.115,116
The first study published used FNPs with PEI and a glycerol mixture under 700 W microwaves for 10 min, where the FNPs were coupled to isobutyric amide at various ratios by amidation reaction to generate FNPs–PEI–IBAm.117 FNPs–PEI–IBAm was yellow and transparent in aqueous solutions, but after being heated the transmittance of FNPs–PEI–IBAm reduced and it became visually turbid, and transparency recovered by cooling the FNPs–PEI–IBAm. Modifying the PEI ratio results in different LCST behavior, where lower IBAm content can increase LCST points and influence FNPs’ temperature responsiveness (Fig. 16). This indicates that hydrophilic polymers typically require higher energy to release the hydrated water molecules from the material. As a temperature-sensitive FNP system, the emission intensity of FNPs–PEI–IBAm decreased by ∼65% when the temperature increased from 26 to 45 °C. Not only does FNPs–PEI–IBAm have temperature-responsive behavior, the presence of PEI in the FNP system also generates pH-sensitivity. In an acidic solution, the amino groups are protonated to form more polar N+ groups, increasing the hydrophilicity and thereby enhancing the LCST, resulting in fluorescence quenching as the temperature is increased. A dual responsive FNP system is promising for biomedicine and biotechnology applications as a “smart” material. Another potential temperature-responsive FNP system that was developed by our group utilizes PNIPAM as a single precursor in two carbonization pathways controlled by temperature and time, complete and partial carbonization. When the carbonization was carried out for 1 min (partial), the PNIPAM moieties were retained in the FNPs and helped to maintain LCST behaviors. However, when the carbonization time reached 1 h (complete) the FNPs lost their LCST behavior. The partial FNPs–PNIPAAm displayed tunable fluorescence emission at room temperature, and there was no detectable fluorescence found at physiological temperatures. This could be attributed to the formation of micelle nanoparticles via hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions maintained by partial carbonization of PNIPAM at high temperatures. However, at room temperature, no “fluorescence off” signal occurred, which could be attributed to the hydrophilic nature of the NIPAM unit. The fluorescence-quenching mechanism involved follows the aggregation-caused quenching concept reported elsewhere.63 This aggregation guides fluorescence decay towards nonradiative pathways for emission of light in the condensed phase. In vitro cellular imaging revealed random accumulation within the cell cytoplasm because of the nonspecific delivery of FNPs with non-toxic properties.63
 Fig. 16  (a) Preparation of multistimuli-responsive FNPs (carbon dots). (b) Typical excitation and emission spectra of FNPs at room temperature (26 °C) and 45 °C. Adapted with permission117 with Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Next, this review will discuss the temperature-sensitive FNPs used for chemotherapy-guided bioimaging. For instance, hybrid nanogels were generated using PNIPAM and FNPs as a carrier for chemotherapy agents. PNIPAM was selected as a model responsive nanogel prepared by a simple one-pot precipitation polymerization method in water solvent.118 The FNPs integrated into the nanogel via hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl/carboxyl group on the FNP surface utilizing the AAm comonomer. Curcumin-loaded FNP nanogels achieved drug concentrations of 60 mg g−1 of nanogel, indicating that FNP nanogels possess a high loading capacity due to hydrophobic interactions. In the in vitro release test conducted in PBS at pH 6.15, at room temperature the curcumin release from the nanogel was only 21.2% after 60 h. In contrast, increasing the temperature significantly enhanced the release of curcumin, with 36.3% release achieved at physiological temperature (37 °C). The π–π interactions between the curcumin molecules and the FNPs became weaker with the increase in temperature, resulting in dilution of curcumin molecules in water, but upon heating, the hydrophobicity of PNIPAM increased making it easier to hold the hydrophobic drug. However, due to the shrinking of polymer networks at elevated temperatures, the surface nanogel did not have enough space to keep all of the drug molecules that were initially loaded. Under NIR irradiation, due to the π–π hybridization of FNPs, the nanogel produced heat and helped to release more drug from the interaction compared to heating at 37 °C. In addition, when tracking delivery in the mouse melanoma cell line B16F10 using the fluorescence properties of the FNP nanogel, it demonstrated good photostability for cell bioimaging. Another thermosensitive nanoparticle that can allow for both accurate intracellular temperature sensing and precise temperature-controlled drug release has been functionalized with MSN in a smart, temperature-controlled DDS. Poly-N-vinylimidazole (PVI) and 1-vinyl-2-(hydroxymethyl)-imidazole (UPH) were added to the surface of FNPs–MSN (using calcination methods) and anti-cancer drug (S)-10-hydroxycamptothecin (HCPT) was loaded into them.119 By varying the copolymer feed ratio, Yang Tian et al. found that the prepared nanoparticles operate at a critical temperature range (34–40 °C) that generates the temperature-dependent fluorescence properties of the FNPs–MSN system. Furthermore, the nanohybrid combined with fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) provided accurate imaging and biosensing of temperature distribution at the single-cell level. In an in vitro test, HCPT release started at 37 °C, with massive release when the ambient temperature was above 37.5 °C. As a result, the in vivo antitumor efficacies had an observable impact on tumor inhibition, indicative of superior antitumor activity. The general possible reason may be because when the FNPs receive the energy, some photoexcited electron relaxes in radiative manner, Auger nonradiative scattering, and thermally activated defects states. This nonradiative thermal activation is an important factor for thermal responsiveness and trapping.119


4.2.3 Light-responsive FNPs. 
Light-responsive DDSs have received tremendous attention in the past decades due to their non-invasive properties and remote spatiotemporal controlling. The demand for a variety of photoresponsive systems has risen in order to achieve remote drug release in response to light at specific wavelengths, such as those in the ultraviolet, visible, or NIR regions. The different strategies available rely on either a one-time or repeatable on–off drug-release event triggered by photosensitivity-induced conformational changes in the nanocarriers. The major drawback with light-triggered DDSs is the low light-penetration depth (∼10 mm) due to the strong scattering properties of soft tissues in wavelength area less than 700 nm; therefore, the potential nanoparticle with light responsive ability with can achieve deeper tissue penetration, lower scattering properties, and minimal harm to tissues was needed to explore.120 Conventional light-induced drug delivery is only applicable to regions of the body that can be directly illuminated (such as the eye or the skin). By using photosensitive groups that respond to higher wavelengths or by exploiting two-photon technology, it is possible to replace the UV light source with a NIR laser (700–1000 nm range).121 This makes NIR-responsive systems extremely promising for clinical applications. The capacity of NIR-absorbing plasmonic materials to convert the photon energy adsorbed during irradiation into heat has been used to trigger the release of chemotherapeutic molecules from NIR responsive nanodevices.
Generally, nitric oxide (NO) can stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis and can help to supply oxygen and respiratory substrates to mitochondria. However, high concentrations of endogenous NO synthesized by inducible NO synthase (iNOS) inactivate the mitochondrial respiratory component of virally infected cells, tumor cells, and parasites, and induce cytotoxic effects in the mitochondrial system.122–124 There are a number of potential therapeutic applications of exogenous NO delivery that have been proposed and explored, including as a treatment for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, cancer, and wound healing, as well as for antimicrobial therapy and functional biomedical devices. In order to control the biological effects of NO, it is crucial to control the concentration and dosage. Many examples of combined FNPs–light assisted NO delivery and visualization have been reported, and one of them is an FNP system prepared by S. Wu et al. at the South China University of Technology.125 The FNPs displayed two important molecular elements: a mitochondria-recognition moiety (triphenylphosphonium, TPP) and a NO-releasing moiety in order to block mitochondrial respiration using NO as a potent cytotoxic agent. In the release profile of the nanosystem without light irradiation, the NO release from the FNP-based nanosystem containing immobilized SNO was slow, while burst release of NO was observed under continuous light exposure. In addition, an intracellular NO release test using a NO imaging dye (DAF-2) under 15 W white light LED irradiation demonstrated NO release behavior inside HeLa cells.125 In addition, targeting and specific sensing of the FNP system was confirmed using regular mitochondria staining, rhodamine 123 (Rh123) and JC-1, to co-stain HeLa cells, displaying selective accumulation of the nanosystem in the mitochondrial region. Regularly, such nanosystem uptake by cells that use endocytic mechanisms begins with the formation of an endosome/lysosome to reach the mitochondria. Therefore, these FNP systems provide anticancer activity by binding intracellular mitochondria and generating mitochondrial damage by apoptosis of the cancer cells tracked using fluorescence imaging (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (a) Scheme of Illustration for the effect of the FNPs-based mitochondria-targeting and NO-releasing nanosystem (FNPs-TPP-SNO) on cancer cell. (b) NO release profile for the FNPs-TPP-SNO incubated in PBS buffered water at 37 °C for varied time periods with or without (in the dark) light irradiation from a 15 W white LED. (c) Confocal microscopic images for HeLa cells stained with DAF-2 (a NO imaging dye) upon being treated with FNPs-TPP-SNO or FNPs-TPP under white light irradiation. The green fluorescence indicates the intracellular release of NO. Adapted with permission125 with Copyright © 1999–2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an extraordinary theranostic modality for a number of malignant and nonmalignant diseases. The general PDT procedure involves the systemic, local, or topical administration of a non-toxic drug or dye known as a photosensitizer (PS), followed by selective illumination with light of appropriate wavelength and power.126,127 Under light irradiation, the PS can transfer the absorbed photon energy to trigger the generation of reactive oxygen species from intracellular oxygen and consequently result in cell death and necrosis of proximal tissues.128 For instance, PS-conjugated FNPs were prepared with the PS agent Ce6 linked via covalent bonding using a modified EDC–NHS reaction for improved PDT by indirect excitation by FRET from the FNPs to Ce6 and direct excitation of the Ce6 moiety.129 In the presence of FNPs the fluorescence of Ce6 increased remarkably because of indirect excitation by FRET from the FNPs to Ce6 and improvement of Ce6 solubility. As such, FNPs–Ce6 was used as a fluorescent nanoprobe for in vivo imaging.129 Simultaneously, with a 671 nm laser (30 mW cm−2) the PDT effect of FNP–Ce6 in the concentration range of 0–50 μM observed in MGC803 cells results in ∼20% cell viability, whereas treated cells without light exposure had over 90% cell viability. In another example, for targeted PDT, it is possible to approach the photo-controlled release by utilizing the PS zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) inside the FNP core. This photosensitive system is based on FA functionalized, passivated FNPs as carriers for zinc(II) phthalocyanine (ZnPc) that is loaded by π–π stacking interactions to achieve biological imaging and PDT targeting simultaneously.130 The only PS currently used is inadequate for in vivo photodynamic treatment due to passive targeting, where modification with active targeting ligands like FA, which are known to bind to folate receptor-α in HeLa cells, could potentially avoid side effects and maximize therapeutic efficacy. The targeted delivery of a PS exhibited singlet oxygen generation upon irradiation for 10 min and effectively decreased tumor volume after 10 days treatment. Upon light irradiation with a 660 nm laser (0.3 W cm−2, 20 min), mice treated with the FNP nanosystem displayed remarkable suppression of the tumor growth rate by 200%, confirming that a combination of targeted ZnPc delivery and light irradiation can effectively induce cancer cell death in vivo.
Previously, researchers used PDT that uses light to excite a PS and kill cancer cells.131,132 However, to excite the PS, short wavelength light that has high energy such as UV-light is normally essentially required to kill cancerous or normal cells. To overcome this problem, a new method called photothermal therapy (PTT) has been developed that applies light of longer wavelengths (even NIR wavelength) and is less harmful for use in humans. PTT is a minimally invasive therapeutic strategy, where light irradiation is converted by PTT agents to heat, thereby increasing the temperature of specific tissues. PTT against cancer allows for the selective destruction of cancer cells and the sparing of healthy cells in the vicinity as the former are more sensitive to an increase in temperature. Carbon nanomaterials, such as graphene oxide and carbon nanotubes, are perfect candidates for use in this approach as they have internal sp2 carbon planes elongating the conjugation bands that can efficiently absorb NIR light.133,134 In brief, numerous FNP systems can generate photothermal heat in response to NIR light to free drugs and provide photothermal treatment simultaneously. As previously described, during the carbonization process, the creation of polydopamine from the oxidative crosslinking of dopamine alters the dopamine molecular structure from an amorphous carbon network to a sp2/sp3 hybrid carbon network similar to graphene. Applying this chemical mechanism, Kim et al. generated polydopamine-derived FNPs that can be used for photothermal-sensitive applications.23 Natural polydopamine nanoparticles cannot be activated by NIR irradiation (i.e., there is no heat production with irradiation). However, carbonized polydopamine nanoparticles exhibit heat energy by absorbing NIR irradiation (5 mg of FNPs rapidly increased the temperature from 18.5 to 54.0 °C within five minutes), demonstrating the potential utility of the FNPs for PTT. Moreover, to investigate the performance of the FNPs, they tested the carbonized polydopamine FNP system in cancer cell lines (i.e., KB and MDCK cells) and bacteria, in vitro. The cell killing efficiency was quantified using the MTT method, achieving 35% when NIR irradiation (wavelength of 808 nm) was applied for 5 min with 1 mg mL−1 of carbonized polydopamine. Moreover, the viability of the cancer cells was dependent on the nanoparticle concentration, which can be further controlled to eliminate more cancer cells. Following this, premixed bacterial cells (i.e., Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli) were applied to the carbonized polydopamine with NIR irradiation (808 nm, 5 min) and colonies were counted after 24 hours. Resultantly, 80% and 99.9% of the bacteria were rapidly eliminated using 0.5 mg mL−1 and 1 mg mL−1 of the carbonized polydopamine nanoparticles respectively.
Apart from the above-mentioned light-triggered drug nanocarriers, the functionalization of FNPs to obtain effective PTT properties for photothermal–chemotherapeutic synergistic effects has been comprehensively explored several years ago. In brief, the functionalized pH-sensitive FNP-based diol linkage to pDA and HA with PTX entrapped in the β-CD cavity was optimized for tumor-specific delivery, tumor distribution, and cellular uptake of a PTX under NIR irradiation. After carbonization, hybridization of the π–π bond induced heat release from the FNPs and mediated time-dependent, complete PTX release. Moreover, PTX release dramatically increased by 10–15% after NIR irradiation at pH 5.0, owing to the synergetic effects of the temperature and pH stimuli.26,135 With regard to tumor-specific stimuli and effective delivery, mitochondrial targeting with TPP and HA in an FNP system resulted in intratumoral drug release in the presence of overexpressed matrix proteins and an EPR effect as observed in the cellular imaging profile (Fig. 18). In another case, organic dyes, including indocyanine green (ICG), IR780, and heptamethine dyes (IR825), were used to modify FNPs in the development of NIR-responsive FNP platforms. One such platform constitutes FNPs conjugated with IR825, having dual photothermal damage activity and bioimaging capabilities in cancer cells.136 Surface passivated FNPs increase the fluorescence QY and also have remarkable PTT behavior. For instance, Dipanjan et al. passivated FNPs with G2–G4 hyperbranched bis-MPA polyester hydroxyl polymers (HBP) resulting in a dramatic increase in NIR emission. Preliminary in vivo experiments showed high contrast enhancement of auxiliary lymph nodes in a mouse model, proving the feasibility of using passivated FNPs for in vivo NIR imaging.137 In addition, modified doping of FNPs has been widely investigated for biomedical applications, especially for photoactive nanoparticle-triggered heat release. N-Doped FNPs (N-FNPs) have strong absorption in the NIR region, high photostability, and excellent biodegradability. The optimized N-FNPs can be utilized as new photoacoustic (PA) imaging agents and superior PTT agents under NIR irradiation. In vivo/ex vivo tests demonstrated the non-invasive PA imaging of sentinel lymph nodes via local delivery and the use of PTT for cancer ablation therapy.138
 Fig. 18  (a) Endocytosis mechanism in the NIR-responsive FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD–PTX system. (b) The temperature elevation curve for FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD and (c) FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD–PTX as a function of NIR irradiation time (808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2), pH 5.0–7.4. (d) In vitro release profiles of FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD–PTX in PBS at pH 7.4, 6.0, and 5.0, without NIR irradiation and (e) with NIR irradiation (5 min, 808 nm, 2 W cm−2). Adapted with permission135 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 


4.2.4 Magnetically responsive FNPs. 
Magnetic nanoparticles have demonstrated tremendous biomedical applications, with uses in biosensing, hyperthermia therapy, and intracellular DDSs because of their nanomagnetism properties and excellent biocompatibility. For instance, magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles are highly efficient for MRI and local heating under AMF exposure through the Neel and Brownian relaxation process and hysteresis losses. The accumulation of magnetic nanoparticles can be controlled to minimize cell stress by intra- and extracellular degradation from homogeneous local heating. In addition, the transfer of radio frequency energy to the drug nanocarrier by the mechanical transducer of the magnetic nanoparticles has been shown to cause defects and trigger drug release. Surface functionalized magnetic nanoparticles can be made using molecular linkers or electrostatic attraction, or anchored on solid substrates, or embedded in polymer chain templates, such as DNA, protein fibrils, and other polyelectrolytes. For example, multifunctional, 1D, magnetic nanoparticle chains were combined for contrast enhanced MRI, fluorescence imaging, and photothermal/chemotherapy using a single 1D nano-object, with iron oxide–fluorescent carbon (Fe3O4@FNPs) nanoparticles created with the solvothermal method.139 The porous FNP shells act as drug carriers with a high drug loading capacity, as a cellular imaging agent, and a NIR photothermal converter. With a carbon-shell covering, the 1D magnetic nanoparticles are weakly ferromagnetic and do not carry a permanent magnetic moment, causing self-aggregation and excellent aqueous dispersion.139 From the same group, the gold (Au) nanocrystal and Fe3O4@FNPs are used in a high-NIR photothermal conversion platform hybrid for enhancing magnetically responsive photothermal drug release in cancer cells. When an external magnetic field is applied, the resultant material produces localized heat to trigger the release of the loaded drug. Therefore, the prepared magnetic DDS system significantly enhances MRI contrast, with great cellular uptake in the intracellular region in mouse melanoma B16F10 cells under laser excitation.140 Different from the above-mentioned techniques, gadolinium (Gd) provides unique magnetic properties and high toxicity through inhibition of calcium channels and release of intracellular ROS upon conversion to gadolinium ions (Gd3+). Yu-Kui Zhang et al. (2017) reported an FNP-stabilized Gd3+ hybrid nanomaterial (Gd–FNPs) for MR and fluorescence dual-modality applications using a one-pot hydrothermal treatment of citrate acid, ethane-diamine, and GdCl3 at 200 °C. Because of the tumor-targeting of RGD functionalization, the Gd–FNPs respond to MR in tissues with deep penetration and fluorescence sensitivity, which gradually showed color brightening depending on the concentration (Fig. 19). In addition, the Gd–FNPs demonstrated MR imaging and fluorescence dual-modality applications in vivo.141
 Fig. 19  (a) One-pot synthesis of Gd–FNPs (CQDs) as a dual-modal imaging probe for magnetic stimuli-responsive FNPs. (b) Optical properties of hybrid FNPs. (c) In vivo MR images of mice after treatment with hybrid FNPs. Adapted with permission141 from Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 
In another case, the sticky thread secreted by marine mussels was found to have a large abundance of a catecholic amino acid, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (i.e., DOPA), in their mussel foot proteins (mfps), especially in mfps-3 and -5.142 It has been widely accepted that the origin of the adhesion force between the mussel threads and the surrounding objects is crosslinking and coordination.143–146 Even if there are trace amounts of metallic ions involved in the binding chemistry, the metallic ions increase the affinity of binding as well as the stiffness of the thread. In particular, the iron(III) ion is a well-known metallic ion that can easily coordinate with DOPA in the mfps depending on pH.147 This indicates the possibility of a sensor that can detect the metallic ions that play important roles in biological processes, such as oxygen transportation, enzyme production, and the immune systems.148
Qu et al. reported an FNP sensor using catecholic compounds (i.e., carbonized polydopamine).149 The FNPs were prepared using a facile one-step solvothermal method in which dopamine was applied to the Teflon-lined autoclave and consequently heated for 6 h. As previously described, ordered carbon states achieved by the carbonization of polydopamine emit fluorescence. Similarly, the FNPs from the study by Qu et al. also had broad emission spectra ranging from approximately 380 to 530 nm. Since the iron(III) ions have the ability to coordinate with catechols, resulting in quinone structure that can act as an electron-acceptor for fluorescence quenching of FNPs, the on/off switching of FNP fluorescence depends on the concentration of iron(III) ions. Moreover, unlike previous methods that require biolabeling to quantify fluorescence for iron(III) ion detection, these FNPs allow for label-free detection of iron(III) ions.

5. Fluorescence in biosensing application-based FNPs
5.1 Overview of fluorescence on/off biosensor systems
Some studies have reported that the fluorescence of FNPs is usually determined by three main factors, including the quantum confinement effect, the surface states of the dots, and the molecular state.21,150,151 The alternation of those physicochemical states theoretically induces a change in fluorescence that enables FNPs to be used in fluorescence-based sensing applications. Fluorescence relies on the movement of electrons that are excited by external energy, such as UV-light, and are continuously relaxed to a ground state, resulting in photon emission (i.e., fluorescence).152 If the electrons from FNPs are interfered with (i.e., engage in electron transfer) the surrounding molecules (i.e., analytes), whether acting as electron acceptors or donors, the fluorescence of FNPs can be manipulated for sensing applications.
Since there are functional groups available on the surface of FNPs, such as carboxyl, amine, and thiol groups (–COOH, –NH2, and –SH), there are many analytes (e.g., small molecules, gas, biomacromolecules, and microorganisms) that can interact with those functional groups. Normally, there are two conventional strategies for FNP-based sensors: (1) if the analyte can bind strongly to the carbon dot surface, linking the surrounding carbon dots (i.e., aggregation), then the otherwise strong fluorescence from the FNPs is weakened due to fluorescence quenching (OFF), allowing the quantitative measurement of the analyte concentration. (2) When the intermediate material binds first to the FNPs (OFF) and then an analyte with a high binding affinity towards the intermediate is subsequently applied, the FNPs’ intrinsic fluorescence is recovered (ON), enabling detection of the analytes.
From a biosensing perspective, one significant advantage with FNP-based sensing assays is biocompatibility. Basically, FNPs are wholly organic materials that, having lots of hydrophilic functional groups, such as –COOH and –OH, are relatively soluble in water. This FNP-based sensing assay is more suitable for biological samples in comparison with intrinsically toxic, inorganic fluorescent quantum dots. In this chapter, we will describe the current biosensing applications in which FNPs are applied to detect biologically significant molecules (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Biosensing mechanism of intracellular/extracellular molecules using FNPs. 
5.2 Sensing of intracellular/extracellular molecules in disease detection

5.2.1 Glucose. 
Glucose, a biologically significant molecule involved in diabetes and some cancers, should be detected for medical purposes or prevention. Boronic acid strongly binds to cis-1,2- or 1,3-diols in saccharides in reversible covalent interactions, enabling saccharides to be used for sensing, including glucose sensing.153 By applying these chemical principles, researchers have developed FNPs-based glucose sensors in which the FNPs is surface functionalized with boronic acid. For example, Qu et al. recently reported a chemically modified graphene quantum dot in which 3-aminobenzeneboronic acid (APBA) is covalently conjugated to the carboxyl group in the graphene quantum dot using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC) chemistry. In this specialized graphene quantum dot, APBA acts as a glucose receptor.154 According to the cis-diol conjugation reaction, the graphene quantum dots constantly aggregate with each other, affecting surface states in a manner that allows for effective fluorescence quenching. The APBA-functionalized graphene quantum dots resulted in a good linear curve in the range of 0.1 to 10 mM, with a glucose detection limit of 5.0, showing high sensitivity. As previous studies tried to functionalize FNPs with boric acid using chemical conjugation, Shen et al. efficiently immobilized boronic acid to FNPs in which phenylboronic acid had been applied as the sole chemical source using a one-step hydrothermal route.155 Since amino, carboxyl, and thiol groups are generally found in biomolecules and unavoidably coordinate with metallic materials, inorganic-based quantum dots, such as CdSe/ZnS or CdTe/ZnTe, that were previously designed as glucose sensors have potential limitations.156–158 The boronic acid functionalized FNPs reacted efficiently with glucose, enabling a 0.009–0.9 mM range of glucose detection with a 1.5 μM detection limit.159


5.2.2 Thiols. 
Thiol, the chemical functional group of cysteine, homocysteine, and glutathione, plays a significant role in biological systems due to particular functionalities, such as metal binding affinity and disulfide bond formation.160 As such, thiolated biological structures are highly related to various diseases, such as vascular-related disease, neurodegenerative disease, and celiac disease.161–163 Thus, the effective sensing of thiols in biological environments is essential. There are several trials that have been attempted to develop carbon dot-based thiol sensors. For example, the FNPs produced in a one-pot synthesis using the solvothermal method in which citric acid and 2-cyanoguanidine were used as FNP sources were successfully applied as a glutathione detector.163 The glutathione-sensing FNPs adopted an intermediate ion, mercury(II), that is initially bound to the FNPs, resulting in fluorescence quenching (OFF). When glutathione is applied, the FNPs gradually regain fluorescence (ON) due to the strong binding affinity between glutathione and the mercury(II) ions. With this system, these specialized carbon dots can be used to recognize glutathione concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 48 mM. Similarly, Ran et al. developed a biothiol-detection method using graphene quantum dots as fluorescence markers.164 This sensing mechanism also used a metallic ion (i.e., silver) as the intermediate that initially coordinates with the graphene quantum dot through electrostatic interactions, leading to fluorescence quenching (OFF). Then, the fluorescence starts to turn-on with the addition of biothiols due to a robust binding affinity for silver ions. As a result, cysteine can be detected within a 0–100 nM range, with a limit of detection of 6.2 nM. Homocysteine and glutathione exhibited comparable results with a limit of detection of 4.5 and 4.1 nM respectively. There is also an analogous approach for glutathione detection in which a carbon dot works as an indicator and copper(II)/gold(III) ions mediate fluorescence quenching.165,166


5.2.3 Nitric oxide. 
NO is a radial gas molecule involved in various biological functions in the human body. For example, NO is used as a neurotransmitter and a signaling molecule in blood vessels. Accordingly, an imbalance in NO concentration in the human body results in health issues, such as diabetes, atherosclerosis, and neurodegenerative diseases.167–169 Simoes et al. confirmed the possibility of using FNPs as NO sensors.170 The FNPs were synthesized using citric acid and ethylenediamine as carbon sources, with 700 W microwave irradiation. The resulting carbon dot had high fluorescence that was quenched by NO. However, the selectivity towards NO did not allow for sufficient differentiation from other various gas molecules, such as H2O2, KO2, ONOO, HO, NO3, and NO2. Thus, they developed another carbon dot-based NO sensing assay in which the carbon dots were co-doped with nitrogen and sulfur,171 allowing for strong selectivity and sensitivity towards NO. However, the FNPs–NO interaction mechanism and the resulting fluorescence quenching had not been sufficiently elucidated, and there was no evidence supporting biomedical applications for these assays.
Bhattacharya and co-workers made a step towards progress with NO sensors using similar FNPs.172 Aminoguanidine and citric acid were used in a hydrothermal route resulting in both carboxyl and amine functionalized FNPs that can effectively detect citric oxide. According to the spectroscopic and chromatography results, two pathways were described that allowed for fluorescence quenching of FNPs by NO. One pathway is related to the reaction between NO and aminoguanidine, initially generating nitrosamine that then forms ionic diazonium. Secondly, alkyl amine groups in the FNPs react with NO, which similarly reacts with nitrosamine, and consequently, diazonium ions. The as-produced diazonium ions can be conjugated via a diazo-coupling reaction that results in FNP condensation, which is the origin of the FNP-based sensor's fluorescence quenching mechanism in NO detection. Moreover, using the FNP-based sensor, NO was successfully observed in a biological sample (i.e., macrophage cell).


5.2.4 Cholesterol. 
Cholesterol not only functions as a steroid precursor, but it also has roles associated with numerous metabolites and is a biologically essential component in humans. However, excessive levels of cholesterol result in severe cardiovascular diseases,173 and unusually low levels of cholesterol, known as hypocholesterolemia, are associated with cancer and cerebral hemorrhage. Thus, efficient sensing assays for cholesterol require development. To detect cholesterol, researchers have attempted to apply inorganic nanoparticles.174,175 However, it takes an excessively long time (∼30 min) for the detection and requires enzymes, such as choline, xanthine, and lactic acid. Recently, cost-effective, simple preparation methods for cholesterol detection have been developed using fluorescent carbon nanoparticles. Bui et al. reported a carbon dot/hemoglobin complex that enables cholesterol detection.174 The FNP system was simply made by a hydrothermal route using citric acid and ethylenediamine heated at 200 °C for 4 h. The fluorescence of the FNPs significantly decreased (by ∼80%) when 6 μM hemoglobin was applied to a 0.002 mg mL−1 carbon dot solution. This caused the formation of a stable complex between hemoglobin and the FNPs, achieving various non-covalent interactions, including π–π interactions, hydrophobic interactions, and metal coordination. Cholesterol is a lipid molecule that has the molecular potential to integrate with hemoglobin protein.176 In fact, the addition of cholesterol to the hemoglobin/FNPs complex restores the FNP platform's fluorescence. This carbon dot sensor can detect cholesterol in the 0–800 μM range with a limit of detection of 56 μM and a fluorescence recovery time of 5 min. Priyadarshinia et al. recently reported a hybrid sensing platform for cholesterol detection composed of FNPs and inorganic dots (i.e., gold nanoparticles).177 The FNPs were initially generated by microwave synthesis, using citric acid and polyethylene glycol as carbon sources. The addition of HAuCl4 with heating (a reduction process) resulted in a gold/carbon dot complex in which the fluorescence of the carbon dot was partially inhibited by photoinduced electron transfer from the carbon nanoparticles to the core composed of gold. Since the specialized gold/carbon dot complex is negatively charged, it can be stabilized into a solution state using intermolecular charge-based repulsions. Introducing cholesterol with its free hydroxyl group interferes with this repulsion resulting in aggregation followed by fluorescence quenching. The advantage of this hybrid system for cholesterol sensing is that it not only detects cholesterol through fluorescence but also through changes in surface plasmon resonance (i.e., dual mode sensing) as there are distinctive changes that only occur in the surface plasmon resonance peak for cholesterol, whereas the other analyte peaks remain the same.
To achieve high sensitivity and selectivity, functionalization is occasionally required. Sun et al. used chromium picolinate as a special agent with a high affinity for cholesterol in order to intercept the cholesterol–FNPs interaction.178 The nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (i.e., carbon dots) were first synthesized using citric acid (carbon source) and ethylenediamine (dopant) via a hydrothermal reaction followed by modification with cysteamine using EDC/NHS chemistry, introducing thiol groups to the FNP surface. After that, chromium picolinate was finally fixed onto the functionalized FNPs. Since chromium picolinate serves as a strong electron donor, weak fluorescence was observed from the FNPs due to the electron transfer from chromium picolinate to FNPs. Subsequently, contact between cholesterol and the chromium picolinate/FNPs complex results in fluorescence enhancement of the FNPs since the electron from the donating group (i.e., chromium picolinate) is more likely to be transferred to cholesterol than FNPs. As a result, a cholesterol detection range of 0–520 μM has been achieved, with a detection limit of 0.4 μM.

5.3 Sensing of bacteria
Detection of microorganisms, especially pathogenic bacteria, is important for the prevention or treatment of foodborne diseases. In previous research, bacteria have been detected using conventional methods, such as the polymerase chain reaction179 or the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.180 However, such conventional methods are cost-ineffective and have lots of time-consuming preparation steps limiting practical use. Several trials have been performed to overcome these issues with regard to bacterial detection. One of the most effective and useful sensing materials are FNPs as they are highly cost-effective, easy to prepare, and biocompatible. In this part of the review, we have divided bacterial sensing into two parts based on two types of bacterial detection.

5.3.1 Target-specific bacterial detection. 
Cheng-I et al. reported carbon quantum dots for bacterial sensing.181 They simply applied a one-step solvothermal method to produce FNPs using mannose and ammonium citrate as carbon sources. The FNPs were able to attach to E. coli since the FimH lectins on the surface of E. coli strains have an affinity for mannose182 that results in the quantitative sensing of bacteria with detection limits. Similarly, Wang et al. produced FNPs using a natural source (i.e., papaya peel) as a carbon source for E. coli sensing.183 Since the composition of papaya peel is basically polysaccharides composed of various monosaccharides, such as mannose and glucose, the FimH lectins located on the surface of E. coli bound strongly to the mannose-functionalized FNPs, allowing for fluorescence sensing.184 As in the research on FimH lectin's receptor, mannose was modified with FNPs (Man-FNPs) that can selectively bind to the FimH lectin unit in wild type E. coli at limit levels of 450 CFU mL−1 in lab samples.181 The combination of FNPs and aptamers, i.e., special nucleic acid sequences for specific and high-affinity interactions, was proposed as a novel fluorescence probe for sensitive quantitative detection of Salmonella typhimurium.185 Amino-modified aptamers were connected to the surface of FNPs modified with carboxyl to form FNPs–aptamer complexes (FNPs–apt). The prepared FNPs–apt system had a linear relationship between S. typhimurium concentration and fluorescence intensity in the range of 103–105 CFU mL−1, which was also validated in egg and tap water samples. Next, the glycopeptide antibiotic vancomycin (Van) was applied to the FNPs to perform bacterial detection based on ligand–receptor interactions. The Van-functionalized FNPs facilitated fluorescence quenching after binding to the terminal peptide D-Ala-D-Ala on the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria.186 This FNP system can detect S. aureus linearly within a 3.18 × 105–1.59 × 108 CFU mL−1 range, with a detection limit of 9.40 × 104 CFU mL−1.


5.3.2 Direct bacterial detection. 
To achieve high bacterial detection sensitivity using FNPs, functionalization or specialized platforms are usually necessary. Yang et al. reported carbon quantum dots that can detect bacteria efficiently.187 Since the FNPs have functional groups due to the presence of amine groups in the carbon dot precursor (3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)ethylamino]propyl-trimethoxysilane), the FNPs can be further functionalized with lauryl betaine (BS-12) using a simple carboxyl-amine coupling reaction (i.e., 1-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) chemistry). The hydrocarbon chain in BS-12 allows the FNP system to penetrate the cell membrane of bacteria. As functionalized FNPs have the ability to attach to Gram-positive bacteria, this allows for selective differentiation between different bacteria due to the diversity in cell wall structure and composition.188 Moreover, the quaternary ammonium group present in BS-12 is, in fact, a well-known antibacterial residue making the FNPs available for the inhibition of Gram-positive bacteria. Later on, Sagarika et al. used an interesting system for bacterial detection, a hydrogel–FNPs hybrid network.189 The fluidization of the hydrogel triggered by secretion of esterase or lipase from bacteria resulted in the aggregation of the FNPs, allowing for fluorescence quenching. Due to the enzymatic sensing system detecting bacteria using a transduction mechanism rather than the recognition of the bacterial cell, the hydrogel–FNPs sensor was highly sensitive, displaying a detection limit of approximately 105 cells per mL.
Different from the above-mentioned research, direct bacterial detection mainly uses the electrostatic attraction between the cationic sites and the outer membranes of bacterial cell walls, which are easily deprotonated to produce negative charges, suggesting that it may aid in the immobilization and detection of bacteria.190,191 The polycationic site in PEI nanoparticles was passivated with FNPs–pDA nanoparticles with PEI to obtain FNPs with a cationic FDA:PEI surface. The nanoparticles possessed bright, distinguishable fluorescence and interacted with both Gram-positive (S. aureus) and Gram-negative (E. coli) bacteria, resulting in fluorescence quenching upon bacterial detection in a solution phase assay. The retained catechol moiety in FDA:PEI nanoparticles resulted in the easy coating of various surfaces, including a propylene (PP) film, with a similar bacterial detection ability as observed in a solid-phase assay (Fig. 21).192
 Fig. 21  Bacterial detection with FDA:PEI. (a) Synthesis of FDA:PEI. (b) Bacterial detection performance in vivo. Adapted with permission192 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. 

6. Conclusion and perspectives
Carbon dots or fluorescent carbon nanoparticles (FNPs) have recently attracted much interest owing to properties such as simple and economic synthesis, chemical modifications, unique mechanochemical properties, and adaptable hybridization with other molecules for improved performance, which distinguished them from conventional fluorescent materials such as organic fluorophores or inorganic nanocrystals. Up to now, extensive research on FNP preparations and their applications in various areas has been performed, ranging from energy gathering and storage to bioanalytics and therapy. So far, many synthesis methods have been developed to improve the functionality of FNPs for various applications such as surface functionalization, doping, hybridization, and loading techniques for controlling the chemical, optical, and electrical properties of FNPs. For instance, FNPs can be produced from natural products, bioinspired materials and biobased polymers due to their availability and intrinsic properties. However, there are only a few options that can be used for functional groups in FNPs such as carboxyl group (–COOH), amine group (–NH2), thiol group (–SH), because there is an intrinsic limitation where only a limited number of oligomers can self-polymerize to create the desired product (i.e., nanosized fluorescent carbon-based particles). Researchers have attempted to overcome this problem by applying additional functional groups using various chemical conjugations. However, the additional cost from chemical intermediates (such as EDC or NHS) that are needed for conjugation chemistry and the complicated experimental procedures involved result in less interest in the practical use of FNPs. Although FNP studies have been rapidly emerging furthering their biocompatibility, cost-effective methods of synthesis, and greatly adjustable functionality, resulting in high sensitivity for sensing applications, there are some limitations to overcome. For example, unlike inorganic quantum dots with uniform molecular structures, the molecular structures of FNPs still remain unclear and are not accurately regulated as the molecular composition varies depending upon the carbon source used, and the condensation reaction is hard to predict. This has resulted in a problem, where randomly synthesized FNPs occasionally exhibit QYs that are too low, especially for FNPs derived from natural polysaccharide derivatives (mostly having a QY of less than 1%), inhibiting the practical use of recyclable natural products. There have been only a few attempts at explaining FNP formation mechanisms, even if it is directly related to the determination of FNPs’ optical performance (i.e., the QY), which is the most significant and unique characteristic of FNPs. Thus, detailed demonstrations of the chemical mechanisms involved in FNP formation should be further studied in the near future.
In this review, we first reviewed the recent exciting developments in FNP-based nanomedicine with great elaboration. Even though the FNPs’ photoluminescence mechanisms remain to be fully elucidated, applications in cellular imaging have become one of the many themes in FNP research since 2004 and efforts have more recently moved towards the development of theranostic agents. In sensing applications, the functionalization of FNPs could greatly improve and expand upon specific and selective sensing. For example, the rich chemical groups on FNP surfaces (NH2, COOH, OH) could be developed to bind a variety of sensory materials using chemical binding mechanisms with recognition elements. Currently, FNPs applied to sensing applications employ the fluorescence on/off, photoluminescence spectral shift and ratiometric phenomenon. In addition to theranostics, nanovesicles are very often decorated with a specific ligand. However, research indicates that only ∼5% of the injected dose can approach a tumor site and the remaining dose will produce side effects in other organs because of the initial release. In this context, the design of nanocarrier-based FNPs sensitive to exogenous or endogenous stimuli may represent an attractive alternative to biosensor and therapy of targeted drug delivery. Presently, the broad range of applicable materials allow for stimuli responsivity that triggers some agent to recognize disease and therapy by drug release at the right place and time, where the design of stimuli-responsive FNP systems improves drug delivery systems guided by bioimaging. As the cancer cell condition is relatively different from normal cells, FNPs can be developed by considering their response to redox, pH, and enzymes, and external stimuli, including temperature, light, and magnetic fields. Although in vivo proof-of-concept studies have been reported, none of them has been investigated at a clinical level. However, the ability of functionalized FNP systems to respond to internal and external variations means that intracellular detection is straightforward to achieve, and issues related to externally applied stimuli will eventually be expanded due to positive results.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This review was supported by grants (No. 10062079 and R0005237) from the Ministry of Trade, Industry, & Energy (MOTIE), National Science Foundation of South Korea convergence R&D over traditional culture and current technology (NRF-2016M3C1B5906485), and the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2017R1A2B2002365).
References
W. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Sun, Q. Zhang, P. Wei, X. Mu, H. Zhou, C. Li, S. Ma, D. He, P. Ji, W. Zhu, X. Nie, X. Su, X. Tang, B. Shen, X. Dong, J. Yang, Y. Liu and J. Shi, Nature, 2017, 549, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Yeh, B. Creran and V. M. Rotello, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1871–1880 RSC .
P. K. Jain, K. S. Lee, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7238–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209–217 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Link and M. A. ElSayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4212–4217 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sriramulu, S. P. Turaga, A. A. Bettiol and S. Valiyaveettil, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7842 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, L. F. Zheng, C. Peng, R. Guo, M. W. Shen, X. Y. Shi and G. X. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 2979–2988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qian, X. Huang, B. Kang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Biomed. Opt., 2010, 15, 058002 Search PubMed .
E. V. Zagaynova, M. V. Shirmanova, M. Y. Kirillin, B. N. Khlebtsov, A. G. Orlova, I. V. Balalaeva, M. A. Sirotkina, M. L. Bugrova, P. D. Agrba and V. A. Kamensky, Phys. Med. Biol., 2008, 53, 4995–5009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, Y. Yang, Y. Dong, L. Xu, Z. Yang and D. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5774–5776 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Guo, Y. Huang, Q. Jiang, Y. Sun, L. Deng, Z. Liang, Q. Du, J. Xing, Y. Zhao, P. C. Wang, A. Dong and X.-J. Liang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5505–5511 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Park and K. Hamad-Schifferli, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2555–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. Mukherjee, R. Bhattacharya, N. Bone, Y. K. Lee, C. R. Patra, S. Wang, L. Lu, C. Secreto, P. C. Banerjee, M. J. Yaszemski, N. E. Kay and D. Mukhopadhyay, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2007, 5, 4 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) W. Eck, G. Craig, A. Sigdel, G. Ritter, L. J. Old, L. Tang, M. F. Brennan, P. J. Allen and M. D. Mason, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2263–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) I. H. El-Sayed, X. H. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 829–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) L. Calzolai, F. Franchini, D. Gilliland and F. Rossi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3101–3105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Lee, H. Koo, I. C. Sun, J. H. Ryu, K. Kim and I. C. Kwon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2656–2672 RSC .
L. C. J. Clark and C. Lyons, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1962, 102, 29–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Turner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3184–3196 RSC .
R. Liu, D. Wu, S. Liu, K. Koynov, W. Knoll and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4598–4601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Genc, M. O. Alas, E. Harputlu, S. Repp, N. Kremer, M. Castellano, S. G. Colak, K. Ocakoglu and E. Erdem, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11222 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Jeong, G. Lee, I. In and S. Y. Park, Luminescence, 2016, 31, 897–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Sharker, S. M. Kim, J. E. Lee, J. H. Jeong, I. In, K. D. Lee, H. Lee and S. Y. Park, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5468–5475 RSC .
W. Lu, X. Qin, S. Liu, G. Chang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5351–5357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bagheri, H. Ehtesabi, M. Rahmandoust, M. M. Ahadian, Z. Hallaji, F. Eskandari and E. Jokar, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11013 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, I. S. Cole, D. Zhao and Q. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7449–7458 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. H. Kim, S. M. Sharker, H. Lee, I. In, K. D. Lee and S. Y. Park, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 61482 RSC ; 
  (b) E. B. Kang, J. E. Lee, Z. A. I. Mazrad, I. In, J. H. Jeong and S. Y. Park, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2512–2523 RSC .

  (a) Y. H. Yuan, Z. X. Liu, R. S. Li, H. Y. Zou, M. Lin, H. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6770–6776 RSC ; 
  (b) E. B. Kang, C. A. Choi, Z. A. I. Mazrad, S. H. Kim, I. In and S. Y. Park, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 13508–13517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wu, Z. X. Liu and Y. H. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 3794–3809 RSC .
S. M. Sharker, S. M. Kim, S. H. Kim, I. In, H. Lee and S. Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5833–5841 RSC .
M. Zheng, S. Ruan, S. Liu, T. Sun, D. Qu, H. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Gao, X. Jing and Z. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 24, 11455–11461 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Kim, S. M. Sharker, I. In and S. Y. Park, Carbon, 2016, 103, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kim, E. B. Kang, S. H. Kim, S. M. Sharker, B. Y. Kong, I. In, K. D. Lee and S. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29827–29834 CAS .
J. Zhou, P. Lin, J. Ma, X. Shan, H. Feng, C. Chen, J. Chen and Z. Qian, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9625–9628 RSC .
H. Choi, S. J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J. W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J. R. Jeong, I. W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B. S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, J. Wang, J. Ren, W. Li and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5675–5677 RSC .
S. Chen, X. Hai, X. W. Chen and J. H. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 6689–6694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12558–12564 RSC .
R. Liu, J. Liu, W. Kong, H. Huang, X. Han, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 10920–10929 RSC .

  (a) P. Luo, C. Li and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7360–7366 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Sarkar, K. Das, M. Ghosh and P. K. Das, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65913 RSC .
Y. Dai, H. Long, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Gu, W. Jiang, Y. Wang, C. Li, T. H. Zeng, Y. Sun and J. Zeng, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 33, 509–516 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, S. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Lu, A. Wu, C. Cai and H. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5450–5453 CrossRef .

  (a) H. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Wang, F. Yang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118–5120 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Choi, N. Thongsai, A. Chae, S. Jo, E. B. Kang, P. Paoprasert, S. Y. Park and I. In, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 47, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, E. Park, H. A. Lee, C. Sugnaux, M. Shin, C. J. Jeong, J. Lee, P. B. Messersmith, S. Y. Park and H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16596–16601 RSC .
T. Shao, G. Wang, X. An, S. Zhuo, Y. Xia and C. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 47977–47981 RSC .
S. Sahu, B. Behera, T. K. Maiti and S. Mohapatra, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8835–8837 RSC .

  (a) B. De and N. Karak, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8286–8290 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Zhou, Z. Sheng, H. Han, M. Zou and C. Li, Mater. Lett., 2012, 66, 222–224 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Hsu, Z. Y. Shih, C. H. Lee and H. T. Chang, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 917–920 RSC .
S. Y. Park, H. U. Lee, E. S. Park, S. C. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Jeong, C. H. Kim, Y. C. Lee, Y. S. Huh and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3365–3370 CAS .
C. J. Jeong, A. K. Roy, S. H. Kim, J. E. Lee, J. H. Jeong, I. In and S. Y. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15196–15202 RSC .
Z. A. I. Mazrad, E. B. Kang, I. In and S. Y. Park, Luminescence, 2018, 33, 40–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. De and N. Karak, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8286–8290 RSC .
V. Gude, A. Das, T. Chatterjee and P. K. Mandal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 28274–28280 RSC .
W. Lu, X. Qin, S. Liu, G. Chang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. A. Youbi and X. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5351–5357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Alam, B. Y. Park, Z. K. Ghouri, M. Park and H. Y. Kim, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3791–3797 RSC .
K. Lee, E. Prajatelistia, D. S. Hwang and H. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6478–6481 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Waite, J. Exp. Biol., 2017, 220, 517–530 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Ju, Y. Lee, S. Lee, S. B. Park and J. K. Lee, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 625–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Ho and S. J. Ding, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2013, 24, 2381–2390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, W. Bing, S. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3775–3784 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, H. Fan, Y. Liu, Z. Shi and Z. Jin, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5497–5505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, K. Parvez, F. Hinkel, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5535–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, T. Schneider, M. Zeigler, J. Yu, P. G. Schiro, D. R. Burnham, J. D. McNeill and D. T. Chiu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15410–15417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Wu, S. Y. Kuo, Y. C. Huang, C. P. Chen and Y. H. Chan, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4831–4839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. I. Mazrad, E. B. Kang, N. Nuraeni, I. In, K. D. Lee and S. Y. Park, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 61482–61491 RSC .
Z. A. I. Mazrad, C. A. Choi, S. H. Kim, G. Lee, S. Lee, I. In, K. D. Lee and S. Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7099–7108 RSC .
K. Khoerunnisa, E. B. Kang, Z. A. I. Mazrad, G. Lee, I. In and S. Y. Park, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 71, 1064–1071 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kanamala, W. R. Wilson, M. Yang, B. D. Palmer and Z. Wu, Biomaterials, 2016, 85, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, F. Yang, F. Xiong and N. Gu, Theranostics, 2016, 9, 1306 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Su, Y. Hu, Y. Du, X. Huang, J. He, J. You, H. Yuan and F. Hu, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2015, 12, 1193–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Tian, Y. Wang and W. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7156–7160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, R. Sun, J. Cheng, J. Liu, F. Gou, H. Xiang and X. Zhou, J. Chem. Educ., 2016, 93, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giménez, C. D. L. Torre, M. Gorbe, E. Aznar, F. Sancenón, J. R. Murguía, R. M. Máñez, M. D. Marcos and P. Amorós, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 3753–3762 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiao, C. Liu, X. Li, J. Liu, D. Di, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhao and S. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 483, 343–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Han, Y. Zhang, Y. Q. Chang, X. W. Chen, R. H. He, Y. Shu and J. H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 355102 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Devi, Cancer Gene Ther., 2006, 9, 819–829 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Marsden, N. Engl. J. Med., 2006, 355, 953–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Rychahou, L. N. Jackson, B. J. Farrow and B. M. Evers, Surgery, 2006, 140, 719–725 CrossRef PubMed .
L. He and G. J. Hannon, Nat. Rev. Genet., 2004, 5, 522–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Wu, H. C. Wu, C. H. Kuan, C. J. Lin, L. W. Wang, C. W. Chang and T. W. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Alanazi, G. A. E. Mostafa and A. A. Al-Badr, Profiles Drug Subst., Excipients, Relat. Methodol., 2015, 40, 43–158 Search PubMed .
K. Das, S. Sarkar and P. K. Das, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25691–25701 CAS .
B. Daly, J. Ling and A. P. D. Silva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4203–4211 RSC .
B. Shi, Y. Su, Z. Zhang, R. Liu, M. Huang and S. Zhao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 82, 233–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, P. Yuan, N. Zhou, Y. Su, M. Shao and C. Chi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9347–9356 RSC .
J. N. Cambre and B. S. Sumerlin, Polymer, 2011, 52, 4631–4643 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Trippier and C. McGuigan, Med. Chem. Commun., 2010, 1, 183–198 RSC .

          W. Yang, X. Gao and B. Wang, Boronic Acids: Preparation and Applications in Organic Synthesis and Medicine,  2005, pp. 481–512 Search PubMed .
J. Yan, G. Springsteen, S. Deeter and B. Wang, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 11205–11209 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Wiskur, J. J. Lavigne, H. A. Haddou, V. Lynch, Y. H. Chiu, J. W. Canary and R. V. Anslyn, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Sun, J. Yi, J. Fu, J. Di, A. D. C. Alonso and S. Zhou, Biomaterials, 2015, 53, 117–126 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zitzmann, V. Ehemann and M. Schwab, Cancer Res., 2002, 62, 5139–5143 CAS .
P. M. Mertz, S. C. Davis, L. Franzen, F. D. Uchima, M. P. Pickett, M. D. Pierschbacher and J. W. Polarek, J. Burn Care Rehabil., 1996, 17, 199–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Arap, R. Pasqualini and E. Ruoslahti, Science, 1998, 279, 377–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Feng, X. Ai, H. Ong and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18732–18740 CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Chen, X. Zhang, J. J. Gooding and Y. Zhou, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z. Li, Z. Liu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 6396–6403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Son, H. Y. Kim, J. H. Ryu, C. W. Chu, D. H. Kang, S. B. Park and Y. I. Jeong, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 16057–16068 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Vasi, M. I. Popa, M. Butnaru, G. Dodi and L. Verestiuc, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 38, 177–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goodison, V. Urquidi and D. Tarin, J. Clin. Pathol., 1999, 52, 189–196 CAS .
A. Aruffo, I. Stamenkovic, M. Melnick, C. B. Underhill and B. Seed, Cell, 1990, 61, 1303–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Lokeshwar and D. Rubinowicz, Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis., 1999, 2, S21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tripodo, A. Trapani, M. L. Torre, G. Giammona, G. Trapani and D. Mandracchia, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2015, 400–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Hautmann, V. B. Lokeshwar, G. L. Schroeder, F. Civantos, R. C. Duncan, R. Gnann, M. G. Friedrich and M. S. Soloway, J. Urol., 2001, 165, 2068–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Roy, S. Hohng and T. Ha, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 507–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. Resonator, A. Konrad, M. Metzger, A. M. Kern, M. Brecht and A. J. Meixner, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10204–10209 RSC .
N. Gao, W. Yang, H. Nie, Y. Gong, J. Jing, L. Gao and X. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 96, 300–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Zhao, B. He, X. Shi, D. Di, Q. Zhang and S. Wang, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2017, 117, 105–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, J. Zhou, Z. Qian, Y. Ma, Y. Huanga and H. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1971–1979 RSC .
Z. Liu, X. Chen, X. Zhang, J. J. Gooding and Y. Zhou, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Iozumi, G. E. Hoganson, R. Pennella, M. A. Everett and B. B. Fuller, J. Invest. Dermatol., 1993, 100, 806–811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Chang, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2009, 10, 2440–2475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Xu, L. Feng, Y. Ji, L. Tao, S. Lia and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5581–5584 RSC .
Q. Li, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. L. Liu, K. Koynov, D. Q. Wu, A. Best, R. Kumar, A. Bonoiu and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12062–12068 CAS .
E. B. Kang, I. In, K. D. Lee and S. Y. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 55, 224–233 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Heskins and J. E. Guillet, J. Macromol. Sci., Chem., 1968, 2, 1441–1455 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Shouei, K. Kubota and I. Ando, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 3311–3313 CrossRef .

  (a) G. L. Seung, A. P. Tod, K. Wonsang, F. B. Giuseppe, A. G. William and S. J. Seung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15974–15985 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. Bathfield, J. Reboul, T. Cacciaguerra, P. L. Desmazes and C. Gerardin, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3374–3384 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arijit, P. Abhijit, O. S. Suma and K. S. Kalyan, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2015, 10, 99–107 CrossRef .
J. Y. Yin, H. J. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Chen and Y. Yao, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 1033–1037 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, F. Ke, A. Mararenko, Z. Wei, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7443–7452 RSC .
F. Dong, T. Zheng, R. Zhu, S. Wang and Y. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7681–7688 RSC .
J. Yang, J. Lee, J. Kang, S. J. Oh, H. J. Ko, J. H. Son, K. Lee, J. S. Suh, Y. M. Huh and S. Haam, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4339–4342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Chang, P. Y. Liao, H. S. Sheu, Y. J. Tseng, F. Y. Cheng and C. S. Yeh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3309–3314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Hobbs, A. Higgs and S. Moncada, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 1999, 39, 191–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. O. McCarthy, J. A. Coulter, T. Robson and D. G. Hirst, J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 2008, 60, 999–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Nisoli, E. Clementi, C. Paolucci, V. Cozzi, C. Tonello, C. Sciorati, R. Bracale, A. Valerio, M. Francolini and S. Moncada, Science, 2003, 299, 896–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, F. Zeng, H. Wu, C. Hu, C. Yu and S. Wu, Small, 2014, 10, 3750–3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Henderson and T. J. Dougherty, Photochem. Photobiol., 1992, 55, 145–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Lovell, T. W. B. Liu, J. Chen and G. Zheng, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2839–2857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, J. Lin, X. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, M. He, K. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Li, G. Shen, D. Cui and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5104–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, S. Kim, M. H. Choi, S. R. Ryoo, J. Park, D. H. Min and B. S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5781–5789 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. J. G. J. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Castano, P. Mroz and M. R. Hamblin, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2006, 6, 535–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lim, A. Barhoumi, R. G. Wylie, G. Reznor, R. S. Langer and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Sharker, J. E. Lee, S. H. Kim, J. H. Jeong, I. In, H. Lee and S. Y. Park, Biomaterials, 2015, 61, 229–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, J. E. Lee, S. M. Sharker, J. H. Jeong, I. In and S. Y. Park, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Kang, J. E. Lee, J. H. Jeong, G. Lee1, I. In and S. Y. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 33, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, M. Luderer, X. Yang, C. Swain, H. Zhang, K. Nelson, A. J. Stacy, B. Shen, G. M. Lanza and D. Pan, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 677–686 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lee, W. Kwon, S. Beack, D. Lee, Y. Park, H. Kim, S. K. Hahn, S. W. Rhee and C. Kim, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 2196–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, A. Mararenko, G. Cao, Z. Gai, K. Hong, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15309–15317 CAS .
H. Wang, G. Cao, Z. Gai, K. Hong, P. Banerjeea and S. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7885–7895 RSC .
Y. Xu, X. H. Jia, X. B. Yin, X. W. He and Y. K. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 12122–12129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li and H. Zeng, Biotribology, 2016, 5, 44–51 CrossRef .
J. H. Waite, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 8–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Harrington, A. Masic, N. H. Andersen, J. H. Waite and P. Fratzl1, Science, 2010, 328, 216–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zenga, D. Soo Hwangc, J. N. Israelachvilib and J. H. Waited, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12850–12853 CrossRef PubMed .
N. H. Andersen, T. E. Mates, M. S. Toprak, G. D. Stucky, F. W. Zok and J. H. Waite, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3323–3326 CrossRef PubMed .
N. H. Andersena, M. J. Harringtonb, H. Birkedalc, B. P. Leed, P. B. Messersmithd, K. Y. C. Leea and J. H. Waitee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 2651–2655 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Abbaspour, R. Hurrell and R. Kelishadi, J. Res. Med. Sci., 2014, 19, 164–174 Search PubMed .
K. Qu, J. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 7243–7249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, P. Yu, Y. R. Toh, X. Hao and J. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 173–178 CrossRef .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Darby, Nature, 1933, 131, 839–840 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Z. Li, X. X. Chen, J. S. Fossey, T. D. James and Y. B. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8032–8048 RSC .
Z. Qu, X. Zhou, L. Gu, R. Lan, D. Sun, D. Yua and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9830–98323 RSC .
P. Shen and Y. Xia, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 5323–5329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Cordes, S. Gamsey and B. Singaram, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3829–3832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman, L. Bahshi, T. Finder, R. Gilla and I. Willner, Chem. Commun., 2009, 764–766 RSC .
W. Wu, T. Zhou, A. Berliner, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6554–6558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Nair and K. Sreenivasan, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 2082–2087 RSC .
L. B. Poole, Free Radicals Biol. Med., 2015, 80, 148–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Stamler and A. Slivka, Nutr. Rev., 1996, 54, 1–30 CAS .
G. J. McBean, M. Aslan, H. R. Griffiths and R. C. Torrão, Redox Biol., 2015, 5, 186–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaplan, I. Ates, M. Yuksel, Y. O. Ozderin, M. Alisik, O. Erel and E. Kayacetin, World J. Gastrointest. Pharmacol. Ther., 2017, 8, 120–126 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ran, H. Sun, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1079–1081 RSC .
Q. Wang, X. Liu, L. Zhanga and Y. Lv, Analyst, 2012, 137, 5392–5397 RSC .
J. Gu, D. Hu, W. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Meng, X. Jia and K. Xi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 27–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Pieper, Hypertension, 1998, 31, 1047–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Anderson, Heart Failure Rev., 2003, 8, 71–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Schulz, R. T. Matthews and M. F. Beal, Curr. Opin. Neurol., 1995, 8, 480–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. F. C. Simões, J. M. M. Leitão and J. C. G. Esteves da Silva, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 1043–1049 CrossRef .
E. F. C. Simões, J. M. M. Leitão and J. C. G. E. D. Silva, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 960, 117–122 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bhattacharya, R. Sarkar, B. Chakraborty, A. Porgador and R. Jelinek, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 1215–1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ganji, V. S. Kamanna and M. L. Kashap, J. Nutr. Biochem., 2003, 14, 298–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Bui and S. Y. Park, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4245–4253 RSC .
X. Zhang, M. Wei, B. Lv, Y. Liu and W. Wei, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35001–35007 RSC .
V. Ranade, Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol., Ther. Toxicol., 1993, 31, 313–321 CAS .
E. Priyadarshini and K. Rawat, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5425–5432 RSC .
L. Sun, S. Li, W. Ding, Y. Yao, X. Yang and C. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 9006–9014 RSC .
Y. Yamamoto, Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol., 2002, 9, 508–514 CAS .
J. W. Law, N. S. Mutalib, K. G. Chan and L. H. Lee, Front. Microbiol., 2015, 5, 770 Search PubMed .
C. Weng, H. T. Chang, C. H. Lin, Y. W. Shen, B. Unnikrishnan, Y. J. Li and C. C. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tchesnokova, P. Aprikian, D. Kisiela, S. Gowey, N. Korotkova, W. Thomas and E. Sokurenko, Infect. Immun., 2011, 79, 3895–3904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Guo, T. Yang, M. Chen and J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 68–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. J. Lai, S. G. Harroun, S. Y. Chen, B. Unnikrishnan, Y. J. Li and C. C. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 228, 465–470 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Xi, T. Zhang and Y. Jiang, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 1701–1706 RSC .
D. Zhong, Y. Zhuo, Y. Feng and X. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 546–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Meziani, X. Dong, L. Zhu, L. P. Jones, G. E. LeCroy, F. Yang, S. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Yang, R. A. Tripp and Y. P. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10761–10766 CAS .
P. F. Juby, T. W. Hudyma and M. Brown, J. Med. Chem., 1968, 11, 111–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharya, S. Nandia and R. Jelinek, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 588–594 RSC .
A. Bandyopadhyay, K. A. McCarthy, M. A. Kelly and J. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6565 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jann, K. Reske and K. Jann, Eur. J. Biochem., 1975, 60, 239–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. I. Mazrad, C. A. Choi, Y. M. Kwon, I. In, K. D. Lee and S. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33317–33326 CAS .

Footnote† Both authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Zihnil Adha Islamy Mazrad
	Zihnil Adha Islamy Mazrad is currently a post-Master student in Prof. Sung Young Park's group, Functional Biomaterial Lab, Department of Chemistry and Biological Engineering at Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. She received her BSc in 2014 from the Department of Chemistry, Institut Teknologi Bandung (ITB), Indonesia, and her MSc in 2017 from KNUT. Currently, her research is focused on the synthesis and application of functionalized fluorescent carbon nanomaterials for selective sensing and killing of bacteria via photothermal therapy.

Kyueui Lee
	Dr Kyueui Lee joined Prof. Haeshin Lee's group in 2012, studying as a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Chemistry, KAIST. He received his PhD degree in Chemistry from KAIST in 2017. Currently, he has been researching in Prof. Phillip B. Messersmith's group as a visiting scholar in the Department of Materials Sciences & Engineering and Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, since 2016. His research interest is biologically inspired carbon nanomaterials.

Ari Chae
	Ari Chae is currently a Master's candidate in the Department of IT Convergence (BK21 PLUS), Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. She received her BS in 2016 from Polymer Science & Engineering, KNUT and pursued research in Prof. Insik In's group, Functional Nanomaterial Lab. Her recent research topic is the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide with functional polymer composites through noncovalent interactions, fluorescent water soluble carbon quantum dots, photocatalysis with dopamine-derivatized titanium dioxide N-doped carbon core shell nanoparticles, and boron nitride surface functionalization using surfactant chemistry.

Insik In
	Dr Insik In is a Professor in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering and the Department of IT Convergence (BK21 PLUS), Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. Dr In received his PhD in Chemistry from Korea Advanced Science and Technology, South Korea, in 2003. Before joining KNUT, he was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow in the University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA. His group research activities include the synthesis and performance optimization of functional nanomaterials which can be exploited for future IT and BT applications. Dr In's research group is working on the development of functional nanomaterials with various compositions and morphologies that include soluble graphene/polymer assembly, fluorescent carbon quantum dots, and stable black phosphorus/perovskite quantum dots.

Haeshin Lee
	Dr Haeshin Lee started his Professor carrier in 2009 at the Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea. Dr Lee received his PhD degree from Biomedical Engineering Department, Northwestern University, in 2007. Before joining KAIST, Dr Lee was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow in the department of Chemical Engineering, Koch Institute for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Dr Haeshin Lee invented the first material-independent surface chemistry named ‘polydopamine’ in 2007, and this study has been cited more than 3800 times as of November 2017. Also, more than 2500 times annual citations of his bio-adhesive studies have demonstrated that his research is widely recognized. His group research activities are focused on mussel-inspired technology which can be exploited for surface modification, superhydrophobic surface engineering, biomedical substrates, catechol-functionalized hydrogels, and biologically inspired carbon nanomaterials.

Sung Young Park
	Dr Sung Young Park is a Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biological Engineering and the Department of IT Convergence (BK21 PLUS), Korea National University of Transportation (KNUT), South Korea. Dr Park received his PhD from the Department of Material Chemistry in Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST) in 2005. Before joining KNUT, he was appointed to several positions including postdoctoral fellow in the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). His group research activities include the synthesis of multifunctional fluorescent carbon nanomaterials which can be applied in future medical applications including drug delivery systems, biosensors and antifouling. Dr Park's research group is working at diagnostic nanomedicine, multifunctional hybrid nanomaterials, theranostic nanoparticle and surface chemistry based new strategies for the imaging and therapy of cancer cells, sensing of different biological molecules and bacterial detection.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the sources, synthesis methods and applications of fluorescent carbon nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles with various unique properties.	 

 	Fig. 3  FNPs’ structural characterization. (a) XRD and (b) Raman spectra (adapted from ref. 16 with Copyright © 1999–2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., all rights reserved). (c) TEM image and (d) HRTEM image (adapted from ref. 24 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society), with scale bars as indicated.	 

 	Fig. 4  FNPs from natural resources and their properties. Adapted from ref. 22 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Water-resistance and sticky properties in mussel foot proteins: DOPA (3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) and Lys (lysine). (b) Mussel-inspired polydopamine nanoparticle formation followed by carbonization resulting in multifunctional FNPs (carbon dots).	 

 	Fig. 6  A variety of polymer based FNPs with unique features.	 

 	Fig. 7  Internal environment-triggered drug release from FNP nanocarriers in cancer cells.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of preparation of siRNA nanocarriers based on functionalized FNPs. Adapted with permission78 with Copyright © 2016, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Schematic representation of the N-FNP synthesis process and the possible pH-responsive luminescence mechanism. (c) Laser confocal fluorescence images of T24 cells after incubation with N-FNPs (0.2 mg mL−1) and immobilization at pH 5.0 (i), 7.0 (ii), and 9.0 (iii). Adapted with permission from ref. 82 with Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  FNP-based PTX delivery. (a) Schematic representation of FNP-based PTX delivery, internally controlled through the acidic microenvironment response and externally controlled via photothermal NIR regulation. (b) In vitro release profile of HA–FNPs–β-CD–PTX in PBS buffer at pH 7.4, 6.0, and 5.0 before and (c) after NIR irradiation. Adapted with permission26 with Copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Multifunctional porous fluorescent carbon nanoparticles (P-FNPs-NCs). (b) Laser scanning confocal microscopy images of DU145 human prostate cancer cells incubated with drug-free P-FNPs-NCs at a final concentration of 0.5 μg mL−1 for 12 h at 37 °C obtained under different λex of (i) 405 nm; (ii) 488 nm; (iii) 561 nm. Adapted with permission89 with Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation describing the preparation of FNP(CD)-based drug nanocarriers with pH-tumor triggered targeting properties and the drug delivery process. (b) Confocal images of (i and ii) MDA-MB-231 and (iii and iv) MCF-7 cells upon treatment with FNPs–RGD–Pt(IV)–PEG at pH (i and iii) 7.4 and (ii and iv) 6.8 at 37 °C under excitation wavelengths of 405, 488, and 543 nm. Adapted with permission93 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The universal detection strategy for glycosidase activity based on β-cyclodextrin (β-CD)-modified FNPs (carbon quantum dots), taking β-Gal as an example. (b) Fluorescence images of OVCAR3 cells in different conditions: (i) OVCAR3 cells only, (ii) treated OVCAR3 cells, (iii) treated OVCAR3 cells followed by incubation with NPGal (200.0 μM) for 30 min, and (iv) treated OVCAR3 cells first incubated with D-galactal (400.0 μM) for 30 min and then incubated with NPGal (200.0 μM) for 30 min. Scale bar, 20 μm. Adapted with permission107 with Copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 

 	Fig. 14  Preparation of FNP-based MSN nanocarriers with the GSH/HAase-tumor triggered targeting property. Adapted with permission from ref. 108 with Copyright © 1999–2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of external stimuli-responsive FNP nanocarriers.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Preparation of multistimuli-responsive FNPs (carbon dots). (b) Typical excitation and emission spectra of FNPs at room temperature (26 °C) and 45 °C. Adapted with permission117 with Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Scheme of Illustration for the effect of the FNPs-based mitochondria-targeting and NO-releasing nanosystem (FNPs-TPP-SNO) on cancer cell. (b) NO release profile for the FNPs-TPP-SNO incubated in PBS buffered water at 37 °C for varied time periods with or without (in the dark) light irradiation from a 15 W white LED. (c) Confocal microscopic images for HeLa cells stained with DAF-2 (a NO imaging dye) upon being treated with FNPs-TPP-SNO or FNPs-TPP under white light irradiation. The green fluorescence indicates the intracellular release of NO. Adapted with permission125 with Copyright © 1999–2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Endocytosis mechanism in the NIR-responsive FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD–PTX system. (b) The temperature elevation curve for FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD and (c) FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD–PTX as a function of NIR irradiation time (808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2), pH 5.0–7.4. (d) In vitro release profiles of FNPs–pDA@HA–TPP–CD–PTX in PBS at pH 7.4, 6.0, and 5.0, without NIR irradiation and (e) with NIR irradiation (5 min, 808 nm, 2 W cm−2). Adapted with permission135 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) One-pot synthesis of Gd–FNPs (CQDs) as a dual-modal imaging probe for magnetic stimuli-responsive FNPs. (b) Optical properties of hybrid FNPs. (c) In vivo MR images of mice after treatment with hybrid FNPs. Adapted with permission141 from Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Biosensing mechanism of intracellular/extracellular molecules using FNPs.	 

 	Fig. 21  Bacterial detection with FDA:PEI. (a) Synthesis of FDA:PEI. (b) Bacterial detection performance in vivo. Adapted with permission192 with Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Both authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
