Matching emerging formic acid synthesis processes with application requirements   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC04791D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC04791D
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 2287-2295Matching emerging formic acid synthesis processes with application requirements†

        
          
            Barbara 
            Thijs
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Rongé
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Johan A. 
            Martens
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis: Characterization and Application Team (COK-KAT), KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200F, Box 2461, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium. E-mail: johan.martens@kuleuven.be
Received 
      22nd December 2021
    , Accepted 21st February 2022First published on 28th February 2022AbstractFormic acid is gaining interest as a carbon capture and utilization (CCU) product produced electrochemically from CO2, water and renewable energy. A common premiss is that concentrated formic acid is the desired product. This originates from the current situation with centralized large-scale industrial production of a concentrated product for reasons of economizing on distribution costs. This premiss is shaping research on green formic acid synthesis, attempting to eliminate water as much as possible from the electrolysis product. Water elimination adds substantially to the overall production cost. Interestingly, the application field of formic acid is shifting to more diluted feedstock. Emerging applications can handle diluted formic acid, and even require dilution. Examples are the use of formic acid as an energy vector, hydrogen gas carrier, syngas storage medium and carbon source for bioprocesses. This review provides an overview of formic acid concentration requirements in emerging applications. The matching of the product specifications from the electrochemical formic acid production process with the requirements of emerging applications is documented.Barbara ThijsBarbara Thijs obtained her master's degree in Bioscience Engineering from KU Leuven in 2018. She is now a PhD student at COK-KAT, KU Leuven. Her research focusses on the electrocatalytic production of formic acid as a renewable building block for chemical processes.Jan RongéJan Rongé is a post-doctoral researcher at COK-KAT, KU Leuven. He obtained his PhD at KU Leuven in 2016, on the topic of photoelectrochemical water splitting cells. His research interests span the fields of electrocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, water-from-air technologies, agrivoltaics and hydrogen production from airborne water vapor. He is a coordinator of the Solhyd project, developing solar hydrogen panel technology.Johan A. MartensJohan A. Martens is full professor at KU Leuven, heading a research team of 40 people. He is an expert in engineering of catalysts and catalytic processes. He translates fundamental concepts of catalysis into applications in a variety of fields, and especially environmental protection, air pollution control, solar hydrogen, carbon capture and utilisation, green ammonia, and water production. He has a vast international network and many of his publication are the result of national and international collaboration.
Introduction
Converting CO2 into value-added green chemicals is one of the sustainable options to close the carbon cycle. Electrolysers powered with renewable electricity can be used to produce green carbon monoxide, methanol, methane and formic acid. Among these options formic acid is an attractive case since the green production of it is likely to become economically competitive with conventional production processes.1 Recent publications demonstrate impressive progress on the electrochemical production of formic acid, reaching faradaic efficiencies of over 90% in electrolysers running at current densities of up to 450 mA cm−2 and this with time-on-stream stabilities of up to 1000 h.2,3
The smallest carboxylic acid serves as platform molecule in the chemical industry and as carbon source for bioprocesses. With its volumetric energy content of 2.1 kW h L−1 it has gained interest as a renewable liquid energy carrier for the sustainable energy sector. It is a liquid hydrogen gas carrier containing 53 g H2 L−1, and a syngas storage medium holding 742 g CO L−1.
The concentration at which formic acid currently is commercialised is 85 to 99 wt%. Electrochemical formic acid (or formate) synthesis typically yields more diluted solutions. Enhancing the concentration to current standards represents a big share of the energy cost of the production process.4 The diluted state of formic acid obtained through electrolysis often is cited as a shortcoming, and recommendations have been formulated stating that future research should aim at increasing the concentration of formic acid in the electrolysis product.2,4 Achieving experimentally near 100% concentration recently has been reported.2 However, a trade-off is encountered between electrolysis performance and formic acid concentration. Processes with high faradaic efficiency and low energy cost produce very diluted formic acid, while processes delivering concentrated formic acid are less selective and more energy intensive.5
In this paper an overview of the emerging formic acid applications and their concentration requirements is provided. It is striking that many of the emerging applications do not require concentrated formic acid and commercial formic acid grades even require dilution before use. Significant energy savings can be obtained by omitting the product concentration step after the electrochemical CO2 reduction process. Better matching and integration of production and application processes enhances the sustainability of emerging formic acid technologies.
Emerging formic acid applications
Formic acid as a fuel
Formic acid has interesting properties for use as a fuel. It can be stored safely, it is relatively non-toxic and refuelling is fast and easy. Unlike hydrogen, methane and ammonia, formic acid is a liquid at ambient conditions so there is no need to store it pressurized or using cooling in expensive storage tanks. The volumetric energy density of various energy storage media including formic acid of different concentrations is compared in Fig. 1. With a volumetric energy density of 2.1 kW h L−1, anhydrous formic acid has an energy density comparable to liquefied hydrogen at −253 °C. Diluted formic acid is less energy-dense, but the concentration can be as low as 40 wt% for the energy density still to be similar to hydrogen gas at 350 bar. The high volumetric energy density of formic acid is often considered a benefit over gaseous fuels and batteries. It is less energy-dense than other carbon containing fuels like gasoline, ethers and alcohols.
 Fig. 1  Volumetric energy density of a selection of energy storage media, including formic acid of different concentrations. PHES = pumped hydroelectric energy storage. 
Direct formic acid fuel cells
Formic acid can serve directly for fuelling a Direct Formic Acid Fuel Cell (DFAFC). Liquid formic acid is fed to the cell and oxidised at the anode (HCOOH → CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−). Oxygen gas is reduced to water at the cathode (1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O). A Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM), typically Nafion™, is used for ionic contact and to conduct protons from anode to cathode. DFAFC technology became commercial in the early 2000's. It has been miniaturized in a micro-fuel cell/battery hybrid with formic acid cartridges. However, currently there are no commercial DFAFC devices as DFAFC is still facing major technological challenges. One of the main challenges is the development of efficient and stable anode electrocatalysts. Historically, Pt and Pd have been used. These noble metals have a high activity for the oxidation reaction but their stability is problematic. On Pt, oxidation follows a dual reaction mechanism where formic acid is first dehydrated, forming adsorbed CO as an intermediate, followed by further oxidation to CO2. CO poisons Pt so that the catalyst deteriorates quickly. Chen et al. recently elucidated the mechanism behind this CO poisoning in detail.6 On Pd, the reaction follows a direct dehydrogenation mechanism such that it does not suffer from CO poisoning. Bifunctional PdxPt1−x or combinations of Pt with Au, Cu, Sn, Pb and Bi combine a high activity with a lower susceptibility to CO poisoning.7,8 However, Pd and non-noble metals tend to dissolve in acid.9 As a result, the performance of the DFAFC decreases over time. The higher the formic acid feed concentration, the larger the degradation rate.10 Besides electrocatalyst instability, DFAFC is less efficient when it is run on concentrated formic acid for at least two reasons. Firstly, formic acid is able to permeate the PEM to some extent, despite of the Donnan-exclusion of the formate anion.11 Permeation rates of formic acid through Nafion of 0.072 to 1.66 mmol cm−2 h−1 were reported in liquid electrolyte H-cell setups, increasing with decreasing thickness of the PEM and with increasing concentrations of formic acid. At 50 wt% formic acid concentration a significant current density loss of over 60 mA cm−2 has been noted due to formic acid crossover.12 This issue of fuel crossover is not unique to DFAFC. In direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) for example, the crossover rate is even about six times higher than in DFAFC under similar conditions, such that often half of the methanol is lost by crossover.12 The more limited crossover is even seen as a relative advantage of DFAFC over DMFC. Secondly, concentrated formic acid can deteriorate the PEM material. Nafion is composed of a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) backbone with perfluoroalkylether pendant chains carrying sulfonic acid groups. Although the mechanism of proton conduction is not fully understood, the presence of water in the membrane is known to be essential for proton conduction. Owing to its hygroscopic properties, concentrated formic acid causes dehydration of the PEM leading to poor proton conduction performance.10,13 The optimal formic acid concentration for DFAFC is disputed, but it is generally considered to be between 14 and 43 wt%,10 with an exceptional report of 50 wt%.12
Indirect formic acid fuel cells
An alternative route for using formic acid for producing electricity is by catalytic reforming to hydrogen (HCOOH → H2 + CO2) for fuelling a hydrogen fuel cell. This approach is referred to as indirect formic acid fuel cells (IFAFC). The technological readiness of this technology is higher than that of DFAFC and small as well as large units are envisioned with power outputs from 5 W to 20 kW converting millilitres up to tens of litres of formic acid per hour.14,15 An IFAFC producing 7000 kWh electricity per year with a nominal power output of 800 W has been reported.16 Decomposition of formic acid to H2 and CO2 can be performed using homogeneous catalysts such as Ru–TPPTS (triphenylphosphine trisulfonate),17 Ir-4,7-dihydroxy-1,10-phenanthroline,18 or a heterogeneous catalyst prepared by immobilizing FeII-phosphine-complexes on silica. On the latter Fe catalysts, there is an inhibitory effect of water. This catalyst likely will not perform well when using diluted formic acid.19,20 The Ru and Ir-based homogeneous catalysts on the contrary work better in aqueous medium compared to organic solvent.21 Iguchi et al. reported the formic acid decomposition reaction on the Ir-catalysts to reach maximal turnover frequency at formic acid concentrations between 14 and 25 wt%.18 The TOF in 80 wt% formic acid solution is only about one fourth of that in 14 wt% solution.18 Handling of diluted formic acid in a continuous stirred tank reactor is faced with an engineering challenge related to the accumulation of water from the feedstock, but this remaining hurdle likely can be overcome.22
Formic acid as a syngas storage medium and chemical reagent
Formic acid can be decomposed to H2, CO and CO2 by dehydrogenation (HCOOH → H2 + CO2) and dehydration (HCOOH → H2O + CO) reactions. This means that formic acid can be used to produce syngas, which is a mixture of CO and H2, or it can serve as an alternative to syngas in several chemical processes. There has been a demand for syngas surrogates for several decades because of safety concerns, so formic acid as a safe and easy to handle liquid could fulfil this role.
Syngas is produced from formic acid with a combination of the dehydrogenation and dehydration reaction. While (noble) metals mainly catalyse the dehydrogenation reaction, acids like sulphuric acid or zeolites catalyse the dehydration reaction.23 In an alternative approach, formic acid could be advantageously co-fed with methane to a methane reformer as proposed by Rahbari et al.24 Syngas is currently produced mainly by steam methane reforming (SMR): CH4 + H2O → CO + 3H2. When formic acid is added, this is referred to as the SRM-FA process (Fig. 2). By varying the feed mixture of methane and diluted formic acid, the H2:CO molar ratio in the produced syngas can be adjusted to the needs.24 To make H2-rich syngas (H2:CO ∼ 3), relatively low concentrations of formic acid (e.g. 22 wt%) are required, while high concentrations (e.g. 94 wt%) enable CO-rich syngas (H2:CO ∼ 1) production.24
 Fig. 2  SMR-FA process for syngas production via steam reforming of methane with formic acid co-feeding to adjust the H2:CO ratio. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright © 2018.‡ 
Through various reactions, formic acid produces value-added chemicals that otherwise require syngas. For example, (hydroxy)carbonylation of olefins with formic acid produces carboxylic acids,25,26 hydroxycarboxylation of alkynes produces acrylic derivatives,27 and hydroformylation of olefins produces aldehydes.28
Formic acid as feed for bioprocesses
Formic acid and formate are carbon sources in C1 biorefinery processes. The molecules are digested by both natural and genetically engineered micro-organisms called formatotrophs to produce various chemicals such as plastic monomers and pigments as well as protein meal.29 Yishai et al. gave a comprehensive overview of the biological assimilation pathways.29 Natural formatotrophs use either the reductive pentose phosphate pathway, the serine pathway or the reductive acetyl-CoA pathway. Unfortunately, these pathways are either energetically inefficient or are only present in micro-organisms that are difficult to cultivate or have a limited product spectrum. Engineering model micro-organisms such as E. coli and S. cerevisiae to grow on formic acid/formate using synthetic assimilation pathways is a more promising approach. However, formic acid is toxic to these micro-organisms and impairs their growth at high concentration. This is attributed to acidification of the cytoplasm, which reduces the proton motive force, and to formate inhibiting the respiratory cytochromes.29 The sensitivity to the formic acid concentration depends on the type of micro-organism, but it should generally not exceed 2 wt%.29 For example, for E. coli strains the formic acid concentration in the medium should not surpass 3–4 g l−1 (ca. 0.4 wt%).30,31 The main challenges in this field are therefore to establish a fully active synthetic pathway and finding a host organism that is as resistant to formic acid as possible.
Summarizing, for the emerging applications of formic acid, there is a need for substantial dilution, with the biorefinery application requiring the strongest dilution. Fuel cell applications (DFAFC) and its indirect version (IFAFC) with formic acid as H2 carrier require formic acid concentrations in the range of 10–50 wt%. The CO carrier application can cope with any degree of dilution (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Preferred concentration ranges of formic acid in emerging applications. 
Formic acid production
Industrial production of formic acid
Formic acid is currently produced at industrial scale in a centralized manner. A small number of production sites is responsible for the global yearly production of ca. 750000 tonnes of formic acid.32 Each site produces between 20000 and 100000 tonnes per year. The product is transported around the globe to be used mainly in the leather and textile industry, the rubber industry, animal feed production and the production of chemicals and pharmaceuticals.25,33 For economic transportation to the location of use, it is concentrated to between 85 and 99 wt%. Over 90% of today's formic acid is produced by carbonylation of methanol to methyl formate (CH3OH + CO → HCOOCH3) and the subsequent hydrolysis of methyl formate (HCOOCH3 + H2O → HCOOH + CH3OH).25 This reaction proceeds at an elevated temperature (80 °C) and pressure (4.5 MPa).25 The unfavourable hydrolysis equilibrium is overcome by using an excess of water.25 Water is removed with two-step distillation or by liquid–liquid extraction followed by distillation.25 The CO currently comes from a fossil source, either from steam reforming, partial oxidation of fossil feedstocks or the gasification of coal.34 CO production consumes most of the energy in the process, followed by steam production.34 On many of these large plants, the production processes have been running continuously for over 40 years. They are optimised and integrated with other processes, so that the energy cost of concentrating the product in the overall process can be kept relatively low.
Formic acid synthesis from CO2
A second scenario is emerging where formic acid is produced from CO2, likely in a distributed way on a smaller scale. This scenario emerges as companies look for ways to convert captured CO2, to safely and densely store hydrogen or to seasonally store renewable energy. Several CO2-based routes are being researched. A first example is the electrochemical route where formic acid, or formate in alkaline medium, is produced in an electrolyser using CO2, H2O and electricity. Electrolysers are currently on laboratory and pilot plant scale. One of the main challenges currently still holding back commercialisation of formic acid electrolysers is the stability of the cathode catalyst. A publication by Van Daele et al. gives insight into the degradation mechanisms of the popular Sn-based electrocatalysts.35 The catalyst is susceptible to an array of degradation pathways so that the lifetime of current CO2 electrolysers generally does not exceed 100 hours. Yang et al. reported an exceptional lifetime of a formic acid electrolyser able to operate stably at 200 mA cm−2 for at least 1000 hours.3 Lifetimes of several thousands of hours are needed before the electrolysers are commercially viable.35 CO2 can also be converted by catalytic hydrogenation with either homogeneous catalysts such as Ir(III)–pincer complexes36 and non-precious Ni(II)-tris(2-(diphenylphosphino)ethyl)amine complexes37 or heterogeneous catalysts, as recently summarized by Sun et al.38 Some routes even combine carbon capture and conversion into one process, such as the hydrogenation of CO2 in polyethyleneimine and Rh/monophosphine systems.39 Although rapid progress is being made in these routes, they are still plagued with a need for expensive catalyst complexes and rather high temperatures and pressures. Different from the electrochemical route, they also require an external supply of H2. Finally, the industrial process could be adapted to also consume CO2 by adding a process step that converts CO2 to CO. Aside from the reverse water gas shift reaction that requires H2, other technologies are being developed to do this conversion. For example plasma technology is being investigated, where CO2 is split by highly energetic electrons. Several types of plasma reactors can be used, which were comprehensively laid out by Snoeckx et al.40 Electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO is another option. Together with formate, CO production is the most advanced among the electrochemical CO2 reduction technologies with already some successful pilot-scale demonstrations.41
Among these CO2-based routes, the electrochemical route has some advantages. A life cycle assessment study by Kang et al. showed that the electrochemical route has a lower impact on climate change and fossil depletion than the catalytic hydrogenation route and the current industrial route.42 Electricity is the dominant factor in the environmental impact of the electrochemical route, so using an environmentally friendly power source is vital.42 Electrolysers are also modular and can work discontinuously. Small formic acid production units could be added to existing infrastructure and operate wherever CO2 and/or renewable energy is available. So, they are well suited for a scenario of distributed, small-scale formic acid production.
Electrochemical production of formic acid
Much like for water electrolysis, H-cells were the first reactors that were researched for the electrochemical reduction of CO2. In a H-cell, both cathode and anode are submerged in a liquid electrolyte. The low solubility of CO2 in aqueous electrolytes such as KHCO3 and slow kinetics of the conversion between HCO3− and CO2 strongly limit the formate production rate in these types of reactor cells. GDE-electrolysers were developed to circumvent this issue. In a GDE-electrolyser, a porous cathode is on one side in contact with a liquid catholyte and on the other side with CO2 gas, creating a three-phase boundary. By feeding gaseous CO2 directly to the cathode, CO2 mass transport is much less limiting. Another solution is to create a gasphilic trap that keeps the area around the catalyst supersaturated with CO2.43,44 Gas phase electrolysers go one step further in this development by eliminating the liquid electrolyte from the cathode compartment altogether. Typically an anolyte such as KOH is oxidised at the anode so that alkali cations are transported through a cation exchange membrane from anode to cathode, where formate salt is produced. These setups produce formate at concentrations typically lower than 10 wt%.4 Formic acid is produced in electrolysers where no alkali salt solution is present, neither at the anode nor cathode. Examples are a PEM-electrolyser, where anode and cathode are both pressed to a proton exchange membrane,45 and a three-compartment electrolyser. In the latter, anode and cathode are separated by a solid electrolyte assembly consisting of a proton exchange membrane (PEM), a porous ion exchange resin layer (IER) layer and an anion exchange membrane (AEM) (Fig. 4). CO2 is reduced to formate ions in the alkaline environment at the cathode flanking the AEM which are transported to a centre compartment, where they are protonated with protons generated at the anode and transported through the PEM. Formic acid is recovered from the centre compartment using either a liquid water flow or a humid gas flow. This electrolyser is capable of producing aqueous formic acid at a range of concentrations up to 60 wt% and even 100 wt% for a short time.2,3,46,47 It lends itself well to be matched with the applications described above that demand aqueous formic acid. Therefore, this electrolyser type is considered in the following.
 Fig. 4  Three-compartment electrolyser for selective CO2 reduction to formic acid with tuneable concentration. 
The energy cost to concentrate formic acid on a small scale is large. Ramdin et al. estimated the energy needed for water elimination for a plant capacity of 4000 tonnes per year.48 Two methods were described: distillation and a hybrid extraction-distillation process. Distillation of formic acid from 10 wt% to 85 wt% requires ca. 9.6 kWh kg−1. The hybrid process involves extraction to 30 wt% using 2-methyltetrahydrofuran followed by distillation to 85 wt%. This process has a lower energy demand of ca. 2.3 kWh kg−1.48 Ramdin et al. also analysed three theoretical scenarios of operating voltage and faradaic efficiencies (Fig. 5). Even with the less energy demanding extraction–distillation process, concentration still represents ca. 50%, 40% and 30% of the total energy demand for a best, base and worse-case scenario, respectively.48 Experimentally, a three-compartment electrolyser that produces formic acid of 9.4 wt% has an energy efficiency of ca. 36%.47 This implies an energy need of 4.8 kWh kg−1 formic acid. If this is coupled with distillation, more than two thirds of the total energy demand goes to product concentration (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Energy demand for electrochemical production of formic acid at a concentration of 85 wt% for four different cases. Ecell = operating voltage, j = current density, EE = energy efficiency, FE = faradaic efficiency. 
The significance of this becomes obvious when considering the round-trip efficiency for formic acid as a fuel. The round-trip efficiency of an energy carrier is defined as the percentage of energy put into storage that can later be retrieved in an energy application, for example in a fuel cell. The round-trip efficiency of the different grades of formic acid is plotted against volumetric energy density and compared to other energy storage media in Fig. 6. Avoiding a post synthetic concentration step, the round-trip efficiency of formic acid is dependent on the energy efficiency of the electrolyser and the fuel cell. Assuming an electrolyser with an energy efficiency between 30 and 67% (Fig. 5) and an IFAFC with an energy efficiency of 45%,49 the round-trip efficiency is between 14 and 30% (Fig. 6). This is in the same range as for example liquid ammonia produced with the Haber–Bosch process or liquefied hydrogen (Fig. 6). Concentration requires a lot of additional energy, so if this is taken into account the round-trip efficiency drops to between 5 and 16% depending on the electrolyser efficiency and concentration method of choice. This is low compared to other energy storage media (Fig. 6). Because concentrating formic acid is very energy-intensive, ways have been proposed to achieve a higher concentration in the electrolyser stage to avoid the energy intensive downstream processing steps. Unfortunately, there is a negative correlation between the energy efficiency of the electrolyser and the concentration of the formic acid product. The higher the desired concentration, the lower the faradaic efficiency and/or the higher the cell voltage. The performance problem persists in the three-compartment electrolyser with liquid water flowing through the centre (Fig. 4). In such a reactor, the final formic acid concentration depends on the flowrate of the water, the current density and the reactor dimensions. The formic acid concentration in the product can be increased by slowing down the water flow or by recirculating the water. But this gain is counteracted by a decrease of faradaic efficiency (Fig. 7).2,3,50 Formic acid concentrations up to 10 wt% are obtained at faradaic efficiencies over 80%. Increasing the concentration to 40 wt% by slowing down the water flow decreases the faradaic efficiency to below 20%. Several factors contribute to this effect. When formic acid builds up inside the cell, crossover through the PEM to the anode compartment increases, similar to what happens in a DFAFC discussed higher. At the anode side, formic acid is oxidised to CO2, and there is poisoning of the anode electrocatalysts with reaction intermediates.47 Formic acid also back-diffuses through the AEM, such that the net rate of formic acid formation decreases.2 With back-diffusion, the cathode compartment also becomes more acidic, reducing the solubility of CO2 and enhancing the parasitic H2 formation reaction.
 Fig. 6  Round-trip efficiency versus volumetric energy density of a selection of energy storage media, including electrochemically produced formic acid of different grades. PHES = pumped hydroelectric energy storage. Details, assumptions and references can be found in the ESI† (Table S1). 
 Fig. 7  Faradaic efficiency against formic acid concentration in three-compartment electrolyser. Data adapted from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright © 2020.§ 
So, there is trade-off between the energy demand of the electrolyser and downstream processing by distillation. The opposing effects are quantified in Fig. 8. Using a humid gas stream instead of liquid water in the central compartment to collect the formic acid product (Fig. 4) does not offer a means for improving substantially the selectivity of the system (Fig. 7). Ohmic losses will be higher in the three solid electrolytes, viz. PEM, AEM and SSE resin (Fig. 4) when only partially hydrated. This decreases their ionic conductivity significantly (Fig. S1 and S2†). Additional energy is needed for the condensation of the formic acid and water vapours.
 Fig. 8  Dependency of energy demand of electrolyser and distillation on formic acid concentration. Distillation data adapted from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright © 2019.¶ Three-compartment electrolyser data adapted from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright © 2020.§ 
In conclusion, formic acid of a range of concentrations can be produced by the electrochemical reduction of CO2, but increasing the concentration to the current commercial standard of at least 85 wt% comes at a large and unavoidable energy cost. If upscaled, the cost could be reduced in the same way as for the current large-scale industrial process, but for small-scale formic acid electrolysers this problem will persist.
The concentration range of formic acid as currently produced with three-compartment electrolysers and current industrial practice and the optimum concentration ranges in emerging applications are overlaid in Fig. 9. The matching of the concentration ranges of electrochemical production and the emerging applications is evident from this figure. The biorefinery application requires strongly diluted formic acid. In that case, liquid water with a high flowrate can be fed through the middle compartment of the electrolyser. The faradaic efficiency for formic acid will be high, the energy demand minimal and crossover through the membranes will be very limited, which benefits the stability of the electrodes. Fuel cell applications (DFAFC) and its indirect version (IFAFC) with formic acid as H2 carrier require formic acid concentrations in the range of 10–50 wt%. This can directly be produced through careful tuning of either the liquid water or humid gas flow rate, but the energy efficiency is currently lower. With more research on the avoidance of crossover through the membranes, the stability of anode and cathode electrocatalysts against poisoning and dissolution in acid and on increasing the ionic conductivity of solid electrolytes at low humidity, this could be improved. For formic acid as a syngas source or surrogate, a wide range of dilutions is useful. In the very high concentration range, large-scale industrial production will most likely be more energy efficient.
 Fig. 9  Matching of the concentration ranges of electrochemically produced formic acid with the emerging applications. 
Conclusions
Formic acid is an important bulk chemical that is being produced in centralized, large-scale industrial processes. For economic storage and transportation, it is concentrated to at least 85 wt%. In centralized production energy management is such that the energy needs for water removal from the produced diluted formic acid stream can be minimized. Electrolytic production processes have recently emerged as a way to produce green formic acid from CO2, water and electricity. This is a highly flexible process that can be performed decentralised and on a small scale. State of the art electrolysers unavoidably produce diluted formic acid. At small scale, energy-efficient water removal is not obvious. Fortunately, most emerging applications do not require high concentrations. Especially applications such as biorefinery applications and direct or indirect formic acid fuel cells show optimum operation with diluted formic acid. Formic acid at concentrations below 50 wt% can be produced with a three-compartment electrolyser. If there is no need for energy-dense storage or transportation, downstream concentration processes can be omitted. This matching of production and application processes makes green formic acid production in small-scale CO2 electrolysers economically attractive and sustainable.
Author contributions
JAM and JR initiated and supervised the research and contributed to the writing. BT performed the experiments and contributed to the writing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by CO2PERATE, a cluster SBO project (No. HBC.2017.0692) supported by Vlaams Agentschap Innoveren en Ondernemen (VLAIO). JAM acknowledges the Flemish government for long term structural funding (Methusalem program).
Notes and references
J. M. Spurgeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1536–1551 RSC .
L. Fan, C. Xia, P. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 42, 101349 CrossRef CAS .
F. Proietto, A. Galia and O. Scialdone, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 2169–2179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Wu, Mol. Catal., 2020, 483, 110716 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. P. Granda-Marulanda, I. T. McCrum and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Shaari, S. K. Kamarudin, R. Bahru, S. H. Osman and N. A. I. Md Ishak, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 6644–6688 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kortlever, I. Peters, S. Koper and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3916–3923 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Rees and R. G. Compton, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 2095–2100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Rejal, M. S. Masdar and S. K. Kamarudin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10267–10274 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. J. Ferrer, E. Couallier, M. Rakib and G. Durand, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5773–5780 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jeong, C. M. Miesse, J. Choi, J. Lee, J. Han, S. Pil, S. Woo, T. Lim and T. Gyu, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. L. Ting and B. S. Yeo, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 8, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
DENS, Emission-free power supply at any location, https://dens.one/.
Elsevier Science, Neah Power releases improved Formira Hydrogen-on-Demand, Fuel Cells Bull., 2015,(11), 9–10 Search PubMed .
EPFL, The world's first formic acid-based fuel cell, https://actu.epfl.ch/news/the-world-s-first-formic-acid-based-fuel-cell/.
V. Henricks, I. Yuranov, N. Autissier and G. Laurenczy, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Iguchi, Y. Himeda, Y. Manaka and H. Kawanami, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2749–2753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bulushev, Energies, 2021, 14, 1334 CrossRef CAS .
P. Stathi, Y. Deligiannakis, G. Avgouropoulos and M. Louloudi, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 498, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
N. Onishi, G. Laurenczy, M. Beller and Y. Himeda, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 373, 317–332 CrossRef CAS .
R. van Putten, T. Wissink, T. Swinkels and E. A. Pidko, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28533–28541 CrossRef CAS .
W. Supronowicz, I. A. Ignatyev, G. Lolli, A. Wolf, L. Zhao and L. Mleczko, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2904–2911 RSC .
A. Rahbari, M. Ramdin, L. J. P. Van Den Broeke and T. J. H. Vlugt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 10663–10674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Hietala, A. Vuori, P. Johnsson, I. Pollari, W. Reutemann and H. Kieczka, Formic Acid, Ullmann’s
Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, Wiley,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. Okada, K. Takeuchi, K. Matsumoto, T. Oku and J. C. Choi, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2021, 19, 8727–8734 RSC .
S. M. Xia, Z. W. Yang, X. Y. Yao, K. H. Chen, L. Q. Qiu and L. N. He, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 8089–8095 RSC .
L. Liu, X. C. Chen, S. Q. Yang, Y. Q. Yao, Y. Lu and Y. Liu, J. Catal., 2021, 394, 406–415 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yishai, S. N. Lindner, J. Gonzalez de la Cruz, H. Tenenboim and A. Bar-Even, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2016, 35, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bang and S. Y. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E9271–E9279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bang, J. H. Ahn, J. A. Lee, C. H. Hwang, G. B. Kim, J. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
MarketsAndMarkets, Formic acid market, https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/.
DATAINTELO, Global formic acid market report, History and forecast 2020–2027, https://dataintelo.com/.
M. Pérez-Fortes, J. C. Schöneberger, A. Boulamanti, G. Harrison and E. Tzimas, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16444–16462 CrossRef .
K. Van Daele, B. De Mot, M. Pupo, N. Daems, D. Pant, R. Kortlever and T. Breugelmans, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4317–4327 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tanaka, M. Yamashita and K. Nozaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14168–14169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Schieweck, N. F. Westhues and J. Klankermayer, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6519–6523 RSC .
R. Sun, Y. Liao, S. T. Bai, M. Zheng, C. Zhou, T. Zhang and B. F. Sels, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1247–1285 RSC .
Y. N. Li, L. N. He, A. H. Liu, X. D. Lang, Z. Z. Yang, B. Yu and C. R. Luan, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2825–2829 RSC .
R. Snoeckx and A. Bogaerts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5805–5863 RSC .
M. Y. Lee, K. T. Park, W. Lee, H. Lim, Y. Kwon and S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 50, 769–815 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, J. Byun and J. Han, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 9470–9478 RSC .
S. Khan, J. Hwang, Y. Horn and K. Kripa, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100318 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yue, Q. Fu, J. Li, L. Zhang, L. Xing, Z. Kang, Q. Liao and X. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126975 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. K. Ju, R. Machunda, S. Uhm, J. K. Lee, H. J. Lee and J. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3029–3034 RSC .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitsk, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramdin, A. R. T. Morrison, M. De Groen, R. Van Haperen, R. De Kler, E. Irtem, A. T. Laitinen, L. J. P. Van Den Broeke, T. Breugelmans, J. P. M. Trusler, W. De Jong and T. J. H. Vlugt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 22718–22740 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, U. Legrand, E. Pahija, J. R. Tavares and D. C. Boffito, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 803–815 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitsk, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc04791d‡ Fig. 2 was reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Direct link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.iecr.8b02443. Further permission related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.§ For Fig. 7 and 8, data was used from ref. 2, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode). Data spread over the article was collected, analysed and reproduced as a graph.¶ For Fig. 8, data was adapted from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Direct link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b03970. Further permission related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Barbara Thijs	Barbara Thijs obtained her master's degree in Bioscience Engineering from KU Leuven in 2018. She is now a PhD student at COK-KAT, KU Leuven. Her research focusses on the electrocatalytic production of formic acid as a renewable building block for chemical processes.
Jan Rongé	Jan Rongé is a post-doctoral researcher at COK-KAT, KU Leuven. He obtained his PhD at KU Leuven in 2016, on the topic of photoelectrochemical water splitting cells. His research interests span the fields of electrocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, water-from-air technologies, agrivoltaics and hydrogen production from airborne water vapor. He is a coordinator of the Solhyd project, developing solar hydrogen panel technology.
Johan A. Martens	Johan A. Martens is full professor at KU Leuven, heading a research team of 40 people. He is an expert in engineering of catalysts and catalytic processes. He translates fundamental concepts of catalysis into applications in a variety of fields, and especially environmental protection, air pollution control, solar hydrogen, carbon capture and utilisation, green ammonia, and water production. He has a vast international network and many of his publication are the result of national and international collaboration.

 	Fig. 1  Volumetric energy density of a selection of energy storage media, including formic acid of different concentrations. PHES = pumped hydroelectric energy storage.	 

 	Fig. 2  SMR-FA process for syngas production via steam reforming of methane with formic acid co-feeding to adjust the H2:CO ratio. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright © 2018.‡	 

 	Fig. 3  Preferred concentration ranges of formic acid in emerging applications.	 

 	Fig. 4  Three-compartment electrolyser for selective CO2 reduction to formic acid with tuneable concentration.	 

 	Fig. 5  Energy demand for electrochemical production of formic acid at a concentration of 85 wt% for four different cases. Ecell = operating voltage, j = current density, EE = energy efficiency, FE = faradaic efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 6  Round-trip efficiency versus volumetric energy density of a selection of energy storage media, including electrochemically produced formic acid of different grades. PHES = pumped hydroelectric energy storage. Details, assumptions and references can be found in the ESI† (Table S1).	 

 	Fig. 7  Faradaic efficiency against formic acid concentration in three-compartment electrolyser. Data adapted from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright © 2020.§	 

 	Fig. 8  Dependency of energy demand of electrolyser and distillation on formic acid concentration. Distillation data adapted from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright © 2019.¶ Three-compartment electrolyser data adapted from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright © 2020.§	 

 	Fig. 9  Matching of the concentration ranges of electrochemically produced formic acid with the emerging applications.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc04791d
‡ Fig. 2 was reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Direct link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.iecr.8b02443. Further permission related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.
§ For Fig. 7 and 8, data was used from ref. 2, licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode). Data spread over the article was collected, analysed and reproduced as a graph.
¶ For Fig. 8, data was adapted from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Direct link: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b03970. Further permission related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
