Photoconductivity enhancement and charge transport properties in a conjugated polyelectrolyte/carbon nanotube hybrid studied by scanning probe microsc ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TC00819G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TC00819G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7739-7751Photoconductivity enhancement and charge transport properties in a conjugated polyelectrolyte/carbon nanotube hybrid studied by scanning probe microscopy†

        
          
            Kin Cheung 
            Lo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sheung Yin 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wai Kin 
            Chan
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, P. R. China. E-mail: waichan@hku.hk
Received 
      23rd April 2014
    , Accepted 15th July 2014First published on 16th July 2014AbstractWe report the use of electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) and photoconductive atomic force microscopy (PCAFM) for the characterization of a cationic conjugated polyelectrolyte/multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) hybrid. The polymer, poly[N,N,N-triethyl-12-(thiophen-3-yl)dodecan-1-ammonium bromide] (PTETDA) may functionalize MWCNTs by noncovalent interactions, and can also enhance the photosensitivity of the resulting polymer/MWCNT hybrid. Molecular dynamics simulation shows that the PTETDA interacts with the MWCNT mainly through the conjugated backbone and the counterions can diffuse away from PTETDA. The unscreened charges were detected by EFM, providing evidence for the presence of the PTETDA wrapped on the MWCNTs. This is the first report that EFM is applied in the characterization of a polymer/MWCNT hybrid. PCAFM shows that the equilibrium conductance exhibited a one-fold increase upon white light illumination at 1.45 mW cm−2. The current–voltage curves were analyzed by the Simmons model to investigate the mechanism of the photoresponse. We also report for the first time that a rigorous advanced bootstrap method was applied to analyze the photocurrent response of nanoparticles. The enhancement in photoconductivity demonstrates the potential of using a conjugated polymer/carbon nanotube hybrid in optoelectronic devices.
Introduction
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been extensively used as the charge transport materials in various electronic and optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells,1,2 light emitters,3 field-effect transistors,4 photodetectors,5 gas sensors,6 biosensors7 and computers.8 Most of these applications can be benefited by functionalization of CNTs by increasing the dispersibility of CNTs and rendering the CNT hybrids responsive to chemical or optical stimuli.9–13 For optoelectronic applications, noncovalent functionalization of CNTs is considered to be a better approach than covalent functionalization because covalent functionalization destroys the π-electron system of CNTs, adversely affecting their electronic properties. To achieve effective nonconvalent interactions, the dispersants usually bear a large π-system, for example, pyrene,14,15 perylene16 or a conjugated backbone.13,17
We have reported the non-covalent functionalization of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) by using a block copolymer functionalized with a pyrene anchoring unit and a ruthenium complex photosensitizer.15 It was shown that the ruthenium complex could enhance the photocurrent response of the resulting polymer/CNT hybrid. In this study, we report the use of conjugated poly[N,N,N-triethyl-12-(thiophen-3-yl)dodecan-1-ammonium bromide] (PTETDA) (Fig. 1) for dispersing MWCNTs by the π–π interaction and the photosensitivity of the resulting hybrid material. It was demonstrated that the interaction between an electron-donating dispersant and MWCNTs resulted in efficient photoinduced electron transfer from the donor materials to the MWCNTs.14 In this work, PTETDA acts as the donor material18 and MWCNTs as electron acceptors.19 Hybrids consisting of poly(3-alkylthiophenes) and CNTs have been used in the fabrication of solar cells.20–23 However, the performance of solar cells is related to the bulk properties of the hybrids such as the overall packing of donor and acceptor materials. To reveal the mechanism of the enhanced photoconductivity of the hybrid material per se, the enhancement in photoconductivity for individual functionalized MWCNTs needs to be measured. With ionic headgroups on the pendant groups of PTETDA, the dispersibility of MWCNTs can be further improved, compared to the neutral poly(3-dodecylthiophene)/MWCNT hybrid.24 The ease of finding individual MWCNTs facilitated subsequent electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) and photoconductive atomic force microscopy (PCAFM).
 Fig. 1  Structure of PTETDA. 
EFM has been widely used to explore electronic properties of optoelectronic devices25,26 and the electronic interaction between nanosized species, such as dipole–dipole interactions of silicon nanoparticles,27 surface potential of graphene28 and the charge transfer process at the CNT/metal interface.29 It has also been used in studying different electronic properties of CNTs, such as local electronic structures,30 defects,31 and charging properties.32,33 However, EFM has only been used in studying pristine nanoparticles only. In this paper, we report the first example of applying EFM in the characterization of the polymer–inorganic hybrid nanomaterial.
The characterization of the outer layer of the polymer/MWCNT hybrid is challenging, especially when the size of the polymer on CNT surfaces is small compared to the CNTs. The polymer molecules on CNT surfaces may be characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) only by looking at the appearance of the hybrids.15,34–36 However, only the approximate thickness of the polymer can be obtained. It has been reported that some thin polymer coatings on CNTs can neither be visualized in TEM nor in AFM.34 Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) has been widely used in the elemental analysis of nanoparticles but was not commonly used for the analysis of polymer molecules coated on the surface of an individual CNT. The reason is that the EDX spectrum is dominated by signals given by carbon atoms of the CNT, blurring or even hiding the signals of the coatings.37 Such a technique is applicable only when the polymer layer is thick or there is a substantial amount of heavy elements in the hybrid.38,39 In our case, the PTETDA layer on an individual MWCNT could not be detected unambiguously by EDX because the PTETDA layer was not very thick and there was no heavy element present. EDX signals became clear when EDX was performed on a group of functionalized MWCNTs. Here, we propose to employ EFM as the technique in studying a monolayer of polyelectrolyte coated on an individual CNT. EFM is a powerful microscopic technique to image surface charges quantitatively.40 If the surface of MWCNTs is charged, the surface charge density can be measured by EFM, which can unambiguously confirm the presence of a polyelectrolyte on the CNT surface. It is also envisaged that EFM is also applicable on metal-containing polymer/CNT hybrids if the metal complexes are charged, including those ruthenium-containing block copolymer/MWCNT hybrids previously reported.15 In this work, we report the utilization of EFM to detect the surface charges due to the PTETDA wrap on the MWCNTs.
We also report the use of the PCAFM technique to study the enhancement in photoconductivity of the hybrid. PCAFM was developed based on modifying the experimental setup of conductive force microscopy (CAFM) that has been extensively used to investigate the charge transport of nanomaterials and molecular junctions.41–47 By CAFM, it is possible to investigate the electrical properties of a very small area of the sample, choose the appropriate position for electrical measurements and accurately control the applied normal force exerted on the sample. Moreover, the sample preparation is simple. No micro- or nanofabrication is required and no high-temperature or high-pressure processes are involved. Unlike the self-assembled monolayer in molecular junctions, MWCNTs are cylindrical 1-D nanomaterials, and therefore finding the appropriate MWCNT and accurately positioning the CAFM probe are of the utmost importance to probe the charge transport properties of an individual MWCNT. The ability to accurately control the applied normal force is also important for preventing the PTETDA wrap on MWCNTs from being damaged by an excessive contact force. To acquire the advantages of CAFM and to investigate the effect of illumination on the charge transport properties of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid, PCAFM was performed.
Results and discussion
Formation of PTETDA/MWCNT dispersion
PTETDA is highly soluble in water but the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid showed very poor solubility. This is mainly due to the fact that dispersing individual CNTs in water is an energetically unfavourable process.48 On the other hand, the hybrid can be readily dispersed in ethanol. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and TEM images of the hybrid from which individual MWCNTs can be identified. In the TEM image, the thin amorphous layers on the CNT surface are suggested to be the PTETDA layer. EDX was used to perform elemental analysis of the hybrid. For individual functionalized MWCNTs, the layer could be seen in the TEM image but the EDX signals of the layer were not always observed. Both the sulphur and the bromine EDX signals could be obtained (Fig. 2(c)) only when EDX was performed on a group of functionalized MWCNTs. The PTETDA wrap was further characterized by EFM and will be discussed in the next section.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. (c) EDX spectrum of a group of functionalized MWCNTs. 
To gain further insight into the structure of the hybrid, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation was performed to investigate the interaction between PTETDA and a MWCNT. In order to simplify the simulation, the MWCNT was replaced by a single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) with the chiral vector (30, 30). Like MWCNTs, a (30, 30)-SWCNT is metallic.49 Despite its small diameter of 4.1 nm, it has been used in MD simulations of MWCNTs.50 The validity of using a (30, 30)-SWCNT as a simplified model of a MWCNT stems from the fact that the conformation of a polymer and the interaction energy between the polymer and the SWCNT usually converge when the diameter of the SWCNT is larger than 4 nm.51 As PTETDA only interacts with MWCNTs by the π–π interaction on the outermost shell of MWCNTs, the inner shells were omitted in the MD simulation. The interaction energy between the entire PTETDA molecule and the MWCNT was calculated to be −104.8 kcal mol−1, or equivalently, –17.5 kcal per mol per monomer. The strong interaction mainly originates from the π–π stacking between the conjugated backbone and the MWCNT and the van der Waals interactions between the alkyl chains and the MWCNT. On the other hand, when the calculation was based on the MWCNT and the PTETDA conjugated backbone only, the interaction energy was −6.9 kcal per mol per monomer, while that between the MWCNT and the PTETDA alkyl side chain was −9.4 kcal per mol per monomer. Despite the presence of long alkyl chains, some of them interact with ethanol molecules instead of the MWCNT, as seen in Fig. 3(a). Fig. S1 (see ESI†) shows the radial distribution function (RDF) g(r) between the MWCNT and the conjugated backbone and that between the MWCNT and the alkyl chains. In the RDF between the MWCNT and the conjugated backbone, the peak rmax is located at 4.9 Å and the peak intensity is 16.7; whereas in the RDF between the MWCNT and the alkyl chains, the rmax is located at 6.0 Å and the peak intensity is 8.5. The smaller rmax and the higher intensity of the RDF between the MWCNT and the conjugated backbone indicate a stronger effective interaction between the MWCNT and the conjugated backbone than between the MWCNT and the alkyl chains,52 despite the larger interaction energy between the MWCNT and the alkyl chains. Since the diameter of the MWCNT is large, unlike other SWCNT hybrids,13 PTETDA on the MWCNT does not exhibit a helical conformation. Instead, the polymer has a more extended conformation and the radius of gyration increases from 14.2 Å to 16.0 Å after attaching onto the MWCNT.
 Fig. 3  Snapshots of the MD simulations of (a) a single PTETDA polymer on a MWCNT and (b) an array of 3 × 2 PTETDA polymers on a MWCNT. The MWCNT is simplified as a SWCNT with a large diameter. For clarity, ethanol molecules are not shown. In (a), the conjugated backbone is colored as blue, the alkyl chains as yellow and the ammonium headgroups as green. Some alkyl chains interact with ethanol molecules and stay away from the MWCNT. The bromide ions are not shown. In (b), the PTETDA polymer is colored according to elements and the brown spheres are bromide ions. The bromide counterions can diffuse into the ethanol and form a cloud of charges around the PTETDA polymer. 
EFM
EFM measurement was performed by a two-pass technique using an atomic force microscope (Fig. 4(a)). Before the experiment, calibration was carried out for every different tip-substrate capacitor in order to account for the difference in tip geometry.40 The detailed setup and the calibration process are described in the Experimental section. EFM can detect the surface charges of nanoparticles. The analytical model for quantitative charge imaging (eqn (1))40 was applied to compute the charges Q and the linear charge density l. (1)where R is the ratio of the charge and capacitive force gradients, g is the nanoparticle shape factor, α is the tip shape factor, Q is the charge of the nanoparticle, εS and t are the relative permittivity and the thickness of the substrate respectively, S is the surface area of the nanoparticle, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, z is the distance between the tip and the sample, VEFM is the bias applied at the tip, VS is the substrate potential, and l is calculated by Q divided by the length of the MWCNT. Fig. 4(b) and (c) show the height and EFM images of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. The attractive capacitive interaction between the tip and the MWCNT leads to quadratic decrease in frequency Δf (Fig. 4(c), (d) and S2†) according to eqn (2):53 (2)where VQ is the surface potential due to the charge in the tip-substrate capacitor, C is the capacitance of the overall system, and f0 and k are the resonance frequency and the force constant of the cantilever, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the EFM measurement. (b) Height image and (c) EFM image of the PTETDA/MWCNT. (d) Plot of Δf vs. distance along the red line in (c). The green triangle is located at the PTETDA/MWCNT and the blue dot is taken as the background. The frequency shift of the PTETDA/MWCNT is negative with respect to the background. 
For each MWCNT, Δf was measured at different VEFMs in the range between −8 V and 8 V. A typical plot of Δf versus VEFM is shown in Fig. S2.† Quadratic curves fit well to the data points and the coefficients of determination are at least 0.978. The R value in eqn (1) was calculated from the coefficients of the best-fit quadratic functions.27α was obtained by tip calibration. Since the geometry of a MWCNT is cylindrical, therefore the value of g = 1.40S was estimated from the tapping mode height image. εS is taken as 3.9 for silicon dioxide.54t, z, VEFM and VS are known experimental parameters. Thus, Q could be calculated by eqn (1). The surface potential of MWCNTs VCNT was extracted from the parabolic curves. The difference between VEFM and VS corresponding to the maximum of Δf equals VCNT.55
EFM measurements were performed for 10 pristine MWCNTs and 10 functionalized MWCNTs. Fig. 5 displays the box-and-whisker plots, showing Q, l and VCNT for both pristine MWCNTs and the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. The whiskers represent the 10th and the 90th percentiles. Fig. 5(a) shows the presence of very low charges in pristine MWCNTs. The presence of such native charges has been reported previously.27 On the other hand, the measured Q, l and VCNT values for the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid are significantly higher than those of pristine MWCNTs, indicating the presence of positive charges on the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. A MD simulation was performed at 298 K to explain the results. The simulation shows that some bromide ions diffuse away from the quaternary ammonium headgroups of PTETDA (Fig. 3(b)). When preparing the sample for EFM, the temperature was around 373 K, higher than the temperature for the MD simulation. It is envisaged that at this relatively high temperature, more bromide ions are far away from the ionic headgroups, leading to less efficient screening of the positive charges of the ionic headgroups. The more positive charges and the higher positive surface potential may result from the unscreened charges of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid compared to pristine MWCNTs. In all box-and-whisker plots, the spread of the PTETDA/MWCNT data are larger than those of the pristine MWCNT data. This is mainly due to the variation in the number of PTETDA molecules attached on different MWCNTs used in the measurements. Longer MWCNTs are likely to be wrapped by more PTETDA. Nevertheless, all PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid samples showed linear charge density l with similar values. From these results, it can be confirmed that PTETDA is present on the surface of MWCNTs. Thus, apart from inferring the presence of the PTETDA wrap on the MWCNTs from the TEM image as discussed in the previous section, EFM has provided more affirmative evidence for the presence of PTETDA by detecting the surface charges on the MWCNTs.
 Fig. 5  Box-and-whisker plots of (a) Q, (b) l and (c) VCNT of pristine MWCNTs and the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. The e in the units of Q and l is the elementary charge. The whiskers represent the 10th and the 90th percentiles. 
PCAFM
The instrumental setup of PCAFM is similar to that of CAFM, except that PCAFM takes the effect of light illumination into account. Fig. 6 shows the schematic diagram of a PCAFM experimental setup. Due to the variation in tip characteristics for each measurement41,56 and the effect of interfacial geometric fluctuation on conductivity,57,58 CAFM data usually have broad distributions. A large number of measurements were performed to draw more tenable conclusions, which is especially crucial in PCAFM to distinguish artifacts from the real effects of illumination. The current–voltage (I–V) curves were analyzed in-depth and the extracted data were analyzed by rigorous statistical methods.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the PCAFM measurement. 
Statistical analysis
The current–voltage characteristics of the hybrid were performed in the dark, under white light (LED without optical band-pass filters), and under different wavelengths of light ranging from 460 to 670 nm. An I–V curve of the hybrid in the dark is shown in Fig. 7. In general, the I–V curves are nonlinear but in the region between −0.2 V and 0.2 V, the responses are close to linear. The data of each trace in this regime were fit by a straight line and the resistance (R) was calculated by the reciprocal of the slope.42,44
 Fig. 7  Typical I–V plot from PCAFM. The results were repeatable and reversible. 
Identifying the distributions of data is important for accurate analysis of the data, especially for PCAFM data which have large statistical dispersion. The distributions of data are related to PCAFM experimental errors41,56–58 and the charge transport mechanism.59 It was reported that for self-assembled monolayer tunneling junctions, the dominant charge transport mechanism was Simmons tunneling.41,59,60 The resistance R and the current density J followed log-normal distributions without performing any normality test. However, deviations from the log-normal distribution have been noticed.56 Like monolayer tunneling junctions, the Simmons model was suitable to be applied to analyze the PCAFM data of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid (see the next section). Thus, it is envisaged that both R and J of the hybrid also follow log-normal distributions. To rigorously reveal whether the data are log-normally distributed, the Shapiro–Wilk normality test was performed. The test involves the calculation of the test statistic W. If the p value is larger than the significance level, the null hypothesis of normality cannot be rejected.61 Table S1† shows the skewness, the excess kurtosis and the Shapiro–Wilk test results performed at the 5% significance level. The Shapiro–Wilk test results revealed that most of the R data are neither normally distributed nor log-normally distributed. However, the skewness and the excess kurtosis of logR are closer to zero than those of R, indicating that logR deviates to a lesser extent from normality than R. In general, logR is positively skewed and leptokurtic. Since logR is closer to normality, the logR values will be used in the subsequent statistical analysis.
In order to analyze the symmetry of I–V curves, the rectification ratio Γ was calculated for each curve with and without illumination. In this study, Γ was defined as the ratio of the current at V = 1.2 V to that at −1.2 V. A study reported that both Γ and J follow log-normal distributions.59 However, if J is log-normally distributed, Γ follows a complicated ratio distribution but not the log-normal distribution.62 It is impossible for Γ and J to be mutually log-normal. For simplicity, only logΓ and Γ were analyzed by the Shapiro–Wilk test. The results are shown in Table S2.† Contrary to the previous study,59Γ is closer to the normal distribution than the log-normal distribution. Thus, Γ but not logΓ will be considered in the discussion.
Comparing data obtained under dark and light illumination was a two-sample problem in statistics. A bootstrap method called the nonparametric bias-corrected and accelerated (BCa) method was used to perform the hypothesis tests and the estimation of confidence intervals (CIs). The nonparametric BCa method is second-order accurate, transformation respecting and does not presume any distribution of the data.63 Since most of the data do not follow normal nor log-normal distributions, this statistical method is ideal in the analysis. To draw tenable conclusions from two distributions of data, the BCa method, but not the direct calculation of the mean difference nor that of the percentage change, was used. Suppose θd and θl are the data obtained under dark and light illumination, respectively, where θ is a physical quantity. The test statistic was chosen to be the percentage change calculated by eqn (3). (3)
The null hypothesis H0 is  = 0. The rejection of H0 was made based on the BCa achieved significance level (ASL) according to Table S3.64† The rejection of H0 suggests that illumination has an effect on θ. The calculation details of the ASLs and the CIs have been reported.64
Charge transport mechanism
The charge transport mechanisms in nanomaterials may be described by different models, which include Simmons tunneling, Fowler–Nordheim tunneling, hopping conduction, Poole–Frenkel emission and thermionic emission.65 Different transport mechanisms have their unique I–V characteristics. The I–V data were fit into different models to check the goodness of fit and if the extracted physical quantities are meaningful. It has been found that the I–V data obtained can be best-fit by the Simmons model, suggesting that Simmons tunneling is the dominant charge transport mechanism. Moreover, the Simmons model was used to describe the charge transport across an analyte-coated CNT,49 which was quite similar to the structure of the PTETDA/CNT hybrid. Therefore, in this work the Simmons model was applied to analyze the charge transport of the PTETDA/MWCNT.
Before fitting the I–V data to the Simmons model, the traces in each measurement were averaged by the geometric mean (eqn (4) and (5)): 〈I〉 = 10〈log|I|〉(4) (5)where N is the number of traces and Ii is the current of the i-th trace. Since I is better described by the log-normal distribution rather than the normal distribution, the geometric mean is more suitable than the arithmetic mean.59 The averaged curve was fit into the Simmons model using the linearized approach.66,67 The linearized Simmons model can be expressed as66 (6)where GS is the equilibrium conductance and ρ is the equilibrium shape factor. GS and ρ were extracted from the linear plot of I/V against V2. Then, the GS and ρ values were substituted into eqn (7) to perform nonlinear curve-fitting: (7)where φ0 is the equilibrium barrier height, α(V) = 1 + mV + nV2 and m and n are approximation parameters.66 The contact area A between the AFM tip and the MWCNT is required for the calculation of the barrier width66 as shown in eqn (8): (8)where A was calculated by Hertzian mechanics. If the AFM tip is considered as a sphere and is in contact with the MWCNT, the contact area is elliptical.68 The radius of the AFM tip R was calculated from the height image of the MWCNT by eqn (9):69 (9)where W is the width and h is the height, or equivalently the diameter, of the MWCNT obtained from the height image. Then, the ratio b/a, where a and b are the semi-major axis and semi-minor axis of the ellipse, respectively, can be calculated by eqn (10):68 (10)where (11)r is the radius of the MWCNT, and K(e) and E(e) are the complete elliptic integral of the first kind and the complete elliptic integral of the second kind, respectively. Also, the total force exerted on the MWCNT is the sum of the applied force Fapp from the AFM probe and the adhesive force Fad.44Fad was calculated from the force curve.69 Then, A was calculated by68 (12)where (13)E1 and E2 are the Young's moduli of MWCNTs and the platinum silicide (PtSi) conductive AFM tip used in this work respectively, v1 and v2 are the Poisson's ratio of MWCNTs and that of PtSi respectively. E1 and E2 were taken as 350 GPa (ref. 70) and 211.3 GPa (ref. 71) respectively. v1 was taken as 0.32 (ref. 71) and v2 was assumed to be 0.33.42 When the value A is obtained, L can be calculated by eqn (8).
The change in conductivity G0 of a MWCNT was used to quantify the effect of light illumination, where G0 = 1/R, but the equilibrium conductivity GS was not used. G0 is the physical quantity that can be conveniently calculated from the raw data without any assumption of the charge transport mechanism, whereas GS is the equilibrium conductivity under the assumption of Simmons tunneling. Although Simmons tunneling is suggested to be the dominant charge transport mechanism, other charge transport mechanisms cannot be completely excluded.
In the control experiment, upon white light illumination, the percentage change of G0 of the pristine MWCNT is −1.6% (−9.5%, 6.5%). The numbers in the parentheses are the 95% CI. For the PTETDA/MWCNT, it is 107% (89%, 126%). The 95% CI for the percentage change of G0 of the pristine MWCNT covers both negative and positive values, so a hypothesis test was performed to check whether the null hypothesis which is the percentage change of G0 is equal to zero can be rejected. The ASL is 0.644 (>0.1), and therefore the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. It implies that the data do not provide conclusive evidence to support the effect of white light illumination on G0 for the pristine MWCNT.
To investigate the mechanism of the photoresponse of the PTETDA/MWCNT, the hybrid was illuminated with different wavelengths of light (λ). Fig. 8 shows the percentage increase of G0 as a function of λ and the UV-vis absorption spectrum of PTETDA. The data points of the percentage increase of G0 are in good agreement with the UV-vis absorption spectrum. The maximum increase of G0 is observed at 460 nm and 520 nm while the absorption maximum is at 570 nm. By considering the large solvatochromism of PTETDA (Table S4†), the small discrepancy between the maximum increase of G0 and the absorption maximum may pertain to the different packing efficiency of the conjugated backbone in its pure form and on the MWCNT.72 It has been reported that the photoresponse of MWCNTs is small in the range of 460 nm and 670 nm.73 Moreover, as discussed above, there is no conclusive evidence to support the effect of illumination on G0 for the pristine MWCNT. Therefore, the increased G0 should be mainly due to the presence of the PTETDA wrap. However, there are small increases of G0 at wavelengths longer than 630 nm while the UV-vis absorption of PTETDA is negligible. This may be due to the photoresponse of the MWCNT.74
 Fig. 8  Plot of the percentage increase of G0vs. λ and the UV-vis absorption spectrum of PTETDA in ethanol. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The absorbance is normalized at the absorption peak at 556 nm. 
The symmetry of the I–V curves was considered before applying the Simmons model to ensure correct data treatment. If the charge transport is symmetric, the Simmons model can fit to the I–V data at both negative and positive biases. Otherwise, the Simmons model should fit to the I–V data at negative and positive biases separately.65Γ characterizes the symmetry of the charge transport. Under dark conditions, for pristine MWCNTs, Γ was calculated to be 2.6 ± 0.1 and for the PTETDA/MWCNT, it was 1.8 ± 0.1. The ranges are the 95% CIs using the one-sample nonparametric BCa method. For both materials, the Γ values are greater than unity, indicating that the current at positive bias is higher than at negative bias. This suggests that holes are the dominant charge carriers.46

Fig. 9(a) shows the energy levels of different materials used in this work. The work function of MWCNTs spans in the range between −4.6 and −5.1 eV.75 The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) are located at −5.2 eV and −3.3 eV, respectively.76 The alkyl chains of poly(3-alkylthiophene) do not significantly affect the energy levels of the π-conjugated system.22,36 The positively charged ammonium side groups lower the HOMO and LUMO levels of the PTETDA to approximately −5.7 eV and −3.8 eV, respectively.77,78 The PTETDA wrap forms the barriers and the MWCNT forms a well between them. The system is described as a double barrier model.46 The interaction between the MWCNT and the conjugated backbone affects the energy levels of P3HT only very slightly.36 It is also expected that the energy levels of the PTETDA/MWCNT resemble those of PTETDA. For simplicity, the PTETDA/MWCNT is regarded as a single material, as shown in Fig. 9(b). The double barrier model is also simplified as a single barrier model and the tunneling length has the dimensions of the PTETDA wrap. This kind of simplification has been implemented to analyze the charge transport of nanoparticles which have a less conductive shell wrapping and a more conductive core.46 Since the work functions of electrodes are closer to the HOMO level of the PTETDA/MWCNT, the LUMO level has negligible effect on the charge transport.79 This suggests that holes are the dominant charge carriers.43,80
 Fig. 9  (a) Energy level diagram of different materials. L1 and L2 are the thicknesses of the PTETDA wrap at different sides. The system is described as a double barrier model. (b) Energy band diagram of the electrodes and the PTETDA/MWCNT. The tunneling length is estimated by the total thickness of the PTETDA wrap. (c) and (d) are the energy band diagrams at the negative bias and the positive bias respectively. h+ represents holes. 
The asymmetric charge transport is mainly due to the asymmetric electrical contact. As shown in Fig. 9(a), the work functions of indium–tin-oxide (ITO) and PtSi are 4.7 eV (ref. 19) and 5.0 eV (ref. 81) respectively. The HOMO level of the PTETDA/MWCNT forms an effective tunneling barrier. The effective tunneling barrier may not be exactly the real tunneling barrier because the simplification by treating the PTETDA/MWCNT as a single material ignores the internal geometry of the hybrid and the detailed band shape. In practice, φ0 and L represent the effective tunneling barrier height and width respectively. As shown in Fig. 9(c) and (d), φ0 is larger at negative bias than at positive bias. The comparison of φ0 at negative and positive biases shows that the experimental data are consistent with this explanation (Fig. 10). Under dark conditions and light illumination with different λ, φ0 at negative bias is larger than that at positive bias. This suggests that the difference in the work function of the electrodes leads to asymmetric charge transport.65
 Fig. 10  Plot of the difference between φ0 at negative bias and that at positive bias under different illumination conditions. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. 
Another factor for the asymmetric charge transport is the different geometry of the electrodes.46 The ITO electrode is very large and planar while the AFM tip is small and conical. The electric field is much stronger at the AFM tip than at the ITO electrode. The non-uniform electric field leads to barrier bending. The band becomes steeper at the AFM tip (Fig. 11). At negative bias, the shape of the effective tunneling barrier becomes more convex while at positive bias, it becomes more concave. Since the average tunneling barrier is used in the Simmons model, the convexity of the effective tunneling barrier suggests a larger effective tunneling barrier.82 Therefore, the asymmetric geometry of the electrode also makes Γ larger than unity for both the pristine MWCNT and the PTETDA/MWCNT.
 Fig. 11  Energy band diagrams under the effect of the asymmetrical electrical contact. (a) and (c) are the energy band diagrams at negative bias while (b) and (d) are those at positive bias. (c) and (d) are the energy band diagrams with uneven distribution of dipoles. The dotted lines in (c) and (d) are of the shapes as those in (a) and (b), respectively. Under the effect of the partial positive charges, the shapes become those of the solid lines in (c) and (d). 
Due to the asymmetric charge transport, the I–V data at negative and positive biases were analyzed separately by the Simmons model. Fig. 12 shows the percentage change of Simmons tunneling parameters at different λ. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The results of the hypothesis tests are shown in Table S5.† All the graphs shown in Fig. 12 are quite different from the UV-vis absorption spectrum of PTETDA, although there is a broad valley at around 570 nm for positive bias in the plot of the percentage change of L versus λ. In general, upon illumination and at positive bias, both φ0 and L decrease. At negative bias, the changes in φ0 are different at different wavelengths and the decrease in L is small. The observations at positive bias are consistent with the literature results,65 suggesting a photoinduced electron transfer process from PTETDA to the MWCNT.22,23 The photocurrent was mainly generated by the photogenerated charge carriers, reducing φ0.65 Illumination may also increase the image force, thereby reducing both φ0 and L by rounding off the corners of the effective tunneling barrier.82 In contrast, at negative bias, the increase in φ0 upon illumination is inconsistent with the literature result.65 The reason is not exactly known but it is tentatively explained by the asymmetric electrical contact and uneven distribution of dipoles. There may be a dipolar layer formed between the PTETDA donor and the MWCNT acceptor in the form of dark dipoles and photogenerated excitons.83 The partial positive charges and the partial negative charges are located in the PTETDA wrap and the MWCNT, respectively. The presence of the dipolar layer alone cannot explain the different observations at negative and positive biases because it has the same effect at both biases. Therefore, other factors may come into play, resulting in an asymmetric behavior under different biases. As mentioned before, there is band bending due to asymmetric electrical contact. At negative bias, the region with a steeper band near the AFM tip together with the negative bias attracts more partial positive charges, thereby lowering the energy level. The effective tunneling barrier becomes more convex (Fig. 11(c)). At positive bias, more partial positive charges are attracted to the ITO than to the AFM tip because of the higher electron energy level of the ITO. The effective tunneling barrier becomes less concave (Fig. 11(d)). However, the attracted partial positive charges should be less dense than those attracted to the region near the AFM tip at negative bias because the band is steeper near the AFM tip than near the ITO. Therefore, the uneven distribution of partial charges increases the convexity of the band at negative bias to a larger extent than at positive bias, probably resulting in the increase of φ0 at negative bias at some wavelengths. The partial negative charges are believed to have negligible effect on the band shape because of two reasons. First, the charges in MWCNTs are delocalized along the whole tube,33 so the partial negative charges should be quite even at both positive and negative biases. Second, the band shape is more affected by the less conductive moiety. Since MWCNTs have higher conductivity than PTETDA,84,85 the potential drop across the PTETDA wrap is larger than that across the MWCNT and the band bending is mostly affected by the PTETDA wrap.46,59 Thus, only the partial positive charges on the PTETDA wrap are considered.
 Fig. 12  (a) Plot of the percentage change of φ0vs. λ. (b) Plot of the percentage change of L vs. λ. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The results of the hypothesis tests are also shown in Table S5.† 
Although the hypothesis of uneven distribution of dipoles provides an explanation of the larger percentage change of φ0 at positive bias compared to that at negative bias, it is difficult to analyze further. Moreover, the data obtained at negative bias generally have larger uncertainty as revealed by the longer error bars in Fig. 12. This may also indicate that the Simmons model describes the positive bias situation better than the negative bias situation. In fact, the image force is only empirically treated in α(V) in eqn (7) (ref. 66) and the effect of illumination is completely ignored.66,82 The intractability arises from the perturbation of illumination during tunneling.86 To the best of our knowledge, there is no simple model to deal with it. The omission of illumination in the Simmons model partially explains the difference in shape between the graphs in Fig. 12 and the UV-vis absorption spectrum of PTETDA.
The relationship between the charge transport and the illumination power P was also investigated (Fig. 13). Since there were several distributions of data, statistical analysis was performed on the regression data87 and the results are shown in Table S6.†G0 and both tunneling parameters φ0 and L at negative bias do not show a linear relationship with P. In contrast, at positive bias, both φ0 and L decreases linearly with P. The lack of a complete model hinders further constructive discussion. Nevertheless, the linear relationships at positive bias match with our expectation because the photocurrent response generally has a linear relationship with P.88 Again, this may imply that the Simmons model describe the positive bias data better than the negative bias data.
 Fig. 13  (a) Plot of the percentage change of G0vs. P upon white light illumination. (b) Plot of the percentage change of φ0vs. P. (c) Plot of the percentage change of L vs. P. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The results of the hypothesis tests are also shown in Table S6.† Linear fit is only applicable to the positive bias data in (b) and (c). 
Conclusions
In summary, PTETDA is an effective dispersant of MWCNTs and increases the photoresponse of MWCNTs. In particular, G0 of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid increases by 107% upon white light illumination. MD simulations show that both the conjugated backbone and the alkyl chains of PTETDA facilitate the dispersion of MWCNTs. Compared with alkyl chains, the conjugated backbone has a stronger effective interaction with the MWCNTs from the analysis of RDFs. EFM successfully detected the charges of the PTETDA wrap on the MWCNTs. It has established a pioneering application of EFM to characterize the polyelectrolyte coatings on nanoparticles. PCAFM was used to measure the charge transport properties of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. The nonparametric BCa bootstrap method was used in the statistical analysis of the large number of PCAFM data. This convenient method has laid the groundwork for the analysis of PCAFM data in the future. PCAFM has shown that the photoresponse of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid mainly originates from PTETDA. This provides an approach of using a photosensitizing dispersant to tune the photoresponse at different wavelengths, which is useful in organic optoelectronic devices.
Experimental
Synthesis of PTETDA
PTETDA was synthesized according to the modified literature procedure.18 Triethylamine was added into poly[3-(12-bromododecyl)thiophene]89–92 in tetrahydrofuran. The reaction mixture was heated to reflux for 48 hours. The reaction was quenched with hexane and purple precipitate was formed in the reaction mixture. The precipitate was filtered to obtain purple solids as the product. Trace amounts of excess solvents and reactants were removed under vacuum for 20 minutes. The number average degree of polymerization of PTETDA was between 6 and 10. The molecular weight was estimated by using end group analysis from the 1H NMR spectrum of poly[3-(12-bromododecyl)thiophene]93 and assuming that the conversion to PTETDA was complete. Yield: 83%. The UV-vis absorption spectrum was obtained by using a Varian Cary 50 UV-vis spectrometer.
Functionalization of MWCNTs
The MWCNTs produced by the chemical vapour deposition method were purchased from NanoLab Inc. (outer diameter = 15 ± 5 nm, length = 5–20 μm). 10 mg of PTETDA and 1 mg of MWCNT were added into ethanol. The mixture was sonicated for 15 minutes. The solution was filtered through a cotton wool filter to remove large aggregates, and then filtered through a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter (pore size = 0.2 μm). The PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid was obtained as black powder on the membrane of the PTFE filter. The hybrid was further washed with an excessive amount of ethanol and then dried in vacuo for 20 minutes.
SEM and TEM
SEM images were obtained by using a JEOL JSM-7001F field emission scanning electron microscope. The SEM image was prepared by drop-casting the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid in ethanol solution onto a silicon wafer, which had been washed in sequence with ethanol, isopropanol and acetone by ultrasonication. TEM images were obtained by using a Philips Tecnai G2 20 S-TWIN Transmission Electron Microscope. To prepare the TEM sample, the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid in ethanol solution was dropped onto a 400 mesh copper grid coated with a holey thin carbon film at room temperature.
MD simulations
MD simulations were performed in NAMD 2.9 (ref. 94) using the CHARMM General Force Field (CGenFF) v. 2b7.95 The molecules were constructed in VMD 1.9.2 and the simulation results were viewed also in VMD.96 The force field parametrization of PTETDA was performed by Force Field Toolkit Plugin 1.0.97 All quantum mechanical calculations for the parametrization were carried out by Gaussian 09.98 The geometry of the molecular fragments of PTETDA were optimized at the MP2/6-31G(d) level by Gaussian 09. The charges were optimized at the HF/6-31G(d) level. The bond energy terms, the angle energy terms and the dihedral energy terms, were optimized at the MP2/6-31G(d) level. The van der Waals/Lennard-Jones parameters of bromide ions were taken from ref. 99. The van der Waals/Lennard-Jones parameters of other atom types were directly taken from CGenFF parameters files by analogy. All the computations were performed in the GRIDPOINT system of the University of Hong Kong.
Three systems were used in the simulation. The first one contained a PTETDA polymer in a 96 × 96 × 96 Å3 ethanol box; the second one contains a PTETDA polymer 7 Å away from a MWCNT in a 116 × 114 × 390 Å3 ethanol box; the third one contains an array of 3 × 2 PTETDA polymers on a MWCNT in a 188 × 138 × 390 Å3 ethanol box. The PTETDA polymers were 14 Å apart and the two polymers closest to the MWCNT were 7 Å away from the MWCNT. The MWCNT was simplified as a 20.0 nm long (30, 30)-SWCNT and the PTETDA has a degree of polymerization of 6. In all systems, energy minimization was performed before the MD simulations. The simulation was performed for 2 ns with a time step of 1 fs in the NPT ensemble. Langevin dynamics with a damping coefficient of 1 ps−1 was applied to maintain the temperature at 298 K.100 The Langevin piston method was applied with a piston period of 100 fs and a piston decay of 50 fs to maintain the pressure at 1 atm.101, 102 Periodic boundary conditions were applied. The particle mesh Ewald method with 1 Å grid spacing was employed to take the full electrostatic interactions into account.103
EFM
EFM was performed using an Asylum Research MFP-3D-SA atomic force microscope. Asylum Research ASYELEC-01 iridium-coated cantilevers were used. The spring constants of the cantilevers were measured by the built-in thermal noise method.104 The two-pass technique nap mode was used. In the first pass, the tapping mode AFM recorded the morphology of the sample. In the second pass, a bias of VEFM was applied on the AFM tip with respect to the substrate and the AFM probe was set to oscillate approximately 100 nm above the sample surface. At this height, van der Waals forces had a negligible effect on the AFM probe and the EFM signal mainly originated from Columbic force gradients.105 A heavily p-doped silicon (p++ Si) wafer with a 300 nm thick oxide layer (SiO2) was used as the substrate to prevent charge leakage processes.106 The PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid was drop-cast onto the substrate, which was grounded so that VS was close to zero.
For tip calibration, EFM was performed on a blank substrate to obtain α. When a bias VEFM is applied on the tip, there is a phase shift Φ due to the capacitive force gradient. After obtaining the quality factor Qtip and the force constant k of the cantilever by standard cantilever calibration, the second partial derivative of the tip-substrate capacitance  can be obtained by eqn (14):105 (14)
This procedure is repeated for different values of z. Using the empirical power law40 (15)α can be obtained by calculating the slope of the plot of versus logz. Straight lines fit well the data points and the coefficients of determination are all higher than 0.984. The α values range from 1.3 to 1.5, which shows that the tips were sharp enough to record accurate EFM data.40 After the tip calibration, EFM was performed for pristine MWCNTs and the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. Since the frequency shift, but not the phase shift, is directly proportional to the capacitive force gradient,53 the frequency-modulated EFM was used so that the EFM data were more accurate and subsequent calculations could be simpler. To perform EFM in the frequency-modulated mode, a phase lock loop was applied to fix the phase and allow the frequency to vary.
PCAFM
PCAFM was performed using an Asylum Research MFP-3D-SA atomic force microscope. Nanosensors PtSi-NCH PtSi-coated silicon cantilevers were used. The spring constants of the cantilevers were measured by the built-in thermal noise method.104 A schematic experimental setup is shown in Fig. 6. At the center of the iron sample stage, there was a hole to allow light to pass through and shine on the sample. The light guide transferred light from the illuminator (Dolan-Jenner LMI-6000 Fiber Optic LED Illuminator) to the sample stage. There was an optical band-pass filter in front of the illuminator to select the incident light wavelength. The bandwidth of each optical band-pass filter was 4 nm and the difference in target wavelengths between two successive filters was 30 nm. The target wavelength of the filters ranged from 460 to 670 nm. The illumination intensities were measured by Newport Optical Power Meter Model 1830-C and are listed in Table S7† for reference. The substrate was a piece of glass coated with patterned ITO. The conductive magnetic dice had two functions: to connect the crocodile clip to the ITO and to fix the sample on the sample stage. To perform electrical measurements of an individual MWCNT, a MWCNT sitting across the boundary between the ITO and the glass was found by tapping mode AFM (Fig. S4†). The conductive AFM probe was positioned at around 1 μm away from the ITO for consistency and controlled carefully to touch the MWCNT gently at 10 nN applied force, which is the minimum force to obtain stable measurements.46 The AFM probe acted as an electrode to allow the current to pass through the MWCNT and then the ITO to complete the circuit. The sample and the AFM probe were located inside the AFM hood, in which the AEK-ATC Air Temperature Controller set the temperature to (25 ± 0.1) °C to minimize the temperature fluctuation and thus the thermal drift. This facilitated pinpointing the desired position and stabilized electrical measurements. There were 50 measurements for each illumination condition and each measurement consisted of four cycles scanning from −2 V to 2 V with frequency 1 Hz.
Statistical analysis and mathematical work

Eqn (10) and (12) were solved by Matlab 7.0.4. The nonlinear curve fitting to eqn (7) was done by the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm in IgorPro 6.3. Bootstrap resampling was performed in IgorPro and a program was written to employ the nonparametric BCa bootstrap method to analyze the data. The Shapiro–Wilk normality test was performed in Origin 8.1.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (HKU700311P, 700613P and T23-713/11). Partial financial support by the Hong Kong/Macao Scholar Collaborative Research Scheme, NSFC, China (project no. 51328302) is also acknowledged. NAMD was developed by the Theoretical and Computational Biophysics Group in the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The computation was performed in part by using the HKU Information Technology Services research computing facilities that are supported in part by the Hong Kong UGC Special Equipment Grant (SEG HKU09).
Notes and references
R. Radbeh, E. Parbaile, M. Chakaroun, B. Ratier, M. Aldissi and A. Moliton, Polym. Int., 2010, 59, 1514–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Brown, K. Takechi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4776–4782 CAS .
J. A. Misewich, R. Martel, P. Avouris, J. C. Tsang, S. Heinze and J. Tersoff, Science, 2003, 300, 783–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. R. Shea, T. Hertel and P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2447–2449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hecht, R. J. A. Ramirez, M. Briman, E. Artukovic, K. S. Chichak, J. F. Stoddart and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2031–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pang, P. Imin, I. Zhitomirsky and A. Adronov, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10376–10381 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Shulaker, G. Hills, N. Patil, H. Wei, H.-Y. Chen, H. S. P. Wong and S. Mitra, Nature, 2013, 501, 526–530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 13–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ehli, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, D. M. Guldi, F. Paolucci, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, M. Melle-Franco, F. Zerbetto, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11222–11231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, J. W. Shin, Y. B. Lee, M. Y. Cho, S. H. Lee, D. H. Park, D. K. Jang, C. J. Lee and J. Joo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4197–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Vijayakumar, B. Balan, M.-J. Kim and M. Takeuchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4533–4539 CAS .
Y. K. Kang, O.-S. Lee, P. Deria, S. H. Kim, T.-H. Park, D. A. Bonnell, J. G. Saven and M. J. Therien, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1414–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, K. C. Lo, J. Xi, D. L. Phillips and W. K. Chan, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 1833–1842 RSC .
C. H. Li, A. M. C. Ng, C. S. K. Mak, A. B. Djurišić and W. K. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 4, 74–80 Search PubMed .
C. Backes, C. D. Schmidt, F. Hauke, C. Böttcher and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2172–2184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nish, J.-Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Chang, R. Zhu, E. Richard, C.-C. Chen, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3284–3289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sgobba and D. M. Guldi, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 153–157 Search PubMed .
E. Kymakis, E. Koudoumas, I. Franghiadakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 1058 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng and T. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16827–16833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharyya, E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4819–4823 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kymakis, I. Alexandrou and G. A. J. Amaratunga, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1764–1768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley, J. Schmidt and Y. Talmon, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1379–1382 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, D. Li, C. Li, K. Lu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei, Y. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4349–4355 RSC .
W.-Y. Chou, C.-W. Kuo, C.-W. Chang, B.-L. Yeh and M.-H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5474–5480 RSC .
T. Mélin, H. Diesinger, D. Deresmes and D. Stiévenard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 166101 CrossRef .
S. S. Datta, D. R. Strachan, E. J. Mele and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 7–11 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, M. Freitag, R. Martel, L. Brus and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 783–787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heo and M. Bockrath, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 853–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sand Jespersen and J. Nygård, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 88, 309–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zdrojek, T. Mélin, C. Boyaval, D. Stiévenard, B. Jouault, M. Wozniak, A. Huczko, W. Gebicki and L. Adamowicz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 213114 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zdrojek, T. Heim, D. Brunel, A. Mayer and T. Mélin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 033404 CrossRef .
D. M. Guldi, H. Taieb, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 871–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saito, V. Troiani, H. Qiu, N. Solladié, T. Sakata, H. Mori, M. Ohama and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2006, 111, 1194–1199 CrossRef .
B. K. Kuila, K. Park and L. Dai, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6699–6705 CrossRef CAS .

          C. H. Li, Ph.D. thesis, The University of Hong Kong,  2011 .
S. A. Steiner, T. F. Baumann, B. C. Bayer, R. Blume, M. A. Worsley, W. J. MoberlyChan, E. L. Shaw, R. Schlögl, A. J. Hart, S. Hofmann and B. L. Wardle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12144–12154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Jensen, S. S. Kanyal, V. Gupta, M. A. Vail, A. E. Dadson, M. Engelhard, R. Vanfleet, R. C. Davis and M. R. Linford, J. Chromatogr. A, 2012, 1257, 195–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mélin, H. Diesinger, D. Deresmes and D. Stiévenard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 035321 CrossRef .
V. B. Engelkes, J. M. Beebe and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16801–16810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Ditzler, C. Karunatilaka, V. R. Donuru, H. Y. Liu and A. V. Tivanski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4429–4435 CAS .
V. B. Engelkes, J. M. Beebe and C. D. Frisbie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14287–14296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Wold and C. D. Frisbie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5549–5556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Beebe, B. Kim, J. W. Gadzuk, C. Daniel Frisbie and J. G. Kushmerick, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 026801 CrossRef .
D. Xu, G. D. Watt, J. N. Harb and R. C. Davis, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 571–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Coffey, O. G. Reid, D. B. Rodovsky, G. P. Bartholomew and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 738–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Walther, R. Jaffe, T. Halicioglu and P. Koumoutsakos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9980–9987 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Léonard, The Physics of Carbon Nanotube Devices, William Andrew, Norwich,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. Gordiz, S. M. Vaez Allaei and F. Kowsary, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 251901 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, V. Koutsos and M. Zaiser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10009–10014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Foroutan and A. T. Nasrabadi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5320–5326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Mélin, M. Zdrojek and D. Brunel, in Scanning Probe Microscopy in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, ed. B. Bhushan, Springer, Berlin, Germany,  2010, vol. 1, ch. 4, pp. 89–128 Search PubMed .
C. Staii, A. T. Johnson and N. J. Pinto, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 859–862 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Coffey and D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Reus, C. A. Nijhuis, J. R. Barber, M. M. Thuo, S. Tricard and G. M. Whitesides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6714–6733 CAS .
H. Basch, R. Cohen and M. A. Ratner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1668–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Andrews, R. P. Van Duyne and M. A. Ratner, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Nijhuis, W. F. Reus and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18386–18401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Seo, A. V. Konchenko, J. Lee, G. S. Bang and H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7617–7624 RSC .
S. S. Shapiro and M. B. Wilk, Biometrika, 1965, 52, 591–611 CrossRef .
D. V. Hinkley, Biometrika, 1969, 56, 635–639 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Efron, J. Am. Stat. Assoc., 1987, 82, 171–185 CrossRef .

          B. Efron and R. J. Tibshirani, An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Chapman & Hall, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
J.-C. Li, D. Wang and D.-C. Ba, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10986–10994 CAS .
A. Vilan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4431–4444 CAS .
I. V. Malyar, D. A. Gorin, S. V. Stetsyura and S. Santer, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 3427–3435 CrossRef CAS .

          K. L. Johnson, Contact Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,  1987 Search PubMed .

          V. V. Tsukruk and S. Singamaneni, Scanning Probe Microscopy of Soft Matter: Fundamentals and Practices, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2012 Search PubMed .
G. Guhados, W. Wan, X. Sun and J. L. Hutter, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 033514 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Niranjan, Intermetallics, 2012, 26, 150–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bondarev, J. Zedník, I. Šloufová, A. Sharf, M. Procházka, J. Pfleger and J. Vohlídal, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 3073–3081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. De Crescenzi, F. Tombolini, M. Scarselli, S. D. Gobbo, E. Speiser, P. Castrucci, M. Diociaiuti, S. Casciardi, E. Gatto and M. Venanzi, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 2810–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Castrucci, C. Scilletta, S. D. Gobbo, M. Scarselli, L. Camilli, M. Simeoni, B. Delley, A. Continenza and M. D. Crescenzi, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 115701 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 112–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Berson, R. deBettignies, S. Bailly, S. Guillerez and B. Jousselme, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3363–3370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elbing, A. Garcia, S. Urban, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9146–9155 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Seo and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10042–10043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Pakoulev and V. Burtman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21413–21421 CAS .
I. D. Parker, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 1656–1666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Niranjan, S. Zollner, L. Kleinman and A. A. Demkov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2006, 73, 195332 CrossRef .
J. G. Simmons, J. Appl. Phys., 1963, 34, 1793–1803 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bässler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Perebeinos, J. Tersoff and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 205–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Park, J. A. Lim, Y. Jang, M. Hwang, H. S. Lee, D. H. Lee, H.-J. Lee, J.-B. Baek and K. Cho, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 317–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hartstein and Z. A. Weinberg, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1978, 11, L469 CrossRef CAS .

          J. H. Zar, Biostatistical Analysis, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 5th edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Freitag, Y. Martin, J. A. Misewich, R. Martel and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1067–1071 Search PubMed .
L. Zhai, R. L. Pilston, K. L. Zaiger, K. K. Stokes and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2002, 36, 61–64 CrossRef .
P. Bäuerle, F. Würthner and S. Heid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1990, 29, 419–420 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, X. Kou, W. Ni, Z. Sun, L. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6222–6229 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Li, S.-J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, Y.-S. Lee, K. Zong and S.-C. Yu, Macromol. Res., 2009, 17, 356–360 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Iovu, E. E. Sheina, R. R. Gil and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8649–8656 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa, C. Chipot, R. D. Skeel, L. Kalé and K. Schulten, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1781–1802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vanommeslaeghe, E. Hatcher, C. Acharya, S. Kundu, S. Zhong, J. Shim, E. Darian, O. Guvench, P. Lopes, I. Vorobyov and A. D. Mackerell, J. Comput. Chem., 2010, 31, 671–690 Search PubMed .
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, J. Mol. Graphics, 1996, 14, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Mayne, J. Saam, K. Schulten, E. Tajkhorshid and J. C. Gumbart, J. Comput. Chem., 2013, 34, 2757–2770 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. J. A. Montgomery, J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, Ö. Farkas, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, J. Cioslowski and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, revision C.01, Gaussian Inc., Wallingford, CT, USA,  2009 Search PubMed .
I. S. Joung and T. E. Cheatham, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 9020–9041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Lemons and A. Gythiel, Am. J. Phys., 1997, 65, 1079–1081 Search PubMed .
G. J. Martyna, D. J. Tobias and M. L. Klein, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 4177–4189 Search PubMed .
S. E. Feller, Y. Zhang, R. W. Pastor and B. R. Brooks, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 103, 4613–4621 Search PubMed .
T. Darden, D. York and L. Pedersen, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 10089–10092 Search PubMed .
J. L. Hutter and J. Bechhoefer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1993, 64, 1868–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Jespersen and J. Nygård, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1838–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mélin, D. Deresmes and D. Stiévenard, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 5054–5056 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00819gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure of PTETDA.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. (c) EDX spectrum of a group of functionalized MWCNTs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Snapshots of the MD simulations of (a) a single PTETDA polymer on a MWCNT and (b) an array of 3 × 2 PTETDA polymers on a MWCNT. The MWCNT is simplified as a SWCNT with a large diameter. For clarity, ethanol molecules are not shown. In (a), the conjugated backbone is colored as blue, the alkyl chains as yellow and the ammonium headgroups as green. Some alkyl chains interact with ethanol molecules and stay away from the MWCNT. The bromide ions are not shown. In (b), the PTETDA polymer is colored according to elements and the brown spheres are bromide ions. The bromide counterions can diffuse into the ethanol and form a cloud of charges around the PTETDA polymer.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the EFM measurement. (b) Height image and (c) EFM image of the PTETDA/MWCNT. (d) Plot of Δf vs. distance along the red line in (c). The green triangle is located at the PTETDA/MWCNT and the blue dot is taken as the background. The frequency shift of the PTETDA/MWCNT is negative with respect to the background.	 

 	Fig. 5  Box-and-whisker plots of (a) Q, (b) l and (c) VCNT of pristine MWCNTs and the PTETDA/MWCNT hybrid. The e in the units of Q and l is the elementary charge. The whiskers represent the 10th and the 90th percentiles.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the PCAFM measurement.	 

 	Fig. 7  Typical I–V plot from PCAFM. The results were repeatable and reversible.	 
	(3)
〈I〉 = 10〈log|I|〉	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 8  Plot of the percentage increase of G0vs. λ and the UV-vis absorption spectrum of PTETDA in ethanol. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The absorbance is normalized at the absorption peak at 556 nm.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Energy level diagram of different materials. L1 and L2 are the thicknesses of the PTETDA wrap at different sides. The system is described as a double barrier model. (b) Energy band diagram of the electrodes and the PTETDA/MWCNT. The tunneling length is estimated by the total thickness of the PTETDA wrap. (c) and (d) are the energy band diagrams at the negative bias and the positive bias respectively. h+ represents holes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Plot of the difference between φ0 at negative bias and that at positive bias under different illumination conditions. The error bars represent the 95% CIs.	 

 	Fig. 11  Energy band diagrams under the effect of the asymmetrical electrical contact. (a) and (c) are the energy band diagrams at negative bias while (b) and (d) are those at positive bias. (c) and (d) are the energy band diagrams with uneven distribution of dipoles. The dotted lines in (c) and (d) are of the shapes as those in (a) and (b), respectively. Under the effect of the partial positive charges, the shapes become those of the solid lines in (c) and (d).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Plot of the percentage change of φ0vs. λ. (b) Plot of the percentage change of L vs. λ. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The results of the hypothesis tests are also shown in Table S5.†	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Plot of the percentage change of G0vs. P upon white light illumination. (b) Plot of the percentage change of φ0vs. P. (c) Plot of the percentage change of L vs. P. The error bars represent the 95% CIs. The results of the hypothesis tests are also shown in Table S6.† Linear fit is only applicable to the positive bias data in (b) and (c).	 
	(14)
	(15)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00819g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
