Halide perovskites and high-pressure technologies: a fruitful encounter  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2QM01257J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2QM01257J
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 2102-2119Halide perovskites and high-pressure technologies: a fruitful encounter

        
          
            Fang 
            Xu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongtao 
            Zou
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanmeng 
            Dai
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mu 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Zeren 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ultraintense Laser and Advanced Material Technology, Center for Advanced Material Diagnostic Technology, and College of Engineering Physics, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen 518118, People's Republic of China. E-mail: limu@sztu.edu.cn; zeren109@yeah.net
Received 
      6th December 2022
    , Accepted 3rd March 2023First published on 9th March 2023AbstractRecent decades have witnessed significant progress in halide perovskites, a rising star in emerging optoelectronic technology. Their development appeared to have reached a ceiling, and few breakthroughs in novel properties were emerging. But there is an exception: high-pressure techniques, which offer a promising way to synthesize new halide perovskites and change the properties of the existing perovskites. This review article provides an overview of research advances in high-pressure technologies for the development of halide perovskites. It starts with an introduction to apparatus for creating high pressures. Then, the synthesis of halide perovskites is discussed to show the effects of high pressures on their composition, morphology, etc. Then, high-pressure-driven modification of halide perovskites is reviewed, including their crystal structure, bandgap, quantum yield and ionic movement. Although plenty of achievements have been made in this field, challenges still remain, such as exploring new halide perovskites and stabilization of the high-pressure phase under ambient conditions.
Fang Xu
Fang Xu is currently an assistant professor at Shenzhen Technology University. She received her PhD degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering of The Chinese University of Hong Kong and B.S. degree from the College of Applied Physics of Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on semiconductor sensors, perovskite solar cells and THz photodetectors.
Yongtao Zou
Yongtao Zou is currently a Full Professor & Doctoral Supervisor at Shenzhen Technology University. Prof. Zou's interest is focused on LVP- and DAC-based high-pressure research, including novel materials synthesis, phase transition, equation of state, sound velocity and elasticity of condensed-matter under high P–T conditions using ultrasonic interferometry and synchrotron X-ray diffraction, and Raman spectroscopy.
Yanmeng Dai
Yanmeng Dai is currently an assistant professor at Shenzhen Technology University. He received his B.S. degree in Applied Physics from Zhengzhou University in 2009 and PhD degree in Condensed Matter Physics from the University of Science and Technology of China. He joined Shenzhen Technology University in 2020. His research interests include plasmon-enhanced light-matter interactions, metasurfaces, metamaterials, X-ray source and imaging, etc.
Mu Li
Mu Li is currently a professor in Shenzhen Technology University. He received his B.S. degree and PhD degree in aerospace propulsion theory and engineering from Northwestern Polytechnical University. From 2008 to 2010, he was a postdoctoral fellow at the Mechanics Postdoctoral Station of the China Academy of Engineering Physics, and from December 2014 to December 2016, he was a visiting scholar in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley. He joined Shenzhen Technology University in 2019. His research interests include laser–matter interaction, high pressure physics, earth and planetary physics, shock and detonation physics, and space propulsion.
Zeren Li
Zeren Li is currently a professor at Shenzhen Technology University. He received his PhD degree in opto-electronic technology at Tianjin University. He is a member of the Board of Directors of the Chinese Society of Optical Engineering and a member of the Standing Committee of the Special Committee on Optoelectronic Technology and Systems of the Chinese Society of Optics. His research covers the theory and technology of optoelectronics.
1. Introduction
Natural perovskites, such as Bridgmanite, are the most abundant minerals on our planet. They are formed in the high-temperature and high-pressure environment of the inner earth and have a general formula of ABX3.1 The extreme conditions force the constituent atoms to form a compact lattice, which exhibits a close-packed face-centered cubic structure. The A site cations are located at the interstice of [BX6]4− octahedra with the representative formula of CaTiO3 (Fig. 1a).2–4 To form a stable perovskite-type structure, all atoms should have suitable radii to make the tolerance factor (τ) be less than 4.18 (Fig. 1b).3 The tolerance factor mentioned here refers to the one defined by C. J. Bartel in 2019, not the Goldschmidt tolerance factor. This τ achieves a classification accuracy of 92% for 576 experimentally characterized ABX3 solids.
 Fig. 1  (a) Cubic perovskite crystal structure.4 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. The A site cations could be calcium ions (Ca2+), methylammonium ions (MA+), cesium ions (Cs+), etc. The B site cations could be titanium ions (Ti4+), lead ions (Pb2+), tin ions (Sn2+), etc. The X site anions could be oxygen ions (O2−), iodide ions (I−), bromide ions (Br−), etc. (b) Perovskite classification for tolerance factor (τ) < 4.18.3 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 3, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In addition to natural perovskites, there is a large family of artificial perovskites, including halide perovskites.5–10 At present, halide perovskites are a superstar in this family, due to their supreme optoelectronic properties and low fabrication costs.4,11–14 Their X sites are halogen anions, such as chloride ions (Cl−), bromide ions (Br−), and iodide ions (I−).15,16 Their B site cations are normally lead ions (Pb2+) or tin ions (Sn2+).17 Their A site cations could be CH3NH3+ (MA+), cesium ions (Cs+), or other organic/inorganic cations with a suitable radius.7,18 Taking MAPbI3 as an example, its A site is MA+, B site is Pb2+ and X site is I−. The Pb and I determine its valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM), while the organic cation serves as the carrier pathway.19,20 These features result in a direct bandgap for MAPbI3 of 1.56 eV, and a relatively long carrier diffusion length, which delivers highly efficient photon-to-current conversion. Other species of halide perovskites also exhibit distinct advantages in their optoelectronic properties compared with other semiconductors.21–23 Solar cells made with halide perovskite absorbers have achieved a certified power conversion efficiency of 25.7%, which is almost the same as that of single crystalline silicon (Si) solar cells (26.7%).24 Light emitting diodes (LEDs) made with halide perovskite emitters have over 20% external quantum efficiency, which is comparable to commercial LEDs.25 X-ray detectors made with halide perovskite absorbers exhibit over 10000 μC Gyair−1 cm−2 sensitivity, which is 500 times larger than that of amorphous Se-based detectors.26–28 Halide perovskites are indeed a game-changer in the field of optoelectronics.29,30
A great deal of effort has been devoted to the development of fabrication strategies, composition engineering and post-treatment techniques for halide perovskites.12,13,31–34 Various halide perovskites have been synthesized, such as mixed cation perovskites (MA0.17FA0.83Pb1.08(I0.83Br0.17)3etc.) and 2D perovskites (BA2PbI4etc.).34–37 The quality of halide perovskites has been greatly improved: first, their bandgap has approached the optimal value for photovoltaic (PV) applications of 1.1 eV to 1.5 eV; second, crystal defects have been largely suppressed; and third, the operation time of perovskite solar cells has been prolonged to over 3000 h.35,37–39 However, improvement in these methodologies appears to be reaching a ceiling. New compounds, and novel properties of existing materials, are desired but hard to find nowadays. A different paradigm is needed to advance halide perovskites for further applications.
Pressure is a key parameter in thermodynamic systems. Under high pressure (typically exceeding 10 MPa), the distances between atoms or molecules of materials can decrease and their interactions can change correspondingly. At first, orbital overlapping of elements could increase, which changes the bandgap and other properties. Moreover, phases at high pressure are usually different to phases at 1 atm, and could exhibit different properties and functions. Thus, the composition, morphology, and properties of halide perovskites could be adjusted by compressing them or changing the pressure during synthesis.40–44 As their lattice parameters are changed under high pressure, halide perovskites could exhibit significantly different phases, and optical and electrical properties, bringing many opportunities.2,41,45,46
High-pressure techniques have been developed over nearly 300 years.47,48 There are many measurements that can be performed under high pressure, including photoluminescence (PL), ultraviolet-visible-infrared absorption/reflection spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), neutron scattering, Mossbaüer spectroscopy, conductance, dielectric constant, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), electron spin resonance (ESR), photocurrent, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).49–53 Thus various properties under high pressure can be obtained, including crystal structures, lattice parameters, band structures, electron spin, valence state, electron transfer, lattice vibration, phonon frequency, magnetic susceptibility, Debye temperature, Curie temperature and Young's modulus. The use of these well-established techniques on halide perovskites is certainly a promising way forward.
In this review, we introduce technologies for generating high pressures, and review recent advances of halide perovskites under high pressures. In the high-pressure technology section, static-pressure-loading and dynamic-pressure-loading techniques are discussed, including diamond anvil cells (DAC), large-volume Bridgman anvil cells (LAC), piston–cylinder devices, belt apparatus, multi-anvil cells (MAC), laser-driven ramp compression, and light gas guns. In the section on the synthesis of halide perovskites under high pressure, we discuss the effect of high pressures on the morphology and synthesis of perovskites using hydrothermal methods. In the section on modification of halide perovskites with high pressure, high pressure is employed at the post-synthesis stage to adjust the properties of halide perovskites, including crystal structures, bandgaps, quantum yields and ionic movements. In the last section, we explore the prospects of this interesting field that offer notable potential.
2. High-pressure loading techniques
Before discussing halide perovskites under high pressure, we examine techniques for generating high pressure. Various techniques can create pressure in the range of 1 MPa to over 1 TPa.47,48,54–60 A comprehensive understanding of these techniques will help us to discuss their applications. The ultra-high-pressure loading techniques can be divided into two kinds: static and dynamic compression. They are quite distinct.
2.1. Techniques for static compression
Static compression is an isothermal process. The enthalpy of the system decreases as its volume decreases, when its temperature is constant.54 Thus, we can study the crystallography, electrical/optical properties of samples, etc. at room temperature. In addition, temperature modules could be added to the pressure loading system, enabling fine control of temperature from 10 K to over 2000 K.47

2.1.1. Diamond anvil cell (DAC) for small-volume samples. 
The diamond anvil cell (DAC) is the most widely used one among all static high-pressure loading apparatuses, because of its wide pressure range, versatility and relatively low cost.40,43,48,58–66 A DAC consists of two opposing diamond anvils with small culets pointing to each other, a pressure-transmitting medium (PTM) surrounding the sample, and a gasket for securing the sample (Fig. 2a).48,67 The pressure can be loaded by mechanically compressing the anvils with simple tightening components, such as bolts with flying washers. In addition to its simplicity, a DAC provides a wide pressure range of 0.1 MPa to 600 GPa. It allows X-ray and wide-band light to pass through, which enables X-ray detection, Raman spectroscopy, UV-vis spectroscopy and other useful measurements.43,61,62,65,67 Consequently, at present, most research on halide perovskites under high pressure is done using a DAC.2,46,67–69 Due to the high cost of large diamonds, the anvil size is typically ∼0.5 carats with culets of 10 μm–1 mm. A DAC requires strict alignment of the two opposed anvils to prevent premature anvil breakage and blowouts. The gasket thickness should be much smaller than the diamond culet's radius, normally at 100 μm.47,48 Thus, samples in a DAC need to be very small to fit the cells. In summary, the DAC is powerful, cost-efficient and portable, but can offer only limited space for samples. These features mean that a DAC is an excellent tool especially for fundamental studies of materials under ultra-high static pressure (Table 1).
 Fig. 2  Scheme of static compression apparatus: (a) opposed anvil cells. Diamond anvil cells and large-volume Bridgman anvil cells are examples. (b) Piston–cylinder device. (c) Belt apparatus. (a–c) Sectional views. (d) A multi-anvil cell: 4-anvil configuration. 
Table 1 Comparison of techniques for static compression47,48,54,55,67,70,71




Equipment
Diamond anvil cell (DAC)
Large-volume anvil cell (LAC)
Piston–cylinder device
Belt apparatus
Multi-anvil cell (MAC)




Pressure
0.1 MPa to 600 GPa
<30 GPa
<10 GPa
<15 GPa
80 GPa


Advantages
Powerful, cost-efficient, portable
Simple, stable
Large sample size: 1 mm to several meters
Larger sample volume than LAC, easy to align, can be maintained at pressure and temperature for a long time
Sample volume of 1 cm3, pressure uniformity, easy to align


Disadvantages
Limited sample space, level of μm
Low maximum pressure, unavoidable pressure gradient
Short lifetime, high cost
Low maximum pressure
Expensive






2.1.2. Four devices for large-volume samples. 
For large-volume samples, 4 basic kinds of apparatus can offer static high pressure: large-volume Bridgman anvil cells (LAC); piston–cylinder devices; belt apparatus; and multiple anvil cells (MAC).
LACs and DACs are both types of Bridgman anvil cells and have the same configuration (Fig. 2a). But no single crystalline diamond is large enough for LAC anvils, so they are made of hard metals or polycrystalline diamonds. A semiempirical relationship between the maximum achievable pressure (Pmax) and the volume of the cell (Vcell) is Pmax ∝ Vcell−n, with n ≈ 2–3.60 A LAC can offer pressures of less than 30 GPa, with a larger sample volume than that of a DAC. In the Bridgman anvil cells, the sample under high pressure is lens-shaped, being thicker at the center and thinner at the edges.47 Thus, a pressure gradient forms in solid samples, the pressure being highest at the center along the anvil axis, decreasing to much smaller pressures at the interface with the gasket. This phenomenon is caused by the elastic deformation of the anvils and strength of the sample, which makes the measurement error-prone. In summary, the LAC apparatus has advantages of simplicity and stability, while its low maximum pressure and unavoidable pressure gradient limit its further utilization (Table 1).
Piston–cylinder devices were first used in the compression of gases, such as the hand-operated air pump for inflating a bicycle tire. For high-pressure applications, tungsten carbide (WC) is the most frequently used material to make pistons and cylinders.47 Sintered diamond is also used to make the piston harder than metals. The working principle is to apply pressure to a surface with a large area to compress samples below with a small area (Fig. 2b). The relationship between the pushing pressure on the piston (P1) and on the samples (P2) is: (1)Here, A1 is the upper surface area of the piston, and A2 is the lower surface area of the piston. The pressure magnification is determined by how much larger A1 is than A2. The upper pressure limit of this apparatus is 10 GPa, which is the pressure at which the piston will easily break via lateral failure (namely, explosive bursting). The piston–cylinder devices’ lifetime is always short when operating at high pressure. Thus, its cost is rather high because of the consumption of pistons. The sample size in piston–cylinder devices can be 1 mm to several meters – a wide range. Higher pressures can be achieved in smaller cells. Peak pressure, 10 GPa, can be achieved in samples smaller than 1 cm (Table 1).
The belt apparatus was invented in 1954 by the scientist Tracy Hall of the General Electric Company, and is assembled by pushing 2 tapered pistons into each side of a tapered chamber (Fig. 2c).47 As with the piston–cylinder devices, WC is frequently used to make the core part of the belt apparatus. The maximum pressure can reach 15 GPa, at temperatures of over 2000 °C, which can be maintained for quite a long time. This has attracted hundreds of groups to use it for diamond synthesis. The available stroke of the belt apparatus is much larger than that of a LAC. With the same face diameter, the belt apparatus stroke is 8–9 times larger than that of a LAC. This makes the sample volume of a belt apparatus significantly larger than that of a LAC. In addition to the sample volume, the belt apparatus is easy to align, which makes it much more robust than a LAC (Table 1).
A multi-anvil cell (MAC) consists of 4 to 8 anvils. It generates pressure by pushing all the anvils together in designed coordinate geometry (Fig. 2d).70 The anvils can be made of hard materials (WC, SiC, TiC, etc.), sintered diamond, or composites of these materials. The maximum pressure of a MAC can exceed 80 GPa, which is much higher than that of the high-pressure apparatuses discussed above. The sample volume of a MAC can be larger than 1 cm3, while maintaining high pressure and high temperature. The multiaxial feature of a MAC brings a unique advantage of uniform high pressure across the sample, in contrast to the pressure gradient that is unavoidable in uniaxial apparatuses such as DAC, LAC, piston–cylinder devices, and belt apparatus. Besides, the difficulty of alignment in a MAC is lower than that in a LAC, making the MAC easier to use. Owing to these advantages, the world's first synthesized diamond was achieved using a tetrahedral MAC.71 To achieve the highest pressure for large volume samples, multistage systems have been developed, which consist of 2 or 3 stages in the pressure loading module.70 Taking the 2-stage MAC as an example, its first-stage pressure loading apparatus is a 6 anvil MAC, and the second is a 6-to-8-facet gain unit. In the pressure loading process, the MAC pushes the cubic gain unit and the gain unit further pushes the samples inside an octahedron chamber. Normally, the pressure of the first-stage apparatus can reach 12 GPa. The pressure of the second-stage apparatus can reach 80 GPa, when using polycrystalline diamond anvils. The anvil material plays a key role in determining the maximum pressure of a MAC. If using WC anvils in the second-stage apparatus, the highest pressure will not exceed 25 GPa.70 The second-stage apparatus usually suffers notable deformation after just one run, and so MACs, especially multilevel devices, are rather expensive to use (Table 1).

2.2. Techniques for dynamic compression
Dynamic compression is achieved by pulsed high-pressure loading.53 The pressure can reach its maximum value in as little as 10 ns.57,72 The dynamic compression process is adiabatic, with the temperature increasing as the pressure increases. The highest pressure achieved to date is 100 TPa and the highest temperature is 20 keV.57,72 Both pressure and temperature are much higher than in static compression, which enables research on space debris and big planets. The main techniques of dynamic compression include: (1) laser-driven ramp compression, (2) light gas gun, (3) electromagnetic drive compression, and (4) explosion drive compression.73 The first three of these dynamic compression techniques are quite expensive, as they require huge instruments and need frequent maintenance, but explosion drive compression is relatively affordable for industrial applications. As dynamic compression instruments are rarely used, we will examine three representative technologies: laser-driven compression, the light gas gun and explosion drive compression.
Laser-driven ramp compression utilizes a time-resolved laser to shoot multiple beams onto a sample surface in a very short time (Fig. 3a). The light hits the target (directly or indirectly) and creates an ablatively driven pressure wave into the sample.57 Finely controlled laser power can load a smooth ramp or a shock pressure onto the sample. The key part of laser-driven compression technology is the laser. The pressure created by the laser pulse is proportional to the laser power. To achieve ultra-high pressure, we need an ultra-powerful laser, whose peak power could exceed 2 TW. These laser facilities are large and cost millions of dollars per year to run, such as those at the National Ignition Facility, the HELEN high-power neodymium:glass laser system,56 and the Shenguang series lasers. The laser power depends on the number of beams. 2 beams can provide 1 kJ, 60 beams can provide 30 kJ and 192 beams can provide 2 MJ. With this high-power shooting at the target in a very short time, normally <20 ns, the laser can create ultra-high pressures, on the TPa scale. Samples for laser-driven ramp compression are very small, with thicknesses of a few micrometers and diameters of a few millimeters. Due to the ultra-high pressures, samples are destroyed by the first shot. In summary, laser-driven ramp compression can realize ultra-high pressures of over 1 TPa, but costs a large amount of money for every experiment. It is mostly used for research into fundamental physics and space technology.
 Fig. 3  Scheme of dynamic compression apparatus: (a) laser-driven ramp compression. To increase the pressure on the sample, multiple laser beams are shot onto the sample simultaneously. (b) The two-stage light gas gun.73 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2019, Space Debris Research. 
The light gas gun utilizes the explosion of a light gas (e.g. hydrogen or helium) to drive a payload to speeds of over 8 km s−1.73 The payload hits the sample and creates a high pressure. There are several types of light gas gun, with one, two, or multiple stages. We use the gunpowder-driven two-stage gas gun to introduce the instrument's configuration and operation (Fig. 3b). The two-stage gas gun can create 0.05–1 TPa pressure on a sample, and maintains the pressure for 0.1–1 μs.53 The sample size can be 3 cm diameter and 5 mm thick. Compared to laser-driven ramp compression, the light gas gun exerts a lower pressure but for a longer duration. Additionally, the pressure loading history of a light gas gun can be controlled, like the laser power managed pressure history. Because, once the payload is accelerated, the loading history could be manipulated with a gradient density impactor. The light gas gun is a large instrument, as can be seen, for example, on the NASA website.
3. Synthesis of halide perovskites under high pressure
Most halide perovskites are synthesized at 1 atm and relatively mild temperatures (80–180 °C). Thus, their morphology and phase are limited to those that are stable at low pressure. For example, MAPbBr3 synthesized at low pressure belongs to the Pmm space group and exhibits a cubic structure, while at higher pressures it can be in the Im phase.44 High-pressure-assisted synthesis has been already employed for some materials, such as nanomaterials via hydrothermal growth, and diamonds via chemical vapor deposition at high pressures.74–76 Pressure can be used to control the composition, morphology and defects of materials, and synthesize materials which are metastable under ambient pressure. For the synthesis of halide perovskites, the use of high pressure has been explored recently, with the outcome of various unusual properties and phenomena.42,44,77
Synthesis of perovskite nanoplates is difficult because of the nature of perovskite's 3D crystal structure.44 Using >4 GPa pressure press-and-release treatment, MAPbBr3 nanodots could be changed to nanoplates with the orthorhombic Pnma phase.44 Pristine MAPbBr3 nanodots synthesized at 1 atm have a diameter of less than 10 nm and belong to the cubic Pmm space group. By loading ultra-high pressure onto MAPbBr3, its phase changed from cubic Pmm to cubic Im, then to orthorhombic Pnma, and to partial amorphization beyond 4 GPa. Along with phase evolution, its morphology changed from dots to plates. After pressure release from ∼2.23 GPa, the nanodots reshaped to nanoslices with rectangular boundaries. When released from ∼6.5 GPa, the nanoslices started to merge together. The MAPbBr3 nanodots finally formed large homogeneous nanoplates, after releasing from ∼11 GPa. The PL intensity of MAPbBr3 nanoplates are ∼14 times larger than that of MAPbBr3 nanodots. In another report, MAPbI3 nanorods could be compressed to nano-pieces under 0.9 GPa pressure, as well as undergoing a phase transition.61
Apart from reshaping the perovskites, pressure can also modify their crystal morphology during growth. Grains of MAPbI3 were enlarged to ∼18 μm with a pressure-assisted annealing process.78 A MAPbI3 film with dendritic grains first absorbed isopropanol (IPA) vapor on its surface (Fig. 4a). Then, 200 MPa pressure was applied to this film during a 3 h annealing process at 100 °C. After this, the film was ultra-smooth and compact without any dendrites or pinholes (Fig. 4b and c). The root-mean-square value of the film's roughness was as little as 17 nm and the mean grain size was ∼18 μm. In the annealing process, high pressure and temperature were able to increase the solubility of perovskite in IPA. Thus, perovskite with poor intra-film crystallinity was gradually dissolved by IPA and diffused along the grain boundaries. Then, during the slow solvent evaporation period, the perovskite crystal could grow in a mild-changing condition, which combined the grains, resulting in large grains. Besides its effect on solubility, pressure also influences the strain and stress on the perovskite grains, further benefiting grain growth.12 Pressure-assisted annealing was also applied to CsPbBr3 and FA0.83Cs0.07MA0.13PbI2.64Br0.39 for the synthesis of compact and flat films.79,80
 Fig. 4  Pressure-assisted annealing process for large perovskite grains. (a) Schematic illustration of this process. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (b) the pristine perovskite film and (c) the perovskite film after pressure-assisted annealing.78 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 78, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Large and uniform perovskite films are crucial for industrial PV applications, but they are relatively hard to obtain. The spin-coating process yields only a radial configuration of perovskite films, with large roughness, because of the precursor's unfavorable wettability and fast crystal growth kinetics. As an alternative synthesis route of large-scale perovskite film, a 12 MPa pressure was used to press the CH3NH3I·mCH3NH2/PbI2·nCH3NH2 mixed precursor under a smooth and flat polyimide (PI) film (Fig. 5a).81 Under this pressure, the precursor could spread out on the substrate uniformly with a size of 64 cm2. Additionally, the film thickness could be finely controlled from 300 nm to 1000 nm by adjusting the loading pressure to between 2 MPa and 14.5 MPa. Compared to ambient conditions, an optimal growth process of perovskite could be achieved to form large grain sizes (0.8–1.0 μm) owing to slow solvent evaporation during the pressure-loaded procedure (Fig. 5b).77 Besides, the crystallinity of perovskite films fabricated by pressure processing is significantly better than that of perovskite films fabricated by the spin-coating method (Fig. 5c). The large grains may reduce the density of trap states and enhance PV performance. Perovskite solar cells synthesized with this pressure method had a 36 cm2 active area and exhibited 12.07% power conversion efficiency, which is highly desirable for industrial fabrication.
 Fig. 5  Pressure processing deposition of perovskite films. (a) Scheme of the pressure processing program. “PI” is polyimide. (b) SEM images of perovskite films fabricated by pressure processing deposition and spin-coating. (c) XRD patterns of perovskite films fabricated by pressure processing deposition and spin-coating.81 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
The hydrothermal method is a widely used synthetic approach, which can provide 1 MPa–1 GPa pressure at 100–1000 °C. Under such conditions many compounds could be synthesized, which would be difficult to achieve under lower pressures and temperatures. In contrast to many halide perovskites, the 0D compound, (CH3NH3)4PbBr6·2H2O, could not be fabricated by the conventional synthetic method of [PbI6]4− compounds at 1 atm.82 By instead employing the hydrothermal method, (CH3NH3)4PbBr6·2H2O could be successfully synthesized at 120 °C and high pressure for 6 h. In another example, high pressure is necessary for the synthesis of CsTlCl3 perovskite which can form at ∼ 200 MPa and 600 °C but not under ambient synthetic conditions.76 At such high pressures, compressed ions and atoms connect with each other, resulting in more compact crystal structures. Thus, cubic CsTlCl3 forms rather than orthorhombic Cs2TlCl5.

Via hydrothermal methods, CsPbI2Br nanocrystals can be assembled into nanosheets.83 During the assembly process, CsPbI2Br nanocrystals were placed in an autoclave and heated to 120 °C, which offered a pressure of ∼10 MPa. High pressure provided the force to remove ligands of nanocrystals. Then, the exposed nanocrystals spontaneously aligned and gradually tended to form 2D arrays. Finally, 2D nanosheets formed, with improved stability and optoelectronic properties, compared with the pristine nanocrystals. In the above cases, various halide perovskites were synthesized with the hydrothermal method, indicating the great potential of high pressure for halide perovskite synthesis.84–87
Pressure is also utilized to synthesize high quality polycrystalline perovskites. In an electrical and mechanical field-assisted sintering technique (EM-FAST), perovskite powders were compressed by ca. 50 MPa pressure with a graphite die. At the same time, perovskite powders were heated to a mild temperature (from 150 to 500 °C) and a certain current was applied. After a 2–10 min process, high quality polycrystalline perovskites were obtained. For example, MAPbI3 made by EM-FAST showed a trap density of 5.4 × 1010 cm−3 and a hole mobility of 1.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, which are much better than perovskite polycrystals made using traditional methods. Besides, perovskites with various compositions could be synthesized via this method, such as MASnI3, MAPbCl3 and bi-layer junctions of MAPbCl3–FASnI3.88
In summary, high pressure could reshape the crystal morphology, make the films flat, and assist in synthesizing mild-condition-unstable perovskites. With pressure up to 11 GPa, halide perovskite nanodots and nanorods could be converted to nanoplates or nanoslices, which show enhanced PL intensity and stability. With pressures in the MPa range, grains of halide perovskites could grow significantly, to the micrometer range. High pressure also reduces the size of ions/atoms and the distance between them, and so could form halide perovskites with more compact structures than under atmospheric conditions, leading to the synthesis of new compounds. One thing should be noted: the utilization of high pressure may somewhat raise the cost of perovskite synthesis. Considering cost effectiveness, halide perovskites synthesized under high pressure are suggested for applications in high-yield fields, such as superconductors and X-ray/infrared light detectors.
4. Modification of halide perovskites with high pressure
Halide perovskites exhibit excellent optical and electrical properties, such as tunable bandgap, large absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length, small exciton binding energy, and ease of processing.5,89,90 These qualities make perovskites highly promising materials for PV, light emission, photodetection and so forth. Many methods have been developed to engineer the optoelectronic properties14,37,39,91,92 of halide perovskites for particular applications, including composition engineering, solvent engineering, and intermediates control.11,13,91,93–95 However, it is still hard to achieve efficient, robust, and stable halide perovskites at present. Alternative ways to improve their optoelectronic properties are essential for potential industrial applications.
High pressure is a powerful tool to adjust perovskites’ properties and expand their applications. For example, compression could manipulate the shell electrons of atoms, as well as induce distortion and bending of chemical bonds, which could break the original crystal field and disorder the wave function overlaps between atoms. This could lead to the discovery of new properties of existing compounds. For lead-halide perovskites, compression could increase the overlap of Pb and I orbitals, which levers up their VBM.54,67 On the other hand, serious lattice distortion creates many defects, or makes the perovskites amorphous, which leads to various unexpected properties under high pressure.
4.1. Structural evolution of halide perovskites under high pressure
The optoelectronic properties of halide perovskites are highly dependent on their structure.96,97 We will introduce the structural evolution of halide perovskites under high pressure before discussing their properties. Taking the most-studied MAPbI3 as a representative example, it exhibited metallic properties under high pressure, in stark contrast to its semiconducting features under ambient pressure.43 With 62 GPa static compression from a DAC, the bandgap of MAPbI3 reduced to 0 eV and its conductivity had a negative relationship with temperature (Fig. 6a). Under pressures of 6 GPa to 66 GPa, the MAPbI3 showed a partially amorphous phase with decreased bandgap, belonging to the cubic Im space group (Fig. 6b).62 This semiconductor-to-metal transition happened without structure transition, indicating that the origin might be Pb–I bond compression and [PbI6]4− octahedra tilting. Between 2.5 GPa and 6 GPa, the bandgap of MAPbI3 continued to blue-shift, while MAPbI3 was still belonging to the cubic Im space group with a partially amorphous γ phase. Under a pressure of 0.35 GPa to 2.5 GPa, MAPbI3 belonged to the cubic Im phase without an amorphous part (Fig. 6c). The pressure variance in this range led to only a tiny bandgap change of 25 meV (Fig. 6d). At 0.35 GPa, the bandgap showed a sharp jump from 1.48 eV to 1.54 eV, along with a change from the tetragonal I4/mcm phase to the cubic Im phase (Fig. 6c and d). At 1 atm to 0.35 GPa, MAPbI3 belonged to the tetragonal I4/mcm space group with a red-shifted bandgap. The pressure-induced optical and structural changes in MAPbI3 were reversible. After release from 66 GPa to 1 atm, the MAPbI3 recovered to the original tetragonal I4/mcm space group, suggesting that the metallization was not caused by lattice collapse.
 Fig. 6  Properties of MAPbI3 under pressure. (a) Arrhenius plot of the temperature dependence of conductivity of MAPbI3 at 50 GPa (red, semiconducting) and 62 GPa (blue, metallic).43 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Pressure dependence of the bandgap of MAPbI3 in the range between 0 and 55 GPa.43 (c) Detailed pressure dependence of the lattice parameters of MAPbI3 in the range between 0 GPa and 4 GPa.62 (d) Detailed pressure dependence of the energy gap of MAPbI3 in the range of 0 GPa to 4 GPa.62 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Structural evolution under high pressure is strongly related to the composition of perovskites. For example, amorphization of MASnI3 began at 3 GPa, which is remarkably different to MAPbI3.98 As its lattice became disordered, the resistivity of MASnI3 gradually increased with the increased pressure. At ∼12 GPa, its resistivity increased to a plateau value of 107 Ω cm from ∼2 Ω cm at 1 atm. When the pressure increased over 0.7 GPa, MASnI3 transferred to an orthorhombic space group Pnma until the onset of amorphization at 3 GPa. From 1 atm to 0.7 GPa, the MASnI3 adopted a tetragonal symmetry with the space group P4mm.
In summary, high pressure changes the structure, and thereby the optoelectronic properties, of halide perovskites. This differs between perovskites with different compositions. Fundamentally, [PbI6]4− octahedra in halide perovskites are rigid and the organic A site cations are rather soft. Two distinct compression processes commonly exist: (1) a rigid octahedra-dominated high-pressure compression; (2) an organic-cation-dominated low-pressure compression. Due to their soft nature, the lattices of halide perovskites could be quite reversible under compression and decompression processes.40,41,99–102
4.2. Bandgaps of halide perovskites under high pressure
The bandgap is one of the most important properties of semiconducting halide perovskites.17,89,103,104 For perovskite solar cells, the bandgaps of absorbers determine their theoretical limits of power conversion efficiency, which is essential for PV applications. For perovskite light emitting diodes or lasers, the bandgaps of emitters determine the colors of their light emissions. The pursuit of high-performance optoelectronic devices requires powerful controls to finely adjust the bandgaps of emerging materials. High pressure is an effective post-treatment method to tune bandgaps of halide perovskites via modulating their lattice structure in a precise and controllable manner. In the following section, we discuss several representative halide perovskites to show their bandgap evolution under high pressure.
FAPbI3 has a bandgap of 1.49 eV, which is a good candidate for PV applications.14,37 After a compression treatment with 2.1 GPa pressure, the bandgap of FAPbI3 decreased to 1.34 eV, which is closer to the ideal than 1.49 eV for a single-junction solar cell.105 In detail, the pristine FAPbI3 crystal belongs to the trigonal P3m1 space group, in which all the 3 Pb–I–Pb angles are ∼180°.106,107 With all angles maintained at ∼180°, the crystal underwent uniform compression, and the relative position of all atoms remained in the PbI6 octahedra during compression. The compressed FAPbI3 still belonged to trigonal P3m1 and led to a larger overlap between I 5p and Pb 6p. As a result, its VBM increased with the increasing orbital overlap. Meanwhile, the nonbonding localized state of Pb p orbitals was quite insensitive to compression, which determined the unchanged CBM under high pressure. Therefore, the bandgap of FAPbI3 narrowed, as the VBM increased and the CBM was unchanged. A critical pressure value was 2.5 GPa. With pressures over 2.5 GPa, the lattice of FAPbI3 began to collapse. Thereafter, its bandgap began to blue-shift and its carrier lifetime decreased. Due to the above-mentioned soft lattice, the FAPbI3 crystal exhibited structural plasticity. After release of pressure, its bandgap was 1.45 eV, which was still lower than the 1.49 eV of pristine FAPbI3.105 This phenomenon shows the potential of using pressure technologies to optimize perovskites as an absorber for solar cells.
When it comes to MAPbI3, the bandgap change under pressure is different from FAPbI3. Between 1 atm and 0.3 GPa, the bandgap of MAPbI3 narrowed slightly.100 Between 0.3 and 0.9 GPa, its bandgap increased from 1.56 eV to 1.65 eV. Then, between 0.9 GPa and 2.7 GPa its bandgap decreased slightly to 1.62 eV. Further increasing the pressure, the bandgap increased sharply, from 1.62 eV to 1.8 eV. The bandgap change caused a change in the photocurrent of MAPbI3, which was higher at 1 GPa than at ambient pressure (Fig. 7a).61 Further increasing the pressure to 5 GPa, the photocurrent began to decrease and finally fell to zero. Alternating current (AC) impedance results showed that the resistance of MAPbI3 decreased between 0 GPa and 0.6 GPa, then increased between 0.6 GPa and 8.5 GPa (Fig. 7b). In the range between 0 and 0.6 GPa, the author attributed the decreased resistance to the reduced density of gaps between MAPbI3 nanorods and bandgap narrowing. It is questionable that the portion of resistance caused by gaps between MAPbI3 nanorods is significant under such a high pressure. Bandgap narrowing should be the major reason for the resistance decrease. With the decreased bandgap and resistance, MAPbI3 could absorb more light and the excessive carriers could be more easily transported to the charge collector under high pressure than the situation at ambient pressure. Thus, the photocurrent increased in the range between 0 GPa and 0.6 GPa. In the range between 0.6 GPa and 8.5 GPa, the MAPbI3 transformed to the orthorhombic phase with increased bandgap.43 Resistance increased significantly as the pressure increased, which significantly reduced carrier transport. The photocurrent began to decrease and finally reached zero.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photocurrent and (b) resistance evolution of MAPbI3 under high pressure.61 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared to their 3D counterparts, the bandgaps of 2D halide perovskites showed better tunability under high pressure. In the pressure range from 1 atm to 3.5 GPa, a 2D perovskite, (PEA)2PbI4, exhibited reversible tunable PL in the range between 2.38 eV (520 nm, green) and 2.04 eV (607 nm, yellow), making it a potential candidate for tunable laser applications (Fig. 8a).66 In this pressure range, the perovskite's lattice underwent greater compression in the out-of-plane direction (perpendicular to the basal plane formed by consecutive [PbI6]4− octahedra) than in the in-plane direction. This is because the C–C bond between the benzene ring and C2H4NH3+ is more easily bent than the Pb–I bond in the rigid [PbI6]4− octahedra (Fig. 8b).36 Both experiments and simulations showed that the out-of-plane deformation (∼2 Å) was five times larger than the in-plane deformation (∼0.39 Å and ∼0.47 Å). With this anisotropic compression feature, the distance between each layer of (PEA)2PbI4 decreased, as the pressure increased. Meanwhile, the [PbI6]4− octahedra maintained their structure. Thus, barrier layers of the quantum well became thinner, which weakened the quantum confinement and narrowed the bandgap of (PEA)2PbI4. As the organic part of (PEA)2PbI4 is rather soft, this compression could be fully recovered with the release of pressure, which enabled the largely reversible tunable PL. In addition, the band edges of (PEA)2PbI4 originated from the interaction between Pb and I. As the [PbI6]4− octahedra maintained their structure during the compression process, the band edge transition could be retained subsequently. As a result, the quantum yield of (PEA)2PbI4 was nearly unchanged, while the wavelength of luminescence varied with considerable magnitude. This is a unique advantage compared to the III–V class semiconductors which suffer a serious decrease of quantum yield under pressure. In sum, the tunable PL of (PEA)2PbI4, as well as the unchanged quantum yield, suggests a considerable potential for in situ optoelectronic applications enabled by high pressure technologies.
 Fig. 8  (a) Relative quantum yield and bandgap of (PEA)2PbI4 under compression. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Lattice structure of (PEA)2PbI4, in which large organic PEA ions separate the [PbI6]4− octahedra.36,66 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
GA(MA)2Pb2I7, another 2D perovskite with different cations in the interlayer space, exhibited significantly different bandgap changes under gradually increased pressure, compared to (PEA)2PbI4.108 From 1 atm to 1.3 GPa, the bandgap of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 narrowed from 2.0 eV to 1.92 eV (Fig. 9a). By further increasing the pressure to 10.0 GPa, its bandgap began to slightly widen (Fig. 9a and b). From 10.0 GPa to 25.1 GPa, its bandgap narrowed again and reached a value of 1.64 eV (Fig. 9b). The reason for this bandgap change is that the lattice of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 contains more small cations than (PEA)2PbI4 does, as well as less elastic compressibility.36 An interesting phenomenon is that the bandgap narrowing of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 remained at 1.79 eV after releasing the pressure, which is significantly smaller than the pristine bandgap of 2.0 eV (Fig. 9c). In the pressure release process from 25.1 GPa, its bandgap began to increase gradually until the pressure reduced to 0.6 GPa. Subsequently, after the pressure decreased to 1 atm, its bandgap narrowed to 1.79 eV. The lattice exhibited an orthorhombic structure similar to the pristine samples, while the cell parameters had changed. This new structure with a narrowed bandgap was stable under ambient conditions, with no change after 7 days of storage. This phenomenon is promising for adjusting the perovskite's bandgap with high pressure technologies.
 Fig. 9  The UV-visible absorption spectra of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 under pressure in the ranges (a) 1 atm to 7.3 GPa, and (b) 8.4 GPa to 25.1 GPa. (c) Tauc plot and optical micrograph of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 before and after compression at 25.1 GPa.108 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 108, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
(BA)2MAPb2I7 showed a similar change in trend as the GA(MA)2Pb2I7, where the bandgap narrowed less than that of the GA(MA)2Pb2I7.109 From 1 atm to 3.7 GPa, the bandgap of (BA)2MAPb2I7 shifted from 2.11 eV to 1.91 eV. Then, from 3.7 GPa to 12.2 GPa, its bandgap became wider. When the pressure increased beyond 12.2 GPa, bandgap narrowing was observed again. The (BA)2MAPb2I7 also retained the narrowed bandgap of 1.93 eV after a full release of pressure from 60 GPa to 1 atm. Its lattice still exhibited the pristine orthorhombic Cc2m space group, while all the lattice parameters were smaller than the pristine crystal.
When the 0D perovskite, Cs3Bi2I9, was compressed, the bandgap exhibited a monotonic decrease.65 From 1 atm to 12.1 GPa its bandgap decreased from 2.06 eV to 1.12 eV, which was significantly larger than the bandgap changes of 3D and 2D perovskites. The VBM of Cs3Bi2I9 mainly originated from the antibonding interactions of I 5p and a small amount of Bi 6s. The CBM of Cs3Bi2I9 was dominated by I 5p and Bi 6p antibonding interactions. Under high pressure, the Bi–I bond contracted and the bridging Bi–I–Bi angle decreased, which enhanced metal halide orbital overlap and thus reduced the bandgap.
In summary, bandgap evolution under high pressure differs between halide perovskites with different dimensionality. Among all the cases mentioned, the 3D perovskites showed the smallest bandgap change, of around 0.1 eV. The bandgaps of 2D perovskites could change by more than 0.3 eV, due to their large A site cation-induced layered lattice structure. The 0D perovskite exhibited a bandgap change of 0.94 eV, which is nearly half of its pristine bandgap (2.06 eV).
4.3. Quantum yield of halide perovskites under high pressure
The quantum yield is the ratio between the number of emitted photons and number of absorbed photons, which indicates the photons’ conversion efficiency. It can also indicate the level of carrier recombination, which significantly influences the performance of optoelectronic devices. For simplicity, if the number of incident photons is the same for all tests, the PL intensity can be regarded as the indicator of quantum yield. In the following section, we discuss the effect of pressure on the quantum yield of halide perovskites.
The above-mentioned GA(MA)2Pb2I7 showed a 5-fold increase in PL intensity under 1.3 GPa pressure compared with that under 1 atm pressure.108 When further gradually increasing the pressure from 1.3 GPa to 7.0 GPa, its PL intensity decreased to zero. The enhanced PL intensity up to 1.3 GPa is attributed to the increased quantum confinement effect, which increases the exciton binding energy of GA(MA)2Pb2I7. The author attributed the decreased PL intensity in the higher pressure range to the suppression effect in the emission effect. The PL intensity of Cs3Bi2I9 also increased as much as 10 times above its initial value, as the pressure gradually increased to 0.9 GPa (Fig. 10a and b).65 This remarkable enhancement was caused by the lattice compression-induced exciton binding energy increase of Cs3Bi2I9. The core clusters, [Bi2I9]3−, were separated by Cs+ cations, which exhibited a large exciton binding energy of 270 meV.65 Under compression, the distance between each [Bi2I9]3− decreased, which increased the binding energy and thus enhanced the PL intensity.
 Fig. 10  (a) PL micrographs of Cs3Bi2I9 showing PL intensity transition at various pressures. The scale bar is 40 μm.65 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 65, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) PL spectra of Cs3Bi2I9 under varying pressures.65 (c) PL spectra of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7 under varying pressures.110 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) PL photographs of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7 showing PL intensity evolution at different pressures.110 (e) Normalized PL intensity versus pressure of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7.110 
Another 2D perovskite, (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7, also exhibited enlarged PL intensity under compression (Fig. 10c and d).110 From 1 atm to 1.59 GPa, its PL intensity was sharply enlarged, at 12-fold (Fig. 10c and e). Then, its PL intensity began to decrease and eventually became zero at 9.48 GPa (Fig. 10e). The trap states of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7 were regarded to have a significant influence on PL intensity, which caused significant non-radiative recombination. Compression reduced the energetic barrier between trap states and free excitons of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7, which restrained its carrier-trapping effect. Non-radiative recombination was suppressed and light emission enhanced.
There can be 2 emission peaks of a halide perovskite under compression, caused by singlet states and triplet states of self-trapped excitons (STE). A representative example is Cs2Na0.4Ag0.6InCl6 double perovskite with Bi doping.111 At 1 atm, this perovskite exhibited a strong broadband PL emission with a maximum at ∼585 nm, and a weak emission at 435 nm (Fig. 11a). In 1 atm up to 0.81 GPa, the intensities of the two peaks were enhanced. When the pressure increased to 5.01 GPa, the intensity of the 585 nm peak decreased and the intensity of 435 nm peak increased. From 5.01 GPa to 9.09 GPa, the intensity of the two peaks decreased to zero. The slightly enhanced PL intensity at 585 nm was possibly associated with the pressure-driven optimal Jahn–Teller distortion of inorganic octahedra at 0.81 GPa. The reverse intersystem crossing played an important role in the enhancement of the 435 nm peak. Between 0.81 GPa and 5.01 GPa, compression of the perovskite's lattice reduced the energy difference between the STE singlet states and triplet states. Thereafter, it increased the possibility of STE jumping from triplet states to singlet states. In this way, radiative recombination of singlet states was enhanced and that of triplet states was reduced, which resulted in the increased 435 nm emission and decreased 585 nm emission. Ultimately, STE achieved radiative recombination mainly via singlet states, resulting in the bright blue emission. In the whole pressure loading process, the phase of Cs2Na0.4Ag0.6InCl6 did not change, indicating that shrinkage of its unit cell was the origin of this PL evolution.
 Fig. 11  (a) PL spectra of Cs2Na0.4Ag0.6InCl6 double perovskite with Bi doping under various pressures.111 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) PL intensity of 563 nm and 370 nm peaks of (PEA)2PbCl4 nanocrystals at different pressures, showing free excitons (FE) and self-trapped excitons (STE).112 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) PL peak positions of 563 nm and 370 nm peaks of (PEA)2PbCl4 nanocrystals at different pressures.112 
Two-peak emission can also be caused by phase transition of (PEA)2PbCl4 nano crystals.112 Between 1 atm and 0.4 GPa, the intensity of the 563 nm PL peak increased to 5 times its initial value (Fig. 11b and c). With further compression to 2.1 GPa, the intensity of the 563 nm peak decreased to near zero and a new 370 nm peak appeared. The 370 nm peak gradually enhanced as the pressure increased up to 4.6 GPa. Then, it began to decrease and finally disappeared at 10.0 GPa. Meanwhile, the intensity of the 563 nm peak increased again between 5 GPa and 11 GPa. From 15 GPa to 30 GPa, (PEA)2PbCl4 could still emit a cold white light, which was different to lots of quenched PL at such high pressure.110,111,113 Between 1 atm and 0.4 GPa, the enhancement of the 563 nm PL peak was attributed to the increased exciton binding energy. From 2.1 GPa to 4.6 GPa, the distinct change of PL was related to the pressure-induced phase transition of (PEA)2PbCl4, and the new phase generated the 370 nm emission.
To conclude, high pressure can modify the soft lattice of halide perovskites by shortening the bond length and tilting the bond's angle, which thereafter changes the PL intensity of perovskites. For halide perovskites such as GA(MA)2Pb2I7 and Cs3Bi2I9, high pressure could increase their exciton binding energy to enhance their PL intensity. For (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7, high pressure could suppress trap-assisted non-radiative recombination. For Cs2Na0.4Ag0.6InCl6, high pressure could trigger radiative recombination of singlet states to enhance PL at short wavelengths. For (PEA)2PbCl4, high pressure could change its phase to improve its deep blue emission. This broad tunability within a relatively low pressure range could expand applications of perovskites to a new paradigm with pressure as a tuning knob.66
4.4. Ionic movements of halide perovskites under high pressure
Most halide perovskites are ionic crystals, in which ionic movement is an important issue. High pressure can modify the ionic movement of halide perovskites, which leads to a change in their ionic conductivity. Taking CsPbBr3 as an example,114 its ionic conductivity increased as pressure increased from 1 atm to 1.2 GPa (Fig. 12a). Between 1.2 GPa and 2.9 GPa, its ionic conductivity began to decrease. The change in ionic conductivity was highly dependent on the crystal structure of CsPbBr3. With the pressure below 1.2 GPa, the CsPbBr3 was a pure orthogonal phase I with space group Pbnm (Fig. 12b and c).115 As the pressure increased up to 1.2 GPa, diffusion of ions became easier, as the lattice was compressed and the ion hopping distance decreased. At 1.2 GPa, CsPbBr3 underwent an isostructural phase transition and changed to orthogonal phase II with space group Pbnm. In the range between 1.2 GPa and 2.3 GPa, the pressure distorted the PbBr6 octahedra in phase II CsPbBr3, which closed the hopping channels of ions. Thereafter, the ionic conductivity decreased as the pressure increased. When pressure exceeded 2.3 GPa, CsPbBr3 became amorphous and no ions could move: zero ionic conductivity.
 Fig. 12  The evolution of (a) resistance (R), (b) unit cell volume, and (c) cell parameters, of CsPbBr3 under compression. Ri is ionic resistance, Re is electrical resistance, and Rtotal = (Ri × Re)/(Ri + Re).114,115 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2019, American Institute of Physics; Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5. Summary and outlook
In this review, we summarized technologies to load up to 600 GPa of static pressure or 100 TPa of dynamic pressure, providing preliminary knowledge about high-pressure technologies. Static compression can provide continuous, uniform and large enough pressure, which have been mostly applied to halide perovskites. Under static compression to tens of GPa, crystallography, composition, optical and electrical properties of halide perovskites have been intensively studied. DAC has been the most widely used apparatus to provide high-pressure static compression. Other kinds of loading techniques such as MAC are also attractive for compressing halide perovskites, as they have advantages in sample volume, pressure uniformity and capability for liquid/gas samples. Dynamic compression of halide perovskites is rarely discussed.116 However, the behaviors of halide perovskites under fast compression are also attracting researchers’ attention, as they offer significant opportunities to explore different factors compared to static compression.
By varying the pressure during synthesis up to the MPa or GPa range, halide perovskites with improved shape, morphology and composition can be obtained. The shape of perovskite nanocrystals can change; the grains of perovskite films can be enlarged, and their roughness can be decreased. Hydrothermal methods work well for halide perovskites, and these could easily provide MPa pressures during the nucleation and growth process of perovskites. In addition to the factors discussed in this review, high pressures can inhibit diffusion of atoms, raise viscosity, increase solubility of solutes, compress ion/atom radii to adjust the chemical potential of reactants and intermediates, improve reaction rates to save reaction time, and change product yield.74–76 All of these call for further work on high-pressure assisted synthesis of halide perovskites.
The halide perovskites exhibit variations in their properties under high pressure. Their bandgaps, quantum yields and ionic movements change, and they undergo phase transition, lattice compression and amorphization. These imply applications in the field of PV, light emitting devices, etc.117 At the same time, broad utilization of these materials requires them to maintain those properties under ambient conditions. Thus, retainability of halide perovskite properties after the release of elevated pressure is vitally important. The above-mentioned GA(MA)2Pb2I7 and (BA)2MAPb2I7 showed a retained narrowed bandgap after decompression, which paves the way for further application of high-pressure synthesis technologies for halide perovskites. Considering the variety in composition of halide perovskites, there must be many unexplored species that could retain novel properties after the release of high pressure. This leaves plenty room for further study.
In all, this interesting field is currently in its initial stage. Many phenomena and properties are still not well understood. We are looking forward to future impressive outcomes from research in the field of halide perovskites under high pressures.
Author contributions
All the authors contributed to this article. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the partial financial support of this work by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [Grant Numbers 62001308, 11974321, 11972330 and 12004263], the Natural Science Foundation of Top Talent of SZTU [Grant Number 20200219] and Shenzhen Outstanding Scientific and Technological Innovation Talent Training Project [Grant Number RCBS20210609103736094]. We thank the crew of the SGII laser facility for their helpful support.
References
O. Tschauner, C. Ma, J. R. Beckett, C. Prescher, V. B. Prakapenka and G. R. Rossman, Discovery of bridgmanite, the most abundant mineral in Earth, in a shocked meteorite, Science, 2014, 346, 1100–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Kong, W. Yang and H. K. Mao, Pressure engineering of photovoltaic perovskites, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 91–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bartel, C. Sutton, B. R. Goldsmith, R. Ouyang, C. B. Musgrave, L. M. Ghiringhelli and M. Scheffler, New tolerance factor to predict the stability of perovskite oxides and halides, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav0693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The emergence of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen and S. Yang, High-quality perovskite in thick scaffold: a core issue for hole transport material-free perovskite solar cells, Sci. Bull., 2016, 61, 1680–1688 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dou, Y. Bai and Q. Chen, Challenges of lead leakage in perovskite solar cells, Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 2779–2789 RSC .
S. Xiao, W. Qian and S. Yang, Interfaced Structures between Halide Perovskites: From Basics to Construction to Optoelectronic Applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 2201472 CrossRef .
S. Xiao, K. Zhang, S. Zheng and S. Yang, Good or evil: what is the role of water in crystallization of organometal halide perovskites?, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1147–1154 RSC .
W. Qian, X. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Chen, Y. Ge, J. Chen, S. Xiao and S. Yang, An aerosol-liquid-solid process for the general synthesis of halide perovskite thick films for direct-conversion X-ray detectors, Matter, 2021, 4, 942–954 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and Y. Qi, Metal halide perovskite-based flexible tandem solar cells: Next-generation flexible photovoltaic technology, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4833–4850 RSC .
K. Zhang, Z. Wang, G. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Li, W. Qian, S. Zheng, S. Xiao and S. Yang, A prenucleation strategy for ambient fabrication of perovskite solar cells with high device performance uniformity, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, Y. Bai, X. Meng, T. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Hu, Y. Qu and S. Yang, Unveiling a Key Intermediate in Solvent Vapor Postannealing to Enlarge Crystalline Domains of Organometal Halide Perovskite Films, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604944 CrossRef .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, H. Hosono, T. Kamiya and N. P. Padture, Bandgap Optimization of Perovskite Semiconductors for Photovoltaic Applications, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2305–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, C. Hu, H. Lin, X. Meng, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Qu, K. Yan, J. Xu, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, Integration of inverse nanocone array based bismuth vanadate photoanodes and bandgap-tunable perovskite solar cells for efficient self-powered solar water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19091–19097 RSC .
D. He, L. Shen, Y. Bai and L. Wang, Rational strategies toward efficient and stable lead-free tin halide perovskite solar cells, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4107–4127 RSC .
C. Yan, J. Huang, D. Li and G. Li, Recent progress of metal-halide perovskite-based tandem solar cells, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4538–4564 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Lin, J. Wang, R. Xu, K. Zhang, G. Wang, T. Liu, H. Zhou, S. Xiao and S. Yang, Amine Salts Vapor Healing Perfected Perovskite Layers for NiOx Based p–i–n Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2203995 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, K. Miyata, Y. Fu, J. Wang, P. P. Joshi, D. Niesner, K. W. Williams, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Screening in crystalline liquids protects energetic carriers in hybrid perovskites, Science, 2016, 353, 1409–1413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Unique properties of halide perovskites as possible origins of the superior solar cell performance, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, C. Zuo, Y. Peng, Y. (Michael) Yang, X. Yang and L. Ding, Large-area perovskite solar cells, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 872–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ye, Y. Zhao, S. Mu, P. Gao, X. Zhang and J. You, Stabilizing the black phase of cesium lead halide inorganic perovskite for efficient solar cells, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 810–821 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, Y. Wei, R. Lin, Z. Fang, K. Xiao, X. Luo, S. Gu, J. Zhu, L. Ding and H. Tan, Low-temperature processed inorganic hole transport layer for efficient and stable mixed Pb-Sn low-bandgap perovskite solar cells, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1399–1401 CrossRef PubMed .
Research Cell Efficiency Records. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2022, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/.
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Perovskite light-emitting diodes with external quantum efficiency exceeding 20 per cent, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Sensitive X-ray detectors made of methylammonium lead tribromide perovskite single crystals, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 333–339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, K. H. Kim, D. Y. Son, D. N. Jeong, J. Y. Seo, Y. S. Choi, I. T. Han, S. Y. Lee and N. G. Park, Printable organometallic perovskite enables large-area, low-dose X-ray imaging, Nature, 2017, 550, 87–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, J. Wu, X. Ou, B. Huang, J. Almutlaq, A. A. Zhumekenov, X. Guan, S. Han, L. Liang, Z. Yi, J. Li, X. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Fan, D. B. L. Teh, A. H. All, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr, T. Wu, M. Bettinelli, H. Yang, W. Huang and X. Liu, All-inorganic perovskite nanocrystal scintillators, Nature, 2018, 561, 88–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, F. Xu, Y. Bai, J. Xiao, T. Zhang, C. Hu, X. Meng, H. Tan, H. Ho and S. Yang, An Ultra–low Concentration of Gold Nanoparticles Embedded in the NiO Hole Transport Layer Boosts the Performance of p–i–n Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800278 Search PubMed .
S. Xiao, Y. Li, S. Zheng and S. Yang, Post-treatment techniques for high-performance perovskite solar cells, MRS Bull., 2020, 45, 431–438 CrossRef .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Solvent Annealing of Perovskite-Induced Crystal Growth for Photovoltaic-Device Efficiency Enhancement, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Polymer-templated nucleation and crystal growth of perovskite films for solar cells with efficiency greater than 21%, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. Il Seok, Efficient, stable solar cells by using inherent bandgap of α-phase formamidinium lead iodide, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Two-Dimensional Hybrid Halide Perovskites: Principles and Promises, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Surface passivation of perovskite film for efficient solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, A Eu3+-Eu2+ ion redox shuttle imparts operational durability to Pb-I perovskite solar cells, Science, 2019, 363, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Incorporation of rubidium cations into perovskite solar cells improves photovoltaic performance, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yin, B. Liu, J. Yan, Y. Fang, M. Chen, W. K. Chong, S. Jiang, J. L. Kuo, J. Fang, P. Liang, S. Wei, K. P. Loh, T. C. Sum, T. J. White and Z. X. Shen, Pressure-Engineered Structural and Optical Properties of Two-Dimensional (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 Perovskite Exfoliated nm-Thin Flakes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1235–1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Flores-Livas, D. Tomerini, M. Amsler, A. Boziki, U. Rothlisberger and S. Goedecker, Emergence of hidden phases of methylammonium lead iodide CH3NH3PbI3 upon compression, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 085201 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pan, B. Yang, G. Niu, K. Xue, X. Du, L. Yin, M. Zhang, H. Wu, X. Miao and J. Tang, Hot-Pressed CsPbBr3 Quasi-Monocrystalline Film for Sensitive Direct X-ray Detection, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, Pressure-Induced Metallization of the Halide Perovskite (CH3NH3)PbI3, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4330–4333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yin, Y. Fang, W. K. Chong, K. T. Ming, S. Jiang, X. Li, J.-L. Kuo, J. Fang, T. C. Sum, T. J. White, J. Yan and Z. X. Shen, High-Pressure-Induced Comminution and Recrystallization of CH3NH3PbBr3 Nanocrystals as Large Thin Nanoplates, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705017 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Chen and Z. Quan, Metal halide perovskites under compression, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16089–16108 RSC .
M. Szafrański and A. Katrusiak, Photovoltaic Hybrid Perovskites under Pressure, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2496–2506 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Hall, High-pressure techniques, Tech. Chem., 1955, 1–33 Search PubMed .
H. K. Mao, X. J. Chen, Y. Ding, B. Li and L. Wang, Solids, liquids, and gases under high pressure, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2018, 90, 15007 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiu, S. Xiao, Y. Tong and S. Yang, Toward Efficient Charge Collection and Light Absorption: A Perspective of Light Trapping for Advanced Photoelectrodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 18753–18770 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiu, S. Xiao, J. Ke, Z. Wang, S. Tang, K. Zhang, W. Qian, Y. Huang, D. Huang, Y. Tong and S. Yang, Freeing the Polarons to Facilitate Charge Transport in BiVO4 from Oxygen Vacancies with an Oxidative 2D Precursor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 19087–19095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, H. F. Lv, S. Y. Wu and H. P. Ho, Light-activated gas sensing activity of ZnO nanotetrapods enhanced by plasmonic resonant energy from Au nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 259, 709–716 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu and H. P. Ho, Light-Activated Metal Oxide Gas Sensors: A Review, Micromachines, 2017, 8, 333 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gong, H. Xie and Y. Fei, Reviews of Recent Advances of Shock Wave Physics Applied to Earth Science in China, Chin. J. High Pressure Phys., 2013, 27, 168–187 CAS .
W. B. Holzapfel, Physics of solids under strong compression, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1996, 59, 29–90 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gong, J. Hua, Q. Jie and F. Jing, Science of high pressure and its function in trans-subject study. Res. Prog. Mathmatics, Met. Phys. Adv. Technol., 2002, 9, 380–388 Search PubMed .
M. J. Norman, J. E. Andrew, T. H. Bett, R. K. Clifford, J. E. England, N. W. Hopps, K. W. Parker, K. Porter and M. Stevenson, Multipass reconfiguration of the HELEN Nd:glass laser at the Atomic Weapons Establishment, Appl. Opt., 2002, 41, 3497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Smith, J. H. Eggert, R. Jeanloz, T. S. Duffy, D. G. Braun, J. R. Patterson, R. E. Rudd, J. Biener, A. E. Lazicki, A. V. Hamza, J. Wang, T. Braun, L. X. Benedict, P. M. Celliers and G. W. Collins, Ramp compression of diamond to five terapascals, Nature, 2014, 511, 330–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Lv and Y. Ma, Materials discovery at high pressures, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17005 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Lamberson and P. A. Boettcher, Compressed gas combined single- and two-stage light-gas gun, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2018, 89, 023903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, L. Fang, Q. Li, X. Li, X. Chen, L. Xie, J. Zhang, F. Liu, L. Lei, G. Sun and D. He, Enhancing the pressure limitation in large-volume Bridgman-anvil cell used for in situ neutron diffraction, High Press. Res., 2019, 39, 655–665 CrossRef .
T. Ou, J. Yan, C. Xiao, W. Shen, C. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Ma and C. Gao, Visible light response, electrical transport, and amorphization in compressed organolead iodine perovskites, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11426–11431 RSC .
M. Szafrański and A. Katrusiak, Mechanism of Pressure-Induced Phase Transitions, Amorphization, and Absorption-Edge Shift in Photovoltaic Methylammonium Lead Iodide, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3458–3466 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Wang and B. Zou, Pressure-Induced Structural Evolution and Optical Properties of Metal-Halide Perovskite CsPbCl3, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15220–15225 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Beimborn, L. M. G. Hall, P. Tongying, G. Dukovic and J. M. Weber, Pressure Response of Photoluminescence in Cesium Lead Iodide Perovskite Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 11024–11030 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Wang, C. Liu, K. Wang and B. Zou, Pressure-Induced Emission Enhancement, Band-Gap Narrowing, and Metallization of Halide Perovskite Cs3Bi2I9, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11213–11217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, S. Sun, C. K. Gan, A. G. del Águila, Y. Fang, J. Xing, T. T. H. Do, T. J. White, H. Li, W. Huang and Q. Xiong, Manipulating efficient light emission in two-dimensional perovskite crystals by pressure-induced anisotropic deformation, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav9445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Chen and Z. Quan, Metal halide perovskites under compression, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16089–16108 RSC .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin and H. I. Karunadasa, Halide Perovskites under Pressure: Accessing New Properties through Lattice Compression, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1549–1555 CrossRef CAS .
P. Postorino and L. Malavasi, Pressure-Induced Effects in Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2613–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. He, C. Xu, J. Guan, W. Wang, Z. Kou and F. Peng, Development of Large Volume-High Static Pressure Techniques Based on the Hinge-Tpye Cubic Presses, Chin. J. High Pressure Phys., 2013, 27, 633–661 CAS .
H. T. Hall, Retraction system for multi-anvil presses, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1975, 46, 436–438 CrossRef .
M. Li, C. Sun and J. Zhao, Progress in high-power laser ramp compression of solids, Explos. Shock Waves, 2015, 35, 145–156 Search PubMed .
G. Song, M. Li, Z. Gong, Q. Wu and K. Xu, Advances in Ground Simulation Experiments of Millimeter-scale Space Debris above 8km/s, Sp. Debris Res., 2019, 19, 1–13 Search PubMed .

          X.-Y. Liu, Modern Inorganic Synthetic Chemistry, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 105–141 Search PubMed .

          W. Matizamhuka, Sintering of Functional Materials, InTech,  2018, vol. i, p. 13 Search PubMed .
M. Retuerto, T. Emge, J. Hadermann, P. W. Stephens, M. R. Li, Z. P. Yin, M. Croft, A. Ignatov, S. J. Zhang, Z. Yuan, C. Jin, J. W. Simonson, M. C. Aronson, A. Pan, D. N. Basov, G. Kotliar and M. Greenblatt, Synthesis and properties of charge-ordered thallium halide perovskites, CsTl+0.5Tl3+0.5X3 (X = F or Cl): Theoretical Precursors for Superconductivity?, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4071–4079 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ye, H. Chen, F. Xie, W. Tang, M. Yin, J. He, E. Bi, Y. Wang, X. Yang and L. Han, Soft-cover deposition of scaling-up uniform perovskite thin films for high cost-performance solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2295–2301 RSC .
X. Fu, N. Dong, G. Lian, S. Lv, T. Zhao, Q. Wang, D. Cui and C. P. Wong, High-Quality CH3NH3PbI3 Films Obtained via a Pressure-Assisted Space-Confined Solvent-Engineering Strategy for Ultrasensitive Photodetectors, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1213–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Ye, Y. Hao, P. Zeng, J. Lian, J. Qu, J. Song and F. Zhang, Realization of ultra-flat perovskite films with surprisingly large-grain distribution using high-pressure cooking, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136803 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, C. Chen, X. Yang, H. Wang and Y. Yan, Pressure-Assisted Annealing Strategy for High-Performance Self-Powered All-Inorganic Perovskite Microcrystal Photodetectors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4714–4719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, F. Ye, W. Tang, J. He, M. Yin, Y. Wang, F. Xie, E. Bi, X. Yang, M. Grätzel and L. Han, A solvent- and vacuum-free route to large-area perovskite films for efficient solar modules, Nature, 2017, 550, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takeoka, K. Asai, M. Rikukawa and K. Sanui, Hydrothermal synthesis and structure of zero-dimensional organic-inorganic perovskites, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 602–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, M. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Qiu, S. Kou, M. A. Padhiar, A. S. Bhatti and N. V. Gaponenko, Pressure-Driven Transformation of CsPbBrI2 Nanoparticles into Stable Nanosheets in Solution through Self-Assembly, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, G. Liu, W. Guo, X. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, B. Qu, J. J. Shi, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Black single crystals of lead-free perovskite Cs2Ag(Bi:Ru)Br6 with an intermediate band, Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 4932–4937 RSC .
W. Zheng, X. Li, N. Liu, S. Yan, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Liang, Y. Zhang and H. Liu, Solution-Grown Chloride Perovskite Crystal of Red Afterglow, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 24450–24455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Feng, Z. Wu, Y. Hua, G. Zhu, X. Chen and S. Huang, Controlled growth of perovskite KMnF3 upconverting nanocrystals for near-infrared light-sensitive perovskite solar cells and photodetectors, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 14207–14221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, J. Luo, X. Rong, P. Wei, M. S. Molokeev, Y. Huang, J. Zhao, Q. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Tang and Z. Xia, Lead-Free Perovskite Derivative Cs2SnCl6−xBrx Single Crystals for Narrowband
Photodetectors, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900139 CrossRef .
L. Zheng, A. Nozariasbmarz, Y. Hou, J. Yoon, W. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, D. Yang, T. Ye, M. Sanghadasa, K. Wang, B. Poudel, S. Priya and K. Wang, A universal all-solid synthesis for high throughput production of halide perovskite, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 7399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Enhanced efficiency of perovskite solar cells through improving active layer morphology by interfacial engineering, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 830 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Ren, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. Yang, F. Yu, J. Sun, C. Zhao, Z. Yao, B. Wang, Q. Wei, F. Xiao, H. Fan, H. Deng, L. Deng and S. F. Liu, 120 mm single-crystalline perovskite and wafers: towards viable applications, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 1367–1376 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Compositional engineering of perovskite materials for high-performance solar cells, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Cesium-containing triple cation perovskite solar cells: Improved stability, reproducibility and high efficiency, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
X. Gong, M. Li, X. Shi, H. Ma, Z. Wang and L. Liao, Controllable Perovskite Crystallization by Water Additive for High-Performance Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, Y. (Michael) Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Moisture assisted perovskite film growth for high performance solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
Y. He, Z. Lin, J. Wang, K. Zhang, X. Xu, Y. Li, X. Huang, T. Ma, S. Xiao and S. Yang, A Heat-Liquefiable Solid Precursor for Ambient Growth of Perovskites with High Tunability, Performance and Stability, Small Methods, 2022, 6, 2200384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Akriti, E. Shi, S. B. Shiring, J. Yang, C. L. Atencio-Martinez, B. Yuan, X. Hu, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, A. J. Pistone, Y. Yu, P. Liao, B. M. Savoie and L. Dou, Layer-by-layer anionic diffusion in two-dimensional halide perovskite vertical heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 584–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Duan and A. Uddin, Defects and stability of perovskite solar cells: A critical analysis, Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 400–417 RSC .
X. Lü, Y. Wang, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Hu, X. Guo, H. Chen, L. Yang, J. S. Smith, W. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, M. G. Kanatzidis and Q. Jia, Enhanced Structural Stability and Photo Responsiveness of CH3NH3SnI3 Perovskite via Pressure-Induced Amorphization and Recrystallization, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8663–8668 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yuan, S. Qin, X. Wu, H. Ding and A. Lu, Pressure-induced phase transformation of CsPbI3 by X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy, Phase Transitions, 2018, 91, 38–47 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, C. M. Beavers, J. Voss, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, High-pressure single-crystal structures of 3D lead-halide hybrid perovskites and pressure effects on their electronic and optical properties, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 201–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, W. Cai, T. Bi, N. Zarifi, T. Terpstra, C. Zhang, Z. V. Verdeny, E. Zurek and S. Deemyad, Effects of Nonhydrostatic Stress on Structural and Optoelectronic Properties of Methylammonium Lead Bromide Perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3457–3465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Lü, W. Yang, T. Wen, L. Yang, X. Ren, L. Wang, Z. Lin and Y. Zhao, Pressure-Induced Phase Transformation, Reversible Amorphization, and Anomalous Visible Light Response in Organolead Bromide Perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11144–11149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Shi, C. H. Chen, Y. H. Lou and Z. K. Wang, Strategies of perovskite mechanical stability for flexible photovoltaics, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 7467–7478 RSC .
Y. Gao, Z. Wei, S. N. Hsu, B. W. Boudouris and L. Dou, Two-dimensional halide perovskites featuring semiconducting organic building blocks, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3400–3418 RSC .
G. Liu, L. Kong, J. Gong, W. Yang, H. Mao, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, R. D. Schaller, D. Zhang and T. Xu, Pressure-Induced Bandgap Optimization in Lead-Based Perovskites with Prolonged Carrier Lifetime and Ambient Retainability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604208 CrossRef .
S. Sun, Z. Deng, Y. Wu, F. Wei, F. Halis Isikgor, F. Brivio, M. W. Gaultois, J. Ouyang, P. D. Bristowe, A. K. Cheetham and G. Kieslich, Variable temperature and high-pressure crystal chemistry of perovskite formamidinium lead iodide: A single crystal X-ray diffraction and computational study, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7537–7540 RSC .
H. Zhu, T. Cai, M. Que, J. P. Song, B. M. Rubenstein, Z. Wang and O. Chen, Pressure-Induced Phase Transformation and Band-Gap Engineering of Formamidinium Lead Iodide Perovskite Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4199–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, R. Fu, L. Wang, Z. Ma, G. Xiao, K. Wang and B. Zou, Emission enhancement and bandgap retention of a two-dimensional mixed cation lead halide perovskite under high pressure, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6357–6362 RSC .
G. Liu, L. Kong, P. Guo, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Cai, D. J. Gosztola, H. K. Mao, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. D. Schaller, Two Regimes of Bandgap Red Shift and Partial Ambient Retention in Pressure-Treated Two-Dimensional Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2518–2524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, Y. Zhao, K. Bu, Y. Fu, H. Luo, M. Chen, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Wang, S. Jin, W. Yang and L. Xujie, Pressure-Suppressed Carrier Trapping Leads to Enhanced Emission in Two-Dimensional Perovskite (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17533–17539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, Q. Li, J. Luo, S. Li, L. Sui, D. Zhao, K. Yuan, G. Xiao, J. Tang, Z. Quan and B. Zou, Pressure-Driven Reverse Intersystem Crossing: New Path toward Bright Deep-Blue
Emission of Lead-Free Halide Double Perovskites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 15176–15184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fu, W. Zhao, L. Wang, Z. Ma, G. Xiao and B. Zou, Pressure-Induced Emission toward Harvesting Cold White Light from Warm White Light, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10082–10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Guo, H. Luo, C. Zhou, H. Lin, X. Ma, Q. Hu, M. H. Du, B. Ma, W. Yang and X. Lü, Reaching 90% Photoluminescence Quantum Yield in One-Dimensional Metal Halide C4N2H14PbBr4 by Pressure-Suppressed Nonradiative Loss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16001–16006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ou, C. Liu, H. Yan, Y. Han, Q. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Ma and C. Gao, Effects of pressure on the ionic transport and photoelectrical properties of CsPbBr3, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 062105 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Q. Zeng and K. Wang, Pressure-Induced Structural and Optical Properties of Inorganic Halide Perovskite CsPbBr3, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3752–3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Song, H. Yang, F. Liu and G. J. Cheng, Ultrafast femtosecond pressure modulation of structure and exciton kinetics in 2D halide perovskites for enhanced light response and stability, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, K. Zhang, J. Zhu, S. Xiao, W. Xiong, J. Wang, T. Liu, G. Xing, K. Wang, S. Yang and X. Wang, Surface passivation of organometal halide perovskites by atomic layer deposition: An investigation of the mechanism of efficient inverted planar solar cells, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 2305–2315 RSC .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:

Fang Xu
	Fang Xu is currently an assistant professor at Shenzhen Technology University. She received her PhD degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering of The Chinese University of Hong Kong and B.S. degree from the College of Applied Physics of Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on semiconductor sensors, perovskite solar cells and THz photodetectors.

Yongtao Zou
	Yongtao Zou is currently a Full Professor & Doctoral Supervisor at Shenzhen Technology University. Prof. Zou's interest is focused on LVP- and DAC-based high-pressure research, including novel materials synthesis, phase transition, equation of state, sound velocity and elasticity of condensed-matter under high P–T conditions using ultrasonic interferometry and synchrotron X-ray diffraction, and Raman spectroscopy.

Yanmeng Dai
	Yanmeng Dai is currently an assistant professor at Shenzhen Technology University. He received his B.S. degree in Applied Physics from Zhengzhou University in 2009 and PhD degree in Condensed Matter Physics from the University of Science and Technology of China. He joined Shenzhen Technology University in 2020. His research interests include plasmon-enhanced light-matter interactions, metasurfaces, metamaterials, X-ray source and imaging, etc.

Mu Li
	Mu Li is currently a professor in Shenzhen Technology University. He received his B.S. degree and PhD degree in aerospace propulsion theory and engineering from Northwestern Polytechnical University. From 2008 to 2010, he was a postdoctoral fellow at the Mechanics Postdoctoral Station of the China Academy of Engineering Physics, and from December 2014 to December 2016, he was a visiting scholar in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley. He joined Shenzhen Technology University in 2019. His research interests include laser–matter interaction, high pressure physics, earth and planetary physics, shock and detonation physics, and space propulsion.

Zeren Li
	Zeren Li is currently a professor at Shenzhen Technology University. He received his PhD degree in opto-electronic technology at Tianjin University. He is a member of the Board of Directors of the Chinese Society of Optical Engineering and a member of the Standing Committee of the Special Committee on Optoelectronic Technology and Systems of the Chinese Society of Optics. His research covers the theory and technology of optoelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cubic perovskite crystal structure.4 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. The A site cations could be calcium ions (Ca2+), methylammonium ions (MA+), cesium ions (Cs+), etc. The B site cations could be titanium ions (Ti4+), lead ions (Pb2+), tin ions (Sn2+), etc. The X site anions could be oxygen ions (O2−), iodide ions (I−), bromide ions (Br−), etc. (b) Perovskite classification for tolerance factor (τ) < 4.18.3 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 3, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of static compression apparatus: (a) opposed anvil cells. Diamond anvil cells and large-volume Bridgman anvil cells are examples. (b) Piston–cylinder device. (c) Belt apparatus. (a–c) Sectional views. (d) A multi-anvil cell: 4-anvil configuration.	 

Pressure	0.1 MPa to 600 GPa	<30 GPa	<10 GPa	<15 GPa	80 GPa
Advantages	Powerful, cost-efficient, portable	Simple, stable	Large sample size: 1 mm to several meters	Larger sample volume than LAC, easy to align, can be maintained at pressure and temperature for a long time	Sample volume of 1 cm3, pressure uniformity, easy to align
Disadvantages	Limited sample space, level of μm	Low maximum pressure, unavoidable pressure gradient	Short lifetime, high cost	Low maximum pressure	Expensive
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Scheme of dynamic compression apparatus: (a) laser-driven ramp compression. To increase the pressure on the sample, multiple laser beams are shot onto the sample simultaneously. (b) The two-stage light gas gun.73 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2019, Space Debris Research.	 

 	Fig. 4  Pressure-assisted annealing process for large perovskite grains. (a) Schematic illustration of this process. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (b) the pristine perovskite film and (c) the perovskite film after pressure-assisted annealing.78 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 78, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Pressure processing deposition of perovskite films. (a) Scheme of the pressure processing program. “PI” is polyimide. (b) SEM images of perovskite films fabricated by pressure processing deposition and spin-coating. (c) XRD patterns of perovskite films fabricated by pressure processing deposition and spin-coating.81 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Properties of MAPbI3 under pressure. (a) Arrhenius plot of the temperature dependence of conductivity of MAPbI3 at 50 GPa (red, semiconducting) and 62 GPa (blue, metallic).43 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Pressure dependence of the bandgap of MAPbI3 in the range between 0 and 55 GPa.43 (c) Detailed pressure dependence of the lattice parameters of MAPbI3 in the range between 0 GPa and 4 GPa.62 (d) Detailed pressure dependence of the energy gap of MAPbI3 in the range of 0 GPa to 4 GPa.62 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photocurrent and (b) resistance evolution of MAPbI3 under high pressure.61 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Relative quantum yield and bandgap of (PEA)2PbI4 under compression. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Lattice structure of (PEA)2PbI4, in which large organic PEA ions separate the [PbI6]4− octahedra.36,66 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  The UV-visible absorption spectra of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 under pressure in the ranges (a) 1 atm to 7.3 GPa, and (b) 8.4 GPa to 25.1 GPa. (c) Tauc plot and optical micrograph of GA(MA)2Pb2I7 before and after compression at 25.1 GPa.108 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 108, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) PL micrographs of Cs3Bi2I9 showing PL intensity transition at various pressures. The scale bar is 40 μm.65 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 65, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) PL spectra of Cs3Bi2I9 under varying pressures.65 (c) PL spectra of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7 under varying pressures.110 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) PL photographs of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7 showing PL intensity evolution at different pressures.110 (e) Normalized PL intensity versus pressure of (HA)2(GA)Pb2I7.110	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PL spectra of Cs2Na0.4Ag0.6InCl6 double perovskite with Bi doping under various pressures.111 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) PL intensity of 563 nm and 370 nm peaks of (PEA)2PbCl4 nanocrystals at different pressures, showing free excitons (FE) and self-trapped excitons (STE).112 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) PL peak positions of 563 nm and 370 nm peaks of (PEA)2PbCl4 nanocrystals at different pressures.112	 

 	Fig. 12  The evolution of (a) resistance (R), (b) unit cell volume, and (c) cell parameters, of CsPbBr3 under compression. Ri is ionic resistance, Re is electrical resistance, and Rtotal = (Ri × Re)/(Ri + Re).114,115 Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2019, American Institute of Physics; Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
