Photocatalytic conversion of biomass into valuable products: a meaningful approach?  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7GC03522E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7GC03522E
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1169-1192Photocatalytic conversion of biomass into valuable products: a meaningful approach?

        
          
            L. I. 
            Granone†
ac, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Sieland†
ac, 
      
        
          
            N. 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Dillert
          
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            D. W. 
            Bahnemann
          
          
        
      *adc
aLeibniz University Hannover, Institute of Technical Chemistry, 30167 Hannover, Germany. E-mail: bahnemann@iftc.uni-hannover.de; tci.uni-hannover.de;   Tel: +49 511 762 5560
bUniversity of Arkansas, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701, USA
cLaboratory of Nano- and Quantum-Engineering (LNQE), 30167 Hannover, Germany
dSaint-Petersburg State University, Laboratory “Photoactive Nanocomposite Materials”, Saint-Petersburg, 198504 Russian Federation
Received 
      22nd November 2017
    , Accepted 21st February 2018First published on 21st February 2018AbstractThe innovative combination of photocatalysis and biomass utilization represents a new and promising approach to achieve a higher grade of sustainability in chemical processes. A growing number of publications deal with topics like biomass conversion to solar fuels and the selective production of fine chemicals from waste. Despite the recalcitrant structure of several biological waste streams, which hampers the technical processing, huge progress has been achieved by the use of photocatalytic systems. This review analyzes recent examples of this promising field and investigates their potential for large-scale applications. Overall, the major critic is the lack of mechanistic investigations hampering the development of photocatalytic systems for biomass conversion. Therefore, this review represents a guideline, emphasizing the strategy and mechanistic considerations for the technical application of sustainable photocatalytic and photochemical reactions.L. I. GranoneLuis Ignacio Granone graduated in chemistry in 2015 at the National University of Mar del Plata, Argentina. He is currently a Ph.D. student at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz University Hannover under the supervision of Prof. Detlef W. Bahnemann and Dr. Ralf Dillert. His research interests include the development of iron-based photoelectrodes for oxygen and hydrogen production via water oxidation/reduction and electrodes for microbiological fuel cells.F. SielandFabian Sieland received his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry in 2015 from the University of Paderborn. Currently, he is a Ph.D. student at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz University Hannover. In the group of Prof. Detlef W. Bahnemann, he focuses on the analysis of charge carrier kinetics in photocatalysts by means of transient absorption spectroscopy. His current research interests include the mechanism of charge carrier recombination, photocatalytic synthesis of chemicals, sustainable and environmentally friendly applications of photocatalysis, and (photo)-electrochemistry.N. ZhengNan Zheng did his undergraduate studies at the University of Science and Technology of China and obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan with Professor William R. Roush. He then performed postdoctoral studies at MIT with Stephen L. Buchwald before starting his independent career at the University of Arkansas in 2008. His research interest is centered on photoredox catalysis.R. DillertRalf Dillert, Dr rer. nat., chemist, is working since 2006 as a researcher at the Institute of Technical Chemistry of the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz University Hannover. His actual research interests comprise photocatalytic water treatment, photocatalytic removal of air pollutants, self-cleaning surfaces, and the interfacial electron transfer at the electrolyte/semiconductor interface.D. W. BahnemannDetlef W. Bahnemann is currently the Head of the Research Unit “Photocatalysis and Nanotechnology” at the Institute of Technical Chemistry of the Leibniz University Hannover in Germany and also the Director of the Research Institute on Nanocomposite Materials for Photonic Applications at Saint Petersburg State University in Russia. His main research topics include photocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, solar chemistry and the detailed investigation of the physicochemical properties of semiconductor and metal nanoparticles.
1. Introduction
1.1. Conversion of solar energy
Catalysis is one of the twelve principles of green chemistry, as proposed by Paul Anastas and John Warner in the 1990s.1 By lowering the activation energy of the rate-determining steps of a chemical reaction, catalysis can achieve not only a faster reaction rate but also a higher selectivity for the formation of the desired product(s). Photocatalysis, a subtype of catalysis, is based on the use of photons to drive chemical reactions thus enabling to obtain several benefits simultaneously. By using photon rather than thermal energy, the reaction can be carried out at lower temperatures. Moreover, it is possible to degrade toxic substances, which often show a low biodegradability under ambient conditions. Potential applications of photocatalysis are not limited to the degradation of undesired compounds. The three main applications of photocatalysis are air/water purification, fuel production from wastewater or renewable feedstock, and the synthesis of fine chemicals, all of which match perfectly with the concept of green chemistry. This review focuses on the heterogeneous photocatalytic conversion of biomass and biomass-derived chemicals with metal oxide based photocatalysts thus assessing the recent work in the areas of fine chemical synthesis and solar fuel production.
The impact of photocatalysis on green chemistry has already been reviewed by Ravelli et al. in 2009.2 The authors emphasized the central role of solar irradiation for humanity (Fig. 1), since the chemical energy stored in plants and fossil fuels is ultimately derived from solar irradiation.
 Fig. 1  Pathways of solar energy. Renewable supply basing on plants or agricultural waste is shown as green arrows. Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, only a tiny fraction of the total solar energy available on the surface of the earth after penetration of the atmosphere is utilized. Until now, the chemical industry and our mobility depend on fossil fuels, which are a non-renewable and non-optimal source of energy causing air pollution, climatic change, and global warming.3–6 Although Ravelli et al. discussed the use of plants as renewable sources for chemicals, food, and energy, they focused on the direct application of sunlight by photocatalysis, due to the limited availability of agricultural waste or plants.2
In contrast, this review will concentrate on the examples of biomass waste streams and the vast potential of the photocatalytic conversion into valuable compounds. The presents work focuses on the photocatalytic conversion of biomass by simultaneously employing of agricultural waste as renewable feedstock and sunlight as irradiation source. Further, the sustainability of biomass sources and processing routes for fuels and chemicals will be shown and discussed.
1.2. Composition of biomass
Every year, 170 billion tons of biomass are produced globally.7 Only a few percent of the global biomass is cultivated and employed in technical processes.6 Carbohydrates and lignin represent the two largest fractions of biomass and, consequently, play a major role in the industrial utilization of biomass (Fig. 2). Hence, they carry the largest potential for photocatalytic biomass conversion.
 Fig. 2  Composition of biomass of common agricultural crops. 
In crops, carbohydrates account for 75% of the dry weight, while lignin represents the second largest fraction with 10%–20% of the dry weight. The rest are mainly triglycerides (lipids). This composition varies significantly with the type of the plant. Softwood conifers, for instance, can contain up to 40% lignin and fewer carbohydrates.6,8 There are two major types of carbohydrates in plants: those for energy storage such as starch and inulin, and structural polysaccharides including cellulose and hemicelluloses.2,6 Due to the controversy about the use of edible biomass as a feedstock, since it directly interferes with food supply, recent research has focused on non-edible biomass or biomass from waste streams as feedstocks.6 This development away from edible biomass represents an important progress for the sustainability of the approach since the potential competition with food is a strong argument against up-scaling of promising photocatalytic processes (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Available biomass wastes, indigestible for humans, for the sustainable photocatalytic production of valuable products. 
Cellulose, the main carbohydrate in plants, is indigestible for humans and most animals. Therefore, it has become a promising candidate for the production of chemicals and fuel. Cellulose has been converted to alcohols, sugars, and fine chemicals by thermal catalysis and biotechnology.9 The production of sugars enables the synthesis of a large number of chemicals based on a so-called sugar derived platform molecules.10,11
Sugars can be obtained directly or indirectly from natural carbohydrates, which constitute the largest fraction of biomass. As already mentioned above, the dilemma of using edible crops in large technical processes presents a large obstacle to sustainability. Nevertheless, the highly functionalized but well-defined structure of saccharides represents versatile raw materials for chemical synthesis. The conversion of glycerol or lignin from non-edible feedstocks to sugar derived platform molecules provides a possible solution to the dilemma.
Lignin is a biopolymer consisting of a three-dimensional polyphenolic framework.12Fig. 4 displays the three primary monomeric building blocks of lignin.13 The structure of natural lignin is very complex since the three phenylpropane units are connected irregularly, and the molecular mass and composition vary with the source of the material.14
 Fig. 4  The three primary building blocks of lignin. 
Lignin is part of the plant cell structure and remains as a side product of the pulp and paper industry. In contrast to the wide variety of applications for starch, cellulose, and hemicelluloses, there is a deficiency for industrial applications of lignin, mainly because it is recalcitrant to degradation. More than 70 million tons of lignin are produced every year, and 98% are burned to cover the energy demand of the paper mills.12,15 The aromatic moieties of lignin are potential building blocks for high-value aromatic compounds, which cannot be accessed from the plant carbohydrates such as cellulose and hemicelluloses. However, cellulose and other carbohydrates have been converted to several high-value non-aromatic chemicals.9 All in all, agricultural plants produce a significant amount of lignin together with cellulose. The use of lignin in the formulation of dispersants and adhesives represents only a minor application so far.15 Therefore, lignocelluloses represent an abundant and renewable carbon source, which can be a viable alternative to fossil resources in the future. Bozell and Key, for instance, compare the potential of lignin as the carbon source with crude oil.12
Lipids are converted to fatty acid methyl esters (biodiesel) by the transesterification (Fig. 5). Biodiesel is another example of biomass applications on a significant and growing scale, with a demand in the EU of more than 10 billion liters in 2010.16 It can be made from a diverse mix of feedstocks and represents one possible solution to satisfy the world's growing wish for liquid fuels.
 Fig. 5  Production of fatty acid methyl esters (biodiesel) and glycerol from lipids. 
The first generation biodiesel was produced mainly from edible vegetable oil, while the second generation of biodiesel shifted to non-edible oils and the third generation focuses on sustainable resources like microalgae.17 A by-product of biodiesel production is glycerol, as the production of one kilogram of biodiesel also results in the production of 100 gram of glycerol.18 However, drawbacks such as high free fatty acid content prevent the extensive use of glycerol co-produced with biodiesel. Recent research showed that these drawbacks can be overcome by employing bifunctional catalysts to produce glycerol with high purity and using the second generation of lipids from non-food crops or microalgae as sustainable feedstocks.9,16,19 Additionally, since the obtained glycerol is of high purity, it can be directly used for the production of chemicals.9
1.3. Conversion of biomass
Even if a photocatalytic reaction successfully converts biomass into valuable products, the photocatalytic approach needs to be compared with the various chemical, biological or physical strategies of utilizing biomass.

1.3.1. Sugars. 
Organic acids like lactic acid are usually produced by sugar fermentation. Hence, lactic acid is an important example of the so-called sugar derived platform molecules and represents a high-value chemical for the pharmaceutical, detergent and food industry. More than 260000 tons of lactic acid are produced every year, while the growing demand for biodegradable polymers emphasizes the importance of lactic acid since poly(lactic acid) is one of the most common building blocks for such systems.18
Fermentation technique is at present widely employed to convert carbohydrate-containing biomass wastes into ethanol. Sugar cane and sugar beet are the primary feedstocks for this process. The wastes are fermented using yeast. Intracellular enzymes convert starch into smaller saccharides and finally into ethanol. Ethanol is then separated in a further purification step.20 To validate the advantages of photocatalytic approaches of biomass valorization, they need to be compared against the corresponding biological reactions (e.g., sugar fermentation) and chemical catalysis.


1.3.2. Lignin. 
An excellent review written by Sheldon covers the biological valorization of lignin extensively and can serve as an advantageous source of information on this topic.6 General catalytic pathways of lignin and bio-refinery processes, on the other hand, have been reviewed by Bozell et al.12


1.3.3. Glycerol. 
The formation of biodiesel from lipids is an exemplary real-world application for biomass conversion. Hence, it is of great interest to investigate potential pathways for conversion of glycerol to high-value products. The production of chemicals from biomass would make the biodiesel production more profitable.12 A growing demand for glycerol, caused by transformation to valuable products would significantly increase the profit of the biodiesel industry.12 Glycerol possesses the potential to replace several fossil feedstocks. With a high number of catalysts glycerol can be converted to a broad variety of chemicals, e.g., acrolein, propanediol, dihydroxyacetone, epichlorohydrin, lactic acid and glyceric acid (Fig. 6).18
 Fig. 6  Products of glycerol obtainable by heterogeneous catalysis. 


1.3.4. Conversion of biomass by thermochemical and biochemical processes. 
Biomass is collected and burnt to generate electricity or heat for other industrial processes. Additionally, rather than combustion, more sophisticated methods have been developed to extract energy from biomass-derived waste. The methods can be encompassed into two broad groups: thermochemical and biochemical. Thermochemical processes can also be subdivided into three different methods: pyrolysis, gasification, and liquefaction (Fig. 7).21
 Fig. 7  Conversion of biomass to valuable products employing various thermochemical and biochemical processes. 
Pyrolysis transforms biomass into solid (charcoal), liquid (bio-oil) or gaseous fuels by heating at around 500 °C in the absence of oxygen. The conversion of wood-derived biomass into bio-oil by fast pyrolysis has been extensively developed. In this process, a mixture of cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin is rapidly heated in an inert atmosphere to generate vapors, aerosols and charcoal. Short vapor residence time, usually less than five seconds, is crucial for liquid production without exposure to secondary reactions.22 The rapid subsequent cooling of the pyrolysis vapors yields the oil product with a heating equivalent approximately half of that from the conventional fossil fuel and a yield of up to 80% of the dry biomass weight.23
Gasification transforms biomass into a combustible gas mixture via a partial thermal oxidation process at around 800 °C. This mixture includes not only gaseous hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, molecular hydrogen, and carbon dioxide, but also condensable compounds, such as tar, oils, and ash.24 The resulting gases can be purified to produce syngas (i.e. CO and H2), a key precursor for the industrial production of methanol.
Liquefaction is the direct conversion of biomass into liquid fuels without the gasification step. This process is carried at low temperature (150–420 °C) and high hydrogen pressures (1–240 bar). Heterogeneous and/or homogeneous catalysts are usually employed to improve the yields.25,26
Biochemical treatment, including digestion and fermentation techniques, is another useful approach for processing biomass. The digestion method is used to convert biomass directly to biogas using bacterial degradation under anaerobic conditions. The resulting biogas consists mainly of methane and carbon dioxide in addition to small amounts of other gases such as hydrogen sulfide.21 Nowadays, it is widely used for the treatment of organic wastes from household and the food and agricultural industry, because it is not only a profitable way to convert biomass wastes into highly valuable fuel, but can also replace fertilizers by nutrient recovery.27
For the reader to get more insight into non-photocatalytic biomass valorization methods, Table 1 summarizes relevant articles published since 2014 reviewing the state-of-the-art of the technologies mentioned above.
Table 1 Selected review articles published since 2014 describing the state-of-the-art of the current technologies for biomass valorization rather than photocatalysis




Biomass valorization technology
Ref.




Pyrolysis

28 and 29



Gasification

30–32



Liquefaction

33 and 34



Biochemical methods

35–40





Although there are other methods for biomass waste treatment such as hydrothermal upgrading and supercritical conversion, they are not frequently used because of high costs and required harsh conditions.41,42 These methods, which are still in a development stage, are outside of the scope of this review.


1.3.5. Economic analysis of lignin/biomass combustion. 
To develop any photocatalytic strategy of using biomass for industrial applications, the viability of the proposed photochemical reaction is not the sole factor to be considered. The energy costs of running the facility has to be added to the overall costs. A successful photocatalytic strategy should have a net benefit when all cost influencing factors are considered. In the following model the biomass being replaced has been burned to produce electricity or heat as energy source. As a consequence, the additional economic costs for replacing the energy need to be considered. Burning of lignin, which is done in paper mills, generates 25 MJ kg−1.43 In comparison, fossil fuels have higher energy densities, ranging from 29 MJ kg−1 for coal to methane gas with 55 MJ kg−1.44 Exchanging lignin with cheap coal will only lead to a relatively small increase in the price of 0.02–0.03 USD per kilogram lignin.45 Assuming a stable price of approximately 0.35 USD per cubic meter for natural gas, replacing lignin by natural gas will significantly increase the price by 0.20 USD per kilogram lignin. To reduce the CO2 footprint of the process lignin can be substituted with renewable energy sources. Unfortunately, these energy sources are far more expensive than coal or natural gas at present. Using wind will increase the price by 0.35 USD per kilogram lignin, whereas using photovoltaic energy, one of the more expensive energy sources today, will add up to 2.1 USD per kilogram lignin.46 In addition to the pure economic view on fossil fuel burning, the ecological perspective should be considered. Burning of fossil fuels can release several toxic volatile compounds. Traces of nitrogen- and sulfur-containing substances in the fuel, for instance, can be converted to volatile SOx and NOx. These toxic pollutants in the exhaust of larger incinerators and engines need to be removed to achieve a green and sustainable system. The required treatment with catalysts undoubtedly adds additional costs to the process. Considering the costs of the energy and pollutant treatment, as well as the effect on climate change, although more expensive than fossil fuel, the energy from wind or photovoltaic represents a greener and better alternative.

2. Photocatalysis
In contrast to many catalytic approaches, photocatalytic reactions are typically carried out under the ambient atmospheric pressure and temperature. This green feature makes the photocatalytic approach stand out among most of the described catalytic reactions.
2.1. Definition
According to the IUPAC, the photocatalytic reaction is defined as a “change in the rate of a chemical reaction or its initiation under the action of ultraviolet, visible or infrared radiation in the presence of a substance—the photocatalyst—that absorbs light and is involved in the chemical transformation of the reaction partners”.47
However, the phrase photocatalysis is also frequently used for photochemical or photoinitiated thermal reactions. Albini discussed this matter in detail.2 In a photochemical reaction, instead of the photocatalyst, the reagent enters an excited state. The excitation process is applied to all photo-sensitized reactions, where, for example, dye molecules absorb photons and the corresponding excited state injects an electron into the conduction band of a suitable semiconductor. In this example, the semiconductor serves only as a catalyst rather than as a photocatalyst. Further, this mechanism can hardly be separated from the electron injection from ligand to metal charge transfer complexes, illustrated in the chapter “surface complexes (LMCT)”. Serpone and Emeline have shown the complexity of definition of photocatalytic reactions and the involved terms.48 It is beyond the scope of this review to identify and discuss the different mechanisms of photo-initiated or -assisted degradation. Therefore, we employ the definition of photocatalysis given at the beginning of this paragraph including LMCT and photo-sensitized reactions.
2.2. General mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalysis
In general, the photocatalytic process strongly depends on the reagents present on the semiconductor surface. Photon absorption, charge carrier generation, charge separation and trapping are commonly observed in the initial steps of the process (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of heterogeneous photocatalysis and trapping of photogenerated electrons. 
First, after a photon with energy exceeding the bandgap energy EBG is absorbed, an electron is promoted from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), creating a vacancy described as a hole (1). These photogenerated charges can undergo direct recombination (2), or migrate to the surface or internal defects, where different trapping sites stabilize the charge carriers (3). The trapped species can recombine with free or trapped charge carriers (4). On the surface of the semiconductor, the trapped holes drive oxidation (not shown) and the trapped electrons carry out reduction reactions (5). A direct hole transfer from the valence band (6) or a direct electron transfer from the conduction band (not shown) are possible as well.
The authors want to stress that only a few examples of using homogeneous photocatalysts for the conversion of biomass have so far been reported. The lack of research activities in this field can be attributed to some intrinsic properties of homogeneous catalysts. Difficult product separation and low photo-stability are often observed in homogeneous systems.2 Furthermore, the photocatalysts are often composed of rare metal ions with organic ligands, which, especially for technical applications, raises concerns about toxicity and high costs.49 Nevertheless, there are several benefits of homogeneous systems. The interaction of the homogeneous photocatalyst with the reactants is more predictable than that of the heterogeneous photocatalyst with the reactants. Also, the reactivity can often be tuned by the choice and structure of the ligands.
On the other hand, multiple catalytic pathways can be observed on the complex heterogeneous surfaces, which inevitably hamper the control and predictability of the reactions. The complexity of surface chemistry can limit the research to empirical observations. Although attempts have been made to directly correlate the structure with the photocatalytic activity based on a deeper theoretical understanding of the photocatalytic process, models built upon this approach remain rudimentary. Hence, although the homogeneous photocatalysts cannot be used readily in industrial processes, the research on the structure–activity-relationship of these systems serves as a bridge to facilitate the rational design of future heterogeneous catalysts.
2.3. Combination of oxidation and reduction
Photocatalytic processes can be performed in the presence of O2 as well as in the absence of O2. In both approaches reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydroxyl radicals and superoxide radicals play a crucial role in the mechanisms of the reaction. The electrons in the conduction band often have a negative potential (vs. NHE). Hence, if the semiconductor surface is exposed to air, oxygen is likely reduced to superoxide radicals O2− (Fig. 9A).5
 Fig. 9  Utilization of photogenerated charge carriers under atmosphere containing oxygen (A) and under inert gas atmosphere (B). 
Synthetic reactions utilizing the reductive potential of the conduction band electrons are typically carried out under oxygen-free conditions to avoid the formation of superoxide (Fig. 9B).2 Since the superoxide radical often results in the formation of undesired side products, a higher degree of chemoselectivity can often be achieved under these conditions. However, working under an inert gas atmosphere can be expensive for technical applications. Technical oxidation processes, on the other hand, can be carried out under inert atmosphere along with the reduction processes. The utilization of both the electrons and holes permits chemical energy being completely used. Typically, however, oxidation reactions are conducted under ambient atmosphere, where the reaction of charge carriers with oxygen can lead to a loss of up to 50% of the photogenerated charge carriers. The overall performance needs to be assessed under both conditions, an inert atmosphere and for the cheaper natural atmosphere, to identify the more economical conditions for technical applications.
2.4. TiO2, the only green photocatalyst?
To choose the most suitable photocatalyst for a reaction, its band positions have to match the oxidation and reduction potentials of the substrate(s). The conduction band position needs to be more negative than the reduction potential of the substrate to drive the reduction reaction with electrons from the conduction band of the catalyst. On the other hand, the valence band position needs to be more positive than the oxidation potential of the substrate to carry out the oxidation with the holes. This fundamental principle of photocatalysis has been discussed by Albini et al. for the solar fuel production. Even though the principle can be applied to every photocatalytic reaction, it has seldom been discussed in publications dealing with selective conversion of chemicals. From our point of view, this principle has been underutilized in identifying the optimal catalyst for chemical reactions. Additionally, the optimal catalyst should have a band gap that is wide enough to perform the redox reaction including overpotentials, but the distance of valence and conduction band should not exceed the potential to drive undesired redox reactions. Otherwise, the formation of strong oxidizing or reducing radicals might trigger unwanted side reactions. Subsequently, exchanging the photocatalyst can significantly increase the selectivity of a reaction. Hence, widening the scope and searching for alternative photocatalyst is of utmost importance.
TiO2 is the most frequently chosen catalyst when dealing with the conversion of biomass because it has beneficial properties that are not self-evident for photoactive materials. TiO2 is abundant, nontoxic, chemically and biologically inert, and stable under UV and sunlight irradiation. All of these properties are necessary for a catalyst to be used in large-scale technical processes.
Nevertheless, TiO2 also has some disadvantages. The commonly used polymorph, anatase, has a large band gap of 3.2 eV and thus is only able to absorb UV light, which represents only a small fraction of the solar irradiation. The absorption of UV light limits the maximum conversion of solar to chemical energy to less than 4% since the solar spectrum does not contain much UV light on the sea level.50,51 TiO2 suspensions usually display quantum yields below 1%.52 Accordingly, the area demand for the systems using genuine solar irradiation is vast and much less than 1% conversion of solar energy is often achieved. The overall energy efficiency will be further lowered if artificial light is employed in comparison to solar irradiation. Such processes will be cost-effective only for the production of high-value fine chemicals. For commodity products with a price of a few dollars per kilogram, it is critical to use the visible solar spectrum to make the process economical. The photocatalystś absorption has to match the solar spectrum closely to maximize the efficiency in the utilization of solar energy.
Although commercially available TiO2 is highly stable and inexpensive, it lacks the required visible light activity in the photocatalytic processes. Therefore, the development of visible light active photocatalysts and techniques to shift the range of light absorption of UV active compounds towards the visible light range has gained increasing importance in the photocatalytic research.53 In the case of making TiO2 visible light active, modifications such as non-metal doping, metal deposition, dye sensitization, defect induction or coupled semiconductors have been studied.54,55 Non-metal doping has evidenced promising results, especially for nitrogen doping. Sato found in 1986 a shift in color from white to pale yellow in TiO2 prepared from a commercial titanium hydroxide by calcination. This spectral sensitization, responsible for a higher photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation was concluded to be caused by NOx impurities, which were formed from NH4OH used in the preparation of the TiO2 precursor.56 Since the discovery made by Sato, several scientists have improved the N-doping process for TiO2.57 Other non-metal dopants such as carbon, sulfur or phosphorous have also shown enhanced photocatalytic activities in the visible light region.58–60 The deposition of metallic compounds, especially transition metals such as iron, vanadium, chromium, etc. also has a good efficiency in shifting the spectral response and, thus, improving photocatalytic activity under visible light. The effect of metal-based dopants is attributed to the formation of inner bands from which electrons can be excited by the visible light to the conduction band.61 Another extensively employed technique is dye sensitization, in which a layer of a dye is covered on the surface of TiO2. After visible light illumination, an electron is excited to the LUMO of the dye molecule and, subsequently, injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Afterwards, the dye is restored by the oxidation of an electron donor present in the suspension. The induction of defects on the TiO2 surface is another strategy to reduce the bandgap of the semiconductor. Reduced TiO2, which contains Ti3+ centers or oxygen vacancies, has been demonstrated to exhibit visible light absorption due to the introduction of electronic states between the conduction and valence bands.62 Finally, TiO2 can be coupled to narrow band gap semiconductors to build a so-called heterojunction. Charge carriers are generated in one photocatalyst and then transferred to the other material, thereby decreasing the recombination rate and prolonging the electron–hole lifetime.63
In addition to TiO2, there are several UV and visible light active materials for biomass conversion. Chen et al. proposed that UV-active photocatalysts can be classified into four groups according to their electronic configuration properties: (1) d0 metal (Ti4+, Zr4+, Nd5+, Ta5+, W6+, and Mo6+) oxide photocatalysts; (2) d10 metal (In3+, Ga3+, Ge4+, Sn4+, and Sb5+) oxide photocatalysts; (3) f0 metal (Ce4+) oxide photocatalysts; (4) non-oxide photocatalysts (Fig. 10).64
 Fig. 10  UV-active photocatalysts classification according to Chen et al.64 
Among the d0 metal group, other titanium-based compounds rather than TiO2 have been investigated for the photocatalytic treatment of model compounds mimicking biomass-derived wastes. Between them, alkaline earth titanates exhibited promising photocatalytic activity under UV light irradiation. Zieliñska et al. investigated the photocatalytic hydrogen generation by CaTiO3, SrTiO3, or BaTiO3 in the presence of formic acid, acetic acid, methanol, 2-propanol, or formaldehyde as electron donors.65 They found formic acid to be the most efficient electron donor and SrTiO3 as the most active photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution. Zirconium-based composites have been extensively investigated for catalytic conversion of biomass-derived wastes into molecular hydrogen.66–68 Watanabe et al. showed the catalytic hydrogen generation from glucose and cellulose with ZrO2 in supercritical water.69 They obtained a yield almost twice as high as that without the catalyst. Onsuratoom et al. studied the photocatalytic hydrogen generation over Ag-loaded mesoporous-assembled TiO2–ZrO2 mixed oxide nanocrystals using methanol as a hole scavenger.70 They found that the mixed oxide with a TiO2-to-ZrO2 molar ratio of 93:7 and 0.5 wt% exhibited the highest activity. Several niobium-based compounds have been reported to be effective photocatalysts for hydrogen generation. Pt loaded mesoporous Nb2O5 exhibited a high hydrogen rate evolution in water/ethanol mixtures under UV-light irradiation as was shown by Chen et al.71 UV-light active Nb-based composites, such as R3NbO7 (R = Y, Gd, La),72 BiInNbO7,73 BiTa1−xNbxO4,74 and LiNbO375 have been investigated by the same group. Domen and coworkers have studied K4Nb6O17 as a photocatalyst, showing high activity for hydrogen evolution from an aqueous methanol solution.76,77 Higher photocatalytic activities were reported when potassium ions between niobium oxide layers were replaced by H+, Cr3+, and Fe3+ cations using exchange reactions. Within the d0 metal group, tantalum oxide (Ta2O5) is shown to be a highly active photocatalyst for hydrogen generation despite its wide band gap between 3.8 and 4.0 eV (326–310 nm). This exceptional performance is due to the combination of surface structure, bulk electron diffusion lengths, and conduction band edge position, which is more negative than TiO2.78 Several tantalum-based compounds have demonstrated high photocatalytic activity for hydrogen generation. Ba5Ta4O15 composites, alkali tantalates with perovskite-type structures (LiTaO3, NaTaO3, and KTaO3), and orthorhombic alkaline earth tantalates (SrTa2O6, BaTa2O6, and CaTa2O6) have been investigated for hydrogen production and been reviewed elsewhere.64 Although metals oxides from d10 and f0 groups have been widely employed for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, studies in their use in photo reforming of biomass are scarce. For more details on the use of these photocatalysts and materials from the group of non-oxide photocatalysts for hydrogen generation, the readers are encouraged to read the comprehensive review by Chen and coworkers.64
Most of the mentioned UV active photocatalysts can be modified to increase the absorption in the visible light range. Nevertheless, there is great interest in developing novel materials that solely focus on visible light activity. For this purpose, different mixed metal oxides, nitrides, and sulfides have been employed for the photocatalytic treatment of biomass-derived compounds under visible light illumination. The first visible light active material for photocatalytic hydrogen generation was reported by Kalyanasundaram et al. in 1981.79 Irradiation of cadmium sulfide loaded with Pt and RuO2 by a 450 W xenon lamp with a 400 nm cutoff filter produced hydrogen and oxygen in stoichiometric ratio. CdS is an excellent photocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction under visible light irradiation because its band gap (2.4 eV) and its conduction band position at around −0.5 eV vs. SHE. However, Kalyanasundaram and coworkers noticed a high hole-mediated photocorrosion of the material resulting in the releasing of highly toxic Cd2+ into the aqueous phase. Bao et al. discovered that a nanoporous CdS loaded with monodisperse 3–5 nm Pt nanocrystals displayed an apparent quantum yield of about 60% for hydrogen evolution when illuminated with visible light,80 and Yan et al. reported an impressive quantum efficiency of 93% at 420 nm for photocatalytic hydrogen generation.81 However, the use of CdS-based photocatalyst for photo-reforming of biomass waste depends on the effectiveness of the oxidation process to compete with the photocorrosion. Since sacrificial reagents such as S2− and SO32− react faster with the photogenerated holes, they often impede the targeted oxidation of the biomass-derived compounds. Nevertheless, several researchers have reported the effectiveness of CdS-based photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution from biomass-derived compounds.82–86
Copper-based semiconductors are an important group of visible light active photocatalysts for biomass-derived waste treatment. Cu2O exhibits a direct band gap of 2 eV and a conduction bang edge at around −0.7 V vs. SHE (Fig. 11).87 The main drawback of the use of Cu2O as a photocatalyst is its high photocorrosion due to anodic and cathodic reactions resulting in CuO and Cu, respectively. However, Cu2O can be stabilized when combined with other materials or in the presence of suitable sacrificial reagents. Lalitha et al. synthesized a highly stabilized Cu2O/TiO2 composite with enhanced photoactivity for hydrogen generation from glycerol. Kakuta and Abe showed that photo-oxidation of formic acid over Cu2O was faster than the anodic photocorrosion.88 Therefore, hydrogen can be generated from a formic acid solution using Cu2O under visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 11  Energy band positions for Cu2O, ZnO, and TiO2 semiconductors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. 
Although various visible light active semiconductors have been studied for the photocatalytic generation of molecular hydrogen,64 their applications for photo-reforming of biomass-derived waste remain somewhat limited.
2.5. Surface complexes (LMCT)
Instead of the use of a visible light active photocatalysts the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) provides the direct formation of desired radical species without the excitation of the large band gap semiconductor (Fig. 12B). Hence, the LMCT allows the selective transformation of organic compounds with a high degree of control.3 The visible light-induced degradation of organic dye molecules has been investigated extensively during the past decades, and mainly the photosensitization was found to be responsible for the photocatalytic activity.89 More recently, for several adsorbates, an LMCT has been assigned to the formation of radical species, which degrade the organic component entirely.3Fig. 12 points out the differences in the two mechanisms. The main benefit of the LMCT approach represents the prevention of the formation of strong oxidizing valence band holes. Further, only light with long wavelengths and low energy is required for the degradation of the compound.
 Fig. 12  Dye sensitization (A) and visible light induced LMCT (B). Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 12B displays the LMCT mechanism, where an electron is excited from the ground state of the adsorbed substrate S0 to the conduction band of the semiconductor (1). The photoexcited charge carriers can recombine (2), or the electron is transferred to an acceptor A (3). The adsorbate can be regenerated by an electron donor D (4). In contrast to the LMCT, in the photosensitization mechanism (Fig. 12A) the adsorbed substrate is excited by irradiation (1), and the excited state injects an electron into the conduction band of the catalyst (2). Therefore, the LMCT mechanism requires very close contact between the adsorbed substrate and the catalyst surface to allow the direct excitation from the electronic state of the substrate to the conduction band of the catalyst.
The adsorption on the semiconductor surface is maximized for substrates which strongly coordinate to the ions or atoms at the surface of the particles.5 This kind of coordination is readily available in solid/gas interfaces or in the absence of protic solvents. Strong adsorption of non-coordinating compounds is mainly observed for highly hydrophilic substrates since most semiconductor surfaces are highly hydrophilic as well. If water or alcohols are present on the surface, they interact readily with the surface hydroxyl groups and thus can suppress the adsorption of organic molecules, in addition to their general influence on the photocatalytic reaction mechanism.
The absorption of LMCT-complexes can be utilized to enable visible light mediated degradation. To aim for such a surface charge transfer complex, the binding energy of the surface-adsorbate structure needs to be evaluated. Matinez et al. studied possible adsorbates on different TiO2 surfaces by DFT calculations. They were able to tune the surface chemistry by changing the oxidation state of the catalyst surface. Furthermore, they identified that the strength of adsorption mainly depends on the absolute (Mulliken) electronegativity χ (Fig. 13) or electron affinity. The weak electron affinity of the ligand allows the charge transfer from ligand to metal; as a result, a positively charged adsorbed species is generated. According to their calculations, some nitrogen-, carbon- or sulfur-containing compounds are potential candidates for the surface LMCT.90
 Fig. 13  Adsorption Energy for adsorbates on TiO2 with different absolute (Mulliken) electronegativity χ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. 
The work of Matinez et al. shows the considerable potential of the LMCT. If it is possible to predict the interaction between semiconductor surface and the adsorbate, the selective transformation of compounds with visible light via the LMCT will be available. Unfortunately, systematic planning of the interactions of the surfaces and adsorbates to induce an LMCT is not available yet.
Despite the required research, the discussed dye sensitization and LMCT reactions represent a potential future technique for the selective conversion of biomass into valuable products. The high selectivity and the utilization of sub-bandgap irradiation (often visible light) are the two most significant benefits.
2.6. Control of reactivity and suppression of side products
Strategic planning of photocatalytic reactions on semiconductor surfaces remains rarely applied in the field of photocatalytic biomass conversion. Well known and applied is that the reactivity of the chemicals and, especially, of the formed radical species can be controlled by choice of solvent and temperature.92,93 Even the strong tendency of the hydroxyl radical to abstract hydrogen atoms can be reduced in dipolar aprotic solvents like acetonitrile.92 On the other hand, solvents may react under the photocatalytic conditions and thus interfere strongly with the targeted photocatalytic process. Maldotti et al. showed the formation of radical species derived from acetonitrile molecules on irradiated TiO2 surfaces.93 Therefore, more pathways to increase the control and the selectivity of the photocatalytic reactions need to be developed. Additionally to the previously described LMCT, several strategies are available to induce mild selective degradation of chemicals. TiO2 and other typically employed photocatalysts with large band gaps create valence band holes with strong oxidizing power. On the illuminated TiO2 surface, many strongly-oxidizing hydroxyl radicals are produced, which can lead to over-oxidation of the desired chemicals, often yielding in CO2 and H2O as the final products. Band gap engineering allows the tuning of the band positions of a photocatalyst over a broad range of potentials.55 Additionally, the over-potentials can be utilized to tune the reactivity of the desired reaction. Together with the other mentioned techniques the over-potentials can be used to suppress the formation of undesired side products, e.g., the formation of hydrogen gas, which has a large over-potential on several catalytic surfaces.94,95
Furthermore, Friedmann et al. mentioned that the over-oxidation can be avoided by optimizing the photocatalyst surface.96 Preventing the over-oxidation is required for any industrial process, but the impact of small changes of the catalyst surface on the photocatalytic efficiency is also of great importance to academic research. If the adsorption of an intermediate on the catalyst surface can be suppressed, the oxidation rate will be drastically reduced and, subsequently, the selectivity increases.
2.7. Reactor design

2.7.1. Reactors for fine chemical synthesis. 
Since the industrial scale for fine chemicals ranges from a few kilograms per year to a few tons per year, it is difficult to generalize the importance of the up-scaling process. Nevertheless, some common issues observed in the up-scaling should be mentioned. Unfortunately, the mass balance is often neglected. The reductive and oxidative steps are seldom taken into account. Side products remain neglected and unidentified, which makes it impossible to optimize and scale up the reaction. Moreover, it should be shown in every publication that the catalyst remains unchanged. The catalyst's activity can be judged according to the turnover number (TON), which gives the information about the amount of the converted substrates per catalyst particle before the catalyst turns inactive. A close monitor of the reaction's kinetics will be critical since catalysts are often sensitive to catalyst poisoning and/or may undergo slow irreversible structural changes to lose their activity.
Furthermore, reactor design is only possible if the rate-limiting step is determined. Ravelli et al. discussed some concepts of reactor design, e.g., uniform illumination and catalyst separation.2 A fluidized bed reactor, and immobilized catalysts are two possibilities to solve the separation problems. On the other hand, the typical slurry systems applied in laboratory research show greater efficiencies than immobilized systems.97 Nonetheless, most of the studies dealing with larger-scale technical applications are focused on water and air depollution.2,4,96 For chemical synthesis beyond laboratory scale, the reactors need to be optimized. This vital topic of reactor design has been reviewed by Cambie et al., and by Oelgemöller, mainly focusing on different strategies in photochemical synthesis.98,99 Moreover, Cambie et al. recently summarized the research of continuous-flow photochemistry in organic synthesis and discussed several potential reactor designs for multiphase reactions, e.g., single channel, falling film, and membrane reactors (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Common reactor types applied in heterogeneous photochemical reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. 
However, compared to the vast amount of literature dealing with photocatalysis, only a little research has been done in the field of reactor design for photocatalytic conversion of biomass-derived compounds. Positive counterexamples can be found for the photocatalytic production of vanillin.100 The photocatalytic pervaporation reactor, which has been used for the synthesis of vanillin, shows the significant impact of reactor design. The yield for the vanillin production was nearly doubled.100 Alfano et al. reviewed the importance of reactor design for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in wastewater streams by heterogeneous photocatalysts in 2000.101 As mentioned above, for the conversion of biomass such detailed investigations are still required. In general, photocatalytic reactions are assessed by the yield or conversion as well as selectivity. Unfortunately, in photocatalytic reactions, the over-oxidation of the reactant often reduces the selectivity at higher conversions. It is often difficult to achieve high conversion and high selectivity at the same time. This problem can be solved by flow reactors since the negative correlation of conversion and selectivity only takes effect in batch reactors. Continuous removal of the product can facilitate the complete conversion of the reactant into the desired product. Subsequently, high selectivity at medium conversions can be achieved for technical applications.
Other examples of studies related to reactor design can be found for photocatalytic treatment of lignin. In the fixed bed reactor developed by Awungacha Lekelefac et al., TiO2 (P25) coatings on glass support showed the highest degradation rates for lignin sulfonate solutions.102 Fan et al. used a corrugated plate reactor coupled with a cyclic extraction apparatus for lignin dissolved in sodium hydroxide.103 Several products were identified, of which 2,6-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-4-methylphenol, dibutyl phthalate, and diisobutyl phthalate were the most valuable ones.


2.7.2. Reactors for solar fuel production. 
Alike fine chemical synthesis from raw biomass-derived waste, literature concerning reactor design for photocatalytic hydrogen generation is scarce. Most of the published research articles deal with photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation using water splitting. In this sense, Pinaud et al. published an outstanding article analyzing the technical and economic feasibility of centralized facilities for solar hydrogen production via photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry.104 For the photocatalytic hydrogen generation, they analyzed two different reactor designs: single bed particle suspension, (type 1, Fig. 15) and dual bed particle suspension (type 2). Reasonable solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies and cost per kilogram of H2 were calculated based on the current performance of semiconductor absorbers. They deduce a cost of 1.60 USD and 3.20 USD for the type 1 and type 2 systems, respectively. If we consider the use of such reactor for the reforming of biomass-derived waste, the price might be even lower because safety concerns due to the generation of H2 and O2 could be avoided. In such a case, H2 and highly oxidized species or CO2 will be the output for the biomass-derived waste reforming.
 Fig. 15  Single bed particle suspension reactor for photocatalytic hydorgen evolution. The reactor consists of a particle slurry contained within baggies separated by an access driveway. A solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 10% was considered by the authors to deduce production costs for hydrogen production. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nevertheless, intensive study of other variables such as availability of raw biomass, refinement treatments, and transportation of feedstocks should be considered. Despite several publications regarding reactor design for photocatalytic water splitting can be found, these approaches might not be meaningful for the photocatalytic treatment of biomass without further research related with detailed reaction mechanisms for each particular raw material.

3. Photocatalysis in fine chemical synthesis
3.1. Biomass feedstock and interconversion

Fig. 16 displays examples for biomass raw materials, which are available for large-scale photocatalytic upgrading. The chemical compounds produced by photocatalytic processes are shown below.
 Fig. 16  Overview of biomass feedstocks available for conversion to fine chemicals and reported products achieved by photocatalytic reactions. 
Although not demonstrated in large-scale applications, interconversion between cellulose, sugars, lipids and terpenes represents a versatile toolbox for biomass-derived chemicals.6
Friedmann et al. recently published a review, which presents the numerous approaches for using photocatalysis in the conversion of organic compounds.96 Although it includes some biomass related processes as well, it is not focused on biomass conversion and contains many general reactions in the field of organic synthesis and transformation.
3.2. Cellulose and sugars
Fan et al. showed the direct photocatalytic degradation of cellulose using TiO2 in a concentrated ZnCl2 solution.106 The ZnCl2 dissolves the cellulose by breaking the hydrogen-bonding network and helps to break down the glycosidic linkage. 5-Hydroxymethyl furfural was reported to be the main product after UV-light irradiation of the sample. With some exception, as in the previous case, the research dealing with the photocatalytic valorisation of cellulose includes an enzymatic or digestive pretreatment to obtain glucose. This is why glucose is mainly used as starting material in photocatalytic experiments concerning the upgrading of biomass derived wastes. In this sense, Colmenares et al. synthesized TiO2 samples, which were used to successfully oxidize glucose to gluconic acid, glucaric acid, and arabitol with 70% selectivity for these products at 11% conversion after 10 minutes of UV irradiation by a mercury lamp in acetonitrile/water mixtures. This result outperformed the selectivity achieved by the commercially available photocatalyst P25.107 More promising results were obtained by Chong et al., which produced 91% selectivity for arabinose and erythrose at 65% glucose conversion in aqueous solutions with rutile catalysts (Fig. 17).108
 Fig. 17  Conversion of glucose with TiO2 photocatalyst to arabinose and erythrose. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. 
Similar results were obtained by Bellardita et al., who realized 54% selectivity for arabinose and 47% for erythrose at 77% conversion for platinized rutile samples under anaerobic conditions.109 Platinized anatase samples under the same conditions showed 85% selectivity for fructose at 40% conversion.109 Intense studies have been performed on the mechanism of the glucose transformation. One notable example of these studies was published by Da Vià et al. who proposed that the LMCT of the TiO2–glucose complex is responsible for the visible light activity and studied the solvent effect of acetonitrile on the conversion to the listed chemicals.110 A monodentate and bidentate complex of TiO2 and glucose was proposed to enable the visible light degradation by Kim et al. (Fig. 18).111
 Fig. 18  Suggested monodentate and bidentate TiO2-glucose complex responsible for the LMCT and photocatalytic degradation of glucose under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. 
3.3. Lignin
Photocatalysis has been shown to be competitive with various metal, metal organic and metal oxide catalysts for the lignin oxidation.112 Indeed, selective conversion of side products like lignin or glycerol to fine chemicals would open up a new value-added chain. Concerning the treatment of pure lignin feedstocks, Kamwilaisak and Wright showed that a photocatalytic process using TiO2 and H2O2 yields a significant quantity of useful short-chain organic acids, such as acetic, lactic, succinic, and malonic acids.113 The amount of these compounds represents ca. 20% of the total products. A similar approach employing TiO2 in combination with H2O2 under UV irradiation was made by Lu et al. for the photocatalytic depolymerization of rice husk.28 They obtained a complex mixture of products including alkanes, alkenes, arenes, aliphatic alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, and nitrogen-, sulfur-, and oxygen-containing organic compounds. Among them, alkanes, phthalates, ketones, and carboxylic acids are relatively abundant. Portjanskaja et al. used different modifications of TiO2, such as Degussa P25, anode-oxidized titanium, and sulfur- and boron-doped titanium dioxide for the photocatalytic treatment of commercial alkali lignin.114 Aldehydes and phenolic compounds were determined to be the major products but without further identification or isolation. The group of Nakatani proposed a solventless delignification of wood flour using a TiO2/polyethylene oxide photocatalyst system.115 In this system, the TiO2 works as the radical initiator, and the acid and the aldehyde compounds produced by the polyethylene oxide photolysis act as accelerators. Vanillin was detected with a considerably low yield between the side products. The low delignification efficiency could be attributed to the radical scavenging activity of lignin and the consequent inhibitory effect on autooxidation. The difficulty for the radical species to spread into the crosslinked polymeric structure of lignin might also be an important factor limiting the yield of the process. In a further publication, the photocatalytic efficiency was improved by including methyl linoleate to the system from 20% to 51% transformation after 24 hours of irradiation.116 The enhancement in the activity was reported to be due to the attack to the lignin by the methyl linoleate radical produced by the TiO2 under UV-light illumination.
In many cases, the depolymerization of lignin is carried out to yield low molecular weight mono- or oligomers. The numerous different methods (physical, chemical, and biological treatment) can be subsumed as pre-treatments to break down the lignin structure.8,13 Typically, chemical treatments use strong acids and bases. Ma et al. reported how lignin is activated for the nucleophilic or electrophilic attack in these acidic or basic media (Fig. 19).112 Nevertheless, there is no optimal pre-treatment for the exploitation of lignin.
 Fig. 19  Activation of lignin under acidic and alkaline conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. 
Further, every industrial process for the extraction and isolation of lignin drastically changes its structure. Distinct moieties like the β-O-4 unit can be split completely, by steam explosion for instance.12 To establish applicable industrial processes, the dominant chemical structures after the pre-treatments need to be identified. Only with this knowledge, it is possible to tackle the photocatalytic task with chemical strategy. Unfortunately, since the separation of the complex structure of lignin remains challenging, most publications focus on the reactions of simpler model compounds.117,118

3.3.1. Benzaldehyde as a model compound. 
The photocatalytic conversion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde is one of the intensely studied model reactions for photochemical conversion.119 Benzyl alcohol represents an essential structure in lignin and belong to the simplest aromatic alcohols.49 Since 2009, when Higashimoto et al. reported the selective photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol on TiO2 by molecular oxygen, a growing number of publications have focused on the use of benzyl alcohol as a model for the valorization of lignin.8,119,120 Benzaldehyde can be found as an additive or as a precursor in many industrial formulations, and possible applications are widespread including perfumes, food and pharmaceutical products.
The group of Colmenares has performed intense research on the selective photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol.119 As already mentioned above, benzyl alcohol can be obtained from lignin, and the resulting oxidation product, benzyl aldehyde, is a promising candidate for technical applications in food and pharmaceutical products. TiO2/maghemite-silica composites reached 90% selectivity for benzyl aldehyde at 50% conversion of benzyl alcohol. Further, the magnetic properties of the particles allow easy separation from the acetonitrile solution for catalyst recovery.121 Finally the photocatalytic synthesis of benzaldehyde can replace the conventional method based on benzyl chloride made from toluene.49 A key step towards realizing this replacement is the mechanistic studies of benzyl alcohol photocatalytic oxidation under visible light by Higashimoto et al.120 They revealed that a surface complex is formed due to the close interaction of the aromatic structure and the alcohol group with surface OH groups of TiO2. Under illumination, the photo-generated holes abstract hydrogen atoms from the carbon atom of the CH2OH group, whereas the electrons react with oxygen and should facilitate the regeneration of the surface hydroxyl groups. The group of Wu has made valuable contributions regarding the photocatalytic oxidation of benzylic alcohols as well.122 They showed how monolayer HNb3O8 2D nanosheets can be used as highly chemoselective and active photocatalyst under visible light irradiation. The proposed mechanism for this transformation differs from that of classic semiconductor photocatalysis. Under irradiation, a ligand-to-metal charge transfer due to the adsorption of the alcohol and oxygen takes place. The adsorbed O2 is reduced yielding a superoxide radical and the photogenerated hole induces the α-deprotonation of benzylic alcohol with assistance from the superoxide radical. In a subsequent step, the superoxide species will induce deprotonation from the complex to form the corresponding aldehyde and hydrogen peroxide. Monolayer C3N4, as well as monolayer Bi2MoO6 have also shown enhanced visible light activity and selectivity towards benzyl alcohol oxidation.123,124 The increase in the activity compared with the bulk counterparts might be due to the molecular thickness of the monolayer, the ultrafast charge separation, the higher capacity for oxygen activation, and the higher surface area. Because of this last feature, more Lewis acid–base active sites are available for surface complexes formation. The selective oxidation of the alcohol to benzyl aldehyde under visible light can be employed for the oxidation of other aromatic alcohols as well.120 De et al. summarized the recent work on photocatalysts for alcohol oxidation, ranging from pure metal oxides, noble metals on semiconductors to polyoxometalates.49


3.3.2. Vanillin as a model compound. 
Another key chemical with a similar spectrum of industrial applications is vanillin. Vanillin is already a product of lignin conversion with commercial importance.125 Augugliaro et al. converted three model compounds to vanillin at room temperature in aqueous solutions. The applied model compounds, eugenol, isoeugenol and trans-ferulic acid, represent lignin-derived building blocks. Fig. 20 illustrates the reaction pathway from ferulic acid to vanillin.117 The utilized TiO2 catalysts showed a maximum selectivity of 21% for vanillin and further studies increased the yield from 4.5% to 8.5% by removing the product through a selective membrane in a continuous process.100 The recovery of vanillin and syringaldehyde (another lignin-derived compound) from oxidation of lignin was reviewed by Mota et al.126
 Fig. 20  Synthesis of vanillin from ferulic acid. Reproduced from ref. 117. 


3.3.3. Structural alteration of lignin. 
Several post-synthetic treatments, for example, steam explosion, fermentation, or acidic/alkaline solutions, are available to reduce the recalcitrance of the polymeric structure of lignin towards degradation. Biosynthetic modification of the lignin network by the introduction of simple and labile linkages provides a completely different strategy to facilitate the degradation. The group of Ralph et al. successfully created lignin bearing weak ester linkages and proved the reduced stability to alkaline pre-treatments.127
It is highly desirable to design a lignin structure, which is easily convertible by photocatalytic pathways, to broaden the use of lignin as feedstock in photocatalysis. The systematic and selective conversion to aromatic molecules based on such modified lignin would open up more potential utilization. Luo et al. discovered a method to cleave the C–O bonds in β-O-4 moieties of lignin selectively, with a two-step photocatalytic oxidation-hydrogenolysis reaction, which represents a major advance in lignin depolymerization (Fig. 21).128 The process was carried out in one pot at room temperature, and during the reaction, the irradiation wavelength was switched from 455 nm to 365 nm. However, it has already been mentioned above that the β-O-4 unit can be split up by pre-treatments like the steam explosion as well.12 All in all, the general difficulties in the separation and identification processes for lignin-derived products remain and still hinder the implementation of photocatalytic conversion of lignin in industrial scale.15
 Fig. 21  Photocatalytic cleavage of β-O-4 alcohols into ketones and phenols by a two-step photocatalytic oxidation-hydrogenolysis reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. 

3.4. Glycerol
Colmenares and Luque already reviewed the potential pathways of photocatalytic processing of glycerol to products, such as oxalic acid, glycolic acid and formic acid (Fig. 22).119
 Fig. 22  Photocatalytic conversion of glycerol to high-value products. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhang et al. applied visible light active photocatalysts based on Bi2WO6 to oxidize glycerol to dihydroxyacetone (DHA) with more than 90% selectivity at 96% conversion (Fig. 23).129,130 The reactions were carried out in water at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Hence, photocatalytic conversion of glycerol showed premise as an alternative to other potential applications of crude glycerol.
 Fig. 23  Proposed mechanism of the reaction oxidation of glycerol to dihydroxyacetone by Bi2WO6 under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yang et al. published a review about value-added uses of glycerol.131 The promising applications include the utilization as an animal feedstuff, biological conversion to 1,3-propanediol, hydrogen or biodegradable polymers. The review article gave a good overview of advantages, disadvantages of the different approaches and the possible influences of impurities in the glycerol feedstock. Due to the attractive properties of glycerol, e.g., its low toxicity and good biodegradability, Gu and Jérôme discussed the possibility to use glycerol as a green solvent.132 They concluded that although glycerol possesses all the required parameters to become a green solvent, more research has to be done, e.g., for the removal of polar compounds from glycerol and reduction of the high energy demand for purification of technical grade glycerol.
Sharninghausen et al. reported that glycerol was applied without the need for prior purification in iridium-catalyzed homogeneous photocatalytic reactions.18 For the synthesis of lactic acid, they reported TONs of 30000 and selectivity greater than 95% at 69% conversion of glycerol. The solvent-free process under mild conditions with hydrogen gas as side products was applied to crude glycerol with 98% conversion and 96% selectivity.
4. Photocatalysis for solar fuels
The scarcity of fossil fuels and the environmental pollution are forcing humanity to shift to renewable green energy sources. In this regard, investigations concerning the use of biomass as feedstock for biofuel production employing different chemical routes have been in constant development.133–135
Photocatalytic fuel production has been a growing subject of research during the last decades since the findings by Fujishima and Honda in 1972, who photolyzed water at a semiconductor electrode to get hydrogen and oxygen.136 They constructed an electrochemical cell in which a TiO2 electrode was connected with a platinum black electrode. After visible light irradiation, electron flow from the TiO2 electrode to the platinum electrode was measured, and hydrogen and oxygen evolution were observed in the cathodic and anodic chamber, respectively. According to the mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalysis presented in chapter 2.2, the photogenerated holes act as electron scavengers to oxidize water producing oxygen, while the excited electrons are involved in the hydrogen generation via a reductive process. Photocatalytic hydrogen generation from biomass is based on the same principle except that organic compounds from biomass-derived wastes rather than water interact with the photogenerated holes. Alternatively, hydroxyl radicals abstract hydrogen atoms from the organic compounds according to the following reactions, producing highly oxidizable radical that can be oxidized by the hole:5H-R + {˙O}H → R˙ + H2OR˙ + h+ → R+ → Highly oxidized species → CO2; SO42−; NO3−; Cl−
Total mineralization yielding CO2 or mineral acids from non-metallic atoms present in biomass waste is the ideal outcome for this photo-mediated oxidation process. With biomass-derived organic matter acting as hole scavenger, the electrons can be employed for the photo-reduction of water to generate hydrogen as a fuel (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Schematic representation of photocatalytic hydrogen generation employing sacrificial reagents. 
Molecular hydrogen has the highest specific energy content among conventional fuels and reacts with oxygen yielding energy and water vapor, without generating harmful toxic emissions. Despite some drawbacks, including high costs for production, transportation, and storage, molecular hydrogen and hydrogen-based fuels stands out as one of the best energy carriers for future applications.137,138
4.1. Organic molecules mimicking biomass-derived wastes
Most of the investigations conducted in the field of photocatalytic conversion of biomass-derived samples have focused on using pure organic compounds as model molecules to mimic biomass wastes rather than using raw biomass directly. In 2016, Puga published a comprehensive review article in which he questioned the viability of using pure substances, such as alcohols, polyols, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, and saccharides as model compounds for biomass waste.53 He concluded that since these model compounds are not directly found in biomass wastes, the transformation or isolation required to obtain these substances finally will not be practical nor economical. For example, methanol, a widely used sacrificial reagent can be obtained from biomass wastes by gasification and subsequent catalytic transformation of the resulted syngas. However, using methanol obtained by this method for photocatalytic hydrogen production will not be economical and practical to produce commodity chemicals such as H2. Moreover, the notion that biomass waste will simply undergo the same transformations as the model compounds is probably stretching, as biomass wastes are complex mixtures containing compounds that may interfere with the desired reactions. Additionally, the undesired role played by sacrificial reagents, well described by Schneider et al., should be taken into consideration.139 This role may compromise the interpretation of the results. For instance, in the case of methanol as an electron donor for TiO2-catalyzed biomass conversion, methanol can be oxidized by the photogenerated holes or the photogenerated reactive species, such as hydroxyl radicals, on the semiconductor surface. Kawai et al.140 have proposed the following mechanism for the total mineralization of methanol in a deaerated TiO2 suspension under UV light irradiation:      
The energy provided by the photons needs to be sufficient to drive the overall reaction, and the consequent evolution of H2 and CO2 prevents the reverse reactions:  
When water is the dominant surface species under aerobic conditions, the oxidation of methanol is mediated by the photogenerated hydroxyl radicals according to the following reactions:141CH3OH + {˙O}H → {˙C}H2OH + H2O˙CH2OH + O2 → HCHO + HO2˙.
The oxidation process will continue to produce CO2 eventually. On the other hand, in the absence of oxygen, formaldehyde is produced after ˙CH2OH injects one electron into the conduction band of the photocatalyst in a so-called “current doubling” process.142 In a platinum co-doped TiO2 photocatalytic system, these electrons will be used to generate hydrogen as shown in Fig. 25.
 Fig. 25  Processes involved in the photocatalytic oxidation of methanol in aqueous solution for hydrogen formation on platinized TiO2. (1) Photogeneration of charge carriers; (2) Trapping of photogenerated electrons by Ti4+ centers; (3) First oxidation step of MeOH; (4) formation of HCHO through “current doubling” process; (5) Production of H2; (6) Recombination of charge carriers. Partially reprinted with permission from ref. 139. 
According to the mechanism presented above, the current doubling process can be responsible for 50% of the hydrogen formed during the photocatalytic reaction. The same effect is commonly observed in alcohols having a hydrogen atom at the α-carbon to its OH group, and in many other species capable of formation of strongly reducing radicals after the photocatalytic oxidation. Therefore, when using model compounds rather than real biomass wastes, the efficiency of the photocatalytic conversion can be highly overestimated.
Simple organic molecules such as methanol, ethanol, formic acid, or acetic acid are not suitable models for raw biomass because cannot be found in relatively high purity in biomass-derived wastes. Other compounds such as glycerol, lignin, and carbohydrates originated from cellulose and hemicellulose can be obtained in relatively high purity from wastes derived from processes such as biodiesel production, agriculture, and paper industry (Fig. 26). From our point of view, a meaningful approach for the photocatalytic conversion of biomass into fuels should include these compounds as starting materials. The photo-reforming of lignin, glycerol, and carbohydrates is discussed below in more detail.
 Fig. 26  Suitable model organic compounds to mimic biomass-derived wastes from industrial and agricultural processes. Glycerol, lignin, and carbohydrates, originated mainly from cellulose and hemicellulose, can be obtained in relatively high purity from wastes derived from biodiesel refineries, wood/paper industries, and agriculture. 
4.2. Photo-reforming of raw biomass: lignin as starting material
Although the use of simple organic compounds has dominated the studies of photocatalytic fuel generation, there are some notable examples of the direct employment of biomass raw materials. Greenbaum et al. published in 1995 the photo-assisted direct conversion of biomass to molecular oxygen and volatile hydrocarbons using ZnO as the photocatalyst.143 They implanted ZnO in cellulose and wood under high pressure and irradiated with near-UV and visible light. Upon irradiation, the electrons excited to the conduction band are found to reduce biomass while the photogenerated holes oxidize water to yield oxygen or oxidized biomass to produce a variety of oxygen-containing compounds and hydrocarbons (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Products obtained from the photocatalytic degradation of lignin over ZnO under near-UV and visible light irradiation as determined by Greenbaum et al.143 
The group of Kale reported simultaneous water splitting and lignin degradation using C-, N-, and S-doped ZnO nanoestructured materials under visible light irradiation.144 Hydrogen generation, as well as lignin degradation, was studied employing a commercial sodium salt of lignosulfonate dispersed in water. A sample consisting of C-, N-, and S-doped mixed phase ZnO/ZnS was found to have a superior activity for both H2 production (5800 μm h−1 g−1) and complete degradation of lignin. 1-phenyl-3-buten-1-ol, 3-hydroxy-2-methyl-3-phenyl-propionic acid, and methyl 4-hydroxyphenylacetate were detected among the degradation products. Ksibi et al. investigated the photodegradation of lignin from an alfalfa black liquor using TiO2 under UV light illumination. Using GC-MS, they detected an interesting variety of products.145 Some monomers of the lignin, such as coniferylic alcohol, as well as their oxidation products (syringaldehyde, vanillic acid, and p-coumaric acid) were identified. The detected products are shown in Fig. 28.
 Fig. 28  Products detected by GC-MS from the photocatalytic degradation of lignin using TiO2 photocatalyst under UV illumination as reported by Ksibi et al.145 
Kobayakawa and coworkers showed that complete mineralization of lignin could be achieved using TiO2 as the photocatalyst.146 They detected several intermediates including phenol derivatives, such as catechol and vanillin and their dimers, methanol, ethanol, formaldehyde, and oxalic acid as well as trace amounts of methane and ethylene. Interestingly, photocatalysis also helped to reduce or replace energy consuming thermochemical pre-treatments.119 Yasuda et al. described a two-step process for the production of bioethanol by fermentation of lignin.147 The first step, a photocatalytic treatment of lignin using TiO2, was shown to shorten the time required for the subsequent enzymatic and fermentative reactions.
As it is clear from these discussed reports, photocatalytic degradation of raw lignocellulosic biomass operates via a complex process including a wide variety of electron donors and acceptors. This is the reason why raw lignin has not often been employed as the sacrificial reagent in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions and conclusions from experiments using simple model compounds are usually extrapolated to complex biomass systems.
4.3. Photo-reforming of glycerol
As discussed in chapter 1.2, glycerol is an abundant byproduct of the biodiesel industry coming mainly from the transesterification process of vegetable oil or animal fat. As the trend of replacing petroleum-derived fuels by biofuel continues to rise, glycerol production exceeded the demand, and the price has subsequently decreased drastically.
Therefore, it is desirable to find new applications for glycerol to increase the demand and prevent the price from collapsing. One of the potential applications is the use as the sacrificial reagent to photocatalytically generate molecular hydrogen. Crude glycerol obtained from the biodiesel industry has varying amounts of impurities including esters, water, soapstock, alcohol, and catalyst depending on the feedstock and chemical process employed.148 Chemical analysis of samples of crude glycerol collected from seven Australian biodiesel manufacturers by Hansen et al. found the contents of glycerol varying from 38.4 to 96.5% with an average of 72.4%.149 Since the glycerol content is much higher in the crude product from the biofuel industry than other components, the use of commercially available pure glycerol to mimic the crude product in academic laboratory research appears to be reasonable.
Kondarides et al. investigated the photocatalytic reforming of aqueous solutions of glycerol at ambient conditions employing platinized TiO2 as the photocatalyst and a solar light-simulating source in an inert atmosphere.150 They found that the reaction resulted in the complete conversion of glycerol to H2 and CO2 with a maximum rate of 2700 μmol h−1 g−1 of photocatalyst for hydrogen generation at an initial glycerol concentration of 1.1 mol L−1. This rate was higher than those obtained from enzymatic hydrolysis of glucose and comparable to those obtained from aqueous-phase reforming of biomass-derived hydrocarbons. Lalitha and coworkers studied Cu2O/TiO2 as the visible light photocatalyst for the continuous production of molecular hydrogen from glycerol.151 The absorption of the photocatalyst was expanded into the visible light region by loading of copper ions on the TiO2 surface. Using 0.5 wt% Cu2O/TiO2 as the photocatalyst, a maximum hydrogen production of 200060 μmol h−1 g−1 of photocatalyst was obtained in 5% aqueous glycerol solution under a nitrogen atmosphere. Approximately 12.5% loss of the co-catalyst was observed due to the dissolution of copper ions into the solution by the acidic conditions obtained after several hours of reaction. Panagiotopoulou et al. performed kinetic and mechanistic studies of photo-oxidation and photo-reforming reactions of glycerol in aqueous TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 suspensions.152 By analyzing reaction intermediates and final products in gas and liquid phase, they discovered that the initial steps involve dehydration of glycerol followed by hydrogenolysis to propylene glycol or oxidation of glycerol to glyceraldehyde. Subsequent dehydration, dehydrogenation and decarbonylation reactions generate a variety of intermediates, namely, glycolaldehyde, 2-oxopropanol, acetaldehyde, acetone, ethanol, and methanol that are ultimately transformed to CO2 (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Possible reaction pathways for photo-oxidation of glycerol with hydrogen evolution over irradiated Pt/TiO2 photocatalyst suspensions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. 
CO is presumably oxidized to CO2 over platinized TiO2 because under similar photocatalytic conditions, CO is known to be oxidized to CO2via the water–gas shift reaction.153 Oxidation of glycerol is likely mediated by some photogenerated oxidizing species such as holes, hydroxyl radicals, superoxide resulting from O2 reduction in the O2 containing atmosphere, and hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen gas is produced via a reduction process mediated by conduction band electrons. Platinum plays two roles in the photocatalytic reaction: one is to act as an electron trap center to improve charge carrier separation; the other is to reduce the overpotential for hydrogen evolution. More details can be found in a recent review by Tran et al.154
4.4. Photo-reforming of carbohydrates
In addition to lignin and glycerol, carbohydrates, mainly originated from cellulose and hemicellulose, are one of the main components of biomass wastes. Kawai and Sakata first reported in 1980 the photocatalytic conversion of carbohydrates such as saccharose, starch, and cellulose into hydrogen fuel.155 For the photocatalytic degradation of cellulose, a filter paper was cut into pieces and put into neutral water or a 6 M NaOH solution together with a photocatalyst consisting of a mixture of RuO2, TiO2, and Pt. Under irradiation with a 500 W xenon lamp, gas bubbles mainly of H2 and CO2 with tiny amounts of CH3OH and C2H5OH were observed. In the alkaline conditions, CO2 was adsorbed in the form of Na2CO3 or NaHCO3, and pure hydrogen was evolved. The quantum yield for the photocatalytic conversion of cellulose was found to be 0.3 and 1.0% in the neutral and alkaline suspensions, respectively. The authors reported complete decomposition of cellulose into CO2 and H2 after long periods of illumination. Following Kawai and Sakata's work, Zhang et al. showed the photocatalytic conversion of microcrystalline cellulose to monosaccharides and CO2 with simultaneous evolution of molecular hydrogen.156 Photocatalytic decomposition under UV or solar light irradiation was achieved by the immobilization of cellulose onto TiO2. A two-step ball-milling process was carried out to prepare a cellulose colloidal aqueous suspension that was, subsequently, mixed with a Pt(0.5 wt%)/TiO2 suspension under sonication and stirring. Photocatalytic experiments were conducted in a deaerated aqueous suspension. HPLC analysis of the solution during the reaction showed cellobiose, glucose, and formic acid as the main soluble products. CO2 and H2 production yields were calculated based on the complete conversion of the glucose unit (C6O5H10) according to:C6O5H10 + 7H2O → 12H2 + 6CO2.
After seven cycles of six hours of UV light irradiation of cellulose@TiO2(Pt) composites with 3.0, 6.5, 13.0, and 20.5 wt% of cellulose, the yields of molecular hydrogen production were found to be 89.5%, 91.7%, 84.5%, and 81.2%, respectively. For the CO2 generation, the yields obtained were 83.5, 81.0%, 74.2%, and 71.0%. Due to the high conversion combined with a simple immobilizing process for the composite preparation, this photocatalytic process seems promising to be adopted for photo-reforming of cellulose in industrial scale.
Caravaca et al. recently investigated the hydrogen production by photocatalytic reforming of cellulose and raw biomass using Ni, Pd, Pt, or Au impregnated TiO2.157 For the photocatalytic characterization, an aqueous suspension containing microcrystalline cellulose and the metal loaded TiO2 photocatalyst was purged with argon and irradiated with a Xe lamp. The hydrogen production rate over Pd/TiO2, Au/TiO2, Ni/TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 with a metal loading of around 0.2% was found to be approximately 173, 113, 77, and 134 μmol h−1 g−1 of photocatalyst, respectively. Long induction time for the hydrogen evolution reaction was observed for Ni/TiO2. This undesirable effect was avoided by pre-reducing the photocatalyst at 400 °C for one hour under an H2/He flow. The use of a co-catalyst such as Ni for hydrogen evolution is of particular interest, because of the lower cost and environmental impact compared with noble metals. Another main conclusion from Caravaca's work was that the first step in the photo-reforming of cellulose was the light-induced hydrolysis of cellulose into glucose, which was subsequently degraded photocatalytically yielding CO2 and H2.
Although other authors have also investigated the photocatalytic hydrogen generation from cellulose,106,150,158 more publications can be found in the field of photo-reforming of glucose. Fu et al. studied the hydrogen evolution by anaerobic photo-reforming of glucose over noble-metal-loaded TiO2.159 The photocatalyst was prepared by the sol–gel method involving the controlled hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide followed by the impregnation of Pt, Ru, Au, Pd, Rh, or Ag metals. As expected, they found that the photocatalytic H2 production was significantly enhanced by the deposition of noble metals. For 1.0 wt% loaded photocatalyst, the rate of H2 evolution increased in the order: Ag/TiO2 (540 μmol h−1 g−1 of photocatalyst) ≈ Ru/TiO2 (540 μmol h−1 g−1) < Au/TiO2 (2700 μmol h−1 g−1) ≈ Rh/TiO2 (2740 μmol h−1 g−1) < Pt/TiO2 (4080 μmol h−1 g−1) < Pd/TiO2 (4580 μmol h−1 g−1). A rate increase was also observed when the pH of the suspension was increased up to pH = 11. On the other hand, the presence of O2 inhibited the H2 evolution rate. Based on the obtained results, a mechanism for the photo-reforming of glucose over Pt/TiO2 was proposed (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Possible mechanism for the photo-reforming of glucose over Pt/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. 
According to this mechanism, a glucose (RCH2OH) molecule interacts with an undercoordinated surface titanium atom via one of its hydroxyl groups and is dissociated into H+ and RCH2O−. The alkoxide is oxidized by a photogenerated hole to yield RCH2O˙. This radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from another glucose molecule, to generate R′C˙HOH, which is then oxidized by a hole to produce R′CHO. Further oxidation to [R′COOH]− by hydroxyl radicals and subsequent decarboxylation via a Photo-Kolbe reaction results in R′H, which continues the oxidative cycle to produce CO2 finally. In the reductive half-reaction, protons are reduced by electrons trapped at the Pt centers yielding hydrogen atoms that subsequently dimerize.
Most of the studies concerning the photo-reforming of glucose are performed employing modified TiO2 photocatalysts.109,150,160–164 However, other types of photocatalysts have also been used for these studies. Li and coworkers studied the photocatalytic hydrogen generation from glucose over ZnS-coated ZnIn2S4 loaded with platinum under visible light irradiation.165 The photocatalyst was prepared by solvothermal synthesis in methanol employing sulfates and thioacetamide as precursors followed by photodeposition of 0.5 wt% platinum. Similar to the work of Fu et al., an increasing activity with higher pH values and a typical Langmuirian catalytic behavior in respect to the glucose concentration were observed. The proposed mechanism for the photo-reforming of glucose over Pt/ZnS–ZnIn2S4 is similar to that published by Fu et al. Glucose (RCHO) adsorbed on the photocatalyst reacts with photogenerated holes or hydroxyl radicals formed after hole-mediated water oxidation. The produced gluconic acid subsequently reacts with hydroxyl radicals, which sets up for a decarboxylation reaction. This mechanism is illustrated in the following reactions:H2O + h+ → H+ + {˙O}HRCHO + {˙O}H → RCO˙ + H2ORCO˙ + H2O → RCOOH + H˙RCOOH + {˙O}H → R′OH + CO2 + H˙.
The resulting species will repeat the cycle to complete mineralization. Molecular hydrogen is produced by the reaction of two H atoms or by proton reduction through the photogenerated conduction band electrons trapped in the platinum centers.
Other visible light active materials such as Pt/Cd0.5Zn0.5S,166 WO3,167 Cu2O,168 Er3+:YAlO3/Pt–TiO2 membranes,169 LaFeO3,170 and Fe2O3171 have also shown high photocatalytic activities for the reforming of glucose. Pure poly saccharides such as cellulose and hemicellulose as well as simpler saccharides, such as glucose have been shown to be not only suitable hole scavengers for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution but also are realistic model compounds to mimic biomass-derived wastes.
5. Conclusions
Biomass represents an important, abundant, and renewable carbon source that is available to us. It is hard to imagine that it is possible to reduce our carbon footprint and have a sustainable society without tapping it to produce compounds such as fuel and fine chemicals our daily life depends on. Although still small, biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel have already claimed an indispensable share of the global energy portfolio. It can safely be assumed that biofuel will play an even more prominent role in the future. On the other hand, the development in the conversion of biomass to fine chemicals lags behind biofuels. However, new applications such as the production of pharmaceutical intermediates and nutrients are on the horizon. Compared to the physical, thermochemical, and biological reforming of biomass, heterogeneous photocatalysis lags far behind regarding efficiencies and costs, although it has arguably the smallest carbon footprint.
Lack of progress in this approach can be attributed to a number of factors:
(1) Catalyst development remains the single most important bottleneck that hinders the development of heterogeneous photocatalysis of biomass. It includes the development of both new photoactive materials and concepts. For example, bare TiO2 or platinized TiO2 remains the photocatalyst of choice despite its poor visible light activity. Current research should be shifted even more towards the development of visible light active semiconductors that avoid the use of noble metals. Although the primary principle about how to pair semiconductors’ band gap and band positions with reactants’ reduction potential has been established, it is not sophisticated and remains underutilized. Development of new strategies/concepts that can minimize the loss of photogenerated charge carriers and utilize both the oxidation and reduction reactions will spearhead the process of identifying the most suitable photocatalyst for the targeted reaction. In this regard, LMCT holds a lot of promise to facilitate the oxidation or reduction reaction.
(2) Biomass is a complex mixture containing numerous compounds. Depending on the source of biomass, its composition varies significantly, which poses an enormous challenge for identifying the optimal photocatalytic conditions. It proves ineffective to use simple organic compounds such as methanol, ethanol, formic acid, or acetic acid to model after raw biomass. Glycerol, lignin, and carbohydrates originated from cellulose and hemicellulose are more suitable for optimizing the catalyst system because these compounds can be obtained in relatively high purity from wastes derived from different processes, especially biodiesel production, agriculture, paper industry, etc.
For photocatalytic reforming processes it is of utmost importance that pure and well-defined compounds are employed. Photocatalytic upgrading of biomass can be hampered by catalyst poisoning. Hence, the industry needs to develop purification steps for the raw biomass to reach the required purities.
(3) The information about the experimental setup given in the current literature is usually very vague. Although the light source and irradiance are generally given, the photon flux inside the photoreactor is usually not given nor is it possible to calculate it from the experimental data. Therefore, it is impossible to make an accurate comparison of different experimental results.
(4) To scale up from the laboratory to pilot plants, a thorough mechanistic investigation of the photocatalytic reaction such as accurate information about byproducts, thermodynamics, and kinetics is a must. Without this information, it is not feasible to design a suitable reactor for the large-scale photocatalytic reaction.
Despite all these challenges, the photocatalytic conversion of biomass is continuously evolving and developing. Researchers are tackling the problem of biomass valorization from a multidisciplinary point of view, combining photocatalysis with other physical, chemical and biological processes. This resulted in several new innovative ways to upgrade biomass-derived wastes. A clear example is the combined use of sonochemistry and photocatalysis for biomass conversion172 or the selective photocatalysis of lignin-inspired chemicals by integrating hybrid nanocatalysis in microfluidic reactors.173 This synergistic approach between different strategies together with detailed mechanistic investigations is of utmost importance to achieve a meaningful approach for the photocatalytic conversion of biomass into valuable products.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) Project “PureBau” No. 13N13350, the Niedersächsisches Ministerium für Wissenschaft und Kultur (NTH-research group “ElektroBak”), and the Global Research Laboratory program (2014K1A1A2041044) Korea government (MSIP) through NRF is gratefully acknowledged. F. Sieland kindly acknowledges the financial support from the Foundation of German Business (sdw).
References

          P. T. Anastas and J. C. Warner, Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
G. Zhang, G. Kim and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 954–966 CAS .
R. Daghrir, P. Drogui and D. Robert, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 3581–3599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sheldon, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 950–963 RSC .
A. Corma, S. Iborra and A. Velty, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2411–2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Li, S. Liu, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Green Chem., 2015, 18, 594–607 RSC .
M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2014, 25, 2215–2228 CAS .
C. O. Tuck, E. Perez, I. T. Horvath, R. A. Sheldon and M. Poliakoff, Science, 2012, 337, 695–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Alonso, S. G. Wettstein and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 584 RSC .
R. E. Key and J. J. Bozell, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5123–5135 CrossRef CAS .
O. Y. Abdelaziz, D. P. Brink, J. Prothmann, K. Ravi, M. Sun, J. Garcia-Hidalgo, M. Sandahl, C. P. Hulteberg, C. Turner, G. Liden and M. F. Gorwa-Grauslund, Biotechnol. Adv., 2016, 34, 1318–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Awungacha Lekelefac, Ph.D. Thesis, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen,  2014 .
C. Awungacha Lekelefac, N. Busse, M. Herrenbauer and P. Czermak, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2015, 2015 CrossRef  , 137634.
A. E. Atabani, A. S. Silitonga, I. A. Badruddin, T. M. I. Mahlia, H. H. Masjuki and S. Mekhilef, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 2070–2093 CrossRef .
A. L. Ahmad, N. H. M. Yasin, C. J. C. Derek and J. K. Lim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 584–593 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Sharninghausen, J. Campos, M. G. Manas and R. H. Crabtree, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
A. E. Atabani, A. S. Silitonga, H. C. Ong, T. M. I. Mahlia, H. H. Masjuki, I. A. Badruddin and H. Fayaz, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 18, 211–245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin and S. Tanaka, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2006, 69, 627–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mckendry, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 83, 47–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater, D. Meier and D. Radlein, Org. Geochem., 1999, 30, 1479–1493 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater and G. V. C. Peacocke, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 1–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. Puig-Arnavat, J. C. Bruno and A. Coronas, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 2841–2851 CrossRef CAS .
K. Behrendt, Y. Neubauer, M. Oevermann, B. Wilmes and N. Zobel, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2008, 31, 667–677 CrossRef .
D. C. Elliott, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 1792–1815 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Weiland, Eng. Life Sci., 2006, 6, 302–309 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, X.-Y. Wei, Z. Wen, H.-B. Chen, Y.-C. Lu, Z.-M. Zong, J.-P. Cao, S.-C. Qi, S.-Z. Wang, L.-C. Yu, W. Zhao, X. Fan and Y.-P. Zhao, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 117, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prado, X. Erdocia and J. Labidi, Chemosphere, 2013, 91, 1355–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Heidenreich and P. U. Foscolo, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2015, 46, 72–95 CrossRef .
A. Molino, S. Chianese and D. Musmarra, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 10–25 CrossRef .
M. Asadullah, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 201–215 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang and X. Yuan, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2015, 49, 59–80 CrossRef .
A. Dimitriadis and S. Bezergianni, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 113–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Saini, R. Saini and L. Tewari, 3 Biotech, 2015, 5, 337–353 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sawatdeenarunat, K. C. Surendra, D. Takara, H. Oechsner and S. K. Khanal, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 178, 178–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mao, Y. Feng, X. Wang and G. Ren, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 45, 540–555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baeyens, Q. Kang, L. Appels, R. Dewil, Y. Lv and T. Tan, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2015, 47, 60–88 CrossRef .
M. Jin, P. J. Slininger, B. S. Dien, S. Waghmode, B. R. Moser, A. Orjuela, L. da C. Sousa and V. Balan, Trends Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 43–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghimire, L. Frunzo, F. Pirozzi, E. Trably, R. Escudie, P. N. L. Lens and G. Esposito, Appl. Energy, 2015, 144, 73–95 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Ruiz, R. M. Rodríguez-Jasso, B. D. Fernandes, A. Vicente and J. A. Teixeira, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 35–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, S. Z. Wang, D. H. Xu, Y. M. Gong, H. H. Ma and X. Y. Tang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 334–343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Minu, K. K. Jiby and V. V. N. Kishore, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 39, 210–217 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Keeling, Tellus, 1973, 25, 174–198 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shafiee and E. Topal, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 181–189 CrossRef .
R. E. H. Sims, H. H. Rogner and K. Gregory, Energy Policy, 2003, 31, 1315–1326 CrossRef .
S. E. Braslavsky, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 293–465 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2002, 4, 91–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, S. Dutta and B. Saha, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7364–7385 CAS .
C. A. Gueymard, Sol. Energy, 2001, 71, 325–346 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Gueymard, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 423–453 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Wang, J. Rabani, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Puga, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 315, 1–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O. Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211–13241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sato, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 123, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari and M. H. Cho, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 3000–3009 RSC .
H. Irie, Y. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 772–773 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem., 2008, 112, 5405–5409 CAS .
L. Körösi, S. Papp, I. Bertóti and I. Dékány, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4811–4819 CrossRef .
A. Zaleska, Recent Pat. Eng., 2008, 2, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zuo, L. Wang, T. Wu, Z. Zhang, D. Borchardt and P. Feng, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 11856–11857 CAS .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zieliñska, E. Borowiak-Palen and R. J. Kalenczuk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1797–1802 CrossRef .
K. Takanabe, K. Aika, K. Inazu, T. Baba, K. Sashan and L. Lefferts, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
P. Biswas and D. Kunzru, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 969–980 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadullah, S. Ito, K. Kunimori, M. Yamada and K. Tomishige, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 4476–4481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Watanabe, H. Inomata and K. Arai, Biomass Bioenergy, 2002, 22, 405–410 CrossRef CAS .
S. Onsuratoom, S. Chavadej and T. Sreethawong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5246–5261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, T. Yu, X. Fan, H. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 8500–8506 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi, K. Sayama, Y. Abe and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2219–2226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, R. Abe and H. Arakawa, Catal. Lett., 2000, 68, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 343, 303–308 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, T. Yu, Z. Zou and J. Ye, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 1–3 Search PubMed .
K. Domen, A. Kudo, A. Shinozaki, A. Tanaka, K. Maruya and T. Onishi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 1481, 356–357 RSC .
K. Domen, A. Kudo, M. Shibata, A. Tanaka, K. Maruya and T. Onishi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 897, 1706–1707 RSC .
Y. Noda, B. Lee, K. Domen and J. N. Kondo, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5361–5367 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram, E. Borgarello and M. Grätzel, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1981, 64, 362–366 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Antoniadou and P. Lianos, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 204, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
N. Strataki, M. Antoniadou, V. Dracopoulos and P. Lianos, Catal. Today, 2010, 151, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. A. Ruberu, N. C. Nelson, I. I. Slowing and J. Vela, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2798–2802 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Daskalaki, M. Antoniadou, G. Li Puma, D. I. Kondarides and P. Lianos, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 7200–7205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Antoniadou, V. M. Daskalaki, N. Balis, D. I. Kondarides, C. Kordulis and P. Lianos, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 188–196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kakuta and T. Abe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2707–2710 CAS .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
U. Martinez and B. Hammer, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 194703 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Deskins, R. Rousseau and M. Dupuis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5891–5897 CAS .
S. Mitroka, S. Zimmeck, D. Troya and J. M. Tanko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2907–2913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maldotti, R. Amadelli, C. Bartocci and V. Carassiti, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1990, 53, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. C. Leung, X. Fu, C. Wang, M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, X. Wang and X. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 681–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 1982, 86, 172 CrossRef CAS .
D. Friedmann, A. Hakki, H. Kim, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5391–5411 RSC .
S. K. Kansal, M. Singh and D. Sud, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 153, 412–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cambie, C. Bottecchia, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noel, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10276–10341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Oelgemöller, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9664–9682 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Camera-Roda, V. Augugliaro, A. Cardillo, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano and L. Palmisano, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
O. Alfano, D. Bahnemann, A. Cassano, R. Dillert and R. Goslich, Catal. Today, 2000, 58, 199–230 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Lekelefac, J. Hild, P. Czermak and M. Herrenbauer, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2014, 2014, 502326 Search PubMed .
H. X. Fan, H. P. Li, Z. H. Liu, F. Yang and G. Li, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 74, 497–504 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, C. L. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 CAS .
H. Fan, G. Li, F. Yang, L. Yang and S. Zhang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2011, 86, 1107–1112 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, A. Magdziarz and A. Bielejewska, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 11254–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chong, J. Li, Y. Ma, B. Zhang, H. Han and C. Li, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bellardita, E. I. Garcia-Lopez, G. Marci and L. Palmisano, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 5934–5947 CrossRef CAS .
L. Da Vià, C. Recchi, E. O. Gonzalez-Yanez, T. E. Davies and J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 281–288 CrossRef .
G. Kim, S. H. Lee and W. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Xu and X. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 24–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamwilaisak and P. C. Wright, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2400–2406 CrossRef CAS .
E. Portjanskaja, K. Stepanova, D. Klauson and S. Preis, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, K. Miyazaki, M. Miura, Y. Shimotori, M. Aoyama and H. Nakatani, J. Polym. Environ., 2013, 21, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyazaki, H. Sato, T. Watanabe and H. Nakatani, J. Polym. Environ., 2014, 22, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augugliaro, G. Camera-Roda, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano, F. Parrino and M. A. Puma, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augugliaro, G. Camera-Roda, V. Loddo, G. Palmisano, L. Palmisano, J. Soria and S. Yurdakal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1968–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
S. Higashimoto, N. Kitao, N. Yoshida, T. Sakura, M. Azuma, H. Ohue and Y. Sakata, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 279–285 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, W. Ouyang, M. Ojeda, E. Kuna, O. Chernyayeva, D. Lisovytskiy, S. De, R. Luque and A. M. Balu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, L. Wen, S. Lin, J. Bi, P. Feng, X. Fu and L. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2951–2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, L. Li, S. Liang, M. Liu, J. Bi and L. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jing, J. Xiong, N. Qin, Y. Song, L. Li, Y. Yu, S. Liang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8604–8607 RSC .

          T. Salmi, D. Murzin, P. Mäki-Arvela, J. Wärnå, K. Eränen, N. Kumar and J. P. Mikkola, in Novel Concepts in Catalysis and Chemical Reactors: Improving the Efficiency for the Future,  2010, pp. 163–188 Search PubMed .
M. I. F. Mota, P. C. Rodrigues Pinto, J. M. Loureiro and A. E. Rodrigues, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2015, 45, 227–259 CrossRef .
C. G. Wilkerson, S. D. Mansfield, F. Lu, S. Withers, J.-Y. Park, S. D. Karlen, E. Gonzales-Vigil, D. Padmakshan, F. Unda, J. Rencoret and J. Ralph, Science, 2014, 344, 90–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Luo, M. Wang, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Liu and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7716–7721 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. Ciriminna, G. Palmisano, Y.-J. Xu and M. Pagliaro, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18341 RSC .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1820 RSC .
F. Yang, M. A. Hanna and R. Sun, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2012, 5, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu and F. Jérôme, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1127 RSC .
F. Orecchini and E. Bocci, Energy, 2007, 32, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, D. Y. C. Leung, M. K. H. Leung and K. Sumathy, Fuel Process. Technol., 2006, 87, 461–472 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mckendry, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 83, 37–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013–4029 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Veziroglu and F. Barbir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1992, 17, 391–404 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3479–3483 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 384, 694–695 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Groenzin and M. J. Shultz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8094–8095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Memming, Top. Curr. Chem., 1994, 169, 105–181 CrossRef CAS .
E. Greenbaum, C. V. Tevault and C. Y. Ma, Energy Fuels, 1995, 9, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kadam, V. R. Mate, R. P. Panmand, L. K. Nikam, M. V. Kulkarni, R. S. Sonawane and B. B. Kale, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 60626–60635 RSC .
M. Ksibi, S. Ben Amor, S. Cherif, E. Elaloui, A. Houas and M. Elaloui, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 154, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kobayakawa, Y. Sato, S. Nakamura and A. Fujishima, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1989, 62, 3433–3436 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yasuda, A. Miura, R. Yuki, Y. Nakamura, T. Shiragami, Y. Ishii and H. Yokoi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 220, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Robra, R. Serpa, A. M. De Oliveira, J. A. A. Neto and J. V. Santos, Biomass Bioenergy, 2010, 34, 1330–1335 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Hansen, A. Hernandez, B. P. Mullan, K. Moore, M. Trezona-Murray, R. H. King and J. R. Pluske, Anim. Prod. Sci., 2009, 49, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Kondarides, V. M. Daskalaki, A. Patsoura and X. E. Verykios, Catal. Lett., 2008, 122, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lalitha, G. Sadanandam, V. D. Kumari, M. Subrahmanyam, B. Sreedhar and N. Y. Hebalkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22181–22189 CAS .
P. Panagiotopoulou, E. E. Karamerou and D. I. Kondarides, Catal. Today, 2013, 209, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bahruji, M. Bowker, P. R. Davies and F. Pedrono, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Tran and G. S. K. Kannangara, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9454–9479 RSC .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, Nature, 1980, 286, 474–476 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, C. Ni, X. Huang, A. Welgamage, L. A. Lawton, P. K. J. Robertson and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1673–1676 RSC .
A. Caravaca, W. Jones, C. Hardacre and M. Bowker, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2016, 472, 1–21 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kaneko, R. Saito, H. Ueno, J. Nemoto and A. Izuoka, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 1199–1206 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, J. Long, X. Wang, D. Y. C. Leung, Z. Ding, L. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and X. Fu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6484–6491 CrossRef CAS .
G. Iervolino, V. Vaiano, J. J. Murcia, L. Rizzo, G. Ventre, G. Pepe, P. Campiglia, M. C. Hidalgo, J. A. Navío and D. Sannino, J. Catal., 2016, 339, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, T. Chen, G. Zhou, X. Zong and C. Li, Sci. China, Ser. B: Chem., 2008, 51, 97–100 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Silva, M. J. Sampaio, R. R. N. Marques, L. A. Ferreira, P. B. Tavares, A. M. T. Silva and J. L. Faria, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 178, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gomathisankar, D. Yamamoto, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and S. Kaneco, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 5517–5524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bahruji, M. Bowker, P. R. Davies, L. S. Al-Mazroai, A. Dickinson, J. Greaves, D. James, L. Millard and F. Pedrono, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 115–118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wang, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7116–7126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D. Gao, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4291–4297 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, R. V. Forest, Y. Chang, N. Gaillard, B. E. Mccandless, S. Hou, K. H. Lee, R. W. Birkmire and J. G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9091–9099 CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Shi, M. Liu, D. Jing and L. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 192–194 RSC .
C. Ma, Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, C. Lu and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 273, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
G. Iervolino, V. Vaiano, D. Sannino, L. Rizzo and P. Ciambelli, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 959–966 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carraro, C. MacCato, A. Gasparotto, T. Montini, S. Turner, O. I. Lebedev, V. Gombac, G. Adami, G. Van Tendeloo, D. Barreca and P. Fornasiero, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chatel, S. Valange, R. Behling and J. C. Colmenares, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 2615–2621 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, R. S. Varma and V. Nair, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6675–6686 RSC .

Footnote† These authors equally contributed to this work and should be considered co-first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
L. I. Granone	Luis Ignacio Granone graduated in chemistry in 2015 at the National University of Mar del Plata, Argentina. He is currently a Ph.D. student at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz University Hannover under the supervision of Prof. Detlef W. Bahnemann and Dr. Ralf Dillert. His research interests include the development of iron-based photoelectrodes for oxygen and hydrogen production via water oxidation/reduction and electrodes for microbiological fuel cells.
F. Sieland	Fabian Sieland received his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry in 2015 from the University of Paderborn. Currently, he is a Ph.D. student at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz University Hannover. In the group of Prof. Detlef W. Bahnemann, he focuses on the analysis of charge carrier kinetics in photocatalysts by means of transient absorption spectroscopy. His current research interests include the mechanism of charge carrier recombination, photocatalytic synthesis of chemicals, sustainable and environmentally friendly applications of photocatalysis, and (photo)-electrochemistry.
N. Zheng	Nan Zheng did his undergraduate studies at the University of Science and Technology of China and obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan with Professor William R. Roush. He then performed postdoctoral studies at MIT with Stephen L. Buchwald before starting his independent career at the University of Arkansas in 2008. His research interest is centered on photoredox catalysis.
R. Dillert	Ralf Dillert, Dr rer. nat., chemist, is working since 2006 as a researcher at the Institute of Technical Chemistry of the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz University Hannover. His actual research interests comprise photocatalytic water treatment, photocatalytic removal of air pollutants, self-cleaning surfaces, and the interfacial electron transfer at the electrolyte/semiconductor interface.
D. W. Bahnemann	Detlef W. Bahnemann is currently the Head of the Research Unit “Photocatalysis and Nanotechnology” at the Institute of Technical Chemistry of the Leibniz University Hannover in Germany and also the Director of the Research Institute on Nanocomposite Materials for Photonic Applications at Saint Petersburg State University in Russia. His main research topics include photocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, solar chemistry and the detailed investigation of the physicochemical properties of semiconductor and metal nanoparticles.

 	Fig. 1  Pathways of solar energy. Renewable supply basing on plants or agricultural waste is shown as green arrows. Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Composition of biomass of common agricultural crops.	 

 	Fig. 3  Available biomass wastes, indigestible for humans, for the sustainable photocatalytic production of valuable products.	 

 	Fig. 4  The three primary building blocks of lignin.	 

 	Fig. 5  Production of fatty acid methyl esters (biodiesel) and glycerol from lipids.	 

 	Fig. 6  Products of glycerol obtainable by heterogeneous catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 7  Conversion of biomass to valuable products employing various thermochemical and biochemical processes.	 

Pyrolysis	
28 and 29

Gasification	
30–32

Liquefaction	
33 and 34

Biochemical methods	
35–40


 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of heterogeneous photocatalysis and trapping of photogenerated electrons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Utilization of photogenerated charge carriers under atmosphere containing oxygen (A) and under inert gas atmosphere (B).	 

 	Fig. 10  UV-active photocatalysts classification according to Chen et al.64	 

 	Fig. 11  Energy band positions for Cu2O, ZnO, and TiO2 semiconductors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87.	 

 	Fig. 12  Dye sensitization (A) and visible light induced LMCT (B). Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Adsorption Energy for adsorbates on TiO2 with different absolute (Mulliken) electronegativity χ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 14  Common reactor types applied in heterogeneous photochemical reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 15  Single bed particle suspension reactor for photocatalytic hydorgen evolution. The reactor consists of a particle slurry contained within baggies separated by an access driveway. A solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 10% was considered by the authors to deduce production costs for hydrogen production. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Overview of biomass feedstocks available for conversion to fine chemicals and reported products achieved by photocatalytic reactions.	 

 	Fig. 17  Conversion of glucose with TiO2 photocatalyst to arabinose and erythrose. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108.	 

 	Fig. 18  Suggested monodentate and bidentate TiO2-glucose complex responsible for the LMCT and photocatalytic degradation of glucose under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111.	 

 	Fig. 19  Activation of lignin under acidic and alkaline conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112.	 

 	Fig. 20  Synthesis of vanillin from ferulic acid. Reproduced from ref. 117.	 

 	Fig. 21  Photocatalytic cleavage of β-O-4 alcohols into ketones and phenols by a two-step photocatalytic oxidation-hydrogenolysis reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128.	 

 	Fig. 22  Photocatalytic conversion of glycerol to high-value products. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  Proposed mechanism of the reaction oxidation of glycerol to dihydroxyacetone by Bi2WO6 under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
H-R + {˙O}H → R˙ + H2O
R˙ + h+ → R+ → Highly oxidized species → CO2; SO42−; NO3−; Cl−

 	Fig. 24  Schematic representation of photocatalytic hydrogen generation employing sacrificial reagents.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
CH3OH + {˙O}H → {˙C}H2OH + H2O
˙CH2OH + O2 → HCHO + HO2˙.

 	Fig. 25  Processes involved in the photocatalytic oxidation of methanol in aqueous solution for hydrogen formation on platinized TiO2. (1) Photogeneration of charge carriers; (2) Trapping of photogenerated electrons by Ti4+ centers; (3) First oxidation step of MeOH; (4) formation of HCHO through “current doubling” process; (5) Production of H2; (6) Recombination of charge carriers. Partially reprinted with permission from ref. 139.	 

 	Fig. 26  Suitable model organic compounds to mimic biomass-derived wastes from industrial and agricultural processes. Glycerol, lignin, and carbohydrates, originated mainly from cellulose and hemicellulose, can be obtained in relatively high purity from wastes derived from biodiesel refineries, wood/paper industries, and agriculture.	 

 	Fig. 27  Products obtained from the photocatalytic degradation of lignin over ZnO under near-UV and visible light irradiation as determined by Greenbaum et al.143	 

 	Fig. 28  Products detected by GC-MS from the photocatalytic degradation of lignin using TiO2 photocatalyst under UV illumination as reported by Ksibi et al.145	 

 	Fig. 29  Possible reaction pathways for photo-oxidation of glycerol with hydrogen evolution over irradiated Pt/TiO2 photocatalyst suspensions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152.	 
C6O5H10 + 7H2O → 12H2 + 6CO2.

 	Fig. 30  Possible mechanism for the photo-reforming of glucose over Pt/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159.	 
H2O + h+ → H+ + {˙O}H
RCHO + {˙O}H → RCO˙ + H2O
RCO˙ + H2O → RCOOH + H˙
RCOOH + {˙O}H → R′OH + CO2 + H˙.
Footnote
† These authors equally contributed to this work and should be considered co-first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
