Optical nanoprobes for biomedical applications: shining a light on upconverting and near-infrared emitting nanoparticles for imaging, thermal sensing, ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TB00403F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TB00403F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4365-4392Optical nanoprobes for biomedical applications: shining a light on upconverting and near-infrared emitting nanoparticles for imaging, thermal sensing, and photodynamic therapy

        
          
            E. 
            Hemmer
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Acosta-Mora
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Méndez-Ramos
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            S. 
            Fischer
          
          
        
      c
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa (ON), K1N 6N5, Canada. E-mail: ehemmer@uottawa.ca
bDepartamento de Fíísica, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California—Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
Received 
      9th February 2017
    , Accepted 20th March 2017First published on 20th March 2017AbstractLanthanide (Ln3+)-based nanoparticles (NPs) with light emission in the ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near-infrared (NIR) region under NIR excitation are emerging multifunctional players in the biomedical field. Excitation and emission wavelengths matching the NIR biological transparency windows (700–1870 nm) set the basis for deeper penetration depth into biological tissues due to less absorption, higher resolution as a result of reduced scattering, and improved imaging contrast due to tissue autofluorescence minimization; all being inevitable requirements for optical in vivo bioimaging. Moreover, frequency-conversion in Ln3+-based NPs is sensitive to their thermal environment, thus allowing for application as optical temperature sensors. Additional heating capability opens the pathway to self-monitored optical agents with potential for photothermal therapies (PTTs). UV-visible emitting upconverting nanoparticles (UCNPs) are of particular interest for applications in photodynamic therapies (PDTs) owing to their capability to trigger various photochemical processes upon NIR excitation. It is the aim of this review to highlight the most recent achievements and advances in the field of Ln3+-based NPs as frequency-converting materials for biomedical applications and to identify current trends as well as remaining challenges. Special focus will be set on the most recently presented Ln3+-based systems whose potential has been evaluated in vitro and in vivo as NIR-to-NIR bioimaging probes, NIR-operating nanothermometers and -heaters as well as photochemical agents.
E. Hemmer
Eva Hemmer received her PhD in 2008 from Saarland University (Germany) under the mentorship of Prof. Sanjay Mathur. From 2009 to 2012, she worked on lanthanide-based nanoparticles for near-infrared bioimaging with Prof. Kohei Soga at the Tokyo University of Science. In 2013 she was awarded a Feodor Lynen Research Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop lanthanide-based nanothermometers in the groups of Profs. Fiorenzo Vetrone and François Légaré at INRS-EMT (Université du Québec, Canada). In 2016, she joined the University of Ottawa as an assistant professor at the Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, where she is working on lanthanide-based nanocarriers for biomedical and energy conversion applications.
P. Acosta-Mora
Pablo Acosta-Mora received his Master's degree in Physics: Matter Structure from the University of La Laguna, Spain in 2013. Currently, he is a PhD student in the group of Prof. Jorge Méndez-Ramos developing photocatalyst materials for water splitting applications. His research has been centered in spectroscopic characterization and photocatalytic applications of up-conversion processes in lanthanide-doped crystals, glasses, polymeric resins and nano-structured materials.
J. Méndez-Ramos
Jorge Méndez-Ramos received his PhD in 2003 from the University of La Laguna, Spain. After two postdoctoral stays at the Novel Photonics Research Group at the University of Nottingham (UK), he returned to the University of La Laguna as a lecturer and researcher from 2004. In 2015, he became an assistant professor at the Department of Physics at the University of La Laguna. His research focuses on spectral conversion processes in lanthanide-doped luminescent materials for photonics applications. He is the coordinator of the Nanomaterials and Spectroscopy Research Group, where he currently works on applications in photocatalysis, solar fuel generation, water-splitting, artificial photosynthesis, and life sciences.
S. Fischer
Stefan Fischer received his PhD in 2014 from the University of Freiburg, Germany, in collaboration with the Fraunhofer ISE, Germany, under the direction of Prof. Eicke R. Weber. In 2015, he joined the University of California at Berkeley and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California, USA, as a postdoctoral scholar under the supervision of Prof. A. Paul Alivisatos. As of 2017, he also joined Stanford University in California, USA, under the mentorship of Prof. Jennifer A. Dionne. His research interests include light–matter interaction, opto-electrical devices, solar energy harvesting, photonics, and luminescent materials, in particular lanthanide-based nanomaterials.
Introduction
Over the last two decades, nanomedicine has been recognized as an emerging field including the design, assessment and application of nanoprobes for imaging and sensing, as drug delivery systems or as therapeutic agents.1,2 In parallel, personal medicine has become an emerging approach in the development of novel, more efficient, reliable and precise therapeutic approaches with more predictable outcomes against diseases such as cancer or cardiovascular diseases by providing care tailored to the special needs of a particular patient.3 In this context, bioimaging is a crucial tool: it is essential for diagnostics, both in vivo and ex vivo, as well as for the investigation of biological processes seeking their better understanding eventually allowing for the development of innovative diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Another important aspect of bioimaging is the monitoring of diseased biological areas prior to and during intervention and treatment as well as in the frame of follow-up care and disease prevention.4,5 Particularly, the accurate and in situ monitoring of disease progression is crucial for the adjustment and optimization of personal treatment. Subsequently, growing efforts have been undertaken to bring modern medicine one step further and beyond diagnosis and therapy as stand-alone tools, namely towards the combination of both aspects into one comprehensive theranostic approach. While progress has been reported, for example in terms of targeted nanotheranostics for personalized medicine against cancer,6,7 challenges remain. These include the need for more specific site-selectivity of the probe, time- and dose-controlled drug release (or triggering of alternative therapeutic functionalities, such as photodynamic or photothermal that will be discussed in more detail at a later point of this review), nanotoxicity, and pharmacokinetic aspects. Current efforts to address these challenges are for instance based on molecular and nanoparticulate approaches. Both strategies provide significant contributions to the development of modern medicine and should be regarded as complimentary rather than competitive. Nevertheless, this review gives full attention to nanoparticulate probes, specifically trivalent lanthanide (Ln3+)-based frequency-converting nanoparticles (NPs) as multifunctional, optical probes for biomedical applications (note: in this review, Ln also refers to yttrium which often serves as a compound in host lattices for doping with different Ln3+ ions). For the interested reader, the latest achievements regarding alternative probe materials have recently been summarized for instance by Jung et al. on molecular approaches,3 Blau et al. on polymeric NPs,8 Costa et al. on carbon nanotubes,9 Wegner et al., Cassette et al. or Gui et al. on semiconductor quantum dots (QDs),10–12 including innovative heavy-metal-free QDs, and Kumar et al. on plasmonic nanostructures.13
Ln3+-based NPs are outstanding candidates for a whole gamut of applications ranging from biomedicine to telecommunication, phosphors, and more recently energy conversion technologies. These applications are based on the optical properties of the Ln3+ ions. Due to the unique electronic structure of the Ln3+ ions, Ln3+-doped materials are very good frequency-converters spanning the spectral range from ultraviolet (UV) via visible to near-infrared (NIR).20 This includes downshifting and upconversion of photons. Downshifting denotes the absorption and subsequent emission of photons where the emitted photon has less energy than the previously absorbed one. The emitted photon has therefore a longer wavelength and appears red-shifted. Upconversion is a non-linear process that describes the emission of a higher energy photon after absorption of two or more lower energy photons. The upconverted photons have shorter wavelengths and therefore appear blue-shifted.21 Due to these frequency-converting properties, Ln3+-based NPs are receiving increasing attention as optical imaging probes and theranostic agents from the materials science, chemistry, physics, and biomedical community.22–24 Seminal work in the field of Ln3+-based NPs focused on the synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of upconverting nanoparticles (UCNPs),25 while the field now experiences a transition from simple optical probes to more complex multifunctional systems. Consequently, current research efforts focus on nanoplatforms not only suitable for optical imaging but also providing additional functional features.23 These include the application of Ln3+-based NPs as (i) temperature sensors and heaters with respect to potential applications in photothermal therapy (PTT) and as (ii) photochemical agents targeting photodynamic therapies (PDTs). In the following sections, after an introduction to the physical background of Ln3+-based frequency-conversion as well as energy transfer (ET) mechanisms involved in upconversion and NIR emission, we will highlight the latest Ln3+-based frequency-converting nanoplatforms. We will mainly focus on cutting-edge systems presented in 2016 and early 2017 that have been assessed in vitro or in vivo.
Lanthanide ions in solids: versatile, efficient, and complex spectral converters
Providing the right frame: lanthanide ions in host materials
Lanthanides are the 14 elements from lanthanum with an empty 4f orbital to lutetium with a completely filled 4f orbital. Divalent (Ln2+) and trivalent (Ln3+) lanthanide ions possess a rich energy level structure with transitions in the NIR, visible, and UV spectral region. This rich energy structure is responsible for the versatile use but also complexity of lanthanides as spectral converters. Although, the concepts and application discussed here are also valid for the divalent Ln2+, we will focus on the trivalent Ln3+ in this review. The 4f electrons of the Ln3+ ions are shielded by the outer, energetically lower 5d and 5s orbitals. As a consequence, the optical transitions of the 4f electrons are only marginally affected by the surroundings and appear at nearly the same energies for different host materials. The electronic states of the Ln3+ ions are denoted by the notation 2S+1LJ with the electron quantum numbers of spin S, angular orbital momentum L, and total angular momentum J.26,27 The energy levels of the Ln3+ ions in lanthanum chloride were determined in the early work of Dieke and Crosswhite.28 The corresponding energy level diagram is well known as the Dieke diagram. Fig. 1 provides an overview of the energy levels and transitions of those Ln3+ ions that have been identified as most relevant for UCNPs and NIR emitters in biomedical applications at the moment. The crystal field acting on a Ln3+ ion by the atoms of a host material splits the 2S+1LJ energy levels in crystal field components – the Stark sub-levels. The splitting of an energy level 2S+1LJ into several Stark sub-levels (e.g., Fig. 1C and D2) leads to an effective broadening of this energy level. As a consequence, the sharp Ln3+ transitions become broader. The Stark sub-levels of a 2S+1LJ energy level are usually spaced with less than the thermal energy kBT at room temperature, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. Therefore, there is a thermal coupling between the Stark sub-levels (see also a later section about nanothermometry). This can be exploited very usefully by the powerful McCumber theory,29 which connects narrow-band absorption with emission spectra and vice versa using the thermal energy. It has been shown that the McCumber theory can also be applied to the 2S+1LJ energy levels of Ln3+.30,31
 Fig. 1  Schematic of energy levels and commonly applied transitions in UCNPs and NIR emitting NPs based on (A) Er3+,Yb3+, (B) Ho3+,Yb3+, (C) Tm3+,Yb3+ and (D) Nd3+. Mechanisms of optical temperature sensing using Ln3+-based NPs are also depicted: the luminescence intensity ratio (LIR) between thermally coupled energy levels is commonly applied for (A) Er3+,Yb3+- and (B) Ho3+,Yb3+-based UCNPs. (C) Energy transfer (ET) and cross-relaxation processes in Tm3+,Yb3+-doped UCNPs. Besides intensity ratio, the temperature-dependent Stark sub-level population of the excited states 1G4 and 3H4 of Tm3+ are suitable for nanothermometry, whereas the latter matches the NIR-I region. (D) NIR nanothermometry in Nd3+-based systems exploiting (D1) the temperature-dependent population of 4F5/2 and 4F3/2 excited levels, (D2) Stark sub-levels of Nd3+ levels 4F3/2, 4I11/2 and 4I9/2, and (D3) phonon-assisted ET processes between Nd3+ and co-dopant Yb3+. Redrawn based on ref. 14–19. 
If we are looking at radiative transitions between the 2S+1LJ energy levels there are certain selection rules. The selection rules for dipole transitions between 2S+1LJ energy levels of a free ion are ΔJ = 0, ±1 with J = 0 → J = 0 forbidden.26 Furthermore, the transitions between the 4fn energy levels occur between states with the same parity, which are forbidden for electric dipole transitions, and as a consequence magnetic dipole transitions arise.26 However, even a small mixing of the opposite-parity configuration 4fn with 4fn−1 5d results in a significant change in the transition probability. The mixing can be caused, for example, by a Ln3+ ion being in a site which is lacking in inversion symmetry.26 An enhanced transition probability is then attributed to a small contribution of the electric dipole component. Generally, the electric dipole coupling is orders of magnitude stronger than the magnetic dipole coupling. However, even for Ln3+ ions occupying a site with inversion symmetry, electric dipole transitions are found.26 This is often a consequence of 4fn states mixing with the opposite-parity 4fn−1 5d states forced by an odd-parity crystal field component which induces electric dipole transitions.32,33 Therefore, host materials with strong crystal fields enhance the dipole moment of the optical transitions and therefore strengthen absorption and emission of the Ln3+ ions. This may be one reason for the popularity of host materials using elements with high electronegativity, such as oxygen, fluorine, and chlorine.
In recent years, there have been numerous approaches used to disturb the crystal structure by co-doping the host materials with impurities, such as Li+,34–36 Mn2+,37 or Fe3+,38 with the intention of altering the crystal field. Another approach to enhance the Ln3+ emission due to crystal field distortion is co-substitution of the inert Ln3+ in the host lattice by two other trivalent species with slightly smaller and larger ionic radii, such as Lu3+ and Gd3+, to disturb the crystal field but reducing crystal defects.39
Besides the differences in the coordination of the Ln3+ and therefore also in the crystal field, the phonon energy spectrum of the host material is another important parameter to keep in mind. The phonon energies translate into non-radiative rates40–42 which are often considered as losses and contribution in phonon-assisted processes, such as phonon-assisted energy transfer.43 The energy gap law (eqn (1))40–42 PMPR,if = PMPR,0exp(−κΔEif)(1)describes the relation between the transition probability for multi-phonon relaxation PMPR,if and the energy gap between the considered energy levels of a transition ΔEif using material parameters which are associated with the phonon energies of the materials (PMPR,0 and κ). In the case of upconversion, host materials with low phonon energies to reduce non-radiative losses are commonly preferred and show the best performance (e.g., in terms of upconversion quantum yield – UCQY).44–49 Common host materials are oxides, fluorides, and chlorides with phonon energies in the range of 600 cm−1, 355 cm−1, and 260 cm−1, respectively.50
Basics of energy transfer
A trend in Ln3+-doped NPs is the design of more complex structures including doping of multiple Ln3+ ions and other co-dopants in a single NP,39,51 multi-shell NPs with novel properties, such as changes of the emission colour upon frequency changes of the excitation,52 multifunctional organic–inorganic hybrid systems,53–55 and other Ln3+-based systems in which the flow of energy can be controlled, such as energy migration upconversion56 or active shell layers for energy migration from absorbers at the surface to the core of the NP.55,57 The design and optimization of such complex structures requires a complete understanding of the energy transfer (ET) mechanisms and the energy flow schemes. Even in the simple case of Yb3+ and Er3+ (Fig. 1A) co-doped β-NaYF4 upconverting materials, which have been studied for many decades,21,58–60 the recent literature discusses whether or not the green luminescence under 980 NIR excitation originates from a 2- or 3-photon upconversion process.61,62 In addition, it is particularly interesting to understand ET processes at the surface of Ln3+-based NPs not only to make the NPs brighter, for example by exploiting surface quenching processes,63 but also to drive chemical reactions as detailed later in this review.
In the following brief fundamental discussion, we will focus on ET between an energy donor (D) and an energy acceptor (A). The theory of ET between molecules was initially proposed independently by Förster65 and Dexter66 for multipolar coupling and was extended later in many studies.62,67–69 ET is a non-radiative process and therefore does not involve the emission or absorption of a real photon. The probability of ET can be described most generally by Fermi's Golden rule (eqn (2)): (2)with the first term being the square expected value of the transfer matrix element with the Hamiltonian of the interaction Hint for the initial and final donor (Di, Df) as well as acceptor (Ai, Af) states, respectively. The second term is the density of states (DOS) given by the overlap integral of the corresponding donor emission spectrum gDi→Df(E) and acceptor absorption spectrum gAi→Af(E) which are both normalized to an integrated value of unity. Based on this fundamental consideration, ET between D and A can be enhanced by either increasing the overlap integral or the transfer matrix element. By choosing appropriate Ln3+ ion combinations, a large overlap integral can be achieved for similar transition energies resulting in ET from one (1) to another Ln3+ ion (2). The reverse process of ET from (2) to (1) may be stronger or weaker than the ET from (1) to (2) because of the different corresponding emission and absorption spectra that need to be considered in the overlap integral. This circumstance is often exploited in efficient upconverting schemes or, as shown later, in nanothermometry.55 On the other hand, there is still an ongoing discussion regarding whether or not the transfer matrix element can be modified, for example by an altered surrounding electro-magnetic field caused by photonic modulation.70–73 This is very different to the altered spontaneous emission by a perturbed electro-magnetic field which originates from a changed density of photon states.74–76
The transfer matrix element term is calculated using Hint for static electro and static magnetic interaction. The dipole–dipole interaction is typically the strongest, but for small dipole moments also higher order interactions such as dipole–quadrupole or quadrupole–quadrupole need to be considered. The dipole–dipole solution was derived by Förster65 in 1948 and is known as Förster resonant ET (FRET). The FRET probability can be written as (eqn (3)) (3)using the dipole moments of the considered transitions of the donor |D|2 and the acceptor |A|2, Planck's constant ℏ, the vacuum permittivity ε0, the refractive index of the medium n, a geometric factor which accounts for the relative orientation of the dipole transitions κ2 (e.g., 2/3 for random orientation), and the distance R between A and D. Eqn (3) can be expressed in many different forms which can be found in the literature and may be more suited in certain cases.26,77–79 The FRET probability (e.g., also the rate in a simple D–A pair system) is also given by eqn (4): (4)with the radiative lifetime of the donor τD and the Förster distance R0 for which the FRET efficiency is 50% in a simple D–A pair system (Fig. 2A). FRET is a long-range process and R0 values in organic molecules reach values up to 7 nm.77,79,80 If the distance between D and A is very short, the electron clouds may overlap directly. This results in direct exchange interaction and the transfer matrix element in eqn (2) can be approximated by J0e(−R/L), where J0 is often approximated by the diagonal exchange term between D and A and L is the next neighbour distance between D and A.26,43,66 This expression, also known as Dexter ET, is typically considered for nearest neighbour-exchange with distances below roughly 0.1 nm.
 Fig. 2  (A) The FRET efficiency (E) in a simple donor–acceptor pair system depends on the Förster radius R0 and the distance R between the donor and acceptor. (B) Energy migration in Er3+ and Yb3+ doped β-NaYF4 as a function of Yb3+ concentration.63 Because of the large spectral overlap of the same transitions, ET between the same Ln3+ ions can be very efficient resulting in long distance energy migration of the excitation energy. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7241–7247. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (C) Efficient migration combined with a down-cascading energy flow scheme is exploited to increase the efficiency in dye-sensitized core-active shell UCNPs (X = null, Er, Ho, Tm, or Pr).64 Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16192–16195. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
FRET is often the most relevant process for efficient upconversion in Ln-based crystals and its role has been discussed extensively in the literature.21,45,47,61,63,81–90 Recently, energy migration in Ln3+-doped materials is receiving more attention and modelling showed that energy migration through Gd3+, Yb3+, or Er3+ based host materials is very efficient resulting in migration distances up to 10–30 nm (Fig. 2B).63,91,92 These long-range energy migration distances result in a dynamic and non-confined energy distribution in such materials as well as the possibility of designing efficient energy flow from the surface to the core and vice versa, for example in core-active shell nanostructures.56,57,91
Upconversion of NIR photons and downshifting to NIR photons
Summaries of upconverting materials, upconversion mechanisms, their efficiency as well as concepts to enhance the luminescence of upconverting materials have already been extensively discussed in several reviews.21,44,84,87,95–97 We refer to these reviews for further reading and describe upconversion only at a basic level. NPs doped with only one Ln3+ ion species, such as Er3+ or Tm3+, have shown useful upconversion of NIR to NIR photons for bioimaging or solar energy conversion, for example.90,92 The most common NIR to visible UCNPs use Yb3+ as a sensitizer to absorb 980 nm photons because the absorption cross-section of Yb3+ is large compared to the ones of many other Ln3+. The excitation energy may migrate from one Yb3+ to another Yb3+ before it is eventually transferred to other Ln3+ ions, where the actual upconversion takes place by exciting higher energy levels through multiple ET processes from excited Yb3+ (Fig. 1A–C). A recent study showed that the QY of core–shell UCNPs approached around 4% for 980 nm to green and red light conversion in the case of β-NaYF4 doped with Yb3+ and Er3+, which is already half of the highest QY reported for the bulk material.44,63 It is likely that UCNPs will continue to be more efficient in the future. Consequently, the limitation of Ln3+-doped UCNPs may not be the low UCQY but rather the weak absorption due to the weak 4f–4f transitions. One way of overcoming the weak absorption is the combination with strong absorbers on the surface, such as dye molecules. Zhang et al. attached organic molecules (tropolonates) on the surface of Nd3+- or Yb3+-doped β-NaYF4 NPs to show an antenna effect.53 The organic molecules acted as a dye with strong absorption in the UV and visible spectrum and the excitation energy was transferred from the dye to the Ln3+ ions in the UCNP followed by emission of NIR photons from the UCNP.53 The concept of dye-sensitization was later used by Zou et al. to show enhanced upconversion luminescence due to the strong NIR absorption of dyes (IR-806) attached to the surface of inorganic NPs.54 This concept to overcome the weak absorption of the Ln3+ ions has become very popular and has been further improved for higher efficiency, for example by active shell migration layers (Fig. 2C).55,98,99 Photostability and expanding the absorption range further into the NIR are some issues that need to be addressed for dye-sensitized systems. Confinement of migration of the excitation energy has been proven as a concept leading to upconversion enhancement. Wang et al. suggested the use of orthorhombic KYb2F7 as a host for Er3+ ions.100 Here, the distribution of Ln3+ ions in arrays of clusters enables the preservation of excitation energy within the sub-lattice domain leading to an effective minimization of the migration of excitation energy to defects, thus reducing energy loss. Alternatively, Chen et al. demonstrated efficient five-photon upconversion emission of Tm3+ ions in a stoichiometric Yb3+-based lattice without concentration quenching through spatial confinement of the migration of excitation energy generated in the Yb3+ ions in a NaYF4/NaYbF4:Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell–shell nanoparticle.101
Besides upconversion, downshifting of NIR photons can be usefully exploited in biomedical applications. Downshifting is commonly a fairly linear process with the advantage of typically high conversion efficiencies compared to upconversion. However, the concentration of Ln3+ ions in the crystals needs to be rather low to prevent concentration quenching and upconversion, which may be a loss mechanism in the case of downshifting. Lower Ln3+ ion concentration results in less absorption and consequently lower luminescence intensities.
Nd3+ ions are very promising NIR to NIR downshifting candidates and have been successfully applied in biomedical applications as presented in more detail in the following section. Typically, the Nd3+ ions are excited at around 800 nm (4I9/2 → 4F5/2) resulting in several longer wavelength emissions with the strongest one typically at around 1050 nm (4F3/2 → 4I11/2) (Fig. 1D3).102 The Yb3+ and Er3+ co-doped NPs, known for bright upconversion of 980 nm photons as discussed above, can also convert the 980 nm excitation to photons around 1500 nm (Fig. 1A). It was recently reported that the efficiency of this NIR to the NIR downshifting process can be modulated for core–shell NPs by an inert shell leading to QY values up to 18% for sub-30 nm NaYF4 particles with inert NaLuF4 shells.63 Besides Er3+ ions, Yb3+-doped materials can also be co-doped with Tm3+, Ho3+, or Pr3+ ions for NIR downshifting of 980 nm photons to 1630, 1200, or 1310 nm, respectively.64,103 Most recent examples for their application in NIR bioimaging will be highlighted in the following section.
Ln3+-based nanostructures for optical bioimaging in the NIR transparency windows
Among the various bioimaging methods available for clinical use and in research, such as ultrasound, radiation-based (e.g., computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), optical imaging is a highly complementary technique. This is due to the possibility to acquire data at high speed allowing for the time-resolved detection of dynamic processes in real time. Taking advantage of different emission wavelengths, the possibility for multicolour imaging is a further advantage of the optical approach. However, drawbacks that are addressed by ongoing research are (i) a generally low penetration depth into biological tissues, typically not reaching deeper than a few milli- to centimetres, and (ii) limited spatial resolution. Seeking deep-tissue optical imaging at high spatial resolution, the ability of the applied light to penetrate the biological tissue is a key parameter. Conventional molecular dyes often require excitation with UV light and typically emit in the visible region of the optical spectrum. Yet, UV light is not only absorbed and scattered by water and biological tissues limiting the penetration depth, it also brings the risk of (i) phototoxicity toward biological tissue, (ii) photodegradation of organic probe molecules, and (iii) tissue auto-fluorescence. Fortunately, light in the so-called NIR biological transparency windows (Fig. 3A – first window: 700 to 950 nm (NIR-I), second window: 1000 to 1350 nm (NIR-II), and third window: 1550 to 1870 nm (NIR-III))93,104,105 has been proven to overcome some of these limitations due to lower absorption and scattering by water and biological species106,107 when compared to shorter wavelengths, allowing for deeper penetration depth and higher spatial resolution. While indocyanine green (ICG) is a FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration) approved organic dye emitting in the wavelength region from 830 to 850 nm under 780 to 790 nm excitation, thus matching the NIR-I window,108 it has been recognized that emission wavelengths longer than 1000 nm (NIR-II and NIR-III) are highly advantageous over the shorter-wavelength NIR-I. This triggered the search for novel NIR-II and NIR-III emitting bioprobes. Global research efforts led to the development of innovative NIR-II or NIR-III emitting organic dyes, carbon-based nanostructures, heavy-metal-free QDs, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) as well as Ln3+-based NPs.109–120 Yet, not only the emission wavelength must be carefully chosen; the choice of the excitation wavelength also requires thorough consideration. As discussed in the previous section, Yb3+ ions absorbing light of 980 nm have been applied widely as co-dopants in UCNPs. Consequently, seminal in vitro and in vivo bioimaging studies are foremost based on the 980 nm excitation of Yb3+-co-doped probes.121–123 Conversely, it was later found that 980 nm is not the optimum choice. In fact, light with a wavelength of around 800 nm shows significantly lower absorption and scattering than 980 nm light allowing for enhanced tissue penetration, better spatial resolution and reduced heat generation that can provoke undesired damage of the biological tissue.124 A suitable Ln3+ ion that can be excited with 800 nm light is neodymium, Nd3+.125–127 Hence, Nd3+ as a sensitizing co-dopant as well as an activator ion is receiving increased attention,128,129 and its successful application has, for instance, been reported by the groups of D. Jaque,130,131 P. N. Prasad,132 D. K Sardar,133 S. He,134 and C.-H. Yan.135 Thus, recent findings in terms of the relevance of an appropriate wavelength choice triggered a clear trend shifting optical bioimaging from the UV-visible to the NIR region where both the excitation and emission wavelengths match with one of the three biological windows. In the following, the most current achievements in the field of Ln3+-based NIR bioimaging made since early 2016 will be highlighted. Herein, the focus will be set on examples of outstanding work that include a proof of concept by in vitro or in vivo assessment.
 Fig. 3  Relevance of the wavelength for deep penetration and low auto-fluorescence bioimaging. (A) First (NIR-I), second (NIR-II), and third (NIR-III) optical windows in some biological tissues and fluids.93 Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711, copyright (2009). (B) Auto-fluorescence of different mice strains in NIR biological windows. Top: Optical images of the mice strains (partially shaved). Centre and bottom: infrared fluorescence images of the different mice strains under excitation with an 808 nm laser diode (power density: 0.2 W cm−2). The middle row corresponds to the infrared fluorescence intensity in the 900–1700 nm range, while the bottom row corresponds to the 1200–1700 nm range.94 Reprinted with permission from J. Biophotonics, 2016, 9, 1059–1067, copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
Light-matter interactions – better understanding for better probes
As mentioned earlier, the interaction between light and the biological environment including tissues and fluids is of fundamental importance when aiming for deep-tissue, high-resolution bioimaging. Cao et al. reported that the spectral landscape from 900 to 1400 nm is dominated by water and lipids in their study from 2011 on the multi-spectral analysis of animal tissues based on endogenous chromophores.136 However, as demonstrated by del Rosal et al. in 2016, not only biological tissues and fluids contribute with different optical characteristics to absorption and scattering. Skin pigmentation is an additional important factor when it comes to tissue auto-fluorescence under NIR illumination.94 It was found that under 808 nm illumination of mice, the auto-fluorescence in the wavelength region from 900 to 1700 nm significantly differs with pigmentation, whereas the highest level of auto-fluorescence was reported for black mice, followed by grey, agouti, albino and hairless mice (Fig. 3B). Skin pigmentation was identified as the main responsible parameter of NIR auto-fluorescence (resulting in lower contrast imaging), while the contribution of hair was found to be insignificant. In contrast, hair was found to be the major reason for non-negligible heating through laser illumination in mice with darker coat colours. Thus, pigmentation, a to date mostly neglected parameter, was demonstrated to be an aspect that more careful attention should be paid to when conducting future in vivo imaging studies.
Recent advances in Ln3+-based bioimaging probes operating in the NIR transparency windows
Ln-fluorides such as NaGdF4, NaYF4 or NaLuF4 are usually considered as the most efficient host materials for Ln3+-based nanoprobes. Other fluorides of interest include GdF3, LaF3, CaF2, BaF2 and SrF2. The relatively low phonon energy of the fluorides, their chemical resistance and photostability as well as low toxicity make Ln3+-doped fluorides promising candidates for in vitro and in vivo bioimaging.105,116,117,119,137,138 Alternative host materials are for instance oxides,139 phosphates,140 or vanadates.141–143 Among the various Ln3+ ions available for doping, the ion pair Er3+,Yb3+ allowing for NIR-I to visible upconversion as well as NIR-III emission (Fig. 1A) has been the most deeply studied candidate. However, with the advancing progress in NIR bioimaging and the search for innovative NIR bioprobes, the choice of Ln3+ ions has been extended, mainly to Tm3+, Ho3+ and Nd3+ (Fig. 1B–D). Herein, it must be taken into account that doping with Tm3+ results in UCNPs showing emission at ∼800 nm (based on 1G4 → 3H5 and 3H4 → 3H6 transitions), thus in the NIR-I region. NIR-II and NIR-III emissions are characteristic for Ho3+ (5I6 → 5I8 transition, emission wavelength λem ∼ 1200 nm) and Er3+ (4I13/2 → 4I15/2 transition, λem ∼ 1550 nm). Nonetheless, Tm3+-based UCNPs constantly raise attention. For example, Luitel et al. performed in vivo NIR-I imaging based on the NIR-to-NIR upconversion emission from Tm3+.148 Remarkable here is the application of an unconventional host material, namely ZnMoO4. Following the previously presented strategy of co-doping for upconversion enhancement, additional K+ ion substitution in the host resulted in the distortion of the crystal field around the Tm3+ ions leading to stronger upconversion emission. Applying the same concept, doping with Li+ as non-Ln3+-ion for luminescence enhancement has been suggested by H. Niioka and co-workers.149 Their work focuses on Y2O3, respectively, Gd2O3 co-doped with Tm3+,Yb3+, Ho3+,Yb3+ and Er3+,Yb3+ covering all three NIR windows, whereas co-doping with Li+ led to a strong enhancement of the NIR signal. The authors consider sodium fluoride-based nanophosphors as the more powerful candidates in terms of NIR excitation and emission when compared to oxides. Yet, they point out that oxide NPs are the better candidates when it comes to cathodoluminescence (CL) microscopy because sodium fluoride-based nanoprobes are not very stable under electron beam irradiation. As such, Y2O3:Tm3+,Yb3+ and Y2O3:Er3+,Yb3+ NPs have been applied in a new correlative imaging technique based on NIR emission and CL.150 This technique allows for the detection of the emission of a single particle. Such high spatial resolution is for instance of interest for the examination of protein distributions and the visualization of ultra-structures of cellular components. In addition, the suitability of Y2O3:Er3+,Yb3+ NPs for in vivo imaging of implanted subcutaneous cell sheets in mice has been demonstrated. In analogy, Gd2O3:Ln3+ (Ln = Tm, Ho, Er, Yb) NPs were used as NIR and CL nanoprobes, whereas the use of Gd2O3 as the host material replacing Y2O3 opens an additional avenue towards MRI, thus providing the potential for multimodal imaging.103

Towards multimodal bioimaging. 
In the context of multimodal imaging, opto-magnetic bioprobes combine the advantages of each imaging modality in order to overcome their respective disadvantages (Table 1).144,145 To provide a recent example, Liu et al. demonstrated multimodal imaging by the use of BaYbF5:Tm3+ NPs.151 The Tm3+ emission at 800 nm under 980 nm excitation was found to be intense enough to perform in vivo bioimaging on Kunming mice upon subcutaneous injection of the nanoprobes. In vitro phantom images confirmed the capability of the NPs to act as T2 MRI contrast agents. Another strategy for multimodal bioimaging is the combination of optical techniques with CT and/or SPECT (refer to Table 1 for pros and cons of these modalities).146,147 Generally speaking, upconversion intensity and CT signals from UCNPs are low which is a major limitation for their application as multimodal in vivo probes. NIR-I enhancement through high Yb3+ co-doping in poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) modified NaYF4:Tm3+ UCNPs and their in vivo application as tri-modal optical, CT and T2-weighted MRI probes for small tumour imaging has been reported by Yi et al.152 In a different approach seeking to overcome low upconversion and CT signals, Lei et al. synthesized citrate-coated NaGdF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ NPs that were co-doped with Bi3+.153 Due to its good X-ray attenuation properties, bismuth is a suitable CT contrast agent. Optimization of the Bi3+ doping rate further led to the enhancement of the NIR-I emission (λem = 800 nm, λex = 980 nm). Moreover, the presence of gadolinium in the host matrix endowed the UCNPs with T1-weighted MRI capabilities. The resultant tri-modal imaging probes were successfully applied for in vivo NIR-I imaging, MRI as well as CT of tumour-bearing mice. Also in 2016, Kamimura et al. reported on the first dual-modal in vivo imaging of mice merging NIR-III luminescence with combined SPECT/CT.154 The idea is to provide a multimodal probe allowing for real-time observation through optical NIR-III bioimaging and the collection of physiological information with anatomical markers through SPECT/CT. Therefore, the surface of NIR-III emitting Er3+/Yb3+ co-doped YPO4 NPs was modified with radioactive 111In3+ in order to implement SPECT/CT activity. In addition, surface modification with the block copolymer poly(ethylene glycol) poly((2-N,N-dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate) (PEG-b-PMMA) has been applied to render the nanostructures water dispersible.
Table 1 Pros and cons of various clinical imaging modalities144–147




Imaging modality
Pros
Cons




Optical imaging
High sensitivity multicolour
Low spatial resolution


High temporal resolution
Low penetration depth


MRI
High spatial resolution
Low sensitivity


High penetration depth
Long imaging time


CT
High spatial resolution
Not quantitative


High penetration depth
Radiation risk


SPECT
High sensitivity
Low spatial resolution


No penetration depth limit
Rather long acquisition times Radiation risk






Surface modification of Ln3+-based optical probes. 
Surface modification is a crucial step on the way to real life biomedical application of Ln3+-based nanostructures – for many reasons: UCNPs and NIR-emitters discussed here, foremost fluoride based nanostructures, usually exhibit hydrophobic surface characteristics due to commonly followed wet-chemical synthesis protocols,57,155 while application in a physiological environment strictly requires hydrophilicity. Further aspects being crucial when it comes to in vivo application include biocompatibility and chemical as well as dispersion stability under physiological conditions. Moreover, surface modification allows for control over blood circulation time, and the introduction of targeting ligands is a key towards site-specific imaging. Hence, being highly relevant for eventual applications in humans, insights into the toxicity of Ln3+-based nanostructures will briefly be summarized prior to a deeper look into recent approaches regarding surface modification.
In search of biocompatible bioprobes, encouraging results have been reported regarding potential toxic effects, yet it must be taken into account that toxicological data on Ln3+-based NPs are still limited.157–163 Also, while sodium lanthanide fluorides are commonly considered as chemically stable, a very recent study investigated the dissolution behaviour of AYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ (A = Na, K) in aqueous media concluding that dissolution in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at 37 °C may result in F− concentrations potentially inducing cytotoxicity.164,165 In addition, the formation of phosphates on the nanostructure surface triggered the concern that UCNPs may lead to depletion of phosphates from the cell's lipid bilayer membrane (also reported for Ln2O3166) or from adenosine triphosphate that is essential for intracellular energy transfer, ultimately leading to cell death. In fact, unless surface modified, UCNPs can undergo severe morphological and surface chemical changes when in acidic biomedia further resulting in emission intensity loss as well as potential inflammation in biological samples (Fig. 4).156
 Fig. 4  Transformation of NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ UCNPs in an acidic biological environment: dissolution and binding of Ln3+ ions to cellular phosphate residues results in the precipitation of urchin-shaped LnPO4 on the particle surface strongly affecting the emission intensity and triggering tissue inflammation. Surface modification with ethylenediamine tetra(methylene phosphonicacid) (EDTMP) provides protection from structural changes and intensity loss, and reduces the inflammation potential.156 Reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3293–3306. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
Various strategies for surface modification have been summarized in comprehensive review papers, e.g., by Muhr et al.167 and Sedlmeier et al.,168 while some of the most recent achievements will be presented in the following. For instance, modification of NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs with poly(maleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene) (PMAO) followed by cross-linking with PEG-diglycidyl ether (PEG-DGE) resulted in stable colloidal aqueous suspensions of NIR-I emitting UCNPs as demonstrated by Generalova et al.169 Because of hydrophilicity and steric repulsion effects non-specific interactions with blood serum proteins could be reduced. This gave rise to an increased blood circulation time of at least 1 h and simultaneously enabled effective targeting and accumulation of the UCNPs in tumours. In a study by Yao et al., core–shell UCNPs based on a NaGdF4:Er3+,Yb3+ core and an un-doped NaGdF4 shell or a NaGdF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ core and a Nd3+-doped NaGdF4 shell were modified with phosphopeptides.171 Seeking to improve the efficiency of surface modification, it was found that phosphorylating specific serine side-chains significantly increased the affinity of the peptides to the UCNPs. The attached peptides further revealed their targeting capability towards U87MG tumour tissue as demonstrated by upconversion (green and red Er3+ emission) and NIR-II (1060 nm Nd3+ emission) in vivo bioimaging on tumour-bearing mice. Here, aside from surface modification, particularly the use of Nd3+ is of interest being in agreement with the previously described recognition that Nd3+-based excitation brings a set of advantages over Yb3+-based excitation. Following this trend, Liang et al. presented a NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell–shell structure.172 Its potential as a NIR-I imaging probe was demonstrated by subcutaneous in vivo imaging of mice as well as through pork muscle tissue revealing a penetration depth of at least 15 mm. Seeking for higher emission intensities, Jiang et al. performed doping of Nd3+ into LiYF4 instead of NaYF4. As a result, enhancement of the characteristic 900 nm (4F3/2 → 4I9/2), 1050 nm (4F3/2 → 4I11/2) and 1330 nm (4F3/2 → 4I13/2) Nd3+ emission bands matching the NIR-I and NIR-II transparency windows was observed.170 Grafting of hydrophilic ethylenediamine tetra(methylene phosphonicacid) (EDTMP) on the surface rendered the LiYF4:Nd3+ NPs water dispersible allowing in vivo NIR-II imaging in mice. In general, when it comes to the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, great significance is given to the lymphatic system, which is a common route for tumour metastasis, as well as to angiography since the growth of new blood vessels is inevitable for the development of a tumour.5,173 In this context, PEG-lipid functionalized NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ NPs emitting in the NIR-I window are suitable for long-term (3–4 days) observation of sentinel lymph nodes in mice.174 Alternatively, the aforementioned EDTMP-modified LiYF4:Nd3+ have successfully been applied for in vivo axillary and sentinel lymph node imaging in the NIR-II window.170 Again, the observed good imaging quality 24 h post injection reveals the potential for long-term tracing. Moreover, EDTMP-LiYF4:Nd3+ NPs were capable of imaging blood vessels as small as ∼0.2 to 0.3 mm in width (Fig. 5) demonstrating that Ln3+-based nanostructures are promising candidates for high-resolution NIR bioimaging.
 Fig. 5  Seeking high-resolution NIR-II bioimaging using EDTMP-LiYF4:Nd3+ NPs. (A) In vivo blood-vessel NIR-II imaging of the left ear of a nude mouse immediately after intravenous injection. (B) The bright-field picture of the nude mouse in vivo. The corresponding regions of NIR imaging are marked with green squares. (C) The NIR-II imaging of the right ear cut immediately after intravenous injection. The corresponding regions of NIR imaging are marked with green squares. Cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles along red-dashed lines of the mouse are displayed at the bottom. The origin points (distance = 0) are presented with red short bars. Gaussian fits to the profiles are shown in red dashed curves. The full width at half maximum is also marked in the diagrams. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Preserving luminescence upon transfer into aqueous media. 
The so far discussed examples apply surface modification for numerous biological benefits, including dispersion stability, controlling blood circulation time, and endowing targeting capability. Yet, when it comes to application in biomedicine, an additional key aspect has to be kept in mind, namely water, being the main component of the aqueous physiological environment in living systems. It is well known that water vibrational modes have quenching effects on Ln3+ emission. This can trigger severe emission intensity loss when the nanostructures are transferred from a non-aqueous (hydrophobic) to an aqueous (hydrophilic) environment. In order to minimize this destructive influence of water on the luminescence, Bazylińska et al. encapsulated NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs in polymeric nanocapsules.175 This synthetic strategy preserves the initial hydrophobic environment around the UCNPs inside the hydrophilic nanocapsules and thus prevents solvent related luminescence quenching. Moreover, tuning the chemistry of the core and shell components of these multilayer nanocapsules opens numerous possibilities for custom-designed multifunctional nanocontainers for encapsulation of different types of hydrophobic, inorganic nanostructures, with potential applications in fluorescence imaging and drug delivery (Fig. 6). Alternatively, aiming to preserve the hydrophobic environment around the NPs while providing water dispersibility, amphiphilic polymer DSPE-mPEG-2000 (1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-methoxy (polyethylene glycol)-2000) was employed by Shao et al.64 Of further great interest is the grafting of ICG on the surface of the embedded NaYF4:Yb3+,X3+/NaYbF4/NaYF4:Nd3+ core–shell–shell NPs acting as a broad band absorber (700–860 nm, X = null, Er, Ho, Tm, or Pr) (Fig. 1C). In line with our theoretical description in the previous section, more efficient excitation through ET from ICG to Nd3+ in the outer shell, followed by a cascade ET Nd3+ (outer shell) → Yb3+ (inner shell) → Yb3+,X3+ (core) yields multiple intense and narrow emission bands in the NIR-II range. These are suitable for optical bioimaging as demonstrated by in vivo mouse imaging and tissue penetration studies revealing penetration depth deeper than 20 mm.
 Fig. 6  Schematic presentation of a custom-designed nanocontainer loaded with NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ NPs. Versatile nanocontainers can be fabricated in a two-step process, namely the layer-by-layer adsorption (Stage II) of polyelectrolytes (PEs) on a polymeric oil core (Stage I). N,N-Bis[3,3-(dimethylamine)propyl] dodecanamide dichloride, C12(DAPACl)2 acts as a stabilizer of the silicone core polymeric template. The PE library contains standard (e.g., PSS (polysodium 4-styrenesulphonate) and PDADMAC (poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride)) as well as biodegradable sugar-based (e.g., DEX (anionic dextran) and CHIT (cationic chitosan)) PEs. Reprint from ref. 175 (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 


Alternative approaches. 
While the design of new host materials, core–shell structures, optimization of Ln3+ doping as well as tailored surface chemistry constitute major physico-chemical approaches to address the search for high-resolution and deep-tissue optical bioimaging, another strategy consists in methodological innovations that enable, for instance, alternative excitation modes and pathways. As an example, Zheng et al. investigated NaLuF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs (800 nm emission under 980 nm excitation) as potential bioprobes.176 While the material itself is well known, the authors performed time-gating measurements demonstrating a 12-fold enhancement in the signal-to noise ratio using Kunming mice injected with NIR-to-NIR UCNPs in contrast to the conventional filter-based approach. This remarkable enhancement was assigned to the capability of the time-gating approach to efficiently eliminate background due to strong scattering of the excitation light. In a very different approach, Levy et al. applied a photo-physical phenomenon, so-called energy-looping, to amplify the population of an intermediate excited state in the absence of strong ground state absorption (Fig. 7).90 Being based on a complex network of ET processes between dopant ions, the identification of potential energy-looping compositions is generally not trivial; yet Tm3+-doped NaYF4 could be identified as most promising by computational modelling and combinatorial screening. As a result, non-resonant excitation of the Tm3+ ions with 1064 nm light triggered the upconversion emission of 800 nm light suitable for in vitro cellular imaging on HeLa cells and ex vivo imaging of the probes through mouse brain tissue.
 Fig. 7  (A) Concept of non-resonant ground-state absorption (GSA) and resonant excited-state-absorption (ESA) for NIR-II-to-NIR-I bioimaging. (B) Energy-looping mechanism in Tm3+-doped NaYF4 for 800 nm upconversion luminescence under 1064 nm excitation.90 Reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8423–8433. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Overall, when it comes to the development of novel Ln3+-based NIR bioprobes, some noticeable aspects can be summarized. First, a set of recent achievements are based on the use of host materials different from the well-established hosts NaYF4 and NaGdF4, namely less employed fluorides (LiYF4, NaLuF4, BaYbF5),151,170,176 conventional (Y2O3, Gd2O3)103,149,150 as well as innovative (ZnMoO4)148 oxides, and phosphates (YPO4).154 Second, bioprobes allowing for multimodal imaging are continuously gaining interest. And third, seeking more efficient deep-tissue, high-resolution optical bioprobes, approaches beyond (co-)dopant and host material optimization have been reported focusing on novel methodological aspects of excitation and ET as well as the computational identification of probe candidates. Yet, it also becomes obvious that, surprisingly, a significant number of in vitro and in vivo studies are still limited to UCNPs emitting in the visible or NIR-I region, while reports on NIR-II and NIR-III bioimaging remain relatively scarce. This might be related to economic reasons, since, as a matter of fact, detection systems required for efficient imaging in the NIR-II and NIR-III regions, such as InGaAs cameras, are still more costly than detectors operating in the visible and NIR-I regions.

Ln3+-based nanostructures for thermal sensing and heating
Ln3+-based nanothermometry
Temperature has been recognized as an important aspect when it comes to the detection of disease or understanding physiological processes. This is based on the fact that thermal changes in a biological system, for instance due to increased metabolic activity, are often a first indicator of disease. Moreover, hyperthermia and photothermal therapeutic approaches have gained much attention as minimally invasive treatments of cancer.177 Herein, controlled heating of the tumour is applied in order to kill cancerous cells. A key aspect is to reach the critical temperature inducing cancer cell death, while avoiding thermal damage to neighbouring healthy tissues. In this context, optical temperature sensing provides a tool that can locally monitor the thermal increase providing direct feedback during the treatment. In order to exploit thermal fluctuations for diagnostics and medical monitoring, it is necessary to develop nano-sized temperature sensors allowing for the contact-less detection of temperature at an ideally sub-cellular level. The rapidly growing research field of nanothermometry is addressing this particular challenge. Among other inorganic and organic compounds,178 Ln3+-based NPs are promising candidates for optical thermal sensing due to the temperature dependence of their optical features such as luminescence intensity, spectral position, band shape and width, polarization as well as lifetime.178–181 In analogy to bioimaging, when compared to other material classes such as QDs or organic fluorophores,178 Ln3+-based nanothermometers bring a set of advantages including (i) excitation with NIR light, (ii) a broad emission wavelength range covering the UV-visible to NIR regions, (iii) excellent photostability allowing for prolonged excitation, and (iv) comparable good biocompatibility as well as water-dispersibility. Moreover, the temperature dependent population of different energy levels (e.g., Boltzmann governed as described below in further detail) and the occurrence of phonon-assisted ET processes allow for ratiometric nanothermometry based on the intensity ratio between two emission peaks. In contrast to intensity based nanothermometry, this approach rules out NP concentration effects, and thus provides a more robust calibration. In addition, doping a variety of Ln3+ ions into one NP leads to several temperature dependent emission peaks which allows more than one intensity ratio to be exploited and therefore provides the potential for advanced self-reference.
In 2010, the first in vitro application of UCNPs, namely NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+, as a ratiometric nanothermometer detecting the intra-cellular temperature of HeLa cells was reported by Vetrone et al.182 In fact, the temperature dependent luminescence intensity ratio (LIR183) between the two closely spaced, thermally coupled energy levels 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 of Er3+ is one of the most widely exploited parameters for optical nanothermometry (Fig. 1A). For two closely spaced energy levels whose population distribution is Boltzmann governed (as in the case of Er3+ levels 2H11/2 and 4S3/2) LIR is determined by eqn (5): (5)where ΔE is the energy gap between the emitting levels in close proximity I1 (upper level) and I2 (lower level). Temperature T is given in Kelvin, kB is the Boltzmann factor, and B is a constant that depends on the experimental system and the intrinsic spectroscopic parameters of the dopant/host pair. ΔE and B can be obtained from the least-squares fitting of the linear dependence of ln(LIR) versus the reciprocal absolute temperature, 1/T, the so-called Boltzmann's plot (eqn (6)): (6) The thermal sensitivity, S, as a figure of merit expressing the extent to which a thermally sensitive parameter changes upon temperature fluctuation is defined by eqn (7): (7) Finally, the relative thermal sensitivity, Sr, has been introduced to compare the performance of different fluorescent nanothermometers,205 and it is given by the first derivative of the LIR divided by the LIR (eqn (8)): (8) Aiming for increased sensitivities, progress and achievements have been made over the last few months. Newly developed Er3+-based nanothermometers exploit co-doping for upconversion enhancement,35 NIR dye modification for enhanced 800 nm excitation,186 and the investigation of unconventional host materials.184,191Table 2 provides an overview of recently reported nanothermometers and their Sr values. As discussed earlier, in general, host materials of low phonon energy are sought after in order to minimize luminescence quenching through non-radiative decay pathways which negatively affects the emission intensity. Yet, improved thermal sensitivity was reported for oxyfluoride or oxides when compared to oxygen-free fluorides which was assigned to increased phonon energy fostering temperature sensitive non-radiative processes and multi-phonon phenomena.187,206 While continuous wave excitation of LiYbP4O12:Er3+ with power intensities in the range from 50 to 300 mW cm−2 resulted in ∼0.5% per °C sensitivity, an increase to 2.88% per °C was determined upon pulsed excitation at an average power below 25 mW cm−2.192 This is further noteworthy in the context of the risk of undesired tissue heating upon laser illumination of biological samples.207
Table 2 Summary of recently reported Ln3+-based nanothermometers operating in (A) the visible, (B) the NIR-I, and (C) the NIR-II/III regions. This table lists excitation wavelength (λex), emission wavelength (λem), temperature-sensitive parameters, relative thermal sensitivity (Sr) obtained at temperature T(Sr), temperature operation range (T-range), and the material form in which the different parameters were measured (measured as)




Thermometer

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)

T-sensitive parameter
Transitions/states involved

S
r (% per °C)

T(Sr) (°C)

T-range (°C)
Measured as
Ref.





a Provided values are thermal sensitivities, S, not relative thermal sensitivities, Sr.
b Room temperature.
c Phosphate buffered saline.





(A) Nanothermometers operating in the visible wavelength region


YF3:Er3+,Yb3+
658
525, 550
LIR

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
∼1.5
0
0–100
Powder

184



KY3F10:Er3+,Yb3+
∼0.9
100


KY2F22:Er3+,Yb3+


KY3F10/YF3:Er3+






LaF3:Er3+,Yb3+ core/LaF3:Nd3+ shell
808
525, 550
LIR

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
1.6
30
20-120
Powder, ex vivo

185







NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+,Li+
980
525, 545
LIR

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
0.59
180
27–180
Powder

35







NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ core/NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb shell/NIR-dye
808
525, 545
LIR

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
1.2
30
30–150
Powder

186







NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+
980
545
Lifetime

4S3/2
0.54


26–60
Powder, ex vivo

187,188



NaY2F5O:Er3+,Yb3+
545

4S3/2
1.5


NaY2F5O:Er3+,Yb3+
660

4F9/2
0.7






NaLuF4:Tm3+,Er3+,Yb3+
980
525, 545
LIR (Er3+)

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
0.77a


27–327
Powder

189



475, 450
Intensity ratio (Tm3+)

1G4 → 3H6, 1D2 → 3F4
6.04a


695, 660
ET (Er3+ → Tm3+)

3F2 → 3H6 (Tm3+), 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 (Er3+)
0.76a






La2O3:Tm3+,Yb3+
980
480
Lifetime

1G4
0.16


25–60
Powder, ex vivo

190



La2O3:Tm3+,Er3+,Yb3+
0.67






Na0.5Gd0.5MoO4:Er3+,Yb3+
980
525, 545
LIR

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
0.856a
3173
25–505
Powder

191



0.48a
0






LiYbPO4O12:Er3+
980
520, 550
LIR

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2




−183–297
Powder

192



cw
∼0.5


Pulsed
2.88






KLu(WO4)2:Tm3+,Ho3+,Yb3+
808
696, 545
Intensity ratio

3F2,3 → 3H6 (Tm3+)
0.61


22–250
Powder

188




5S2/5F4 → 5I8 (Ho3+)






(B) Nanothermometers operating in the NIR-I biological window


LaF3:Nd3+
808
866, 887
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I9/2
0.25
RTb
10–55
Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo

193, 194







LaF3:Nd3+ thermally treated
808
861, 863
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I9/2
0.4


20–60
Powder, aqueous dispersion, ex vivo

195







LaF3:Nd3+ & Au Nanorods@PLGA
790
863, 886
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I9/2
0.2a


25–65
Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo

196







Y3Al5O12(YAG):Nd3+
808
940
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I9/2
0.15


10–70
Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo

197







YVO4:Nd3+
808
879, 887
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I9/2
0.19


25–60
Aqueous dispersion

17







(GdNd)2O3
580
892
Intensity ratio

4F5/2 → 4I9/2
1.75
15
15–50
Powder

16



1076

4F3/2 → 4I9/2






NaNbO3:Tm3+
1319
800
Stark splitting

3H4 → 3H6
0.75
30–60
22–90
Powder, aqueous dispersion

198







LiNdP4O12
808
880
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I9/2
0.22
40
32–83
Aqueous dispersion

199







LiLa0.4Nd0.1Yb0.5P4O12
808
870
Intensity ratio (Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET)

4I3/2 → 4I9/2 (Nd3+)
∼0.4
57
−180–390
Powder, aqueous dispersion

18



1000

2F5/2 → 2F7/2 (Yb3+)






LiLaP4O12:Nd3+,Cr3+
665
840
Intensity ratio
Cr3+
4.89
50
−160–180
Powder

200



1048



2H11/2 → 4I11/2 (Nd3+)






(C) Nanothermometers operating in the NIR-II/III biological windows


YVO4:Nd3+
808
1063
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I11/2
0.15


25–60
Aqueous dispersion

17



1072






(GdNd)2O3
808
1350
Stark splitting

4F3/2 → 4I11/2
0.23
30
27–127
Powder

201







LaF3:Yb3+ core/LaF3:Nd3+ shell
808
1350
Intensity ratio

4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (Nd3+)
0.74
20
15–50
Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo

202



1000
(Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET)

2F5/2 → 2F7/2 (Yb3+)






LaF3:Nd3+ core/LaF3:Yb3+ shell
790
1300
Intensity ratio

4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (Nd3+)
0.41
10
10–50
Powder, PBSc dispersion, in vivo

19



LaF3:Yb3+ core/LaF3:Nd3+ shell
1000
(Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET)

2F5/2 → 2F7/2 (Yb3+)
0.36


LaF3:Nd3+,Yb3+
0.1






NaGdF4:Nd3+ & PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs@PLGA
808
1060
Intensity ratio

4F3/2 → 4I11/2 (Nd3+)
2.5
30
10–50
PBS dispersion

203



1250
QDs






NaGdF4:Er3+,Ho3+,Yb3+ core/NaGdF4:Yb3+ shell/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+ shell/NaGdF4 shell
806
1180
Intensity ratio

5I6 → 5I8 (Ho3+)
1.1


20–50
Aqueous dispersion

204



1340

4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (Nd3+)


1550

4I13/2 → 4I15/2 (Er3+)




While many studies are based on LIR using Er3+-doped UCNPs, it must be noted that the LIR technique is by far not limited to Er3+ ions. Conversely, thermally coupled energy levels have been used for thermal sensing through UCNPs doped with Tm3+, Ho3+ or Nd3+.14Fig. 1 provides an overview of transitions used for ratiometric thermal sensing through Ln3+-doped upconverting and NIR-emitting nanostructures. While the LIR technique using intensity ratios between two closely spaced energy levels exhibiting a Boltzmann governed population is a popular approach, it is not the sole mechanism on which nanothermometry can be based. Other mechanisms exploit intensity changes upon temperature induced population and de-population of non-thermal coupling levels or ET processes between different Ln3+ ions.188,189 Aside from emission intensity, luminescence lifetime measurements provide an additional means of thermal sensing.187,190

Shifting nanothermometry into the biological transparency windows. 
The afore-mentioned examples mainly focus on the upconversion emission of visible light. However, again, the main drawback of visible light is increased scattering and absorption by biological tissues. Thus, for practical reasons, researchers are seeking in vivo suitable nanothermometers and much effort has been made to bring nanothermometry into the biological transparency windows. For instance, NaNbO3:Tm3+ NPs with both emission (800 nm, NIR-I) and excitation (1319 nm, NIR-II) matching the NIR transparency windows were applied by Pereira et al. for ex vivo sub-tissue thermal sensing (Sr = 0.75% per °C). Here, the thermal sensing capability is based on the temperature governed population of thermally coupled Stark sub-levels belonging to the 3H4 Tm3+ excited state (Fig. 1B).198 The suitability of the temperature dependent population of thermally coupled Stark sub-levels for ratiometric nanothermometry in the NIR-I region has further been demonstrated for Nd3+-doped nanostructures (Fig. 1D2). Based on the Stark splitting of the 4F3/2 excited and 4I9/2 ground state of Nd3+, Sr typically ranges from 0.15 to 0.4% per °C (Table 2). Comparing these Sr values with those obtained for upconversion-based nanothermometers operating in the visible wavelength region, it becomes obvious that the advantage of operating in the NIR biological windows comes currently with the drawback of sensitivity loss. Balabhadra et al. suggested a different approach to overcome inherent sensitivity limitations due to the small energy difference between the Stark sub-levels (typically <100 cm−1): significant increase of the thermal sensitivity of (GdNd)2O3 up to 1.75% per °C was achieved by defining the thermometric parameter as the 4F5/2 → 4I9/2 to 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 intensity ratio (Fig. 1D1).16 Finally, ET between different Ln3+ ions has been exploited for nanothermometry in the NIR transparency windows. An example taken from recent literature is the study by Marciniak et al. on temperature dependent ET processes between Nd3+ and Yb3+ in LiLa0.9−xNd0.1YbxP4O12 (x = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5) nanocrystals (Fig. 8).18 The temperature dependence of the probes' intensity ratio could be assigned to a complex interplay between phonon-assisted Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET, phonon-assisted Yb3+ → Nd3+ back-ET and Yb3+ concentration dependent Yb3+ → Yb3+ energy migration processes (Fig. 1D3). The best performance (Sr = 0.4% per °C) is reported for the LiLa0.4Nd0.1Yb0.5P4O12 nanocrystals. Of potential interest for biomedical applications is the fact that some of the probe's emission bands approach or match the advantageous NIR-II window, namely the 2F5/2 → 2F7/2 Yb3+ transition (1000 nm) and the 4F3/2 → 4I11/2 Nd3+ transition (1048 nm). In another study by the same group, co-doping with Cr3+ in addition to Nd3+ has been applied.200 Both ions can be excited with 650 nm light, and the relative emission intensity of Cr3+ ions (820–840 nm) versus the intensity of Nd3+ (880 and 1048 nm) has been used as a temperature sensor exhibiting a maximal thermal sensitivity of 4.89% per °C. While this value is clearly outstanding, toxicity concerns may arise due to the presence of heavy metal Cr3+ ions requiring a future careful biocompatibility assessment prior to biomedical application.
 Fig. 8  Nanothermometry based on Nd3+ to Yb3+ ET – temperature evolution of the emission spectra of LiLa0.8Nd0.1Yb0.1P4O12 NPs under 808 nm excitation. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. 


Nanothermometers operating in the NIR-II and NIR-III biological transparency windows. 
As discussed in the section on optical bioimaging, the emission wavelength of choice for deep tissue penetration and high spatial resolution is longer than 1000 nm. Seeking thermal sensing at increased tissue depth, the same requirement applies for optical nanothermometers, and the first nanothermometers operating in the >1000 nm region have now been reported. For instance, in 2016, Kolesnikov et al. demonstrated ratiometric luminescence nanothermometry in the NIR-II window upon excitation at 808 nm using the relative intensities of the Stark sub-levels of 4F3/2 → 4I11/2 (1062 and 1072 nm) of Nd3+ doped into a YVO4 matrix.17 In a similar approach, Balabhadra et al. reported the suitability of (GdNd)2O3 nanospheres with sensing capability fully in the NIR-II region (4F3/2 → 4I13/2 Nd3+ transition centred at around 1300 nm) under 808 nm (NIR-I).201 While the achievement of NIR-II nanothermometry is an important step forward, the reported thermometers show relatively low Sr values, 0.15% per °C and 0.23% per °C, respectively. One order of magnitude higher thermal sensitivity could be obtained by Cerón et al.203 In their approach, NaGdF4:Nd3+ NPs emitting at 1060 nm and PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs having a characteristic broad emission band centred at around 1300 nm were simultaneously encapsulated in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanostructures. The temperature dependence of both the Nd3+ and QD-based emissions resulted in an overall ratiometric NIR thermal sensitivity close to 2.5% per °C. In fact, this study from 2015 marks the first demonstration of NIR-II nanothermometry. Thus, NIR-II nanothermometry is a young research field, and research activities are continuously progressing. To date, the highest Sr values of NIR-II operable nanothermometers have been achieved for systems that are based on the intensity ratio between the emission bands originating from (i) a Ln3+ ion and (ii) a non-Ln3+ counterpart (e.g., Cr3+, QDs). However, the potential to increase the Sr value of purely Ln3+-based NIR nanothermometers has not yet been fully exploited and some encouraging results have been reported by D. Jaque and co-workers. For instance, a remarkable 4-fold enhancement of the NIR-II thermal sensitivity was achieved by applying the core–shell concept for spatial separation of Nd3+ and Yb3+ in order to control ET processes between the Ln3+ ions when compared to LaF3:Er3+,Yb3+ core-only NPs.19 Moreover, this work provides to date seldom in vivo validation by monitoring of the dynamics of thermal relaxation after laser-induced heating in the subcutaneous tissue of a living mouse (Fig. 9). Here, a significant discrepancy between sub-tissue temperatures locally measured using Ln3+-based nanothermometers and surface temperatures measured with a thermal camera have been observed (Fig. 9F). While surface measurements reveal too low temperature values, Ln3+-based nanothermometers provide a tool for precise sub-tissue temperature monitoring which is an important aspect with respect to future PTT applications where precise temperature monitoring is crucial for successful treatment.19,185,202 In 2017, the NIR-III optical transparency window was opened to temperature sensing by Skripka et al.204 In their study, NaGdF4:Er3+,Ho3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4:Yb3+/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4 core–multi–shell NPs were encapsulated in phospholipid (PEG-DOPE) micelles rendering the NPs water dispersible while conserving the hydrophobic environment around the NPs (Fig. 10A). Under ∼800 nm excitation, these ratiometric nanothermometers exploit the NIR-II and NIR-III emission bands of Ho3+ and Nd3+ (1.18–1.34 μm) as well as Er3+ and Nd3+ (1.55–1.34 μm) (Fig. 10B), displaying relatively high Sr values of around 1.1% per °C. Moreover, it was found that, in addition to the Ln3+–Ln3+ ET, ET to surrounding water molecules contributes to the thermal sensing capability (Fig. 10C). Most recently, Kamimura et al. observed the same influence of vibrational relaxation effects of water affecting the temperature-dependent ET in PEG-modified NaYF4:Er3+,Ho3+,Yb3+ NIR-II/III nanothermometers.208 These studies highlight the importance of better understanding the ET processes between Ln3+ ions and surrounding media, in particular aqueous environments with respect to anticipated in vivo applications.
 Fig. 9  Optical monitoring of the dynamics of thermal relaxation under physiological conditions: (A) fluorescence top-image of a CD1 mouse (delimited by the dashed line) where the subcutaneous injection of LaF3:Nd3+/LaF3:Yb3+ core–shell NPs is evidenced by the bright fluorescence spot. (B) Digital picture of the CD1 mouse during in vivo thermal relaxation experiments. (C) Schematic representation of the subcutaneous thermal relaxation experiments. Thermal infrared images of the CD1 mouse before (D) and at the end (E) of the heating stimulus. (F) Time evolution of the temperatures measured using the subcutaneous luminescent thermometer (grey) and the IR thermal camera (orange). Dots are experimental subcutaneous (circles) and skin (squares) temperatures, whereas the solid line is the obtained fit.19 Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1695–1703. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  Nanothermometry in the NIR-II and NIR-III biological transparency windows. (A) Schematic representation of water-dispersible NaGdF4:Er3+,Ho3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4:Yb3+/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4 core–multi–shell NPs encapsulated in phospholipid (PEG-DOPE) micelles. (B) Temperature dependent emission bands originating from Ho3+ (1.18 μm), Nd3+ (1.34 μm) and Er3+ (1.55 μm) allowing for NIR-II and NIR-III ratiometric nanothermometry under 806 nm excitation. (C) Suggested interplay of ET processes between Ln3+ ions and from Ln3+ ions to surrounding water molecules. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

From thermal sensors to temperature sensing heaters
In order to further open the pathway for Ln3+-based nanothermometers in thermal therapy applications, additional validation of the concept has to be provided. Herein, two main requirements have been identified: first, efficient conversion of NIR laser light into heat must be provided, which means a probe that can act as a nanoheater; second, subcutaneous thermal feedback has to be given through a suitable nanothermometer. In order to address this, Rocha et al. combined gold nanorods (GNRs) with LaF3:Nd3+ NPs in water-dispersible PLGA nanocapsules that were applied for ex vivo subcutaneous measurements.196 Herein, GNRs act as efficient heaters211 under 790 nm irradiation, while the role of LaF3:Nd3+ is two-fold. On the one hand, taking advantage of the deep penetration depth of 790 nm excitation light and the weak attenuation of the NIR light emitted from the LaF3:Nd3+, subcutaneous localization of the GNRs by NIR optical imaging became possible. On the other hand, spectral analysis of the 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 Nd3+ emission provided thermal feedback monitoring the overall thermal process. Zhu et al. demonstrated in 2016 the suitability of carbon-coated NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+ core/NaLuF4 shell UCNPs for in vivo PTT.212 In this system, the generation of heat is triggered by 730 nm illumination of carbon, while the LIR technique using the upconversion emission of Er3+ under 980 nm excitation allows the local temperature to be monitored. Again, a significantly higher local temperature was found based on LIR (called eigen temperature by the authors) when compared to the apparent temperature determined with a thermal camera. This indicates that efficient PTT can be performed at a mild apparent temperature without damaging normal tissue. Most promisingly, in vivo studies revealed PTT-induced tumour shrinkage and final elimination after intravenous injection of tumour-targeting folic acid conjugated carbon-UCNPs followed by 730 nm irradiation (0.3 W cm−2) for 3 min three times per day for 6 days.
The group of D. Jaque has further shown that Nd3+-based NPs themselves, such as LaF3:Nd3+ or GdVO4:Nd3+, are capable of generating heat under 808 nm excitation which opened a new avenue of simultaneous heating and sensing with one single nanoprobe.185,194,213 Currently, very promising research achievements are based on exploiting this potential of Ln3+-doped NPs as dual heating and sensing probes operating in the NIR-I and NIR-II regions (Fig. 11), while also seeking to increase their thermal sensitivity (Table 2).193,195,202 Alternatively, NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ core/NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+ shell NPs as well as LiNdP4O12 have been reported for temperature sensing and photothermal conversion under 808 nm excitation expanding the library of probes suitable for simultaneous thermal sensing and heating.186,199
 Fig. 11  One-particle-approach for simultaneous sensing and heating under single beam excitation using Yb3+-doped core/highly Nd3+-doped shell LaF3 nanostructures. (A) Temperature dependent emission spectra of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ core–shell NPs under 808 nm excitation. (B) Calibration (red circles) and sensitivity (orange squares) curves of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ nanothermometers (laser power density: 0.2 W cm−2). (C) Thermal images of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ with different Nd3+ concentrations (λex = 808 nm, laser power density: of 3.4 W cm−2). Control corresponds to a microscope slide without LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+. (D) Temperature variation of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ under different laser power densities obtained with an infrared thermal camera and a nanothermometer.202 Reprinted from Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 253103, with the permission of AIP Publishing. 
Overall, Ln3+-based optical temperature sensing is a relatively young but very actively progressing research field and outstanding work has been published within only a few years. Of particular interest with regard to therapeutic approaches is the discovery that Ln3+-based NPs can not only act as thermal sensors, but also as nanoheaters, which paves the way to innovative, self-monitored PTT agents. In analogy to optical bioimaging, the search for thermal probes operable in the NIR biological windows has resulted in the first stories of success. Yet, nanothermometers operable in the NIR-III region have barely been reported to date. Other remaining challenges that have to be addressed in the near future include the enhancement of NIR thermal sensitivities, potential influence of the environment on the thermal behaviour (e.g., the role of solvents and physiological species in ET processes), the need for water dispersibility and surface modification with targeting ligands when seeking in vivo application, and last but not least, further comprehensive in vivo validation beyond the subcutaneous level.
Ln3+-based nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy
UCNPs as delivery platforms and photo-triggers for cancer therapy
Immunosuppressive concerns of conventional chemo- and radiotherapy have triggered the search for alternative cancer therapeutic approaches preserving the patient's immune system while still efficiently attacking cancer cells. In this context, photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a promising alternative approach. Commonly, PDT is based on the photosensitized generation of singlet oxygen (1O2) which only requires oxygen, light of an appropriate wavelength (typically in the UV-visible region), and a photosensitizer capable of absorbing the light and using that energy to transfer the oxygen to its singlet state (Fig. 12A). Herein, excitation of the photosensitizer results in the transition from the ground state to a singlet excited state. Subsequent intersystem relaxation processes from the photosensitizer to oxygen ultimately trigger the formation of 1O2 as well as free radicals that further react with oxygen to form additional reactive oxygen species (ROS).214 These species are able to induce tumour cell death through known mechanisms, including apoptotic, necrotic and autophagy-associated cell deaths.215 Often, tumour-targeting in PDT is driven by the tendency of the relatively hydrophobic molecular photosensitizers to rapidly diffuse into tumour cells and to localize in intracellular membrane structures, such as mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum. Tetrapyrrole bio-functionalized structures including porphyrins, chlorines, bacteriochlorines, and phothalocyanines have been extensively investigated and received clinical approval in PDT.209,215,216 Other groups of photosensitizers that will be highlighted at a later part of this section include semiconductors (e.g., black phosphorous, TiO2, ZnO) as well as transition-metal complexes (e.g., platinum complexes). Conventional photosensitizers are mostly excited by visible or UV light. However, as emphasized throughout this review, UV-visible light is not capable of penetrating deeply into biological tissues. Consequently, PDT based solely on conventional photosensitizers is not suitable for the treatment of deep-seated or large tumours. In order to overcome these restrictions, significant efforts have been devoted by researchers around the globe to developing novel PDT strategies. A promising approach is the local activation of photodynamic processes by light being able to penetrate biological tissue, thus reaching deep-seated or larger volume tumours. Obviously, light matching the NIR biological transparency windows can be considered as an ideal light source opening new possibilities for deep-tissue photodynamic cancer treatment. Although the focus of this review is set on the biologically benign excitation of Ln3+-based upconverting and NIR emitting probes with NIR light, X-ray induced PDT must be mentioned as an interesting alternative overcoming penetration depth limitations of UV-visible and NIR light.217,218 In this approach, scintillating NPs (SCNPs) based on, for instance, Ce3+, Eu2+, Eu3+ or Tb3+ are applied. These SCNPs are able to convert X-ray photons to visible photons that then can be used to trigger the desired photodynamic processes. Moreover, seeking multifunctionality, SCNPs open a pathway to combined photodynamic and radiotherapy.219
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic representation of PDT comprising three elements: light, a photosensitizer and oxygen. When the photosensitizer is exposed to specific wavelengths of light, it becomes activated from a ground to an excited state. As it returns to the ground state, it releases energy, which is transferred to oxygen generating reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as singlet oxygen and free radicals. These ROS mediate cellular toxicity.209 (B) Dual-agent photosensitizing nanoplatform combining UV-blue emitting multi-shell UCNPs (λex = 808 nm), TiO2 (UV-light-excited photosensitizer) and hypocrellin A (blue-light-excited photosensitizer).210 Reprinted from Biomaterials, 101, Z. Hou et al., “808 nm Light-triggered and hyaluronic acid-targeted dual-photosensitizers nanoplatform by fully utilizing Nd3+-sensitized upconversion emission with enhanced anti-tumor efficacy”, 32–46, Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier. 
To date, two strategies can be found in the literature to provide visible or UV light for the photosensitizer under NIR illumination. First, the photosensitizer may be directly NIR-activated by a two-photon absorption process, such as cooperative luminescence or second harmonic generation.220 However, as stated by Wang et al.,216 this technique requires the use of a high-energy pulsed laser to obtain the sufficient instant energy needed for the two-photon absorption. Consequently, this approach has only limited value for in vivo experiments and clinical applications because of potential harmful side effects caused by the high-energy laser light itself. Second, an efficient frequency-converter can be introduced which absorbs NIR light and subsequently emits UV-visible light that triggers the photoactivity of the photosensitizer.221,222 In this context, PDT-based on UCNPs for site-specific activation and delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs opens an intriguing avenue towards future cancer therapeutic strategies. The upconverted UV-visible light has first been proven capable to activate photosensitizers resulting in the formation of singlet oxygen and ROS in 2007 by Zhang et al.223 Since then, a multitude of UCNP-mediated PDT nanoplatforms has been proposed as highlighted in previous comprehensive literature reviews.224–228 Most importantly, the use of NIR-light for the activation of the upconversion process (typically matching the NIR-I window, i.e., 800 or 980 nm) allows deeper tissue areas to be reached. Moreover, a second advantage is the local generation of UV-visible light by the UCNPs which reduces the risk of photo-induced damage to healthy tissue.216,221,229
Prior to shining a light on the most recent achievements made in the field of UCNP-based, NIR-light activated photochemistry for cancer treatment (and beyond), the concept of prodrugs has to be introduced.230 Generally speaking, a prodrug is the inactive precursor of a drug, which can be activated by exogenous or endogenous stimuli or chemical reactions. Upon activation, the prodrug is transformed into the active drug molecule which is then capable of exerting the desired biological action (i.e., anticancer activity). Most commonly applied prodrugs are based on transition-metal complexes, leading for instance to the release of platinum-based anticancer drugs.231 Yet, seeking NIR-triggered activation, a remaining challenge lies in the fact that, at the moment, most light-activatable transition-metal complex based prodrugs require high-energy UV-visible light to trigger a photochemical response, and therefore are inactive towards NIR-excitation.225 Other drawbacks of many of the anticancer drugs available to date include their poor solubility as well as the development of drug resistance.232 In this context, UCNPs are sought after to provide the required UV-visible activation upon NIR radiation and to act as nanocarriers allowing for enhanced drug delivery into cancer cells. Alternatively, it is possible to employ mechanisms for drug release that do not require the formation of singlet oxygen and ROS, thus being oxygen independent. These include, for example, DNA-photobinding or photouncaging of bioactive molecules.225
Recent advances in UCNP-driven singlet oxygen and ROS generation for PDT
Seeking to overcome the limitations of existing PDT techniques, UCNPs as nanoscopic ‘light bulbs’ are highly promising candidates, as discussed by Wu et al.233 When it comes to the assessment of the suitability of UCNPs for PDT, NaLnF4 host materials have been applied most frequently due to their comparably high upconversion efficiency. In terms of the Ln3+ dopants, Er3+ and Tm3+ emitters in combination with Yb3+ and Nd3+ sensitizers are the most widely employed ions. This becomes obvious when screening the current literature, whereas, in the following, we will focus on recent pioneering systems that have been evaluated in vitro or in vivo. One such example is the work by Wang et al. in which they coated NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ UCNPs with a biocompatible mesoporous silica shell containing the photosensitizer Chlorin e6 (Ce6, one of the traditionally applied photosensitizers absorbing in the red wavelength region) and observed an increased effectiveness of in vitro PDT for the treatment of atherosclerotic plaques.234 The NIR-to-visible upconverted light from the UCNPs is absorbed by the photosensitizer to generate singlet oxygen, ultimately leading to the death of THP-1 macrophages and thus inhibiting the further development of atherosclerosis. This also constitutes one of the recently reported cases of PDT beyond cancer treatment. Other examples are the reduction of glial scar formation235 and cell differentiating molecule delivery followed by long-term stem cell tracking,236 for instance. Besides Ce6, other organic dye-based photosensitizers that are applied in recently developed UCNP-based nanoplatforms for PDT include zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPC),237–242 aluminium phthalocyanines,243 silicon phthalocyanine dihydroxide (SPCD),244 merocyanine 540 (MC540),235,237,245 rhodamine B,232 pyropheophorbide-a (Ppa),246 methylene blue,247,248 riboflavin (Rf, also known as vitamin B2),249 and curcumin.250 Among these, as an example, SPCD absorbs at 672 nm, which matches the red upconversion emission of Er3+ ions, and contains two silanol hydroxyl groups that can interact with tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). This allows for the synthesis of core–shell nanostructures with a UCNP core and a SPCD-incorporated dense silica shell.244 Additional modification with mitochondria-targeting mitochondriotropic ligand triphenylphosphonium (TPP) led to their accumulation within the mitochondrial matrix. It was shown that NIR-triggered ROS formation in mitochondria destabilizes the mitochondria. Consequently, the mitochondrial membrane was permeabilized, hemeprotein cyt c (cytochrome complex) and other intermembrane space proteins were released, and ultimately apoptotic cell death was observed.244 Moreover, due to the spectral overlap between the absorption of cyt c and the green Er3+ emission, the proposed PDT nanoplatform simultaneously allows for the optical monitoring of cyt c release in cells.

UCNP-triggered activation of semiconductor photosensitizers. 
In 2016, Lv et al. developed a novel multifunctional composite by integrating multi-shell UCNPs with ultrathin black phosphorus sheets (BPS) for single 808 nm laser light-mediated PDT.251 The multi-shell UCNPs consist of a NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ core with several outer layers (NaGdF4:Yb3+/NaNdF4:Yb3+/NaGdF4:Yb3+).251 While pure black phosphorous, a semiconductor material, has previously been reported as an efficient singlet oxygen generator under UV-visible illumination,252 grafting of UCNPs on ultrathin BPS allows for the NIR-activation of the BPS resulting in the observation of high ROS generation efficiently killing HeLa cells in vitro and in vivo. Following a similar strategy, Feng et al. demonstrated the suitability of graphitic-phase carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets as two-dimensional photosensitizers whose absorption matches well with the UV-visible light emission of NaGdF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs.253 The decoration of NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs with g-C3N4 QDs using the positive ligand poly(L-lysine) was reported by Chan et al.254 Under NIR illumination, ROS generation triggered apoptosis of OEC-M1 cells due to the disruption of the mitochondrial function, which reveals the potential of the composite for PDT. In an alternative approach, Hou et al. combined Tm3+-doped UCNPs with semiconductor TiO2 whose absorption band overlaps with the UV emission from the UCNPs allowing for NIR induced PDT.255 A similar system was investigated by Lucky and co-workers demonstrating in vivo PDT using a NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+/TiO2 core–shell structure.256 Upon 980 nm irradiation, the authors observed the formation of a significant amount of ROS enabling the targeted treatment of thick and bulky head and neck tumours in oral cancers. It is also worth mentioning that this work constitutes one of the longest reported studies until now in terms of biosafety (120 days), PDT efficacy (35 days), and animal survival (60 days). Seeking to increase the photodynamic efficiency, Hou et al. later reported a dual-agent photosensitizing nanoplatform combining UV-blue emitting UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4:Yb3+/NaNdF4:Yb3+/NaYF4 core–multi–shell-structures) with blue-light excitable photosensitizer hypocrellin A and UV-light excitable photosensitizer TiO2 for 808 nm light triggered PDT (Fig. 12B).210 Enhanced intracellular ROS generation was observed which lead to the disruption of the mitochondrial membrane and ultimately triggered improved cancer cell apoptosis when compared to other single photosensitizer systems (UCNPs with TiO2 as well as UCNPs with hypocrellin A) under identical irradiation conditions. Enhanced performance could be achieved by taking full advantage of both the UV and blue Tm3+ upconversion emission being absorbed by the combination of hypocrellin A (blue absorber) and TiO2 (UV absorber). In addition, doping with Nd3+ allowed for excitation with 808 nm light which is advantageous over 980 nm excitation. While TiO2 has been employed in several studies, Du et al. suggested a unique approach combing UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4) with fullerene (C60, photo-activated by visible light) as the photosensitizer.257 In order to overcome the poor water solubility of C60 and the resulting accumulation under physiological conditions, the PDT nanoplatform was embedded in chitosan micelles. Another, less employed in UCNP-triggered PDT, alternative to TiO2, is semiconductor material ZnO.258 ZnO has a band gap of 3.3 eV, which greatly matches the UV emission of Tm3+ ions. Thus, Dou et al. grew a ZnO shell on NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs that were rendered water-dispersible through surface modification with citrate.259 Upon 980 nm illumination, significant ROS generation could be detected in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, and a PDT effect was evident by a cancer cell killing efficiency of 45%. Recently, Tou et al. demonstrated the suitability of a similar nanocomposite (NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ core/SiO2 shell/ZnO shell) as an antibacterial agent that efficiently inhibits the growth of various kinds of bacteria through ROS.260


Towards multimodular UCNP-based PDT agents. 
Addressing the search for multimodal bioprobes, it is of further interest to endow systems being able to perform PDT with additional imaging and PTT capability. However, it must be taken into account that the upconverted light used for PDT is no longer available for imaging.261 In this context, Liu et al. proposed a multifunctional nanoplatform for UCNP-based bioimaging in combination with synergetic PTT and PDT.262 While the UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+ core–shell) are here solely used for imaging, additionally implemented ICG is photo-triggered by 808 nm irradiation to produce simultaneously both a photothermal effect and cytotoxic ROS. In order to overcome the drawbacks of ICG, such as concentration dependent aggregation, poor aqueous stability, and rapid elimination from the body, ICG was grafted onto the surface of a polydopamine shell also acting as a nanovehicle for the UCNPs. In an alternative approach by Li et al., two different emission bands of NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+ core–shell NPs originating from Er3+ and Yb3+ were exploited (Fig. 13).261 The visible Er3+ upconversion and the NIR-I (980 nm) Yb3+ emission bands were used in order to (i) trigger the 1O2 generation by photosensitizer rose bengal (RB, absorbing the visible upconversion emission) and (ii) perform NIR-I bioimaging (using the Yb3+ emission). Both emission bands were obtained through 808 nm excitation of Nd3+ followed by a Nd3+ → Yb3+ → Er3+ ET route. In vivo studies on mice revealed serious cell apoptosis in tumour tissue after PDT for 2 weeks resulting in an effective tumour inhibition rate of 67%. Additional MRI capability was endowed by the gadolinium containing host material leading to a multimodal imaging and therapeutic nanoplatform. Zeng et al. also took advantage of the low heating 808 nm excitation of Nd3+ ions in a complex NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ core/NaGdF4:Yb3+ shell/NaGdF4:Yb3+,Nd3+ shell structure that was further coated with mesoporous SiO2 and loaded with photosensitizer Ce6. In vivo studies on modelling MDA-MB-435 tumour-bearing nude mice revealed the potential of the obtained multimodal nanoplatform as a MRI and PDT agent.264 Alternatively, Du et al. implemented Fe3O4 NPs into their UCNP-based multifunctional opto-magnetic imaging/PDT nanoplatform enabling T2-weighted MR imaging.257 Besides multimodular imaging, other studies report on the addition of PTT capability by implementing carbon dots (C-dots),239 or GNRs,265 respectively. It is further worth mentioning that GNRs have also been shown to enhance the ROS formation efficacy of methylene blue loaded NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ core/SiO2 shell nanostructures due to plasmonic effects.248
 Fig. 13  Multimodal Ln3+-based NP nanoplatform combining NIR-I imaging, MRI, and PDT for 4T1 breast murine tumour after topical administration in vivo. (A) Time-dependent tumour imaging with an 808 nm laser (520 mW cm−2). The yellow arrow indicates the tumour site. (B) In vivo T2-weighted colour-mapped MRI of the tumour. (C) Tumour volume growth curves and (D) digital photos of tumour for the four groups of mice. The scale bar is 2 cm. (E) Average weight of the tumours and (F) major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) collected from the four groups of mice. (G) TUNEL analysis of the tumours after PDT. The apoptotic cells in the tissues were labelled with FITC, while the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342.261 Reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2766–2773. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 

UCNPs for NIR-mediated activation of transition-metal complex prodrugs and drug release

UCNP-triggered transition-metal complex prodrug activation. 
Systems described in the previous section employ NIR light activated PDT cancer treatments based on the formation of ROS under NIR irradiation, subsequently inducing cancer cell apoptosis. Alternatively, the NIR photoactivation of anticancer prodrugs, most commonly transition-metal complexes, has been reported as a promising strategy for PDT. In this approach, UCNPs are used to excite the transition-metal complexes and to prompt their photochemistry inducing tumour cell death. Hence, the development of innovative nanostructures combining UCNPs and metal based prodrugs provides a potential new class of NIR-triggered chemotherapeutics.225 Recent achievements addressing this research line have been reported by Ruggiero et al., for instance.263 The authors successfully developed NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs that mediate the photoactivation of the anticancer PtIV complex cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2(Cl)2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] when irradiated with NIR light (Fig. 14). Here, the UCNPs were modified with biocompatible PEGylated phospholipids which were further functionalized with the PtIV complex. Upon NIR illumination, the PtIV complex undergoes photoinduced transformation into anticancer active PtII which is subsequently photocleaved. Aside from Pt-based complexes, in an earlier study by the same group, NIR photolysis of Ru-based complex cis-[Ru(bpy)2(py)2]Cl2 (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, py = pyridine) was reported.267 Aiming at in vivo application, where photo-induced overheating of biological tissues under high laser power density illumination must be avoided, Chen et al. subsequently suggested the alternative complex cis-[Ru(bpy)2(C18H37CN)2]2+.268 The presence of monodentate ligands allowed for binding of the RuII polypyridyl complex on the UCNP (LiYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+) surface rather than using a mixture of the two components. This resulted in enhanced FRET efficiency between the UCNPs and the transition-metal complex and ultimately allowed the laser power density to be reduced to 3 W cm−2 (compared to the previously reported 25 W cm−2). More recently, the group of L. Salassa demonstrated that NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs are also suitable for NIR light photoactivation of pyridinato RuII–arene complexes, providing the first example of remote NIR photoactivation of a RuII–arene model prodrug.269 Also in 2016, Raj et al. demonstrated the first use of an organoiridium complex [(ppy)2Ir(dcbpy)]+PF6− (ppy = phenylpyridine, dcbpy = 2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid) that was grafted onto SiO2-coated LiYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs for NIR triggered ROS generation.270
 Fig. 14  NIR-mediated activation of an anticancer PtIV complex by UCNPs: spectral overlap between the UV-Vis absorption (normalized, grey) of Pt complex (1) and the upconverted emission (normalized, blue) of NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs (λex = 980 nm). Adapted from ref. 263 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


UCNP-mediated drug release. 
Besides transition-metal complexes, doxorubicin (DOX) is a clinically approved and commonly employed anticancer drug that finds large application as a model drug. For instance, the group of S. Wu conducted Ru-polypyridyl photochemistry in order to achieve NIR light controlled release of DOX.266,271 In 2015, they proposed a photoactive drug delivery platform based on NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs that were coated with mesoporous silica encapsulating the DOX molecules along with a Ru-based metallic complex (Ru[(bpy)2 (trimethylphosphine)((3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane)](PF6)2) (Fig. 15).266 The Ru complex exhibits a metal-to-ligand charge transfer band at ∼453 nm providing good overlap with the characteristic UV-blue Tm3+ emission. Under NIR irradiation as low as 0.35 W cm−2, the complex photo-dissociates and liberates DOX from the UCNPs. HeLa cells treated with the nanostructures and irradiated for 10 min with NIR light through 1 mm thick pork tissue revealed a significant reduction of cell viability which provided in vitro validation of the proposed concept.
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic model and TEM image of Tm3+-based UCNPs (UCNP@mSiO2), modified with mesoporous SiO2. (B) The upconverted blue luminescence of Tm3+ triggers the cleavage of Ru complexes and the release of DOX from the DOX-loaded and Ru-modified UCNP@mSiO2 nanoparticles.266Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 431–434. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Instead of coating a mesoporous SiO2 shell around the UCNP for loading with photosensitizers and drug molecules, an alternative approach consists in the use of conjugating linkers. For instance, a thioketal linker has successfully been applied for the conjugation of drugs such as DOX or camptothecin (CPT) on UCNPs.245,272,273 Upon NIR-irradiation, photosensitizer-induced ROS generation triggers the cleavage of the linker which results in drug release. With regard to controlled drug release, it is further worth mentioning that the green emission band of Er3+ doped UCNPs overlaps with the absorption band of DOX.274 This leads to quenching of the Er3+ emission when DOX is loaded in close vicinity to the UCNPs, while the emission is restored upon DOX release. Consequently, while Tm3+ is a suitable Ln3+ ion to trigger DOX release, Er3+ allows for spectral monitoring of DOX loading and release. Alternatively, addressing the need for long-term on-demand drug release systems, Cheng et al. proposed to blend bioresorbable polyester poly-L-lactic acid (PLLA) films with self-assembling ZnO and LiYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ UCNPs.275 These films were further loaded with fluorescein diacetate in order to mimic a hydrophobic small molecule drug. As demonstrated by release kinetic studies, a 500-times increase in fluorescein diacetate release was observed under NIR irradiation compared to non-irradiated control films. Last but not least, a very different biomedical application of UCNP-mediated photochemical processes was suggested by Pierri et al.276 Here, the suitability of UCNPs (NaGdF4:Tm3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4 core–shell structures) to trigger carbon monoxide (CO) uncaging from a suitable precursor grafted on the UCNP's surface under NIR irradiation was demonstrated. Such photo-triggered CO release is of particular interest since CO has been shown to have cytoprotective and anti-inflammatory properties. Thus, therapeutic capability, e.g., for the treatment of heart conditions or wound healing is provided. This example unveils again the great diversity of UCNP-based systems as promising multifunctional theranostic tools.
Summarizing achievements and efforts made in the field of remote-controlled photochemistry for biomedical applications, NaYF4- as well as NaGdF4-based UCNPs doped with the ion pairs Tm3+,Yb3+ or Er3+,Yb3+ are commonly accepted as the most convenient and widespread combinations due to their intense UV-blue and green-red emission, respectively. These emission wavelength regions are highly accessible by organic dyes or semiconductor materials used as photosensitizers as well as by transition-metal complexes for NIR-light triggered ROS formation, prodrug activation, and drug release, thus allowing for PDT. As an alternative to the 980 nm excited Yb3+ ions, Nd3+ ions have been applied in order to allow for excitation with 800 nm light promoting the treatment of deep-seated tumours. A strategy to increase UC luminescence, and thus PDT efficacy, is doping with higher Yb3+ ion concentrations to absorb more light in combination with a low Tm3+ ion doping level to avoid luminescence quenching; in other words, using a stoichiometric Yb3+-based lattice, as already pointed out by Wang et al.100 and Chen et al.101 If other non-radiative loss mechanisms can be avoided, such as surface quenching, the higher Yb3+ ion concentration will potentially lead to enhanced UV-blue upconversion intensities, as observed in a K2YbF5 host.277,278 Further tuning of the emission wavelength in order to provide the best possible overlap with the absorption range of the photo-active unit becomes possible through host material variation. For instance, LiYF4 has been used as an efficient host material for PDT agents fostering the UV emission of Tm3+ ions.270 As another example, co-doping of Er3+ and Yb3+ ions in nonstoichiometric Na0.52YbF3.52, followed by the addition of a SrF2 shell, resulted in UCNPs with enhanced red emission under 915 nm excitation.241 Consequently, laser-induced overheating was diminished, while similar therapeutic effects in comparison to those triggered by 980 nm light became possible. Still, the majority of the studies published to date employ NaLnF4 (Ln = Y, Gd) as the host material. Alternative material classes (such as oxides, e.g., Gd2O3) remain very scarce.279 Finally, following the previously identified trend, promising multifunctional nanoplatforms combining PDT activity with additional theranostic (PTT) and imaging (optical, MRI, CT) modalities have been reported. Yet, the future development of advanced multifunctional therapeutic nanoplatforms will face several challenges. Aiming for maximal therapeutic efficiency, a major task is the improvement of the upconversion efficiency of the UCNPs and the photochemical response of the photoactive therapeutic agent. As mentioned in the previous sections, the chosen excitation wavelength as well as the excitation power density also have a major impact on the performance of Ln3+-based bioprobes, and laser light control is essential to prevent undesired tissue damage. It is known that the maximum permissible exposure (MPE) of human skin for visible light (400–700 nm) is around 0.20 W cm−2, while the MPE for NIR light can reach values up to 0.73 W cm−2.271 While the first promising candidates have been reported, in order to become applicable in real-life, UCNP-assisted photochemistry must further become suitable under this low-intensity threshold, requiring the careful design of innovative, more efficiently emitting UCNPs.

Summary
Overseeing research achievements published in the current literature, frequency-converting Ln3+-based nanostructures emitting UV, visible and NIR light upon NIR illumination are highly promising candidates for a whole gamut of applications. Clearly, the recognition that NIR light matching the biological transparency windows is advantageous over UV and visible light when seeking high-resolution, deep-tissue optical imaging was a key finding that triggered increasing interest in Ln3+-based NIR-excited UCNPs and NIR emitters for biomedical applications. Consequently, the search for more efficient emitters providing additional characteristics such as chemical stability, dispersibility in water, biocompatibility, and targeting capability necessary for optical bioimaging started. When it comes to the most classically applied host/dopant pairs, sodium lanthanide fluorides doped with Er3+,Yb3+ or Tm3+,Yb3+ are at the forefront, which can be assigned to the fact that these are very well characterized with regard to their spectroscopic properties. However, summarizing current trends and advances, a set of observations can be made. First, from a materials perspective, Nd3+ ions have become a state-of-the art dopant allowing for 800 nm excitation, which has relevant advantages over the more conventional 980 nm excitation of Yb3+ ions, such as deeper penetration depth and lower risk of undesired laser-induced tissue heating because of water absorption. Moreover, doping with Nd3+ showing emission at roughly 1060 and 1350 nm expands the library of Ln3+ ions emitting in the favourable >1000 nm region (others being Er3+ emitting at 1550 nm and Ho3+ emitting at 1200 nm). Also in the context of probe materials, there is a current trend to explore alternative host materials including oxides, vanadates and phosphates. Here, the choice of host materials – as well as additional co-dopants – very often comes along with the aim to add multimodality, ultimately leading to probes being capable for optical, magnetic, and radiation-based (CT, SPECT) imaging. In fact, as a second observation, multifunctional nanoplatforms, rather than solely imaging probes, offering simultaneous imaging, sensing and ideally therapeutic features are very sought after. In this context, Ln3+-based nanostructures have been demonstrated as highly intriguing thermal sensors and nanoheaters paving the way towards potential application as PTT agents. Here, particular research efforts have been undertaken in order to shift Ln3+-based nanothermometry from the relatively well-studied visible wavelength region into the NIR biological windows. Yet, nanothermometers being fully operable in the >1000 nm region are still scarce. Finally, seeking multifunctional nanoplatforms, UCNPs have been exploited as highly promising agents to trigger photochemical processes being suitable for PDT. In this context, one of the main challenges is the enhancement of the UV-visible UCQY in order to render the NIR-mediated photochemical reactions (such as ROS generation, photo-activation of chemotherapeutic prodrugs, or drug release) more efficient eventually leading to higher therapeutic efficacy. Moreover, although excellent work has been published on Ln3+-based systems, including studies on their in vitro and in vivo behaviour, there is still a lack of Ln3+-based NPs in clinical trials. In fact, despite the tremendous effort invested in nanomedicine, only a few material systems made the transition from the research laboratory to the clinic (trial or approved status). Most of these are organic compounds, often nanostructures based on polymers such as PEG or liposomes, while there are only a few inorganic NPs listed, namely iron oxide, NBTXR3 (hafnium oxide), gold colloids, and Cornell-dots (silica NPs).280 It is important to identify drawbacks and challenges that hinder Ln3+-based multifunctional nanostructures entering the clinical trial status and to eventually bring the most promising candidates closer to application. In fact, one of the reasons may be the remaining toxicity concerns that have to be dispelled through more rigorous in vivo toxicology, chemical stability, physiological integrity, and clearance studies to confirm their safety.281 As further hindering factors, lack of evaluation of the clinical need and benefit of new probes over the standard agents were identified by Obaid et al.281
Conclusions and outlook
Ln3+-based frequency-converting nanostructures represent without any doubt a materials class exhibiting great potential for biomedical application which is based on their optical properties, sensing and heating capability as well as potential to eventually act as multifunctional NIR-triggered theranostic probes. Yet, despite highly encouraging research results and findings, a critical review reveals a set of challenges that need to be addressed prior to clinical implementation (Scheme 1). Aside from open questions regarding biodistribution, nano-bio-interaction and long-term toxicity, additional need for improvement is seen when it comes to the low QY of Ln3+-nanomaterials, water-dispersibility and prevention of aggregation under biological conditions, quenching of the emission by biological species and aqueous systems, stable surface functionalization under physiological conditions, as well as the detection of light emitted from deep biological regions. Current research is making efforts and will further have to address these challenges, whereas three major trends have been identified: (i) the search for multimodality – design of multifunctional nanocarriers providing imaging, sensing and therapy in one nanoscopic platform. (ii) The search for NIR-to-NIR probes for optical imaging and sensing – shifting the excitation and emission wavelength into the NIR-II and NIR-III transparency windows for deeper penetration depth and higher spatial resolution. (iii) The search for novel materials and hybrid-structures – developing innovative host materials and sensitizers to increase the QY of UCNPs. Encouraging results have been obtained. Yet, in order to become ready to bring those probes to the next stage and eventually into clinical application, it now is the time that researchers with different expertise, such as chemistry, materials science, physics, and biology, work together with clinical researchers, technicians, and physicians to address open questions regarding toxicology, pharmacokinetics, and clinic applicability. Eventually, this will open up the pathway to novel multifunctional bioprobes exploiting frequency-conversion for diagnosis and therapy purposes.
 Scheme 1  Shining a light on spectral converting Ln3+-based nanoprobes: potential and challenges of upconverting and NIR emitting multifunctional NPs on the way to real-life biomedical applications. 
Acknowledgements
J. M. R and P. A. M thank “Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad” (MINECO) for financial support of the MAGEC Project (ENE2013-47826-C4-4-R and ENE2016-74889-C4-2-R). S. F. gratefully acknowledges the scholarship support from the German Research Foundation (DFG, agreement FI 2042/1-1).
References
E. H. Chang, J. B. Harford, M. A. W. Eaton, P. M. Boisseau, A. Dube, R. Hayeshi, H. Swai and D. S. Lee, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2015, 468, 511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. van Elk, B. P. Murphy, T. Eufrásio-da-Silva, D. P. O'Reilly, T. Vermonden, W. E. Hennink, G. P. Duffy and E. Ruiz-Hernández, Int. J. Pharm., 2016, 515, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Jung and K.-H. Lee, J. Pathol. Transl. Med., 2015, 49, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. O. Radiology, Insights Imaging, 2011, 2, 621 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Brindle, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2008, 8, 94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Kim, S. Lee and X. Y. Chen, Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn., 2013, 13, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Jo, S. H. Ku, Y. Y. Won, S. H. Kim and I. C. Kwon, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 1362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Blau, A. Krivitsky, Y. Epshtein and R. Satchi-Fainaro, Drug Resist. Updates, 2016, 27, 39 CrossRef PubMed .
P. M. Costa, M. Bourgognon, J. T. W. Wang and K. T. Al-Jamal, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 241, 200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Wegner and N. Hildebrandt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4792 RSC .
E. Cassette, M. Helle, L. Bezdetnaya, F. Marchal, B. Dubertret and T. Pons, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and L. Tan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 296, 91 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, S. Kim and J. M. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. Bu, C.-S. Liu, T. Liu and X. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 86219 RSC .
M. Quintanilla, I. X. Cantarelli, M. Pedroni, A. Speghini and F. Vetrone, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3108 RSC .
S. Balabhadra, M. L. Debasu, C. D. S. Brites, L. A. O. Nunes, O. L. Malta, J. Rocha, M. Bettinelli and L. D. Carlos, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17261 RSC .
I. E. Kolesnikov, E. V. Golyeva, M. A. Kurochkin, E. Lahderanta and M. D. Mikhailov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 235, 287 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marciniak, A. Bednarkiewicz, M. Stefanski, R. Tomala, D. Hreniak and W. Strek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24315 RSC .
E. C. Ximendes, W. Q. Santos, U. Rocha, U. K. Kagola, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, N. Fernandez, A. D. Gouveia-Neto, D. Bravo, A. M. Domingo, B. del Rosal, C. D. S. Brites, L. D. Carlos, D. Jaque and C. Jacinto, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Cotton, Lanthanide and Actinide Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester,  2006 Search PubMed .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273, 100 CrossRef .
H. Dong, S. R. Du, X. Y. Zheng, G. M. Lyu, L. D. Sun, L. D. Li, P. Z. Zhang, C. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Teo, J. Termini and H. B. Gray, J. Med. Chem., 2016, 59, 6012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Yan, H. G. Zhao, D. F. Perepichka and F. Rosei, Small, 2016, 12, 3888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Henderson and G. F. Imbusch, Optical Spectroscopy of Inorganic Solids, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. N. Russell and F. A. Saunders, Astrophys. J., 1925, 61, 38 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Dieke and H. M. Crosswhite, Appl. Opt., 1963, 2, 675 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. McCumber, Phys. Rev. [Sect.] A, 1964, 136, A954 CrossRef .
S. A. Payne, L. L. Chase, L. K. Smith, W. L. Kway and W. F. Krupke, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1992, 28, 2619 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Martin and R. S. Quimby, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2006, 23, 1770 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Judd, Phys. Rev., 1962, 127, 750 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Ofelt, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 37, 511 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Ding, Y. R. Ni, Y. Song, X. X. Liu, T. L. Cui, D. Q. Chen, Z. G. Ji, F. Xu, C. H. Lu and Z. Z. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 623, 42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dubey, A. K. Soni, A. Kumari, R. Dey and V. K. Rai, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 693, 194 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, J. H. Sui and W. Cai, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 779 RSC .
Z. Y. Huang, H. P. Gao and Y. L. Mao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 83321 RSC .
J. Tang, L. Chen, J. Li, Z. Wang, J. H. Zhang, L. G. Zhang, Y. S. Luo and X. J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14752 RSC .
M. D. Wisser, S. Fischer, P. C. Maurer, N. D. Bronstein, S. Chu, A. P. Alivisatos, A. Salleo and J. A. Dionne, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Weber, Phys. Rev., 1967, 157, 262 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Weber, Phys. Rev., 1968, 171, 283 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Riseberg and H. W. Moos, Phys. Rev., 1968, 174, 429 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyakawa and D. L. Dexter, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 2961 CrossRef .
J. C. Goldschmidt and S. Fischer, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 510 CrossRef CAS .
R. Martin-Rodriguez, S. Fischer, I. Aruna, B. Froehlich, K. W. Kraemer, J. C. Goldschmidt, B. S. Richards and A. Meijerink, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1912 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pokhrel, A. K. Gangadharan and D. K. Sardar, Mater. Lett., 2013, 99, 86 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fischer, B. Frohlich, K. W. Kramer and J. C. Goldschmidt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 30106 CAS .
S. Fischer, E. Favilla, M. Tonelli and J. C. Goldschmidt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 136, 127 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, J. Shen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, N. J. Patel, A. Kutikov, Z. P. Li, J. Song, R. K. Pandey, H. Agren, P. N. Prasad and G. Han, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Lüthi, M. Pollnau, H. U. Gudel and M. P. Hehlen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 162 CrossRef .
D. Q. Chen, L. Liu, P. Huang, M. Y. Ding, J. S. Zhong and Z. G. Ji, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Deng, F. Qin, R. Chen, W. Huang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. M. Shade, D. A. Chengelis and S. Petoud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, J. Damasco, H. L. Qiu, W. Shao, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. R. Valiev, X. Wu, G. Han, Y. Wang, C. H. Yang, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Han, H. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, V. Mahalingam, C. G. Morgan and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2924 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kano, Y. Otomo and H. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1972, 119, 1561 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bril, J. L. Sommerdijk and A. W. D. Jager, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 122, 660 CrossRef CAS .
M. Laroche, S. Girard, J. K. Sahu, W. A. Clarkson and J. Nilsson, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2006, 23, 195 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Anderson, S. J. Smith, P. S. May and M. T. Berry, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Berry and P. S. May, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 9805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fischer, N. D. Bronstein, J. K. Swabeck, E. M. Chan and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shao, G. Y. Chen, A. Kuzmin, H. L. Kutscher, A. Pliss, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55 CrossRef .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inokuti and F. Hirayama, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 43, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yokota and O. Tanimoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1967, 22, 779 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Soules and C. B. Duke, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 3, 262 CrossRef .
A. O. Govorov, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 125308 CrossRef .
C. Blum, N. Zijlstra, A. Lagendijk, M. Wubs, A. P. Mosk, V. Subramaniam and W. L. Vos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 203601 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. A. de Dood, J. Knoester, A. Tip and A. Polman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 115102 CrossRef .
F. T. Rabouw, S. A. den Hartog, T. Senden and A. Meijerink, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3610 Search PubMed .
J. Gersten and A. Nitzan, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 75, 1139 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fischer, D. Kumar, F. Hallermann, G. von Plessen and J. C. Goldschmidt, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A460 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer, New York, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

          J. García Solé, L. E. Bausá and D. Jaque, An Introduction to the Optical Spectroscopy of Inorganic Solids, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2005 Search PubMed .
R. M. Clegg, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 1995, 6, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Wu and L. Brand, Anal. Biochem., 1994, 218, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Rabouw and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2364 CAS .
X. P. Chen, X. Y. Huang and Q. Y. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 063518 CrossRef .
D. C. Yu, R. Martin-Rodriguez, Q. Y. Zhang, A. Meijerink and F. T. Rabouw, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e344 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Huang, S. Y. Han, W. Huang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173 RSC .
G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1635 RSC .
L. P. Tu, X. M. Liu, F. Wu and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1331 RSC .
X. Chen, D. Peng, Q. Ju and F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1318 RSC .
S. Fischer, H. Steinkemper, P. Loper, M. Hermle and J. C. Goldschmidt, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 013109 CrossRef .
E. M. Chan, E. S. Levy and B. E. Cohen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Levy, C. A. Tajon, T. S. Bischof, P. Iafrati, A. Fernandez-Bravo, D. J. Garfield, M. Chamanzar, M. M. Maharbiz, V. S. Sohal, P. J. Schuck, B. E. Cohen and E. M. Chan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Deng, J. Wang, R. F. Chen, W. Huang and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fischer, N. J. J. Johnson, J. Pichaandi, J. C. Goldschmidt and F. van Veggel, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 193105 CrossRef .
A. M. Smith, M. C. Mancini and S. Nie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. del Rosal, I. Villa, D. Jaque and F. Sanz-Rodriguez, J. Biophotonics, 2016, 9, 1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Han, R. R. Deng, X. J. Xie and X. G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, H. L. Qju, P. N. Prasad and X. Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haase and H. Schafer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, W. Shao, R. R. Valiev, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, G. S. He, H. Agren and P. Prasad, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1760 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. W. Zhang, K. Takle, O. Bilsel, Z. J. Li, H. Lee, Z. J. Zhang, D. S. Li, W. Fan, C. Y. Duan, E. M. Chan, C. Lois, Y. Xiang and G. Han, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, R. R. Deng, M. A. MacDonald, B. L. Chen, J. K. Yuan, F. Wang, D. Z. Chi, T. S. A. Hor, P. Zhang, G. K. Liu, Y. Han and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. M. Jin, W. Kong, T. Y. Sun, W. F. Zhang, X. H. Liu, J. Fan, S. F. Yu and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 6 Search PubMed .
H. H. Lin, T. Yu, M. K. Tsang, G. X. Bai, Q. Y. Zhang and J. H. Hao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 041902 CrossRef .
D. T. K. Dung, S. Fukushima, T. Furukawa, H. Niioka, T. Sannomiya, K. Kobayashi, H. Yukawa, Y. Baba, M. Hashimoto and J. Miyake, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 163 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Sordillo, Y. Pu, S. Pratavieira, Y. Budansky and R. R. Alfano, J. Biomed. Opt., 2014, 19, 056004 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Prodi, E. Rampazzo, F. Rastrelli, A. Speghini and N. Zaccheroni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4922 RSC .
T. Durduran, R. Choe, W. B. Baker and A. G. Yodh, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 076701 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Bashkatov, E. A. Genina, V. I. Kochubey and V. V. Tuchin, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2543 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Hadjipanayis, H. B. Jiang, D. W. Roberts and L. Yang, Semin. Oncol., 2011, 38, 109 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Amiot, S. P. Xu, S. Liang, L. Y. Pan and J. X. J. Zhao, Sensors, 2008, 8, 3082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Luo, E. L. Zhang, Y. P. Su, T. M. Cheng and C. M. Shi, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jain, A. Homayoun, C. W. Bannister and K. Yum, Biotechnol. J., 2015, 10, 447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, X. Y. Chen and P. Huang, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Xu, S. W. Zeng, B. T. Zhang, M. T. Swihart, K. T. Yong and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Owens, M. Henary, G. El Fakhri and H. S. Choi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jaque, C. Richard, B. Viana, K. Soga, X. G. Liu and J. G. Sole, Adv. Opt. Photonics, 2016, 8, 1 CrossRef .
E. Hemmer, A. Benayas, F. Legare and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 168 RSC .
Y. R. Wei, X. D. Yang, Y. R. Ma, S. F. Wang and Q. Yuan, Chin. J. Chem., 2016, 34, 558 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Liu, J. Conde, T. Lipinski, A. Bednarkiewicz and C. C. Huang, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, 25 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Zhao, S. Q. He and M. C. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8349 RSC .
G. Hong, A. L. Antaris and H. Dai, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0010 CrossRef .
D. K. Chatterjee, A. J. Rufaihah and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Hilderbrand, F. Shao, C. Salthouse, U. Mahmood and R. Weissleder, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4188 RSC .
M. Kamimura, N. Kanayama, K. Tokuzen, K. Soga and Y. Nagasaki, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3705 RSC .
R. Wang, X. M. Li, L. Zhou and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, G. Y. Chen, A. M. Vu, W. Fan, O. S. Bilsel, C. C. Chang and G. Han, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 644 CrossRef .
X. J. Xie, N. Y. Gao, R. R. Deng, Q. Sun, Q. H. Xu and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wen, H. Zhu, X. Chen, T. F. Hung, B. L. Wang, G. Y. Zhu, S. F. Yu and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Zhan, B. J. Wang, X. Y. Wen and S. L. He, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 1011 CrossRef .
B. del Rosal, U. Rocha, E. C. Ximendes, E. M. Rodriguez, D. Jaque and J. G. Sole, Opt. Mater., 2017, 63, 185 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto, I. Villa, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, M. D. I. de la Cruz, A. Juarranz, E. Carrasco, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, E. Bovero, J. G. Sole and D. Jaque, Small, 2014, 10, 1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Villa, A. Vedda, I. Xochilt Cantarelli, M. Pedroni, F. Piccinelli, M. Bettinelli, A. Speghini, M. Quintanilla, F. Vetrone, U. Rocha, C. Jacinto, E. Carrasco, F. Sanz Rodríguez, A. Juarranz de la Cruz, B. del Rosal, D. H. Ortgies, P. Haro Gonzalez, J. García Solé and D. Jaque García, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 649 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, S. Liu, W. C. Law, F. Wu, M. T. Swihart, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pokhrel, L. C. Mimun, B. Yust, G. A. Kumar, A. Dhanale, L. Tang and D. K. Sardar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1667 RSC .
Y. X. Zhao, Q. Q. Zhan, J. Liu and S. L. He, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2015, 6, 838 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Wang, G.-Y. Liu, L.-D. Sun, J.-W. Xiao, J.-C. Zhou and C.-H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, S. T. Wang, N. G. Zhegalova, W. J. Akers and M. Y. Berezin, Proc. SPIE, 2013, 85870V DOI:10.1117/12.2008786 .
A. Escudero, C. Carrillo-Carrion, M. V. Zyuzin and W. J. Parak, Top. Curr. Chem., 2016, 374, 15 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Tan, M. H. Wang, C. Y. Hsu, N. G. Chen and Y. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 984 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hemmer, N. Venkatachalam, H. Hyodo, A. Hattori, Y. Ebina, H. Kishimoto and K. Soga, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11339 RSC .
T. Grzyb, A. Gruszeczka and S. Lis, J. Lumin., 2016, 175, 21 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. H. Wang, Z. G. Xu, H. X. Zhang, P. Y. Dong, L. N. Guo, F. H. Li, S. Y. Xin and W. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 330 RSC .
C. L. Chen, C. G. Li, T. Li, J. H. Liu, H. Huang, T. Y. Bai, Z. R. Wang, Z. Shi and S. H. Feng, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 3108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeyaraman, A. Shukla and S. Sivakumar, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 1330 CrossRef CAS .
R. Naccache, P. Chevallier, J. Lagueux, Y. Gossuin, S. Laurent, L. Vander Elst, C. Chilian, J. A. Capobianco and M. A. Fortin, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, H. Wang, W. Gu, S. Li, N. Xiao, C. Shao, Q. Xu and L. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1521 RSC .
D. Kryza, J. Taleb, M. Janier, L. Marmuse, I. Miladi, P. Bonazza, C. Louis, P. Perriat, S. Roux, O. Tillement and C. Billotey, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 1145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Ma, L. J. Meng, Y. Z. Chen, M. Hu, Y. K. Chen, C. Huang, J. Shang, R. F. Wang, Y. M. Guo and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16257 CAS .
H. N. Luitel, R. Chand, H. Hamajima, Y. R. Gaihre, T. Shingae, T. Yanagita and T. Watari, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 6192 RSC .
H. Niioka, J. Yamasaki, D. T. K. Dung and J. Miyake, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 1406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukushima, T. Furukawa, H. Niioka, M. Ichimiya, T. Sannomiya, N. Tanaka, D. Onoshima, H. Yukawa, Y. Baba, M. Ashida, J. Miyake, T. Araki and M. Hashimoto, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu and W. Miu, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2016, 9, 4 Search PubMed .
Z. G. Yi, X. L. Li, Z. L. Xue, X. Liang, W. Lu, H. Peng, H. R. Liu, S. J. Zeng and J. H. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7119 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Lei, P. Zhang, S. Yao, S. Y. Song, L. L. Dong, X. Xu, X. L. Liu, K. M. Du, J. Feng and H. J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27490 CAS .
M. Kamimura, R. Saito, H. Hyodo, K. Tsuji, I. O. Umeda, H. Fujii and K. Soga, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2016, 29, 525 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Li, Z. X. Ji, J. Y. Dong, C. H. Chang, X. Wang, B. B. Sun, M. Y. Wang, Y. P. Liao, J. I. Zink, A. E. Nel and T. Xia, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Ahmad, B. A. Abdel-Wahab, A. Alam, S. Zafar, J. Ahmad, F. J. Ahmad, P. Midoux, C. Pichon and S. Akhter, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 7873 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gnach, T. Lipinski, A. Bednarkiewicz, J. Rybka and J. A. Capobianco, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1561 RSC .
E. Hemmer, F. Vetrone and K. Soga, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 960 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hemmer, T. Yamano, H. Kishimoto, N. Venkatachalam, H. Hyodo and K. Soga, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9, 4734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hemmer, H. Takeshita, T. Yamano, T. Fujiki, Y. Kohl, K. Loew, N. Venkatachalam, H. Hyodo, H. Kishimoto and K. Soga, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2012, 23, 2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Venkatachalam, E. Hemmer, T. Yamano, H. Hyodo, H. Kishimoto and K. Soga, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2012, 58, 121 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hemmer, Y. Kohl, V. Colquhoun, H. Thielecke, K. Soga and S. Mathur, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lisjak, O. Plohl, J. Vidmar, B. Majaron and M. Ponikvar-Svet, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 8222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Plohl, M. Kraft, J. Kovač, B. Belec, M. Ponikvar-Svet, C. Würth, D. Lisja and U. Resch-Genger, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Li, Z. X. Ji, C. H. Chang, D. R. Dunphy, X. M. Cai, H. Meng, H. Y. Zhang, B. B. Sun, X. Wang, J. Y. Dong, S. J. Lin, M. Y. Wang, Y. P. Liao, C. J. Brinker, A. Nel and T. Xia, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Muhr, S. Wilhelm, T. Hirsch and O. S. Wolfbeis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sedlmeier and H. H. Gorris, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1526 RSC .
A. N. Generalova, V. V. Rocheva, A. V. Nechaev, D. A. Khochenkov, N. V. Sholina, A. Semchishen, V. P. Zubov, A. V. Koroleva, B. N. Chichkov and E. V. Khaydukov, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 30089 RSC .
X. Y. Jiang, C. Cao, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 87 RSC .
C. Yao, P. Y. Wang, R. Wang, L. Zhou, A. M. El-Toni, Y. Q. Lu, X. M. Li and F. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 1930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Liang, X. J. Xie, D. T. B. Loong, A. H. All, L. Huang and X. G. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 10801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Paduch, Cell. Oncol., 2016, 39, 397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Park, S. H. Nam, J. Kim, H. S. Shin, Y. D. Suh and K. S. Hong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Bazylińska, D. Wawrzynczyk, J. Kulbacka, R. Frackowiak, B. Cichy, A. Bednarkiewicz, M. Samoc and K. A. Wilk, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Zheng, X. J. Zhu, Y. Q. Lu, J. B. Zhao, W. Feng, G. H. Jia, F. Wang, F. Y. Li and D. Y. Jin, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. W. Chen, J. Wen, H. J. Li, Y. Q. Xu, F. Y. Liu and S. G. Sun, Biomaterials, 2016, 106, 144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Bai and N. Gu, Small, 2016, 12, 4590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jaque and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4301 RSC .

          E. Hemmer and F. Vetrone, in Upconverting Nanomaterials: Perspectives, Synthesis, and Applications, ed. C. Altavilla, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,  2016, ch. 11, pp. 319–357 Search PubMed .
M. D. Dramicanin, Methods Appl. Fluoresc., 2016, 4, 23 Search PubMed .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Zamarron, A. J. de la Fuente, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, L. M. Maestro, E. M. Rodriguez, D. Jaque, J. G. Sole and J. A. Capobianco, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Quintanilla, E. Cantelar, F. Cussó, M. Villegas and A. C. Caballero, Appl. Phys. Express, 2011, 4, 022601 CrossRef .
A. Assy, H. J. Lin, M. Schoenauer-Sebag, P. Gredin, M. Mortier, L. Billot, Z. Chen and L. Aigouy, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 250, 71 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Ximendes, U. Rocha, C. Jacinto, K. U. Kumar, D. Bravo, F. J. Lopez, E. M. Rodriguez, J. Garcia-Sole and D. Jaque, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3057 RSC .
Q. Y. Shao, X. S. Li, P. Y. Hua, G. T. Zhang, Y. Dong and J. Q. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 486, 121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Savchuk, P. Haro-Gonzalez, J. J. Carvajal, D. Jaque, J. Massons, M. Aguilo and F. Diaz, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9727 RSC .
O. A. Savchuk, J. J. Carvajal, M. C. Pujol, J. Massons, P. Haro-Gonzalez, O. Martinez, J. Jimenez, M. Aguilo and F. Diaz, J. Lumin., 2016, 169, 711 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Lu, H. Y. Hao, G. Shi, Y. C. Gao, R. X. Wang, Y. L. Song, Y. X. Wang and X. R. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55307 RSC .
A. Siai, P. Haro-Gonzalez, K. Horchani-Naifer and M. Ferid, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 234, 541 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, L. H. Luo, H. K. Park and J. S. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 840 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marciniak, K. Waszniewska, A. Bednarkiewicz, D. Hreniak and W. Strek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8877 CAS .
D. Jaque and C. Jacinto, J. Lumin., 2016, 169, 394 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto, J. Ramiro, A. J. Caamano, J. G. Sole and D. Jaque, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 053703 CrossRef .
U. Rocha, C. Jacinto, K. U. Kumar, F. J. Lopez, D. Bravo, J. G. Sole and D. Jaque, J. Lumin., 2016, 175, 149 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rocha, J. Hu, E. M. Rodriguez, A. S. Vanetsev, M. Rahn, V. Sammelselg, Y. V. Orlovskii, J. G. Sole, D. Jaque and D. H. Ortgies, Small, 2016, 12, 5394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Benayas, B. del Rosal, A. Perez-Delgado, K. Santacruz-Gomez, D. Jaque, G. A. Hirata and F. Vetrone, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 687 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Pereira, J. F. Silva, A. S. Gouveia-Neto and C. Jacinto, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 238, 525 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marciniak, K. Prorok, A. Bednarkiewicz, A. Kowalczyk, D. Hreniak and W. Strek, J. Lumin., 2016, 176, 144 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marciniak, A. Bednarkiewicz, D. Kowalska and W. Strek, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5559 RSC .
S. Balabhadra, M. L. Debasu, C. D. S. Brites, J. Rocha and L. D. Carlos, J. Lumin., 2016, 180, 25 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Ximendes, U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto and D. Jaque, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 5 CrossRef .
E. N. Cerón, D. H. Ortgies, B. Del Rosal, F. Ren, A. Benayas, F. Vetrone, D. Ma, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, J. G. Sole, D. Jaque and E. M. Rodriguez, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4781 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Skripka, A. Benayas, R. Marin, P. Canton, E. Hemmer and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3079 RSC .
C. D. Brites, P. P. Lima, N. J. Silva, A. Millan, V. S. Amaral, F. Palacio and L. D. Carlos, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4799 RSC .
H. Suo, C. F. Guo, J. M. Zheng, B. Zhou, C. G. Ma, X. Q. Zhao, T. Li, P. Guo and E. M. Goldys, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30312 CAS .
K. Podgorski and G. Ranganathan, J. Neurophysiol., 2016, 116, 1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kamimura, T. Matsumoto, S. Suyari, M. Umezawa and K. Soga, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1917 RSC .
D. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Hou, K. R. Deng, C. X. Li, X. R. Deng, H. Z. Lian, Z. Y. Cheng, D. Y. Jin and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2016, 101, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Austin, M. A. Mackey, E. C. Dreaden and M. A. El-Sayed, Arch. Toxicol., 2014, 88, 1391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, W. Feng, J. Chang, Y. W. Tan, J. C. Li, M. Chen, Y. Sun and F. Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10 Search PubMed .
B. del Rosal, A. Perez-Delgado, E. Carrasco, D. J. Jovanovic, M. D. Dramicanin, G. Drazic, A. J. de la Fuente, F. Sanz-Rodriguez and D. Jaque, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 782 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. DeRosa and R. J. Crutchley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 233, 351 CrossRef .
H. Abrahamse and M. R. Hamblin, Biochem. J., 2016, 473, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 317 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Karnkaew, F. Chen, Y. H. Zhan, R. L. Majewski and W. B. Cai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3918 CrossRef PubMed .
W. P. Fan, P. Huang and X. Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6488 RSC .
G. D. Wang, H. T. Nguyen, H. Chen, P. B. Cox, L. Wang, K. Nagata, Z. Hao, A. Wang, Z. Li and J. Xie, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Velusamy, J. Y. Shen, J. T. Lin, Y. C. Lin, C. C. Hsieh, C. H. Lai, C. W. Lai, M. L. Ho, Y. C. Chen, P. T. Chou and J. K. Hsiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2388 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Marín and D. A. Russell, in Near-infrared Nanomaterials: Preparation, Bioimaging and Therapy Applications, ed. F. Zhang, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2016, vol. 40, ch. 7, pp. 192–231 Search PubMed .
N. M. Idris, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, J. Zhang, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, W. Steelant, M. Kumar and M. Scholfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, X. Zhang, Z. J. Gu and Y. L. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ruggiero, S. Alonso-de Castro, A. Habtemariam and L. Salassa, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13012 RSC .
A. Bagheri, H. Arandiyan, C. Boyer and M. Lim, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500437 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Wang, A. Y. Bi, W. B. Zeng and Z. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5331 RSC .
J. Hu, Y. A. Tang, A. H. Elmenoufy, H. B. Xu, Z. Cheng and X. L. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 5860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Bansal and Z. Yong, in Upconverting Nanomaterials: Perspectives, Synthesis, and Applications, ed. C. Altavilla, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,  2016, ch. 9, pp. 255–290 Search PubMed .
V. Abet, F. Filace, J. Recio, J. Alvarez-Builla and C. Burgos, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2017, 127, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ding and U. Bierbach, Future Med. Chem., 2015, 7, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Ai, T. Y. Sun, Z. F. Xu, Z. G. Wang, W. Kong, M. W. To, F. Wang and G. Y. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13052 RSC .
T. Wu and N. R. Branda, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8636 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Zhu, R. L. Han, X. Wang, L. M. Yang and Y. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 239, 78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. X. Ban, C. Ma, Z. G. Zhang, J. Y. Zhang, S. J. Gao and S. Q. Feng, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2016, 12, 2063 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Li, W. Y. W. Lee, T. Y. Wu, J. B. Xu, K. Y. Zhang, D. S. H. Wong, R. Li, G. Li and L. M. Bian, Biomaterials, 2016, 110, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Gao, Z. H. Lin, Z. G. Wu, X. K. Lin and Q. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34252 CAS .
J. Liu, L. Huang, X. M. Tian, X. M. Chen, Y. Z. Shao, F. K. Xie, D. H. Chen and L. Li, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Xu, D. Yang, R. C. Lv, B. Liu, S. L. Gai, F. He, C. X. Li and P. P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5883 RSC .
W. D. Gao, Z. H. Wang, L. W. Lv, D. Y. Yin, D. Chen, Z. H. Han, Y. Ma, M. Zhang, M. Yang and Y. Q. Gu, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Huang, Q. B. Xiao, H. S. Hu, K. C. Zhang, Y. M. Feng, F. J. Li, J. Wang, X. G. Ding, J. Jiang, Y. F. Li, L. Y. Shi and H. Z. Lin, Small, 2016, 12, 4200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Dong, Z. Y. Liu, S. Wang, B. Zheng, W. S. Guo, W. T. Yang, X. Q. Gong, X. L. Wu, H. J. Wang and J. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32688 CAS .
Z. Watkins, I. Uddin, J. Britton and T. Nyokong, J. Mol. Struct., 2017, 1130, 128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, J. W. Zhang, C. J. Zuo, Z. Zhang, D. L. Ni, C. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. W. Yao and W. B. Bu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3257 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, G. Q. Meng, S. Zhang and X. L. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Zhang, F. J. Ai, T. Y. Sun, F. Wang and G. Y. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 3872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, R. L. Han, L. M. Yang, J. H. Shi, Z. J. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Wang, S. J. Liu and Y. Gan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4416 CAS .
C. W. Chen, Y. C. Chan, M. Hsiao and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32108 CAS .
E. V. Khaydukov, K. E. Mironova, V. A. Semchishen, A. N. Generalova, A. V. Nechaev, D. A. Khochenkov, E. V. Stepanova, O. I. Lebedev, A. V. Zvyagin, S. M. Deyev and V. Y. Panchenko, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Xiong, Y. Sun, P. Gao, H. Li and Y. R. Duan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 6970 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Lv, D. Yang, P. P. Yang, J. T. Xu, F. He, S. L. Gai, C. X. Li, Y. L. Dai, G. X. Yang and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4724 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Z. Yang, W. Shao, S. C. Chen, J. F. Xie, X. D. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, F. He, G. Yang, S. Gai, Y. Dai, C. Li and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 8000 RSC .
M. H. Chan, C. W. Chen, I. J. Lee, Y. C. Chan, D. T. Tu, M. Hsiao, C. H. Chen, X. Y. Chen and R. S. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Hou, Y. X. Zhang, K. R. Deng, Y. Y. Chen, X. J. Li, X. R. Deng, Z. Y. Cheng, H. Z. Lian, C. X. Li and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lucky, N. M. Idris, K. Huang, J. Kim, Z. Q. Li, P. S. P. Thong, R. Xu, K. C. Soo and Y. Zhang, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 1844 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Du, S. P. Han, F. F. Zhao, K. H. Lim, H. W. Xi, X. J. Su, H. C. Yao and J. Zhou, Nanomedicine, 2016, 12, 2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Zhang, Y. F. Shan and L. J. Dong, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Dou, A. Rengaramchandran, S. T. Selvan, R. Paulmurugan and Y. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8 Search PubMed .
M. J. Tou, Z. G. Luo, S. Bai, F. Y. Liu, Q. X. Chai, S. Li and Z. Q. Li, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 70, 1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. L. Tang, D. X. Pan, L. D. Sun, C. Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. F. Wang, S. Shi and C. H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, C. X. Li, B. G. Xing, P. P. Yang and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4884 RSC .
E. Ruggiero, J. Hernandez-Gil, J. C. Mareque-Rivas and L. Salassa, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2091 RSC .
L. Y. Zeng, Y. W. Pan, R. F. Zou, J. C. Zhang, Y. Tian, Z. G. Teng, S. J. Wang, W. Z. Ren, X. S. Xiao, J. C. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, A. G. Li, G. M. Lu and A. G. Wu, Biomaterials, 2016, 103, 116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Sun, L. G. Xu, W. Ma, X. L. Wu, H. Kuang, L. B. Wang and C. L. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. He, K. Krippes, S. Ritz, Z. J. Chen, A. Best, H. J. Butt, V. Mailander and S. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 431 RSC .
E. Ruggiero, A. Habtemariam, L. Yate, J. C. Mareque-Rivas and L. Salassa, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1715 RSC .
Y. Chen, G. Jiang, Q. Zhou, Y. Zhang, K. Li, Y. Zheng, B. Zhang and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 23804 RSC .
E. Ruggiero, C. Garino, J. C. Mareque-Rivas, A. Habtemariam and L. Salassa, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. J. Raj, M. Quintanilla and F. Vetrone, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 3113 RSC .
Z. J. Chen, W. Sun, H. J. Butt and S. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, H. M. Lin, L. R. Cui, N. An, R. H. Tong, Y. H. Chen, C. Y. Yang, X. Li, J. Y. Liu and F. Y. Qu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 1206 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Yue, C. L. Zhang, G. Alfranca, Y. Yang, X. Q. Jiang, Y. M. Yang, F. Pan, J. M. de la Fuente and D. X. Cui, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, E. Hemmer, F. Rosei and F. Vetrone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 4992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, R. O'Rorke, R. F. Ortiz, Y. Y. Tay, E. Hemmer, F. Vetrone, R. Marks and T. W. Steele, Acta Biomater., 2017 DOI:10.1016/j.actbio.2017.03.021 .
A. E. Pierri, P. J. Huang, J. V. Garcia, J. G. Stanfill, M. Chui, G. Wu, N. Zheng and P. C. Ford, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2072 RSC .
J. Mendez-Ramos, P. Acosta-Mora, J. C. Ruiz-Morales and N. M. Khaidukov, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 575, 263 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mendez-Ramos, J. C. Ruiz-Morales, P. Acosta-Mora and N. M. Khaidukov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 801 RSC .
H. Li, S. Song, W. Wang and K. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 16081 RSC .
D. Bobo, K. J. Robinson, J. Islam, K. J. Thurecht and S. R. Corrie, Pharm. Res., 2016, 33, 2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Obaid, M. Broekgaarden, A. L. Bulin, H. C. Huang, J. Kuriakose, J. Liu and T. Hasan, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12471 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

E. Hemmer
	Eva Hemmer received her PhD in 2008 from Saarland University (Germany) under the mentorship of Prof. Sanjay Mathur. From 2009 to 2012, she worked on lanthanide-based nanoparticles for near-infrared bioimaging with Prof. Kohei Soga at the Tokyo University of Science. In 2013 she was awarded a Feodor Lynen Research Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop lanthanide-based nanothermometers in the groups of Profs. Fiorenzo Vetrone and François Légaré at INRS-EMT (Université du Québec, Canada). In 2016, she joined the University of Ottawa as an assistant professor at the Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, where she is working on lanthanide-based nanocarriers for biomedical and energy conversion applications.

P. Acosta-Mora
	Pablo Acosta-Mora received his Master's degree in Physics: Matter Structure from the University of La Laguna, Spain in 2013. Currently, he is a PhD student in the group of Prof. Jorge Méndez-Ramos developing photocatalyst materials for water splitting applications. His research has been centered in spectroscopic characterization and photocatalytic applications of up-conversion processes in lanthanide-doped crystals, glasses, polymeric resins and nano-structured materials.

J. Méndez-Ramos
	Jorge Méndez-Ramos received his PhD in 2003 from the University of La Laguna, Spain. After two postdoctoral stays at the Novel Photonics Research Group at the University of Nottingham (UK), he returned to the University of La Laguna as a lecturer and researcher from 2004. In 2015, he became an assistant professor at the Department of Physics at the University of La Laguna. His research focuses on spectral conversion processes in lanthanide-doped luminescent materials for photonics applications. He is the coordinator of the Nanomaterials and Spectroscopy Research Group, where he currently works on applications in photocatalysis, solar fuel generation, water-splitting, artificial photosynthesis, and life sciences.

S. Fischer
	Stefan Fischer received his PhD in 2014 from the University of Freiburg, Germany, in collaboration with the Fraunhofer ISE, Germany, under the direction of Prof. Eicke R. Weber. In 2015, he joined the University of California at Berkeley and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California, USA, as a postdoctoral scholar under the supervision of Prof. A. Paul Alivisatos. As of 2017, he also joined Stanford University in California, USA, under the mentorship of Prof. Jennifer A. Dionne. His research interests include light–matter interaction, opto-electrical devices, solar energy harvesting, photonics, and luminescent materials, in particular lanthanide-based nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of energy levels and commonly applied transitions in UCNPs and NIR emitting NPs based on (A) Er3+,Yb3+, (B) Ho3+,Yb3+, (C) Tm3+,Yb3+ and (D) Nd3+. Mechanisms of optical temperature sensing using Ln3+-based NPs are also depicted: the luminescence intensity ratio (LIR) between thermally coupled energy levels is commonly applied for (A) Er3+,Yb3+- and (B) Ho3+,Yb3+-based UCNPs. (C) Energy transfer (ET) and cross-relaxation processes in Tm3+,Yb3+-doped UCNPs. Besides intensity ratio, the temperature-dependent Stark sub-level population of the excited states 1G4 and 3H4 of Tm3+ are suitable for nanothermometry, whereas the latter matches the NIR-I region. (D) NIR nanothermometry in Nd3+-based systems exploiting (D1) the temperature-dependent population of 4F5/2 and 4F3/2 excited levels, (D2) Stark sub-levels of Nd3+ levels 4F3/2, 4I11/2 and 4I9/2, and (D3) phonon-assisted ET processes between Nd3+ and co-dopant Yb3+. Redrawn based on ref. 14–19.	 
PMPR,if = PMPR,0exp(−κΔEif)	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 2  (A) The FRET efficiency (E) in a simple donor–acceptor pair system depends on the Förster radius R0 and the distance R between the donor and acceptor. (B) Energy migration in Er3+ and Yb3+ doped β-NaYF4 as a function of Yb3+ concentration.63 Because of the large spectral overlap of the same transitions, ET between the same Ln3+ ions can be very efficient resulting in long distance energy migration of the excitation energy. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7241–7247. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (C) Efficient migration combined with a down-cascading energy flow scheme is exploited to increase the efficiency in dye-sensitized core-active shell UCNPs (X = null, Er, Ho, Tm, or Pr).64 Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16192–16195. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Relevance of the wavelength for deep penetration and low auto-fluorescence bioimaging. (A) First (NIR-I), second (NIR-II), and third (NIR-III) optical windows in some biological tissues and fluids.93 Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711, copyright (2009). (B) Auto-fluorescence of different mice strains in NIR biological windows. Top: Optical images of the mice strains (partially shaved). Centre and bottom: infrared fluorescence images of the different mice strains under excitation with an 808 nm laser diode (power density: 0.2 W cm−2). The middle row corresponds to the infrared fluorescence intensity in the 900–1700 nm range, while the bottom row corresponds to the 1200–1700 nm range.94 Reprinted with permission from J. Biophotonics, 2016, 9, 1059–1067, copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

Optical imaging	High sensitivity multicolour	Low spatial resolution
High temporal resolution	Low penetration depth
MRI	High spatial resolution	Low sensitivity
High penetration depth	Long imaging time
CT	High spatial resolution	Not quantitative
High penetration depth	Radiation risk
SPECT	High sensitivity	Low spatial resolution
No penetration depth limit	Rather long acquisition times Radiation risk

 	Fig. 4  Transformation of NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ UCNPs in an acidic biological environment: dissolution and binding of Ln3+ ions to cellular phosphate residues results in the precipitation of urchin-shaped LnPO4 on the particle surface strongly affecting the emission intensity and triggering tissue inflammation. Surface modification with ethylenediamine tetra(methylene phosphonicacid) (EDTMP) provides protection from structural changes and intensity loss, and reduces the inflammation potential.156 Reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3293–3306. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Seeking high-resolution NIR-II bioimaging using EDTMP-LiYF4:Nd3+ NPs. (A) In vivo blood-vessel NIR-II imaging of the left ear of a nude mouse immediately after intravenous injection. (B) The bright-field picture of the nude mouse in vivo. The corresponding regions of NIR imaging are marked with green squares. (C) The NIR-II imaging of the right ear cut immediately after intravenous injection. The corresponding regions of NIR imaging are marked with green squares. Cross-sectional fluorescence intensity profiles along red-dashed lines of the mouse are displayed at the bottom. The origin points (distance = 0) are presented with red short bars. Gaussian fits to the profiles are shown in red dashed curves. The full width at half maximum is also marked in the diagrams. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic presentation of a custom-designed nanocontainer loaded with NaYF4:Tm3+,Yb3+ NPs. Versatile nanocontainers can be fabricated in a two-step process, namely the layer-by-layer adsorption (Stage II) of polyelectrolytes (PEs) on a polymeric oil core (Stage I). N,N-Bis[3,3-(dimethylamine)propyl] dodecanamide dichloride, C12(DAPACl)2 acts as a stabilizer of the silicone core polymeric template. The PE library contains standard (e.g., PSS (polysodium 4-styrenesulphonate) and PDADMAC (poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride)) as well as biodegradable sugar-based (e.g., DEX (anionic dextran) and CHIT (cationic chitosan)) PEs. Reprint from ref. 175 (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Concept of non-resonant ground-state absorption (GSA) and resonant excited-state-absorption (ESA) for NIR-II-to-NIR-I bioimaging. (B) Energy-looping mechanism in Tm3+-doped NaYF4 for 800 nm upconversion luminescence under 1064 nm excitation.90 Reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8423–8433. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)


(A) Nanothermometers operating in the visible wavelength region
YF3:Er3+,Yb3+	658	525, 550	LIR	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	∼1.5	0	0–100	Powder	
184

KY3F10:Er3+,Yb3+	∼0.9	100
KY2F22:Er3+,Yb3+
KY3F10/YF3:Er3+


LaF3:Er3+,Yb3+ core/LaF3:Nd3+ shell	808	525, 550	LIR	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	1.6	30	20-120	Powder, ex vivo	
185



NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+,Li+	980	525, 545	LIR	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	0.59	180	27–180	Powder	
35



NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ core/NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb shell/NIR-dye	808	525, 545	LIR	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	1.2	30	30–150	Powder	
186



NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+	980	545	Lifetime	
4S3/2	0.54	
	26–60	Powder, ex vivo	
187,188

NaY2F5O:Er3+,Yb3+	545	
4S3/2	1.5
NaY2F5O:Er3+,Yb3+	660	
4F9/2	0.7


NaLuF4:Tm3+,Er3+,Yb3+	980	525, 545	LIR (Er3+)	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	0.77a	
	27–327	Powder	
189

475, 450	Intensity ratio (Tm3+)	
1G4 → 3H6, 1D2 → 3F4	6.04a
695, 660	ET (Er3+ → Tm3+)	
3F2 → 3H6 (Tm3+), 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 (Er3+)	0.76a


La2O3:Tm3+,Yb3+	980	480	Lifetime	
1G4	0.16	
	25–60	Powder, ex vivo	
190

La2O3:Tm3+,Er3+,Yb3+	0.67


Na0.5Gd0.5MoO4:Er3+,Yb3+	980	525, 545	LIR	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	0.856a	3173	25–505	Powder	
191

0.48a	0


LiYbPO4O12:Er3+	980	520, 550	LIR	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	
	
	−183–297	Powder	
192

cw	∼0.5
Pulsed	2.88


KLu(WO4)2:Tm3+,Ho3+,Yb3+	808	696, 545	Intensity ratio	
3F2,3 → 3H6 (Tm3+)	0.61	
	22–250	Powder	
188


5S2/5F4 → 5I8 (Ho3+)


(B) Nanothermometers operating in the NIR-I biological window
LaF3:Nd3+	808	866, 887	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2	0.25	RTb	10–55	Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo	
193, 194



LaF3:Nd3+ thermally treated	808	861, 863	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2	0.4	
	20–60	Powder, aqueous dispersion, ex vivo	
195



LaF3:Nd3+ & Au Nanorods@PLGA	790	863, 886	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2	0.2a	
	25–65	Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo	
196



Y3Al5O12(YAG):Nd3+	808	940	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2	0.15	
	10–70	Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo	
197



YVO4:Nd3+	808	879, 887	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2	0.19	
	25–60	Aqueous dispersion	
17



(GdNd)2O3	580	892	Intensity ratio	
4F5/2 → 4I9/2	1.75	15	15–50	Powder	
16

1076	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2


NaNbO3:Tm3+	1319	800	Stark splitting	
3H4 → 3H6	0.75	30–60	22–90	Powder, aqueous dispersion	
198



LiNdP4O12	808	880	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I9/2	0.22	40	32–83	Aqueous dispersion	
199



LiLa0.4Nd0.1Yb0.5P4O12	808	870	Intensity ratio (Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET)	
4I3/2 → 4I9/2 (Nd3+)	∼0.4	57	−180–390	Powder, aqueous dispersion	
18

1000	
2F5/2 → 2F7/2 (Yb3+)


LiLaP4O12:Nd3+,Cr3+	665	840	Intensity ratio	Cr3+	4.89	50	−160–180	Powder	
200

1048	
	
2H11/2 → 4I11/2 (Nd3+)


(C) Nanothermometers operating in the NIR-II/III biological windows
YVO4:Nd3+	808	1063	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I11/2	0.15	
	25–60	Aqueous dispersion	
17

1072


(GdNd)2O3	808	1350	Stark splitting	
4F3/2 → 4I11/2	0.23	30	27–127	Powder	
201



LaF3:Yb3+ core/LaF3:Nd3+ shell	808	1350	Intensity ratio	
4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (Nd3+)	0.74	20	15–50	Aqueous dispersion, ex vivo	
202

1000	(Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET)	
2F5/2 → 2F7/2 (Yb3+)


LaF3:Nd3+ core/LaF3:Yb3+ shell	790	1300	Intensity ratio	
4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (Nd3+)	0.41	10	10–50	Powder, PBSc dispersion, in vivo	
19

LaF3:Yb3+ core/LaF3:Nd3+ shell	1000	(Nd3+ → Yb3+ ET)	
2F5/2 → 2F7/2 (Yb3+)	0.36
LaF3:Nd3+,Yb3+	0.1


NaGdF4:Nd3+ & PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs@PLGA	808	1060	Intensity ratio	
4F3/2 → 4I11/2 (Nd3+)	2.5	30	10–50	PBS dispersion	
203

1250	QDs


NaGdF4:Er3+,Ho3+,Yb3+ core/NaGdF4:Yb3+ shell/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+ shell/NaGdF4 shell	806	1180	Intensity ratio	
5I6 → 5I8 (Ho3+)	1.1	
	20–50	Aqueous dispersion	
204

1340	
4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (Nd3+)
1550	
4I13/2 → 4I15/2 (Er3+)

 	Fig. 8  Nanothermometry based on Nd3+ to Yb3+ ET – temperature evolution of the emission spectra of LiLa0.8Nd0.1Yb0.1P4O12 NPs under 808 nm excitation. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 9  Optical monitoring of the dynamics of thermal relaxation under physiological conditions: (A) fluorescence top-image of a CD1 mouse (delimited by the dashed line) where the subcutaneous injection of LaF3:Nd3+/LaF3:Yb3+ core–shell NPs is evidenced by the bright fluorescence spot. (B) Digital picture of the CD1 mouse during in vivo thermal relaxation experiments. (C) Schematic representation of the subcutaneous thermal relaxation experiments. Thermal infrared images of the CD1 mouse before (D) and at the end (E) of the heating stimulus. (F) Time evolution of the temperatures measured using the subcutaneous luminescent thermometer (grey) and the IR thermal camera (orange). Dots are experimental subcutaneous (circles) and skin (squares) temperatures, whereas the solid line is the obtained fit.19 Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1695–1703. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Nanothermometry in the NIR-II and NIR-III biological transparency windows. (A) Schematic representation of water-dispersible NaGdF4:Er3+,Ho3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4:Yb3+/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+/NaGdF4 core–multi–shell NPs encapsulated in phospholipid (PEG-DOPE) micelles. (B) Temperature dependent emission bands originating from Ho3+ (1.18 μm), Nd3+ (1.34 μm) and Er3+ (1.55 μm) allowing for NIR-II and NIR-III ratiometric nanothermometry under 806 nm excitation. (C) Suggested interplay of ET processes between Ln3+ ions and from Ln3+ ions to surrounding water molecules. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  One-particle-approach for simultaneous sensing and heating under single beam excitation using Yb3+-doped core/highly Nd3+-doped shell LaF3 nanostructures. (A) Temperature dependent emission spectra of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ core–shell NPs under 808 nm excitation. (B) Calibration (red circles) and sensitivity (orange squares) curves of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ nanothermometers (laser power density: 0.2 W cm−2). (C) Thermal images of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ with different Nd3+ concentrations (λex = 808 nm, laser power density: of 3.4 W cm−2). Control corresponds to a microscope slide without LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+. (D) Temperature variation of LaF3:Yb3+/LaF3:Nd3+ under different laser power densities obtained with an infrared thermal camera and a nanothermometer.202 Reprinted from Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 253103, with the permission of AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic representation of PDT comprising three elements: light, a photosensitizer and oxygen. When the photosensitizer is exposed to specific wavelengths of light, it becomes activated from a ground to an excited state. As it returns to the ground state, it releases energy, which is transferred to oxygen generating reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as singlet oxygen and free radicals. These ROS mediate cellular toxicity.209 (B) Dual-agent photosensitizing nanoplatform combining UV-blue emitting multi-shell UCNPs (λex = 808 nm), TiO2 (UV-light-excited photosensitizer) and hypocrellin A (blue-light-excited photosensitizer).210 Reprinted from Biomaterials, 101, Z. Hou et al., “808 nm Light-triggered and hyaluronic acid-targeted dual-photosensitizers nanoplatform by fully utilizing Nd3+-sensitized upconversion emission with enhanced anti-tumor efficacy”, 32–46, Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Multimodal Ln3+-based NP nanoplatform combining NIR-I imaging, MRI, and PDT for 4T1 breast murine tumour after topical administration in vivo. (A) Time-dependent tumour imaging with an 808 nm laser (520 mW cm−2). The yellow arrow indicates the tumour site. (B) In vivo T2-weighted colour-mapped MRI of the tumour. (C) Tumour volume growth curves and (D) digital photos of tumour for the four groups of mice. The scale bar is 2 cm. (E) Average weight of the tumours and (F) major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) collected from the four groups of mice. (G) TUNEL analysis of the tumours after PDT. The apoptotic cells in the tissues were labelled with FITC, while the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342.261 Reprinted with permission from ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2766–2773. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  NIR-mediated activation of an anticancer PtIV complex by UCNPs: spectral overlap between the UV-Vis absorption (normalized, grey) of Pt complex (1) and the upconverted emission (normalized, blue) of NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs (λex = 980 nm). Adapted from ref. 263 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic model and TEM image of Tm3+-based UCNPs (UCNP@mSiO2), modified with mesoporous SiO2. (B) The upconverted blue luminescence of Tm3+ triggers the cleavage of Ru complexes and the release of DOX from the DOX-loaded and Ru-modified UCNP@mSiO2 nanoparticles.266Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 431–434. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 1  Shining a light on spectral converting Ln3+-based nanoprobes: potential and challenges of upconverting and NIR emitting multifunctional NPs on the way to real-life biomedical applications.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
