Feasibility analysis of a CO 2 recycling plant for the decarbonization of formate and dihydroxyacetone production   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01042E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01042E
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4840-4851Feasibility analysis of a CO2 recycling plant for the decarbonization of formate and dihydroxyacetone production†

        
          
            M. 
            Rumayor
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Dominguez-Ramos
          
        
       and 

        
          
            A. 
            Irabien
          
        
      
University of Cantabria, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Av. Los Castros s/n, Santander, Spain. E-mail: marta.rumayor@unican.es;   Tel: (+34) 942 20 67 49
Received 
      25th March 2021
    , Accepted 1st June 2021First published on 1st June 2021AbstractRenewable-driven CO2 recycling plants (CO2RPs) to produce chemicals have a certain role to play in the decarbonization of the economy. In recent years, significant progress has been made in the decarbonization of chemicals such as formate/formic acid (HCOO−/HCOOH) by CO2 electrochemical reduction (CO2ER). The traditional approach consists of the cathodic CO2ER coupled to the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Current trends consist of alternative anodic processes, such as glycerol (GLY) electro-oxidation (EOG), as a powerful alternative to the OER because it can noticeably lower the cell voltage. Also, this recent alternative leads to the formation of products in the anode with more economic value than O2, for example, the fine chemical dihydroxyacetone (DHA). Until now factors other than just the energy savings in the ER cell have been neglected. But these factors, such as the anodic market size, the downstream separation energy demand, etc., have to be contemplated in the whole decarbonization picture. In the present study, we analyze the environmental and economic benefits of the integrated production of HCOO− and DHA by a renewable-driven CO2RP in which the traditional OER is substituted by the EOG alternative. Life Cycle Thinking was used to support the decision-making. HCOO− and DHA fossil routes as well as the traditional decarbonization OER scheme (that decarbonized the amount of HCOO−) were used for benchmarking. The integrated production in the proposed CO2RP is highly limited by the small market size of DHA compared to that of HCOO− and also by the high energy requirements in the DHA purification step. Anodic DHA concentration over 1.5 wt% is compulsory in short–mid-term developments to achieve a positive decarbonization scenario wherein the integrated production of DHA and HCOO− is compared with the traditional route. A noticeable reduction in the market price of DHA would be possible with appropriate anode developments. In addition, we evaluate the influence of the renewable electricity market forecast in the economic figures of DHA and HCOO− produced by the co-electrolysis technology.
Introduction
The world's heavy reliance on the limited fossil fuels has caused an excess of anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere overtaking nature's CO2 recycling capability. This disturbance has resulted in the so-called greenhouse effect1 and global warming. In recent decades, policy targets and scientific/technological efforts have been focused on reducing CO2 emissions. In fact, the decarbonization of the economy is at the heart of the European Green Deal.2 In this sense, chemical synthesis using the recycled greenhouse gas (GHG) CO2, as a feedstock, could open up a complementary strategy for decarbonizing the chemical industry while contributing to the closing of the anthropogenic carbon cycle. CO2 recycling leads to another long-term concern; it can reduce our dependency on the still relatively available fossil resources. With the feasible implementation of carbon recycling plants (CO2RPs), especially if they are integrated into hard-to-abate sectors,3 CO2 emissions would become an economically attractive resource to produce value-added fossil-free chemicals. The climate benefits of these CO2-conversion chemicals rely on a substitution effect, which is the reduction in resource consumption and CO2 emissions elsewhere in the economy when conventional products are finally replaced by them. Of course, the energy needed for CO2 conversion to chemicals has to be low-carbon to provide an environmental benefit over the fossil production route. Another advantage is related to the use of intermittent renewable sources (RWs) (i.e. PV solar and wind) that are currently limited by storage possibilities. CO2RPs could be a powerful strategy to convert this intermittent power source into storable carbon-neutral chemicals. Much progress has been achieved in recent years and some projects have already entered the market, such as the company CRI in Iceland that produces 4000 t per year of methanol via CO2 hydrogenation using surpluses of geothermal energy.4
Several chemicals could be derived from CO2 and the technologies to convert CO2 into such chemicals are countless and found at different stages of maturity and performance.5 Among the many CO2 conversion products, we highlight formate or formic acid (HCOO−/HCOOH) as it may be employed as both a feedstock chemical and a fuel. The conventional production process of HCOO− involves the heating of the fossil raw materials carbon monoxide (CO) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) under pressure (or methanol (CH3OH) that replaces NaOH in the HCOOH production route). A clear advantage of HCOO−/HCOOH is that it is a liquid product so it can be easily stored and distributed according to the existing infrastructure. Regarding the global market of this chemical, it has evidenced a linear growth in the past few years, which is estimated to increase in the coming years from 620 kton in 2012 to 1 Mton in 2030 (around 350 kton in the EU).6 This fact is mostly motivated by its potential as a storage medium for hydrogen.7 Among the CO2 conversion technologies, electrochemical reduction (CO2 ER) is currently the most mature technology to produce HCOO−/HCOOH from CO2 and the expected timeframe until deployment is only 10 years.5 Det Norske Veritas (DNV)8 and Mantra Venture Group9 have reported results from 350 kg HCOOH per yr and 35 ton HCOOH per yr pilot plants, respectively. These plants are based on the ER of CO2 in conjunction with anodic water oxidation (i.e. with oxygen (O2) obtained as the by-product).
In recent decades, the CO2 ER studies have been focused on developing new catalysts, electrolytes and electrochemical reactors.10 The common configuration scheme found in the literature is based on the co-electrolysis of CO2 (in the cathode) and water (in the anode) by the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). A recent study carried out within the research group of the authors has shown important progress regarding the cathode performance at the lab scale11 reaching energy consumption values as low as 3.92 kW h kg−1 of HCOO− and HCOO− concentrations close to 30 wt%. These values follow the latest figures of merit found in a recent study carried out by the authors in which low-carbon HCOO−/HCOOH could be achieved by the ER of CO2 (using the OER in the anode).12 However, the OER consumes up to 90% of the electricity input in the electrochemical (EC) cell13 and recent techno-economic studies suggest the anodic electro-oxidation of glycerol (EOG) as a powerful alternative to the anodic OER resulting in a reduction of the overall electricity consumption by 53%.13,14 The EOG reaction is also an opportunity to produce commercially valuable chemicals in the anode (instead of O2) from widely available wastes, such as glycerol (GLY), making a sound contribution to the circular economy. Several EOG products are possible such as glyceraldehyde (GLAD), dihydroxyacetone (DHA), and glyceric acid (GA). Unlike the sacrificial OER-based anodes, which produce O2 and can be valorized or emitted to the air with no impact, these alternative production-anodes generate mostly liquid products (e.g. DHA, GLAD, and GA). Among them, DHA is one of the most economically interesting anodic products due to its high market price (ca. 2 € kg−1).15 Despite the high economic value, such liquid products must be purified; otherwise, they would be considered as liquid wastes and the benefit from the EOG energy savings will be completely overshadowed by the impact of the anode-waste management. As a rule, several factors other than just EC cell energy savings must be considered when assessing this novel approach, such as (i) the economic value of the anode product; (ii) its market size; (iii) the cell voltage; and (iv) the complexity of the anode-product separation.15
In the present study, we analyze the whole decarbonization picture to determine the environmental and economic feasibility of a CO2RP that is based on the co-electrochemical conversion of CO2 and GLY into HCOO− and DHA. The results are compared with those of the conventional routes and the production by the traditional/first decarbonization approach, which considers the traditional anodic water oxidation. The study addresses (i) the possibilities of carbon footprint (CF) reduction with the proposed joint production in a CO2RP that uses the alternative anodic EOG with respect to the conventional HCOO− and DHA and the well-known traditional decarbonization approach (using anodic-OER); (ii) the key economic performance indicators including the capital expenditure (CAPEX) and operational expenditure (OPEX), the net present value (NPV) and the total cost of production (TCP) of the proposed CO2RP; (iii) the possibilities for a near-term DHA market price reduction; and (iv) the influence of the renewable electricity market forecast and other variables (cost of the EC cell, CO2 price, etc.) in the overall economic figures. This study may guide the future development of innovative processes in CO2RPs in the context of chemical industry decarbonization.
Methodology
In this paper, we investigate the environmental benefits (in terms of carbon footprint (CF)) and the impact on economic figures of the recently proposed decarbonization scheme, which is based on renewable-driven electrochemical conversion of CO2 and GLY (considering anodic-EOG instead of the traditional anodic-OER) into HCOO− and DHA. This scheme will permit an integrated decarbonization of HCOO− and DHA within the same plant. Therefore, the authors used for benchmarking the CF for the same amount of these chemicals when they are produced by their conventional fossil-based routes as well as the first/traditional approach that decarbonizes the amount of HCOO− using the ER of CO2 coupled to the anodic-OER. The comparison between these three scenarios (Fig. 1) will provide the whole picture of the decarbonization possibilities arising from the recently proposed decarbonization scheme (Fig. 1(c)) with respect to the benchmark, which includes conventional routes (Fig. 1(a)) and of course, the traditional/first decarbonization approach that was previously assessed (Fig. 1(b)).3,16–18 According to our final objective, which is to produce HCOO− and DHA in the same integrated plant (CO2RP), the chosen functional unit (FU) is a mass combination of HCOO− and DHA. As mentioned before, the first restriction is the market capacities of both chemicals that will determine the plant capacity and the FU. Both parameters must be established considering that HCOO− and DHA have different market sizes. It must be taken into account that 1 Mton yr−1 is the global HCOO−/HCOOH capacity (around 350 kton yr−1 in the EU) whereas DHA capacity is limited to only 10 kton yr−1 (in the EU).19 According to this market limitation, it is not possible to follow just the EOG stoichiometry (shown in the ESI†) as it would make no sense to assume a discarding of the excess of DHA. If we consider to discard the excess DHA, any benefit from EC energy savings will be overshadowed by the impact of waste treatment. Annual capacities of conventional formic acid plants could range from 20kton to more than 50 kton. The production capacity for HCOO− was fixed in this study at 12 kton yr−1 according to similar CO2 utilization studies3,20 and taking into account the local production. The DHA capacity in the CO2RP was restricted to 60% of the total EU capacity. A value of 5.7 kton yr−1 was assumed for the DHA capacity in the proposed CO2RP (according to its small market size). Hence, in the proposed CO2RP a switch between EOG and OER anodes must be made to fulfil the DHA market restriction. Once the DHA capacity (5.7 kton yr−1) is achieved, an anode based on the OER (e.g. a commercial dimensionally stable O2 anode (O2-DSA)) continues producing O2 until the plant accomplishes the HCOO− capacity (12 kton yr−1). An anode switching is possible thanks to the EC's modular design.21 Then, the EOG anode is disengaged (when 5.7 kton yr−1 are produced) and the OER anode is assembled. Furthermore, the appropriate electrolyte is pumped. It should be mentioned that the electrolyte is usually circulated via an external parallel-feed-manifold arrangement and therefore it can be switched simultaneously with the anode. Accordingly, the chosen FU is a joint amount of 1.00 kg of HCOO− and 0.47 kg of DHA. Note that a corresponding amount of water of 0.177 kg is considered in the mass balance to reach a HCOO− concentration of 84 wt%, which is the current standard purity.
 Fig. 1  System boundary of the proposed decarbonization scenarios: (a) traditional production (S1); (b) first decarbonization approach (S2); and (c) new decarbonization approach by the CO2RP to produce both HCOO− and DHA (S3). *Conventional HCOO− route (S1) and DHA chemocatalytic route (S1 and S2) were modelled according to the benchmarking datasets.23,24 Note that heat and electricity in those datasets come from steam and grid mix, respectively. Conventional routes powered by renewables are also assessed by sensitivity analyses. 
A mathematical model built in previous studies18,22 has been expanded to include the decarbonization approach (labelled as S3). The conventional production of HCOO− and DHA (labelled as S1) and the first/traditional HCOO− decarbonization approach by ER of CO2 coupled to the anodic-OER (labelled as S2) (updated with the latest performance parameters) are used for benchmarking. The authors analyze the environmental benefit, in terms of CF, and then, the influence on economics by comparing the obtained results in the proposed S3 with those from the previous well-known scenarios (S1 and S2).
Description of scenarios

Conventional production and first/traditional decarbonization approach (benchmark). 
The conventional scenario called S1 integrates the conventional production of 1.00 kg of sodium formate salt (HCOONa) and 0.47 kg of 1,3-dihydroxyacetone (DHA). Furthermore, the authors included the first decarbonization approach labelled as S2. These scenarios will serve in this study as benchmarks to analyze the proposed HCOO− and DHA joint production by the renewable-driven CO2RP (S3).
The corresponding amount of HCOO− (1.00 kg) produced in S1 is modelled using the Ecoinvent dataset for HCOONa23 while the DHA amount (0.47 kg) has been modelled by the chemocatalytic zeolite-based production route.24,25 Note that from the environmental perspective HCOONa and HCOOH have almost the same impact on the environment.26 Both chemicals can be produced during the CO2ER in the cathode (depending on the chemicals involved in the process and the pH), but most ER studies found in the literature report neutral to alkaline conditions. Under these conditions, a formate-based salt is the chemical species that should be preferentially obtained.27 Hence, the authors decided to choose the conventional production of HCOONa in the benchmark scenario. On the other hand, the chemocatalytic zeolite-based production is assumed as the DHA conventional production route according to the latest DHA production trends, which indicated this route as a possible replacement for the currently practised low-productive technology based on the biocatalytic process using the enzyme Gluconobacter oxydans.19 Note that the authors are performing a prospective or ex-ante feasibility assessment so the time at which the comparison is made must be aligned to the same development stage for all the modelled technologies.28 Nevertheless, the conventional route for HCOONa is mature with high productivity, and the currently biocatalytic system practised for DHA production has very low productivity and a high carbon footprint impact (around 5 kg CO2 eq. per kg).24 For this reason, the chemocatalytic zeolite-based process was assumed in the conventional benchmark to achieve a fair prospective comparison. Both biocatalytic and chemocatalytic DHA production inventories are detailed in the ESI.†
The first decarbonization approach (S2) includes the common EC configuration in which CO2 is captured from a hard-to-abate source and reduced in the cathode to produce low-carbon HCOO− while water is oxidized in the sacrificial OER-anode to produce O2 that can be emitted to the air with a negligible impact. The amount of DHA (0.47 kg) in S2 comes from its conventional route as so far there is no CO2-based route to produce DHA. The first decarbonization approach (for 1 kg of HCOO−) has been previously modelled and assessed by the authors.16,17 However, as a novelty, in this study the authors have used the latest ER performance parameters11 for modelling and DHA production has been integrated in the model.


Decarbonization alternative using a CO2 recycling plant (CO2RP). 
In the proposed scenario, called S3, a CO2RP uses the co-electrolysis technology achieving a joint production of HCOO− and DHA. The S3 scenario enables us to evaluate the influence of the recent anode alternative (anodic-EOG) for the integrated decarbonization of these chemicals. On the one hand, the feasibility of EOG (using glycerol, an abundant by-product of biodiesel production) coupled to the oxygen reduction reaction has been effectively proved.29–31 On the other hand, Verma et al.13 have recently proposed to couple the anodic EOG to the cathodic ER of CO2 in order to reduce the cell voltage. According to that, the benefit of S3 with respect to S2 is not only the reduction of the EC energy consumption but also the possibility to decarbonize the amount of DHA (together with HCOO−) and to reduce the fossil resource consumption by recycling CO2 and GLY, a by-product from biodiesel production, as raw materials, which makes a sound contribution to the circular economy. The authors aim to assess the conditions in which this alternative decarbonization approach could be considered feasible from the environmental and economic perspectives.
The system boundary of S3 includes (i) the capture technology that is based on absorption using MEA32 (a well-established end-of-pipe technology; the capture inventory can be found in the ESI†); (ii) the electrochemical process (EC cell); (iii) the purification of formate-based products by distillation; (iv) the compression of gas by-products and pumping for liquids; and (v) an electric heating unit to supply thermal energy from renewable electricity to the capture, purification and compression steps. In addition, we include (vi) a crude GLY purification step; and (vii) DHA purification (by crystallization technology). A detailed process simulation including the corresponding mass flows, compositions, and P&T in the involved streams is out of the scope of the present study.
The CO2 captured and water are injected into the cathode compartment. As the solubility of CO2 is assumed to be high enough, the soluble CO2 reaches the cathode surface. The reaction is performed under neutral to alkaline conditions.27 CO2 is reduced to HCOO− and H2O to hydroxide ions (OH−), in the presence of the corresponding electrolyte in the cathodic compartment of the EC cell. Simultaneously, EOG takes place in the anode to form the mentioned amount of DHA (C3H6O3) (5.7 kton yr−1, limited by its market size). When the production of DHA is completed, a sacrificial-OER anode (the same as that used in S2) continues producing O2. Note that in an ideal EC reactor, a perfect electrode would lead to a value of 100% for the faradaic current efficiency (FE) in both compartments. This would correspond with the formation of pure HCOO− in the cathode and pure O2/DHA in the anode. However, a fraction of the applied current density is deviated to other parallels/parasitic reactions,27 reducing the FE of the HCOO− production. In this study, the H2 evolution reaction (HER) is assumed as the unique parallel reaction in the cathode. The O2 evolution reaction (in OER anode) and the DHA production (in EOG anode) are the only reactions taking place in the anodic compartment in each case. Within the electrochemical process, the cathode performance is entirely modelled by the latest lab-scale parameters obtained by the research group of the authors, which are the same as in S2.11 In S3, an EOG anode (Pt–Bi/C) produces a limited amount of DHA and then, it is switched by a sacrificial OER-anode (a commercial DSA-O2 that produces O2) while the cathode performance scenario is maintained (Bi-GDEs) (Table 1). The DHA production rate by the EOG anode was linearly estimated from the values found in the literature31 and considering compatible current densities between the cathode and anode (j, 45 mA cm−2). A detailed cathode and anodes (both OER and EOG) performance description is given in the ESI†.
Table 1 Performance of the CO2RP and the traditional decarbonization approach (more information is available in the ESI†)




Parameter
Traditional approach
Alternative approach


S2
S3


 
1st stage
2nd stage





a The DHA amount (5.7 kton yr−1) is produced by the chemocatalytic process in the traditional decarbonization approach.





Cathode
Bi-GDEs
Bi-GDEs
Bi-GDEs


Anode
DSA-O2
Pt-Bi/C
DSA-O2


Production HCOO− (kton yr−1)
12.0
3.0
9.0


Production DHA




5.7
—




Energy consumption is considered as the PV solar electricity for the EC step, the compression of gas by-products and the purification of DHA and GLY. The thermal energy required by the CO2 capture and desorption and the units for the distillation of HCOO− and DHA purification (crystallization) were supplied by renewable heat instead of using fossil heat (i.e. steam from natural gas). The authors considered an electric boiler to produce electric-steam with a 99% heat/electricity efficiency driven by PV solar electricity.33 Electric boilers have demonstrated to be suitable for larger installations using higher voltages and power capacities at lower installation expenses.34 Mass and energy balances, including the pumping of liquids, compression of gas subproducts, the distillation of HCOO−, crystallization of DHA and purification of the required amount of GLY are described in the ESI.†

Carbon footprint assessment
In this study, CFs of the FU in the benchmarks S1 and S2 and the CF of the proposed decarbonization alternative in S3 were determined through the admittedly ex-ante LCA tool, which is the best tool to assess the projected future of emerging technologies before their large-scale implementation.35 The procedure evaluates the technology using scenarios that detail a future in which the technology system can operate at a full operational scale. This does enable estimating and simulating the technology in the target scenarios, in particular those with maximum energy efficiency and better production rates for both HCOO− and DHA conversion products. The scenarios have been evaluated using a cradle-to-gate approach. The LCA assessment was performed using the GaBi Professional software by Sphera.36 The mid-point method CML 2001 was used to calculate the CFs. The method restricts quantitative modelling to early stages in the cause-effect chain to limit uncertainties.37 This method allows the assessment of impact grouped in midpoint categories according to common environmental mechanisms (e.g. global warming, abiotic depletion, etc.) or commonly accepted groupings (e.g. ecotoxicity). It must be highlighted that the global warming impact (evaluated in terms of CF) was the only impact category shown in this study because the viability of the suggested technology should be fulfilled at least for the impact category indicator that is intended to benefit from this decarbonization process. Of course, a complete LCA study (including other environmental impact categories) must be considered as future work when this technology reaches a higher TRL. Furthermore, in this study, we have considered transport as a negligible impact in comparison with the parameters that are inherent to the decarbonization technology (e.g. electricity consumption, CO2 capture, GLY purification, etc.). Regarding GLY, we have only considered the impact that comes from the concentration upgrading (the inventory and purification details of crude GLY can be found in the ESI†). But GLY is assumed as burden-free. In any case, this assumption is pessimistic as it could have even negative CF value (−0.27 kg CO2 kg per FU) because biomass absorbs CO2 in the cultivation stage.38 Certainly, other influences such as transport, geographical location, renewable sources, specific origin of CO2 or GLY etc. must also be considered and studied for each particular solution before the implementation of the emerging technology in CO2RPs. In the scenarios S2 and S3 a system expansion was carried out following the ISO 14040-series39,40 to quantify the effect of minor sub-products on the emissions of the CO2RP when necessary (i.e. H2 and O2 that are produced in the cathode and anode, respectively). H2 and O2 could be valorized and included as avoided emissions or emitted to the atmosphere with a negligible environmental impact. Their CFs, calculated using their Ecoinvent datasets, are 1.75 kg kg−1 and 0.702 kg kg−1 for H2 and O2 respectively (expressed as the amount of CO2 eq. per unit of mass of H2/O2 produced). The following additional hypotheses were assumed in this study:
 i. The CO2 valorization plant is close to the CO2 and GLY sources and then no transport is considered. CO2RP are intended to be implemented in industrial clusters.
 ii. The feed of CO2 to the plant is assumed to be pure and with a suitable pressure for the ER process.
 iii. The crude GLY as waste coming from biodiesel production is assumed to be free of environmental burdens.
 iv. The vapour steam (from the electric boiler) needed for the purification units is at dry saturated conditions.
 v. The electrolytes used in the process can be perfectly separated and recirculated and therefore their impacts are neglected.
Economic assessment
An economic analysis has been conducted to estimate the total cost of production (TCP) required to synthesize HCOO− and DHA in S2 and S3 that can be compared with the reference conventional market prices 0.65 € kg−1 (HCOO−) and 2 € kg−1 (DHA). The economic impact in S3 caused by the DHA co-electrolysis (including its purification cost) was also evaluated.
The capital (CAPEX) and operational (OPEX) expenditures of each scenario were estimated together with the calculation of the key performance indicator (KPI) of the net present value (NPV). The OPEX consists of fixed and variable operating costs (FCP and VCP, respectively). VCP includes the costs of (i) raw materials consumed by the processes, (ii) utilities, and (iii) consumables. FCP involves (i) operating labour, (ii) supervision, (iii) direct salary overhead, (iv) maintenance, (v) property taxes and insurance, and (vi) interest.
The currency exchange rate used in the study is €2020, which was based on Eurostat data.41 The preferred geographical location of the analysis is the EU-27. The lifetime of the plant is assumed to be 20 years. The reader must note that at the current low TRL values of the co-electrolysis technology, it is not suitable to envisage larger plant lifetimes. Most of these prices and costs were assumed constant for the analyzed period. However, a sensitivity analysis was performed in order to investigate the sensitivity of the NPV to the expected variation of some affecting parameters. We chose the economic parameters that are likely to change in the short/mid-term such as energy price, CO2 price and of course, the market price of DHA. The plant features, cost of equipment and market price of utilities that were considered in the assessment are shown in the ESI.† The assessment of the market penetration of the emerging technology (scenario S3) is out of the scope of the present study. It must be taken into account that this technology is in its infancy (proof of concept and lab-scale) and there is a restriction marked by the lack of data.
Results and discussion
Carbon footprint assessment
The operating inventories obtained from the mathematical model for the production of the FU (1.00 kg of HCOO− + 0.47 kg of DHA) are shown in the ESI.† Briefly, raw materials for the first/traditional decarbonization approach (scenario S2) are 0.957 kg of CO2 and 1.025 kg of H2O while 0.631 kg of GLY is required in the proposed S3 scenario. The inventory includes the values for the main utilities (heat and electricity) and the raw materials used in the processes. Other utilities displayed include the needs in both DHA and GLY purification processes such as air compressed, acetone, process water, etc. The noticeable energy consumption by the DHA purification process is highlighted. In particular, in S3 a value of heat consumption of 104 MJ kg−1 (per mass of FU) is required in this stage while 17.02 MJ kg−1 (per mass of FU) is required for the purification of the amount of HCOO−. It was expected due to the current low concentration of DHA in the anode outlet stream (0.4 wt%).

Fig. 2 displays the CF results of the production of the FU (1.00 kg of HCOO− + 0.47 kg of DHA) by the conventional S1, the traditional decarbonization scenario, S2, as well as the proposed joint decarbonization alternative in S3. By this comparison, the authors aim to demonstrate the decarbonization possibilities of S3 with respect to the conventional route (S1) as well as its competitiveness and hot spots when comparing with the traditional decarbonization approach (S2). The CF of the conventional production is around 2.8 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU. S2 achieves a considerable CF decline. The CF value in S2 is 1.5 kg CO2eq per FU considering no commercialization of by-products H2 and O2 and neither the CO2 amount recycled (0.957 kg), which would be assumed as allocated to the main product of the CO2 source (e.g. a hard-to-abate sector). If H2 and O2 would be considered (i.e. commercialization) and the amount of CO2 recycled allocated to the recycling plant, the CF value could be as low as 0.25 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU. Note that in scenario S2, DHA comes from its conventional production (blue bars). In any case, the CF range is lower than the CF of S1 (2.8 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU). The green bars represent the joint DHA and HCOO− production by the co-electrolysis in S3. In this case, DHA is synthesized in the EC cell, avoiding its conventional route. As expected, the CF results are higher than those obtained in S2 due to the high impact that comes from the DHA purification step. In the proposed alternative, and under the co-electrolysis assumptions, the obtained CF is 2.9 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU with no commercialization of the subproducts (H2 and O2) and the amount of CO2 recycled is allocated to the main product of the source. Nonetheless, the value is quite close to the CF value from S1 (2.8 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU) but higher than CF from S2. As expected, the CF values obtained from S2 show the great improvement of this traditional approach compared to our previous studies.12,22 It should be mentioned that this kind of decarbonization approaches would be competitive only if they are based on renewables (i.e. on a low carbon electricity) while the main constraint to the conventional route (S1) is the fossil resource consumption. Notice that these fossil resources, which are consumed as raw materials in S1, are avoided in the decarbonized pathways (S2 and S3). This fact is in agreement with the recent LCA guidelines for decarbonization technologies.42 Note that the conventional HCOO− + DHA route has only 0.581 kWh per unit of mass of FU of electricity consumption (from the Grid mix) while the HCOO− + DHA produced in the CO2RP, under our assumptions, can consume more than 4.0 kWh per mass of FU. In addition, heat consumption (as steam) represents an overall value of 3.633 MJ per mass of FU in the traditional S1. For a fair comparison, the authors have also considered the same renewable background in S1. If both heat and electricity consumption were supplied by renewables (from PV solar), the overall CF of S1 would decrease to 2.53 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU.
 Fig. 2  CF results of the conventional route (S1), the traditional decarbonization scenario (S2) and the joint production in the alternative scenario (S3) (CF values are expressed as unit of mass of CO2 eq. per unit of FU (1.00 kg of HCOO− + 0.47 kg of DHA)). 
A breakdown of the CFs in both decarbonization approaches is carried out to identify the hotspots and then to evaluate the challenges of the recent alternative decarbonization route (S3) by the comparison with the traditional approach (S2). Essentially, the authors aim to assess the window of opportunity of S3 in relation to the traditional approach (S2) in order to guide future developments of the electrochemical technology. According to the breakdown results (Fig. 3(a)), the electricity consumption by the HCOO− purification step and the EC cell are important contributors to the CF value from S2 according to our previous results.16 Of course, now the highest impact in the traditional scenario is the DHA, which comes from its conventional route. Its contribution represents the 46% of the overall CF value. Note that in S2 approach the amount of DHA is not decarbonized being still produced by its conventional route. The results indicate that certainly, co-electrolysis technology could open an opportunity to reduce the CF of such alternative anodic-chemicals, such as DHA, avoiding effectively the impact from their conventional production routes. The analysis of the breakdown results from S3 (Fig. 3(b)) shows the unbalanced compromise between the EC cell energy savings (achieved by the cell potential reduction when EOG replaces the OER) with the energy consumption by the purification of the anodic DHA. It can be seen that this consumption of energy by the purification step represents 74% of the CF value. Actually, DHA purification is the main hot spot of the novel decarbonization approach. Further research should focus now on the anode EOG performance to achieve a higher DHA concentration (i.e. new catalyst, electrolytes). Other contributions such as the HCOO− purification, the EC cell electricity consumption and CO2 capture step have a similar influence on the value. Processes such as pumping or GLY purification are negligible in both scenarios.
 Fig. 3  CF breakdown results of CF in scenarios S2 (a) and S3 (b). 
In agreement with the previous results, the next step is to establish the target DHA concentration that should be achieved at the anode compartment to ensure the environmental competitiveness of S3. A sensitivity assessment of the CF versus DHA anode concentration was performed (Fig. 4). Note that HCOO− concentration in the cathode compartment is fixed in this study at 30.0 wt% (in S2 and S3, according to the latest lab concentration achievements). A concentration of DHA over 1.5 wt% would be needed to achieve a CF equal to that of S2, i.e. carbon-free HCOO− compared with the conventional route. If we consider the commercialization of H2 and O2 and the amount of CO2 recycled (0.957 kg of CO2) was allocated to the recycling plant, a concentration of DHA over 2.4 wt% would suggest a net-zero emission of the joint production in the CO2RP (CF = 0.0 kg CO2eq per unit of mass of FU).
 Fig. 4  Sensitivity analysis of the influence of DHA concentration (in the anode) on the CF of S3 and the breakdown CF analysis in the target anode performance (DHA, 1.5 wt%). 
Economic assessment
Once the feasible/target performance scenario for S3 from the environmental perspective has been found, an economic assessment must be carried out. The objective is to evaluate the chance of S3 for being deployed under a future market perspective. The target performance scenario (found in the previous section) is that in which DHA is produced in the anode compartment at concentrations around 1.5 wt%. Taking this assumption, S3 could achieve the same decarbonization degree as the traditional decarbonization approach (S2). In this section, the economic viability of the investment for the installation of a CO2 capture and utilization plant is investigated for both S2 and S3 decarbonization scenarios. The KPI values are listed in Table 2. It was estimated that a CAPEX increment of 18% was needed for the EOG reaction instead of the OER in the anode, which is mainly due to the investment in DHA purification infrastructure and the higher price of the EOG anode that is under development comparing with the traditional DSA-O2 (that is commercially available). Fig. 5 shows the VCP distribution for both scenarios. The overall annual production cost expenditure (OPEX) for S2 and S3 are about 9.2 M€ and 17 M€, respectively. The most important contributor is the energy costs for HCOO− distillation (37%), consumables (37%) and electricity consumption by the EC cell (25%) in S2. On the other hand, the cost for DHA purification (42%) and consumables (28%) are the main cost contributors in S3 (Fig. 5); it is worth noting that other costs, such as pumping or GLY purification costs, are negligible.
 Fig. 5  Annual variable cost breakdown for S2 and S3. 
Table 2 Results of economic assessment for scenarios S2 and S3




KPIs
Unit
S2
S3




CAPEX
M€
27.0
32.0


VCP
€ kg−1
0.55
1.2


FCP
M€ yr−1
2.6
2.7


OPEX
M€ yr−1
9.2
17


TCPHCOO−
€ kg−1
0.90
0.67


TCPDHA
€ kg−1
—
1.40


NPV
M€
−31.0 (not feasible)
−5.00 (not feasible)




Both scenarios can be positive from the environment perspective, however, the NPV values obtained in the economic assessment indicate that both decarbonization approaches are still unfeasible under current market conditions. In order to know the situations in which these projects could become profitable, different sensitivity analyses have been performed for both S2 and S3. The influences of HCOO− market price, CO2 price (as benefits from a tax on emissions) and electricity market price in the NPV indicator of the traditional approach are shown in Fig. 6. At current HCOO− market prices (0.65 € kg−1) the project will be profitable for electricity market prices under 10 € MW h−1. Electricity market prices higher than 20 € MW h−1 would require increasing the current price for HCOO− in the market up to 0.85–1.00 € kg−1. The results show that CO2 price (considered as a tax on direct emissions from the source plant) is the less-sensitive parameter to the economics. Even though the CO2 market price is expected to vary considerably in the short/mid-term, the variation in the economic figures of the plant will be mild in comparison with the influence of the electricity or HCOO− prices. The results indicate that a price of electricity lower than 10 € MW h−1 would be necessary under current CO2 price (0.033 € kg−1) while prices over 15 € MW h−1 would allow positive NPVs considering an income from CO2 higher than 0.1 € kg−1. This CO2 income price (0.100 € kg−1) is found in the range of those CO2 tax values predicted in EU ETS by 2050.43 On the other hand, PV solar prices were predicted to decrease between 25 € MW h−1 and 45 € MW h−1 by 2030, reaching a value as low as 10 € MW h−1 by 2050.44,45
 Fig. 6  Sensitivity analysis of the influence in NPV of S2 of: (a) HCOO− and electricity market prices; and (b) CO2 price and electricity market price. 
The obtained NPV value for S3 (−5 M€) is much closer to the feasibility (NPV > 0) than the NPV from S2 (−31 M€). This fact denotes that the market conditions needed to ensure economic feasibility in the proposed decarbonization approach could be mild in comparison with the market conditions required under the traditional approach (S2). The main advantage in the economic figures of S3 is the benefit that comes from the commercialization of the fine chemical DHA. However, this benefit should be balanced with the DHA purification cost, which is the main contributor to the operation cost of this novel decarbonization approach. The authors carried out a sensitivity analysis to display the influence of the most leading parameters in the economics of S3 (Fig. 7). As can be seen in Fig. 7, the window of opportunity for economic feasibility is much broader than the feasibility window obtained in the previous traditional approach (shown in Fig. 6). The analysis of the influence of the DHA concentration (obtained in the anode compartment of the EC cell) on the NPV indicator (Fig. 7(a)) shows that DHA concentrations over 3 wt% improve noticeably the economic figures, even at the current electricity market price (40 € MW h−1). One of the parameters that affect the economic figures the most is the DHA market price (Fig. 7(b)). In this study, the price reduction possibilities were investigated since the current DHA market price is still significantly high (2 € kg−1). Despite the small current size of the DHA market in the EU, with the ongoing development of new cheaper production alternatives, it is expected that its market would expand and hence its market price could sharply decrease.19 The results obtained in the sensitivity assessment indicate that under electricity market prices lower than 20 € MW h−1, DHA market price could be reduced up to 1.6 € kg−1 (considering that 5.7 kton yr−1 of DHA is effectively sold in the market). Of course, the further expected future reduction of the electricity market price will promote DHA market price reductions. Other influences, such as the expected EC cell cost reduction (Fig. 7(c)) in the short/mid-term and the rising CO2 price (Fig. 7(d)), have been analysed. The influence of these parameters is much slighter than the influence of DHA market price or even the anodic DHA concentration, nevertheless, in combination with a reduction of the electricity market price, these could also improve the overall economic figures. Strong policies are expected in the coming years to create incentives for achieving a decarbonization roadmap including direct incentives or adjustments to the financial requirements for investment or utilities incentives for the companies that consider CO2 recycling, among other decarbonization solutions (e.g. hydrogen, biomass, electrification, etc.).46,47
 Fig. 7  Sensitivity analysis of the influence in the economics of S3 of the electricity market price and the variation of (a) DHA concentration; (b) DHA market price; (c) EC cell cost; and (d) CO2 price. 
Conclusions
This paper has investigated the possibilities of joint decarbonization of HCOO− and DHA manufacture using a carbon recycling plant (CO2RP), which is based on the renewable-driven co-electrochemical conversion of CO2 and glycerol (GLY). This study has shown environmental and economic benefits when alternative oxidation reactions such as GLY electro-oxidation (EOG) are considered in the anodic compartment instead of the traditional decarbonization approach, which is based on the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The environmental assessment results of HCOO− and DHA production in the reference scenario (based on the traditional decarbonization approach that used anodic-OER) displayed CF values for the joint production in the range of 1.5–1.2 kg kg−1. The integrated production in the proposed CO2RP is highly limited by the small market size of DHA compared to that of HCOO− and also by the high energy requirements in the DHA purification step. The proposed joint decarbonization approach in the CO2RP could represent 10% energy savings in the EC cell consumption as well as a benefit from the DHA production in the anode instead of the traditional low-value O2. The EC cell energy savings can be overshadowed by the large amount of energy consumed by DHA purification, which is currently synthesized at low concentrations in the anode compartment (0.4 wt%). A sensitivity analysis has indicated a target DHA concentration of 1.5 wt% to achieve a carbon-neutral synthesis compared with the traditional decarbonization approach. The economic assessment results for the traditional EC performance indicated that the project would be feasible when the electricity market price is under 10 € MW h−1 while the feasibility window obtained for the proposed joint HCOO− and DHA production in the CO2RP is much broader. The proposed decarbonization alternative would be economically feasible from electricity market price values of 20 € MW h−1 or lower. The CO2 price (considered as a tax on direct emissions from the source plant) that is expected to vary considerably in the short/mid-term is less sensitive to the economics. The market price of DHA could be noticeably reduced under appropriate development of the co-electrolysis technology. The results obtained in this study have demonstrated the environmental and economic benefits of the novel EC scheme of considering the EOG to DHA (in the anode) with the ER of CO2 to HCOO− (in the cathode). The study represents a step forward in electrochemical CO2 conversion, proposing the new figures of merit regarding the concentration of the alternative anodic product DHA as well as the possibilities for DHA market price reduction and the expected short–mid-term feasibility under electricity market price reduction.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) for the financial support through the project PID2019-108136RB-C31. We would also like to thank MINECO for providing the Juan de la Cierva postdoctoral contract (IJCI-2017-32621) to Marta Rumayor.
References
S. Arrhenius, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1896, 41, 237–276 CrossRef CAS .

          European Comission, European Commission,  2019, 24 Search PubMed .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11956–11966 CrossRef CAS .

          Carbon Recycling International (CRI), Carbon Recycling International, http://www.carbonrecycling.is/, (accessed 11 March 2019).
R. Chauvy, N. Meunier, D. Thomas and G. De Weireld, Appl. Energy, 2019, 236, 662–680 CrossRef CAS .

          Global CO2 Initiative and CO2 Sciences Inc., Global Roadmap for Implementing CO2 Utilization,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Eppinger and K.-W. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .

          Det Norske Veritas (DNV), Carbon dioxide utilisation: Electrochemical conversion of CO2: Opportunities and challenges,  2011 Search PubMed .

          M. V. Group, Mantra releases update on demonstration projects, http://mantraenergy.com/mantra-releases-update-on-demonstration-projects/, (accessed 3 March 2021).
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(6), 2165–2177 CrossRef CAS .
G. Díaz-Sainz, M. Alvarez-Guerra, B. Ávila-Bolívar, J. Solla-Gullón, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126965 CrossRef .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 914 CrossRef .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4(6), 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H. S. Oh and U. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5193 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vass, B. Endrődi and C. Janáky, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 25, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos, P. Perez and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 490–499 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Sustainable Prod. Consumption, 2019, 18, 72–82 CrossRef .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 914 CrossRef .
R. Ciriminna, A. Fidalgo, L. M. Ilharco and M. Pagliaro, ChemistryOpen, 2018, 7, 233–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pérez-Fortes, J. C. Schöneberger, A. Boulamanti, G. Harrison and E. Tzimas, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16444–16462 CrossRef .
A. S. Agarwal, Y. Zhai, D. Hill and N. Sridhar, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1301–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Sustainable Prod. Consumption, 2019, 18, 72–82 CrossRef .

          Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, The ecoinvent database Version 7, http://www.ecoinvent.org (accessed 3 May 2018) Search PubMed .
G. M. Lari, C. Mondelli, S. Papadokonstantakis, M. Morales, K. Hungerbühler and J. Pérez-Ramírez, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 106–118 RSC .
M. Morales, P. Y. Dapsens, I. Giovinazzo, J. Witte, C. Mondelli, S. Papadokonstantakis, K. Hungerbühler and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Energy
Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 558–567 RSC .
A. Dominguez-Ramos, B. Singh, X. Zhang, E. G. Hertwich and A. Irabien, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 104, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Oloman and H. Li, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 385–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Thonemann, A. Schulte and D. Maga, Sustainability, 2020, 12, 1–23 CrossRef .
M. Simões, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2106–2124 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Talebian-Kiakalaieh, N. A. S. Amin, K. Rajaei and S. Tarighi, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 1347–1379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon, Y. Birdja, I. Spanos, P. Rodriguez and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 759–764 CrossRef CAS .
L. Giordano, D. Roizard and E. Favre, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2018, 68, 146–163 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Ü. Yilmaz, R. Hartel, D. Keles, R. McKenna and W. Fichtner, Analysis of the potential for Power-to-Heat/Cool applications to increase flexibility in the European electricity system until 2030,  2017 Search PubMed .

          D. Schüwer and C. Schneider, Eceee Industrial Summer Study Proceedings, 2018-June,  2018, pp. 411–422 .
S. Cucurachi, C. Van Der Giesen and J. Guinée, Procedia CIRP, 2018, 69, 463–468 CrossRef .

Sphera,  2019 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Guinée, M. Gorrée, R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, R. Kleijn, A. de Koning, L. van Oers, A. Wegener Sleeswijk, S. Suh, H. A. Udo de Haes, H. de Bruijn, R. van Duin and M. A. J. Huijbregts, Handbook on life cycle assessment. Operational guide to the ISO standards. I: LCA in perspective. IIa: Guide. IIb: Operational annex. III: Scientific background, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. Galera and F. J. Gutiérrez Ortiz, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 96, 637–645 CrossRef CAS .

          International Organization for Standardization, ISO 14040:2006. Environmental management- Life cycle assessment- Principles and framework, https://www.iso.org/standard/37456.html, (accessed 12 February 2018).

          International Organization for Standardization, ISO 14044:2006. Environmental management- Life cycle assessment- Requirements and guidelines, https://www.iso.org/standard/38498.html, (accessed 10 February 2018).

          European Commission, ECU/EUR exchange rates versus national currencies, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/tec00033, (accessed 1 February 2021).
M. Finkbeiner and V. Bach, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2021, 26(4), 635–639 CrossRef .
P. Y. Oei and R. Mendelevitch, Energy J., 2016, 37, 171–194 Search PubMed .

          E. Vartiainen, G. Masson and C. Breyer,  2015, 1–15.

          EIA, AEO2020,  2020 Search PubMed .

          A. de Pee, D. Pinner, O. Roelofsen, K. Somers, E. Speelman and M. Witteveen, Decarbonization of industrial sectors: the next frontier,  2018 Search PubMed .

          Energy Transitions Commission, Mission possible: Reaching net-zero carbon emissions from harder-to-abate sectors by mid-century,  2018 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc01042eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  System boundary of the proposed decarbonization scenarios: (a) traditional production (S1); (b) first decarbonization approach (S2); and (c) new decarbonization approach by the CO2RP to produce both HCOO− and DHA (S3). *Conventional HCOO− route (S1) and DHA chemocatalytic route (S1 and S2) were modelled according to the benchmarking datasets.23,24 Note that heat and electricity in those datasets come from steam and grid mix, respectively. Conventional routes powered by renewables are also assessed by sensitivity analyses.	 




Cathode	Bi-GDEs	Bi-GDEs	Bi-GDEs
Anode	DSA-O2	Pt-Bi/C	DSA-O2
Production HCOO− (kton yr−1)	12.0	3.0	9.0
Production DHA	


	5.7	—

 	Fig. 2  CF results of the conventional route (S1), the traditional decarbonization scenario (S2) and the joint production in the alternative scenario (S3) (CF values are expressed as unit of mass of CO2 eq. per unit of FU (1.00 kg of HCOO− + 0.47 kg of DHA)).	 

 	Fig. 3  CF breakdown results of CF in scenarios S2 (a) and S3 (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  Sensitivity analysis of the influence of DHA concentration (in the anode) on the CF of S3 and the breakdown CF analysis in the target anode performance (DHA, 1.5 wt%).	 

 	Fig. 5  Annual variable cost breakdown for S2 and S3.	 

CAPEX	M€	27.0	32.0
VCP	€ kg−1	0.55	1.2
FCP	M€ yr−1	2.6	2.7
OPEX	M€ yr−1	9.2	17
TCPHCOO−	€ kg−1	0.90	0.67
TCPDHA	€ kg−1	—	1.40
NPV	M€	−31.0 (not feasible)	−5.00 (not feasible)

 	Fig. 6  Sensitivity analysis of the influence in NPV of S2 of: (a) HCOO− and electricity market prices; and (b) CO2 price and electricity market price.	 

 	Fig. 7  Sensitivity analysis of the influence in the economics of S3 of the electricity market price and the variation of (a) DHA concentration; (b) DHA market price; (c) EC cell cost; and (d) CO2 price.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc01042e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
