Resilient biomass-derived hydrogel with tailored topography for highly efficient and long-term solar evaporation of high-salinity brine   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07040H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07040H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22645-22656Resilient biomass-derived hydrogel with tailored topography for highly efficient and long-term solar evaporation of high-salinity brine†

        
          
            Xiaoxiao 
            Chen
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Zhiying 
            Wu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dengguo 
            Lai
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Zheng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiangbo 
            Huo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhangxu 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Baoling 
            Yuan
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Ming-Lai 
            Fu
          
        
      *ad
aCAS Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, 361021, China. E-mail: dglai@iue.ac.cn; mlfu@iue.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, China
cFujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Ecology-Toxicological Effects & Control for Emerging Contaminants, Putian, 351100, China
dCollege of Civil Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen, 361020, China
Received 
      19th July 2020
    , Accepted 10th September 2020First published on 11th September 2020AbstractSolar-driven steam generation is an emerging, attractive, and sustainable technology for potential seawater desalination and wastewater purification. Despite the tremendous progress to date, some technological gaps still remain such as the seemingly unavoidable salt accumulation on the solar absorbers and the generally costly and delicate nanostructures. Here, a cost-effective biomass-derived hydrogel with rationally architected sponge-like skeletons is fabricated through a facile and scalable foaming-polymerization strategy. With advantageous features of organic-polymer chains, inorganic-particles and hierarchical bubble templates, the constructed hydrogel exhibits well-interpenetrative channels and unique porous topography with excellent resilience, fast water-transfer and enhanced light-trapping performances, leading to an ultrahigh and long-term stable evaporation rate of 1.77 ± 0.05 kg m−2 h−1 at 1 sun illumination out of high-salinity seawater (25 wt%) over the entire 7 12 h cycles without deterioration. This promising performance outperforms all the pioneering reported low-cost carbon-based solar absorbers for high-salinity desalination. Importantly, the salt accumulation prefers to crystalize around the edges, spatially isolated from the steam generation surface, achieving complete separation between water and solute. This simple technology to turn “waste” biomass to efficient solar-driven evaporators is anticipated to offer new possibilities to continuously and economically produce pure water from seawater and solute recovery.
1. Introduction
Water shortage and pollution has become one of the most serious global challenges due to the fast growth of modern society and increasing population. As 94.5% of the water on earth is seawater, developing a scalable and eco-friendly technology for desalination is crucial to satisfy the increasing demand of freshwater.1,2 Traditional thermal and membrane-based methods for clean-water regeneration spend large amounts of electricity, require complex infrastructures, and emit waste gases into the environment.3,4 The sun radiates an enormous amount of light energy and heat flux (1.5 × 1022 J per day) to the surface of our planet each day.5 Based on this abundant and sustainable solar energy, solar steam generation has been viewed as one of the most promising sustainable technologies to alleviate the freshwater scarcity without sacrificing the resources and environment.6–10 In the past decade, the solar-driven evaporation for seawater desalination has attracted intensive attention.
The core component and critical process of a typical solar-driven seawater desalination system is the photothermal materials on top of the devices and their interfacial solar vapor generation, including enhanced solar absorption, vapor evaporation and easy water supply.1,6,11,12 In such design, a conspicuous problem is the gradual accumulation of precipitated salt on the surface of the photothermal materials after pure water has evaporated, which inevitably blocks out the sunlight, clogs the interior channels for continuous water supply and vapor escape, and causes to an obvious decay in evaporation rates.13–17 For example, due to the precipitation of salt crystals on the surface of evaporators, the evaporation rate of carbon fibers decreased to almost one-third (0.40 kg m−2 h−1) of its initial rate after 8 h testing (10 wt% concentrated seawater),14 the evaporation rate for 2D silica/carbon/silica coaxial fibrous membrane decreased to 0.73 kg m−2 h−1 (25 wt%), which is equivalent to a 31% decrease in 16 h,13 and for most conventional absorbers, the evaporation rates decreased by 30–60% of their initial values.18,19 This fouling issue becomes more concerning when the solar vapor evaporation rate is higher or the materials are implemented in a higher salt concentration.13 Till now, salt blocking is one of the key scientific challenges for long-term and stable solar-driven desalination.20,21
To this end, several innovative strategies have been explored to stabilize the high evaporation rate of concentrated seawater over a long period of time. For example, two-component structures/units were rationally designed to separately capture sunlight and collect the remaining salt during solar desalination. By deliberately dividing the area for sunlight absorption and salt deposition on the integrated evaporator, Wang et al.13 realized a relatively stable performance of 1.15–1.30 kg m−2 h−1 over 120 h for high concentrated brine (25 wt%), but there was a slight decrease in evaporation rate in the first 10 h due to the slightly blocking of precipitated salt. Recently, Zhu's group18 proposed a well-designed waterlily inspired hierarchical structure (WHS) with a hydrophobic top solar absorber with efficient solar absorption and antifouling ability, and the evaporation only occurs below the top solar absorber. The average evaporation rate of the WHS was 1.39 kg m−2 h−1 for a continuous 8 h experiment and 1.27 kg m−2 h−1 under natural sunlight over 18 days in an outdoor experiment with no salt fouling in brine with a concentration of 10 wt%. Furthermore, Hu et al.20 developed a stable, low-cost and environmentally friendly solar vapor generator based on the inherent porous and interconnected microstructure of wood. The nature-inspired solar evaporator showed a long-term stable and high-salinity brine desalination with an evaporation rate of 0.8 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination. Despite the encouraging and interesting progress of the salt-rejecting solar-driven desalination, some issues remain to be solved for the large-scale application of such materials or designs, such as the complex and elaborate fabrication process, costly raw materials, and unsatisfactory vapor generation performance. It is imperative to develop a material with a high and long-term stable evaporation rate of concentrated brines based on low-cost materials via a scalable and simple method.8
Compared to metallic materials and semiconductors, carbon-based materials are cheaper, more abundant, and more capable of absorbing light over a broad spectrum with a high light-to-heat conversion efficiency.12,16 Diversified photothermal conversion architectures have been designed and fabricated by incorporated 0D–3D carbon forms, such as black carbon,22,23 CNTs,24 graphene,1,9,25 carbon fabric,14 and carbonized blocks26,27 for photothermal desalination applications. Hydrogel solar-driven evaporators, which are polymeric networks swollen with H2O and incorporated with various functional materials for photothermal conversion effects, have emerged as a promising material platform for efficient solar water purification.1,6,28–30 The intriguing properties of confining the solar heat, activating water molecules inside the polymeric networks, and self-float property endow the hydrogel-based evaporators with appealing salt resistance and water purification performance, presenting distinct advantages compared to other reported evaporators.6,22,31 To obtain the hydrogel-based purification systems with high-efficiency solar steam generation, stability and durability in severe conditions (i.e., brines), several key characteristics should be incorporated: (1) a highly porous framework and rational modification of the surface structure to concentrate and trap the incident light and facilitate the vapor escape; (2) low-cost production of solar evaporators for industrial-scale utilization; (3) a mechanically resilient structure to ensure long-term and cycled water purification. Nevertheless, most hydrogel-based architectures appear to be soft without resilience, and the hydrogels with elastic performance and tailored topography have been rarely designed.1,7 It is significantly important and promising to rationally construct hydrogel evaporators with enhanced toughness, desired topography, and prominent salt-resistance based on low-cost materials for high and stable water production over a long time duration.
Here, based on low-cost carbonized biomass-derived biochar particles, we develop a facile and scalable foaming-polymerization method to construct a salt-resistant, resilient, and sponge-like hydrogel for the stable and fast evaporation purification of high-salinity brine. This sponge-like architecture employs the hydrophilic acrylamide polymer as the binder (“mortar”) to enhance the resilience; the low-cost and abundant biochar particles are the reinforced agents (“brick”) and solar absorbers; bubbles formed by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) is the template to construct a unique 3D interconnected macro- and micro-structure for the enhanced solar absorption and quick water replenishment (Fig. 1a). As a result, the obtained porous sponge-like hydrogel exhibits a high resilience (over 100 compression/releasing cycles under 50% strain) and can be interestingly and easily sliced into pieces. The vapor generators based on the porous sponge-like hydrogel present a continuous and stable water evaporation (1.77 ± 0.05 kg m−2 h−1) during the test, where 25 wt% brine was treated over 84 h. Such high water purification for brine highlights their great potential to continuously and stably yield sufficient clean water.
 Fig. 1  (a) Fabrication process for the porous hydrogel through a facile and scalable foaming-polymerization method; (b) schematic illustration of the structures of the obtained sponge-like hydrogel; (c) designed porous sponge-like hydrogel-based evaporator for solar absorption and vapor generation. 
2. Results and discussion
The rice husk biochar (RHB) was produced by the pyrolysis of rice husk (RH) in an oxygen-limited atmosphere at ∼500 °C. As shown in Fig. 1a, the RHB particles were first mixed with acrylamide monomer (AM) and N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (MBA) by ball-milling. After SDS was added as the foaming reagent, the mixture rapidly expanded and formed a stable solution jammed with bubbles via mechanical stirring in a few minutes. Then, the obtained solution full of bubbles formed a hydrogel when an inducer was added to begin the polymerization, which resulted in a sponge-like RHB-based porous hydrogel (RHB-PH) within 10 min. Fig. 1a shows the as-prepared RHB-PH samples with a diameter of ca. 6 cm and a height of ca. 8 cm, which indicates the potential scalability of RHB-PH. Notably, the foaming-polymerization method is very convenient and time-saving, with no special equipment. Hydrogels with any shapes can be easily prepared by selecting specific containers. In nature, biomaterials, e.g., nacre, are observed to have outstanding mechanical property, high strength and toughness due to their inorganic-brick and organic-mortar hierarchical structure. The intrinsic properties of these natural architectures have inspired a broad range of material design.32 In this work, the bioinspired strategy is proposed to fabricate these hydrogel-based solar evaporators with excellent resilience and mechanical strength based on the biochar-particle and polymer-chain hybridized architecture (Fig. 1b). The “brick–mortar” mimicking hydrogel uses carbonized biochar particles as the “brick” to endow the hydrogel with mechanical resilience and wide solar absorbance, whereas hydrophilic polymers (MBA, AM) are the “mortar” to trigger the synergistic toughening effects including polymer chain stretching to absorb the loading energy and suppress the crack propagation. Furthermore, bubbles foamed by SDS create abundant interconnected micro- and macro- porous structures in the hydrogels as well as the tailored surface topography, which can offer sufficient interfacial area and water paths for the solar absorption, vapor evaporation and fast water diffusion (Fig. 1c). To explore the potential of using RHB-PH to fabricate an attractive solar absorber with effective salt resistance, the surface morphology, solar absorption-conversion performance and inner water diffuse paths of RHB-PH were examined as shown in the next section.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was employed to confirm the different topography and microstructure of the obtained hydrogels. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 2a, due to the presence of “bubble templates”, RHB-PH had a sponge-like skeleton with abundant round pores and cells in sizes of 100–300 μm on its surface and interior, which is profiled by white dotted circles. The adjacent cells clearly connected to form well interpenetrate channels. This unique porous structure with increased interfacial area greatly extends the optical path in RHB-PH for more efficient diffusion of water. Under higher magnification (Fig. 2b), a relatively smooth skeleton of polymers was observed, while carbon particles were well dispersed and embedded in the skeleton as “bricks” (Fig. 2c), which indicates a well-constructed “mortar–brick” architecture of RHB-PH. For comparison, nonporous RHB-based RHB-NH and raw-biomass (RH) -derived RH-H were fabricated. RHB-NH shows a flat and smooth outmost surface decorated by very shallow depressions with similarly nonuniform particles (Fig. 2d–f) but no interconnected paths. The black carbon particles were laid deep inside the compact bulk. RH-H has cracked surface with larger blocks, which should be attributed to the swollen biomass. No microsized porous structure was observed in RH-H samples even with the presence of the foaming agent (SDS), which indicates that the raw biomass was not act an efficient foam stabilizer to create round cells in RH-H. Both RHB and RH particles show similar size ranges (less than 100 μm) and microstructure (Fig. S1†). The well performance of RHB particles as a stabilizer should be attributed to the transformation of surface chemical compositions during the oxygen-limited pyrolysis. As for RHB, it is partially hydrophilic/hydrophobic due to the growth of aromatic structure and partial removal of oxygen-containing groups during high temperature pyrolysis, being the critical factor for RHB to act as an efficient foam stabilizer.33 Thus, RHB particles can well adsorb at the air–water interface to stabilize the bubbles, while RH particles having hydrophilic and water absorption properties will be easily dispersed in water. The microstructure and surface chemical properties of RH and RHB particles are characterized and compared in Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†). More microscopic structures of RHB-PH, RHB-NH and RH-H are provided in Fig. S3–S5.†
 Fig. 2  Surface topography of biomass-derived hydrogels. SEM images of (a–c) RHB-PH, (d–f) RHB-NH, and (g–i) RH-H. 
Due to different topographies, inner interconnected paths, and biochar-polymer hydrogel assemble processes of RH-H, RHB-NH and RHB-PH, their light absorption, conversion efficiency and water diffusion process were evaluated. The light absorption properties of the carbon-derived hydrogels were measured (Fig. 3a–c). As shown in Fig. 3a, RHB-NH and RHB-PH were all black compared to the yellow-brown RH-H, and all hydrogel samples showed neglectable transmission in the wavelength range of 230–2500 nm. Thus, the incident solar light could be totally hindered by the photothermal layers. As shown in Fig. 3b, RHB-PH with porous surface had the lowest reflectance (∼6.7%) compared to RHB-NH (∼11.6%) and RH-H (∼11.6%) due to their smooth surfaces (shown in Fig. 2). Simultaneously, RHB-PH had excellent broadband absorption of 93.4%, which is higher than RHB-NH (88.4%) and RH-H (88.4%) (Fig. S6†). The improved solar light harvest due to the porous sponge-like architecture is also be confirmed by the surface temperature measurement under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination, as recorded from the IR images in Fig. 3c and d. The surface equilibrium temperature of RHB-PH quickly increased to 88.5 °C after 10 min of irradiation. In contrast, the surface temperature of RHB-NH and RH-H much more slowly increased to 75.6 and 67.8 °C, respectively, which are over 10 and 20 °C lower than that of the sponge-like RHB-PH. The highest absorbance and surface temperature of RHB-PH can be attributed to the deliberately rough and porous surface structure with interconnected paths of RHB-PH (Fig. 3e), which could effectively extend the optical pathways and reduce the optical losses through multiple reflection and reabsorption.12,22,34 These phenomena are consistent with their corresponding interior structures, which suggests that controlling the surface enables the control of the material properties.
 Fig. 3  UV-vis-NIR spectra of RH-H, RHB-NH and RHB-PH: (a) transmission, and (b) absorption; (c) infrared images under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination for 10 min; (d) the corresponding surface temperature changes and (e) schematic illustration of the photothermal layer to decrease the light reflection. The inset shows the optical image of RH-H, RHB-NH and RHB-PH. 
Generally, the smooth and fast water transportation from the bulk part to the evaporator interface is crucial to the water evaporation and salt-resistance.13Fig. 4 presents the water delivery capability of three samples. RHB-PH had a rapid water absorption once dipped in a solution. Water was quickly transported from the bottom to the top of RHB-PH within 10 s, and the entire cellulose paper was fully wetted in 20 s (Video S1†). The transport speed, which was evaluated based on the time to arrive at the cellulose paper, is approximately 2 mm s−1, which is significantly higher than those in other foam structures such as graphene oxide wrapped fiber sponges (0.35 mm s−1),35 wood (0.5 mm s−1),36 polyurethane foam,35 and melamine foam.35 In contrast, with RHB-NH and RH-H, water could not spontaneously diffuse to the top cellulose paper due to the dense bulk structure without interpenetrated paths for water transfer, even with squeezing (Videos S2 and S3). These results reveal that the excellent pumping ability of RHB-PH should be attributed to the porous sponge-like structure with strong capillary and multiple-level interweaved channels (confirmed by SEM in Fig. 2). The fast water diffusion in RHB-PH guarantees the sufficient water supply and long-term solar-driven desalination.
 Fig. 4  Water pumping with (a) RHB-PH, (b) RHB-NH and (c) RH-H (5 × 5 × 20 mm3) and distribution on white cellulose paper within 20 s. 
The improved strengths and mechanically robust structure of hydrogels is indispensable to achieve the stability and durability of solar vapor generation, but remains one of the most challenging tasks.7 Notably, the obtained RHB-PH with a unique “mortar–brick” architecture showed high mechanical strength and elasticity, which can be easily incised by a knife into arbitrary shapes (e.g., the well-shaped sliced strips of hydrogels) with no fragment (Fig. 5a). The high mechanical strength and stiffness enabled the dissipation of loading energy and suppression of crack growth, which were attributed to the intrinsic properties of nacre-mimetic hierarchical architectures of synthesized sponge-like hydrogels.32 More importantly, the obtained slice can freely float on water. Even when the hydrogel piece was pressed deep into water, it naturally floated back to the water surface via buoyance (Fig. 5b). In other words, a cylinder-shaped porous sponge-like hydrogel with a diameter of 6 cm and a height of 8 cm can be sliced into pieces and float on water with an area of ∼904 cm2 for efficient direct solar-driven evaporation when each slice is 0.25 cm thick (Video S4 in ESI†). In addition, strain–stress compression tests were performed to study the resilience property which was an important factor to practical application. Fig. 5c shows the strain–stress curves of the sponge-like hydrogel under 50% strain. The hydrogel can completely recover its original shape without plastic deformations or macroscopic fractures when unloading; even after 100 cycles, it retained approximately 90% of its original compressive strength and no cracks was observed on the skeletons (Fig. S7 and –S8†), which indicates its excellent robust compression performance and exceptional strength and resilience.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photographs of the manual slicing process of sponge-like RHB-PH; (b) self-floating property of the sliced hydrogel; (c) strain–stress curves of the sponge-like hydrogel at the maximum strain of 50% for 100 cycles. 
To systematically evaluate the photothermal performance of RHB-based hydrogels with porous sponge-like architectures, the water evaporation rates of biomass-derived hydrogels (RHB-PH, RHB-NH and RH-H) with different structures were recorded by monitoring the real-time weight change under simulated solar irradiation with an intensity of 1 kW m−1 in 720 min. Fig. 6a schematically exhibits the homemade photothermal evaporation test system. Due to the excellent mechanically strength, these hydrogels fabricated in this work can be regularly well cut into umbrella-shaped evaporators, and directly applied for solar vapor generation. As shown by the pure water mass changes in Fig. 6b, these curves clearly reveal that the present biomass-derived evaporators have more water evaporated per unit area than the contrasted systems. Compared to the gradual declined water mass change in RH-H and RHB-NH-based systems, the mass change in the solar evaporation with sponge-like RHB-PH was steady over the entire testing process as long as 720 min. The evaporation rates were calculated from the slope of the mass change curves, and the corresponding evaporation rate curves are provided in Fig. 6c. All calculated evaporation rates of three hydrogels did not subtract the self-evaporation rate of water in the dark. For comparison purposes, the reported evaporation rates in the literature would be added to the evaporation rate of water in the dark if they had been subtracted. For pure water without the hydrogel, the evaporation rate stabilized at approximately 0.074 and 0.31 kg m−2 h−1 in the dark and 1 sun environment, respectively. The calculated evaporation rate of RHB-PH can be obviously increased to 1.79 kg m−2 h−1, which is 5.77 times faster than pure water alone under the same illumination condition. The evaporation rate for RHB-PH remained stable even after it was continuously running for 720 min, while the evaporation rates for RH-H and RHB-NH rapidly decreased to 0.64 and 0.43 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. The curves of time-dependent temperature changes of the RHB-PH evaporator surface and bulk water under 1 sun illustration were provided in Fig. S9,† and the surface temperature of RHB-PH increased rapidly to an equilibrium temperature of about 46 °C within 20 min irradiation. However, the temperature of bulk water was only ∼26 °C after 20 min of irradiation, and reached an equilibrium temperature 240 min later. This indicates that most of the heat is well localized within the RHB-PH evaporator with an umbrella shape. High light intensity prompts steam generation for RHB-PH, as shown in Fig. 6d and e. The evaporation rates reached 2.30 and 3.24 kg m−2 h−1 under 1.5 and 2 sun illumination, respectively. The high and stable evaporation rate for RHB-PH is attributed to the enhanced solar harvest, localized heat generation and fast water diffuse due to the porous sponge-like architecture with rough surfaces,12 as evidenced in Fig. 2–4. Meanwhile, the weakly bonded water molecules in polymer chains play a role in increasing the vapor generation.37 Therefore, the suppressed optical and heat losses, fast water replenishment of RHB-PH and activated water molecules inside had synergistic contributions to its superior performance. Specifically, the RHB-PH evaporator attained the best performance among all previously reported low-cost and widely available biomass/biochar-derived evaporators, such as geopolymer-biomass mesoporous carbon composites (GBMCC, 1.58 kg m−2 h−1), carbonized mushroom (1.523 kg m−2 h−1), wood-derived carbon foam (1.26 kg m−2 h−1), and candle soot coated cotton (1.19 kg m−2 h−1) et al. (Fig. 6f and Table S1†), which was also superior to the recently reported high-cost porous MXenes38 (1.46 kg m−2 h−1) and MnO2/graphene39 (1.35 kg m−2 h−1) foam-based evaporators. The performance of RHB-PH device is still lower than the counterparts with elaborate reinforced parts by coupling with wind,37 or solar electrical power11,40 or being under low pressure41 (0.17 atm),which indicates that the outstanding performance of RHB-PH could be easily achieved by coupling with other equipment. The solar to vapor energy conversion efficiency (η) of RHB-PH is given by the following equation:30,42 η = ṁ × ΔHequ/(Copt × P0)(1)where ṁ is the mass flux calibrated with the dark evaporation data, ΔHequ is the calculated vaporization enthalpy of the water in RHB-PH, Copt is the optical concentration on the evaporator, and P0 refers to the solar irradiation power of 1 sun (1 kW m−2). The real vaporization enthalpy of water in RHB-PH (ΔHequ) was shown in Fig. S10,† which is smaller than that of bulk water, confirming the activated intermediate state of water molecules inside the polymeric network of RHB-PH. Based on this, the energy efficiency of RHB-PH was estimated to be ∼94% under 1 sun irradiation, indicating a highly efficient energy utilization. Moreover, the strong adaptability of this foaming method and the property of filled particles enable further modification of the materials to improve the water evaporation efficiency and endow it with other fantastic abilities. We believe that the water evaporation efficiency of the foam material can be further improved by selecting or endowing fillers with a higher energy conversion rate.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the solar steam generation device; (b and c) mass changes and evaporation rates of pure water over 720 min in the solar steam-generation device under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination; (d) mass change over time under 1, 1.5 and 2 sun illumination; (e) calculated evaporation rates from the mass change curves; (f) comparison of the solar steam generation performances of different low-cost and widely available carbon-derived materials under the same solar illumination of 1 kW m−2. The numbers in (f) are the reference numbers in Table S1 in ESI.† 
Apparently, such low-cost, rough, and environmentally friendly prepared wasted biomass-derived sponge-like hydrogel with excellent resilience, fast water diffuse and enhanced solar absorbing properties present great potential for practical waste water treatment, solar seawater distillation, especially high-concentration brine. To evaluate the purification effects of the wastewater treatment, desalination and long-term stability of the designed biochar-based sponge-like hydrogel (RHB-PH), the organic pollutants and ion concentrations in purified water and water mass changes were carefully tracked. The purified water contained negligible organic contaminant (MB and MO) as evidenced by the nearly zero optical absorbance (Fig. 7a and b). In addition, the concentrations of all primary ions in simulated seawater (Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, and B3+) were significantly reduced, satisfying the World Health Organization (WHO) standard for drinking water (Fig. 7c). The long-term stability of RHB-PH solar evaporators is the ultimate determinant for practical application. We performed a continuous 60 h experiment (5 12 h cycles without regeneration) of solar practical seawater treatment under a solar simulator. As shown in Fig. 7d, during 60 hours of continuous solar desalination under 1 sun illumination, the average evaporation rate over 60 hours (without regeneration after each cycle) is calculated to be 1.73 ± 0.03 kg m−2 h−1, which is comparable to that of the pure-water experiment. Particularly, the surface of the evaporator remains clean during the entire evaporation (60 hours), and only a small amount of salt crystals grows on the edges (yellow marks in Fig. 7d), indicating great potential of this sponge-like hydrogel evaporator for practical seawater desalination. To further disclose the salt-resistance property of RHB-PH, a continuous test of high-concentration brine (25%) was performed in the next section. A long-term out-door test for seawater desalination was also carried out under the natural solar light, and a typical sunny day illumination is shown in Fig. S11.† The sponge-like hydrogel was cut into square pieces and floated on seawater as the absorber, as shown in the inset in Fig. S12.† In such device, the evaporated water condenses on the top transparent polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) plate and flows to the purified water sink. This system was operated outdoors for 7 days. As shown in Fig. S12,† the average daily clean water was 3.9 kg m−2, which can satisfy the daily individual drinking need of adults (∼2.5 L).23
 Fig. 7  Purification performances of RHB-PH for various sewage (a) methyl orange (MO), (b) methylene blue (MB), and (c) simulated seawater under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination; (d) evaporation cycle performances of RHB-PH for practical seawater with each cycle sustained for 60 h. 
For most previous solar vapor generation systems for seawater/high concentration brine, a large amount of salt crystal may accumulate on the surface even in a low-salinity environment.20 Inadequate rejection can lead to clogged structures, which ultimately deteriorates the optical and wicking properties of the structures and results in the low solar absorption efficiency of incident sunlight and even clogging of the water path.14 The issue is still challenging, but it is promising to construct low-cost desalination device with excellent salt rejection to continuously and efficiently desalinate the high concentration brine (>10%). To examine whether the sponge-like hydrogel (RHB-PH) can well avoid performance degradation and salt-fouling issues, we performed a continuous experiment of high-concentration brine (25%) purification under 1 sun illumination for seven consecutive days. As plotted in Fig. 8a, the water evaporation rate remained almost stable during 7 cycles, where each cycle ran for 12 h. The slight increase in water evaporation rate can be attributed to the increase in water temperature during the 12 h long-duration test. The salt harvest and water loss were also measured in another 7 12 h cycles. As shown in Fig. S13,† the mass of salt harvest and water loss held steady during the whole experimental period, further confirming the stable performance of RHB-PH evaporators for seawater desalination and solute recovery. The average rates of RHB-PH over testing time showed an average evaporation rate of ∼1.77 ± 0.05 kg m−2 h−1 (Fig. 8b, Table S2†), which is much higher than that of MXene aerogel (∼1.46 kg m−2 h−1, 1.2–7.6 wt%),38 phenol–formaldehyde (PF) resin carbonized 3D cup (1.33 kg m−2 h−1, 25 wt%),13 hydrophobic Ti3C2 membrane (1.31 kg m−2 h−1, 2.75 wt%),15 carbon black@Cu foam (1.39 kg m−2 h−1, 10 wt%),18 bimodal porous carbonized wood (0.80 kg m−2 h−1, 15 wt%),20 and glucose-coated carbon fiber (0.62 kg m−2 h−1, 10 wt%),14 which has one of the best performances among the reported solar-driven desalination systems for high concentrated seawater. The microstructure of PVA/graphene hydrogel deteriorated due to shrinking when it is exposed to salty water (25 wt%), resulting in a decreased evaporation rate of 1.614 kg m−2 h−1.1 Because of the prominent resilience and mechanical strength of RHB-PH with a unique nacre-mimetic architecture, the interconnected micro- and macro-porous structure could be well preserved even in water with high salinity. More interestingly, the salt only precipitates at the edge part of the hydrogel-based evaporator as illustrated in Fig. 8c. The inset in Fig. 8c clearly shows that the white salt crystals nucleate and grow at the edges of the hydrogel evaporator after 12 h testing. These salt particles can easily fall off the evaporator by gently shaking, which implies that a complete separation of water and solute can be achieved during the purification of high concentration brine. This particular salt accumulation form should be attributed to the fast and sufficient fresh seawater supply through the vertical channels and spread out from the center of the absorbers to the edge to dissolve away the salt, which resulted in a salt concentration gradient on the evaporator surface (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Rate changes of evaporating simulated brine (25 wt%) under 1 sun illumination over 7 12 h cycles; (b) comparison of the solar steam generation performances for high concentration brines under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination; (c) photographs of the salt precipitated on the surface of RHB-PH absorber over time when the brine with 25% salinity initially, and the evaporator was reused by immersing into the pristine brine to redissolve the precipitated salt; (d) schematic diagram of the salt concentration distribution profile and salt-rejecting mechanism of RHB-PH. The numbers in (b) are the reference numbers in Table S2† in SI. 
To further illustrate the salt precipitation process and optimize the surface area of the evaporator, the RHB-PH based solar steam generators with different sizes of vertical water transport channels (2.0 × 2.0 cm2, 1.0 × 1.0 cm2, 0.5 × 0.5 cm2) and evaporation surfaces (2.0 × 2.0 cm2, 4.0 × 4.0 cm2) were prepared and applied for brine (25 wt%) desalination over 12 hours (Fig. 9). Interestingly, once an evaporator with a rectangle shape (Fig. 9a) was used as an evaporator, the salt precipitation occurred not only at the edge part, but also at the evaporator surface after 12 h. On the contrary, the salt crystals only gathered at the edge part of the evaporators with umbrella shapes (Fig. 9b and c). These distinct salt precipitation phenomena should be attributed to the different water diffuse manners inside the samples with various sizes of vertical channels. It was reported that the edge-preferred crystallization of salt particles was attributed to the formation of the increased salt concentration gradient along the outward radial direction on the evaporator surface, as a result from the horizontal water transport from the center of the evaporator to the edge.4 Once the distance (D) from the place, where the salt concentration exceeds its solubility limit in water, to the center is larger than the radius of the evaporator, the salt will crystallize at the edge part. As depicted in Fig. 9a, when the vertical channels was the same size as the evaporation surface (2.0 × 2.0 cm2), most of the salt solution transported in the vertical direction, and a salt concentration gradient from the center to the edge could not be formed on the evaporator. However, the salt concentration gradient was easily formed on the evaporators with umbrella shapes, in which the fresh salt solution transported through the vertical channels and spread throughout the surface in the direction from the center to the edge (Fig. 9b and c). The vertical water transport and horizontal diffuse process on the evaporator with umbrella shapes can be observed visually on the white cellulose paper as shown in Fig. 4a and Video S2.† Hence, the salt gradually crystallized at the edge of the evaporator due to the continuous water removal via evaporation and the replenishment of the source water in the direction from the center to the edge part. In addition, as long as the surface area of the evaporator was larger than the distance (D), the supplementary of the fresh salt solution from the center would be insufficient to dissolve away the salt, then the salt would crystallize between the center and edge, resulting in a salt ring.4 We also conducted additional experiment to determine the radius of the salt ring on RHB-PH evaporator. An evaporator with a larger surface area (4.0 × 4.0 cm2) and a 0.5 × 0.5 cm2 sized water channels was applied. As shown in Fig. 9d, a legible salt ring with a radius of ∼1.3 cm was observed. These results revealed that the optimal evaporation surface should be the same or smaller than that of the salt ring, as the salt prefer to crystallize at the edge part of the evaporators. Furthermore, the salt harvest and temperature changes of water and prepared hydrogels in the experiments were measured (Fig. 9e–g). As the size of vertical channels increased, less amount of salt precipitated on the surface and more heat diffused to the bulk water. These results indicate that the evaporator with the umbrella shape can well separate the solute from the solution and maintain heat localization, which is a promising evaporator for solar steam generation.
 Fig. 9  (a–d) Digital photographs of the RHB-PH based solar steam generators with different sizes of vertical water transport channels and evaporation surfaces over 12 h brine (25 wt%) desalination; (e) salt harvest, (f) evaporation surface and (g) corresponding bulk water underneath temperature changes of evaporators with different sizes of vertical water transport channels. 
3. Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrated the facile and scalable fabrication of a resilient biomass-derived hydrogel with rational architecting interconnected networks and tailored surface topography. This low-cost hydrogel can act as an efficient evaporator with fast and stable solar-driven desalination at 1.77 ± 0.05 kg m−2 h−1 at one sun over a long continuous experiment even when high salinity seawater (25 wt%) is treated. Interestingly, good separation of water and salt crystals is achieved with no salt-fouling on the surface of the hydrogel evaporators. The performance is among the best-performing solar-driven evaporation in terms of the cost effectiveness and simple fabrication. The combination of the significant salt resistance, high solar-driven evaporation ability, and scalable fabrication method utilizing low-cost carbonized biomass materials highlights great potential in desalination, sea-salt production, resource recovery, and wastewater treatment.
4. Experimental section
Materials
All chemicals except acrylamide (industrial reagent grade) were of analytical grade and used without further purification. The rice husk was collected from a farmland in Anhui province, China, which was washed with deionized water for three times and dried at 80 °C for 24 h, and mechanical grounded to pass through a 100-mesh sieve before used.
Fabrication of carbon-based hydrogels
To prepare biomass-derived sponge-like hydrogel, the powdered biomass (rice husk, RH) was tightly packed into a ceramic pot with a lid, and then pyrolyzed at 500 °C in a muffle furnace in an oxygen-limited atmosphere for 2 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. The obtained black carbonized rice husk is referred to as Rice Husk Biochar (RHB).
The RHB-based sponge-like porous hydrogel (RHB-PH) was prepared via a facile foaming-polymerization method by the following procedures. First, acrylamide (AM, 3.6 g) and N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (MBA, 0.3 g), RHB (15 g) and 20 mL water were added into a mill pot under vigorous ball-milling for 60 min to obtained a homogeneous black slurry. Then the resulted mixture was transferred into a beaker and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, 0.03 g) as foaming agent was added with mechanical stirring for 10 min. Subsequently, N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA, 1.2 mL) was introduced with continuous stirring for about 5 min. Then, Na2S2O8 solution (10 wt%, 5 mL) was slowly added dropwise to the foaming slurry to trigger crosslinking reaction. The mixture was stirred constantly, until the beaker was slightly heated. After cooled to room temperature, a black sponge-like hydrogel was formed and immersed into water for 24 h to remove the impurities, and labeled as RHB-PH.
For comparison, RH-derived hydrogel (RH-H) was prepared according to the same procedure except that RHB was replaced with powdered RH. To further emphasize the porous interconnected architecture in solar water desalination, a nonporous RHB-based hydrogel (RHB-NH) was also synthesized according to the same procedure without addition of SDS as a foaming agent.
Characterization
Sample morphologies were observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800). Reflectance and transmittance spectra (230–2500 nm) of all the hydrogels were measured by an ultraviolet-visible-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectrophotometer (UV3600, Shimadzu) coupled with an integrating sphere. Compressive stress–strain response was measured by a universal testing machine fitted with a 50 N load cell at a strain rate of 10 mm min−1. The temperature of the evaporator surface was monitored using an infrared thermal imaging camera (FLIR ONE PRO) connected with an iphone, and the water weight change through evaporation was measured using an electronic mass balance (AR224CN, OHAUS) with an accuracy of 0.0001 g. The temperature changes of water during solar vapor generation in the presence of hydrogels were measured by a thermometer (DM6801A, VICTOR). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were recorded using a Thermo Scientific Escalab 250 XI with Al Kα source. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were obtained using a Thermo Nicolet FTIR spectrophotometer from 4000 cm−1 to 400 cm−1 using pellets with KBr powder. The concentrations of Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, and B3+ of collected water were analyzed by an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES, 7000DV, Optima, USA). The concentrations of rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB) were recorded by UV-vis absorption spectra.
Solar vapor generation measurement
A hand-cut umbrella-shaped evaporator with a square surface (2.0 × 2.0 cm2) and a vertical water transport channel (1.0 × 1.0 cm2) was supported on a polyethylene foam, and floated on water in a glass tube. The steam generation experiments were conducted in the lab using a solar simulator (PLS-SXE 300) and an optical filter for the standard AM 1.5G solar spectrum. The power density of solar light irradiation was determined by an accessional detector (CEL-NP2000). The sample was irradiated by the solar simulator under different optical density, and the average evaporation rates were calculated over the testing time at steady-state condition. The collected salt crystals during the high concentration brine desalination was dried at 40 °C for 12 h before weighing. During these experiment, the indoor temperature and humidity were monitored to 25 °C and ∼60%, respectively.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (21806163, 51778598, 51978638 and 51478449), Fujian National Science Foundation (2019J01137), the Industry Leading Key Projects of Fujian Province (2019H0056), and Key Laboratory of Ecological Environment and Information Atlas, Fujian Provincial University (ST18003).
References
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
T. Oki and S. Kanae, Science, 2006, 313, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, N. Shauloff and R. Jelinek, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13186–13194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Q. F. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Y. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. T. Wang and X. W. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, J. Bae, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7913–7919 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meng, X. Zhao, C. Y. Tang, P. Yu, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2701–2711 RSC .
X. Zhao, X. J. Zha, J. H. Pu, L. Bai, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10446–10455 RSC .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706805 CrossRef .
L. Yang, G. L. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. X. Xu and X. F. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19311–19320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Q. Fang, X. Xi, Y. Chen and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 586–593 RSC .
J. Q. Zhao, Y. W. Yang, C. H. Yang, Y. P. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. T. Yin and W. X. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16196–16204 RSC .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
T. Wei, X. Li, J. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1405–1416 Search PubMed .
N. Xu, J. L. Li, Y. Wang, C. Fang, X. Q. Li, Y. X. Wang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, Z. Wu, S. N. Zhu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 7013 CrossRef .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
S. M. He, C. J. Chen, Y. D. Kuang, R. Y. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Q. Kong, W. T. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. M. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. B. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
X. Z. Hu and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Z. Chen and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2530–2536 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, T. Li, Z. Chen, H. Lin, P. Wang and F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10672–10679 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Qin, Y.-J. Zhu, F.-F. Chen, R.-L. Yang and Z.-C. Xiong, Carbon, 2019, 150, 233–243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao, Y. Ma, P. M. Ajayan, G. Shi and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bian, Q. O. Du, K. Tang, Y. Shen, L. C. Hao, D. Zhou, X. K. Wang, Z. H. Xu, H. L. Zhang, L. J. Zhao, S. M. Zhu, J. D. Ye, H. Lu, Y. Yang, R. Zhang, Y. D. Zheng and S. L. Gu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800593 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
T. Terada, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 3619–3622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Guo, H. Y. Lu, F. Zhao, X. Y. Zhou, W. Shi and G. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907061 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kudo, J. Ishida, G. Syuu, Y. Sekine and T. Ikeda-Fukazawa, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 044909 CrossRef .
X. L. Shi, H. K. Wang, X. T. Xie, Q. W. Xue, J. Y. Zhang, S. Q. Kang, C. H. Wang, J. J. Liang and Y. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 649–659 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moon, J. Q. Kim, B. Q. Kim, J. Chae and S. Q. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4838–4854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, S. K. Megarajan and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 963–971 RSC .
T. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Wu, X. Wang, J. Peng, B. Wu, J. Cui, X. Fang, Y. Xiec and N. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14571–14576 RSC .
T. Li, H. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Chen, J. Dai, G. Pastel, C. Jia, C. Chen, E. Hitz, D. Siddhartha, R. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707134 CrossRef .
F. Liu, B. Zhao, W. Wu, H. Yang, Y. Ning, Y. Lai and R. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803266 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. T. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CAS .
Z. Zhang, P. Mu, J. X. Han, J. X. He, Z. Q. Zhu, H. X. Sun, W. D. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18092–18099 RSC .
X. Zhao, L.-M. Peng, C.-Y. Tang, J.-H. Pu, X.-J. Zha, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 855–865 RSC .
W. G. Li, Z. Li, K. Bertelsmann and D. E. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900720 CrossRef .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta07040hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Fabrication process for the porous hydrogel through a facile and scalable foaming-polymerization method; (b) schematic illustration of the structures of the obtained sponge-like hydrogel; (c) designed porous sponge-like hydrogel-based evaporator for solar absorption and vapor generation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface topography of biomass-derived hydrogels. SEM images of (a–c) RHB-PH, (d–f) RHB-NH, and (g–i) RH-H.	 

 	Fig. 3  UV-vis-NIR spectra of RH-H, RHB-NH and RHB-PH: (a) transmission, and (b) absorption; (c) infrared images under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination for 10 min; (d) the corresponding surface temperature changes and (e) schematic illustration of the photothermal layer to decrease the light reflection. The inset shows the optical image of RH-H, RHB-NH and RHB-PH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Water pumping with (a) RHB-PH, (b) RHB-NH and (c) RH-H (5 × 5 × 20 mm3) and distribution on white cellulose paper within 20 s.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photographs of the manual slicing process of sponge-like RHB-PH; (b) self-floating property of the sliced hydrogel; (c) strain–stress curves of the sponge-like hydrogel at the maximum strain of 50% for 100 cycles.	 
η = ṁ × ΔHequ/(Copt × P0)	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the solar steam generation device; (b and c) mass changes and evaporation rates of pure water over 720 min in the solar steam-generation device under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination; (d) mass change over time under 1, 1.5 and 2 sun illumination; (e) calculated evaporation rates from the mass change curves; (f) comparison of the solar steam generation performances of different low-cost and widely available carbon-derived materials under the same solar illumination of 1 kW m−2. The numbers in (f) are the reference numbers in Table S1 in ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 7  Purification performances of RHB-PH for various sewage (a) methyl orange (MO), (b) methylene blue (MB), and (c) simulated seawater under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination; (d) evaporation cycle performances of RHB-PH for practical seawater with each cycle sustained for 60 h.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Rate changes of evaporating simulated brine (25 wt%) under 1 sun illumination over 7 12 h cycles; (b) comparison of the solar steam generation performances for high concentration brines under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination; (c) photographs of the salt precipitated on the surface of RHB-PH absorber over time when the brine with 25% salinity initially, and the evaporator was reused by immersing into the pristine brine to redissolve the precipitated salt; (d) schematic diagram of the salt concentration distribution profile and salt-rejecting mechanism of RHB-PH. The numbers in (b) are the reference numbers in Table S2† in SI.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) Digital photographs of the RHB-PH based solar steam generators with different sizes of vertical water transport channels and evaporation surfaces over 12 h brine (25 wt%) desalination; (e) salt harvest, (f) evaporation surface and (g) corresponding bulk water underneath temperature changes of evaporators with different sizes of vertical water transport channels.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta07040h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
