Luminescence spectroscopy of lead-halide perovskites: materials properties and application as photovoltaic devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00669A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00669A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3427-3437Luminescence spectroscopy of lead-halide perovskites: materials properties and application as photovoltaic devices

        
          
            Yoshihiko 
            Kanemitsu
          
          
        
      
Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan. E-mail: kanemitu@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Received 
      13th February 2017
    , Accepted 9th March 2017First published on 23rd March 2017AbstractResearch on solution-processed lead-halide perovskites is on the rise due to their highly anticipated applications as photonic devices. These perovskites exhibit strong band-to-band luminescence even at room temperature, resulting in high energy-conversion efficiencies for solar cells and light-emitting diodes. Here we summarize recent optical spectroscopic studies on CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite single crystals, thin films, and diode devices along with a discussion on their carrier generation, recombination, and transport dynamics in relation to the inherent efficient conversion between light and electricity.
Yoshihiko Kanemitsu
Yoshihiko Kanemitsu is a Professor of Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. He received his PhD in 1986 from The University of Tokyo. Currently, his interest is focused on the optical properties and functionalities of exciton complexes in semiconductor nanostructures and the photophysics of solar-cell materials and devices.
Introduction
The first practical silicon solar cells (SCs) have been reported in 1954,1 with conversion efficiencies reaching about 6%. Ever since then, the development of SCs with higher efficiencies has been one of the central issues in semiconductor science and engineering.2,3 Very recently, especially after 2010, studies on photovoltaics have shown a sharp increase, and consequently the energy-conversion efficiencies of many different types of solar cells increased significantly.4 During these efforts, apart from conventional SC materials like Si and GaAs, much attention has been paid to light-weight, low-cost, and complicated compounds such as CIGS (CuInGaSe) and organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites. In particular, starting with the fabrication of high-efficiency all-solid-state SCs based on perovskite MAPbI3 [MA = CH3NH3] thin films in 2012,5,6 metal-halide perovskites synthesized by low-temperature solution processes have received exceptional attention as a promising class of low-cost and high-efficiency SCs. So far, thin-film SCs based on MAPbI3 perovskite and their mixed perovskites (cation-mixed and halide-mixed perovskites) have shown a rapid increase in conversion efficiency, now exceeding 22%.4
Many studies have been devoted to shedding light on the physical reason behind the successful rise of perovskite solar cells. A recent experiment showed that SC devices based on perovskites provide high open-circuit voltages of above 1.2 V.7 Thermodynamic considerations of the device voltage2,8,9 suggest that losses due to non-radiative carrier recombination or trapping of photocarriers in the perovskite layer are very low. The low density of traps and defects has been shown theoretically.10 Moreover, lead-halide perovskite semiconductors exhibit further excellent optoelectronic properties as photonic device materials, such as sharp absorption edges and large absorption coefficients due to their direct-gap character11–15 and long carrier diffusion.16–20 Because of these superior properties, MAPbI3 is able to challenge the high-quality GaAs single crystals. MAPbI3 and related lead-halide perovskite semiconductors are expected as future materials for light-emitting-diodes (LED), high-sensitive photodetectors, and lasers, besides SCs. To design such unique photonic devices, the conversion processes between electricity and light have to be understood and thus a thorough understanding of the fundamental optical properties and their relation to the device performance is needed.
This short review paper provides a summary of recent spectroscopic data for MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, which are considered as the model materials for perovskites. The discussion focuses on the relation of the fundamental optical data with the high efficiencies observed in SC and LED applications. The exceptionally strong light emission at room-temperature is caused by a band-to-band transition and clearly shows that perovskites are ideal semiconductors with a sharp optical absorption edge and extremely low densities of traps and defects. Interestingly, photoluminescence (PL) exhibits no Stokes shift between the absorption edge and the PL peak, which enables efficient photon recycling and improves the SC efficiencies significantly. Even strong electroluminescence (EL) is observed in the perovskite SC devices. These superior luminescence properties are the reasons for the high energy-conversion efficiencies of perovskite SCs. By taking advantage of the efficient luminescence it is possible to directly trace the carrier dynamics and evaluate the transport mechanisms. In such a way, it is possible to learn about the optimal design of future devices.
Connection between internal radiative efficiencies of semiconductors and solar cell conversion efficiencies
Already in the 90's, organic–inorganic hybrid lead-halide perovskites have been studied because they provide an experimental testing ground for exciton physics.21,22 Organic–inorganic layered materials such as (C10H21NH3)2PbI4 are recognized as one of the “natural” quantum well structures, where the organic layer corresponds to the barrier and the inorganic layer to the well.21 Excitons are confined in the inorganic well layer, and the excitonic properties of these one- and two-dimensional structures have been intensively studied.23–26 Unfortunately, at that time detailed experimental studies on the optoelectronic properties of three-dimensional bulk crystals were not considered being fruitful, and thus have not been performed. At present, it became widely accepted that high-quality LED materials with low densities of nonradiative recombination centers can also be candidates for excellent SCs,27,28 and lead-halide perovskites have always been recognized as good LED materials. Therefore, the focus of perovskite research shifted to bulk properties. For SC devices, it is important to recognize that the energy conversion efficiency depends on the luminescence quantum efficiency of the used semiconductor material.27,29,30 This means that both the radiative and non-radiative recombination channels have to be known accurately.
In 1961, Shockley and Queisser predicted the theoretical upper limit of the SC conversion efficiency2 and quantified the detrimental effect of non-radiative recombination processes on the SC performance. Such detailed balance calculations are widely used for analysing the conversion-efficiency limits and optimum bandgaps of SCs under various configurations and conditions.31–33 In almost all semiconductor materials, the dominant carrier recombination at room temperature and higher temperatures is non-radiative, which causes the lowering of the internal radiative efficiency and a significant decrease of the SC conversion efficiency.
The internal radiative efficiency of a semiconductor (ηint) is a good indicator of its material quality,27,29 but is difficult to measure as the inside of the semiconductor volume is not directly accessible. On the other hand, the external radiative efficiency (ηext) can be measured directly, but is not an intrinsic material parameter. It depends on the specific cell design, e.g., cell geometry, surface reflectivity and the substrate material. Fig. 1 summarizes the solar cell efficiencies (ηsc) and optimized subcell band-gap energies (Eg) of single- to five-junction solar cells with planar surfaces, perfect anti-reflection coating on the topmost cell, and perfect rear mirror in the bottommost cell,30 which are similar to the SC structure discussed in ref. 27. The calculation reveals that a slight deviation of ηint from 1 causes a significant decrease of the conversion efficiency ηsc.27,30 The key point here is that the dependence is by far not linear. Because in thick semiconductors multiple internal reflections of emitted light occur inside the layer, ηsc is very sensitive to ηint, when ηint ∼ 1, but rather insensitive to significantly lower values.27,29,30 Despite these severe conditions, MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskites are excellent SC materials, which means that they provide extremely high ηint. The photophysics of high ηsc in perovskite devices will be discussed later.
 Fig. 1  The optimized set of band-gap energies Eg (eV) as a function of the junction number at various values of ηint under (a) AM1.5G (1 Sun) and (b) AM1.5D (1000 Sun). Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2016 The Optical Society. 
The usually very small external luminescence efficiencies of optically thick devices are also due to the multiple internal reflections, and can be characterized using PL and EL. Although the details of the perovskite device structure and the common Si solar cell device are different, both employ a diode structure based on electron- and hole-rich layers as selective contacts. Concerning such diode device structures, EL measurements are one of the most powerful techniques for gaining deeper insights into conversion processes between light and electricity,34–42 because the EL process is uniquely related to the photovoltaic process through a reciprocal relationship.34 This relationship explains why bright LEDs can also work as high-efficiency SCs. A comparison of absolute EL measurements and current–voltage curves can be used to quantify this statement.37,38Fig. 2 shows the EL intensity image and the EL and PL spectra of a MAPbI3 perovskite SC device under a bias of 1 V. The obvious fine-structured inhomogeneity of the EL image is caused by the inhomogeneous underlying TiO2 layer and/or the fabrication method (spin-coating).41,42 A similarity between the EL and PL spectra indicates the low density of trap states, which means that the luminescence observed here is straight-forward to interpret even in multilayered perovskite SC structures. Therefore, time-resolved PL spectroscopy turns out to be a very powerful tool for understanding the free-carrier dynamics of perovskite SCs during operation. The following sections explain the luminescence properties of perovskite thin films and SCs and discuss the photocarrier generation, recombination, and transport in MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals, thin films, and SC devices.
 Fig. 2  (a) Spatial EL intensity map of a MAPbI3 perovskite solar cell. (b) PL spectrum under 648 nm laser excitation (red) and the EL spectrum under a forward bias of 1 V (blue). 
Optical spectra and dynamics of perovskite thin films and single crystals
A. Optical absorption and luminescence of thin films
High-quality MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 thin films and SCs can be prepared conveniently by different methods including low-temperature and solution-based methods.43–50 Two types of samples were used in the following experiment: perovskite thin films on quartz (SiO2) substrates as well as solar cell devices. The standard solar cell device, which will be analysed later, was designed with a multilayer structure: FTO/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au, where spiro-OMeTAD is [2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene]. For both the polycrystalline thin films and SC devices, a combination of different optical methods provides deep insights into their optical and electronic properties,51–53 and allows us to discuss the SC operation mechanisms on a quantitative basis.
As shown by Shockley and Queisser, the band-gap energy determines the upper limit of the SC conversion efficiency.2 Therefore, the band-gap energy of MAPbI3 was carefully determined from a whole set of spectroscopic data obtained by various methods.11Fig. 3 shows the diffuse reflection (DR), photocurrent (PC), PL, PL excitation (PLE), and transient photo-induced absorption (TA) spectra at room temperature.11 The DR, PC, PL, and PLE spectra suggest that the band-gap energy lies in the range of 1.60–1.63 eV. Furthermore, the TA spectrum immediately after excitation (5 ps) exhibits a distinct negative peak at 1.61 eV. This negative TA peak indicates photobleaching, which usually appears at around the band-gap energy of direct-gap semiconductors. Although each experiment alone would not be conclusive, the combination of these results evidence that MAPbI3 is a direct-gap semiconductor and the band-gap energy of MAPbI3 films is 1.61 eV at room temperature. This 1.61 eV band-gap energy was also supported by ellipsometry54 and magneto-optic experiments.55
 Fig. 3  DR, PC, PL, PLE, and TA spectra of a MAPbI3 photovoltaic cell at room temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2014 Japan Society of Applied Physics. 

Fig. 4 shows the optical absorption spectrum of MAPbI3 thin films at room temperature.54 It is evident that there are no band-tail states below the absorption edge.12,54 The very sharp edge in the absorption spectrum means that there are almost no defects and this material can be applied in LEDs and SCs with excellent performance, because SQ theory predicts that a more step-like absorption enables a better SC performance.
 Fig. 4  Optical absorption coefficient of a MAPbI3 thin film at room temperature. The figure is drawn from the numerical data provided by H. Fujiwara (Gifu Univ.). 
After the basic PL and absorption spectra, one of the first advanced optical characterization procedures for any semiconductor is time-resolved PL and TA spectra and their excitation power dependence. This is because for a variety of semiconductors including oxide perovskites, the excitation fluence dependence of the PL and TA decay curves provides essential information about the photocarrier recombination mechanisms.56–60 It has been shown that power-dependent PL dynamics are well explained by a simple rate equation that includes nonradiative and radiative recombination processes.57,58 The rate equation for photocarriers under strong photoexcitation is described by the nonradiative single-carrier trapping, radiative electron–hole (bimolecular) recombination, and nonradiative Auger recombination processes.56,57 In the Auger process via three-particle interactions (either electron–hole–electron or electron–hole–hole), the nonradiative recombination energy of one electron–hole pair is transferred to the kinetic energy of another electron or hole. For weak photoexcitation, the photocarrier recombination dynamics are influenced by unintentionally doped electrons and holes. Thus, from PL decay curves, it is possible to evaluate the density and spatial profiles of the unintentionally doped carriers or the traps and defects. With this method, the spatial and temporal profiles of photocarriers and defects for oxide perovskites have been clarified successfully.57,58 By applying the rate equation formalism to the metal-halide perovskite thin films, it is possible to specify the electronic origin of efficient PL from this material.61 With this approach, it can be proved that the PL decay curves are sensitive to the excitation fluence61,62 and that the PL decay dynamics are well explained by the free-carrier band-to-band recombination rather than the exciton recombination.61

Fig. 5 shows the PL decay dynamics of MAPbI3 films under different excitation fluences. It is evident that the PL decay curves are very sensitive to the excitation fluence.61 Under weak photoexcitation, the PL decay curve shows a slow and single-exponential decay profile. In this excitation regime, the initial PL intensity depends linearly on the excitation fluence. Under weak photoexcitation the recombination occurs predominantly between photocarriers and oppositely charged unintentionally doped carriers, and the estimated unintentionally doped carrier density is less than 1 × 1015 cm−3. With an increase of the excitation fluence, a fast and non-exponential component appears, which is in accordance with our theoretical model. Fig. 5b summarizes the effective PL lifetime as a function of the excitation fluence and the initial photocarrier density.61 The PL lifetime is inversely proportional to the excitation fluence at higher photoexcitation, while it is almost constant under weak excitation conditions. Because even under strong photoexcitation no essential Stokes shift between the PL peak and the absorption edge is observed, and it can be concluded that the origin of the PL at any excitation power is a radiative two-carrier recombination process involving free conduction-band electrons and free valence-band holes, but not excitons. A similar excitation fluence dependence is observed in the TA experiments, as shown in Fig. 5c. The experimental results shown in Fig. 5b and c can be reproduced well by the same simple theoretical formalism. The rate-equation analysis leads to the radiative recombination coefficient B of about 1.7 × 10−10 s−1 cm3.61 Interestingly, the band-to-band recombination coefficient of MAPbI3 is comparable to that of typical direct-gap semiconductors such as GaAs.63 Large B coefficients are typically caused by an allowed direct band-to-band transition. Such details of carrier dynamics are essential to determine the optimum junction design.
 Fig. 5  (a) PL decay curves of MAPbI3 films under different excitation fluences. (b) Initial PL intensity and PL lifetime as a function of excitation fluence given in nJ cm−2. (c) TA intensity and TA lifetime as a function of excitation fluence given in μJ cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The above time-resolved PL and TA data show that perovskite solar cells rely solely on the transport via free electrons and holes. The perovskite semiconductors behave completely different from other organic semiconductors for solar cells, whose recombination dynamics are typically controlled by excitons. To understand the role of excitons in the optical responses of perovskites, their exciton binding energies have been discussed frequently.55,64–68 Recent papers clearly show that the exciton binding energy of MAPbI3 is small compared to the thermal energy (25 meV) at room temperature.66,67 The observed small binding energies fit very well into the picture established by the above-mentioned PL and TA dynamics: metal-halide perovskites have almost no defects or stable excitons at room temperature and thus the photoresponses and solar-cell operation of MAPbI3 are from free carriers.
The above discussion made clear that despite the simple production technique, MAPbI3 thin films have wonderful optoelectronic properties. One point which can be easily overlooked in materials with strong optical absorption and no PL Stokes shift is that reabsorption of emitted photons occurs in the interior region,69 but this amount is rather small in thin films. However, bulk materials allow for sufficient reabsorption and simultaneously also efficient reemission, and thus photon recycling effects become important. In fact, since the observation of photon recycling in MAPbI369 and MAPbBr3 single crystals,70 photon recycling is gaining more and more attention for designing perovskite-based photonic devices.
B. Efficient luminescence and photon-recycling in single crystals
For solar cell applications, only thin films of perovskites are used as the light absorber. Consequently, extensive experimental studies have been conducted on thin-film samples, which usually exhibit a grain structure (typically several hundreds of nanometers in size). The polycrystalline grain structure affects the diffusion and recombination processes of photocarriers in thin films,71,72 and many optical and electrical properties depend on the grain size. Therefore, experimental studies on perovskite single crystals are needed for better understanding the intrinsic optical properties of perovskites. Perovskite single crystals are rather easy to fabricate by the inverse temperature method73 or the anti-solvent vapour-assisted crystallization method.19 The following time-resolved PL measurements of MAPbI3 thin films on SiO2 glass and thick MAPbI3 single crystals have been performed using a streak camera. The PL dynamics of single crystals are different from those of polycrystalline thin films consisting of grains.61,69 The comparison of optical responses between thin films and single crystals is very interesting and important for understanding the whole spectrum of photophysics in perovskites.

Fig. 6a and b show the time-resolved PL spectra of MAPbI3 thin films and single crystals at room temperature. Both thin film and single crystal samples show efficient PL at room temperature.61,69 To verify the photon recycling effect, the temporal evolution of the PL spectrum should be studied. Thin film samples exhibit no spectral change in the band-to-band PL at around 1.60 eV,61 while the single crystal sample shows a clear red-shift of the PL spectrum.69 This difference suggests that the spatial distribution of photocarriers plays an important role in the PL properties. In thin films, the photocarriers are created homogeneously throughout the whole sample thickness, since the optical penetration depth is larger than the sample thickness. On the other hand, in thick bulk samples, the majority of photoexcited carriers are initially located in the near-surface region and then diffuse towards the interior volume as time elapses. The time-dependent depth-profiles of photocarriers should directly determine the temporal changes in the PL spectra.
 Fig. 6  (a) Time-resolved PL spectrum of a MAPbI3 thin film under one-photon excitation. (b) Time-resolved PL spectrum of a MAPbI3 single crystal under one-photon excitation. (c) Time-resolved PL spectrum of a MAPbI3 single crystal under two-photon excitation. (d) Theoretically calculated PL spectrum based on carrier diffusion and photon reabsorption. Panels (b–d) are adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
To confirm the origin of the red-shift of the PL peak energy with time, a two-photon excitation technique can be used to control the initial location of the carriers in the thick bulk crystal.69,70 In this technique simultaneous absorption of two photons, each with energy below the band gap, is employed to create photocarriers in the interior region of the single crystal, and a so-called two-photon excited PL (2-PL) spectrum is obtained. As shown in Fig. 6c, several highly interesting features are revealed by this approach. Firstly, there is no PL peak shift in the 2-PL spectrum, which is in strong contrast to the red-shift in the one-photon excited PL (1-PL) spectrum. Secondly, the 2-PL peak energy (1.53 eV) is smaller than that obtained with one photon excitation (around 1.60 eV). Lastly, the PL lifetimes for excitation of the interior region are longer than those for the near-surface excitation.69
All three features noted above can be explained well by reabsorption of emitted photons due to strong band-to-band transitions in MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals.69,70,74 Due to the subsequently occurring photon recycling effect (i.e., recurring photon emission and absorption), the photon reabsorption should be important to any material with high PL efficiencies.27,30 The almost overlapping absorption and PL spectra (no PL Stokes shift) evidence that the high-energy part of the band-to-band PL emitted in the interior region is immediately reabsorbed and cannot readily escape from the crystal, because of the strong band-to-band optical transitions. The higher energy part of the PL is strongly absorbed in thick single crystals, which results in a seemingly red-shifted PL spectrum in comparison to the intrinsic emission profile. On the other hand, the band-to-band emission in the near-surface region can easily escape from the crystal. The time-dependence of the PL spectra is therefore a result of diffusion in combination with absorption, and its analysis provides important materials parameters. A quantitative analysis has been performed by considering photon reabsorption and one-dimensional photocarrier diffusion.69,70 The theoretically predicted spectral changes are shown in Fig. 6d. The calculated results based on a diffusion and photon reabsorption model reproduce very well the experimental results.69 This agreement indicates that photon recycling is responsible for the unusual slow PL decay, long-range carrier diffusion, and red-shift of the PL spectra observed in the experiments. These unique properties of MAPbI3 are the reason why this material has been so successfully applied in photonic applications.
To gain direct experimental evidence for our photon recycling model, it would be conclusive to analyse arbitrary carrier depth profiles. One possible way is to study the space- and time-resolved PL spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystals by means of time-resolved two-photon-excitation microscopy.74 To freely control the generation profile, a newly developed femtosecond 2-PL microscope, wherein the photocarriers are selectively generated at the focal point, can be used. By changing the focal point of the excitation laser, the influence of reabsorption on the PL of thick crystals can be clarified systematically. As the distance between the focal point and the surface increases, a red-shift in the PL peak is observed, and the PL lifetime becomes longer.74Fig. 7 shows the PL spectra for different excitation depths (i.e., the distance of the excitation focal point from the surface).74 It can be seen that the red-shift increases with increasing excitation depth, and that the high-energy side of the PL spectrum is significantly reduced in intensity, leading to an asymmetric PL shape. This excitation depth dependence of the PL spectrum is very consistent with the temporal changes in the PL spectra discussed in Fig. 6. The proposed model is thus verified experimentally. In thick samples, the PL spectrum and dynamics are determined by the fast carrier diffusion from the near-surface to the interior region and the reabsorption of luminescence in the interior. This favours photon recycling processes, which improve the solar cell efficiency by effectively enhancing the carrier densities,27,28 but making it difficult to obtain the intrinsic properties of the material since the measured PL lifetimes and carrier diffusion lengths are longer than the intrinsic ones. The enhancement of PC and the improvement of the SC device performance via photon recycling phenomena are being discussed actively.75,76
 Fig. 7  PL spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystals under two-photon excitation as a function of excitation depth. Solid curves are theoretically calculated ones. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017 American Physical Society. 
The above observation of photon reabsorption in optically thick single crystals helps to understand the unique PL properties of thin films. It has been reported that the PL spectrum depends on the grain size of the thin film sample. This behaviour can be analysed by controlling the grain size via the MAI concentration in precursor solution. The average grain size changed from ∼200 nm at 0.08 M to ∼810 nm at 0.04 M. The grain-size dependence of the PL spectrum of the obtained MAPbI3 thin films is shown in Fig. 8. With an increase of the grain size, a red-shift of the PL peak energy occurs. Quantum size effects should be excluded as a reason for the PL wavelength shift, because the grain size is several hundreds of nanometers much larger than the exciton Bohr radius. The experiments outlined above clarify that the red-shift of the PL energy in large grains is most likely a simple result of photon reabsorption of emitted light in large crystal grains.
 Fig. 8  PL peak energy of MAPbI3 thin films as a function of the MAI concentration in solutions. Typical SEM images are shown in the insets. The average grain size of MAPbI3 changed from 200 nm at 0.08 M to 810 nm at 0.04 M. 
So far, the discussion covered experiments conducted at room temperature. It is quite interesting and valuable to investigate the optical responses also at low temperatures, but thin films exhibit rather complicated trends. For example, based on the optical spectra of polycrystalline thin films, it has been inferred that two phases coexist at low temperatures.11,66,77–80 Studies on single crystals and a conclusive comparison between single crystals and thin films are needed to understand the nature of excitons at low temperatures. The PL spectral width would be an important parameter to compare the excitonic properties. Unfortunately, for single crystals, at low temperatures, the single crystals exhibit several emission bands,81,82 whose spectral overlap impedes precise extraction of the spectral width. A more complex experimental setup with a combination of different spectroscopic techniques promises a better alternative approach. Accordingly, the exciton properties of MAPbI3 single crystals at low temperatures have been studied using PC and PL spectroscopy. Fig. 9 shows the PC and PL data at 15 K, clearly indicating the existence of the so-far unconfirmed free excitons at low temperatures.82 A sharp feature due to free excitons is confirmed at 1.637 eV for both the PC and PL spectra. Owing to the complementary nature of PL and PC measurements, a detailed discussion on the thermal activated processes becomes possible. From the analysis of the temperature dependence of the free-exciton-PC, free-exciton-PL, and free-carrier-PC intensities, the value for the exciton binding energy in the orthorhombic-phase MAPbI3 single crystals was determined to be EB = 12.4 meV.82
 Fig. 9  PC and PL spectra of a MAPbI3 single crystal at 15 K. Sharp PL and PC peaks at 1.637 eV due to free excitons. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
This section summarized the luminescence properties of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 thin films and single crystals. They have extremely high PL quantum efficiencies74,75,83,84 and thus can be used as new materials for LEDs and lasers.39,40,85–87 In addition, the broad PL spectrum and a strong anti-Stokes PL are caused by strong electron–hole couplings.82,83,88 The formation of polarons and the slow relaxation of hot carriers have been discussed in the literature.89,90 Further detailed experimental studies will reveal unique intrinsic optoelectronic properties of metal-halide perovskites.
Luminescence characterization of solar-cell devices
The previous sections clarified why MAPbI3 is an excellent photonic device material: it provides 1.61 eV band-gap energy, extremely high PL efficiency, very sharp absorption edge, photon recycling, no PL Stokes shift, etc. The following experiments elucidate the optoelectronic properties of thin-film SCs fabricated using such high-quality MAPbI3 films. In the standard SC device structures, the perovskite MAPbI3 films are sandwiched between the TiO2 electron-transport layer and the spiro-OMeTAD hole-transport layer. The heterointerfaces between MAPbI3 perovskite and charge-transport layers obviously should have a large influence on the charge carrier flow through the layers (i.e., carrier injection) and the recombination of the MAPbI3 perovskite layer and thus also on the degradation and hysteretic behaviours of SC devices.91,92 However, the details remain unknown for a long time since conventional SC device characterization techniques are not enough to study such effects. Since the MAPbI3 layer has a high PL quantum efficiency, time-resolved PL spectroscopy is considered as one of the most powerful tools for understanding charge injection at the heterointerfaces and charge flow in solar cell devices.93–95 Characterization of SC devices with PL is fast, highly sensitive, contactless, and non-destructive. The difficult point is that in SC devices, the PL decay responses exhibit a complex behaviour due to the time-dependent electric fields in the diode structure.96–98
To systematically evaluate the impact of the carrier injection on the photovoltaic performance, three different samples were prepared: (i) MAPbI3/SiO2 (MAPbI3 thin film on a quartz substrate), (ii) MAPbI3/TiO2 (MAPbI3 thin film on mesoporous TiO2/compact TiO2/FTO), and (iii) a solar cell device (glass/FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au). Fig. 10 shows the excitation fluence dependence of the PL decay curves for these three samples under 650 nm laser pulse excitation.95 The PL curves of the MAPbI3 film in Fig. 10a are almost single-exponential under weak photoexcitation, but show a non-exponential and fast decay due to the effective radiative electron–hole (bimolecular) recombination process under strong photoexcitation. The photophysics as explained in the previous section applies here.
 Fig. 10  Excitation-fluence dependence of PL decay curves for (a) a MAPbI3 film (b) a MAPbI3/TiO2, and (c) a solar cell device. The excitation fluence was varied between 0.8 and 800 nJ cm−2 for (a) and (c), and 0.89 and 890 nJ cm−2 for (b). Dotted lines represent the fitting results. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The PL decay changes drastically when the electron-transport layer is added to one side of the perovskite layer. The decay curves for MAPbI3/TiO2 in Fig. 10b exhibit two components under weak photoexcitation: an initial very fast decay component (with a time constant of about 1 ns) followed by a slow component (time constant, about 90 ns). The slow component is similar to that observed for the thin film, but the fast component is obviously related to the TiO2 layer. Interestingly, this fast decay component disappears under strong photoexcitation. This means that after the instantaneous injection of a large number of carriers just after photoexcitation, further injection is inhibited by a blocking mechanism.
Qualitatively the same effects also occur in the device. The PL decay curves of the SC device under short-circuit conditions in Fig. 10c show a fast decay for weak photoexcitation, whereas the PL decay becomes longer with increasing excitation fluence.95 Compared to the MAPbI3/TiO2 sample, the device has an additional spiro-OMeTAD layer, and thus hole injection also occurs, resulting in even shorter PL lifetimes under weak photoexcitation. Under short-circuit conditions, an internal electric field exists across the perovskite layer, which accelerates the charge-carrier separation. However, under strong photoexcitation, high-density electron–hole pairs are created in the perovskite layer, and they reduce the internal field for separation. Note that under strong photoexcitation, the decay curves for all three samples are very similar to each other. These results suggest that the low injection rates at the heterointerfaces limit the charge flow through the device. Even in devices, the short lifetimes under high photoexcitation are determined by radiative electron–hole recombination, and not by enhanced carrier separation.
High-efficiency SC devices fabricated by cost-efficient production techniques are substantially responsible for the popularity of these perovskites. However, solution-processed perovskite devices exhibit spatially nonuniform layer thickness and optical properties, because of the polycrystalline grain structures, inhomogeneous TiO2 substrate, and the spin-coating method, which was used for sample preparation in our works.42,99 Such microscopic inhomogeneity is usually detrimental to devices. A combination of different space-resolved imaging techniques is more effective for a thorough understanding of the optoelectronic properties of inhomogeneous solution-processed MAPbI3 SCs.99,100 To obtain further information for improving SC efficiencies, spatial mapping of simultaneous PL and PC measurements with a step resolution of 20 μm has been performed, as illustrated in Fig. 11a.99Fig. 11b–d show the spatial image of the effective PL lifetime (τPL), the time-integrated PL intensity (IPL), and the PC intensity (IPC). In all images, a stripe pattern is observed with spacing on the order of a few tens of microns, which reflects the structural inhomogeneity of perovskite solar cells. These data evidence a clear positive correlation between PL intensity and PL lifetime and a negative correlation between PL and PC intensities. These correlations are caused by the competition between the escape of photocarriers from the perovskite layer and the recombination of photocarriers within the perovskite layer.99
 Fig. 11  (a) Experimental setup. Spatial images of (b) the average PL lifetime, (c) the time-integrated PL intensity, and (d) the PC intensity. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
With a similar experiment, it has also been possible to investigate one of the most critical issues of long-term stability of perovskite SCs, i.e., light-induced degradation and structural changes.92,99,101 For this experiment, the spatial change in the PL and PC intensities was measured before and after 1 Sun AM1.5 global illumination for 1 h in air, where significant degradation of unsealed samples is observed after 1 h.99 The advantage of this microscopic imaging technique is that it allows the statistical evaluation of solar cell characteristics in both the light-illuminated and non-illuminated areas of a single sample, removing any fluctuations arising from sample differences. Fig. 12 shows the spatial image of τPL, IPC and I0, where I0 is the initial PL intensity of the time-resolved signal at zero time delay. The left half of the figure represents the light-illuminated area, whereas the right half represents the non-illuminated area. It is evident that prolonged light illumination causes clear changes in τPL, IPC and I0.99
 Fig. 12  Spatial images of (a) IPC, (b) τPL, and (c) the initial PL intensity at zero time delay (I0). Only the left half of the image area was irradiated by 1 Sun AM1.5G for 1 h in air. Histograms of (d) IPC, (e) τPL, and (f) I0. The bars indicate the occurrence of each value and the solid curves show the fitting result with a Gaussian function. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In order to quantitatively compare the changes caused by light illumination, a plot of the histograms of τPL, IPC and I0 before and after light illumination can be highly useful. In the intensity histograms, the solid lines represent Gaussian fitting functions. The decrease in τPL after illumination suggests that nonradiative recombination centers are formed in the perovskite layer and the PL decays faster. The decrease in IPC and the increase in I0 are due to suppressed charge carrier injection at the interfaces between the MAPbI3 and charge-transport (TiO2 and/or spiro-OMeTAD) layers. Note that the PC intensity change is significantly larger compared to the change in the PL lifetime. The histograms reveal that device performance degradation is mainly caused by the decrease in the carrier injection efficiency, and not due to low material quality. This is a highly interesting result, and shows once more that our advanced experimental techniques provide important insights for understanding the carrier injection at the interfaces in perovskite SCs. The PL and PC responses of SC devices are mainly determined by two parameters, that is, the carrier recombination rate in the MAPbI3 layer and the carrier injection rate at the interface. In addition, the light-induced degradation of the transport layer may also lead to a decreased injection rate. The main reason for the light-induced degradation of the device appears to be a change in the carrier injection at the interface. The development of high-mobility and stable electron- and hole-transport layers is considered to be important for perovskite-based devices.
Summary and perspectives
Solution-processed perovskites, MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, show highly efficient luminescence even at room temperature. This luminescence can in turn be used to understand much of the physics of perovskites. Using luminescence spectra and dynamics, we are able to quantitatively discuss the generation, recombination, and interfacial injection of photocarriers in MAPbI3 single crystals, thin films, and SC devices. Luminescence studies provide essential information for realizing high-performance devices based on metal halide perovskites. Perovskites have superior optoelectronic properties such as extremely high luminescence efficiencies, no luminescence Stokes shift, very sharp absorption edge, and strong anti-Stokes luminescence. In addition, their nanocrystals and halogen substitution enable efficient luminescence in the whole visible spectral region.102–104 The unique luminescence properties of lead-halide perovskites open new perspectives for fundamental optical science and photonic device applications.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Y. Yamada, A. Wakamiya, T. Yamada, T. Handa, M. Endo, L. Q. Phuong, D. Yamashita, H. Akiyama, L. Zhu, D. M. Tex, H. Tahara, A. Shimazaki, and Y. Nakaike for collaboration, experimental help, and discussions, and H. Fujiwara for providing their numerical data for the absorption spectrum in Fig. 4. Part of this work was supported by JST-CREST. Finally, the author thanks many of the authors cited in this short review for discussions.
Notes and references
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wolf, Proc. IRE, 1960, 48, 1246 CrossRef .
For a summary of the world-record solar-cell efficiencies, http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png.
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Ross, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 4590 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. King, D. Bhusari, A. Boca, D. Larrabee, X.-Q. Liu, W. Hong, C. M. Fetzer, D. C. Law and N. H. Karam, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 797 CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef CAS ; W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926 Search PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 032302 CrossRef .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, J.-S. Lauret, D. Sapori and E. Deleporte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10161 CAS .
G. Giorgi, J. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Ishihara, in Optical Properties of Low-Dimensional Materials, ed. T. Ogawa and Y. Kanemitsu, World Scientific, Singapore,  1995, p. 288 Search PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, S. Wang, C. A. Feild, C. A. Chess and A. M. Guloy, Science, 1995, 267, 1473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Era, S. Morimoto, T. Tsutsui and S. Saito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 676 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, J. Takahashi and T. Goto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 42, 11099 CrossRef .
T. Kondo, T. Azuma, T. Yuasa and R. Ito, Solid State Commun., 1998, 105, 253 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Miller, E. Yablonovitch and S. R. Kurtz, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 303 CrossRef .
E. Yablonovitch and O. D. Miller, IEEE Photonics Society Newsletter, 2013, 27, 4 Search PubMed .
L. Zhu, C. Kim, M. Yoshita, S. Chen, S. Sato, T. Mochizuki, H. Akiyama and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 031118 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, T. Mochizuki, M. Yoshita, S. Chen, C. Kim, H. Akiyama and Y. Kanemitsu, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A740 CrossRef PubMed .
P. T. Landsberg and G. Tonge, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, R1 CrossRef CAS .
A. de Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839 CrossRef .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085303 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, U. Rau, M. Hermle, A. W. Bett, A. Helbig and J. H. Werner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 123502 CrossRef .
S. Roensch, R. Hoheisel, F. Dimroth and A. W. Bett, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 251113 CrossRef .
S. Chen, L. Zhu, M. Yoshita, T. Mochizuki, C. Kim, H. Akiyama, M. Imaizumi and Y. Kanemitsu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 5, 7836 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Yoshita, S. Chen, T. Nakamura, T. Mochizuki, C. Kim, M. Imaizumi, Y. Kanemitsu and H. Akiyama, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2016, 6, 777 CrossRef .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tvingstedt, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Baumann, C. Deibel, H. J. Snaith, V. Dyakonov and H. J. Bolink, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Handa, D. M. Tex, A. Shimazaki, T. Aharen, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A917 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Okano, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya, M. Yoshita, H. Akiyama and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 102302 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, C. R. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Park and N. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088 RSC .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 133907 CrossRef .
D. M. Tex, I. Kamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 245305 CrossRef .
D. M. Tex, T. Ihara, I. Kamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125301 CrossRef .
M. Shirayama, H. Kadowaki, T. Miyadera, T. Sugita, M. Tamakoshi, M. Kato, T. Fujiseki, D. Murata, S. Hara, T. N. Murakami, S. Fujimoto, M. Chikamatsu and H. Fujiwara, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 5, 014012 CrossRef .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T.-W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962 CAS .

          P. T. Landsberg, Recombination in Semiconductors, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England,  1991 Search PubMed .
H. Yasuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 193202 CrossRef .
H. Yasuda, Y. Yamada, T. Tayagaki and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 233202 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, H. Yasuda, T. Tayagaki and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 247401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamada, H. K. Sato, Y. Hikita, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 047403 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef .
A. Dmitriev and A. Oruzheinikov, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 3241 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2015, 5, 401 CrossRef .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sestu, M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, F. Chen, D. Marongiu, R. Piras, M. Mainas, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, L. Q. Phuong, N. Maruyama, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamada, Y. Yamada, H. Nishimura, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500290 CrossRef .
V. D’Innocenzo, A. R. S. Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730 CrossRef PubMed .
O. G. Reid, M. Yang, N. Kopidakis, K. Zhu and G. Rumbles, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 561 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yamada, Y. Yamada, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 7, 014001 CrossRef .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vrućinić, M. Alsari, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Science, 2016, 351, 1430 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Staub, H. Hempel, J.-C. Hebig, J. Mock, U. W. Paetzold, U. Rau, T. Unold and T. Kirchartz, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 6, 044017 CrossRef .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081513 CrossRef .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tahara, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5347 CAS .
L. Q. Phuong, Y. Yamada, M. Nagai, N. Maruyama, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Fang, R. Raissa, M. Abdu-Aguye, S. Adjokatse, G. R. Blake, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2378 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Phuong, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Ha, C. Shen, J. Zhang and Q. Xiong, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 115 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. S. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 Search PubMed .
X.-Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, K. Miyata, Y. Fu, J. Wang, P. P. Joshi, D. Niesner, K. W. Williams, S. Jin and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2016, 353, 1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Handa, D. M. Tex, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Tex, T. Ihara, H. Akiyama, M. Imaizumi and Y. Kanemitsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 013905 CrossRef .
D. M. Tex, M. Imaizumi and Y. Kanemitsu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A1687 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Tex, M. Imaizumi and Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 7, 014019 CrossRef .
D. Yamashita, T. Handa, T. Ihara, H. Tahara, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pathak, N. Sakai, F. W. R. Rivarola, S. D. Stranks, J. Liu, G. E. Eperon, C. Ducati, K. Wojciechowski, J. T. Griffiths, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Pellaroque, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8066 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Yoshihiko Kanemitsu
	Yoshihiko Kanemitsu is a Professor of Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. He received his PhD in 1986 from The University of Tokyo. Currently, his interest is focused on the optical properties and functionalities of exciton complexes in semiconductor nanostructures and the photophysics of solar-cell materials and devices.

 	Fig. 1  The optimized set of band-gap energies Eg (eV) as a function of the junction number at various values of ηint under (a) AM1.5G (1 Sun) and (b) AM1.5D (1000 Sun). Adapted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2016 The Optical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Spatial EL intensity map of a MAPbI3 perovskite solar cell. (b) PL spectrum under 648 nm laser excitation (red) and the EL spectrum under a forward bias of 1 V (blue).	 

 	Fig. 3  DR, PC, PL, PLE, and TA spectra of a MAPbI3 photovoltaic cell at room temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2014 Japan Society of Applied Physics.	 

 	Fig. 4  Optical absorption coefficient of a MAPbI3 thin film at room temperature. The figure is drawn from the numerical data provided by H. Fujiwara (Gifu Univ.).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL decay curves of MAPbI3 films under different excitation fluences. (b) Initial PL intensity and PL lifetime as a function of excitation fluence given in nJ cm−2. (c) TA intensity and TA lifetime as a function of excitation fluence given in μJ cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Time-resolved PL spectrum of a MAPbI3 thin film under one-photon excitation. (b) Time-resolved PL spectrum of a MAPbI3 single crystal under one-photon excitation. (c) Time-resolved PL spectrum of a MAPbI3 single crystal under two-photon excitation. (d) Theoretically calculated PL spectrum based on carrier diffusion and photon reabsorption. Panels (b–d) are adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  PL spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystals under two-photon excitation as a function of excitation depth. Solid curves are theoretically calculated ones. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  PL peak energy of MAPbI3 thin films as a function of the MAI concentration in solutions. Typical SEM images are shown in the insets. The average grain size of MAPbI3 changed from 200 nm at 0.08 M to 810 nm at 0.04 M.	 

 	Fig. 9  PC and PL spectra of a MAPbI3 single crystal at 15 K. Sharp PL and PC peaks at 1.637 eV due to free excitons. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Excitation-fluence dependence of PL decay curves for (a) a MAPbI3 film (b) a MAPbI3/TiO2, and (c) a solar cell device. The excitation fluence was varied between 0.8 and 800 nJ cm−2 for (a) and (c), and 0.89 and 890 nJ cm−2 for (b). Dotted lines represent the fitting results. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Experimental setup. Spatial images of (b) the average PL lifetime, (c) the time-integrated PL intensity, and (d) the PC intensity. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Spatial images of (a) IPC, (b) τPL, and (c) the initial PL intensity at zero time delay (I0). Only the left half of the image area was irradiated by 1 Sun AM1.5G for 1 h in air. Histograms of (d) IPC, (e) τPL, and (f) I0. The bars indicate the occurrence of each value and the solid curves show the fitting result with a Gaussian function. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
