Giant current amplification induced by ion migration in perovskite single crystal photodetectors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC02334D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC02334D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8042-8050Giant current amplification induced by ion migration in perovskite single crystal photodetectors

        
          
            Ting 
            Wu†
, 
      
        
          
            Mahshid 
            Ahmadi†
 and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Hu
          
        
      *
      Joint Institute for Advanced Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA. E-mail: bhu@utk.edu
Received 
      14th May 2018
    , Accepted 2nd July 2018First published on 3rd July 2018AbstractSingle crystals of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have become attractive candidates for application in photodetection and high-energy radiation detection based on a unique solution growth method with a large interacting cross-section with electromagnetic waves in different energy regimes and high drift mobilities through optically induced polarization. However, inevitable ion migration often represents a technical difficulty in controlling the detection performance. This work reports giant current amplification induced by ion migration in the MAPbI3 single crystal photodetectors with a lateral geometry of Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag based on light soaking studies. Upon light soaking, a stabilized device can demonstrate a giant amplification factor reaching 600 at −2 V under weak light illumination (1 mW cm−2). The time-dependent current profile shows a slow response during amplification under light soaking. This indicates that optically activated ions are driven away from working areas to the respective electrodes, leading to the reduction of dark current by decreasing bulk defects. Simultaneously, the accumulation of iodine anions and methylammonium cations at Ag and Au contacts can trigger the counter charge injection, largely amplifying the total electrical current and leading to giant current amplification in perovskite single crystal photodetectors.
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have received immense interest due to their promising optical and electrical properties for developing multi-functionality, including photovoltaics,1–4 light-emitting diodes,5–8 optically pumped lasers,9–12 photodetection,13–20 and high energy radiation detection.21–24 Since 2015, single crystals of hybrid perovskites,25–28 with much more promising properties with respect to their polycrystalline counterparts, have demonstrated great advantages for photodetection16–19 and high energy radiation detection.21–24 Despite these remarkable achievements in perovskite detectors, the fundamental understanding of the development of photodetector actions is still lacking. In particular, hybrid perovskites are known to possess dual conduction channels, electronic conduction, and ionic conduction.29–32 The ionic conducting characteristics are highly associated with the operation stability of perovskite optoelectronic devices.33 Meanwhile, ion migration due to photoexcitation34,35 or electrical poling36,37 is known to be one of the origins for the hysteresis effect in perovskite solar cells.38–41 Recently, we found that mobile ions can interact with metal contacts and lead to interface modified semiconducting properties in perovskite single crystals.42 This provides a hypothesis that ion migration can provide a mechanism to trigger electrical injection and consequently generate current amplification in perovskite photodetectors.
In this work, we report giant current amplification in lateral perovskite single crystal photodetectors, which can be attributed to the effect of ion migration and accumulation with the aid of external bias and photoexcitation. We find that a stabilized device through light soaking for 30 min can generate giant amplification with the amplification factor reaching 600 at −2 V under weak light illumination (1 mW cm−2). We propose that the giant current amplification in our devices can be attributed to photoexcitation and electrical field induced migration and accumulation of iodine anions (I−) and methylammonium cations (MA+) at the respective contacts. The interfacial charging due to ion accumulation offers an effective mechanism to trigger counter charge injection, consequently amplifying the total electrical current. Simultaneously, the field-induced ion migration wipes the defects from the working area to the electrode contacts, leading to the reduction of dark current due to the reduced density of defects within the working area.
Results and discussion
Single crystals of MAPbI3, as shown in Fig. 1a, were grown by a solution growth method reported in our previous publication.42 By controlling the precursor concentration, oil bath temperature, and cooling rates, we are able to grow large crystals with a thickness of about 3 mm. The details of single crystal growth can be found in our previous publication.42 In this study, single crystals with a thickness of about 3 mm ensure a large crystal surface (3 mm × 3 mm) assigned to the {100} facet to pattern charge transport layers (C60/BCP) and metal contacts laterally. Fig. 1b shows the device structure of single crystal photodetectors with a lateral geometry of Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag. The cathode and anode contacts were deposited on the crystal surface with a separation distance of 100 μm using a shadow mask. More specifically, fullerene (C60) and 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP) were sequentially deposited as the electron transport layer, while silver (Ag) and gold (Au) were deposited as cathode and anode contacts, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Giant current amplification from MAPbI3 single crystal photodetectors. (a) Photograph of a grown single crystal of MAPbI3. (b) Schematic diagram of a photodetector device based on a MAPbI3 single crystal with a lateral geometry; (c) current density–voltage (JV) characteristics of the device without soaking under both dark conditions and under white light illumination; the inset shows the characteristics on a semi-logarithmic scale and the current amplification factor (AF) at −1 V and −2 V; (d) JV characteristics under both dark conditions and under white light illumination after light soaking treatment for 30 min, the inset shows the characteristics on a semi-logarithmic scale and AF at −1 V and −2 V. 
Interestingly, the device exhibits giant current amplification under electrical biasing and light soaking. The current density–voltage (JV) characteristics under both dark conditions and white light illumination are shown in Fig. 1c. The JV curve under illumination can be divided into two regimes: (i) the photovoltaic (PV) regime at forward bias, and (ii) the photodetector (PD) regime at reverse bias. In the PV regime, the device generates an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.68 V and a fill-factor (FF) reaching 40%, but the power conversion efficiency is seriously limited by the inefficient generation of photocurrent under zero bias. However, in the PD regime, we can observe a large current amplification from the lateral single crystal device. In particular, the current under 2 V reverse bias is 0.62 μA cm−2 under dark conditions, but dramatically increases to 10.70 μA cm−2 under illumination, while the short-circuit current is 0.66 μA cm−2. This result indicates that the lateral single crystal photodetectors can present a large current amplification effect, in which the current amplification factor (AF) is defined using eqn (1):56 (1)where J is the measured electrical current at a given bias, JDK is the dark current under the same bias, and JSC is the short-circuit current under the same illumination conditions. The lateral single crystal photodetector gives an AF of 6 and 15 under 1 V and 2 V reverse biases, respectively. The current amplification capability is comparable with the reported values from polycrystalline perovskite photodetectors.56 More interestingly, when the device is continuously illuminated for 30 minutes (min), the current density in the PD regime is dramatically enhanced (Fig. 1d) with the current amplification factor increased from 15 to 456 under 2 V reverse bias and white light illumination, while the PV performance is significantly decreased. Meanwhile, the dark current is reduced by one order at 2 V reverse bias after light soaking for 30 min. This indicates that the density of defects within the working area is effectively reduced under the working conditions. The reduction in dark current after light soaking is in agreement with recent studies on photoinduced defect density reduction and defect healing by ion migration.35,43 More interestingly, it is found that the voltage at the drip of dark JV curves is shifted from nearly zero to 0.19 V after illumination for 30 min, while the Voc is reduced from 0.68 V to 0.55 V. The reduction in Voc suggests that light soaking causes large accumulation of ions at the electrode interface enhancing interfacial charge recombination which is deleterious to the performance of the device in the photovoltaic regime.44 Light soaking45 and the light-induced self-poling effect34 have been revealed in the polycrystalline perovskite photovoltaics. The former effect has been attributed to the neutralization of charge defects, leading to an enhancement of photovoltaic performance with time. While the latter effect has been interpreted by optically activated ion migration driven by photovoltage (also known as open-circuit voltage). In order to ensure the presence of significant injection at negative bias we have calculated the drift photocurrent expected at −2 V according to the simple electrical conduction theory shown in eqn (2). Jph = enμE(2)where e is the charge of an electron, n is the number of free charges, μ is the mobility of the charge carriers and E is the applied electric field. By considering the applied −2 V and built-in potential (Voc), we can estimate the photocurrent Jph under this reverse bias by using JSC developed using built-in potential. Based on eqn (2), Jph = JSC*(2 + Voc) = 0.26 μA cm−2. Obviously, the estimated photocurrent is much less than the observed photocurrent 21 μA cm−2 at −2 V. This provides an experimental indication that, after light soaking, ion migration towards the respective electrodes can modify the interfacial barrier and trigger the electrical injection at electrode contacts and consequently generate giant current amplification in lateral single crystal photodetectors. It was noted that after 30 min of light soaking the devices are stable; however, as a result of further light soaking, a serious issue develops due to ion accumulation and the devices become unstable. The longer light soaking can cause photocurrent decay since further ion migration can induce an electric field with a direction opposite to the built-in electric field which consequently reduces the collection of photogenerated carriers and photocurrent decays.
It is well established that ion migration is time, voltage and photoexcitation dependent. Here, we further examined the time-dependent current at different excitation intensities to understand the underlying mechanism responsible for giant amplification induced by light soaking in the single crystal device. Fig. 2a shows the time-dependent current profiles measured with repeating light-on and light-off cycles at different excitation intensities from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2 under four different biases 0 V, −1 V, −2 V and +1 V. We can see that the current is much larger under reverse bias as compared to the zero bias and forward bias. As shown in Fig. 2b, the amplification factor reaches 600 at −2 V reverse bias under weak light illumination (1 mW cm−2), but decreases with increasing photoexcitation intensity. In particular, the amplification shows a slow response time for light soaking from the light-on to light-off condition with increasing excitation intensity in the Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag device. Previous studies attributed the slow photocurrent response to the ion migration and buildup of space charges driven by an electric filed.36,46–48 As can be seen in Fig. 2a this phenomenon is more dominant at higher reverse bias and photoexcitation intensity. When light is on and the device is under bias both electronic and ionic charges redistribute and form new interface space charge regions, and hence develop a new interfacial barrier at the semiconductor/electrode interface. The interfacial charge region can’t contribute to an immediate photocurrent response but can cause a slow response. Here, we observe a slow response which confirms the existence of a slow process, i.e. ion migration towards the respective electrodes (Fig. 2a). This interfacial barrier modification can trigger the injection of additional charges into the device. Hence, this slow response time provides evidence that current amplification is induced by optically activated ions driven by an external field. It is known that free surfaces are more susceptible to defects and surface degradation (hydration) can in fact mask the carrier transport by increasing the surface traps. This leads to resistive losses and high leakage current. Here, in Fig. 1c and d we observe a small dark current which ensures the lack of leakage current. However, eventually long exposure to ambient and humidity may cause degradation in these devices.
 Fig. 2  Excitation intensity dependence of current amplification. (a) Time-dependent current profiles measured with repeating light-on and light-off cycles with increasing excitation intensities from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2 under 0 V, −1 V, −2 V and +1 V in the Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag device. (b) The amplification factor is shown as a function of photoexcitation intensity at −1 V and −2 V. 
Here, we discussed the underlying mechanism accountable for giant current amplification in our single crystal photodetectors. As was discussed above, the continuous illumination can cause ion migration and redistribution of charges in MAPbI3 perovskite. Ion migration along a free surface or grain boundaries is easier than along bulk due to the lack of chemical bonding on one side. It is revealed that photoexcitation can enhance ionic transport by changing the activation energy of ions.49 Most recently, based on several techniques Kim et al. has shown significant ionic conduction in methyl ammonium lead iodide under illumination.50 It was revealed that both light soaking35 and electric field51,52 induce halide migration and redistribution of ions in thin films and single crystals of hybrid perovskites. In addition, the drift of charged ions/vacancies towards the respective contacts and compositional changes at the electrodes was demonstrated under applied field and photoexcitation.36,53–55 In the reverse bias regime, the Au contact is subjected to a negative bias, which can induce organic cation (MA+) migration toward the Au contact. In our recent study, we have demonstrated that Au can interact with MA+, forming positive complexes at the interface.42 In contrast, the Ag contact is subjected to a positive bias, which can induce large iodine anion (I−) migration. In the presence of C60 and BCP, the I− ions can largely accumulate at the contact interface.
To further explore the accumulation of charges at the interface we performed impedance spectroscopy. Fig. 3 presents a low-frequency (1 kHz) capacitance profile monitored at different DC bias (0 V, −1 V and −2 V) with repeating light-off/on cycles. The excitation intensities are increased from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2. In general, reverse biasing is expected to assist charge dissociation, charge transport and charge collection, and consequently decrease the low-frequency capacitance, which essentially contributed from interfacial charge accumulation. The interfacial charge could have two sources: charge carriers (electrons or holes) and charged ions. When the device is subjected to zero bias, the capacitance profile does not show significant time dependence, suggesting negligible ion migration under zero bias; The increment in capacitance upon increasing excitation intensity is due to the increased accumulation of charge carriers (electrons or holes). Unlikely, applying reverse bias exhibits a slow response in the capacitance profile, particularly under high excitation intensity. This provides the evidence of ion migration and accumulation towards the electrode interface under the manipulation of external bias and light illumination. As compared to the zero bias condition, the low-frequency capacitance tends to decrease at −1 V bias but increase at −2 V. The decrease in capacitance at −1 V can be explained by a decrease in the interfacial accumulation of charge carriers (electrons or holes) due to the dominant field assisted charge collection; while the increase in capacitance at −2 V is due to dominant field induced ion migration/accumulation. This interface-charge accumulation intends to reduce the internal built-in field, leading to a decrease of the photovoltaic performance. However, we can expect that these accumulated ions can trigger counter charge injection from the respective electrodes as shown in Fig. 4, consequently enhancing the total current under reverse bias. Such current amplification is expected to be enhanced due to light-assisted ion migration.34,35
 Fig. 3  Time-dependent low-frequency (1 kHz) capacitance profile under different DC bias (0 V, −1 V and −2 V) and repeating light-off/on cycles with increasing excitation intensities from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2. 
 Fig. 4  Proposed mechanism of current amplification in the reverse bias regime. (a) Top view of the open-circuit condition; (b) front view of the open-circuit condition; (c) top view under reverse bias; and (d) front view under reverse bias. 
In order to confirm the proposed mechanism of current amplification, we carefully measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) from our sample under different biasing conditions (0 V, −0.5 V and −1 V) as shown in Fig. 5. The original data are shown in Fig. 5a, which do not consider any boundary conditions. We found that the EQE in our single crystal device is below expectations as compared to the thin film device most likely due to the large charge transport distance between the 2 electrodes (100 μm) in the lateral electrode geometry in addition to the light penetration decay in thick single crystals (3 mm). It should be noted that the charge transport (conduction) channel between the cathode and the anode has an effective thickness (xeff) in a lateral geometry rather than infinity (xeff = ∞). As a result, the EQE should be corrected by considering the effective thickness of the conduction channel. Fig. 5b plots the ratio of the number of photons absorbed within the volume with a given thickness x to that of the incident photons according to eqn (3): (3)where N(x) represents the number of photons absorbed within the volume with a given thickness x, N0 represents the number of incident photons, and α = 5 × 104 cm−1. With a rough estimation, the number of photons being absorbed in the effective channel is dramatically reduced to 17% and 40% when xeff is taken as 50 nm and 100 nm, respectively. In addition, if the thickness (D) in a photodetector is much larger than the light penetration depth, according to eqn (4). (4)where Popt is the incident optical power and WLD is the device dimensions, the photo-carrier generation gain decreases as the device thickness increases. By considering the effective channel thickness, EQE is indeed over unity when xeff < 100 nm (Fig. 5c and d).
 Fig. 5  External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the single crystal photodetectors under different bias before and after the correction. (a) EQE of the device measured under different bias (0 V, −0.5 V, and −1 V); (b) the ratio of the number of photons absorbed at position x to the incident photons; (c) EQE of the device corrected by considering the effective thickness of the conducting channel (xeff) of 100 nm; (d) EQE of the device corrected by considering an xeff of 50 nm. 
Current amplification has been reported in both organic material based photodetectors and polycrystalline perovskite photodetectors.56–58 However, the underlying mechanism remains unsettled with the different proposed mechanisms, e.g. enhanced charge tunneling injection assisted by trapped charge carriers,56,57 and enhanced photoconductivity due to the enhanced ferroelectric polarization.58 Yet there are controversies on the ferroelectric polarization phenomenon in hybrid perovskites. We have recently demonstrated the presence of regions with aligned electric dipoles; however, ion migration, high charge mobility and free exchange between the surface and bulk ionic species prevent ferroelectric switching.59 This unique ionic and electrochemical properties of organic–inorganic perovskites open a broad range of applications beyond classical ferroelectric functionalities. For instance, they can be used as systems to explore the coupling between ferroelectric and ionic behavior, i.e. recently discovered ferroionic states60 mediated by light flux, optically-addressable gas sensors and devices for internet of things (IoT) applications. As a result, here we rule out the ferroelectric effects as the mechanism behind this amplification. The other proposed mechanism behind photoamplification was described via modification of the potential barrier by interfacial trapped charges. The trapped charges can induce band bending at the interface, reduce the Schottky junction thickness and subsequently allow the injection of counter charges under reverse bias. In this work, giant current amplification can be realized through ion redistribution by modifying the interfacial barrier and triggering counter carrier injection. Besides, ions on the surface of single crystals can only escape if additional energy is provided. Therefore, ions on the surface can act as trapped charges. Our proposed mechanism is similar to trap assisted charge injection in photodetectors.
Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrate giant current amplification from MAPbI3 single crystal photodetectors with a lateral geometry of Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag based on the ion migration effect. A stabilized device with light soaking for 30 min can generate giant amplification with the amplification factor reaching 600 at −2 V under weak light illumination (1 mW cm−2). Such giant current amplification can be attributed to the electrical field induced migration and accumulation of ions at the respective electrodes. The interfacial charging due to ion accumulation offers an effective mechanism to trigger counter charge injection, consequently amplifying the total electrical current. Simultaneously, field-induced ion migration wipes the defects from the working area to the electrode contacts, leading to the reduction of dark current due to the reduced density of defects within the working area. Clearly, this work provides an insightful understanding of the effect of ion migration on the photodetector action in the devices based on single crystals of hybrid perovskites.
Experimental section
Single crystal growth and device fabrication
The single crystals of MAPbI3 were grown using a solution growth method according to our previous publication.42 Large SCs, with dimensions up to sub-centimeters, were mounted on top of glass using super glue for device fabrication. The devices were prepared with a lateral geometry of Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag. The cathode and anode contacts were deposited on the crystal surface with a separation distance of 100 μm using a shallow mask. More specifically, 40 nm C60 and 6 nm BCP were sequentially deposited as the electron transport layer in a vacuum of 2 × 10−7 Torr, while 100 nm Ag and 70 nm Au were deposited as cathode and anode contacts, respectively.
Measurements and characterization

JV characterization was performed using a Keithley 2400. Photoexcitation was applied using AM 1.5G solar light from a Thermal Oriel 96000 300 W solar simulator. The light intensity was changed by using different neutral density filters. External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded under ambient conditions using a homemade setup with a xenon arc lamp (1TDN4A, Dayton), a monochromator (CS130-RG-1-FH, Newport), a chopper controller (SR540, Stanford Research Systems), a low-noise preamplifier (SR570, Stanford Research Systems) and a lock-in amplifier (SR830 DSP, Stanford Research Systems). The setup was calibrated with a Si detector (DET100A, Thorlabs).
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the financial support from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) under the grant number FA 9550-15-1-0064, AOARD (FA2386-15-1-4104), and the National Science Foundation (CBET-1438181). This research was partially conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences based on user projects (CNMS2016-279 and CNMS2016-R45), which is sponsored by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Division of Scientific User Facilities, the U.S. Department of Energy. The authors also acknowledge the project support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61475051, 2014CB643506, and 2013CB922104).
References
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Photovoltaics. Interface Engineering of Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, SOLAR CELLS. High-Performance Photovoltaic Perovskite Layers Fabricated through Intramolecular Exchange, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Incorporation of Rubidium Cations into Perovskite Solar Cells Improves Photovoltaic Performance, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z. H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Efficient and Stable Solution-Processed Planar Perovskite Solar Cells via Contact Passivation, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Bright Light-emitting Diodes Based on Organometal Halide Perovskite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Hoye, M. R. Chua, K. P. Musselman, G. Li, M. L. Lai, Z. K. Tan, N. C. Greenham, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, R. H. Friend and D. Credgington, Enhanced Performance in Fluorene-free Organometal Halide Perovskite Light-emitting Diodes Using Tunable, Low Electron Affinity Oxide Electron Injectors, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1414–1419 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Overcoming the Electroluminescence Efficiency Limitations of Perovskite Light-emitting Diodes, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, N. L. Tran, K. M. Lee, T.-W. Koh, G. D. Scholes and B. P. Rand, Efficient Perovskite Light-emitting Diodes Featuring Nanometre-sized Crystallites, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 108–115 CrossRef .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Low-temperature Solution-Processed Wavelength-tunable Perovskites for Lasing, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Room-temperature Near-infrared High-Q Perovskite Whispering-gallery Planar Nanolasers, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995–6001 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Perovskite Microdisk Microlasers Self-assembled from Solution, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405–3410 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Lead Halide Perovskite Nanowire Lasers with Low Lasing Thresholds and High Quality Factors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Filterless Narrowband Visible Photodetectors, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 687–694 CrossRef .
X. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, P. Jing, Z. Yang, X. Shi, T. Zhao, L. Y. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, High-Performance Near-IR Photodetector Using Low-bandgap MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 Perovskite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701053 CrossRef .
J. Zhou and J. Huang, Photodetectors based on Organic-inorganic Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskites, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700256 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Fang, Q. F. Dong, Y. C. Shao, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Highly Narrowband Perovskite Single-crystal Photodetectors Enabled by Surface-charge Recombination, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679–686 CrossRef .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Planar-integrated Single-crystalline Perovskite Photodetectors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724–8730 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bao, Z. Chen, Y. Fang, H. Wei, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, L. Li and J. Huang, Low-noise and Large-linear-dynamic-range Photodetectors based on Hybrid-perovskite Thin-single-crystals, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703209 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, 
            In Situ Observation of Heat-induced Degradation of Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15012–15018 CrossRef .
M. Ahmadi, T. Wu and B. Hu, A Review on Organic-inorganic Halide Perovskite Photodetectors: Device Engineering and Fundamental Physics, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605242 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Sensitive X-ray Detectors Made of Methylammonium Lead Tribromide Perovskite Single Crystals, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 333–339 CrossRef .
S. Yakunin, D. N. Dirin, Y. Shynkarenko, V. Morad, I. Cherniukh, O. Nazarenko, D. Kreil, T. Nauser and M. V. Kovalenko, Detection of Gamma Photons Using Solution-grown Single Crystals of Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 585–589 CrossRef .
H. Wei, D. DeSantis, W. Wei, Y. Deng, D. Guo, T. J. Savenije, L. Cao and J. Huang, Dopant Compensation in Alloyed CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx Perovskite Single Crystals for Gamma-ray Spectroscopy, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 826–833 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shrestha, R. Fischer, G. J. Matt, P. Feldner, T. Michel, A. Osvet, I. Levchuk, B. Merle, S. Golkar, H. Chen, S. F. Tedde, O. Schmidt, R. Hock, M. Rührig, M. Göken, W. Heiss, G. Anton and C. J. Brabec, High-Performance Direct Conversion X-ray Detectors based on Sintered Hybrid Lead Triiodide Perovskite Wafers, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 436–440 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Solar cells. Electron-hole Diffusion Lengths > 175 μm in Solution-grown CH3NH3PbI3 Single Crystals, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Low Trap-state Density and Long Carrier Diffusion in Organolead Trihalide Perovskite Single Crystals, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan, F. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Two-inch-sized Perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) Crystals: Growth and Characterization, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, High-quality Bulk Hybrid Perovskite Single Crystals within Minutes by Inverse Temperature Crystallization, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586–7591 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mizusaki, K. Arai and K. Fueki, Ionic-conduction of the Perovskite-type Halides, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 11, 203–211 CrossRef .
T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and J. Maier, The Significance of Ion Conduction in a Hybrid Organic-inorganic Lead-iodide-based Perovskite Photosensitizer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7905–7910 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Ionic Transport in Hybrid Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497–7504 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Ion Migration in Organometal Trihalide Perovskite and its Impact on Photovoltaic Efficiency and Stability, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Achieving Long-term Stable Perovskite Solar Cells via Ion Neutralization, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
Y. H. Deng, Z. G. Xiao and J. S. Huang, Light-induced Self-poling Effect on Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Solar Cells for Increased Device Efficiency and Stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500721 CrossRef .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Photo-induced Halide Redistribution in Organic-inorganic Perovskite Films, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683–11691 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Giant Switchable Photovoltaic Effect in Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Devices, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. C. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. G. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. S. Huang, Photovoltaic Switching Mechanism in Lateral Structure Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Understanding the Rate-dependent J–V Hysteresis, Slow Time Component, and Aging in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells: The Role of A Compensated Electric Field, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kiessling, A. Kohler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Iodine Migration and Its Effect on Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446–2454 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckevicius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Graetzel, Ionic Polarization-Induced Current–Voltage Hysteresis in CH3NH3PbX3 Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10334–10342 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Grain Boundary Dominated Ion Migration in Polycrystalline Organic–inorganic Halide Perovskite Films, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
T. Wu, R. Mukherjee, O. S. Ovchinnikova, L. Collins, M. Ahmadi, W. Lu, N. G. Kang, J. W. Mays, S. Jesse, D. Mandrus and B. Hu, Metal/Ion Interactions Induced p-i-n Junction in Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite Single Crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17285–17288 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Brenes, D. Guo, A. Osherov, N. K. Noel, C. Eames, E. M. Hutter, S. K. Pathak, F. Niroui, R. H. Friend, M. Saiful Islam, H. J. Snaith, V. Bulović, T. J. Savenije and S. D. Stranks, Metal Halide Perovskite Polycrystalline Films Exhibiting Properties of Single Crystals, Joule, 2017, 1, 155–167 CrossRef .
J. Shi, X. Xu, D. Li and Q. Meng, Interfaces in Perovskite Solar Cells, Small, 2015, 11, 2472–2486 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, B. Chen, X. Qiao, L. Luan, K. Lu and B. Hu, Revealing Underlying Processes Involved in Light Soaking Effects and Hysteresis Phenomena in Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500279 CrossRef .
T. Leijtens, E. T. Hoke, G. Grancini, D. J. Slotcavage, G. E. Eperon, J. M. Ball, M. De Bastiani, A. R. Bowring, N. Martino, K. Wojciechowski, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Mapping Electric Field-Induced Switchable Poling and Structural Degradation in Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskite Thin Films, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500962 CrossRef .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Defect migration in methylammonium lead iodide and its role in perovskite solar cell operation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(7), 2118–2127 RSC .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Ionic transport in hybrid lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Zhao, W.-K. Zhou, X. Zhou, K.-H. Liu, D.-P. Yu and Q. Zhao, Quantification of light-enhanced ionic transport in lead iodide perovskite thin films and its solar cell applications, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16243 CrossRef .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Large tunable photoeffect on ion conduction in halide perovskites and implications for Photodecomposition, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445–449 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, P. Khoram, S. Brittman, Z. Zhu, B. Lai, S. Ping Ong, E. C. Garnett and D. P. Fenning, Direct Observation of Halide Migration and its Effect on the Photoluminescence of Methylammonium Lead Bromide Perovskite Single Crystals, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703451 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vashishtha and J. E. Halpert, Field-Driven Ion Migration and Color Instability in Red-Emitting Mixed Halide Perovskite Nanocrystal Light-Emitting Diodes, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(14), 5965–5973 CrossRef .
J. Ding, L. Jing, X. Cheng, Y. Zhao, S. Du, X. Zhan and H. Cui, Design Growth of MAPbI3 Single Crystal with (220) Facets Exposed and Its Superior Optoelectronic Properties, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(1), 216–221 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cheng, L. Jing, Y. Zhao, S. Du, J. Ding and T. Zhou, Crystal orientation-dependent optoelectronic properties of MAPbCl3 single crystals, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1579–1586 RSC .
J. Ding, X. Cheng, L. Jing, T. Zhou, Y. Zhao and S. Du, Polarization-Dependent Optoelectronic Performances in Hybrid Halide Perovskite MAPbX3 (X = Br, Cl) Single-Crystal Photodetectors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(1), 845–850 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Moehl, J. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, K. Domanski, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. I. Dar, L. P. Heiniger, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park and M. Gratzel, Strong Photocurrent Amplification in Perovskite Solar Cells with A Porous TiO2 Blocking Layer under Reverse Bias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3931–3936 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, F. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. An, Q. Sun, W. Wang, J. Zhang and F. Teng, Achieving EQE of 16,700% in P3HT:PC71BM based Photodetectors by Trap-assisted Photomultiplication, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9181–9187 CrossRef PubMed .
H. W. Chen, N. Sakai, A. K. Jena, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami, K. C. Ho and T. Miyasaka, A Switchable High-sensitivity Photodetecting and Photovoltaic Device with Perovskite Absorber, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1773–1779 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ahmadi, L. Collins, A. Puretzky, J. Zhang, J. K. Keum, W. Lu, I. Ivanov, S. V. Kalinin and B. Hu, Exploring Anomalous Polarization Dynamics in Organometallic Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705298 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Yang, A. N. Morozovska, R. Kumar, E. A. Eliseev, Y. Cao, L. Mazet, N. Balke, S. Jesse, R. K. Vasudevan, C. Dubourdieu and S. V. Kalinin, Mixed electrochemical-ferroelectric states in nanoscale ferroelectrics, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 812 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Giant current amplification from MAPbI3 single crystal photodetectors. (a) Photograph of a grown single crystal of MAPbI3. (b) Schematic diagram of a photodetector device based on a MAPbI3 single crystal with a lateral geometry; (c) current density–voltage (JV) characteristics of the device without soaking under both dark conditions and under white light illumination; the inset shows the characteristics on a semi-logarithmic scale and the current amplification factor (AF) at −1 V and −2 V; (d) JV characteristics under both dark conditions and under white light illumination after light soaking treatment for 30 min, the inset shows the characteristics on a semi-logarithmic scale and AF at −1 V and −2 V.	 
	(1)
Jph = enμE	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Excitation intensity dependence of current amplification. (a) Time-dependent current profiles measured with repeating light-on and light-off cycles with increasing excitation intensities from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2 under 0 V, −1 V, −2 V and +1 V in the Au/MAPbI3/C60/BCP/Ag device. (b) The amplification factor is shown as a function of photoexcitation intensity at −1 V and −2 V.	 

 	Fig. 3  Time-dependent low-frequency (1 kHz) capacitance profile under different DC bias (0 V, −1 V and −2 V) and repeating light-off/on cycles with increasing excitation intensities from 1 mW cm−2 to 100 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Proposed mechanism of current amplification in the reverse bias regime. (a) Top view of the open-circuit condition; (b) front view of the open-circuit condition; (c) top view under reverse bias; and (d) front view under reverse bias.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the single crystal photodetectors under different bias before and after the correction. (a) EQE of the device measured under different bias (0 V, −0.5 V, and −1 V); (b) the ratio of the number of photons absorbed at position x to the incident photons; (c) EQE of the device corrected by considering the effective thickness of the conducting channel (xeff) of 100 nm; (d) EQE of the device corrected by considering an xeff of 50 nm.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
