Mechanically robust nanocomposites from screen-printable polymer/graphene nanosheet pastes   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR08933G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR08933G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2343-2354Mechanically robust nanocomposites from screen-printable polymer/graphene nanosheet pastes†

        
          
            Liqiang 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianlei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lixin 
            Wu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xu 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aCAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, People's Republic of China. E-mail: lxwu@fjirsm.ac.cn; wyszhangxu@gmail.com
bCollege of Materials Science and Opto-Electronic Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19 Yuquan Road, Shijingshan District, Beijing 100049, People's Republic of China
Received 
      6th November 2018
    , Accepted 6th January 2019First published on 7th January 2019AbstractInnovative methods for producing graphene-based polymer nanocomposites with excellent mechanical robustness have become a focus for their practical utilization, existing solutions suffer from drawbacks such as limited laboratory-scale fabrication, affordability, and inadequate processability. To address these issues, we proposed a screen printing approach utilizing formulated graphene-modified water-based printable pastes to achieve inexpensive and scalable manufacturing of graphene-reinforced polymer nanocomposites. Leveraging this simple and versatile manufacturing process, mass production, as well as personalized-patterned bulk materials, can be efficiently produced using easily obtainable substrates. The surface-tailored graphene (PEI-rGO) can improve the dispersion quality and strengthen the interfacial bonding with a waterborne polyurethane (WPU) matrix, yielding an optimized enhancement effect and enhancing the tensile strength and Young's modulus about 9.46 and 19.8 times higher than those of the pure WPU, respectively. In particular, their utility as an anti-wear modifier through direct printing on textile and wear-reduction performance were investigated. Our study establishes screen printing as a general strategy to achieve facile fabrication of polymer nanocomposites at an industrial-scale in an economically viable manner, which can to a great extent bridge the gap between scientific research and real-world applications.
1. Introduction
Interest in graphene, a two-dimensional carbon nanomaterial with a single carbon atom bonded together in a hexagonal lattice, centers on its outstanding mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties as well as its high aspect ratio.1,2 These fascinating properties have stimulated a wide range of research on graphene-based polymer nanocomposite productions for diverse applications such as high-performance engineering materials,3 functional thermal or electrically conductive materials,4,5 functional anticorrosion coating.6 The major challenges to achieving large-scale applications of these performance-enhanced or functional materials are workable high-throughput fabrication methods and the maximization of the enhancement effect of graphene on polymers, which is strongly affected by the dispersion uniformity of graphene and the interfacial adhesion of compounded elements.7,8 Several attempts have been made to prepare graphene/polymer nanocomposites. Guo et al. fabricated graphene/thermoplastic polyurethane nanocomposites for sensor application by a co-coagulation plus thermal compression molding technique, which suffers from a complex process, excessive organic-solvent usage, and undesirable distribution of graphene in the polymer, leading to serious environmental pollution and limited performances improvements.9
Recently, an in situ polymerization method has been developed and widely used to manufacture graphene/polymer nanocomposites due to the better dispersion of graphene that can be obtained, but rigorous polymerization conditions, complex operation processes, and uncontrolled polymer molecular weight from the inhibition effect of graphene result in the unavailability of large-batch processing and even deteriorated performance.10–12 It is well demonstrated that the functionalization of graphene offers a useful strategy to optimize its spatial distribution in a polymer matrix and the interfacial adhesion with the polymer, which gives a strong impetus to realize its reinforcement effect on polymers.3,10,13–15 Also, exploring workable, inexpensive, and industrial-grade fabrication routes for graphene-based polymer nanocomposite productions are highly sought for practical utilization, but current solutions have many drawbacks such as small laboratory-scale production, affordability, and inadequate processability. Considering this fact, screen printing is a promising alternative since it offers manipulability and a cost-efficient fabrication route for industrial-scale applications.
Screen printing is a facile mass-printing method, which has been widely regarded as one of the most versatile techniques for integrating functional materials with scalable productions for a large variety of applications like flexible electronic devices, solar cell modules, the packing and textile industry, to name but a few.16–23Fig. 1a shows an illustrative depiction of a typical screen printer. The main components, the screen or stencil consisting of woven wires of e.g. nylon, polyester, silicon, and stainless steel with a certain density, are attached onto a frame. The required printing patterns are predefined on the screen by designing non-printing and printing areas. The pores of the mesh are closed in non-printing areas by a photo-polymerized resin, while the remaining pores in the printing pattern areas are left open to allow the paste to flow through. A typical squeegee composed of polyurethane or rubber deflects the screen downward to make contact with the substrate by applying appropriate pressure. During printing, the well-equipped screen printing setup is first placed above the substrate at a proper offset distance, then the prepared paste containing functional materials and polymers are filled in the pores of screen by moving the squeegee and brought into proximity of the substrate, finally, the paste is deposited to produce the nanocomposite. To revisit the screen printing process, the requirements for its use are very modest and it can in essence, be performed with very few prerequisites, in a laboratory or in a factory, due to its simple procedures and short operation period. What's more, it is thrifty and there is essentially no loss of paste during printing so cost can be greatly reduced.18,23
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a typical screen printer, comprising squeegee and screen mesh attached onto a frame. (b) Schematic of the fabrication route of WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites, which mainly includes three steps: GO functionalization, paste processing, and screen printing. 
To study the feasibility of screen printing as a workable approach for nanocomposite manufacturing, waterborne polyurethane (WPU) was selected as the polymer matrix, which is a sort of odorless, non-flammable, and environment-friendly polymer materials and has a distinctive position among various technologically crucial materials for its practical applications in coatings, adhesives, foams, varnishes, leathers, films, etc. due to its wide range of tailorable properties such as its excellent flexibility and elasticity, good chemical resistance as well as wide processing window.24,25 Nevertheless, its poor mechanical and wear-resistance properties make the use of neat WPU problematic in a range of real-world applications. Therefore, incorporating graphene nanosheets into WPU is a very promising strategy to overcome many of its drawbacks. To the best of our knowledge, until now there are few reports for using a screen printing approach to fabricate graphene-reinforced WPU nanocomposites and make real applications in the textile industry.
In the present work, a simple and scalable route, screen printing, was developed to fabricate graphene-reinforced polymer nanocomposites at the industrial level. The processing pathway is obtained by controlled printing the graphene/polymer heterogeneous printing paste on easily accessible substrates such as glass, paper, and textile, thus ideally avoiding time- and energy-consuming preparation processes and having extensive applicable prospects in real industrial production. The proof-of-concept example is a WPU bulk nanocomposites using polyethylenimine surface-tailored graphene (PEI-rGO) as a performance enhancer. The whole fabrication process was investigated in detail and considerable enhancement in the mechanical durability of the resulting nanocomposites was achieved and interpreted by combining experimental tests, theoretical predictions, nanoindentation examinations, and fractured morphology analysis. As an example, we have demonstrated its use for wear-proof materials for textile treatment. Moreover, this approach offers an attractive route for the continuous production of polymer nanocomposites.
2. Experiment section
2.1 Materials
Flaky graphite powder (325 mesh) was supplied by Tianheda Graphite Co., Ltd (Qingdao, P. R. China). The synthesis and surface-modification reagents of graphene oxide (GO) were of analytical grade. Concentrated sulfuric acid (99.8%), potassium permanganate, sodium nitrate, hydrogen peroxide, branched polyethylenimine (PEI, Mw = 800), 1-[bis(dimethylamino)methylene]-1H-1,2,3-triazolo[4,5-b]pyridinium 3-oxid hexafluorophosphate, (HATU, catalyst of Amidation reaction), and hydroxyethyl cellulose (thicker) were purchased from Aladdin reagent corporation (Shanghai, P. R. China). The waterborne polyurethane (WPU) (Bayhydrol A 2695, solid content: 55 wt%) and defoamer were provided from Covestro, Germany. All the mentioned chemicals were used without further purification.
2.2 Preparation of graphene oxide
Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized from flaky graphite based on a modified Hummers’ method.26–28 3 g graphite, 3.6 g sodium nitrate, and 140 mL concentrated sulfuric acid were mixed together in a three-necked flask and mechanical stirring at 300 rpm (revolution per minute) was conducted at below 5 °C for 0.5 hours to form the graphite intercalation compound. After that, 9 g potassium permanganate was sequentially added to convert the graphite intercalation compound into graphite oxide at 35 °C. Finally, 150 mL of distilled water was added to hydrolyze the covalent sulfates in graphite oxide at 75 °C, simultaneously making a conversion of the graphite oxide into pristine GO, and 10 wt% hydrogen peroxide was added to quench the reaction. The bright yellow solution was washed with distilled water until the pH approached 7 and the solid was finally collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm.
2.3 Preparation of PEI-rGO
Initially, 2.0 mg mL−1 GO dispersion (200 mL) was sonicated for 0.5 hours to secure a single-layer and a stable suspension. Secondly, 8.0 g PEI and 10.0 mg HATU were added into the pre-treated GO dispersion and the reaction was performed at 80 °C for 12 hours under a nitrogen atmosphere. The sediment was collected by centrifugation at 10000 rpm and was then washed with deionized water repeatedly. Free-drying was then chosen to get polyethylenimine surface-tailored graphene (PEI-rGO). This process was repeated to produce enough PEI-rGO for the printing paste.
2.4 Preparation of WPU/PEI-rGO printing paste
The designated amount of PEI-rGO was poured into WPU latex and stirred by a laboratory disperser at 6000 rpm for 15 min, followed by ultrasonication with a digital sonicator (JY-99 II, Ningbo Xinzhi Biotechnology Co., Ltd) for 30 min. Working for 3 s at intervals of 3 s under 60% power was chosen as the ultrasonication settings to avoid overheating. After the treatment, a certain amount of thickener (0.05% based on total weight of WPU and PEI-rGO) and defoamer (0.02% based on the total weight of WPU and PEI-rGO) were added into the mixture under intense mechanical stirring (6000–1000 rpm) to increase the viscosity and remove trapped air.
2.5 Fabrication of WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites using screen printing
The screen printer used here was provided by the Huafeng Group (Putian, Fujian, P. R. China). The formulated printing paste was then subjected to screen printing with WPU nanocomposites containing 0.2 wt%, 0.5 wt%, 0.8 wt%, and 1.0 wt% of PEI-rGO, which is denoted by WPU/PEI-rGO-0.2, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.5, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8, and WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0, respectively. In addition, the WPU nanocomposites with 0.5 wt% and 0.8 wt% of GO, denoted by WPU/GO-0.5 and WPU/GO-0.8, were also prepared as control samples. The designations of other WPU nanocomposites with different filler contents also followed this rule. The entire fabrication process for the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites was schematically illustrated in Fig. 1b.
2.6 Characterization
The chemical structure of GO and PEI-rGO were verified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Vertex70, Bruker Optics) in transmission mode. The elemental analysis and surface changes were detected with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Escalab 250 Xi, ThermoFisher) using Al Kα as an X-ray excitation source at a constant analyzer. The structural evolution of GO and PEI-rGO were monitored by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Miniflex600, Rigaku) and Raman spectroscopy (Labram HR Evolution, Horiba Jobin Yvon) with a 532 nm laser. The morphologies of GO and PEI-rGO were studied using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai, FEI) with an acceleration voltage of 100 kV. The thickness of the GO and PEI-rGO were recorded using atomic force microscopy (AFM, Dimension ICON, Bruker) in the tapping mode. The rheological characterization of WPU/PEI-rGO paste was performed using a TA Instruments AR-G2 controlled-stress rheometer fitted with a Peltier stage. All measurements were performed using a 25 mm plate geometry analyzed using TA Instruments TA Orchestrator software. The thermal stability of the nanocomposite samples were measured on a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, STA449-F3, Netzsch) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 from 30 to 800 °C under an air atmosphere. The structure and morphologies of the fractured surfaces of the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites were examined on a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, SU-8010, Regulus) using a beam voltage of 5 kV. The tensile properties of the pure WPU, WPU/GO, and WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites were recorded on an electromechanical universal testing machine (CMT6203). Five replicas of the nanocomposites with each filler content were measured at a crosshead speed of 50 mm min−1. The mechanical enhancement effect of the nanocomposites was explored by a nanoindenter instrument (Hysitron Inc., Tribo Indenter 750, USA) with a three-sided pyramid Berkovich diamond indenter (radius of the indenter probe was 50 nm). The samples were carefully polished before testing. The wear-resisting performance was tested using a Taber abrasion tester (GT-7012-T).
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Analysis of PEI-rGO
To effectively have strong reinforcement of the graphene on WPU, the branched PEI consisting of a lot of amine groups was selected to decorate the graphene surfaces to improve the distribution uniformity and to maximize interfacial adhesion, which enable it to fulfill its mechanical enhancement effect. The changes in the surface functional groups and morphologies were observed and analyzed as per the following procedures:
The particular evolution of surface functional groups on PEI-rGO was examined using XPS. From the comparison results shown in Fig. 2a and b, the deconvoluted C1s peaks in the case of GO (Fig. 2a) and PEI-rGO (Fig. 2b) indicate that the intensity of all the oxygenated groups were remarkably reduced because the reduction was simultaneously performed in the process of the surface modification and this change was further confirmed by XRD analysis (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†). It is worth noting that the bonding energy for –COOH (288.9 eV) completely disappears, while a new peak prominently emerges at a binding energy of 288.4 eV, suggesting that the PEI was successfully grafted onto GO by reacting with the carboxylic groups on GO.29 To fully understand the detailed interactions between GO and PEI, the N1s peak was further deconvoluted, as illustrated in Fig. 2c, demonstrating that the forms of the nitrogen element in PEI-rGO include –N (397.6 eV), –NH– (398.5 eV), and –NH2 (399.7 eV), and the secondary amine groups were dominant, which probably comes from the reaction between the amino groups of PEI and the epoxide and carboxyl groups on GO. These findings coupled with the FT-IR results (see Fig. S2 in the ESI†) gave clear evidence for the successful functionalization of GO via covalent interactions. On the other hand, these results confirm the presence of the reactive primary and secondary amine groups on the surface of graphene, which provides more opportunities to maximize the interfacial adhesion. Additionally, Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 2d) reveals that the structural transformation of GO occurred during the GO functionalization process. As shown in Fig. 2d, both the D and G peaks of GO and PEI-rGO were clearly detected. The relative intensity between the two characteristics bands (D/G ratio, where the D peak stands for a defect peak due to intervalley scattering and G refers to the graphene G peak) experiences an increase from 0.86 (GO) to 1.03 (PEI-rGO), indicating that the modification process altered the structure of GO due to the formation of sp3 carbon through the covalent bond of the amine groups of PEI with GO. The result is similar to previous literature reports30 and is also consistent with the results of XPS discussed above and the AFM observation shown below.
 Fig. 2  XPS spectra of C1s for (a) GO and (b) PEI-rGO and N1s for (c) PEI-rGO. (d) The Raman spectroscopy of GO and PEI-rGO. 

Fig. 3 exhibits the shift in the morphologies of GO and PEI-rGO nanosheets. Before modification, the pure GO nanosheets show a typical sort of transparent wrinkled surfaces (Fig. 3a),31 corresponding to a single layer with a thickness of about 0.82 nm (Fig. 3c). After PEI treatment, the layered structures of GO remained unchanged and the surfaces of PEI-rGO nanosheets clearly became dark (Fig. 3b). The thickness of GO grafted with PEI was examined to be around 1.13 nm (Fig. 3d), thus the grafted polymer layer was estimated to be about 0.31 nm. Overall, the combination of the chemical composition analysis and the morphology detection exhibits the success in preparation of PEI-rGO by a one-step reduction and functionalization route.
 Fig. 3  TEM of (a) GO and (b) PEI-rGO. AFM of (c) GO and (d) PEI-rGO. 
3.2 Analysis of screen printing process
The rheological properties of the printing paste are a crucial factor in suiting the screen printing process.17,23,32 With this in mind, the rheological characterization of the printing paste was carried out and is presented in Fig. 4. The strain-dependent oscillatory rheology of the printing paste (WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8), as shown in Fig. 4a, displays an extremely broad linear viscoelastic regime and network failure only at high strain (>10%), indicating a wide processing range and shear-thinning behavior. Comparing the storage oscillatory shear modulus (G′) of WPU/GO (the blue line in Fig. 4a) and WPU/PEI-rGO (the black line in Fig. 4a) printing paste at an equivalent filler loading (0.8 wt%), it can be found that the WPU/GO printing paste possesses a slightly lower G′, suggesting lower network formation due to the limited interfacial interactions. Fig. 4b reveals that the frequency dependence of the storage and loss oscillatory shear modulus in the linear viscosity regime (strain = 1%) exhibits hydrogel-like behavior because the storage oscillatory shear modulus (G′) was much greater than the loss oscillatory shear modulus (G′′) as well as the G′ was dominant across the whole range of investigated frequencies (0.1–100 rad s−1), which is most likely associated with interfacial interaction-induced entanglement network formation between the amino-rich modified graphene and the WPU chains.33
 Fig. 4  Rheological characterization of printing pastes. (a) Strain-dependent, (b) frequency-dependent oscillatory shear rheology of WPU/PEI-rGO and WPU/GO printing paste, and (c) steady shear rheology of printing paste. The inset in (c) is the image of the printing paste from WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8. (d) Thixotropic loop measurement of printing paste. 
Moreover, the identified shear-thinning behavior was verified with steady shear rheometrical measurements (Fig. 4c), showing that the viscosity of both WPU/PEI-rGO and WPU/GO diminishes as the shear rate increases. It is worth noting that the initial viscosity of both were higher. However, compared with the WPU/PEI-rGO paste, the viscosity of the WPU/GO printing paste decreases more rapidly due to the existence of GO. It could be speculated that the nematic phase in the GO printing paste was distributed randomly and did not align at a lower shear rate, which gives rise to the higher viscosity. At a higher shear rate, the randomly distributed nematic phase reoriented in the direction of the shear stress, thereby weakening their interfacial interactions and leading to a decreased viscosity.34 As shown in Fig. 4d, the hysteresis phenomenon was observed in a cycle of the shear-rate sweep, known as a thixotropic loop, suggesting that the WPU/PEI-rGO printing paste are thixotropic and easily shapeable. The shear-thinning and thixotropic characteristics confirmed by rheological characterization are typical pseudoplasticity, which is significantly similar to the behavior of graphene ink,18,19,35,36 and also demonstrates that the WPU/PEI-rGO printing paste can easily travel through the stencil, but is prevented from overspreading once printed on the substrates. Moreover, the broad rheological tunability of the thicker and wider serviceability of screen printing enable and simplify the paste manufacturing process, thus laying a promising foundation for scalability.
In our experiments, the selected screen printer was first well arranged (see Fig. S3 in the ESI†) and the glass substrate was held on a platform in contact with the screen to receive the paste. Fig. 5a and Fig. S4 (see the ESI†) depict a schematic diagram for the semi-stereographic screen printing process, illustrating the mechanics of screen printing with a nylon stencil. During printing, the paste was first placed and spread over the nylon stencil. A squeegee was then drawn across it, forcing the paste to penetrate the open pores. Because the stencil is flexible, the stencil bends and simultaneously makes contact between the stencil and the glass. As the squeegee passed the openings, the paste was deposited on the glass. After that, the squeegee was removed from the stencil, and then the stencil was separated from the glass, leaving the paste on the glass. Finally, the automatic dryer equipped on the top of the printed paste (about 10 cm) was programmed to accelerate the water evaporation at a predefined temperature of 60 °C at a speed of 120 mm min−1. The procedures mentioned above are facile and controllable to customize the thickness of nanocomposites by applying overlapping layers of paste, enabling the high throughput production of functional polymer matrix nanocomposites.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic process of screen printing using the nylon stencil and formulated WPU/PEI-rGO paste, (b) the established mass production line for manufacturing WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites, (c) the picture of scaled WPU/PEI-rGO bulk nanocomposites from mass production line, and the individualized-pattern WPU/PEI-rGO bulk nanocomposites using custom-made images stencil on (d) paper-based and (e) textile-based substrate. 
In addition, the possibility of both scalable and versatile fabrication these nanocomposite materials was also investigated, and the production of WPU nanocomposites was scaled to the industrial level (Fig. 5b and c). The semi-stereographic screen printing system used here also allows an excellent processability advantage by being able to define precise patterns onto the screen mesh. To verify the mentioned strongpoints, we have made an attempt to print some letters and complex butterfly patterns on paper and on textile surfaces, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5d and e, the fine patterns can be clearly printed, which could be particularly useful for when personalized images are required.
3.3 Effect of PEI-rGO on mechanical properties of WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites
To quantitatively evaluate the enhancement effects of the PEI-rGO on the WPU nanocomposites, experimental mechanical robustness tests and theoretical predictions were examined. The stress–strain curves of pure WPU, WPU/GO, and WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites were compared in Fig. 6a. The detailed information of the mechanical properties are listed in Table S1 (see the ESI†). As can be seen from Fig. 6a and Table S1,† both the tensile strength and the Young's modulus were substantially improved with increasing filler concentration, but the elongation at break simultaneously had the opposite trend. The WPU nanocomposites incorporated with a 1.0 wt% loading of PEI-rGO (WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0) provides a tensile strength and Young's modulus of 15.27 ± 0.9 MPa and 21.84 ± 1.4 MPa, respectively, which corresponds to an increase of 946.6% and 1979.9% higher than that of the pure WPU. It is noted that, at the same level of filler loading, e.g. 0.8 wt%, the tensile strength and Young's modulus of the WPU/GO nanocomposites (10.55 ± 0.8 MP and 12.62 ± 1.2 MPa) are obviously much lower than that of the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites (14.06 ± 1.2 MPa and 15.35 ± 0.9 MPa), indicating that PEI-rGO has a larger capacity for transferring the stress from the WPU matrix to the graphene nanosheets. As proposed in the inset of Fig. 6a, the considerable enhancement of the mechanical properties is most likely ascribed to (i) the strengthened interfacial bonding between the PEI grafted graphene nanosheets and the WPU molecular chains by decorating more interaction sites, and (ii) the improved spatial distribution of the graphene nanosheets in the WPU matrix as the reason that the amino-modified interphase has a positive effect on the compatibility of the components and the PEI chains coated on graphene nanosheets can serve as a spacer that weakens the π–π interactions and thereby further optimizes the dispersion quality by deterring the graphene nanosheets from restacking.
 Fig. 6  (a) Tensile stress–strain curves of WPU, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.2, WPU/GO-0.5, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.5, WPU/GO-0.8, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8, and WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0. (b) The comparison between the experimental Young's modulus and theoretical values based on Halpin–Tsai model assuming that graphene nanosheets are in random and parallel conditions for the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites. 
In order to further elucidate the reinforcement effects on the mechanical properties as mentioned above, a comparison was made between the experimental results and the theoretical predictions for the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites. The popular Halpin–Tsai model for the fiber-reinforced polymer composites was adapted here to predict the Young's modulus of the nanocomposites. To more reasonably estimate the tensile modulus of the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites, the PEI-rGO nanosheets was the equivalent of effective rectangular solid fiber with length (L), width (D), and thickness (t).7,37–39 The modified Halpin–Tsai model with the assumption that the PEI-rGO platelets are aligned parallelly and randomly in the polymer matrix are deduced and expressed in an equation (see the S6. Justification of Halpin–Tsai models in the ESI†). The predicted and measured normalized tensile moduli of the nanocomposites are plotted in Fig. 6b. Overall, our experimental results mainly fall in between the tensile modulus values predicted by the Halpin–Tsai model assuming that the graphene nanosheets are in random and parallel states in the WPU matrix, respectively. It is noteworthy that the experimental data are higher than the theoretical values from the random-distribution model by up to 9.5%, demonstrating that the cooperative effects of the enhanced dispersion and strengthened interfacial bonding greatly enable efficient load transfer to the graphene nanosheets across the WPU/graphene interphase so that there is a resulting reinforcement effect.
In addition, the typical load-penetration depth curves obtained by nanoindentation technique are presented in Fig. 7 to reflect the enhancement effects of the graphene on the mechanical properties from the nanoscale horizon. The mechanical properties were improved as expected. The nanohardness of the unreinforced WPU is 44 MPa, while, for the 0.8 wt% and 1.0 wt% PEI-rGO reinforced nanocomposites, it increases to 92 MPa and 112 MPa, respectively. These results could also be confirmed by the corresponding loading-hold-unloading curve changes on movement towards the higher side probably owing to the markedly enhanced hardness. Furthermore, an improved effective volume of the graphene with the PEI-assisted dispersion method was achieved, which can be inferred from the fact that the hold sections remain unaltered.40,41
 Fig. 7  Typical loading-hold-unloading curves for the WPU and the WPU nanocomposites from nanoindentation. 
Fractographic studies were conducted to collect more evidence to explain the mechanical performance-enhancements in the resultant nanocomposites. Fig. 8 depicts a clear difference in fractured surface structures using FESEM. As shown in Fig. 8a and b, the fracture surfaces of the neat WPU exhibit typical brittle fracture characteristics with an extremely smooth morphology. This gives strong evidence that the fast crack propagation probably results in a markedly lower mechanical strength. By contrast, the nanocomposites incorporated with 0.8 wt% PEI-modified graphene (WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8), shown in Fig. 8c and d, displays a much rougher surface, with the WPU-coated graphene platelets obviously protruding out of the fracture surfaces. This plays a key role in the larger energy absorption by suppressing creak propagation and inducing crack pinning and crack-deflection during fracture, thus improving the mechanical properties.38,42 In addition, for the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites, the profiles of the graphene nanosheets can be identified, as denoted by the red circles in Fig. 8c, indicating the good dispersion quality of graphene nanosheets. Nevertheless, for the WPU/GO-0.8 nanocomposites, remarkable graphene aggregation, marked by red arrows, can be observed in Fig. 8e and f probably due to the poor distribution, some of which were not consolidated with the matrix surface, instead of being anchored in the matrix due to insufficient interfacial adhesion.
 Fig. 8  Fractured cross-sectional FESEM images: (a, b) neat WPU, (c, d) WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8, and (e, f) WPU/GO-0.8 nanocomposites, where the (b), (d), and (f) is the magnified image corresponding to the marked area in (a), (c), and (e), respectively. 
3.4 Thermal stability

Fig. 9 shows the thermal stability of the pure WPU and the WPU nanocomposites evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis, where the analyzed data including the decomposition temperatures at 5% and 50% weight loss are also listed in Table S2 (see the ESI†). The general trends are similar and the absolute values of the thermal decomposition temperatures show a gradual increase with the continuous addition of the graphene-based nanofillers. Compared with pure WPU, the highest improvement of the initial decomposition temperature, evaluated by 5% weight loss from the WPU nanocomposites containing 1.0 wt% of PEI-rGO nanosheets (i.e. WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0, the purple curve in Fig. 9a), is about 45 °C (see the inset of Fig. 9a). The 50% degradation temperature for the WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0 nanocomposites occurs at 393.6 °C, which is roughly 17 °C higher than that of the pure WPU (377.1 °C). The extraordinary improvement in the thermal stability is chiefly ascribed to the confinement and barrier effect of the layered nanofillers. The PEI-modified graphene nanosheets enjoy a lot of free amino functional groups, which likely interact with the WPU molecular chains by hydrogen bonding and physical adsorption to form a tight interphase surrounding the two dimensional fillers, thus the polymer chain dynamics were altered via geometric constraints at the nanofiller surfaces.43–45 Comparing the WPU/PEI-rGO and WPU/GO nanocomposites containing the same loading level of 0.5 wt% and 0.8 wt%, the thermal decomposition temperature of the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites is much higher than that of the WPU/GO nanocomposites, indicating that the modified interfacial interactions in WPU/PEI-rGO is conducive to thermal stability enhancement due to the increased activation energy of degradation.46 On the other hand, the well-dispersed two dimensional graphene nanosheets in the polymer nanocomposites can act as an effective barrier to deter the volatile products from being released and reacting with oxygen or air by means of their intrinsic mechanical properties and high aspect ratio.47,48 It is interesting to note that the saturation of the thermal stability enhancement at graphene loadings exceeding 0.8 wt% was observed from the magnified TGA curves (Fig. 9b) in the temperature range from 365 °C to 407 °C, reasonably suspecting that the deteriorated confinement effects and/or barrier effects derived from the rheological percolation phenomenon or percolated interphase may mostly be responsible for the near plateau.3,49
 Fig. 9  (a) TGA curves of neat WPU and WPU nanocomposites under air atmosphere. (b) The magnified TGA curves at mass percentage between 40% and 60%. The black line in (b) locates at 50% mass loss. 
3.5 Wear-reduction applications
WPU-based materials have been gaining a large share in the field of adhesive, pigment paste, textile dyes, and leather surface treatment due to their volatile organic component-free nature.21 However, the poor wear-resistance reduced their popularity and therefore good wear-proof WPU materials are highly sought after in industry. With the facile screen printing technique and the modified WPU materials in hand, we focused on using these materials for textile/leather surface anti-wear treatment based on the condition that the bonding strength between the paste and textile is qualified to industrial requirements (details can be seen in the ESI: S8. Bonding Strength Analysis.†). To further assess the anti-wear performance of the nanocomposites for leather treatment, the abrasion resistance test was carried out using the standard Taber abrasion technique, where the loaded wheels were abraded against well-organized substrates and mounted on a rotary platform, as shown in Fig. S7 (see the ESI†). Each nanocomposite testing sample comes from about 8 printing cycles on the leather substrates in order to increase the material thickness, approximately ranging from 4.2 mm to 5.6 mm in our experiment to meet the requirements of the high-cycle abrasion resistance test. The effect of filler concentration on the abrasion resistance of the nanocomposites is presented in Fig. 10a, and is the plot of the anti-wear performance evaluated by weight loss change after the abrasion cycles. Each abrasion data point and error bar was gathered from distinct measurements on at least three different nanocomposite samples at 250 g load. It is expected that, by introduction of the PEI-modified graphene nanosheets, the abrasion performance of the nanocomposites can be greatly improved. Different amounts of weight loss were experienced by all samples with the continuing abrasion cycles. The weight loss of the WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0 nanocomposites, about 2.58 mg, is 4.5 times lower than that of pure WPU (12.10 mg) after 600 abrasion cycles.
 Fig. 10  (a) The changes in mass loss with Taber abrasion cycles at a 250 g load. (b) The proposed synergistic wear-reduction mechanism of neat WPU (right) and WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites (left). 
The significant wear-reduction performance is most likely responsible for the synergistic effect of lubricity of the chemically-modified graphene nanosheets, the good dispersion, and the stronger interfacial adhesion between PEI-rGO and the WPU polymer matrix, as illustrated in Fig. 10b. On one hand, the two dimensional chemically-modified graphene, an excellent lubricant, provides lower resistance in shear contact which remarkably reduces the wear coefficient at wear areas, thereby helping to enhance the wear resistance of the WPU nanocomposites.50–53 On the other hand, the stronger interfacial bonding between PEI-rGO and WPU leads to fewer stress accumulation points due to the better load transfer efficiency, less possibility of crack extension by suppressing creak propagation and inducing crack pinning during abrasion, largely avoiding devastating damage and greatly improving the wear resistance of nanocomposites. As proposed in Fig. 10b, for the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites (left pattern in Fig. 10b), the crack propagation is influenced by the crack that grows and “passes” near the graphene nanosheets, even the crack growth is inhibited and the crack-pinning occurs in the vicinity of the graphene sheets to minimize the disruptive strength. While for the neat WPU (right pattern in Fig. 10b), the abrasion-induced crack and its growth are free of any obstacles, resulting in fatal destruction. Moreover, for the well-bonded graphene/WPU interphase, the pull-out of graphene and de-bonding most likely make great contributions to dissipating a majority of the abrasion energy. This is also reflected in the comparison between the nanocomposites reinforced by PEI-rGO and GO, in which the weight loss of the nanocomposites with modified filler/matrix interfaces is lower than that of nanocomposites only incorporated with GO. The results clearly demonstrate that rational interface modification is helpful in improving the anti-wear performance of polymer matrix nanocomposites, which is in accordance with the work reported in recent studies.54–56
4. Conclusions
The screen printing approach was creatively applied to fabricate graphene-reinforced polymer matrix nanocomposites. The fabrication process proposed here is highly compatible with facile operations and meets affordable large-scale industrial requirements, thus offering an industrially available route to achieve simplicity and scalability for fabricating polymer nanocomposites. In addition, it was found that the surface-tailored graphene nanosheets (PEI-rGO) enable sound enhancement effects and therefore exert outstanding mechanical improvement and durability as well as increased thermal stability for the polymer (WPU) matrix nanocomposites, which is expected to accelerate the practical applications of the graphene/polymer nanocomposites. Although the WPU/PEI-rGO material system was used as a proof of concept, the screen printing technique can be readily expanded to produce multifunctional nanocomposites coupled with various nanomaterials like carbon nanotubes, montmorillonites, metal and ceramic nanoparticles, which are ongoing in our laboratory. Overall, the present work provides a general and scalable method for fabricating graphene-based polymer nanocomposites with improved performances, as such paving a high-throughput and cost-effective way to fabricate polymer nanocomposites.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the State's Key Project of Research and Development Plan (Grant No.: 2016YFB1100900), the Regional Key Program of Science and Technology Service Network Initiative from Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Fund of National Engineering Research Center for Optoelectronic Crystalline Materials, and the STS Project of Fujian-CAS (Grant No.: 2017T3005, 2018T3011, and 2018T3026). Support from the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No.: 2018M632590) is also appreciated.
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei and J. Kivioja, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10108–10126 RSC .
T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herreraalonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'Homme and L. C. Brinson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Guan, L. Zhao, Y. J. Wan and L. C. Tang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14788–14811 RSC .
C. S. Boland, U. Khan, G. Ryan, S. Barwich, R. Charifou, A. Harvey, C. Backes, C. Li, M. S. Ferreira, M. E. MÖbius, R. J. Young and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2016, 354, 1257–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dutta, A. N. F. Ganda, J. K. Chih, C. C. Huang, C. J. Tseng and C. Y. Su, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12612–12624 RSC .
H. H. Wang, S. D. Qin, X. F. Yang, G. Q. Fei, M. Tian, Y. M. Shao and K. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 939–951 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Mohan, K. T. Lau, D. Hui and D. Bhattacharyya, Composites, Part B, 2018, 142, 200–220 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, H. Liu, Y. Li, K. Dai, G. Zheng, C. Liu, C. Y. Shen, X. R. Yan, J. Guo and Z. H. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 4, 157–166 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yang, S. B. Li, W. Y. Yang, W. T. Yuan, J. H. Xu and Y. D. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13807–13814 CrossRef CAS .
V. Eswaraiah, K. Balasubramaniam and S. Ramaprabhu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1258–1262 RSC .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. F. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4541–4583 RSC .
P. Wang, J. J. Zhang, L. Dong, C. Sun, X. L. Zhao, Y. B. Ruan and H. B. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3412–3422 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Ha, A. Choudhury, T. Kamal, D. H. Kim and S. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4623–4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Shaheen, R. Radspinner, N. Peyghambarian and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Xu, M. G. Schwab, A. J. Strudwick, I. Hennig, X. L. Feng, Z. S. Wu and K. Müllen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1035–1040 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, E.
B. Secor, M. C. Hersam, C. D. Frisbie and L. F. Francis, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 109–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Varghese, C. Hollar, J. Richardson, N. Kempf, H. Chao, P. Gamarachchi, J. Gamarachchi, D. Estrada, R. J. Mehta and Y. L. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1–14 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Q. Fang, S. J. Li, Y. L. Cheng, W. Q. Lei and X. J. Meng, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 708–722 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Hu, J. H. Kang, L. W. T. Ng, X. X. Zhu, R. C. T. Howe, C. G. Jones, M. C. Hersam and T. Hasan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265–3300 RSC .
Z. Ma, A. Wei, J. Ma, L. Shao, H. Jiang, D. Dong, Z. Y. Ji, Q. Wang and S. L. Kang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7116–7216 RSC .
M. Joshi, B. Adak and B. S. Butola, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 97, 230–282 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, B. W. Yao, Y. R. Li, L. Huang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1874–1881 RSC .
A. M. Dimiev and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3060–3068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, X. Z. Tang, T. Das, L. Y. Zhang, Y. M. Li, S. Ting, X. Hu and C. Y. Yue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3142–3151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Su, Y. P. Xu, W. J. Zhang, J. W. Zhao, A. P. Liu, X. H. Tang, C. H. Tsai, Y. Z. Huang and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5285–5292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Paredes, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15389–15413 RSC .
H. W. Lin, C. P. Chang, W. H. Haw and M. D. Ger, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2008, 197, 284–291 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, F. Irin, L. Ma, S. K. Bhattacharia, R. C. Hedden and M. J. Green, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8633–8640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lin, Y. J. Zhong, X. L. Zhao, T. Sawada, X. M. Li, W. H. Lei, M. R. Wang, T. Serizawa and H. W. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803004 CrossRef PubMed .
E. B. Secor, S. Lim, H. Zhang, C. D. Frisbie, L. F. Francis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4533–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Secor, T. Z. Gao, A. E. Islam, R. Rao, S. G. Wallace, J. Zhu, K. W. Putz, B. Maruyama and M. C. Hersam, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2332–2340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wan and B. Q, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3637–3646 RSC .
M. A. Rafiee, J. Rafiee, Z. Wang, H. H. Song, Z. Z. Yu and N. Koratkar, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3884–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Young, I. A. Kinloch, L. Gong and K. S. Novoselov, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 1459–1476 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Díez-Pascual, M. A. Gómez-Fatou, F. Ania and A. Flores, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 67, 1–94 CrossRef .
M. Humood, Q. Shuang, Y. X. Song, K. Polychronopoulou, Y. F. Zhang, J. C. Grunlan and A. A. Polycaipou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 9, 1107–1118 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chandrasekaran, N. Sato, F. Tölle, R. Mülhaupt, B. Fiedler and K. Schulte, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 97, 90–99 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Xu and M. J. Buehler, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3869–3876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bansal, H. Yang, C. Z. Li, K. Cho, B. C. Benicewicz, S. K. Kumar and L. S. Schadler, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 693–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rittigstein, R. D. Priestley, L. J. Broadbelt and J. M. Torkelson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 278–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, M. Y. Gu, H. B. Han and G. H. Mu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 112, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sang, Z. W. Li, X. H. Li, L. G. Yu and Z. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 8271–8295 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Chen, P. J. Liu, L. Z. Min, Y. M. Zhou, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and W. F. Duan, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 39 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Kota, B. H. Cipriano, M. K. Duesterberg, A. L. Gershon, D. Powell, S. R. Raghavan and H. A. Bruck, Macromolecules, 2010, 40, 7400–7406 CrossRef .
S. Z. Li, Q. Y. Li, R. W. Carpick, P. Gumbsch, X. Z. Liu, X. D. Ding, J. Sun and J. Li, Nature, 2016, 539, 541–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Esquivel-Gaon, N. H. A. Nguyen, M. F. Sgroi, D. Pullini, F. Gili, D. Mangherini, A. L. Pruna, P. Rosicka, A. Sevcu and V. Castagnola, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6539–6548 RSC .
X. Dou, A. R. Koltonow, X. He, H. D. Jang, Q. Wang, Y. W. Chung and J. X. Huang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1528–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tripathi, F. Awaja, G. Paolicelli, R. Bartali, E. Iacob, S. Valeri, S. Ryu, S. Signetti, G. Speranza and N. M. Pugno, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6646–6658 RSC .
Y. L. Li, S. J. Wang and Q. Wang, Composites, Part B, 2017, 120, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Mungse and O. P. Khatri, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14394–14402 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, Y. S. Xin, T. S. Li, S. Nutt, C. Su, H. M. Chen, P. Liu and Z. L. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4878–4891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr08933gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a typical screen printer, comprising squeegee and screen mesh attached onto a frame. (b) Schematic of the fabrication route of WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites, which mainly includes three steps: GO functionalization, paste processing, and screen printing.	 

 	Fig. 2  XPS spectra of C1s for (a) GO and (b) PEI-rGO and N1s for (c) PEI-rGO. (d) The Raman spectroscopy of GO and PEI-rGO.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM of (a) GO and (b) PEI-rGO. AFM of (c) GO and (d) PEI-rGO.	 

 	Fig. 4  Rheological characterization of printing pastes. (a) Strain-dependent, (b) frequency-dependent oscillatory shear rheology of WPU/PEI-rGO and WPU/GO printing paste, and (c) steady shear rheology of printing paste. The inset in (c) is the image of the printing paste from WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8. (d) Thixotropic loop measurement of printing paste.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic process of screen printing using the nylon stencil and formulated WPU/PEI-rGO paste, (b) the established mass production line for manufacturing WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites, (c) the picture of scaled WPU/PEI-rGO bulk nanocomposites from mass production line, and the individualized-pattern WPU/PEI-rGO bulk nanocomposites using custom-made images stencil on (d) paper-based and (e) textile-based substrate.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Tensile stress–strain curves of WPU, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.2, WPU/GO-0.5, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.5, WPU/GO-0.8, WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8, and WPU/PEI-rGO-1.0. (b) The comparison between the experimental Young's modulus and theoretical values based on Halpin–Tsai model assuming that graphene nanosheets are in random and parallel conditions for the WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 7  Typical loading-hold-unloading curves for the WPU and the WPU nanocomposites from nanoindentation.	 

 	Fig. 8  Fractured cross-sectional FESEM images: (a, b) neat WPU, (c, d) WPU/PEI-rGO-0.8, and (e, f) WPU/GO-0.8 nanocomposites, where the (b), (d), and (f) is the magnified image corresponding to the marked area in (a), (c), and (e), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TGA curves of neat WPU and WPU nanocomposites under air atmosphere. (b) The magnified TGA curves at mass percentage between 40% and 60%. The black line in (b) locates at 50% mass loss.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The changes in mass loss with Taber abrasion cycles at a 250 g load. (b) The proposed synergistic wear-reduction mechanism of neat WPU (right) and WPU/PEI-rGO nanocomposites (left).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr08933g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
