Anomalously large interface charge in polarity-switchable photovoltaic devices: an indication of mobile ions in organic–inorganic halide perovskites   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE04064C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE04064C
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1256-1260Anomalously large interface charge in polarity-switchable photovoltaic devices: an indication of mobile ions in organic–inorganic halide perovskites†

        
          
            Yong 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunjun 
            Liang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Huimin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ding 
            Tian
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guobao 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiping 
            Jing
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wenguan 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Weikang 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fujun 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhiqun 
            He
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China. E-mail: chjliang@bjtu.edu.cn; zhqhe@bjtu.edu.cn
bSchool of Science, China University of Geosciences, Beijing 100083, China
cCollege of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
dLab of Printing & Packaging Material and Technology-Beijing Area Major Laboratory, Beijing Institute of Graphic Communication, Beijing 102600, China
Received 
      24th December 2014
    , Accepted 12th February 2015First published on 12th February 2015AbstractIt is proved that a large amount of mobile ions exist in organic–inorganic halide perovskites. The accumulated ions at the interface change the band bending of the semiconductor, leading to polarity-switchable photovoltaic devices. The interface charge significantly influences the function and performance of perovskite devices. The discovery of the interface charge has important implications for current–voltage hysteresis in perovskite solar cells.

Broader context
The development of organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been very fast, recently. PSCs display diversified device architectures and anomalous current–voltage hysteresis. These features imply that the organic–inorganic halide perovskites possess some unique properties. Here we report an unusual polarity-switchable photovoltaic device in the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Al. The polarity of the device is switchable with a preset voltage. An unusually large quantity of interface charge is observed. The accumulation of the interface charge converts the device from a hole-only device to a functional photovoltaic device in a time scale of ∼10 s. The interface charge has been proved to mainly originate from mobile ions in the hybrid perovskite. The discovery of the interface charge reveals a unique device mechanism in perovskite photovoltaics. The interface charge changes the band bending near the interface and thus leads to a wide range of device architectures, current–voltage hysteresis, and polarity switch. The results suggest that manipulating the interface charge is key to controlling the performance of PSCs. The discovery of the mobile ions indicates an unexpected, unique property of the hybrid perovskites. Future studies should investigate the origin and the related effects of the mobile ions.

The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been increasing rapidly since the emergence of solar cell-based organic–inorganic halide perovskites.1–10 PSCs display diversified device architectures, such as distributed heterojunctions with mesoporous TiO2, ZrO2, and Al2O3 nanostructures10–14 as well as thin-film planar heterojunctions (TPHJs).3,5,15 The solar cells in the TPHJ structure are composed of a perovskite layer (abbreviated as PRV) and carrier-selective layers, such as an n-type electron transport layer (abbreviated as N) and a p-type hole transport layer (abbreviated as P). Layer combinations, such as N–PRV–P,16,17 N–PRV18 and PRV–P19 display remarkable photovoltaic performance. In addition, a wide range of carrier-selective (TiO2, ZnO, PCBM, spiro-OMeTAD, and P3HT) and electrode materials (Au,18,20 PEDOT:PSS and carbon14) have been used. Other solar-energy materials do not show the same wide range of device architecture and electrode materials as organic–inorganic perovskites. PSCs exhibit current–voltage (J–V) hysteresis in all architectures. The shape of the J–V curve varies depending on the scan direction, range, and rate of the applied voltage during measurements. Hysteresis becomes prominent when the n-type or p-type carrier-selective layer is absent. The unusually wide range of device architectures and the J–V hysteresis imply that the organic–inorganic halide perovskites possess a unique property, which is unknown, although several mechanisms have been proposed to address the hysteresis.21
In this work, we report an unusual perovskite device, i.e., a polarity-switchable photovoltaic device. Its polarity switches with changing bias, thus suggesting a unique device mechanism. A large quantity of electric charge at the interfaces between the perovskite and the electrodes, which leads to the polarity switch, is observed. Finally, we prove that high-density mobile ions, which are the origin of the interface charge, exist in the hybrid perovskite.
PbI2 (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) and MAI (>99.9%, HeptaChroma) were dissolved in DMF and 2-propanol, respectively. To ensure MAI and PbI2 were fully dissolved, both solutions were heated at 70 °C for 30 min before use. Samples were prepared on glass substrates with indium tin oxide (ITO). The device architecture is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/MoO3/Al, and the active area is 0.038 cm2. PEDOT:PSS (Baytron-P4083) was spin-cast onto the clean surface of the ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 40 s and then thermally annealed on a hot plate at 120 °C for 30 min in air. In a nitrogen-filled glove box, the PbI2 solution in DMF (460 mg ml−1) was spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer at 4000 rpm for 15 s and then annealed at 70 °C for 15 min. After drying, the MAI solution in 2-propanol (20 mg ml−1) was spin-coated onto the PbI2 layer at 3000 rpm for 5 s and then annealed at 70 °C for 45 min to form the perovskite MAPbI3. The samples were moved to a thermal evaporator for MoO3 (8 nm) and aluminium (100 nm) deposition. The resulting thickness of the perovskite was ∼480 nm, as measured with an Ambios XP-2 profilometer. The J–V characteristics were recorded by a Keithley (and Agilent) source meter under an illumination of AM 1.5G 100 mW cm−2 from an Abet 2000 solar simulator. Ferroelectric hysteresis loops were measured using a Radiant ferroelectric tester Premier II. Impedance spectroscopy was conducted on a ZAHNER ZENNIUM electrochemical workstation.
The crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) is illustrated in Fig. 1a. The perovskite MAPbI3 is sandwiched between two conventional hole-injection electrodes, ITO/PEDOT:PSS and MoO3/Al (Fig. 1b), which have close work functions of 5.0 and 5.3 eV, respectively. The polarity of the device is switchable with a preset voltage (Fig. 2). Tempering the device at +2.0 V for 10 s before the forward scan and at −2.0 V for 10 s before the backward scan yields an impressive PCE of 10.6% in the forward scan and 4.8% in the backward scan (we define ITO/PEDOT:PSS as ground, the scan from positive to negative as the forward scan, and that from negative to positive as the backward scan). Moreover, the observed Voc of 0.95 V in the forward scan and −0.88 V in the backward scan cannot be understood with a conventional view because the symmetric electrodes ITO/PEDOT:PSS and MoO3/Al can provide neither sufficient nor direction-switchable built-in fields. Therefore, the unusual performances suggest a unique photovoltaic mechanism in the device. We found that large interface charge exists in the device and leads to the mechanism.
 Fig. 1  Material, device and mechanism of polarity-switchable perovskite photovoltaic devices. (a) Crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3. (b) Device structure. (c) Energy-level diagram of the materials. (d–f) Schematic energy band diagrams under equilibrium (dark and short circuits) conditions. (d) Without interface charge the device is a hole-only device. (e) The device is a forward diode due to positive charges near the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode. (f) The device is a reversed diode due to positive charges near the MoO3/Al electrode. Interface charge and screen charge are represented in red and black, respectively. 
 Fig. 2  Current–voltage characteristics of the polarity-switchable photovoltaic device under one sun illumination. A preset voltage of 2.0 V (−2.0 V) is applied on the device for 10 s before the forward (backward) scan. The open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) indicate the photovoltaic performance. 
Changeable interface charge near the electrode, which originates from mobile ions22,23 or ferroelectric polarization,24 leads to polarity switch in diodes. We propose that a very strong electric field is formed between the interface charge in the perovskite and the screen charge on the electrode (Fig. S1†). The strong field changes the band bending near the interface and thus modulates the barrier height of the contact. Consequently, the same electrode material can form an Ohmic contact with the perovskite semiconductor for either electron injection or hole injection, depending on the nature of the interface charge. In the virgin state (no interface charge), the device acts as a hole-only device (Fig. 1d), in which the J–V curve obeys the power law (typically V2 for space charge limited current). If a positive charge is accumulated near the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode (Fig. 1e), the positive charge changes the band bending and reduces the barrier height between Ec and the electrode, thus forming an Ohmic contact for electron injection. As a result, the device would be a diode with ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the cathode and MoO3/Al as the anode. Similarly, if the positive charge is accumulated near the other electrode (MoO3/Al), the resulting diode will switch its polarity, i.e., ITO/PEDOT:PSS would serve as the anode and MoO3/Al as the cathode (Fig. 1f). The J–V curve of diodes obeys the exponential law (diode equation: J = J0(exp(qV/nkT) − 1)). The interface charge can be controlled by a preset voltage, leading to the polarity-controllable photovoltaics.
A constant bias (including the preset voltage) induces and accumulates the interface charge and thus changes the device from a hole-only device to a diode and functional photovoltaic device. The transition is displayed in Fig. 3. As indicated in Fig. 3a, the current decreases and eventually stabilizes after tens of seconds when the constant bias is lower than ∼1.1 V. When the applied voltage is higher than ∼1.1 V, the current increases and stabilizes in the time scale of ∼10 s. A higher bias leads to a shorter transition time. Fig. 3b indicates the J–V curves of the device before and after the transition. At the beginning (0 s) the J–V curve can be fitted with a power law, indicating that the device is a hole-only device at this moment. At the time of 30 s the J–V curve is consistent with an exponential law, indicating that the device becomes a diode.
 Fig. 3  Transition of the device from a hole-only device to a diode. (a) Under constant bias the dark current changes with time, indicating that the transition is underway. (b) At the beginning (0 s) the J–V curve obeys the power law, but after the transition (30 s) the J–V curve obeys the exponential law. The current densities in panel (b) are the current densities in panel (a) at the measurement times of 0 s (blue triangle) and 30 s (red circle), respectively. 
Relaxation (decline) of the interface charge was observed (Fig. 4). A bias of 2.0 (−2.0) V was applied on the device for 12 s to accumulate the charge. The device was then kept at a short circuit condition to observe the relaxation current. After removal of the 2.0 (−2.0) V bias (Fig. 4a), a small reverse current appears and decays in a time scale of ∼20 s (Fig. 4a, inset), indicating the relaxation process. Assuming that the perovskite finally relaxes to the virgin state, the time integral of the relaxation current is an indication of the interface charge density before the relaxation, which is 56 μC cm−2 for 2.0 V bias and 53 μC cm−2 for −2.0 V bias.
 Fig. 4  Relaxation of the interface charge. (a) A bias of 2.0 (−2.0) V was applied on the device for 12 s. The device was then kept at a short circuit condition to observe the relaxation. The inset shows the relaxation current and the time integral of the current density. (b) Interface charge density measured at different bias. The interface charge density was calculated from the time integral of the relaxation current. 
The density of the accumulated interface charge varies with different bias (Fig. 4b). In the lower voltage range, the density of the interface charge continuously increases with the rising bias until a peak value of 284 μC cm−2 is reached at a voltage of 3.6 V. The anomalously large interface charge is consistent with the very high dielectric constant (over 10000) observed from impedance spectroscopy (Fig. S2†).
The observed interface charge mainly originates from mobile ions in the perovskite layer because of the following reasons: (i) the transition time ∼10 s is consistent with moving ions (seconds to hours),25,26 whereas the switching time of typical ferroelectric polarization is much faster (sub-microsecond);27 (ii) the relaxation indicates the gradual vanishing of the interface charge after the removal of the applied voltage, which does not support ferroelectric polarization because permanent polarization is a necessary condition for ferroelectricity; (iii) no ferroelectric hysteresis was observed in the device at room temperature and at a low temperature of 77 K (Fig. S3†); and (iv) even if ferroelectric polarization occurs in the material, a maximum polarization of 71 μC cm−2 is estimated in MAPbI3 (Fig. S4†), which is much smaller than the observed interface charge density (D) 284 μC cm−2.
Point defects, such as interstitial atoms and/or methylammonium (iodine) vacancies, possibly exist and act as mobile ions. The density of ions (defects) is estimated as N = D/qL = 3.7 × 1019 cm−3, where q is the elementary charge and L is the thickness of the perovskite. This value is unacceptably high for most solar cells because high-density defects severely reduce the carrier collection efficiency.28 This value indicates that PSCs have very high tolerance to defects.
Conclusions
It is found that a large amount of mobile ions exist in organic–inorganic halide perovskites. Under an electric field these ions accumulate at the interfaces of the device. The existence of the interface charge changes the band bending near the interface and modulates the barrier height of the contact, thus forming an Ohmic contact for either electron injection or hole injection depending on the polarity of the charge. This unique mechanism leads to the polarity-switchable photovoltaic device. The device ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/MoO3/Al is a switchable photovoltaic device, of which the performance is determined by the dynamics of the interface charge (Fig. S8†). The simple device structure and the impressive photovoltaic response suggest that it can be used as a special photodetector, of which the sensitivity and the polarity can be controlled by interface charge.
The above results have important implications for perovskite photovoltaic devices. Firstly, the results indicate that photovoltaics from the hybrid perovskites can be achieved in a very simple device structure with even symmetric electrodes. The existence of the interface charge leads to band bending of the semiconductor and thus conventional PN junctions or asymmetric electrodes are not a necessary condition for perovskite photovoltaics. This finding suggests that various electrode materials can be used, and explains the wide range of device architectures and the wide variety of electrode materials in perovskite photovoltaics. It also suggests that more carrier-selective and non-selective electrode materials should be further explored to develop efficient, low-cost, and long-life devices (Fig. S5†). Secondly, the polarity switch is actually an exaggerated J–V hysteresis. Our results indicate that the different polarities of the interface charge during the scans cause the exaggerated J–V hysteresis, thus implying that the dynamic change of the interface charge is an important cause of J–V hysteresis. The results also suggest that manipulating the interface charge is key to controlling the performance of perovskite photovoltaic devices.
The discovered high-density mobile ions indicate a unique property of the hybrid perovskite. These ions significantly influence the function and performance of perovskite devices. Very likely they would affect the stability of PSCs as well. Therefore the origin and the related effect of the mobile ions should be investigated extensively in the future. We note that in the submission period of this manuscript an ion drift in hybrid perovskites was observed with an optical microscopic image.29
Author contributions
Z.Q.H. and C.J.L. contributed to the conception and analysis of the data. Y.Z. and H.M.Z. carried out the device fabrication and measurement. D.L., D.T., X.P.J. and F.J.Z. contributed to the data calculation and analysis. G.B.L. performed the ferroelectric hysteresis measurement. W.G.Z. obtained the impedance spectroscopy. W.K.X. and Q.L. contributed to material synthesis and device fabrication. C.J.L. wrote the manuscript with the assistance of Y.Z.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 11474017, 21174016 and 60776039), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (no. 20120009110031), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. 2013JBZ004, 2013JBM102).
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, F. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400355 Search PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
S. Sun, T. Salim, N. Mathews, M. Duchamp, C. Boothroyd, G. Xing, T. C. Sum and Y. M. Lam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 399 CAS .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, J. W. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, A. Henning, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, S.-J. Moon, L. Haggman, G. Boschloo, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18762–18766 RSC .
Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, T. Liu and H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. G. Lee, Y. C. Kim, J. Seo, J. H. Noh, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7837–7840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, J. Dong, S. Lv, Y. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Wu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063901 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, M. Wuβler, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. Lakus-Wollny, E. Mankel, T. Mayer, W. Jaegermann and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 680–685 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pei, G. Yu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 269, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K.-j. Jin, Z.-t. Xu, L. Wang, C. Ge, H.-b. Lu, H.-z. Guo, M. He and G.-z. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 192901 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Zysman-Colman, J. D. Slinker, J. B. Parker, G. G. Malliaras and S. Bernhard, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 388–396 CrossRef .
J. Slinker, D. Bernards, P. L. Houston, H. D. Abruna, S. Bernhard and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2392–2399 RSC .
W. J. Merz, J. Appl. Phys., 1956, 27, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Mohamad and A. M. Mustafa, Renewable Energy, 2005, 30, 187–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee04064cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
The development of organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been very fast, recently. PSCs display diversified device architectures and anomalous current–voltage hysteresis. These features imply that the organic–inorganic halide perovskites possess some unique properties. Here we report an unusual polarity-switchable photovoltaic device in the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Al. The polarity of the device is switchable with a preset voltage. An unusually large quantity of interface charge is observed. The accumulation of the interface charge converts the device from a hole-only device to a functional photovoltaic device in a time scale of ∼10 s. The interface charge has been proved to mainly originate from mobile ions in the hybrid perovskite. The discovery of the interface charge reveals a unique device mechanism in perovskite photovoltaics. The interface charge changes the band bending near the interface and thus leads to a wide range of device architectures, current–voltage hysteresis, and polarity switch. The results suggest that manipulating the interface charge is key to controlling the performance of PSCs. The discovery of the mobile ions indicates an unexpected, unique property of the hybrid perovskites. Future studies should investigate the origin and the related effects of the mobile ions.


 	Fig. 1  Material, device and mechanism of polarity-switchable perovskite photovoltaic devices. (a) Crystal structure of CH3NH3PbI3. (b) Device structure. (c) Energy-level diagram of the materials. (d–f) Schematic energy band diagrams under equilibrium (dark and short circuits) conditions. (d) Without interface charge the device is a hole-only device. (e) The device is a forward diode due to positive charges near the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode. (f) The device is a reversed diode due to positive charges near the MoO3/Al electrode. Interface charge and screen charge are represented in red and black, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current–voltage characteristics of the polarity-switchable photovoltaic device under one sun illumination. A preset voltage of 2.0 V (−2.0 V) is applied on the device for 10 s before the forward (backward) scan. The open circuit voltage (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) indicate the photovoltaic performance.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transition of the device from a hole-only device to a diode. (a) Under constant bias the dark current changes with time, indicating that the transition is underway. (b) At the beginning (0 s) the J–V curve obeys the power law, but after the transition (30 s) the J–V curve obeys the exponential law. The current densities in panel (b) are the current densities in panel (a) at the measurement times of 0 s (blue triangle) and 30 s (red circle), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Relaxation of the interface charge. (a) A bias of 2.0 (−2.0) V was applied on the device for 12 s. The device was then kept at a short circuit condition to observe the relaxation. The inset shows the relaxation current and the time integral of the current density. (b) Interface charge density measured at different bias. The interface charge density was calculated from the time integral of the relaxation current.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee04064c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
