A generic surfactant-free approach to overcome wetting limitations and its application to improve inkjet-printed P3HT:non-fullerene acceptor PV   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA02209K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02209K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13215-13224A generic surfactant-free approach to overcome wetting limitations and its application to improve inkjet-printed P3HT:non-fullerene acceptor PV†

        
          
            Philipp 
            Maisch
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lena M. 
            Eisenhofer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kai Cheong 
            Tam
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Distler
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Monika M. 
            Voigt‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Christoph J. 
            Brabec
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Hans-Joachim 
            Egelhaaf
          
        
      ab
aBavarian Centre for Applied Energy Research (ZAE Bayern), Fürther Str. 250, 90429 Nuremberg, Germany. E-mail: philipp.maisch@zae-bayern.de
bInstitute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (i-MEET), Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstraße 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
Received 
      27th February 2019
    , Accepted 3rd May 2019First published on 7th May 2019AbstractSolution based thin film technology often implies challenging wetting behaviour which has to be improved in order to achieve good printing or coating qualities. A common way of solving such problems is the use of wetting agents but they often show undesired side effects. In this work, we introduce a generic strategy to overcome this problem. We demonstrate inkjet printed arrays of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) dots to efficiently pin the three-phase contact line of wet films, thereby enforcing homogenous wetting and subsequent drying on low energetic surfaces. By printing and drying single droplets of ink, a matrix of anchoring points is created which pins the subsequently printed continuous wet layer and thus enables the coating of large surface areas with homogeneous, defect free films. This method also allows convenient patterning of surfaces by combining inkjet-printing of anchoring points with subsequent large area flood coating, e.g., by doctor blading. Furthermore, the defined placement of each anchoring point allows full thermodynamic control of the film formation by quantitative calculation of the processing windows and patterning precision. The beneficial application of this new strategy to printed electronics is demonstrated by fabricating organic solar cells with power conversion efficiencies of 5%. This is achieved by printing a hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS electron blocking layer without addition of surfactants at unprecedented quality onto an otherwise non-wettable hydrophobic active layer consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and the indacenodithiophene-based non-fullerene acceptor O-IDTBR.
Introduction
Solution coating of surfaces is an almost ubiquitous technology of general significance. Especially in the field of printed electronics, coating and surface patterning from the liquid phase play an essential role. ‘Printed’ solar modules, light emitting diodes and thin film transistors are examples where the quality of coating directly determines the performance of the devices.1–3 As these devices consist of several different layers which are coated on top of each other, the concept of ‘orthogonal solvents’ is an often applied strategy to ensure that coating a layer does not damage the underneath lying layer.4 This implies that the surface energy of the substrate and the surface tension of the ink are often grossly different. In systems with high ink surface tension and low substrate surface energy, energy minimization often causes the applied wet film to shrink or rupture, a phenomenon which is referred to as ‘dewetting’. Several strategies have therefore been developed to help this issue. A common approach is to increase the surface energy by, e.g., plasma or corona treatment.5 However, these techniques are not applicable to many organic surfaces as they cause serious damage. Wetting agents like 2,5,8,11-tetramethyl-6-dodecyn-5,8-diol ethoxylate (Dynol 604) or the fluorosurfactant Zonyl FS-300 reduce the ink surface tension, but typically remain in the film and may negatively impact on the long time stability of the device. Savva et al.6 reported organic solar cells with significantly reduced device performance when adding more than 0.5 wt% Zonyl or 0.3 wt% Dynol to PEDOT:PSS. In view of these limitations, it is clear that novel concepts to overcome wetting problems have to be identified.
A further requirement for printed electronic devices is the fabrication of distinct layer patterns. Well working and highly reproducible structuring processes are necessary to achieve for example source and drain contacts in organic field effect transistors (OFETs),3 patterning of organic light emitting diodes (OLED) displays7 or monolithic cell-to-cell interconnection in OPV modules.8 It is possible to achieve such patterning subsequent to layer deposition by lithography processes or LASER scribing.9 This separation of coating and structuring steps increases production complexity and is often a major cost driver. Ideally, coating and patterning in the 10 s of μm scale should be combined in a single process. Approaches offering such direct patterning of the surface, i.e., by locally defined deposition of the coating, have been described in various publications. Multiple works make use of the coffee-ring effect to generate line structures.10,11 Zhang et al. followed this strategy to deposit silver nanoparticles in various patterns on substrates with different wettabilities.10 By means of inkjet printing they were able to fabricate micro circuits formed by two parallel conductive lines of silver nanoparticles, each of these lines having a width of 5–10 μm. Due to the nature of the coffee-ring effect, such fabrication methods are limited to line structures. Manufacturing of larger continuous films is not possible. Another strategy to create patterned layers is to actively control wetting and dewetting by introducing heterogeneities onto the surface. The starting point for many works relying on this principle dates back to the year 1944 when Cassie and Baxter introduced their famous model to predict equilibrium contact angles of liquids on composite surfaces based on the area fractions and individual contact angles.12 Significant progress to this field was made by Raj et al., who investigated circular hydrophilic wetting defects and introduced a model to predict receding as well as advancing contact angles of liquids on heterogeneous and superhydrophobic surfaces.13 They demonstrated later how this technology can be used to influence the contact area and 3D shape of single droplets on such surfaces.14 A similar approach to achieve wetting was introduced by Colsmann et al.,15 who used a low flow rate spray coating process with shadowing masks to deposit wetting defects on hydrophobic polymer surfaces.
The application of wetting/dewetting phenomena to structuring purposes in electronic device manufacturing was demonstrated by Wang et al.16 They investigated the direct patterning of single dots of PEDOT:PSS by controlled rupturing of droplets of PEDOT:PSS ink on top of an ultrathin hydrophobic line of evaporated SiO2 modified with a self assembled monolayer of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane. Using the two PEDOT:PSS semi-circles thus formed as source and drain contact they were able to manufacture OFETs with a channel width of only 500 nm. Another work demonstrating the strength of wetting/dewetting phenomena for device manufacturing was reported by Chen et al.17 They achieved controlled rupturing of silver ink wet films by sandwiching the liquid between a surface covered with wetting defects and a non-patterned substrate to form a space confined assembly. With evaporation starting from the sample edge they were able to form 1-dimensional (1D) nanoscale bridges on superhydrophobic surfaces.
All the methods described above provide direct patterning techniques by overcoming or even benefiting from low surface energy and dewetting effects. However, none of these techniques provides R2R compatible and material loss free processing of structured layers applicable for printed electronics mass production.
In this work, we present an additive-free method to spatially enhance the wetting behaviour of surfaces, which comprises the placement of pinning centres by inkjet printing, followed by deposition of the same material by arbitrary techniques. Digital printing of pinning centres enables the template-free deposition of arbitrarily shaped functional films and precise thermodynamic control of the structuring process with sub-10 μm resolution.
Materials and methods
Float glass as well as indium doped tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω □−1 were purchased from Weidner Glas. P3HT (Lisicon SP001) was obtained from Merck KGaA. The donor polymer PV2000 was obtained from Raynergy Tek. Technical grade PC60BM as well as PC70BM > 99% was purchased from Solenne BV. The indacenodithiophene-based non-fullerene acceptor O-IDTBR was acquired from Flexink Ltd. Three different inks with challenging wetting behaviour were selected: (i) Clevios P VP Al 4083, (ii) FHC Solar and (iii) Clevios P Jet N V2 (all from Heraeus Clevios GmbH). Fluorosurfactant Capstone FS-31 (CFS) was acquired from DuPont Co. An alcohol based SnO2 nanoparticle dispersion (N31) was purchased from Avantama AG. UV curable epoxy Delo-Katiobond LP655 was purchased from DELO Industrial Adhesives. All solvents used in this work are above 99% purity and were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation.
Prior to coating and printing experiments all glass and ITO coated glass substrates were cleaned in ultrasonic baths containing acetone and 2-propanol. To create low energy hydrophobic surfaces, blends of P3HT with technical grade PC60BM or O-IDTBR and PV2000 with PC70BM were doctor bladed from solutions containing chlorobenzene (95 vol%) and 4-bromoanisole (5 vol%) or o-xylene (95 vol%) and 1-methylnaphthalene (5 vol%) at a temperature of 65 °C on the glass substrates. The concentration of both solid components in the solution is 15 mg ml−1. A Pixdro LP 50 inkjet printer equipped with Spectra SE-128 AA print heads (128 nozzles, native resolution 50 dots per inch (DPI), nominal drop size 30 pl) was used to deposit the pinning centres as well as continuous layers of PEDOT:PSS. Pinning centres were dried between 80 and 140 °C for 5 min prior to application of the continuous wet layer.
Solar cells with the layer sequence ITO/SnO2/P3HT:O-IDTBR/PEDOT:PSS/Ag were manufactured. Therefore ITO coated glasses were patterned using an LS-7xxP setup from LS Laser Systems GmbH equipped with a High Q LASER (femtoREGEN UC – 1040–8000 fs Yb SHG). As electron extraction layer, SnO2 nanoparticles were doctor bladed from N31 ink and dried at 80 °C for 5 min. Subsequently, P3HT:O-IDTBR active layer blends were doctor bladed from solution as described above. Pinning centres and continuous layers of PEDOT:PSS were applied by inkjet printing as described above. Subsequently, the solar cells were annealed at 140 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere followed by thermal evaporation of a 100 nm thick silver electrode. Prior to characterization in ambient atmosphere, solar cells were encapsulated using curable epoxy Delo-Katiobond LP655.
The PEDOT:PSS ink surface tension was characterized using an optical contact angle measuring and contour analysis system OCA 20 from DataPhysics following the pendant drop method. Contact angles were measured according to the sessile drop method. To gain information about polar and dispersive parts of the surface energy, contact angles of known polar and dispersive liquid droplets on the substrate were measured. Diiodomethane was used as highly dispersive, ethylene glycol as intermediate and water as polar reference liquid. A Teflon substrate was used as reference surface. From the measurements, polar and dispersive parts of the surface energy were calculated according to the Owens, Wendt, Rabel and Kaelble (OWRK) method.
For conductivity measurements, a 4 point probe system R-chek from EDTM Inc. was used. Layer thicknesses as well as topography were characterized using a confocal microscope NanoFocus μsurf custom. Furthermore, optical microscope images were recorded using a MX51 from Olympus Co. Solar cells were characterized by measuring their current–voltage (JV)-characteristics with an AAA solar simulator, which provides AM1.5G illumination and source measurement system from LOT-QuantumDesign, calibrated with a certified silicon solar module. The sweeping ranges for solar cells and modules are −0.5 V to 1.5 V in steps of 20 mV.
Results and discussion
A typical example of challenging wetting behaviour is the deposition of aqueous PEDOT:PSS formulations on top of extremely hydrophobic polymeric active layers in organic photovoltaic or light emitting devices. In the following, we will briefly describe this problem, using representative examples, and conventional methods to achieve wetting. Subsequently, the novel pinning centre concept will be introduced as an alternative. As an example for a low energy surface with high impact in organic photovoltaics, blends of P3HT:PC60BM, P3HT:O-IDTBR and PV2000:PC70BM were chosen. As typical examples of hydrophilic inks, three different commercially available and inkjet printable PEDOT:PSS inks, namely Clevios P VP 4083, F HC solar and P JET N V2 were chosen for investigation, because they cover a wide range of different physical properties, applications and processing techniques.
P VP Al 4083 is low conductive (σ = 0.002–0.0002 S cm−1) and often applied in organic or perovskite PV and LED technology.18,19 F HC solar is a highly conductive material (σ ≈ 500 S cm−1), which can be used as transparent electrode.20 P Jet N V2 is a special inkjet formulation. It has high conductivity (σ ≈ 250 S cm−1) and is tailored in such a way that the dispersions show low viscosities and dry slowly to avoid the clogging of the inkjet nozzle.21 Furthermore, this PEDOT:PSS ink has a neutral pH value to protect corrosion sensitive parts of the print heads which might be attacked by acidic media.
The problem
One feature that all these different aqueous PEDOT:PSS inks have in common is the challenging wetting behaviour on hydrophobic surfaces, such as P3HT:O-IDTBR, P3HT:PC60BM or PV2000:PC70BM active layers. The surface energies/tensions of both, the surfaces to be wetted as well as the liquids to be applied had been investigated. Based on the gained data, wetting envelopes were created. Detailed description of the theory can be found elsewhere.22

Fig. 1 shows the wetting envelopes of the different active layer materials, as well as the surface tension of the chosen PEDOT:PSS inks. The corresponding values are listed in Table 1. The wetting envelopes of the different polymeric active layer materials lie close to each other, indicating similar wetting behaviour. One can assume that the obtained results can be transferred also to many other polymeric OPV active layers.
 Fig. 1  (a) Wetting envelopes (θ = 0°) of commonly used OPV active layer materials P3HT:PC60BM, P3HT:O-IDTBR and PV2000:PC70BM and surface tension data of PEDOT:PSS inks P VP Al 4083, F HC solar, P JET N V2. An amount of 0.1% wt wetting agent CFS was added to the PEDOT:PSS inks to lower the surface tension and improve wetting. Inks within the wetting envelope are expected to show complete wetting on the corresponding surface. Inks located outside are expected to show only partial wetting or dewetting. (b) Photographs (size: 1 × 1 cm) of dry inkjet printed PEDOT:PSS layers from (left) P VP AL 4083 and (right) P VP AL 4083 + 0.1 wt% CFS, (c) (left) F HC solar and (right) F HC solar + 0.1 wt% CFS, (d) (left) P JET N V2 and (right) P JET N V2 + 0.1 wt% CFS on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. 
Table 1 Surface energies (γS) of different commonly used OPV active layer materials and surface tensions (γL) of PEDOT:PSS inks with and without the fluorosurfactant Capstone FS 31 (CFS). The polar (γP) and dispersive parts (γD) were determined following the Owens, Wendt, Rabel and Kaelble method (OWRK). Each pendant drop and sessile drop measurement was repeated at least three times. The presented data are mean values. The standard deviation is in all cases < 0.2 mN m−1




Surface

γ
S (mN m−1)

γ
DS (mN m−1)

γ
PS (mN m−1)
Structure




P3HT:PC60BM
24.5
24.3
0.2





P3HT:O-IDTBR
25.3
24.9
0.4


PV2000:PC70BM
26.3
26.2
0.1






Ink

γ
L (mN m−1)

γ
DL (mN m−1)

γ
PL (mN m−1)
Structure




Reference H2O
74.1
19.5
54.6





P VP Al 4083
75.4
21.0
54.4


P VP Al 4083 + 0.1% wt CFS
13.9
6.6
7.3


P Jet N V2
26.8
22.3
4.5


P Jet N V2 + 0.1% wt CFS
19.8
18.0
1.8


F HC solar
26.6
19.5
7.1


F HC solar + 0.1% wt CFS
20.9
17.6
3.3




The polar/dispersive surface tension coordinates of all three as-purchased PEDOT:PSS inks are located outside the wetting envelopes. PEDOT:PSS P VP Al 4083 clearly exhibits the highest value and thus the most challenging wetting properties. The dispersive and polar surface tension components of P VP Al 4083 are similar to water, which is the main component of the ink. Other PEDOT:PSS inks like P Jet N V2 and F HC solar have a lower surface tension. This indicates that the manufacturer already modified the aqueous inks by the addition of solvents or additives. Nevertheless, the wetting properties of all as-purchased PEDOT:PSS inks are insufficient for inkjet printing a homogeneous layer on the P3HT:PC60BM substrate. All tested pristine PEDOT:PSS inks dewet from the active layer surfaces (see photographs Fig. 1). To improve this situation, we added surfactants to these inks. As depicted in Fig. 1, for F HC solar and P VP AL 4083 a small amount of 0.1% wt fluorosurfactant addition (CFS) is sufficient to print homogeneous layers on P3HT:PC60BM surfaces. A relatively small change in surface tension seriously impacts film formation. This illustrates the delicate balance between surface tension and film formation for this system. The addition of 0.1% CFS to P Jet N V2 as well shifts the surface tension within the wetting envelope of P3HT:PC60BM. However, we find that P Jet N V2 layers still shrink or rupture during drying. Similar results were found when testing other wetting agents such as Dynol and Surfynol in combination with P Jet N V2 or the wetting of P Jet N V2 on P3HT:O-IDTBR or PV2000:PC70BM surfaces. The misprediction of the wetting envelope can have multiple reasons, such as the evaporation of volatile ink components during the layer drying process and an associated change of the surface tension. At the current stage, the reason for the overestimation of the wetting agents efficacy remains unclear, highlighting that the consequences of modification of the ink in order to achieve wetting are more complex than expected from textbook predictions.
A further point of concern is the long term interaction of surfactants with the film components. Wetting promoters typically remain within the dry layer or at its interfaces and may change the physical properties. One such example is provided in ESI Fig. 1.† The addition of 0.5% wt fluorosurfactant CFS leads to a decrease of conductivity of PEDOT:PSS F HC solar layers by more than 10%. Evidence that high amounts of fluorosurfactants can adversely affect OPV efficiency was provided by Savva et al. (ESI, ref. 6). By adding higher amounts of the fluorosurfactant Zonyl FS-300 to PEDOT:PSS, they reported significantly reduced device efficiency due to series resistance increase and introduction of an S-shape into the current–voltage characteristics.
The results described above highlight the importance of surfactants to overcome wetting limitations of hydrophilic PEDOT:PSS inks on top of hydrophobic surfaces. However, the example of P Jet N V2 shows that an addition of small amounts of fluorosurfactant cannot prevent dewetting phenomena for every ink type. At the same time, larger amounts can negatively influence the device performance. Moreover, many surfactants are known to be toxic and harmful to the environment.23 In view of the issues associated with enforcing wetting by additives, we have developed the alternative ‘pinning centre’ approach to overcoming wetting problems, which is not limited by such restrictions.
Pinning centre strategy
The method is based on inkjet printing of anchoring points on the surface to be coated. After drying and, if necessary, annealing, these pinning centres prevent a subsequently deposited wet film from dewetting. In the following, the concept and implementation of this approach are described.
(1) In a first step, an array of single droplets is inkjet printed onto the hydrophobic substrate at a resolution (typically 100–300 DPI) low enough to avoid merging of the droplets. Due to the low resolution, this step is usually very fast. With the given laboratory scale setup, several cm2 of surface area are covered within 1 second.
(2) Subsequently, the ink is dried, resulting in shrinkage of the droplets and formation of small solid islands which we refer to as ‘pinning centres’. In order to enhance adhesion of the pinning centres to the substrate, they may be annealed at temperatures up to 140 °C. A detailed description of the adhesion mechanism at the PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC60BM interface, which is directly related to material interdiffusion, and the influence of annealing temperature and time on the adhesion energy is reported by Dupont et al.24
(3) Finally, a continuous layer is inkjet printed in a second pass of the same material at higher resolution (400–1000 DPI). As the liquid film sticks to the previously placed pinning centres, shrinkage and layer rupturing due to dewetting are prevented. It should be noted that the second pass does not necessarily have to be performed by inkjet printing, but may also be performed by other coating techniques, even 1-dimensional ones, such as blade coating or slot die coating.
The implementation of the pinning centre concept is illustrated in Fig. 2. PEDOT:PSS pinning centres printed from P Jet N V2 ink on top of highly hydrophobic P3HT:PC60BM (contact angle water 103°) are presented. Fig. 3 a) shows inkjet deposition of a continuous P Jet N V2 wet film on top of a P3HT:PC60BM surface, which is partially covered by an array of pinning centres. While the wet film remains perfectly homogeneous in the area covered by pinning centres, it retracts from the non-modified area. The forces acting on the pinning centres can be considerable. Weakly anchored pinning centres can be swept away by the pull of the retracting wet film (Fig. 3b). However, this can be easily resolved by a temperature annealing step of the pinning centres. An annealing temperature of 140 °C is found to be sufficient for the system of P3HT:O-IDTBR or P3HT:PC60BM and P Jet N V2 (Fig. 3 c)). Images (d–f) highlight that the pinning centre concept is of generic character and can be transferred also to other systems, such as PEDOT:PSS ink P VP AL 4083 or water on poly(vinylidene fluoride) PVDF surfaces (contact angle with water θ = 91°).
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the creation and use of inkjet printed pinning centres. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Optical microscope image of a dry PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 layer on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. The dashed and dotted lines mark the edges of the pinning and printing areas, respectively. Printing in an area covered by pinning centres results in stable film formation. Printing on a blank surface results in dewetting and shrinkage of the layer. (b) PEDOT:PSS pinning centres dried at 60 °C do not provide sufficient adhesion to pin the subsequently applied continuous wet film. (c) The same sample after annealing at 140 °C shows stable film formation. (d) Pinning centres preventing the dewetting of a blade coated PEDOT:PSS layer from P VP AL 4083 ink on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. (e) Photograph of a PVDF surface with water droplets. The square shaped droplet is held in position by P Jet N V2 pinning centres. (f) Microscope image of the pinned three phase contact line of the water droplet. 
Patterning of surfaces by pinning centres
The concept of inkjet printed pinning centres allows the deposition of patterned layers with high resolution. We outline two different strategies:
(1) Cover the complete surface by inkjet printed pinning centres and apply the continuous wet film locally, using inkjet technology. Implementation of this strategy is demonstrated in Fig. 3c.
(2) Cover a discretionary and well-defined area of the surface with pinning centres. This is achieved by ink jet printing the desired pattern at low resolution, resulting in a spatial modification of the surface energy. The subsequent application of the continuous wet film can even be done with a 1-dimensional process like blade or slot die coating as the ink will only wet on the part of the surface that had been modified by pinning centres. An example of this approach is provided in Fig. 4. The photographs show a P3HT:PC60BM layer, locally covered by PEDOT:PSS pinning centres. A subsequently applied continuous layer of PEDOT:PSS ink P Jet N V2 dewets and leaves the areas without pinning centres uncovered, thus revealing the pattern of the ZAE Bayern research institute logo.
 Fig. 4  Demonstration of locally defined pinning centres on a P3HT:PC60BM surface for patterning applications. (a) Schematic illustration of pinning centre deposition in form of the ZAE research institute lettering as negative image and (b) blade coating of continuous PEDOT:PSS liquid film. (c–h) Photographs of samples after liquid film deposition recorded in 5 s intervals. The PEDOT:PSS film ruptures and uncovers the surface area without pinning centres, thus creating the desired layer patterning. 
With the printing setup used in our experiments, both patterning approaches allow high spatial resolution of ∼25 μm. The precision is mainly limited by the recession of the three phase contact line between the pinning centres located at the edge of the liquid layer (see Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical microscope image of dry PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 layer pinned on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. (b) The zoom shows a 3D confocal microscope image of the pinned PEDOT:PSS layer edge. The pinning centres printed from 30 pl droplets have an average diameter of 10.2 ± 0.5 μm after drying. 
Clearly, the achievable patterning precision highly depends on the printer setup. In this work, Spectra SE 128 AA print heads offering a droplet size of 30 pl are used. More advanced printheads offer drop volumes of less than 1 pl.25 This enables the deposition of much smaller pinning centres which can be packed in denser arrays. Consequently, shorter distances between neighbouring pinning centres can be realized leading to less recession of the three phase contact line. With a 500 fl printhead and under the assumption of the same spreading characteristics of the impacting droplet on the substrate surface (spreading factor β, eqn (1)), we anticipate a minimum pinning centre distance of 22 μm and patterning precision due to contact line recession of 5 μm.
Besides the question how to increase the pinning centre density and pattern resolution, there is also the question how far the pinning centre density can be decreased before the recession as shown becomes critical and leads to a rupture of the wet layers between the pinning centres. This topic will be theoretically discussed after proving the applicability of the pinning centre concept for device manufacturing.
Application
The ability to produce homogenous and patterned layers makes inkjet printed pinning centres highly attractive for the manufacturing of printed electronic devices. The usefulness of this new concept is demonstrated by fabricating organic solar cells with the inverted structure ITO/SnO2/P3HT:O-IDTBR/PEDOT:PSS (P Jet N V2)/Ag. Fig. 6 shows the layout of the substrate used in our laboratory, which comprises six solar cells. Homogeneous PEDOT:PSS fingers of well-defined contact area to the active layer underneath are required, as this area determines the photocurrent measured for the respective solar cell. This requirement was met by following strategy 1 as described in the previous chapter, using the PEDOT:PSS ink as purchased, i.e., without additional surfactants. As references, also devices manufactured from PEDOT:PSS ink containing 1.5 wt% fluorosurfactant Capstone CFS 31 are provided. Lower amounts of the wetting promoter do not allow printing of PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 layers homogenously enough for solar cell production.
 Fig. 6  Application of inkjet printed pinning centres in inverted P3HT:O-IDTBR solar cells. (a) Schematic illustration of the layout of a substrate with six solar cells, (b) current-density vs. voltage curve of solar cells using pinning centres and fluorosurfactant, respectively, for printing the PEDOT:PSS layers. (c) Box plot statistics of solar cell performance values (PCE – power conversion efficiency, FF – fill factor, Jsc – short circuit current, Voc – open circuit voltage). 
The resulting JV-characteristics (Fig. 6b) and the box-plot statistics (Fig. 6c) demonstrate that the performance of solar cells manufactured with the pinning centre strategy is comparable to that of state-of-the-art devices from literature using similar materials and device structure.26 In contrast, solar cells manufactured from PEDOT:PSS ink containing high amounts of wetting promoter suffer from severe degradation of all performance parameters. This is in agreement with literature reports from Savva et al., who found significantly reduced performance and increased series resistance of P3HT:PC60BM solar cells when adding 2 wt% of the fluorosurfactant Zonyl FS 300 to a PEDOT:PSS ink.6
Limits of pinning centre density
For the pinning centre approach to work properly, it appears clear that there are both, an upper and a lower limit for the pinning centre density. On one hand, a too high printing resolution will lead to merging of the ink droplets and thus prevent the formation of a regular pinning centre pattern. On the other hand, if the density of pinning centres is too low, they cannot prevent dewetting. For practical purposes, the processing window of the pinning centre method needs to be determined more quantitatively. While the maximum density of pinning centres (Resmax) determines the maximum achievable resolution of surface patterning, the minimum density (Resmin) results in maximized processing speed.
To find Resmax, the area occupied by the liquid droplets just after their arrival at the surface has to be considered. Numerous models have been described in literature to estimate the maximum droplet spreading diameter Dmax upon impact on the substrate in dependence of the initial droplet diameter D0, the ink surface tension, the ink viscosity and the droplet velocity upon impact.27,28 The ratio of Dmax to D0 is hereby referred to as the maximum spreading factor βmax (eqn (1)). (1) (2)
For the applied setup (Spectra SE-128 AA print heads, driving voltage: 90 V, driving waveform: 6–6–6 μs, droplet volume: VolD = 30 pl, D0 = 38.6 μm), we determined a maximum spreading factor βmax of 2.2 for water based PEDOT:PSS inks, such as P Jet N V2 or FHC Solar. This corresponds to a maximum droplet diameter upon impact on the substrate Dmax of 85 μm. Dmax is also the minimum distance at which two neighbouring droplets can be placed on the substrate without merging together. Eqn (2) translates this value into the maximum pinning centre resolution Resmax of 300 DPI. Experimental verification of Resmax is provided in Fig. 7. For printing resolutions < Resmax, a regular pattern of pinning centres is formed, whereas for printing resolutions > Resmax droplets merge together forming irregular patterns.
 Fig. 7  Pinning centres printed with P Jet NV2 ink on P3HT:PC60BM layers at different resolutions. (a) 250 DPI – regular pattern of pinning centres. (b) 400 DPI – pinning centres start to merge. (c) 800 DPI – droplets have merged to a wet film, which dewets from the surface by contracting. 
The minimum pinning centre resolution at which dewetting of the wet film deposited on top is prevented, can be estimated by comparing the difference of the Gibbs free energies Gi of the system in the wetted (w) and dewetted (d) state, Gw and Gd, respectively. According to the principle of lowest energy, wetting is thermodynamically favourable, if the difference of the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) from eqn (3) is positive. ΔG = Gd − Gw > 0(3)
We assume a pure liquid, a smooth and homogeneous solid surface, constant pressure p, constant temperature T and a constant number of molecules Nm. Under this conditions the free surface energies γ can be expressed as the change in Gibbs free energies (eqn (4)), with A being the surface area. (4)
Hence, ΔG can be obtained by multiplication of the free energies of the interfaces solid–gas (S), solid–liquid (SL) and liquid–gas (L) with the respective interface areas in the wetted (w) and dewetted (d) state, according to eqn (5). ΔG = (ASd − ASw) × γS + (ASLd − ASLw) × γSL + (ALd − ALw) × γL(5)
The interface areas in the wetted and dewetted states are given by eqn (6)–(11), based on the geometric considerations illustrated in Fig. 8. Due to the translational symmetry of the quadratic pinning centre array, it is sufficient to describe a single unit cell of length xUC, which equals the smallest distance between pinning centres.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the model used to estimate the minimum pinning centre density: (a) Substrate surface covered with a regular pattern of pinning centres and a continuous wet film. (b) If the pinning centre density is too low, dewetting results in formation of spherical caps of ink surrounding the pinning centres. (c) Zoom-in on spherical cap. (d) PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 at a P3HT:PC60BM surface with different pinning centre densities. A pinning centre resolution of 100 DPI (<Resmin) leads to dewetting of the wet film printed on top. (e) A pinning centre resolution of 200 DPI (>Resmin) stabilizes the wet film and prevents layer rupturing and subsequent shrinkage during drying. 
In the wetted state, the solid–vapour interface disappears, while both, the solid–liquid and the liquid–vapour interface areas are equal to the square of the unit cell length. In the fully dewetted state, it is assumed that a spherical cap of ink forms around every pinning centre. We furthermore assume that the pinning centres are of negligible volume (solid contents of PEDOT:PSS inks are usually ∼1–2% wt). By substituting the surface areas of eqn (5) using eqn (6)–(11), as well as the surface energies with Young's law (eqn (12)), ΔG is expressed as a function of the wet layer thickness d, the unit cell width xUC and the contact angle θ. Mathematical reshaping leads to an expression for the maximum unit cell length xUC (eqn (13)), i.e., the maximum distance between pinning centres at which the wet film is stable. Eqn (14) gives the corresponding minimum pinning centre resolution Resmin, which increases with decreasing thickness d of the wet film and with increasing contact angle θ of the corresponding ink at the surface to be wetted. ASw = 0(6) ASLw = xUC2(7) ALw = xUC2(8) ASd = xUC2 − π × rSC2(9) ASLd = π × rSC2(10) ALd = π × (rSC2 + hSC2)(11) (12) (13) (14)
The validity of the model derived above is confirmed by the experiments shown in Fig. 8d and e. For P Jet N V2 (θ = 32.9°), printed with a wet layer thickness of 10 μm (460 DPI, VolD = 30 pl), onto a P3HT:PC60BM surface, a minimum pinning centre resolution of 114 DPI is calculated. For resolutions smaller than the predicted value, the wet film ruptures between the pinning centres, whereas for pinning centre resolutions higher than the calculated number, formation of a stable PEDOT:PSS wet film is achieved.
Summary and conclusion
We have presented a novel, surfactant free strategy based on digital printing, to coat homogeneous, defect free layers on surfaces with challenging wetting behaviour. This is achieved by inkjet printing single droplets, which form anchoring points upon drying. Dewetting of the subsequently coated continuous layer of ink is prevented, as the anchoring points pin the wet film to the desired position. Combining the advantages of digital printing and dewetting, surface coatings can be patterned in arbitrary shapes at resolutions down to a few tens of micrometres without employing masks. This is possible by printing the pinning centres in the desired pattern prior to wet film deposition. Applying this strategy, we demonstrated unprecedented film quality of aqueous PEDOT:PSS inks on hydrophobic P3HT:O-IDTBR, PV2000:PC70BM and P3HT:PC60BM layers. Calculations based on the free surface energy of ink and solid substrate combined with simple geometric considerations yield minimum and maximum printing resolutions required for suppressing the dewetting. Furthermore, they also determine the maximum processing speed and highest achievable patterning resolution. With the current generation of 30 pl heads we have demonstrated a patterning precision of 21 μm. By further reduction of the droplet size to 500 fl, we anticipate to shrink the resolution to below 6 μm. Registration is no longer limited by the alignment of the coating or print head, but instead by the pinning centre pattern and the non wetting properties of the ink and surface. The quantitative investigation of the limitations of the pinning centre strategy provides a clear definition of the processing window and thus allows the precise processing of functional inks on non-wetting surfaces. The (i) film quality, (ii) resolution and (iii) registration of this method is only limited by the precision of the pinning centre pattern and the wetting properties of ink and surface.
The proposed pinning centre strategy also provides the solution to a major problem of printing functional inks. In many applications, like printed electronics, the use of ink additives and surface modifiers is limited, because any change of ink formulation has direct influence on the properties and therefore functionality of the printed film. Pinning of the wet film obviates the need for such modifications, leaving the ink and layer properties unaffected. The beneficial application of this new strategy to printed (opto-)electronics is demonstrated by the fabrication of inverted organic solar cells. By overcoming the wetting issues of the water based PEDOT:PSS ink on top of the hydrophobic P3HT:O-IDTBR active layer with the pinning centre strategy, fully functional devices with a PCE of 5% were printed. The PEDOT:PSS layers strongly adhere to the hydrophobic polymeric active material and the resulting solar cells do not show the shortcomings of devices fabricated with wetting promoters. This example highlights the potential of this roll-to-roll compatible and material loss free processing method for printed electronics mass production.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest including financial, personal or other relationship.
Acknowledgements
Durst Phototechnik AG is acknowledged for supporting inkjet printing equipment. Furthermore, the authors acknowledge the ‘Solar Factory of the Future’ as part of the Energy Campus Nuremberg (EnCN), which is supported by the Bavarian State Government (FKZ 20.2-3410.5-4-5).
References
L. Lucera, P. Kubis, F. W. Fecher, C. Bronnbauer, M. Turbiez, K. Forberich, T. Ameri, H.-J. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 373–384 CrossRef .
T. R. Hebner, C. C. Wu, D. Marcy, M. H. Lu and J. C. Sturm, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 519–521 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. H. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu and E. P. Woo, Science, 2000, 290, 2123–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gamerith, A. Klug, H. Scheiber, U. Scherf, E. Moderegger and E. J. W. List, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3111–3118 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chan, T. Ko and H. Hiraoka, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1996, 24, 1–54 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savva, M. Neophytou, C. Koutsides, K. Kalli and C. A. Stelios, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3123–3130 CrossRef CAS .

          S.-H. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, K. Kang and H. Kang, 2009 Int. Symp. Optomechatronic Technol.,  2009, pp. 71–76 Search PubMed .
L. Lucera, F. Machui, P. Kubis, H. D. Schmidt, J. Adams, S. Strohm, T. Ahmad, K. Forberich, H.-J. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 89–94 RSC .
P. Kubis, L. Lucera, F. Machui, G. Spyropoulos, J. Cordero, A. Frey, J. Kaschta, M. M. Voigt, G. J. Matt, E. Zeira and C. J. Brabec, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2256–2263 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Xin, M. Deng, Y. Wen and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2013, 24, 6714–6718 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Bromberg, S. Ma and T. J. Singler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 2141011–2141014 CrossRef .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 546–551 RSC .
R. Raj, R. Enright, Y. Zhu, S. Adera and E. N. Wang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15777–15788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raj, S. Adera, R. Enright and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
A. Colsmann, M. Reinhard, T. Kwon, C. Kayser, F. Nickel, J. Czolk, U. Lemmer, N. Clark, J. Jasieniak, A. B. Holmes and D. Jones, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 118–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, Z. H. Zheng, H. W. Li, W. T. S. Huck and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 171–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, M. Su, C. Zhang, M. Gao, B. Bao, Q. Yang, B. Su and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3928–3933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jäckle, M. Liebhaber, C. Gersmann, M. Mews, K. Jäger, S. Christiansen and K. Lips, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lövenich, Polym. Sci., Ser. C, 2014, 56, 135–143 CrossRef .
D. Janssen, R. De Palma, S. Verlaak, P. Heremans and W. Dehaen, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 1433–1438 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Giesy and K. Kannan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 146A–152A CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Dupont, E. Voroshazi, D. Nordlund, K. Vandewal and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .

          K. Ozawa, T. Usui, K. Ide, H. Takahashi and S. Sakai, Int. Conf. Digit. Print. Technol.,  2007, pp. 898–901 Search PubMed .
S. Strohm, F. Machui, S. Langner, P. Kubis, N. Gasparini, M. Salvador, I. Mcculloch, H. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2225–2234 RSC .
J. Perelaer, P. J. Smith, E. Van Den Bosch, S. S. C. Van Grootel, P. H. J. M. Ketelaars and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clanet, C. Béguin, D. Richard and D. Quéré, J. Fluid Mech., 2004, 517, 199–208 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02209k‡ Present address: Institute of Polymer Materials (LSP), Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstraße 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Wetting envelopes (θ = 0°) of commonly used OPV active layer materials P3HT:PC60BM, P3HT:O-IDTBR and PV2000:PC70BM and surface tension data of PEDOT:PSS inks P VP Al 4083, F HC solar, P JET N V2. An amount of 0.1% wt wetting agent CFS was added to the PEDOT:PSS inks to lower the surface tension and improve wetting. Inks within the wetting envelope are expected to show complete wetting on the corresponding surface. Inks located outside are expected to show only partial wetting or dewetting. (b) Photographs (size: 1 × 1 cm) of dry inkjet printed PEDOT:PSS layers from (left) P VP AL 4083 and (right) P VP AL 4083 + 0.1 wt% CFS, (c) (left) F HC solar and (right) F HC solar + 0.1 wt% CFS, (d) (left) P JET N V2 and (right) P JET N V2 + 0.1 wt% CFS on a P3HT:PC60BM surface.	 

P3HT:PC60BM	24.5	24.3	0.2	


P3HT:O-IDTBR	25.3	24.9	0.4
PV2000:PC70BM	26.3	26.2	0.1

Reference H2O	74.1	19.5	54.6	


P VP Al 4083	75.4	21.0	54.4
P VP Al 4083 + 0.1% wt CFS	13.9	6.6	7.3
P Jet N V2	26.8	22.3	4.5
P Jet N V2 + 0.1% wt CFS	19.8	18.0	1.8
F HC solar	26.6	19.5	7.1
F HC solar + 0.1% wt CFS	20.9	17.6	3.3

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the creation and use of inkjet printed pinning centres.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Optical microscope image of a dry PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 layer on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. The dashed and dotted lines mark the edges of the pinning and printing areas, respectively. Printing in an area covered by pinning centres results in stable film formation. Printing on a blank surface results in dewetting and shrinkage of the layer. (b) PEDOT:PSS pinning centres dried at 60 °C do not provide sufficient adhesion to pin the subsequently applied continuous wet film. (c) The same sample after annealing at 140 °C shows stable film formation. (d) Pinning centres preventing the dewetting of a blade coated PEDOT:PSS layer from P VP AL 4083 ink on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. (e) Photograph of a PVDF surface with water droplets. The square shaped droplet is held in position by P Jet N V2 pinning centres. (f) Microscope image of the pinned three phase contact line of the water droplet.	 

 	Fig. 4  Demonstration of locally defined pinning centres on a P3HT:PC60BM surface for patterning applications. (a) Schematic illustration of pinning centre deposition in form of the ZAE research institute lettering as negative image and (b) blade coating of continuous PEDOT:PSS liquid film. (c–h) Photographs of samples after liquid film deposition recorded in 5 s intervals. The PEDOT:PSS film ruptures and uncovers the surface area without pinning centres, thus creating the desired layer patterning.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical microscope image of dry PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 layer pinned on a P3HT:PC60BM surface. (b) The zoom shows a 3D confocal microscope image of the pinned PEDOT:PSS layer edge. The pinning centres printed from 30 pl droplets have an average diameter of 10.2 ± 0.5 μm after drying.	 

 	Fig. 6  Application of inkjet printed pinning centres in inverted P3HT:O-IDTBR solar cells. (a) Schematic illustration of the layout of a substrate with six solar cells, (b) current-density vs. voltage curve of solar cells using pinning centres and fluorosurfactant, respectively, for printing the PEDOT:PSS layers. (c) Box plot statistics of solar cell performance values (PCE – power conversion efficiency, FF – fill factor, Jsc – short circuit current, Voc – open circuit voltage).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Pinning centres printed with P Jet NV2 ink on P3HT:PC60BM layers at different resolutions. (a) 250 DPI – regular pattern of pinning centres. (b) 400 DPI – pinning centres start to merge. (c) 800 DPI – droplets have merged to a wet film, which dewets from the surface by contracting.	 
ΔG = Gd − Gw > 0	(3)
	(4)
ΔG = (ASd − ASw) × γS + (ASLd − ASLw) × γSL + (ALd − ALw) × γL	(5)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the model used to estimate the minimum pinning centre density: (a) Substrate surface covered with a regular pattern of pinning centres and a continuous wet film. (b) If the pinning centre density is too low, dewetting results in formation of spherical caps of ink surrounding the pinning centres. (c) Zoom-in on spherical cap. (d) PEDOT:PSS P Jet N V2 at a P3HT:PC60BM surface with different pinning centre densities. A pinning centre resolution of 100 DPI (<Resmin) leads to dewetting of the wet film printed on top. (e) A pinning centre resolution of 200 DPI (>Resmin) stabilizes the wet film and prevents layer rupturing and subsequent shrinkage during drying.	 
ASw = 0	(6)
ASLw = xUC2	(7)
ALw = xUC2	(8)
ASd = xUC2 − π × rSC2	(9)
ASLd = π × rSC2	(10)
ALd = π × (rSC2 + hSC2)	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02209k
‡ Present address: Institute of Polymer Materials (LSP), Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstraße 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
