Ultrafast dual photoresponse of isolated biological chromophores : link to the photoinduced mode-specific non-adiabatic dynamics in proteins  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3FD20150C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3FD20150C
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2013, 163, 297-319Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUltrafast dual photoresponse of isolated biological chromophores: link to the photoinduced mode-specific non-adiabatic dynamics in proteins

        
          
            Anastasia V. 
            Bochenkova
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Lars H. 
            Andersen
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, DK-8000, Aarhus C, Denmark. E-mail: bochenkova@phys.au.dk;   Tel: +45 8715 6353
bDepartment of Chemistry, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119991 Moscow, Russia
Received 
      13th December 2012
    , Accepted 9th January 2013First published on 11th January 2013AbstractThe anionic wild-type Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) chromophore defines an entire class of naturally occurring chromophores, which are based on the oxydized tyrosine side chain. The GFP chromophore exhibits an enriched photoinduced non-adiabatic dynamics in the multiple excited-state decay channels. Deactivation includes vibrational resonant photodetachment and internal conversion. Here, we provide detailed insight into the efficiency of different vibrational modes in promoting a selective photoresponse in the bare GFP chromophore anion. We introduce a general theoretical model that is capable of accounting for the alternative non-equivalent pathways in internal conversion, and we outline the factors, by which the photo-initiated response may be altered in this channel. The topography around the planar minimum in S1 and the two distinct types of the S1/S0 conical intersections obtained through high-level ab initio calculations provide direct support to the proposed model. There are mode-selective ways to control the photoresponse and to direct it towards a single excited-state decay channel. By tuning the excitation wavelength, the photoresponse may be directed towards the ultrafast non-statistical electron emission coupled with vibrational (de)coherence, whereas a vibrational pre-excitation in the ground state may lead to the ultrafast non-statistical internal conversion through a conical intersection. We also discuss the implication of our results to the photo-initiated non-adiabatic dynamics in the proteins.
1 Introduction
Light-induced processes are ubiquitous in nature. Interaction of molecules with light is central to the vital activities of living organisms and human beings. Photosynthesis, vision in vertebrates, solar energy harvesting and conversion, and light sensing are remarkably efficient processes, and much focus has been placed on elucidating the role played by the protein environment in their primary events which occur on a timescale down to sub-picoseconds. Photoactive proteins attract immense attention not only because of their crucial role for the functioning of living organisms, but they also provide a stage for studying some very elementary processes in nature, such as photoinduced isomerization, light-driven electron transfer, and charge separation. These fundamental events, initiated as a primary response to light absorption, are ultrafast and, at the same time, are rate-determining inside the proteins. In this respect, the intrinsic photoresponse of light-absorbing molecular units in these proteins, and the characteristic timescales of their photo-initiated dynamics are of utmost importance as they provide a well-defined reference to the functioning of the proteins.
Recent advances in modern physics, including ultrafast pulsed laser techniques, new light sources, and ion-storage facilities, combined with a detailed theoretical insight gained by using state-of-the-art methods of quantum chemistry enable the disclosure of new fundamental concepts that lie at the heart of the functioning of the photoactive proteins.1–5 Remarkably, an ever increasing number of experimental evidence for an important role of quantum effects, such as electronic coherence in photosynthetic proteins4,5 and non-adiabatic dynamics through conical intersections in visual3 and signaling1 photoreceptors, is emerging. Our most recent findings reveal the existence of competing and remarkably fast dual energy transfers between the nuclei and the electrons in the photoinduced channels of the isolated anionic chromophore from the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP).6 Importantly, the energy flow may be directed towards electronic as well as nuclear degrees of freedom mediated by specific vibrational modes. This results in vibrationally mediated photodetachment (PD) out of the first electronically bound excited state of the anion or in internal conversion (IC) back to the ‘hot’ ground state of the anion (see Fig. 1). In the case of the anionic GFP chromophore, the inherent timescales of the photo-initiated reaction dynamics may be down to the tens of femtoseconds when coupled to vibrational coherence of the excited active modes.6 We consider these non-adiabatic couplings in the excited states dynamics of biological chromophores as a key point for various mechanisms by which the proteins efficiently tune their response to the absorption of light. Here, we explore the ways by which the GFP proteins may use this electron-to-nuclei coupling to guide the photochemistry and photophysics upon which their functioning is based.
 Fig. 1  Intrinsic de-excitation channels mediated by the two types of vibrational modes of the deprotonated GFP chromophore terminated with the two methyl groups: PD directly from S1 and IC into a vibrationally hot anion in the electronic ground state S0. From the hot S0 state statistical fragmentation (SF) may occur. Shown are the two exocyclic angles, ϕ and θ, that induce a non-adiabatic coupling between the S1 and S0 surfaces. 
The wild-type GFP is a 27 kDa protein composed of 238 amino acids. The protein has an 11-stranded β-barrel structure with a single α-helix running through the center.7 The heart of the protein is the chromophore which is formed at the central helix, well shielded by the hydrophobic core of the protein. The GFP chromophore is a 4-(p-hydroxybenzylidene)-5-imidazolinone (pHBI) derivative formed by autocatalytic cyclization of the Ser65-Tyr66-Gly67 tripeptide.8,9 One important role of the protein environment is to dictate the balance between a neutral chromophore and a deprotonated phenolate ion. Numerous wild-type and mutant green fluorescent proteins contain solely the anionic chromophore and are therefore characterized by a single-peak excitation, as seen in one of the most popular GFPs, enhanced eGFP.10 In wild-type GFP, the ratio between the two forms is six to one in the electronic ground state,7 whereas the neutral chromophore exhibits increased acidity in the excited state.11 An excited-state proton transfer occurring on the sub-picosecond timescale is well known to result in a remarkable blue-to-green light conversion in absorption/emission of the wild-type GFP protein.12,13 Out of the 238 amino acids, Gly67 is essential for the formation of the chromophore, but others form by substitution the basic principles behind the development of many GFP color variants that are so widely used as in vivo fluorescent tags.10 For this purpose numerous studies have been aimed at fine-tuning the photophysical properties of fluorescent proteins, in particular to work in the far-red spectral regions to enable a mammalian deep tissue imaging.14,15
The GFP is strongly fluorescent because the conjugated system of the chromophore with the two rings exists in a nearly co-planar orientation in the cis-configuration in the protein. The planarity is maintained by a network of hydrogen bonds which prevents the rings from twisting after the chromophore has been photo-excited. In the gas-phase, as well as in solutions, nothing, however, prevents the chromophore in the excited state from returning to the ground state by internal conversion without emission of fluorescent light, and indeed the search for gas-phase fluorescence has been unsuccessful.16 The twisting in the central methine bridge along the θ and/or ϕ angles (see Fig. 1) is thought to induce a non-adiabatic coupling between the two surfaces. This results in a very fast excited-state decay via a conical intersection.17–19
The (sub)picosecond non-radiative deactivation, which leads to efficient fluorescence quenching outside the protein environment, has been extensively studied in various solvents by time-resolved spectroscopy.20–22 The effect of conformational freedom on the rapid internal conversion has also been studied through structural modifications of the chromophore and through adjustments of supra-molecular systems.11 All these studies strongly support the idea that internal conversion occurs through the conical intersection(s) induced by twisting in the methine bridge. However, there is still no agreement on the details of the deactivation mechanism. Even in the case of the bare chromophore, there are controversial theoretical predictions18,19,23,24 for the most favorable IC pathway that includes either a single of the two possible twisting coordinates or both of them (the so called space-conserving ‘hula-twist’ mechanism25).
The experimental solution data clearly show the non-exponential decay kinetics with a dominant sub-picosecond component,20–22,26 dependence of the fluorescence decay on temperature20,22 and, in some cases, on viscosity.20 Isoviscosity analysis shows that internal conversion is effectively a nearly barrierless process.27 There is, however, a single activation parameter which has been found to depend linearly on inverse temperature in the markedly multi-exponential decay of the excited electronic state.22 This has been explained by invoking a model of the two-dimensional dynamics that couples the phenyl-ring rotation to a weakly activated libration of the imidazolinone ring.22 The latter has been considered as a fast active mode that leads to a conical intersection, while the former has been assigned to a slow coordinate inhomogeneously distributed in S1. This model directly implies a different character of the two bridge bonds and, hence, the different topographies (shallow versus steep) associated with the twisting along the corresponding angles, so that the topographies become reverse upon excitation. However, a simple consideration in the molecular orbital framework suggests that there should be a nearly perfect resonance between the two mesomeric structures in the bare chromophore anion, which completely scrambles the bond orders in the central bridge moiety and leads to a charge delocalization throughout the entire conjugated system.28 This apparently contradicts the above mentioned model, although solvent effects may play a role in decoupling the two resonance forms.
It can be seen from the above consideration, that although certain progress has been made in describing the mechanism of the deactivation channel, there are still many open questions and contradictions that have to be resolved. It seems that rigorous characterization of the possible types of conical intersections and the corresponding structural motifs is missing even in the case of the isolated anion. In this respect, a simple reasonable model that is capable of giving the entire picture of the excited-state radiationless decay pathways and that is free of a particular computational scheme is highly in demand. Knowledge of the intrinsic properties, such as barrier heights for escaping from the planar minimum (if any) associated with the fluorescent state and pathways to various types of the conical intersections characterized by their relative energies will enable us to list the factors which may be altered in different media and, in particular, in various proteins. For example, the inconsistency in particular IC mechanisms in different media suggests that there are several types of conical intersections that may be altered in energy, depending on the environment. The quantitative picture, then, comes from high-level ab initio calculations. Since the theoretical level that is affordable for computational studies is ever increasing, it is of utmost importance to have a qualitative picture that can be further quantitatively refined in the future.
Since many GFP-like proteins are fluorescent, much focus has been put on elucidating the role of the protein in suppressing the competing non-radiative channel. However, there are certain GFP homologues which are non-fluorescent, but they may be reversibly photo-activated.29,30 Photoinduced isomerization is thought to be responsible for the photo-switching of these kindling fluorescent proteins. Most recent results suggest that diverse GFPs, containing anionic tyrosine-based chromophores, may also be involved in biological photoinduced electron transfer reactions.31 Therefore, GFP-like proteins show remarkable diversity in terms of their excited-state decay channels, thus enabling a wide range of their possible applications as fluorescent markers in bioimaging, as photoswitches in super-resolution optical microscopy and ultimately as redox sensors in living cells. Such diversity has to be closely related to the intrinsic excited-stated decay channels of the deprotonated GFP chromophore, where specific vibrational modes have recently been shown to facilitate selective photoresponse.6
About ten years ago, the first gas-phase absorption measurement of a deprotonated GFP-model chromophore (a dimethyl derivative of pHBI, called pHBDI) was performed.32 It was found that it absorbs at about the same wavelength in vacuum and in the protein, implying that the sum of perturbations in the wild-type GFP environment has very little effect on the absorption wavelength, which to a large extent is determined by the intrinsic properties of the chromophore. Today it is well established that the spectral diversity (color tuning) of fluorescent proteins is first and foremost a consequence of chemical modifications of their chromophore itself,10,14,33 and fine tunings are primarily achieved by non-covalent interactions with the surrounding amino acids through mutagenesis. Since the first measurements, action spectroscopy has been extensively used to study the absorption of biologically relevant chromophores and, in particular, the GFP chromophore anion in the gas phase. Various ion storage techniques, including electrostatic storage rings,34,35 quadrupole ion traps16,36 and ion cyclotron resonance cells,37 along with detection of both ionic16,36 and neutral fragments,34,35 as well as parent ions loss16,36,37 after photoexcitation have been used (see Fig. 1). However, several precautions should apply when using a photoresponse of these chromophores for retrieving their absorption profiles. In particular, a sequential multiple photon absorption and competing decay channels have to be taken into account.
Recent photoelectron spectroscopy studies have directly confirmed that electron emission is indeed one of the deactivation channels in the bare anion.38–40 Moreover, these results strongly suggest that S1 is electronically bound in the Franck–Condon region, and electron emission occurs resonantly through vibrational autodetachment inside the S0–S1 absorption band.40
The aim of this discussion is two-fold. In light of our recent findings that excited-state dynamics is governed by the non-adiabatic nature that couples the electronic and nuclear motion in both competing decay channels of the GFP chromophore anion,6 we first aim at getting a deep insight into the efficiency of different vibrational modes in promoting a selective photoresponse in the bare anion. We introduce a general theoretical model that is capable of accounting for different IC pathways, and we outline the factors by which the photo-initiated response may be altered in this channel. The topography around the planar minimum in S1 obtained through high-level ab initio calculations within the extended multiconfigurational quasi-degenerate perturbation theory41 provides direct support to the proposed qualitative model. We then explore the wavelength-dependence of the PD/IC branching ratio, where both competing decay channels are mediated by internal vibrational energy redistribution (IVR) in S1 at low excitation energies. Their lifetimes are determined through the corresponding activation energies. Secondly, we discuss the implication of our results to the photo-initiated non-adiabatic dynamics in the proteins. We show remarkable similarity of the photoinduced nuclear dynamics in the gas phase and in the protein and emphasize the close interrelation between excited-state dynamics and the corresponding spectral shapes. Finally, we discuss the ways, by which the GFP-like proteins may use the intrinsic dual electron-to-nuclei coupling to promote a selective photoresponse.
2 Methods
2.1 Electronic structure calculations and simulation of absorption profiles
Equilibrium geometry parameters and vibrational frequencies in the ground electronic states of the anion and the neutral radical were found using the density functional theory with the hybrid PBE0/(aug)-cc-pVDZ functional. Geometry parameters in the first excited state of the anion were optimized at the XMCQDPT241/CASSCF(14,13)/(aug)-cc-pVDZ level of theory. The XMCQDPT2 excited-state gradient was calculated numerically as a two-sided derivative.
The vertical excitation energy was obtained using the XMCQDPT2/SA(7)-CASSCF(16,14)/(aug)-cc-pVDZ approach within the active space which comprised all valence orbitals of the π-type. The vertical detachment energies were calculated at the XMCQDPT2/SA(2)-CASSCF(14,14) level of theory within the (p-type d-aug)-cc-pVTZ basis set. Oxygen atoms were treated with the entire aug-spdf diffuse shells. The basis set was also augmented with an additional diffuse function of p-type with a particularly small exponent (−10) centered at the middle carbon atom. The π* orbital of this highly diffuse shell was included in the active space and was used to mimic an electron-detachment process. The ground and ionized states were included in the state-averaging procedure. The XMCQDPT2 effective Hamiltonians were constructed in the frame of the reference spaces spanned by 9 zeroth-order wavefunctions. For all electronic structure calculations the Firefly version 8.0 package,42 partially based on the GAMESS (US) source code,43 was used.
The S0→S1 vibrational profiles at 0 K and 300 K were obtained through a time-domain formalism44 based on Fourier transforms of the Lax's autocorrelation function45 within the double harmonic parallel-mode approximation.46
2.2 Protein simulations
The model of the Ser 65→ Thr GFP mutant that contained a permanently deprotonated chromophore47 was constructed based on the crystal structure 1EMA48 from the pdb databank.49 The initial structure was obtained by adding missing hydrogen atoms to the heavy nuclei, assuming a protonated Glu 222 aminoacid residue and treating all His residues as neutral and δ-protonated. The overall net charge of the protein was set to zero by performing a set of point mutations of charged Glu and Asp residues exposed to solvent to their neutral Gln and Asn analogues. Five surface residues (Asp 19, Glu 32, Glu 34, Asp 117, Asp 173) lacking charge-stabilization through the corresponding salt bridges were mutated along with the C-end that was kept neutral. The structure was then extensively solvated by adding ∼6500 water molecules and exposed to the preliminary geometry optimization (10000 steps) followed by constant temperature NVT molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with CHARMM force field parameters.50 The protein backbone and the chromophore were held fixed during the simulations. Periodic boundary conditions were applied. The equilibration temperature was set to 300 K using a Langevin thermostat. Long-range electrostatic interactions were treated with the particle mesh Ewald method. The simulations were carried out with a 1 fs integration step for 2 ns. After that, the temperature of the system was gradually reduced down to 50 K in steps of 50 K during 1.2 ns. The final MD geometry was then obtained by performing energy minimization during another 10000 steps. The atomistic model of the S65T-GFP protein was constructed using the VMD program,51 while all MD simulations were run by using the NAMD 2.7b2 version.52
The final annealed MD atomistic model was reduced for the subsequent quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical (QM/MM) treatment by removing outer water molecules located farther than 2.9 Å from the protein, i.e., out of the first solvation shell. The reduced system contained 909 water molecules, while the total number of atoms, including the entire protein, was equal to 5410. The chromophore anion based on the entire Thr 65, Tyr 66 and Gly 67 residues as well as the positively charged Arg 96 and protonated Glu 222 side chains together with all residues and water molecules of the chromophore's binding pocket that formed an extensive hydrogen bonding network were included in the QM part. The chromophore was hence represented by the extended model of 70 atoms based on the backbone and side chains of the residues which were covalently bound to the conjugated system. In total, 154 atoms, including 15 capping hydrogen atoms, were assigned to this subsystem treated using 1550 basis functions at the PBE0/(aug)-cc-pVDZ level of theory, while performing ground state geometry optimization within a mechanical embedding QM/MM scheme. This method implied geometrical constraints to be imposed on the QM part, where the QM and MM interactions were treated by the classical MM force field. The current choice of the QM part accounted correctly for all interactions of the chromophore with the key residues, such as charge transfer, hydrogen bonding, short-range repulsion, treating the entire binding pocket at a sufficiently high level of theory. Additional constraints were imposed on the outer part of the protein, located more than 7 Å from the chromophore, that was held fixed during the QM/MM optimization procedure.
Vibrational analysis was carried out in the frame of the same QM/MM scheme, where the second derivatives of the total QM and MM energy with respect to nuclear coordinates of the extended chromophore were calculated. The partially evaluated Hessian matrix (210 × 210) was projected to eliminate rotational and translational contaminants and diagonalized, and its all 204 real eigenvalues ensured that the located QM/MM stationary point was a true minimum. Since the size of the extended chromophore was approximately two times larger than that of the conjugated system itself, the calculated medium and high frequencies associated with rather localized normal modes of the conjugated part, such as breathing or stretching, were considered to be close to the ‘true’ values. These ‘true’ values may be obtained through diagonalization of the entire Hessian matrix, where the corresponding mixed second derivatives of the energy with respect to the Cartesian coordinates of the chromophore and its protein surrounding are expected to be close to zero.
The equilibrium geometry parameters of the neutral radical chromophore were found in the frame of the same QM/MM scheme, where the partial charges of the radical chromophore used in calculating long-range electrostatic interactions of the QM and MM parts were recalculated at the PBE0/ROHF/(aug)-cc-pvdz level of theory, applying the natural orbital analysis (NBO).53 The differences in the calculated NBO charges between the isolated chromophore anion and its radical were used to redefine the corresponding force field parameters.
The excited state gradient calculations at the XMCQDPT2/CASSCF(14,13) level of theory were performed using the extended model of the chromophore and all nearby residues that directly formed hydrogen bonds with the conjugated system. The QM part included 110 atoms and was described by 1130 basis functions. The rest of the protein (MM part) was represented by a set of MM point charges and this electrostatic field was incorporated in the one-electron integrals of the electronic Hamiltonian by means of the effective fragment potential (EFP) method,54 thus allowing the QM electron density to be polarized in the field of the protein. The final excited-state gradient was corrected by subtracting from it the S0 gradient, calculated at the same level of theory.6
The modified PC GAMESS/Firefly version 6.4. and Firefly version 8.042 were used for the QM/MM modeling using the mechanical embedding scheme and the QM/EFP electrostatic approach, respectively.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Intrinsic excited-state decay channels
Action absorption spectroscopy studies have previously revealed two excited state decay channels in pHBDI anion upon excitation to S1 (see Fig. 1). One of these channels is attributed to the delayed statistical fragmentation in the vibrationally hot ground electronic state of the anion, following fast internal conversion. This channel has been directly confirmed by measuring neutral34,35 as well as charged16,36 daughter fragments. The second photodetachment channel has first been identified by indirect measurements of parent ions loss in action spectroscopy experiments and has recently been confirmed by direct registration of outgoing electrons.38–40 The interplay between the two channels has recently been studied experimentally as well as theoretically,6 where the emphasis has been on explaining a relatively long excited-state lifetime that enables IC to be the predominant channel in deactivation of the pHBDI anion at the excitation wavelength of the maximum fragmentation yield (482 nm).
Here, we provide a detailed mechanistic insight into the IC channel and also show that the totally symmetric stretching coordinates, which are Franck–Condon active modes (see below), are those that assist photodetachment, as opposed to out-of-plane twisting coordinates which efficiently lead out of the region of very close proximity between the surfaces of D0 and S1. The latter is observed even at very small fluctuations of the twisting angles on the flat potential energy surface (PES) of S1 due to energy increase of D0.

3.1.1 Vibrational photodetachment. 
We have shown that an electronically stable anion in the Franck–Condon (FC) region with a very low electron affinity can fully support an experimental finding of a substantial lifetime in the S1 state.6 Our calculated vertical detachment energy (VDE) is 2.62 eV, and that places the D0 state vertically above the S1 state by ∼0.1 eV. The calculated vertical detachment and excitation energies as well as origin shifts for the S0 and S1 electronic states of the anion and for the D0 ground state of the neutral radical may be used to illustrate the picture of embedded vibrational resonances for the anion in S1 (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Upper panel: equilibrium geometry parameters for the planar structures of the S1, D0 and S0 minima. All distances are shown in Å. Lower panel: three one-dimensional quadratic surfaces of the S0, S1 and D0 electronic states shifted according to the calculated minimum displacements along the totally symmetric stretching coordinates and according to the calculated vertical detachment and excitation energies. Note that PD occurs through vibrational resonances out of S1 within the S0–S1 absorption band down to ∼350 nm. 

Fig. 2 shows quadratically approximated PESs for the three states as a function of the two emission-active mode coordinates. The harmonic approximation is valid here, since these modes refer to the medium and high-frequency stretching coordinates. If not being coupled to the nuclear motion, electron detachment would never occur, since the S1 state is electronically bound in the FC region. These are vibrational resonances that enable electron autodetachment (VAD). The crossing point of the S1 and D0 surfaces is importantly located outside the FC region, thus even at energies where this crossing occurs (∼2.7 eV), vibrations are required to reach this point (autodetachment through vibrational Feshbach resonances, VFRAD). At the crossing point, the states are electronically degenerate, and this can be distinguished from VAD that occurs even below the crossing point (and even when a photon energy is less than adiabatic detachment energy). In VAD, the energy has to be transferred from the nuclei to the electrons through their (non-adiabatic) coupling. This means that this coupling may occur not only when two surfaces are close in energy to each other, but also in cases where the states do not cross at all. This is, in fact, a well-known phenomenon.55
The mode-specificity in VAD comes from the S1/D0 origin shifts. In the case of VAD, the non-adiabatic couplings should depend on the vibrational overlap between the final vibrational wavefunction and the derivative of the initial vibrational wavefunction with respect to the corresponding nuclear coordinates. In the harmonic approximation, such overlap would simply be zero if the two surfaces along the corresponding normal mode are not displaced. Remarkably, these PD-active modes are those that are excited upon the S0–S1 transition. This means that the S1 surface is shifted in the same direction with respect to both the S0 and D0 surfaces. In the case of the high-frequency stretching modes, the S1 and D0 minima are displaced in the opposite directions with respect to the one of S0. This is easily recognized by comparing the corresponding equilibrium geometry parameters in S0, S1 and D0 (see Fig. 2).


3.1.2 Internal conversion through conical intersections. 
As shown above, there are quite controversial findings regarding the mechanism of internal conversion and the possible pathways from the Franck–Condon region in S1 to the S1/S0 conical intersection seam. We summarize the experimental findings of time-resolved experiments in various solvents that are most intriguing for the following discussion:
• a non-exponential decay kinetics of the first excited-state of the anion with a sub-picosecond predominant component;
• a nearly barrierless radiationless conversion;
• a weak dependence on solvent viscosity.
Before discussing our theoretical results, we introduce a simple qualitative picture of the distinct electronic structures that may lead to different types of the conical intersections in the case of the deprotonated GFP chromophore. These types taken separately were previously discussed, although the main emphasis was on the optimized geometry parameters of the points which corresponded to the minimum-energy conical intersections (MECI) located using different levels of theory.18,19,23,24 It has previously been pointed out that the bright character of the S0–S1 transition in pHBDI anion may be easily interpreted in the frame of a simplified molecular orbital picture based on the Hückel model.28 According to this model illustrated in Fig. 3, the central bridge moiety can be described by invoking a three orbital diagram of the symmetric allyl anion. However, it is easily recognized that this model can not entirely reproduce changes in the character of the electronic structure of the S0 and S1 states upon twisting in the methine bridge (the model was not originally applied to the twisted conformations). The two equivalent structures, which are 90° twisted along one of the two bonds, correspond to the cases where one of the three orbitals is completely decoupled from the others. This refers to the ethylene molecule and a single non-interacting orbital. It is then easily recognized that twisting along a single bond would never lead to a conical intersection and further decoupling in the ethylene molecule should occur, resulting in piramidalization of the central carbon atom.
 Fig. 3  Hückel model of the symmetric allyl anion with four electrons distributed in three orbitals. The perfect resonance interaction between the two mesomeric structures in the planar configuration is shown. The first excited state may then be described as a linear combination of the charge transfer (CT) and diradical (DR) valence electronic structures with equal weights. Upon twisting, the interaction breaks down and this decouples the system into two non-interacting parts: the non-bonded orbital of the carbon atom and the ethylene molecule. Due to decoupling, the energy gap of the frontier orbitals tends to decrease. The conical intersection associated with the equal contributions of the corresponding valence structures of the ground state and of the first excited state of the CT character is, however, never reached upon twisting about one of the two alternative C–C bonds. Simultaneous partial decoupling of all three orbitals is required to reach quasi-degeneracy of the two electronic states. 
The above-mentioned model suffers from its perfect symmetry, whereas the two parts in the GFP chromophore anion, the phenol (Ph−) and imidazolinone (Im−) rings, may hardly be thought of as perfectly symmetric. However, it is appealing to find a simple model that can be applied to a qualitative prediction of possible IC pathways in the pHBDI anion. Fig. 4 introduces such a model based on the asymmetric allyl anion. This model has predictive power and results in two alternative non-equivalent pathways for IC based on:
• two non-equivalent electronic structures of the twisted conformations with a distinct negative charge localized on one of the two parts;
• two distinct types of the S1/S0 conical intersections based on the different electronic structure;
• similar small barriers in S1 for initial twisting out of the planar minimum, where there is a strong coupling between the two mesomeric structures;
• two structurally different motifs of the MECIs: a hula-twist (double twist, I) and a (primarily) single twist about only one of the two bonds (II). The actual twist about the two bonds drastically depends on the relative electron affinities of the two subsystems (see Fig. 4) or, in other words, on the degree of asymmetry. The hula-twist structure exhibits a markedly higher degree of pyramidalization of the central carbon atom as induced by an additional decoupling in the neutral counterpart.
• The transfer between the two types of the electronic structures may occur in S1 in the vicinity of the S2/S1 conical intersection.
 Fig. 4  Qualitative molecular orbital framework for the asymmetric allyl anion, which mimics the central bridge moiety of the deprotonated GFP chromophore. The two alternative pathways along the twisting coordinates are non-equivalent and bring the system to two distinct cases, where only one of them leads to close proximity of the two surfaces of the ground and first excited states (II). The corresponding natural CASSCF(16,14) orbitals are shown for the planar and twisted structures. The latter refers to the transition states along the corresponding coordinates. The decoupling of the orbitals as well as the bonding and anti-bonding character of the CC bridge bond of the corresponding neutral fragments are easily recognized. The asymmetry is defined by different electron affinities of the phenol and imidazolinone rings. The conical intersection associated with the ϕ coordinate requires an additional twisting along the θ coordinate that further decouples the second CC bridge bond and also results in piramidalization of the central carbon atom. The geometries of the S1/S0 and S2/S1 conical intersections simultaneously twisted along the two angles are envisaged for the electronic structure associated with the system I, where the latter presumably lies lower in energy. The lowest energy conical intersection corresponds to the electronic structure of system II, where the geometry is primarily twisted along the θ coordinate. 
In the case of the bare GFP chromophore anion, this model predicts that the conical intersection of type II is more favorable and formally corresponds to the isomerization pathway. This results from the fact that the structural motif of the PhCH2 neutral counterpart is known to be an efficient electron acceptor, thus it is readily involved in the excited state of the charge transfer character. The type I hula-twist conical intersection presumably lies higher in energy, as has indeed been previously shown.18 However, the barrier heights for twisting along the two alternative coordinates are expected to be very small (the two bridge bonds are simultaneously elongated upon excitation, as follows even from the simple Hückel model), even though they may have been expected to be slightly different due to asymmetry. This inevitably leads to splitting of the excited-state population into two alternative branches in S1, leading out of the fluorescent state. The subpopulation II goes directly to the lowest-energy S1/S0 CI, whereas the evolution of the subpopulation I needs special consideration. Remarkably, the system is not trapped along the pathway I, since there should be an alternative route to the ground state rather than the corresponding high-energy hula-twist CI. The subpopulation I is expected to evolve in S1 towards the same conical intersection of type II, however it requires to pass the region in S1, where the electronic character of the wavefunction changes. In other words, the system should evolve in the vicinity of the S2/S1 conical intersection. A presumably small fraction of the subpopulation I may be reflected back to the fluorescent state. This may cause a non-exponential fluorescence decay with the second component characterized by an increased excited-state lifetime. However, this pathway in S1 has to be studied in more details.
The planar minimum of the anion does exist in S1, as follows from the unconstrained geometry optimization procedure. However, as expected, the S1 potential energy surface is very flat in the vicinity of the fluorescent state. By performing a series of constrained geometry searches along the two alternative twisting coordinates, the corresponding transition states (TS) have been located (see Fig. 5). The barrier heights are similar and equal to ∼1.2 kcal mol−1 (∼0.05 eV).
 Fig. 5  S0, S1 and D0 energies as a function of the twisting angles, ϕ and θ. Each point is obtained through constrained geometry optimization in S1 at the XMCQDPT2/SA(2)-CASSCF(14,13)/(aug)-cc-pVDZ level of theory, where the corresponding angle is held fixed, while all the other coordinates are allowed to relax. The first point, which corresponds to the planar configuration, is obtained through entirely unconstrained geometry optimization. The energies of the D0 and S0 states are calculated in the S1 optimized structures. To the right, the equilibrium geometry parameters of the corresponding transition states in S1 are shown. All distances and angles are depicted in Å and degrees, respectively. 
Remarkably, the change in energy as a function of the corresponding twisting angles is markedly different in both cases. Therefore, the high level ab initio calculations strongly support the conclusions drawn above. As a consequence, the type II CI is easily reached by the system, whereas the topography around the type I CI is sloped, as follows from the calculated S1 and S0 gradients, and the MECI point (see Fig. 6) lies higher in energy by 4 kcal mol−1 with respect to the corresponding transition state. Furthermore, the S1 potential energy surface is found to be very steep with respect to the out-of-plane twisting coordinate θ, which leads to the type II CI (see Fig. 5). This appears to be consistent with a weak dependence on medium viscosity,30 since the substantial energy gain enables to overcome solvent friction upon twisting.
 Fig. 6  Geometry parameters of the type I S1/S0 MECI (left) and the type II S1/S0 MECI (right). The type I exhibits a hula-twist geometry for the bare anion. Note, this type of the S1/S0 conical intersections lies higher in energy than the transition state, which leads out of the fluorescent state in S1. The type II is the lowest-energy MECI, which lies 0.2 eV below the planar minimum in S1. For this type, small variations of the angle ϕ belong to the conical intersection seam. Due to symmetry consideration, two MECI structures of each type exist. All distances and angles are depicted in Å and degrees, respectively. 

3.2 PD/IC branching ratio
The PD and IC rate constants, their branching ratio and the excited-state lifetime may be estimated using the RRKM/QET quasi-equilibrium theory. The average excited-state lifetime equals the inverse of the effective rate constant, which is a sum of the PD and IC microcanonical unimolecular rate constants. The RRKM/QET rate constant is given by the following expression: (1)where W‡ is the sum of energy levels at the transition state, ρ is the density of states for the minimum-energy structure, E‡0—the activation energy, including zero point vibrational energy correction and h is the Planck constant. The total internal energy E in S1 available to the system after one-photon absorption is estimated as a sum of vibrational energy in the ground state at 300 K, 0.31 eV, and the difference in the photon energy and the vertical excitation energy (2.52 eV). The exact sums and densities of harmonic oscillator eigenstates are calculated using the direct count algorithm of Beyer and Swinehart,56 assuming the same set of frequencies in S1 as in the ground state. The sum of energy levels at the TS is calculated in the reduced dimension, where the reaction mode, out-of-plane twisting at 64.8 cm−1, is excluded. This mode corresponds to twisting about the C–C bond adjacent to the phenol ring. Given that there are two alternative pathways to the S1/S0 conical intersection that refer to twisting about one or the other C–C bridge bonds, the IC rate constant is multiplied by a factor of two. The estimated IC lifetimes as a function of the excitation wavelength are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Calculated statistical VAD and IC lifetimes (left) and their branching ratio (right) as a function of the excitation wavelength. 
The VAD rate is determined by the energy transfer to the lowest-frequency emission-active mode of 849 cm−1 (0.105 eV). The amount of energy required for VAD corresponds to the 0–1 excitation energy for this mode. This enables a nearly perfect resonance between the S1 (ν = 1) and D0 (ν = 0) states (see Fig. 2). The rate constant for the energy transfer may then be statistically estimated using eqn (1). It is proportional to the total number of vibrational states, where the emission-active mode is excited at least to the first level. And it is reciprocally proportional to the density of all states at energy E. Note that the VAD activation energy is two times higher than that of IC. The VAD lifetimes and the PD/IC branching ratio as a function of the excitation wavelength are shown in Fig. 7.
What should specifically be stressed here is that the timescales are very sensitive to the excitation wavelength, since the PD mechanism changes upon increase in photon energy.6 The timescales discussed above are relevant only at low energies, when both processes are IVR-mediated in the vicinity of the planar minimum in S1 (governed by the transition and pseudo-transition states crossing). At higher energies, the emission active modes are directly excited, and electron-emission dynamics may occur within a timescale of vibrational decoherence. Support to this comes from the experiment,6,16 where the IC channel essentially vanishes at energies higher than 2.75 eV (450 nm). To completely surpass IC, PD should be ultrafast and non-statistical. The photoresponse of the GFP chromophore may also be directed towards IC by a vibrational pre-excitation of the IC-active twisting modes. This regime can be explored by sequential pumping of two low-energy photons. In this case, the low-frequency IC-active modes ‘statistically’ bear enough energy in the ground electronic state after one-photon absorption to overcome the barrier in S1 after the second photon absorption.
3.3 Tuning by proteins
Two characteristic timescales may be outlined in the photo-initiated dynamics of the GFP chromophore anion at low excitation energies: a sub-picosecond timescale, when the early-time adiabatic nuclear dynamics in S1 defines the spectral shape of photoabsorption and a picosecond timescale of the non-adiabatic dynamics in the excited-state decay channels. We discuss below a remarkable similarity between the early-time dynamics in the gas phase and in the protein and outline the implications of our gas-phase findings to the photoresponse of the proteins.

3.3.1 Photoinduced excited-state nuclear dynamics and spectral shapes. 
The active FC modes of the deprotonated chromophore in the gas phase and in the protein are shown in Fig. 8. To the left, the graphs represent the so-called Huang-Rhys factors Si. To the right, the graphs show the contributions from each normal mode to the overall band width estimated based on the short-time approximation of the Lax's autocorrelation function45 that produces a nearly Gaussian absorption band.46 The Gaussian variance parameter accounts for temperature, the corresponding origin shifts, and frequencies νi: (2)where i is the thermal average occupation number of the i-th mode. It is worth noting that the major contribution to the width comes from the high-frequency modes, while those with low frequencies promote spectral blurring. All most active FC modes refer to in-plane vibrations of the conjugated part of the chromophore both in the gas phase and in the protein. In the latter case, there are also certain modes with non-zero ground-to-excited state minimum displacements attributed to changes in the protein as a response to perturbation within the chromophore. Two groups of modes contribute to the environmental rearrangements: low-frequency modes and deformation vibrations with frequencies below 1600 cm−1 of the –OH and –NH groups that are involved in the hydrogen bonding network in the binding pocket of the chromophore.
 Fig. 8  Active Franck–Condon modes for the S0→S1 transition in the bare deprotonated GFP chromophore (lower panel) and in the S65T-GFP protein (upper panel). The Huang-Rhys factors, which are defined as squares of origin shifts in the dimensionless normal coordinates divided by a factor of two, and normal mode contributions to the spectral width at 0 K are shown. 
Remarkably, the high-frequency stretching modes play the same role in the early-time excited-state nuclear dynamics that determines the corresponding spectral shapes both in the gas phase and in the protein (see Fig. 8). These modes define the spectral width, while the large-amplitude lower-frequency bending and breathing modes are, to a large extent, arrested in the protein due to the steric constraints imposed by the environment. The calculated vertical excitation energy is red-shifted by only 0.1 eV in the S65T GFP protein compared to the gas phase, and this is fully consistent with the experimental findings and earlier theoretical predictions.57 Note that there are small deviations in the absorption maxima of various GFP variants. In particular, the maximum of the wild-type GFP (471 nm at 77 K and 477 nm at 300 K)58 is blue-shifted as compared to those of the S65T structure (489 nm)47,59 and of the enhanced S65T/F64L GFP mutant (492 nm)60 at 300 K.
The time-domain approach used here for simulating photoabsorption profiles also allows one to get valuable insights into the early-time excited state dynamics, such as quantum coherence loss and media response timescales,61 thus providing a link between the protein dynamics and decoherence rate in the photoexcited chromophore inside the protein. Here, we focus on the excited-state evolution of the chromophore in the gas phase and in the protein and on the associated dynamics. By analyzing the decay of the absolute value of the Lax's autocorrelation function (AF) in time shown in Fig. 9, we identify three characteristic timescales that refer to initial downhill movement of the vibrational wave packet along the path of steepest descent (tID), the coherence decay while the system wanders in the vicinity of the excited-state minimum (τD), and the entire vibrational relaxation associated here with almost complete decay of AF at early times used to define a time cutoff.
 Fig. 9  Decay of the absolute values of Lax's autocorrelation functions in time in the gas phase (lower panel) and in the protein (upper panel) at 0 K. The total propagation time is 0.5 ps. The initial Gaussian AF decays are shown in the insets. Three characteristic timescales can be indicated in the early-time excited-state nuclear dynamics: the initial AF decay time, tID, the decoherence times, τD, and the times Δt, at which recurrence in the time domain occurs. These characteristic timescales may straightforwardly be correlated with the vibrational structure of the photoabsorption band. The decoherence times estimated assuming a Gaussian damping of the subsequent overlap peaks are used as labels for the corresponding vibrational modes in the AF decay. 
The initial AF falloff is described by a Gaussian function in the short-time approximation, |G(t)| ∼ exp(−t2/2t2ID) (see Fig. 9), and its Fourier transform produces a nearly Gaussian vibrationally unresolved shape of the photoabsorption band46 (see Fig. 10). The characteristic time of the Gaussian decay is straightforwardly connected with the Gaussian variance parameter in the frequency domain t2ID ∼ 1/(δν)2 (see also eqn (2).) The initial AF decay occurs on a timescale of 3.5 fs, while the spectrum can be obtained within a time of ∼500 fs at 0 K.
 Fig. 10  The calculated S0–S1 absorption profiles of the deprotonated GFP chromophore (lower panel) and the S65T-GFP protein (upper panel) at 0 K. The nearly structureless profile is also shown for the bare chromophore at 300 K. The Gaussian-like envelopes, which refer to the initial AF decay time, are depicted as the dashed lines. The structure in the frequency domain is correlated with the characteristic timescales in the early-time excited-state nuclear dynamics. Note the similar full widths at half maximum (FWHM) in the gas phase and in the protein. 
The coherence loss rates τD that refer to the Franck–Condon active modes important in the excited-state decay/reaction channels are determined by the sensitivity of the ‘spectator’ bath modes evolution to the states of these active modes in the chromophore. These bath modes may well be attributed to the low-frequency modes of the chromophore itself, but also include the modes of the protein. The larger the ‘bath’, the faster is the decoherence. Even the bare GFP chromophore has quite a number of low-frequency spectator modes (Fig. 8) that are sensitive to the excitation of the chromophore and respond to such a perturbation through the corresponding nuclear rearrangements. Their excited-state evolution considerably increases decoherence rates and also results in an inherently poor resolution of the absorption band of the GFP chromophore even at 0 K (Fig. 10). The characteristic time of the coherence loss, which is estimated assuming a Gaussian damping of the subsequent overlap peaks in the AF decay, occurs within ∼18 fs at this temperature, while it proceeds faster (∼9.5 fs) at room temperature, where the low-frequency bath modes also bear considerable amount of energy, or, in other words, more bath states “interact” with the quantum states of interest.
Remarkably, the vibrational decoherence rate defines a characteristic time for the non-statistical electron emission that occurs above ∼2.75 eV, where the emission active modes are directly excited upon photoabsorption and the competing IC channel essentially vanishes.6 The electron emission dynamics thereby becomes coupled with the vibrational coherence. PD from the emission-active modes should then proceed within a decoherence timescale, otherwise the energy deposited into the active modes is most likely dissipated through couplings to the bath modes upon the excited-state evolution. At room temperature, the coherence is lost on a timescale of ∼10 fs, thus determining the timescale of the ultrafast electron dynamics.
The absorption maximum in the protein appears to be red-shifted as compared to the one in the gas phase (see Fig. 10), while the vertical excitation energies are strikingly similar in both media, as discussed above. However, precautions should apply, when trying to interpret the shift in the absorption maximum. It must be stressed that the absorption profile does not necessarily peak at the wavelength of the main transition with the largest relative FC strength that defines vertical excitation energy. This is a well-known fact, but is often overlooked, since such shifts are usually small (300–500 cm−1) and originate from a set of transitions to the states where low-frequency active modes are excited in addition to the main transition. The relative strengths of such transitions are smaller, but their density is obviously higher. This has previously been discussed.62 In contrast to this, the shift disclosed here is much larger. The maximum rather refers to the transitions where the high-frequency modes are excited. This is not usually expected, since each subsequent higher-energy transition, also accompanied by the same low-frequency satellites as the main transition, has a smaller relative strength according to the corresponding FC progression. The non-trivial aspect here is that there is an accidental degeneracy of the two sets of the active modes, breathing at 849 cm−1 and stretches at 1600–1700 cm−1 in the case of the bare chromophore. The former breathing mode has a long FC progression, such that its 0–2 excitation coincides in energy and in the corresponding strengths with those of the 0–1 excitation for the high-frequency modes. This causes a peak in the density of states of the active modes, and the maximum in the absorption is blue-shifted down to 452 nm. The breathing mode is arrested in the protein (see Fig. 8) and, hence, absorption peaks closely to the main vibronic transition.

3.4 Photoresponse of the GFP proteins
The photoabsorption profiles and the early-time excited-state nuclear dynamics of the anionic GFP chromophore are strikingly similar in the gas phase and in the protein. Here, the high-frequency stretching vibrational modes play a crucial role. The mode-specificity of the intrinsic non-adiabatic photoresponse of the chromophore6 should then have a direct implication to the functioning of the GFP proteins.
The well-established paradigm in the functioning of the fluorescent proteins is the IC suppression by the protein environment. The intrinsic IC mechanism introduced here highlights the existence of the two alternative twisted intramolecular charge transfer30 pathways, which importantly are non-equivalent. This suggests that the following factors may be altered in order to block (or enhance) the radiationless channel:
• The electron affinity of the phenol and imidazolinone rings, which may be selectively changed by the nearby charged aminoacid residues, such as Arg 96. This positively charged residue stabilizes the negative charge on the imidazolinone ring, thus resulting in the destabilization of the lowest-energy type II CI (see Fig. 4).
• The energy gap between the frontier orbitals of the corresponding neutral counterparts, which may be altered by increasing the conjugation in the imidazolinone part, as, for example, seen in the red variants of the fluorescent proteins, including the photoswitchable kindling fluorescent proteins.
• The barrier heights for twisting, which are apparently changed in wild-type GFP through an adjustment of the hydrogen bonding network around the chromophore.
A new emerging scenario31 is based on the active role of the GFP proteins, containing tyrosine-based chromophores, in the photochemical reactions. Remarkably, the modes that are excited upon photoabsorption should also be most active in the possible electron transfer reactions involving the GFP oxidation, since the S1/D0 minimum displacements are large along these high-frequency stretching modes, similar to the gas phase.6 The electron transfer through resonant tunneling, involving GFPs as electron donors, should then be accompanied by nuclear rearrangements along these particular modes.
The biological function is closely connected to the ways by which the protein environment tunes the intrinsic photoresponse of their chromophores and guides their excited-state evolution. Many GFP proteins prohibit internal conversion of their chromophores, thus possibly directing the decay towards the fast electron transfer governed by the most Franck–Condon active stretching modes. Remarkably, the long timescale fluorescence may then be regarded as a side channel31,63 only enabled in the absence of relevant electron acceptors.
4 Conclusions
Here, we have provided insight into the efficiency of different vibrational modes in promoting a selective photoresponse in the bare GFP chromophore anion. We have introduced a general theoretical model that is capable of accounting for the alternative non-equivalent IC pathways, and we have outlined factors by which the photo-initiated response may be altered in this channel. The topography around the planar minimum in S1 obtained through the high-level ab initio calculations provides direct support to the proposed qualitative model. Our results are consistent with the experimental data.
We have explored the interplay between the intrinsic ultrafast competing excited-state decay channels. At low excitation energies, statistical IVR-mediated reaction channels may compete with each other on a picosecond timescale in the case of the isolated GFP chromophore anion. IC is a predominant channel at low excitation energies, which is consistent with the most recent experimental findings.6 There are alternative mode-selective ways to control the photoresponse and to direct it towards a single excited-state decay channel. By tuning the excitation wavelength, the photoresponse may be directed towards the ultrafast non-statistical electron emission coupled with vibrational (de)coherence, whereas a vibrational pre-excitation in the ground state may lead to the ultrafast non-statistical internal conversion through a conical intersection. Effective vibrational pre-excitation of the twisting modes in the ground electronic states may be achieved by sequential photon pumping at low excitation energies above 480 nm. We have then discussed the implication of our results to the photo-initiated non-adiabatic dynamics in the proteins and the ways, by which the GFP-like proteins may use the intrinsic dual electron-to-nuclei coupling to promote a selective photoresponse.
The anionic wild-type GFP chromophore defines an entire class of naturally occurring chromophores which are based on the oxydized tyrosine side chain. Remarkably, the tyrosine-based chromophores are found in various fluorescent and photoactive proteins, like GFPs of diverse origin as well as Photoactive Yellow Protein. Since these proteins have very diverse biological functions, their structurally similar chromophores represent a fascinating class for getting a deep insight into the intrinsic properties and photo-initiated quantum dynamics of their light-absorbing molecules. This will enable to disclose their similarities, which are anticipated based on the common structural motif of the oxidized tyrosine side chain, as well as to outline possible distinctions in their intrinsic photo-behavior and the ways by which proteins may use this for tuning their photoresponse.
Acknowledgements
The work is supported by a Marie Curie European Career Integration Grant within the 7th European Community Framework Programme. A.V.B. also acknowledges support from the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No.11-03-01214), as well as the Supercomputing Center of the M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University for providing high-performance computing resources. This work was also granted access to the HPC resources of the High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart, Germany made available within the Distributed European Computing Initiative by the PRACE-2IP, receiving funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement RI-283493.
References
I.-R. Lee, W. Lee and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 258–262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, R. R. Frontiera, R. Tran and R. A. Mathies, Nature, 2009, 462, 200–204 CrossRef CAS .
D. Polli, P. Altoe, O. Weingart, K. M. Spillane, C. Manzoni, D. Brida, G. Tomasello, G. Orlandi, P. Kukura, R. A. Mathies, M. Garavelli and G. Cerullo, Nature, 2010, 467, 440–443 CrossRef CAS .
E. Collini, C. Y. Wong, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi, P. Brumer and G. D. Scholes, Nature, 2010, 463, 644–647 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS .

          A. V. Bochenkova, J. Rajput, D. B. Rahbek, B. Klærke and L. H. Andersen, unpublished work .
R. Y. Tsien, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1998, 67, 509–544 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ormö, A. B. Cubitt, K. Kallio, L. A. Gross, R. Y. Tsien and S. J. Remington, Science, 1996, 273, 1392–1395 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, L. G. Moss and G. N. Phillips, Nat. Biotechnol., 1996, 14, 1246–1251 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chudakov, M. Matz, S. Lukyanov and K. Lukyanov, Physiol. Rev., 2010, 90, 1103–1163 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Tolbert, A. Baldridge, J. Kowalik and K. M. Solntsev, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 171–181 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chattoraj, B. King, G. Bublitz and S. Boxer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 8362–8367 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, R. R. Frontiera, R. Tran and R. A. Mathies, Nature, 2009, 462, 200–204 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sample, R. H. Newman and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2852–2864 RSC .
D. Shcherbo, I. Shemiakina, A. Ryabova, K. Luker, B. Schmidt, E. Souslova, T. Gorodnicheva, L. Strukova, K. Shidlovskiy, O. Britanova, A. Zaraisky, K. Lukyanov, V. Loschenov, G. Luker and D. Chudakov, Nat. Methods, 2010, 7, 827–829 Search PubMed .
M. W. Forbes and R. A. Jockusch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17038–17039 CrossRef CAS .
A. Toniolo, S. Olsen, L. Manoha and T. J. Martinez, Faraday Discuss., 2004, 127, 149–163 RSC .
M. E. Martin, F. Negri and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5452–5464 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Polyakov, B. L. Grigorenko, E. M. Epifanovsky, A. I. Krylov and A. V. Nemukhin, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 2377–2387 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kummer, C. Kompa, H. Niwa, T. Hirano, S. Kojima and M. Michel-Beyerle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7554–7559 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mandal, T. Tahara and S. Meech, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 1102–1108 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gepshtein, D. Huppert and N. Agmon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4434–4442 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weber, V. Helm, J. Mccammon and P. Langhoff, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 6177–6182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Olsen and R. McKenzie, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 184302 CrossRef .
R. S. H. Liu and G. S. Hammond, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4536–4545 CrossRef CAS .
K. Solntsev, O. Poizat, J. Dong, J. Renault, Y. Lou, C. Burda and L. Tolbert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 2700–2711 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Litvinenko, N. M. Webber and S. R. Meech, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 2616–2623 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Bravaya, B. L. Grigorenko, A. V. Nemukhin and A. I. Krylov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 265–275 Search PubMed .
K. A. Lukyanov, D. M. Chudakov, S. Lukyanov and V. V. Verkhusha, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2005, 6, 885–890 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Meech, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2922–2934 RSC .
A. M. Bogdanov, A. S. Mishin, I. V. Yampolsky, V. V. Belousov, D. M. Chudakov, F. V. Subach, V. V. Verkhusha, S. Lukyanov and K. A. Lukyanov, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2009, 5, 459–461 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Nielsen, A. Lapierre, J. U. Andersen, U. V. Pedersen, S. Tomita and L. H. Andersen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 228102 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Pakhomov and V. I. Martynov, Chem. Biol., 2008, 15, 755–764 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Andersen, H. Bluhme, S. Boye, T. J. D. Jørgensen, H. Krogh, I. B. Nielsen, S. B. Nielsen and A. Svendsen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2617–2627 RSC .
T. Tanabe, M. Saito and K. Noda, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2011, 62, 191–195 Search PubMed .
M. W. Forbes, A. M. Nagy and R. A. Jockusch, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 308, 155–166 Search PubMed .
K. Chingin, R. M. Balabin, V. Frankevich, K. Barylyuk, R. Nieckarz, P. Sagulenko and R. Zenobi, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2011, 306, 241–245 Search PubMed .
D. A. Horke and J. R. R. Verlet, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8511–8515 RSC .
C. R. S. Mooney, M. E. Sanz, A. R. McKay, R. J. Fitzmaurice, A. E. Aliev, S. Caddick and H. H. Fielding, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7943–7949 Search PubMed .
Y. Toker, D. B. Rahbek, B. Klærke, A. V. Bochenkova and L. H. Andersen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 128101 Search PubMed .
A. A. Granovsky, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 214113 Search PubMed .

          A. A. Granovsky, Firefly, http://classic.chem.msu.su/gran/firefly/index.html.
M. W. Schmidt, K. K. Baldridge, J. A. Boatz, S. T. Elbert, M. S. Gordon, J. H. Jensen, S. Koseki, N. Matsunaga, K. A. Nguyen, S. Su, T. L. Windus, M. Dupuis and J. A. Montgomery, J. Comput. Chem., 1993, 14, 1347–1363 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Heller, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lax, J. Chem. Phys., 1952, 20, 1752–1760 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Yurenev, M. K. Kretov, A. V. Scherbinin and N. F. Stepanov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 12804–12812 Search PubMed .
R. Heim, A. Cubitt and R. Tsien, Nature, 1995, 373, 663–664 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ormö, A. Cubitt, K. Kallio, L. Gross, R. Tsien and S. Remington, Science, 1996, 273, 1392–1395 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.rcsb.org/
        .
A. MacKerell Jr, D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. Dunbrack Jr, J. Evanseck, M. Field, S. Fischer, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph-McCarthy, L. Kuchnir, K. Kuczera, F. Lau, C. Mattos, S. Michnick, T. Ngo, D. Nguyen, B. Prodhom, W. Reiher III, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J. Smith, R. Stote, J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J. Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera, D. Yin and M. Karplus, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 3586–3616 CrossRef CAS .
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, J. Mol. Graphics, 1996, 14, 33–38 CrossRef .
J. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa, C. Chipot, R. Skeel, L. Kalé and K. Schulten, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1781–1802 CrossRef CAS .

          E. D. Glendening, J. K. Badenhoop, A. E. Reed, J. E. Carpenter, J. A. Bohmann, C. M. Morales and F. Weinhold, NBO 5.G., Theoretical Chemistry Institute, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, http://www.chem.wisc.edu/nbo5 Search PubMed .
P. Day, J. Jensen, M. Gordon, S. Webb, W. Stevens, M. Krauss, D. Garmer, H. Basch and D. Cohen, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 1968–1986 CrossRef CAS .
J. Simons, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6401–6511 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Stein and B. S. Rabinovitch, J. Chem. Phys., 1973, 58, 2438–2445 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Bravaya, M. G. Khrenova, B. L. Grigorenko, A. V. Nemukhin and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 8296–8303 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lossau, A. Kummer, R. Heinecke, F. Pöllinger-Dammer, C. Kompa, G. Bieser, T. Jonsson, C. Silva, M. Yang, D. Youvan and M. Michel-Beyerle, Chem. Phys., 1996, 213, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brejc, T. Sixma, P. Kitts, S. Kain, R. Tsien, M. Ormö and S. Remington, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1997, 94, 2306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hosoi, S. Yamaguchi, H. Mizuno, A. Miyawaki and T. Tahara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 2761–2763 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Prezhdo and P. J. Rossky, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 5294–5297 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kamarchik and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 488–492 Search PubMed .
K. A. Lukyanov, E. O. Serebrovskaya, S. Lukyanov and D. M. Chudakov, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 1301–1306 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Intrinsic de-excitation channels mediated by the two types of vibrational modes of the deprotonated GFP chromophore terminated with the two methyl groups: PD directly from S1 and IC into a vibrationally hot anion in the electronic ground state S0. From the hot S0 state statistical fragmentation (SF) may occur. Shown are the two exocyclic angles, ϕ and θ, that induce a non-adiabatic coupling between the S1 and S0 surfaces.	 

 	Fig. 2  Upper panel: equilibrium geometry parameters for the planar structures of the S1, D0 and S0 minima. All distances are shown in Å. Lower panel: three one-dimensional quadratic surfaces of the S0, S1 and D0 electronic states shifted according to the calculated minimum displacements along the totally symmetric stretching coordinates and according to the calculated vertical detachment and excitation energies. Note that PD occurs through vibrational resonances out of S1 within the S0–S1 absorption band down to ∼350 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Hückel model of the symmetric allyl anion with four electrons distributed in three orbitals. The perfect resonance interaction between the two mesomeric structures in the planar configuration is shown. The first excited state may then be described as a linear combination of the charge transfer (CT) and diradical (DR) valence electronic structures with equal weights. Upon twisting, the interaction breaks down and this decouples the system into two non-interacting parts: the non-bonded orbital of the carbon atom and the ethylene molecule. Due to decoupling, the energy gap of the frontier orbitals tends to decrease. The conical intersection associated with the equal contributions of the corresponding valence structures of the ground state and of the first excited state of the CT character is, however, never reached upon twisting about one of the two alternative C–C bonds. Simultaneous partial decoupling of all three orbitals is required to reach quasi-degeneracy of the two electronic states.	 

 	Fig. 4  Qualitative molecular orbital framework for the asymmetric allyl anion, which mimics the central bridge moiety of the deprotonated GFP chromophore. The two alternative pathways along the twisting coordinates are non-equivalent and bring the system to two distinct cases, where only one of them leads to close proximity of the two surfaces of the ground and first excited states (II). The corresponding natural CASSCF(16,14) orbitals are shown for the planar and twisted structures. The latter refers to the transition states along the corresponding coordinates. The decoupling of the orbitals as well as the bonding and anti-bonding character of the CC bridge bond of the corresponding neutral fragments are easily recognized. The asymmetry is defined by different electron affinities of the phenol and imidazolinone rings. The conical intersection associated with the ϕ coordinate requires an additional twisting along the θ coordinate that further decouples the second CC bridge bond and also results in piramidalization of the central carbon atom. The geometries of the S1/S0 and S2/S1 conical intersections simultaneously twisted along the two angles are envisaged for the electronic structure associated with the system I, where the latter presumably lies lower in energy. The lowest energy conical intersection corresponds to the electronic structure of system II, where the geometry is primarily twisted along the θ coordinate.	 

 	Fig. 5  S0, S1 and D0 energies as a function of the twisting angles, ϕ and θ. Each point is obtained through constrained geometry optimization in S1 at the XMCQDPT2/SA(2)-CASSCF(14,13)/(aug)-cc-pVDZ level of theory, where the corresponding angle is held fixed, while all the other coordinates are allowed to relax. The first point, which corresponds to the planar configuration, is obtained through entirely unconstrained geometry optimization. The energies of the D0 and S0 states are calculated in the S1 optimized structures. To the right, the equilibrium geometry parameters of the corresponding transition states in S1 are shown. All distances and angles are depicted in Å and degrees, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Geometry parameters of the type I S1/S0 MECI (left) and the type II S1/S0 MECI (right). The type I exhibits a hula-twist geometry for the bare anion. Note, this type of the S1/S0 conical intersections lies higher in energy than the transition state, which leads out of the fluorescent state in S1. The type II is the lowest-energy MECI, which lies 0.2 eV below the planar minimum in S1. For this type, small variations of the angle ϕ belong to the conical intersection seam. Due to symmetry consideration, two MECI structures of each type exist. All distances and angles are depicted in Å and degrees, respectively.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Calculated statistical VAD and IC lifetimes (left) and their branching ratio (right) as a function of the excitation wavelength.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Active Franck–Condon modes for the S0→S1 transition in the bare deprotonated GFP chromophore (lower panel) and in the S65T-GFP protein (upper panel). The Huang-Rhys factors, which are defined as squares of origin shifts in the dimensionless normal coordinates divided by a factor of two, and normal mode contributions to the spectral width at 0 K are shown.	 

 	Fig. 9  Decay of the absolute values of Lax's autocorrelation functions in time in the gas phase (lower panel) and in the protein (upper panel) at 0 K. The total propagation time is 0.5 ps. The initial Gaussian AF decays are shown in the insets. Three characteristic timescales can be indicated in the early-time excited-state nuclear dynamics: the initial AF decay time, tID, the decoherence times, τD, and the times Δt, at which recurrence in the time domain occurs. These characteristic timescales may straightforwardly be correlated with the vibrational structure of the photoabsorption band. The decoherence times estimated assuming a Gaussian damping of the subsequent overlap peaks are used as labels for the corresponding vibrational modes in the AF decay.	 

 	Fig. 10  The calculated S0–S1 absorption profiles of the deprotonated GFP chromophore (lower panel) and the S65T-GFP protein (upper panel) at 0 K. The nearly structureless profile is also shown for the bare chromophore at 300 K. The Gaussian-like envelopes, which refer to the initial AF decay time, are depicted as the dashed lines. The structure in the frequency domain is correlated with the characteristic timescales in the early-time excited-state nuclear dynamics. Note the similar full widths at half maximum (FWHM) in the gas phase and in the protein.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
