Carbon cycle in advanced coal chemical engineering  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00453A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00453A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5409-5445Carbon cycle in advanced coal chemical engineering

        
          
            Qun 
            Yi
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenying 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Feng
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Kechang 
            Xie
          
          
        
      ab
aKey Laboratory of Coal Science and Technology (Taiyuan University of Technology), Ministry of Education and Shanxi Province, Taiyuan 030024, P. R. China. E-mail: ying@tyut.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 351 6018453;   Tel: +86 351 6018453
bTraining Base of State Key Laboratory of Coal Science and Technology Jointly Constructed by Shanxi Province and Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiyuan 030024, P. R. China
Received 
      3rd December 2014
    First published on 15th May 2015AbstractThis review summarizes how the carbon cycle occurs and how to reduce CO2 emissions in highly efficient carbon utilization from the most abundant carbon source, coal. Nowadays, more and more attention has been paid to CO2 emissions and its myriad of sources. Much research has been undertaken on fossil energy and renewable energy and current existing problems, challenges and opportunities in controlling and reducing CO2 emission with technologies of CO2 capture, utilization, and storage. The coal chemical industry is a crucial area in the (CO2 value chain) Carbon Cycle. The realization of clean and effective conversion of coal resources, improving the utilization and efficiency of resources, whilst reducing CO2 emissions is a key area for further development and investigation by the coal chemical industry. Under a weak carbon mitigation policy, the value and price of products from coal conversion are suggested in the carbon cycle.
Qun Yi
Qun Yi obtained his PhD degree from Taiyuan University of Technology (TUT) in 2013. Subsequently, he joined the research group of Prof. Wenying Li to work on clean coal technology. He went to Curtin University of Technology in Australia as a visiting scholar in 2014. His research focuses on system integration and design technology of coal conversion, and the lifecycle analysis of energy conversion systems.
Wenying Li
Wenying Li received her PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 1995. After a year as a postdoctoral researcher at Imperial College, London, UK, and after a year as Senior Visiting Scholar at the Max-Planck Institute for Coal Research, Germany, she spent the next 17 years at the faculty of TUT as a Professor of Chemical Engineering. She cooperated with the Energy Systems Analysis Group at PEI in Princeton University, USA, for 3 months in 2013. Her current research is entirely focused on enabling the discovery and design of processes and catalysts for sustainable energy, including converting coal to liquid and fuels, providing clean conversion technology from lower rank coal and poor quality coal, clean and efficient catalytic pyrolysis and the gasification of lignite and biomass, and optimizing traditional coal conversion processes and integrating a carbon-based polygeneration system of carbon mitigation initiative.
Jie Feng
Jie Feng was born in Taiyuan, Shanxi, China. He received his bachelor's degree (1989) and PhD (1998) in Chemical Engineering and Chemical Technology from Taiyuan University of Technology. After a year as a postdoctoral researcher at the Monash University, Australia, and after a year as Senior Visiting Scholar at the University of Florida, USA, he spent the next 15 years on the faculty of TUT as a Professor of Chemical Engineering. His current research is entirely focused on the design of coal-to-liquid fuels processes and scaling-up the reactor for coal/biomass gasification and optimizing traditional coal conversion processes.
Kechang Xie
Kechang Xie is the former Vice President of the Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE) and a professor specialized in coal and chemical engineering. He was an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering (2003) and a Foreign Associate of the NAE (2013) for understanding coal molecular structure and its reactivity and for leadership in the modern clean coal conversion industry. He graduated from Tianjin University in 1968, and gained his Master's degree at the Taiyuan Institute of Technology in 1981. From 1983 to 1985, he continued his study as a visiting scholar at the University of South Carolina in the United States. Between 1998 and 1999, he was engaged in doctoral dissertations at Shinshu University in Japan and was honored with PhD in Engineering in the field of energy.
Introduction
Over the past centuries, our daily requirements for fuel, chemicals, and electricity have been mainly derived from fossil carbon-rich sources (i.e. coal, oil and natural gas), and these fossil fuels will continue to constitute the backbone of current energy resources in the foreseeable future. Fossil fuels account for 80–85% of the total use of world energy today, which has been heavily implied for the rising concentrations of CO2 (accounts for about 40% of the total anthropogenic emissions of carbon worldwide) in the earth's atmosphere that are expected to lead to significant changes in climate with serious economic and social effects.1,2 The CO2 concentration in the atmosphere has consequently risen from 280 ppm before the industrial revolution to 390 ppm in 2010, and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predicted that atmospheric CO2 level could reach up to 590 ppm by the end of this century and the global mean temperature would rise by 1.9 °C.3,4 The impact of the greenhouse effect will be global and serious in many different aspects, such as ice melting at the Earth's poles, fast rising sea levels and increasing precipitation across the globe.5 It is generally accepted that a reduction of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that promote climate change is globally necessary. Aimed at controlling greenhouse gas emissions, the Kyoto protocol was made under the UN framework convention on climate change, and was agreed on by more than 150 countries.6 The Copenhagen Accord can be regarded as another milestone towards milestone to controlling CO2 emission. It aimed to develop a post 2012 climate regime, determining long-term greenhouse gas emission targets and the future contributions of Annex I and non-Annex I countries.7
The coal chemical industry,8,9 as one of the most important fields for coal use, is also a primary contributor of CO2 emissions. To realize coal conversion with high efficiency and low CO2 emissions is the key for the further development of coal chemical industry. In principle, there are at least three possible strategies for reducing the amount of CO2 in coal chemical production. These strategies include the reduction of CO2 amount produced, CO2 capture and storage (CCS), and CO2 capture and recycle (or CO2 utilization) (CCR).10–12 The first strategy requires efficient improvements of coal utilization to reduce coal consumption.13–15 However, these options may not be enough to sufficiently control CO2 emissions in coal chemical production due to the sharply increasing demand for chemicals (fuels) to provide for a high quality of life in the future. The capacity of CCS technology is also limited due to the environmental risk of leakage and the energy requirement for the gas compression and transportation.4 As an economical, safe, renewable carbon source, and an attractive alternative to CO2 sequestration, during the past decade, growing concerns have driven research activities during the past decade toward the artificial conversion of CO2 into fuels or valuable chemicals.16–18 The utilization of CO2 as a feedstock for producing chemicals not only contributes to alleviating global climate changes caused by increasing CO2 emissions, but also provides a grand challenge in exploring new concepts and opportunities for catalytic and industrial development.19,20 CO2 could be considered as a C resource rather than as a “devil” molecule due to several simple reasons:21 (1) with the increasing socio-political pressure on reducing CO2 emissions and the creation, in several countries, of carbon-emission taxes, CO2 becomes an interesting raw material with a cost of zero, or even negative costs; (2) visible CO2 management strategies can become a positive part of a company's public image; (3) recycling CO2 rather than storing it [CCR vs. CCS] avoids the costs of transporting CO2. The cost factor is critical because it can amount to up to about 35–40% of the total CCS costs when the capture site is located more than about 100–150 km away from the storage site (a common situation in, for example, many European countries), and CCR thus becomes a valuable economic alternative to CCS; and (4) CO2 can be used as a C resource to cut down or even replace fossil fuel consumption. Valorization of CO2 emissions could be one important part of the general strategy for reducing CO2 emissions in coal chemical engineering and push chemical and energy companies towards a more sustainable use of the resources.22,23
This review primarily focuses on the research related to CO2 recycle in advanced coal chemical industry. Accordingly, the aims of this paper are to: (1) review CO2 utilization or conversion technologies that can be used in the advanced coal chemical industry; (2) clarify the effects of C recycle on coal chemical engineering, and disclose the integration and optimization principle of advanced coal chemical engineering systems with CO2 recycle; (3) propose recommendations for advanced coal chemical engineering systems with CO2 recycle, which integrate coal with different energy sources (e.g. fossil fuels or renewable fuels), and combine chemical production and power generation; (4) provide a current understanding of the remaining challenges, and future development of the main CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering.
1. Carbon cycle and carbon resources
1.1. The global carbon cycle
According to recent studies on the geochemical cycle of carbon, a large amount of atmospheric CO2 over the past >106 years is regulated by the carbon cycle which includes geological processes such as silicate weathering, carbonate precipitation, carbonate metamorphism, mantle CO2 degassing, oxidative weathering and the burial of organic carbon,6 as shown in Fig. 1. The principle “natural” processes that lead to the release of CO2 to the atmosphere from land and water include, animal and plant respiration, the decay of vegetation, where oxygen and nutrients are converted into CO2 and energy.5 Carbon absorbed by vegetation (123 Gt carbon per year (C per year)) is stored in biomass, but 60 Gt C per year generated from the plant respiration processes are released back to the atmosphere.5 The release of CO2 from currently decaying biomass and respiration of plant and animals in the ecosystem both contribute to a release of a further 60 Gt C per year to the atmosphere. Overall, this results in the sequestration of 3 Gt C per year in soils.4,5,24 Likewise, in the oceans, photosynthetic organisms absorb 92 Gt C per year, while respiration and decay leads to the release of 90 Gt C per year. This means a carbon sequestration rate of 2 Gt C per year in the oceans.5,25 Volcanic eruptions also release carbon from rocks that are present deep in the earth's crust, but the amount is relatively small on a global scale.3 It is estimated that global volcanic CO2 emissions are approximately 0.13 Gt C per year, but this is dwarfed by the estimated 9 Gt C per year emitted through human activities. Human activities have led to an imbalance in the global carbon cycle. As the rate of release of CO2 exceeds the rate of carbon sequestration, an increase in the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere ensues. This increase is estimated to be at a rate of 4.2 Gt C per year.5,26 The anthropogenic CO2 emissions leads to an increase of about 4 Gt C per year in atmospheric carbon. The anthropogenic carbon cycle is compiled from CO2 emissions from human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels and cement production.3 The annual net increase in atmospheric CO2 is attributed to the increase in anthropogenic CO2 emissions from fossil fuels used in transport, energy and industry sectors.5 That is to say, we should take the measure to reduce CO2 emissions from human activities, and realize CO2 conversion and recycle in human internal production activities.
 Fig. 1  The fast movement of carbon between land, atmosphere, and ocean.27 (Yellow numbers are natural fluxes, and red are human contributions in gigatons of carbon per year. White numbers indicate stored carbon.) 
1.2. The relationship among C accumulation, energy density and carbon cycle in coal chemical engineering

1.2.1. Carbon cycle. 
“Carbon cycle” refers to the exchange of C element among the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and biosphere on Earth. However, the “carbon cycle” introduced in coal chemical engineering means actually only a portion of its original notion. The related research mainly concentrates on the variation laws of C during the human production process. The process where carbon becomes useless from useful could be called as utilization process, while the process where carbon becomes useful from useless could be called as regenerative process. Then this carbon cycle can be expressed as C utilization–C regeneration–C utilization–C regeneration… a cycle process. (Note: here using CO2 as fertilizer is not considered as C utilization). The concept of the “carbon life cycle” is similar to the “carbon cycle”, but to put it more exactly, it is the “life cycle of carbon products”. It refers to the whole process that C exchanges from nature and back to nature. Compared with the “carbon cycle”, the “life cycle of carbon products” mainly involves the C utilization process, not including the C regeneration. From the perspective of time period, the C utilization is short while C regeneration takes long.
In terms of carbon transformation, there are two ways of C utilization during the coal chemical engineering process: the first way is from “carbonaceous raw material” to the “carbon products”, for example, the coal to liquid (CTL) system. The second is from “carbonaceous raw material” to the “waste carbon”, for instance, the coal to hydrogen system. The “carbonaceous raw material” herein mentioned refers to the carbon sources such as coal and natural gas that are applied in the field of coal chemical engineering, the “carbon products” refers to carbonaceous products such as methanol, dimethyl ether, olefins from the coal chemical engineering, and the “waste carbon” refers to the CO2 produced during the process.


1.2.2. C (value) accumulation and carbon cycle. 
From carbon transformation perspective, there are still the above mentioned two ways. One is to convert the low-value “carbonaceous raw material” to the high-value “carbon products”; the other is to convert the high-value “carbonaceous raw material” to the low-value “waste carbon”. During these processes, products of other forms (with no carbon content) such as hydrogen and electricity were profit. From the economic perspective, both ways can be profitable, but in terms of the coal chemical engineering system and considering the C utilization, it is better to enhance the first way while reducing the second. In this way, the aim of the carbon cycle is to accumulate C (or convert C) into the final products and reduce the CO2 emission in the whole coal chemical production process.
In general, the “carbon products” price (C value) will be higher if it experiences more units longer periods. Nevertheless, the syngas synthesis of methanol and oil undergo similar processes, but end up with a big difference in price. This may be partly due to the different technical difficulties in processing, and partly related with the fact that methanol is only an intermediate product while the oil products are the terminal products, which always have a higher price. Besides, it is noted that in the coal chemical production process from raw materials to final products, CO2 (waste carbon) may be produced in each processing unit caused by energy consumption. That means the C (value) accumulation is realized by sacrificing part of the carbon, which explains why some final carbon products are so expensive and lead to the following deduction that the products with more “waste carbon” emission have more value and higher price.
On the basis of the mentioned above, CO2 can be redefined as low-value C, then the reduction of CO2 emission and the reuse of “waste carbon” can be considered as ways to utilize low-value C or to “save” the low-value C. As a result, for a coal chemical engineering system, using carbon cycle can reduce the “waste carbon” emission while maintaining or even lowering the overall value of the products. Carbon cycle can realize C accumulation, but also may bring about extra more CO2 emission and low value carbon products. Therefore, the balance of C accumulation, C value, and CO2 emission should be seriously considered while adopting carbon cycle in coal chemical engineering.


1.2.3. The energy density of the raw materials and products. 
Coal resources, compared with other resources such as oil, natural gas and the current research hotspot, biomass, is different not only in the state of matter, but also in the energy density that indicates the amount of heat generated from the burning of unit mass of energy. As is shown in Table 1, the mass energy density of coal is lower than oil, but bituminous coal and anthracite are much higher than biomass, and lignite is similar to or slightly lower than biomass. This difference in energy density, to some extent, determines the energy conversion rate of the processing system.
Table 1 Mass energy density of various energy sources




Feed
Mass energy density (MJ kg−1)




Lignite
8.5–16.5


Bituminous coal
21–33.5


Anthracite
25–32.5


Oil
41–45


Natural gas
∼36


Biomass
14–18


Solar energy
16 MJ (m2 day)−1




From the energy density perspective, accumulation of C value is mainly due to the different categories of products. Generally speaking, the final products of coal chemical engineering can be divided into two types: fuels and materials. For the material type, the energy density is of little significance, since its value is not reflected by the heat, but by the attached functional groups like styrene. Imitating the energy density, a functional group density can be defined to reflect the value of the carbon products of a material type. A rough definition could be the C ratio of the functional group of a unit mass. For the carbon products of fuel type, the energy density is of vital importance. As indicated in Table 2, the mass energy density is related with the amount of C and H in the products. Take gaseous hydrocarbon for example, the energy density decreases with the increase of C and decrease of H. The introduction of O will greatly reduce the energy density. The hydrogen without C content, as a special coal chemical engineering product, has much higher mass energy density over others. In terms of price, it is not always the case that a higher energy density leads to higher price. Thus, it can be concluded that the price of coal chemical engineering products is closely related with their energy density, phase, and specific usage. The value of fuel type products is mainly reflected by their energy density while the value of material type products is reflected by their functional group density.
Table 2 The mass energy density of parts of the coal chemical engineering products




Feed
Calorific value (kJ mol−1)
Mass energy density (MJ kg−1)




Methane
890.3
55.5


Ethane
1558.3
51.8


Ethylene
1411
50.4


Propane
2217.8
50.4


Propylene
2049
48.8


Methanol
726.5
22.7


Gasoline


∼43


Diesel


∼46


Hydrogen
285.8
142.9




From a macro point of view, resources with different energy densities are like the energy flow of the food chain, thus can be substituted to various degrees. As seen in Fig. 2, resources with a high energy density are more difficult to be replaced by others, while those with a low energy density have a wider choice for substitution. This may be relevant to the energy grade that these materials can reach.
 Fig. 2  Sustainable energy relationship between the energy grade and energy density. 
Herein, CO2, as a resource with very low energy density, recycle in coal chemical engineering should aim for high energy density fuel products and high functional group density materials. Because CO2 conversion and recycles needs to the aid of extra energy, and the high energy density fuel products (carbonaceous fuel products) as energy storage containers can efficiently realize extra energy (such as solar, wind energy) that are not easy to get and use storage. For CO2 cycle to produce functional group density materials, the energy consumption by CO2 conversion and recycle can be compensated by the high value products (high functional group density materials), which is also a form of C appreciation or accumulation. The mentioned above two points are very critical and can be used as guidance for the carbon cycle in coal chemical engineering.

2. Energy use and CO2 emission in current coal chemical engineering
The term coal covers a wide range of materials from brown coal or lignite to bituminous coal and anthracite, all of them can be roughly described as having complex macromolecular organic structures. These structures are composed predominantly of carbon with significant proportions of oxygen and hydrogen and small percentages of nitrogen and sulfur. This elemental composition makes coal a storehouse of chemicals. The problem is to find the key to this storehouse and to unlock it so as to be able to utilize the elements in order to produce more valuable substances that which will provide the feedstock or reactive intermediates for the production of substances and materials that contribute to the desired lifestyle of today.
The route from coal to chemicals can be simply classified into three processes of coal carbonization (pyrolysis and coke), coal gasification, and coal liquefaction. Different ranking coals with different chemical compositions and physical properties result in different ways in usage.28 As shown in Fig. 3, low-rank coals, such as brown coal, non-caking coal and long flame coal is rich in volatiles and contains high-valued chemical structures that generally are converted by pyrolysis upgrading technology to obtain coal-tar oil, char and fuel gas products.29–32 Bituminous coals with a carbon content of around 75–90 wt% are primarily used in coking process for the production of metallurgical coke. Meagre coal and anthracite normally are used via gasification to produce syngas to synthesize liquid fuels (Fischer–Tropsch (F–T) synthesis oil), chemicals (methanol and dimethyl ether (DME)) and fuel gas (natural gas (NG) and hydrogen). Fig. 4 shows the carbon element flow and energy flow in different coal conversion processes. Traditional coal chemical industry involving production of coke, char and synthetic ammonia exhibits high energy efficiency and low CO2 emissions. However, due to the growing demand for energy and the oil shortage in recent years, there has been increasing interest in advanced coal chemical industry, which mainly applies to the production of a substitute to natural gas, liquid fuels etc. Nevertheless, they present an obvious decrease in energy efficiency and increase in CO2 emissions compared with traditional coal chemical industry, as well as a low carbon element conversion efficiency. The excessive emission of CO2 have become a technical bottleneck for coal chemical industry development, and even arose the whole world's attention. Currently, reducing CO2 emission is the emphasis and hotspot in coal chemical industry, but noted that CO2 recycle use incorporated with coal chemical engineering will be more realistic and reliable compared to CCS that involves high cost, geopolitical risks and other technological problems.33
 Fig. 3  The routes from coal to chemicals based on differently ranked coals. 
 Fig. 4  The comprehensive performance of coal to chemicals. 
3. The possible routes for CO2 conversion and utilization in coal chemical engineering
CO2 is inert and its chemical transformations are thermodynamically highly unfavorable.34 Its inertness is due to it being the most oxidized state of carbon. There are various possibilities to activate and convert CO2, but it is necessary to overcome a thermodynamic barrier. Consequently a substantial input of energy, optimized reaction conditions and (almost invariably) active catalysts are required for any transformation of CO2 into useful products. As a result, the strategies for CO2 conversion and utilization should be based on the unique physical and chemical properties. Some strategic considerations for developing technologies for CO2 conversion and utilization are listed below, and will be further elaborated in the subsequent sections.
• Use CO2 as a C-source to produce industrially useful chemicals and materials that adds value to the products.
• Use CO2 as a beneficial fluid for processing or as a medium for energy recovery, contaminant removal, and emission reduction.
• Use CO2 recycling involving renewable sources of energy such as biomass and solar energy or ‘waste’ energy to conserve C sources for sustainable development.
Therefore, there are two major pathways for CO2 conversion (Fig. 5),35 chemical and physical. CO2 is generally used as a storage media for renewable energy or a feedstock for various chemicals. CO2 can be converted via thermo-chemical, biochemical, electrochemical and photochemical processes to other energy storage chemicals, such as syngas, formic acid, methane, ethylene, methanol, and DME.17,36 The entire portfolio of commodity chemicals are currently manufactured from a few primary building blocks or platform chemicals in the fossil-based chemical industry. CO2 can also be used as a source material that can be converted into a similar suite of building block chemicals. Insertion of CO2 into epoxides in order to manufacture various polymeric materials is an exciting technology as it does not only utilizes CO2, but also avoids using fossil feedstock and creating CO2 emissions. It was estimated that the various chemical conversion pathways could consume approximately 0.3–0.7 Gt per year of CO2.37 Moreover, there is a huge potential in the aspect of physical methods of CO2 utilization as well; for instance, CO2 as a beneficial working medium to replace N2 will effectively increase the generating efficiency of gas turbine. In this section, possible CO2 conversion and utilization routes that can be incorporated with coal chemical engineering will be considered and reviewed.
 Fig. 5  Possible routes for CO2 conversion. 
3.1. CO2 as a gasifying agent to produce syngas
Many conventional coal/biomass gasification processes utilize air or pure oxygen with/without steam as gasifying agents to produce syngas at a desirable H2/CO ratio. Air is the cheapest gasifying agent as it is readily available at almost no cost, but its syngas product has a very low heating value because of the existence of N2.38 The gasifying efficiency and the heating value of a syngas product is increased by using pure oxygen as gasifying agent. The deficiency of oxy-combustion is the cause of high cost and energy consumption of an oxygen purifying facility.39 A large amount of energy to produce enough steam for gasification and water consuming would overwhelm the benefits of steam as gasifying agent, such as enhancing the yield of H2 production. Recently, CO2 as a candidate for gasifying agent instead of steam or as a partial substitute for steam in coal and biomass direct gasification processes40–44 is one of several potentially useful applications of CO2.
Many researchers have performed studies on gasification in a CO2 atmosphere with various carbonaceous feedstocks (such as coal, wheat straw char, olive residue, and biomass char etc.).39,43,45–48 Overall, reaction rates increase with temperature and vary among different feedstocks. There is no general trend for the effects of different coal ranks on coal gasification with CO2 but generally low-rank coals are more reactive than high-rank coals.49 CO2 gasification generally has lower reaction rates than steam gasification due to more endothermic character of the CO2 reactions.50 As expected, the rate of gasification depends on the pressure as well. Under low to moderate pressure, an increase in pressure increases the rate of gasification, before the effect diminishes under high pressures.51 The gasification rate, however, generally decreases as the pressure increases under high pressures, due to the inhibition by CO. Besides, it has also been reported that fluidized bed gasification with CO2, or a mixture of CO2 with steam is more rather suitable for more reactive coals (sub-bituminous with higher content of volatiles), for biomass, for coal-biomass blends and for coal-slurries containing higher concentrations of water.50
The use of CO2 as a gasifying agent offers several advantages38 including (1) producing a more reactive char resulting in efficient gasification and reduction in residual char, (2) being a less corrosive gasification medium compared with steam, (3) offering more flexibility in syngas production suitable for various downstream applications, and (4) saving water or steam as the gasifying agent. The use of CO2 is also reported to increase the production of CO but reduce that of H2, because the Boudouard reaction (CO2 + C → 2CO) takes place and the water–gas shift reaction (WGS) favors a different direction (CO2 + H2→CO + H2O) at high CO2 concentration, as evidenced by the lower H2 concentration. Moreover, CO2 addition in gasification plays an important role in the gasification temperature, and too much CO2 added to gasifier causes an obvious decrease in the gasifier temperature. A high CO2/C ratio would lead to more O2 consumption and energy requirement to meet the gasification temperature, as well as lower H/C ratio, which would have a negative influence on the total gasification efficiency and syngas ratio for downstream products, though a high portion of CO2 entering the gasifier could substitute for steam and improve carbon element utilization.52 Nevertheless, the design of a certain type of gasifier for operation conditions (such as temperature, pressure and coal-water-slurry concentration) always limits CO2/H2O, CO2/C and CO2/O2 ratios. Hence, it follows that a suitable CO2 for gasification is a key to different conversion system for different carbonaceous energy resources.
3.2. Hydrogenation of CO2 to form fuels or chemicals
Hydrogen is a high energy material and can be used for CO2 transformation as the reagent. The main products of CO2 hydrogenation fall into two categories – fuels and chemicals. Metal-catalyzed heterogeneous hydrogenation of CO2 generally produces methanol or methane, depending on the reaction conditions. The syntheses of methanol and DME are generally the most important heterogeneous hydrogenation reactions of CO2 because of the potential of these oxygenates to become future energy carriers and major feedstocks for the petrochemical industries through C1 chemistry.36 Wang et al.53 have showed that the catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 is a powerful process in CO2 conversions. A major drawback of this technology is the need for renewable hydrogen.54–57 Additionally, CO2 hydrogenation is a low-temperature exothermic process which generates waste heat and thus it requires thermal integration58,59 to achieve cost-effectiveness.

3.2.1. CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. 
Nowadays, over 90 methanol plants with a combined production capacity of about 75 million metric tons and each day more than 100000 tons of methanol is used as a chemical feedstock or as a transportation fuel worldwide.60–63 Methanol, as an alternative energy source, medium for the storage and transportation of hydrogen and a starting material for many chemicals as well. It is one of the chemicals with the largest potential to convert very large volumes of CO2 into a valuable feedstock. Under proper conditions, methanol can be synthesized via CO2 hydrogenation with the reverse water-gas shift (RWGS) reaction as side reactions.2 This opens up the possibility of an alternative energy source for diminishing oil and gas resources and could lead to a feasible “methanol economy”,64 in which methanol for CO2 could reach much larger volumes; as large as 1.5 or 3 Gt per year.23 CO2 + 3H2 = CH3OH + H2O(1) CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O(2) Methanol synthesis by CO2 hydrogenation has been extensively studied, mainly over Cu-based catalysts.65–67 Many have addressed the disadvantages of using CO2 in methanol synthesis because the yield of methanol is much lower than that obtained from syngas conversion under the same temperature and pressure.68 Also, the equilibrium value for methanol obtained from a CO2–H2 mixture is about one-third that of CO hydrogenation. In the past decades, Cu, Zn, Cr, and Pd were commonly used to minimize by-products formation (i.e. hydrocarbons) and to maximize methanol yield and selectivity. Up to now, the majority of the catalysts still employ Cu and Zn as the main components together with different modifiers using different preparation methods.53,68–70 Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 catalysts are well-known for their high activity and selectivity for the methanol synthesis reaction from CO2 and H2 and in the steam reforming of methanol.31,36,71 To improve their activity and stability, these basic catalysts are often modified by addition of different oxides. Apart from ZrO2, other oxides such as Al2O3, TiO2 and Ga2O3 have also been investigated.34 The effects of several other metals (e.g. boron, chromium, tungsten and manganese)72–74 and metal oxides (such as VOx, MnOx and MgO) additives have also been reported.71,74 CuO/ZnO-based catalysts promoted with Pd and Ga are especially useful. As a result of Pd incorporation, methanol yield is enhanced. The presence of Ga2O3 promoter enhances the activity, selectivity and stability of CuO/ZnO. Pd also has a high efficiency for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol.75 However, the activity and selectivity of Pd-based catalysts depend on the type of support,76 and the method of catalyst preparation.77 Among the Pd-based catalysts, Pd/ZnO catalysts supported on multi-walled carbon nanotubes show an excellent performance for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. The addition of Ga to Pd/SiO2 results in an unusually high catalytic behavior.
Catalysts based on Cu/Zn/Al2O3 can for example be used to produce methanol for CO2 and H2 by water electrolysis (a mature technology). The first commercial CO2 to methanol recycling plant is based on the conversion of CO2, a significant by-product accompanying local geothermal energy sources or industrial sources (aluminum production). H2 is produced by water electrolysis.69 The present annual production of 3500 tons is planned to be increased to 35000 tons. In Japan, Mitsui Chemicals is operating an approximately 100 t per year pilot. To accomplish this target, H2 will be generated by the photochemical splitting of water using solar energy.78 By 2010, the plant was running for about 2000 h, and to verify the reliability of the catalyst, Mitsui Chemicals aims to run it for 8000 h. Mitsui Chemicals now is planning a first commercial-scale (600 kt per year) methanol plant on the basis of Mitsui's Green House Gases-to-Chemical Resources (GTR) technology.23


3.2.2. CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons. 
The production of hydrocarbons from CO2 is fundamentally a modification of the F–T synthesis, where CO2 is used instead of CO, and in which the catalyst composition is tailored to maximize the production of hydrocarbons. These products could be utilized as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or petrochemical feedstocks. Iron oxides, which have been used as FT catalysts for many years are active in both WGS and RWGS reactions.79,80 Fe-based catalysts are attractive for the hydrocarbons synthesis due to the highly olefinic nature of the obtained products.81 Fe, γ-Al2O3, and potassium would be recommended as active site catalysts, best support, and promoters respectively for CO2 hydrogenation which proceeds via a two-step process, with initial reduction of CO2 to CO via the RWGS reaction followed by chain propagation82–84 with water vapor displaying an inhibiting effect on the reaction rate.82 The two stages (eqn (2) and (3)) may be combined, but water should preferably be removed in situ to shift equilibrium and avoid inhibition of the FT catalyst. CO + 2H2 → CnH2n + CnH2n+2 + H2O + CO2 (n = 1, 2,…)(3)


3.2.3. CO2 hydrogenation to dimethyl ether. 
DME is a clean and economic alternative fuel, particularly to diesel oil and LPG due to its high cetane number, low emissions of NOx, and low boiling point. DME is also a platform chemical for the selective production of olefins, especially propylene and of methyl acetate by carbonylation.23 There are two routes for DME production from CO2 hydrogenation: a two-step process (eqn (1) and (4)) that refers to methanol synthesis on a metallic catalyst and subsequent dehydration of methanol on an acid catalyst; and a single-step process by means of a bifunctional catalyst to perform the two steps simultaneously.85–89 2CH3OH → CH3OCH3 + H2O(4) The main advantage of the single-step process on a bifunctional catalyst is its lower thermodynamic limitation in contrast with the two-step process. Hence, the bifunctional catalysts contain functionally independent catalysts, which is comprised of a methanol forming component based on Cu/Zn and a methanol dehydration component based on suitable zeolites such as HZSM-5 and HY zeolites.90,91
Korea Gas Corporation (KOGAS) has developed a process that starts from CO2, NG, or biogas by using of tri-reforming to produce syngas for DME synthesis.92 KOGAS is the first organization in the world to successfully develop and demonstrate a commercially viable ‘one-step’ process with 10 tons DME per day for the last three years. Recently, Unitel Technologies was awarded a contract by KOGAS to prepare the basic engineering and design package for a plant that will make 300 kt of DME per year.48


3.2.4. CO2 hydrogenation to methanation. 
The complete hydrogenation of CO2 to methane is the Sabatier reaction: CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O(5) The mainly applications of the methanation of CO2 are the production of syngas and the formation of compressed natural gas. The methanation of CO2 is thermodynamically favorable (ΔG298K = −130.8 MJ mol−1). However, the reduction of the fully oxidized carbon to methane is an eight-electron process with significant kinetic limitations, which thus requires a catalyst to achieve acceptable rates and selectivity.93,94 A number of catalytic systems based on VIIIB metals (e.g. Ru and Rh) supported on various oxides (such as SiO2, TiO2, Al2O3, ZrO2, and CeO2) have been investigated for hydrogenation of CO2 to methane. Nevertheless, supported nickel catalysts remain the most widely studied materials due to its low cost and high activity. The nature of support plays a crucial role in the interaction between nickel and the support, and thus determines the catalytic performances on the activity and selectivity of CO2 methanation.95
One of the major problems of Ni-based catalysts is deactivation at low temperatures due to the interaction of the metal particles with CO and the formation of mobile Ni-subcarbonyls.96 Instead, noble metals (e.g. Ru, Pd, and Pt) are stable at operating conditions and more active for CO2 methanation than Ni.97,98
Several pilot scale processes based on the Sabatier reaction have been established. The Norwegian company RCO2 AS99 has developed a pilot scale process based on the recovery of CO2 from flue gas and its conversion to methane using renewable H2. BP and Tohoku University of Technology (Japan) have developed a pilot plant based on the Sabatier reaction with very high selectivity (<1% ethane as the major by-product).55 Using seawater electrolysis to produce H2, the Desert Research Institute (DRI) in the USA has also studied the reaction in a small pilot unit and obtained 60% CO2 conversion under the conditions of 300–350 °C, H2/CO2 ratio 4:1.56


3.2.5. CO2 hydrogenation to formic acid. 
Formic acid has been produced traditionally by reaction of CO with alkali hydroxides and subsequent transformation of formate with sulfuric acid, in which the reaction of CO with methanol and subsequent cleavage of the methyl ester with sodium hydroxide or water is most widely applied today. An issue is the separation of formic acid from the reaction mixture that requires a dedicated extraction and an economic and energy cost. The first report on CO2 hydrogenation to formic acid was made by Farlow and Adkins in 1935 using Ni-RANEY® as the catalyst.100 CO2 + H2 → HCOOH(6) Recently, formic acid has been considered as a potential liquid H2-carrier. This is done by combining CO2 hydrogenation with selective formic acid decomposition to give a quasi-CO2-neutral cycle. Such an attractive perspective is subordinate to the development of mild process conditions, in terms of heat and pressure, for the minimization of energy input. The development of a sustainable process of renewable hydrogen storage into formic acid and the decomposition of the latter to afford CO-free H2 suitable for fuel cells represent a big challenge that has a limitation in the fact that formic acid does not meet the USA DOE limit of 5.5% storage capacity. In fact, formic acid at its best can contain only 4.4% H2 by weight, a figure that will further decrease if the entire storage equipment is considered: this is an intrinsic limitation.101 A technology called the electro-reduction of CO2 has been developed by Mantra Energy Alternatives Ltd for the electrochemical production of formic acid (as first product) from water and captured CO2.65,102 The technology had been deployed first at the prototype level (1 kg per day) and had been planned to be tested at the demonstrator plant level (100 kg) in collaboration with Lafarge North America. Kemira Oyj of Finland will work with Mantra in improving the formic acid concentration technology. The use of formic acid as a reservoir for hydrogen or CO may also be of interest in energy applications, although the storage density for hydrogen is limited.
The challenge in the direct hydrogenation of CO2 is that it is an exothermic but endergonic reaction under normal conditions (ΔH298K and ΔG298K = −31.6 and 32.9 kJ mol−1, respectively). Without a stabilizer, the equilibrium is far on the side of the reactant under conditions that include typical organic solvents. The situation is more favorable in aqueous systems103 and other hydrogen-bonding solvents.104,105 The catalyst development is extremely advanced,106–108 generally, Rh and Ru complexes are used as homogeneous catalysts.109–111 Most recent progresses with respect to iron hydride catalysts with tetradentate phosphine ligands112,113 and Ir complexes with pincer ligands.107 However, the isolation of formic acid remains a challenge.114


3.2.6. CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol. 
Ethanol, as a higher molecular weight alcohol, is less toxic and a better intermediate for some chemicals than methanol as product of CO2 hydrogenation in the field of safe transport and it has excellent compatibility with gasoline.22 2CO2 + 6H2 ↔ C2H5OH + 3H2O(7) Direct synthesis of ethanol from CO2 could be regarded as a combination of the direct formation of ethanol from syngas and RWGS reaction.22 As a result, a catalyst for the formation of higher alcohols requires a combination of RWGS activity along with the hydrogenation of syngas under the same conditions, which would be favorable for the overall reaction.115–117 Fe-based FT catalysts mixed with Cu-based catalysts, as well as Rh-based catalysts, have the functions of the partial reduction of CO2 to CO and ethanol synthesis.116,118 Co/SiO2 and Ir–Mo/SiO2 catalysts were also reported to have a high activity for the hydrogenation of CO2 to C2+ higher alcohols.68 However, with the addition of small concentrations of Pd, Ga, Li, K, and Na (depending which catalyst is used) to the catalysts, CO2 conversion and selectivity to alcohols could be increased.116,117,119,120 The mechanisms of ethanol formation based on different type catalysts are proposed in the literature.115,121,122 Nevertheless, direct conversion of CO2 to ethanol has not been accomplished for a large-scale operation.68

3.3. CO2 + CH4 using reforming catalyst to prepare syngas
CO2 reforming of methane (also called dry reforming), which was first proposed by Fischer and Tropsch in 1923,123 is a potential technology that utilizes both CO2 and CH4 as the reactants for a preferable feedstock, produces syngas production in industry, and simultaneously reduces the greenhouse gases emissions. The dry reforming can be used for converting and utilizing CO2-rich natural gas or gasified gas, and can also be used to recycle CO2 emissions from sources such as flue gases from fossil fuel (coal, petroleum, natural gas, etc.) and biogas burning power plants, exhaust of cement factories, and various industries.124 CH4 reforming with CO2 (eqn (8)), rather than H2O, could be especially employed in areas where water is not available to form syngas with H2/CO ratio of about 1.0.
In the past decade, a lot of researches have been devoted to the catalytic performance of noble metals, including Pt, Ru, Rh, Pd, and Ir, for this reaction.125–127 It has been shown that Rh and Ru exhibited both high activity and stability in CH4 dry reforming, while Pd, Pt and Ir were less active and prone to deactivation. Nevertheless, considering the aspects of high cost and limited availability of noble metals, it is more practical to develop non-noble metal catalysts which exhibit both high activity and stability. Ni-based catalysts have been widely investigated128,129 and applied due both to their similar activity and relatively low price when compared with noble metals, and Al2O3, MgO, CaO were used as support to prepare Ni-based catalysts for CH4 reforming reaction.130 The studies showed smaller particles had better abilities to suppress carbon deposition and the mesoporous structure of the Ni-based catalyst was the critical factor to provide high stability for the catalyst, which stabilized nanosized Ni particles by means of the “confine effect” during the reaction. Given that the CO2 reforming with CH4 reaction is even more endothermic, operational temperatures are usually above 1173 K. Based on this reaction, two commercial technologies: the CALCOR process (a reforming process combined with CO2 recovery and CO purification)131 and the SPARG (sulfur passivated reforming) process132 have been developed. In order to adjust H2/CO ratios and operate under more favorable conditions, the two processes are combined with steam reforming or partial oxidation.133–135 The dry reforming reaction can lead to a carbon deposition on the catalytic surface. In addition, the presence of sulfur compounds could inhibit the chemisorption of small molecules and lead to the deactivation of the catalysts. Even though dry reforming has disadvantages such as the easy deposition of carbon and deactivation of the catalyst,136 commercial processes to minimize these problems are now available. Dry reforming: CH4 + CO2 = 2CO + 2H2(8) Steam reforming: CH4 + H2O = CO + 3H2(9) Partial oxidation: CH4 + 1/2O2 = CO + 2H2(10) Bi-reforming, in which dry and steam reforming are combined in a single step (eqn (8) and (9)), is another way for CO2 conversion and utilization. It can adjust the ratio of methane, steam, and CO2 to generate a mixture gas with different ratio of H/C in the range of 1.0–3.0. For instance, a specific ratio of methane, steam, and CO2 of 3/2/1 produces a gas mixture with essentially a 2/1 ratio of hydrogen to carbon monoxide, which was suggested to be called “metgas” to underline its difference from the widely used syngas mixtures of varying H2/CO ratio. This specific 2/1 H2/CO gas mixture is for the preparation of methanol and subsequently derived hydrocarbon products with complete utilization of all the hydrogen (eqn (11)). (11) Another different approach, useful for the conversion and utilization of CO2 for syngas production, is called tri-reforming, which is a synergetic combination of endothermic CO2 reforming, steam reforming and exothermic partial oxidation of CH4 in a single reactor for producing syngas (eqn (8)–(10)). It can produce synthesis gas (CO + H2) with H2/CO molar ratio in the range of 1.5–2.0 and can mitigate carbon formation, which is a serious problem in the CO2 reforming of methane, while incorporating oxygen in the reaction generates heat in situ that can be used to increase energy efficiency and O2 also reduces or eliminates carbon formation on the reforming catalyst.124 This technology has been successfully applied in a Yufutsu GTL (gas-to-liquid) pilot plant which has been operating at a capacity of 7 barrels per day (bpd) in Hokkaido (Japan; JOGMEC GTL process).137 As the pilot plant tests were successful achieving the targets, 500 barrels per day demonstration test project commenced in 2006, and noble metals (Rh and/or Ru) on MgO carriers were used as the catalyst.22 Stability of the operations with a H2/CO ratio of 2.0 for approximately 7000 h has been demonstrated.22 The Nippon GTL technology association125 reported that a 15000–20000 bpd plant (Japan GTL process) is planned. A recent simulation showed that the zero emission of CO2 can be obtained by recycling the unreacted syngas.138 Theoretically, the tri-reforming reaction can cover the shortages mentioned for the dry reform. The presence of water and the catalytic partial oxidation reaction give a possibility to reduce carbon generation and deposition on the catalyst. The methane steam reforming reaction and WGS occurs contributing to produce higher H2 yields. The addition of O2 combustion with other gases reduces significantly the energy requirements.124,139 Tri-reforming is a very promising process and should be pursued by researchers in the coming years.
Summarily, by using of dry reforming or tri-reforming, CO2 can therefore be chemically transformed from a detrimental greenhouse gas causing global warming into a valuable, renewable and inexhaustible carbon source of the future allowing the environmentally neutral use of carbon fuels and derived hydrocarbon products.
3.4. Organic carboxylation from CO2
Synthesis of organic chemicals by the utilization of CO2 can effectively contribute to both developing clean synthetic processes and avoiding CO2 emissions. It can be seen as a great example of “carbon recycling”.140 CO2 fixation into organic compounds refers to reactions that use the entire molecule. Therefore, the amount of excess energy, if required, is usually very low. As recently reviewed,141–145 the products are usually fine or commodity chemicals, which are molecules containing several functional groups (such as three or more) and carbon atoms numberings in the tens. Quadrelli23 and Peters146 reviewed the organic compounds deriving from a full incorporation of the CO2 moiety (or CO–N possibly formed by energy-facile ammonolysis) that were at an industrial or pre-industrial level of development, or with transformation principles that had already been established. Fig. 6 is an overview of some of the possible organic chemicals produced from CO2. Nowadays, only five are earmarked as industrialized, which consume CO2 at a rate of about 200 Mt per year.23 However, if carbonates, especially dimethyl carbonate (DMC), will be used as gasoline additives, a large increase in its production is predictable. Also, if the method of carbonate synthesis based on CO2 is to be incorporated, the amount of CO2 used in chemical industry would be increased by several tens of Mt per year. Recycling CO2 is estimated to cut 7–10% of the excess amount of CO2 in atmosphere.147
 Fig. 6  Summary of the organic chemicals produced from CO2. (Elaborated from ref. 145). 
3.5. Biological CO2 conversion
Biological systems with photosynthesis could potentially make a significant contribution to the conversion of CO2 from various industrial sources such as power plants, chemical industries, etc., because they can be deployed in a sustainable and renewable manner. A carbon cycle for the production of synthetic fuels from biomass and carbon-resources can be seen in Fig. 7. Biomass can be directly or indirectly converted into bio-oils, fuels, high value chemicals, food etc.148,149 More importantly, biomass contains a number of hydrogen element and alkali metals when it being as an energy resource, biomass conversion process involves the same processing such as pyrolysis (or liquefaction) and gasification. If biomass conversion process incorporated with a coal chemical production process can achieve synergies in the aspects of element supplement, energy matching, which not only reduce fossil fuel consumption and improve energy efficiency, but also succeed in recycling the use of CO2 and cut down CO2 emissions by the biological system.150–155 It was reported that the addition of 10% Scots pine to the coal conversion process can result in a significant 3% reduction in non-renewable carbon emissions and even zero fossil CO2 emission. For instance, Seo and Pan et al. have studied the co-gasification of coal and biomass in a dual fluidized bed reactor and the carbon conversion is increased greatly as the biomass ratio is increased from zero to 100%.156–158 Meanwhile, in Howaniec et al.'s study,159 they found that the total gas and hydrogen yield, process efficiency, carbon conversion rate and hydrogen content were all increased with a rise temperature during the co-gasification of coal and biomass. The CO2 produced from flue gas as well as the use of products will be fixed in biomass via photosynthesis finally. From the viewpoint of lifecycle, the whole production process is closed-loop for biomass carbon recycle that shows only coal carbon emission in the form of CO2. However, establishing new value chains from biomass and coal (or other C-resources) to energy and chemicals should also create more economic activity.
 Fig. 7  Carbon cycle for the production of synthetic chemicals and fuels from biomass and coal. 
The use of algae cultured in non-oceanic environments to capture emissions from fossil fuel sources such as coal could be a technology that aids in the inexpensive reduction of CO2 emissions from the energy sector in the near future. Nevertheless, algae biofuel mass production is still very far from its industrial reality. Based on a stochastic lifecycle model of algae cultivation processes, algae appear to have a larger environmental impact, energy use and greenhouse gas emissions (in harvesting and processing) as compared to conventional crops, regardless of the cultivation method.160 Algae perform favorably only in total land use and eutrophication potential, while its cultivation performs poorly also with respect to water consumption.161,162 One possible solution for overcoming the high cost of microalgae cultivation is to replace freshwater with seawater or wastewater and to use flue gas as carbon source for culturing microalgae.163 It is necessary to reduce the production costs and energy requirements, while maximizing lipid productivity and increasing the biomass value by making use of all the algal biomass components. Land biomass (mainly cellulosic biomass), such as conventional forest wastes, agriculture wastes and energy crops also have the problems of large planting area, more scattered distribution, and high water content. Therefore, it is more suitable for land biomass to develop a distributed energy system, or as an auxiliary energy supply to integrate with coal conversion production.
3.6. CO2 + H2O photocatalytic conversion to syngas
Direct solar conversion of CO2 and water into high valued chemicals or fuels using sunlight is an attractive prospect, serving to reduce CO2 emissions while providing on a renewable basis an energy dense portable fuel compatible with our current energy infrastructure.164–166 This approach for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to fuel uses solar energy by integrating a photoanode cell on which the water splitting produces electrons and protons necessary for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.167,168 Aresta and Tahir13,169 explained how a device should be assembled for the conversion of CO2 and water into fuels. In order to realize the real breakthrough in cycling CO2 or recycling C based on the use of solar energy for converting CO2 and water into chemicals or fuels, an effective device should thus integrate the photoanode (for water dissociation) with the electrocatalyst (for CO2 reduction) in a photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) device, which can take effective advantage of the large technological developments made on these systems in recent years.167,168
In 1979, the photoreduction of CO2 to formaldehyde and methanol in purified water using the semiconductors TiO2, ZnO, CdS, GaP, SiC, and WO3 was first reported.170 Recently, many different types of photocatalysts have been investigated for these reactions, including SiC and ZnSe, ZnS, and InTaO4etc.171–175 However, TiO2 has been most extensively investigated for CO2 reduction compared to the corresponding bulk semiconductor.172 A recent trend regards the development of nanophotocatalysts (such as TiO2-based catalyst) stabilized inside micro- and meso-porous materials.176 The use of nanoparticle semiconductors can provide a higher activity. Besides, different types of photocatalysts utilized for photocatalytic CO2 reduction under UV and/or visible light irradiations with their characteristics are summarized by Muhammad Tahir.169 The main products of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction over these systems are hydrocarbons, mainly methane besides methanol, CO and H2 as well.146,169
Up to now, albeit significant progress has been made in this area, there is still a considerable need for further development.177 The direct photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO, methanol, ethanol, methane, and higher hydrocarbons are still major scientific challenges, and the low energy efficiency has been prohibitive. Thus, a short- or mid-term technical realization seems to be unlikely. Routes to a successful industrial implementation require more fundamental knowledge in oder to identify the lead structures and to develop systematic approaches for their improvement.
3.7. Electrochemical CO2 conversion
Electrochemical reduction of CO2 (ERC) provides ways to convert CO2 to produce diverse high valued chemicals and fuels such as methanol, formic acid and other hydrocarbons146,178 by using electricity as a source of energy.179 For making high-energy products by electrochemical CO2 reduction, the electricity production needs to be based on a renewable source, such as solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal, tidal, and thermoelectric processes. The process requires electrocatalyst or cathode material to carry out the reaction at low overpotential and with high current density. This process is attractive because it can be carried out at room temperature and low pressure, which could be a most convenient way of storing electrical energy in the form of liquid fuels from CO2. For instance, in contrast to methanol formation from syngas and CO2 feed, which requires extreme reaction conditions, the aqueous selector chemical CO2 reduction into methanol is performed under ambient conditions.72,180,181 The formic acid and carbon monoxide require little energy input compared to their respective market values. Therefore, they constitute most promising carbon-based energy vectors derived from this value-added carbon management technology. As the electrochemical method offers several advantages101 over thermochemical routes a great variety of organic compounds such as benzylchlorides,182,183 alkenes,184 alkynes and epoxides,185,186 have been successfully synthesized by electrochemical routes.
While the electrochemical conversion of CO2 has great potential, significant technological advances are still needed for this process to become economically viable. Most of the early studies in this area mainly focused on exploring different catalysts and products that can be produced, as well as reactor designs.187–191 However, to be feasible, the major challenges of ERC is how to realize high energy efficiency, improve mass transfer of CO2 to the cathode surface and enhance reaction rates, products' selectivity and reactor capacity.192–196
3.8. O2/CO2 cycle in the gas turbine
Gas turbines show indeed attractive performances in terms of energy efficiency and ease of use. However, it produces diluted CO2 in the flue gas (typically 4% by mass).197 This specificity complicates the capture and concentration step compared to other flue gases, a more diluted flue gas logically translates into a larger energy requirement and cost for the capture step.198 Therefore, the development of a carbon capture process offering an improved energy efficiency on a gas turbine is extremely challenging.
The concept of oxy-fuel (O2/CO2 recycle) combustion was proposed in 1982 by Abraham et al.,199 which is characterized by the combustion that takes place in high purity oxygen combustion environment rather than air with recycled flue gas. Oxy-fuel combustion with recycled flue gas has been considered one of the most energy and cost efficient CCS technologies to retrofit the existing coal based power plants or polygeneration plants with the production of chemicals or fuels and electricity.52,200–204 This approach has the following advantages relative to the use of nitrogen. First, there is no generation of NOx. Second, the flue gas consists of mainly H2O and CO2 in oxy-fuel combustion, which makes it possible to capture CO2 at a fairly low cost.205 It has been reported that the concentration of CO2 in the flue gas can reach higher than 95% in the oxy-fuel combustion,206 which is beneficial for the CO2 capture and reduction of flue gas emission.207 The reduction in thermal efficiency and the increment of investment cost are less than (or at least comparable to) pre-combustion and post-combustion if the most common technologies are used. Recycling CO2 to the gas turbine allows for temperature control to maintain the combustion temperature at acceptable levels so that material constraints are not exceeded. Besides, on one hand, it makes Rankine cycle integrate with Brayton cycle to realize a reasonable utilization of thermal energy. On the other hand, it makes concentration of CO2 in the working substances decrease largely and the working substances can be expanded to vacuum status to produce more power.205 Jin et al.208 found that under the condition of CO2 recovery of 50%, the efficiency of the O2/CO2 cycle system is about 46%, and is close to efficiency of IGCC without CO2 recovery. Otherwise, the total investment cost of the O2/CO2 cycle system is about 20% lower than that of an IGCC.
A simplified flow sheet for the oxy-fuel combustion is proposed in Fig. 8. In this form, oxy-fuel combustion involves a modification to familiar coal technology to include oxygen separation, flue gas recycling, CO2 compression, transportation and storage. The extra cost associated with implementing sequestration will also increase the capital and the operating costs. Nevertheless, since air separation technologies have been improved to reduce the cost of oxygen production and the key issue of CO2 capture was drawing more attention (CO2 tax increases), oxy-fuel (coal, gas, and oil) combustion provide an attractive option for clean coal utilization technology that can be widely used in industry.
 Fig. 8  Proposed schematic of oxy-fuel technology. 
There are no full-scale plants using oxy-fuel combustion in operation. However, laboratory work and theoretical studies have provided understanding of the relevant design parameters and operational issues.209–211 Globally there have been some investigations in pilot-scale facilities in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan. Air Liquide (US), CANMET (Canada), International Flame Research Foundation (IFRF), and Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries (IHI) have analyzed and studied this technology.49 The 30 MW pilot-scale CCS demonstration plant of Vattenfall181 which was designed as an oxy-coal combustion plant started its operation in September 2008. In July 2009, Doosan Babcock started the demonstration of the world's largest OxyCoal™ clean combustion system on a full-size 40 MWth burner in Scotland, UK. The advantages and disadvantages, as well as the technical and economic limitations for the oxy-fuel combustion are summarized in the literature.212
4. The relationship among carbon conversion, separation, cost and carbon cycle in coal conversion
Coal, the raw material of a coal chemical production system, is rich in carbon but lacking in hydrogen. The H/C ratio in coal is generally below 1, which is not beneficial to the downstream production of carbonaceous chemicals and liquid fuels. Therefore, most of the production processes in coal chemical engineering need to enhance the H/C ratio (reduce C content and improve H content) to satisfy with the downstream chemical synthesis. However, the adjustment of H/C ratio involves carbon conversion and separation, or the supplement of extra hydrogen (such as hydrogen from solar, electrolysis etc.), both of which will lead to an increase of energy consumption and economic investment. As a result, low-energy CO2 conversion and separation techniques and cheap hydrogen source would be the first choice for H/C ratio adjustment. CO2 cycle in coal chemical production can realize CO2 reuse and conversion, and reduce CO2 emissions. However, it also similarly brings about extra energy consumption and economic investment. Therefore, it is necessary to find a balance point among CO2 separation, adjustment of H/C and CO2 recycling in the coal chemical production process to obtain the optimal production technology.
4.1. Adjustment of H/C ratio in coal chemical engineering

4.1.1 WGS process to adjust H/C ratio. 
Generally, syngas from gasifiers has a low H/C ratio (<1), which is not suitable for downstream use, e.g. the proper H2/CO ratio is about 2 and 1.5–2 for methanol and F–T synthesis,213,214 respectively. Adjustment of H/C ratio is necessary in coal chemical production. An effective and common method is to use WGS process to convert CO and H2O into CO2 and H2, thus increase the ratio of H/C. The main reaction is presented in eqn (12). H2O + CO ↔ CO2 + H2(12) The WGS process can improve the H2 content in syngas, but also increase the quantity of CO2 at the same time. From the viewpoint of CO2 capture, this process is an effective way to concentrate CO2, because the products of WGS reaction are CO2 and H2O. CO2 concentration in syngas can increase from ∼15 vol% to ∼70 vol% through the WGS reaction. Hence, CO2 with high concentration is very easy to separate out for further capture and storage. However, from a chemical process point of view, it is a waste of the carbon resources. Taking coal to methanol as an example, if raw syngas with an H/C ratio of 0.5 is provided, half quantity of the CO should be converted into CO2 to acquire the desired H/C ratio (2–2.05). This CO2 is generally released into atmosphere the carbon resource has not been made full use of. Therefore, adjustment of H/C ratio by means of WGS is the end of the migration for the C that take part in the reaction. To improve the resource utilization in coal chemical production, effective measures should be taken to recycle CO2 or avoid the WGS process to enhance CO conversion.


4.1.2 Adding extra hydrogen resources to adjust H/C ratio. 
Extra hydrogen resources (CH4 or H2) can be obtained from NG, unconventional natural gas (UNG), such as shale gas, coal bed methane etc., coke oven gas (COG) and even H2 from renewable energy using electrolysis of water. CH4, as a hydrogen resource added into coal chemical production generally needs to be converted into H2 by some method, e.g. dry reforming or tri-reforming, to achieve the goal of adjustment of the H/C ratio. Also, CH4 can directly react with the captured CO2 from the chemical industry or power plant to produce syngas thus converting it into chemicals or fuels. Adding enough H2 from outside of coal chemical production system can avoid the reaction, increasing the carbon which is fixed to the final products. Extra H2 can also react with the CO2 captured by hydrogenation reduction to produce syngas or chemicals or fuels. However, the main problem of supplying the external H2 may be its high cost. Some H2 production scenarios are compared in costs and the results are shown in Table 3.215,216
Table 3 Cost of production of hydrogen (1 kg) using various technologies




Technology
Gas reforming
Electrolysis with nuclear energy
Electrolysis with electricity from oil-powered station
Electrolysis with PV
Electrolysis with wind
Electrolysis with CSP




Cost, €
1.10–1.15
1.15–1.5
3.5–2.2
2.8–4
3.8–5.2
3.5




Methane reforming is nowadays a more competitive available technology for the production of hydrogen from an economical point of view. Water electrolysis is considered as a promising hydrogen production method but the hydrogen cost by electrolysis would be very high as compared to the other mature technologies such as gas reforming.217 Besides, the production of hydrogen accounts for related carbon footprint of CO2. Life-cycle CO2 emissions for various hydrogen production methods are presented in Table 4.218
Table 4 CO2 emission from lifecycle assessment (LCA) studies on various H2 production methods




H2 production method
CO2 production/(kgCO2 kgH2−1)




Wind/electric
1.2


Hydroelectric
2.1


Nuclear/steam electrolysis
2


Solar thermal
2.5


Biomass
3.1


Solar photovoltaic
6.5


Methane steam reforming
12.1




It was concluded that extra hydrogen resources added into coal chemical production could realize CO2 recycle and cause more carbon resources to be fixed into chemicals and fuels, which help to prolong the lifecycle of part of the carbon. However, CO2 recycle and the production of hydrogen resource both have the problems of energy consumption, CO2 emission and production costs. Therefore, a comprehensive assessment for the total system on the basis of lifecycle viewpoint should be considered so as to provide guidance for technology selection and improvement, and system integration and optimization for minimizing energy consumption, CO2 emission and production cost.

4.2. Impact of chemical looping processes on carbon cycle
The chemical looping concept can be traced back to nearly 100 years ago, when the steam-iron process was used in using chemical looping combustion commercial plants to generate hydrogen from syngas through the use of iron-based looping particles.219 Modern applications of chemical looping processes are prompted by the need of developing an optimized reaction scheme that minimizes the exergy loss involved in the chemical/energy conversion system.220–222 Also driven by the envisaged CO2 emission control, the recent development in chemical looping systems has focused on the efficient conversion of gaseous carbonaceous fuels such as natural gas and coal derived syngas223–225 and solid fuels such as petroleum coke and coal.226
The chemical-looping processes can generally be described based on chemical looping combustion (CLC) and chemical looping gasification, as shown in Fig. 9. In the chemical looping combustion, a metal oxide is first reduced with fuels and the reduced metal oxide is then combusted with air to generate heat for electricity production.222 In the chemical looping gasification, a metal oxide is first reduced with fuels and the reduced metal oxide is then reacted with steam to form hydrogen. The hydrogen can then be used to produce liquid fuels, chemicals and electricity.227 The four main typical chemical looping gasification processes: syngas chemical looping (SCL) process, calcium looping (CLP) process, chemical looping reforming process (CLR) and coal direct chemical-looping (CDCL) process were discussed by Fan and Juan Adanez.228,229 Chemical looping combustion systems are being conducted extensively on various scales.230–235 Up to now, more than 700 different materials based on Ni, Cu, Fe, Mn, Co, as well as other mixed oxides and low cost materials have been tested in the CLC process.229 The main drawback attributed to CLC was a very low confidence level as a consequence of the lack of maturity of the technology. It must be considered that this is an emerging technology. However, during the last 10 years it has experienced a great development.229 Recent research on chemical looping gasification processes, however, is mostly limited to conceptual studies.236–238
 Fig. 9  Schematic of chemical looping processes. 
Regarding CO2 capture, compared with the other three main approaches for CO2 capture, post-combustion systems, oxy-fuel combustion, and pre-combustion systems, which have a high energy penalty and results in a reduction of energy efficiency of the processes and an increase in the price of the energy, the CLC and chemical looping gasification process were suggested among the best alternatives to reduce the economic cost of CO2 capture for combustion or hydrogen production.229 These processes produce a pure hydrogen stream and a concentrated carbon dioxide stream in two separate reactors, or a stream with mixed CO2 and H2O, implying very low or even no CO2 separation energy penalty and cost.227 As a result, from the viewpoint of C conversion and use, chemical looping process is more suitable for CO2 capture rather than carbon recycle and use.
4.3. Carbon cost and carbon cycle
Coal chemical industry can be regarded as a carbon processing industry. Many products can be obtained from coal conversion technologies. Different production processes of coal chemical products are accompanied with different carbon emission intensities. In other words, the carbon in product is at the cost of some other carbon being emitted. CO2 recycle can improve the carbon value in CO2, but it is predicted that the generated CO2 recycle use will cause additional energy consumption, CO2 emission and cost, as shown in Fig. 10. CO2 is a highly stable molecule. Consequently, a substantial input of energy, effective reaction conditions and often active catalysts are necessary for the chemical conversion of CO2.
 Fig. 10  Diagram of CO2 recycle in coal conversion process. 
The total CO2 emission includes: (1) CO2 emission caused by energy consumption in each production unit; and (2) CO2 emission from conversion of a part of C in coal. Each chemical product has its own value which is determined by production cost that is comprised of energy cost and non-energy cost (capital cost and operation and maintenance cost), as can be seen in Fig. 11. According to the use value of C, the carbon value in CO2 is zero and as a result, the value of the carbon in chemical products is the sum of the total value of all carbon input in the system. It is required using CO2 recycle to produce the same product should present lower CO2 emission, energy consumption and production costs compared with that of production without CO2 recycling or else CO2 recycling makes no sense. Technology and products selection, and investment of CO2 recycle process determine the final value of the carbon of the recycle CO2. Although a small bit more products are produced, the carbon cycle has no future as many studies concluded if no carbon tax is adopted, because the input of the capital and energy outweighs the output revenue. Therefore, there exists a balance among the carbon cycle, emission and other treatment scenarios when mature carbon policies are made. Integration and optimization of coal conversion coupled with CO2 recycles are considerably significant and necessary.
 Fig. 11  Carbon value in the carbon conversion process and recycle. 
4.4. Carbon cycle and carbon tax
As more and more fossil fuels are used annually, energy saving and emission reduction are becoming a hot topic of the related researching fields.239 The problems of how to harmonize the relationship between the necessary energy consumption and emission controlling have attracted wide attention around the world.240 Low carbon economy or green economy requires more attention be paid to the CO2 reduction when developing economically. Traditionally, the Pigouvian fee on CO2 and other greenhouse gases via carbon taxes or emissions caps and permit trading are regarded as the economically optimal policies to address climate change-related problems.241 Carbon tax is an incentive-based policy instrument for controlling GHG emissions. Many economic studies indicate that a low-rate carbon tax policy can effectively reduce GHG emissions without having a significant negative impact on future economic growth.242 Nevertheless, carbon tax is only the restrictive or punitive measure for CO2 reduction, but won't get to the root of the problem. As there is not yet any practice about carbon tax in most countries, the pricing for carbon tax is highly volatile. A summary of international policies on carbon tax is listed in Table 5.243
Table 5 Summary of international policies on carbon tax




Country
Current carbon tax USD (t-CO2)−1
Year started
Policy details




Denmark
Approx. 18
2002
Levied on hydrocarbon fuels according to the level of pollution each source emits


Ireland
20
2010
Applied to kerosene, marked gas oil, liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, and natural gas


Netherlands
19.53
1992 & 1996
Collected on hydrocarbon fuels only for energy use; a 50/50 carbon/energy tax, which is assessed partly on carbon content and partly on energy content


Sweden
140
1997
Levied on transport, space heating, and non-combined heat and power generation


Norway
21
1991
Levied on hydrocarbon fuels


Switzerland
11.41
2008
Collected on hydrocarbon fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas, unless they are used for energy


Canada
15–30
2007–2008
Implemented in Quebec, British Columbia, Alberta


United States
Approx. 5
2006–2010
Implemented in Colorado, California, Maryland


South Africa
—
2010
Applied at the time of sale; 9.72 USD is added to the price for every gram of CO2 per kilometer the vehicle emits over 120 g km−1


India
$1.07 per t-coal
2010
Levied on produced or imported coal into India


Costa Rica
3.5% of fuel price
1997
Levied on hydrocarbon fuels




The carbon policies in different countries indicate that in most cases carbon taxes are not greater than 30 USD per ton of CO2 emissions. As a result, an unwilling result will be presented that when the cost of CO2 reduction is higher than the carbon tax, the CO2 producer would pay for carbon rather than reducing CO2. For instance, the production cost of methanol today is 0.08 € per kg, in the best case considering the capital expense (CAPEX) and operating expense (OPEX), methanol can be produced from electrolytic hydrogen at a cost of 0.33 USD per kg, which is circa four times higher than the current price. What may make the balance positive for industry is the fact that if CO2 tax (C-tax) can be at least 174–217 USD per t.166 This price for CO2 tax is impractical. More importantly, CCS has received a lot of attention in recent years for reducing CO2 emissions. As an effective and advanced technology, CCS has a huge potential in CO2 reduction, however, it has always been controversial as to whether CCS should be implemented, due to its high cost and big risks. Low carbon tax is not attractive enough to promote the development and application of CCS. Fossil fuel runs out gradually nowadays, and the storage of CO2 means a waste of C resource. CO2 as a main carbon feedstock to replace a considerable part of fossil fuels will be an indisputable fact. Therefore, planning to reduce CO2, one should comprehensively consider the sustainable use of the resource and economy.
CO2 recycle as a technology of CO2 conversion can convert CO2 into highly valuable products. These value-added products may offset costs associated with carbon management, and also make use of C resource, thus reducing CO2 emissions. Under the condition of a low carbon tax or even having no extra subsidies with respect to CO2 reduction, CO2 recycle is more reliable and feasible, both economically and with respect to resource use, when compared with CCS, and it is a sustainable technology for CO2 reduction and control.
5. Basis and theories of the integration and optimization of carbon cycle in coal conversion
Coal chemical production process will become more complex due to its integration with CO2 recycle. It is significant and necessary to obtain a best comprehensive performance in terms of energy, economy and environment, and the integration and optimization of process conditions, configuration, operating parameters and production scale etc. for the integrated system. Coal chemical conversion processes integrated with CO2 recycling may lead to new technologies or changes in technological conditions, and the integrated system would express different new features and performance in comparison with the original system without CO2 recycle.52,244,245
The primary problems to be solved is how to implement the new system assessment and process and technique validation. In view of the complexity, economy and feasibility for the whole conversion process study, the most suitable way is using a previous modeling methods to conduct the investigation of the new system. For this research the best technologies and operation parameters suitable for the integrated system can be determined. We can get the optimal process with CO2 recycle, and find the technical bottlenecks that should be solved to enhance system performance. In order to realize the integration and optimization of coal chemical conversion with CO2 recycle, there are several important steps or principles to be followed as described in the following sections.
5.1. Integration and optimization of advanced chemical engineering with carbon cycle
The new system integration must comply with the principle of cascade utilization of energy and classify conversion of elements. Effects of process configuration, technology type and process conditions on system features and performance can the guide of the design and optimization of the integrated system. Optimization process should reflect the feature of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen elements conversion, which can help reveal the principle and mechanism for energy saving, and the potential path of carbon cycle use. The ultimate embodiment of optimization is that the coal chemical production incorporated with CO2 recycle process can obtain the best operational conditions, technology configuration and production scales.

5.1.1 Basic principle for the integration. 
For the single coal chemical production process, the major concern is the achievement of the highest conversion between coal and the product. Comparatively, energy utilization in the chemical production processes usually submits to the pursuance of chemical conversion. This constraint has set the limitation on the energy utilization technologies adopted by the chemical production process. Thus, this is the main obstacle for the improvement of energy utilization.246 Advanced coal chemical engineering (with/without CO2 recycle) is the integration that combines coal with different types of energy resources (such as biomass, NG, solar, wind) and integrates chemical production and power generation into one system to obtain high energy efficiency, high economic benefits, high element conversion and low pollutant emissions. The basic principles for system integration mainly covers the four parts of the following:246
• Coal coupling with different types of fuels. The coal coupling with different types of fuels can be made according to their characteristics, advantages and disadvantages. For example, those fuels rich in hydrogen, such as biomass, can be used to co-gasification with coal and the production of syngas can avoid the WGS process to adjust the H/C ratio. More importantly, different types of fuels can be utilized in a cascade way according to their energy level and chemical characteristics. This can promise an effective utilization of the fuel's chemical energy.
• Step by step conversion of effective components. The raw material is usually composed of different types of effective components for chemical production. The concept of the step by step conversion of the effective components is the regulation of each component's utilization. Step by step conversion tries to meet the requirements of different chemical production processes and utilizes the different components selectively and orderly. This is achieved by relying on system integration instead of complex composition adjustment processes and recycle schemes.
• Cascade utilization of both chemical and thermal energies. Physical energy should be cascade-utilized according to temperature level. More importantly, in the integrated system, heat produced in the chemical production process can be effectively utilized in power generation according to its energy level. At the same time, a power subsystem can provide heat for the chemical production process with a matching energy level. Otherwise, an important point emphasized here is that chemical energy also should be cascade-utilized according to its energy level.
• Integration of energy utilization and pollutant control. Recovering pollutants before or within their production process is a promising technology, which will lead to the collaboration between energy utilization and environmental protection. Polygeneration system, coupling with chemical and power production processes, can bring a breakthrough for the joint solution of energy and environmental problems. The desired performance is that pollutants can be concentrated and removed without extra energy consumption while products are in production. With the production of excellent clean fuel such as methanol, DME, or hydrogen, the polygeneration system can recover CO2 with reduced (or even without) energy penalty.

Fig. 12 illustrates the basic principles for integration of coal chemical production system with CO2 recycle. Coal incorporated with other carbon or hydrogen resources such as biomass, NG, UNG, and COG etc. may be converted into fresh gas in a fresh gas preparation subsystem. The primary function of the fresh gas preparation subsystem is to produce qualified syngas from raw materials. In the subsystem, some methods such as partial-gasification or co-gasification/pyrolysis, and partial-reforming or dual-fuel reforming can be used to produce the syngas. Thus, syngas with proper composition can be sent to the chemical synthesis unit. At the same time, the part of the syngas that is difficult to be converted for chemical production can be used as a fuel for power generation. Non-fossil fuels (or renewable fuels) such as solar or wind can provide the heat, electricity, and hydrogen needed in chemical conversion and power generation processes. More importantly, CO2 can be recovered with less (or even without) energy penalty from synthesis subsystems and flue gas. On the one hand, the captured CO2 can recycle to fresh gas preparation subsystem to be converted into fresh gas or fuel gas by methanation, reforming and gasification. CO2 also can be converted into fuels and chemicals by electrochemical conversion, photocatalytic conversion and hydrogenation reduction which are supported by renewable fuels.
 Fig. 12  Basic principles for integration of coal chemical production system with CO2 recycle. 


5.1.2 Optimization of objective functions. 
The optimization process can be described as follows: given a set of feedstock and desired final products with specifications, it is desirable to generate a systematic framework with various objectives (such as energy, economy, and environment, etc.) for the extraction of the best configuration and unit operation with the optimal technical conditions among an astronomically large number of promising alternatives.247 However, multi-objectives brings a new challenge to system analysis and evaluation, which urgently requires to establish multi-objective comprehensive analysis and evaluation methods.248–251 In general, the three aspects are: energy/exergy, economics and environment. These need to be studied for energy system evaluation.244,248,252,253
Energy and exergy analysis of any energy system and/or components of the system is a well-established and effective tool of thermodynamics for the conservation, auditing, and accounting of the energy in terms of quantity as well as quality.254,255 Traditional, energy analysis uses the first law of thermodynamics analysis to calculate the energy losses and quantify the loss of efficiency in any process. Exergy analysis is a method that uses the conservation of mass and conservation of energy principles together with the second law of thermodynamics for analysis, design and improvement of systems.256 Both energy and exergy were widely used for analysis and assessment of energy conversion systems.252,253,257–259
The economic objectives can be divided into two parts: non-energy cost/investment and exergo economics. The former is the common economic principle that is only to highlight the total system costs in monetary terms but without any thermodynamic analysis of the system. The most common non-energy economic criteria include the net present value (NPV), the internal rate of return on investment (IRR), return on investment (ROI), payback period and the levelized cost of the product. Many researchers use these criteria to assessment the economic performance of the studied systems.260–263 However, though non-energy cost/investment analysis can express the economic performance, it cannot reveal the reason for positive or negative economic performance. Exergo economics is a branch of mechanical and chemical engineering that appropriately combines, at the level of system components, thermodynamic evaluations based on an exergy analysis and economic principles, to provide designers or operators of energy conversion systems with essential information on designing a cost-effective system, but not obtained by conventional energy and exergy analyses and economic analysis.264 It may be considered as an exergy based cost minimization tool for the energy conversion systems. Some references in the literature also term it as thermoeconomic analysis.265,266 This approach is referred to as exergy costing, which assigns monetary values to energy streams and to the thermodynamic inefficiencies within the system.267 The understanding of these costs is very useful for improving the cost effectiveness of the system and for reducing the cost of the final product of the system under consideration. Many investigations on thermal power plants, cogeneration, and other energy systems using the thermoeconomic analysis tool are reported in literature.262,268–271 Basic equations for thermoeconomic analysis of these systems are available elsewhere.272,273
Particular focus has been placed on the release of CO2 and optimization of energy conversion systems.274,275 A primary objective for minimizing CO2 emissions is to increase the efficiency of energy conversion processes and thereby decrease the fuel use. CO2 emission per unit energy or the mass of feedstock or products generally is used to evaluate the CO2 emission performance of system. From this viewpoint, the CO2 avoidance cost, which combines the cost of product with CO2 emission, is a widely used measurement of CO2 reduction cost, and it can clearly show the cost caused by CO2 reduction compared with the reference system without CO2 capture or recycle.3,202,260,268 Carbon conversion efficiency as another criterion for CO2 emission reduction capacity was widely applied.245,269,276 Because carbon element as the object for investigating element efficiency in coal chemical engineering is consistent with the requirements of ultimate analysis,277 and can disclose the carbon conversion in each production procedure, which will provide the guide to optimize the operating conditions and improve the technology and can even reveal the contribution of CO2 recycle to carbon conversion and use.
For a given set of feedstock, several promising technologies can be utilized to convert them to the final products. In terms of the reactor itself of a given energy conversion system, there are probably multiple alternatives for each operating unit; for example, a fluidized-bed reactor, a moving-bed reactor and a fixed-bed reactor can be selected for the solid sorbent based carbon capture process. Of course, different units will generate different capital costs. The decision on the operating unit selection will significantly affect the whole flow sheet. For a given energy system, there usually exists several conflicting objectives, such as environmental requirement and overall process cost. As an example, for a coal-based power plant with a CO2 capture system, adding the CO2 capture device will improve the capital cost and reduce the efficiency of the power plant. In addition, the process flow sheet will vary with the changes in multi-objective trade-offs. All of the above aspects demonstrate that the selection of the optimal technology and corresponding operating unit to systematically deal with the above conflicts based on the system engineering viewpoint requires a systematic optimization methodology. The majority of the investigations of operation optimization of energy conversion systems focused on single objective optimization, such as cost or energy minimization or economic optimization.278–282 However, the optimization of an energy conversion system should cover the multiple-criteria that are integrated from the different fields of science: energy, economy, environment and even society. Multiple-criteria optimization and assessment are most important to the system's reliability, feasibility and sustainability. Hence, most of the recent studies for operation optimization of energy conversion systems establish multi-objective optimization models to obtain comprehensive optimal operation strategies considering cost saving, energy saving and emission reduction. As the above mentioned three aspects often conflict with one another, determining how to optimize these objectives in a comprehensive way is the main problem of multi-objective optimization. Usually, the weighted method,283–285 genetic algorithm method,286–288 lexicographically stratified method289 and evolutionary algorithm method290,291 are used in multi-objective optimization. Among these technologies, a mathematical programming-based approach is the most widely used method for the optimization of both specific subsystems and total process flow sheets. Fig. 13 demonstrates the brief flow sheet of the mathematical programming-based approach. On the basis of this method, many different energy integrated systems with and without CCS or CCR were optimized and evaluated.247,263,292–296
 Fig. 13  The brief flow sheet of the mathematical programming-based approach. 

6. The utilization of the CO2 cycle during advanced coal conversion process
Building upon the fossil fuels depletion and CO2 emissions challenges, various innovative coal chemical engineering solution with CO2 recycle systems have been developed for the production of cost-competitive fuels, and chemicals. Due to their sustainability, the following examples of advanced coal chemical engineering solutions with CO2 recycle systems have brought about much concerns from both industry and academia.
6.1. CO2 recycle as a gasifying agent in coal chemical engineering
Gasification is a frequently applied processing technique in the field of coal chemical engineering. Many highly valued products are obtained from gasification. One of the methods to increase the carbon conversion efficiency is to reuse the CO2 produced during the process as a gasifying agent and put it back into the gasifier. However, during the process of CO2 forming-conversion-reforming, the C value does not increase, but cycles from high to low (It may be easier to understand if one assume the amount of carbon cycling is fixed).
CO2 has been proposed as a candidate for gasifying agent since its utilization has the potential to further reduce CO2 emissions and reduce steam consumption.38 Thus, valuable steam can be saved, resulting in a reduction of phenol water produced in the gasification process, especially in fixed-bed gasifiers (Lurgi and BGL etc.),297,298 as well as a reduction in the load of wastewater to be treated. CO2 can react with C at temperatures above 1073 K (C + CO2 = 2CO). Generally, the temperature of the gasifier is higher than 1273 K. The higher the temperature is, the higher the chemical activity of CO2 will be. Increasing the amount of CO by recycling CO2 into the gasifier is a smart way to improve carbon element utilization and downstream chemical. The recycled CO2 proves to increase syngas production. Hence, a novel scheme design based on coal gasification with CO2 recycle for coal chemical production is presented in Fig. 14. Coal is gasified with steam, CO2 and oxygen, which is obtained from the air separation unit (ASU). After being cleaned up and having its H/C ratio adjusted, the purified syngas is sent for chemicals or fuels synthesis. Unreacted gas as fuel gas is sent to power generation subsystem for producing electricity. The CO2 generated from the chemicals or fuel production process as a gasifying agent are recycled into the gasifier. Besides, the CO2, from the power production process, can also be recycled and utilized for gasification of coal to increase fuel utilization and to decrease the carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere, or as a working medium are recycled to the gas turbine to increase the power output.52,205,245 In this way, a considerable amount of CO2 can be used and fixed into chemicals or fuels, which can improve carbon element utilization efficiency and energy efficiency by reducing the amount of CO2 captured and storaged.
 Fig. 14  Coal gasification with CO2 recycle for coal chemical production. 
A variety of systems based on this CO2 recycle have been reported.299–302 Kidoguchi et al.303 have researched a new system that combines an oxygen–CO2 blown coal gasifier that use CO2 in exhaust gas with a closed gas turbine. It has been experimentally clarified that the char gasification reaction is promoted by enriched CO2. A high net thermal efficiency (40% or more) could be expected because of a more simplified system without a WGS unit or a CO2 separation unit. Singh et al.304 have investigated O2/CO2 recycle combustion combined with a low temperature flash (LTF) unit avoiding 74% of the original CO2 emissions and only 35 USD per t-CO2 (tons of CO2) avoided cost (the cost of reducing CO2 emission by a unit of amount). This solution is similar to Xiong et al.305 who investigated the cost efficiency and CO2 avoidance cost (CAC) of an oxy-combustion retrofitted system with the CO2 avoidance cost of 28.18 to 35.48 USD per t. In terms of the whole system performance, Yi et al.52 have proposed a novel system in which CO2 is recycled into gasifier and gas turbine with a high exergy efficiency (46.3%) and CO2 emission (0.47 t per (t-coal)). Yang302 has done the similar works by combining the dry reform reaction with CO2 recycling into gasifier in a polygeneration system to produce chemicals as well as generate power. The same results show that the new process is promising since it reduces CO2 emission and increase the carbon efficiency and energy efficiency. Otherwise, the process with CO2 capture and utilization has advantages in both technical and environmental aspects and even in economic aspect with the introduction of carbon tax.52,244,306
CO2 recycling into gasifier is a promising way for CO2 reduction and reuse in the coal chemical industry, however, the key technology is to control the CO2 recycling ratio. Too much CO2 recycling mass flow, leading to a low gasification temperature and a low H/C ratio, would produce negative influence on the gasification efficiency, the gasifier slag-off performance, and the downstream products synthetic ratio. Although, if the recycling ratio of CO2 is above a certain quantity, a high portion of CO2 entering into the gasifier could substitute for steam and improve carbon element utilization.52,245 Relevant research over coal gasification with CO2 such as coal rank, pressure, temperature, gas composition, etc., and the kinetics/the reaction rate equations for coal-char gasification, both in the reaction kinetic control region (low temperature) and the diffusion control region (high temperature) as discussed in the literature,49 will be of great help to the development and application of this technology.
6.2. CO2 recycle coupled with CH4-rich gas in coal chemical engineering
Two of the most important GHGs, CO2 and CH4, are consumed into a useful and valuable product, syngas (hydrogen and carbon monoxide) by a reforming process (dry reforming, bi-reforming or tri-reforming) that retards GHG emission and increases the C element utilization efficiency. A synthesis gas with a proper mole ratio of CO/H2 is preferentially used for the production of liquid hydrocarbons or chemicals synthesis, and the conventional WGS process can be avoided. CO2 and CH4 can therefore be chemically transformed into a valuable carbon source of the future, allowing environmentally neutral use of carbon fuels and derived hydrocarbon products. These advantages will undoubtedly result in high energy utilization efficiency and low CO2 emission for the whole production system. An integrated scheme in terms of CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering coupled with CH4-rich gas is proposed in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Scheme of CO2 conversion and recycle in coal chemical engineering coupled with CH4-rich gas. 
CO2-rich gas from gasification, and CO2 generated from chemical and power production processes are recycled to mix with CH4-rich gas, which generally includes NG, UNG, and COG. Generally, UNG such as shale gas and coal bed methane produced in coal mining process is released into atmosphere or used for combustion directly, which is a great waste of the hydrogen source. COG is treated in a similar manner. These CH4-rich gases, if integrated with coal chemical production to reform with the generated CO2 can solve the problem of “rich carbon but lack hydrogen” in the coal conversion process and enhance the CH4 resource utilization efficiency, as well as realize CO2 recycle use and reduce CO2 emission.
Due to favorable environmental and energy features of CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering coupled with CH4-rich gas, the integrated energy conversion systems have attracted significant attention in recent years. A polygeneration system with COG and coal gasified gas, in which dry reforming was used to convert CH4 + CO2, was proposed by Xie et al. Result from this polygeneration show that chemical energy, internal rate of return and power output increase by 11.5%, 1.3% and 8.4% respectively, and the CO2 emission reduces by 33.8%.276,307 Lim et al.308 have proposed a combined steam reforming process with dry methane reforming process instead of the removal of the former, and then gave a conclusion that the combined system could reduce net CO2 emission by 67% when compared with a single steam reforming process. Yang et al.302 proposed a coal-to-olefins system that recycled CO2 into both the gasifier and the dry reforming unit, considering effects of the CO2 recycling distribution between the two paths on system performance. They concluded that the new system is 2 times higher at carbon efficiency, 1.5 times lower at CO2 emission rate, and 1.3 times higher at energy efficiency than those of old processes. Kok Siew Ng et al.309 modified a conventional coal IGCC with CCS system into a polygeneration system wherein CO2 from the fuel gas of the gas turbine is reused into syngas generation through tri-reforming. The efficiency can be improved from 36% to 86%. Furthermore, the CO2 emission per unit product was reduced from 127.8 to 16.9 t-CO2/(GW h)−1, which implied 86% reduction in the plant GHG emissions, and that the new system is thermodynamically and economically more promising compared to an equivalent coal IGCC system with CCS. Song et al.124 proposed a novel concept called tri-reforming of methane using CO2 in the fuel gases without CO2 separation. A comparative energy analysis by calculation indicates that tri-reforming is more desirable for producing syngas with H2/CO ratios of 1.5–2.0, compared to CO2 reforming and steam reforming of methane, in terms of less amount of energy required and less net amount of CO2 emitted in the whole process for producing synthesis gas. Besides, the similar studies are conducted with respect to NG, COG or CH4-rich gas reformed with CO2 or exhaust gas for CO2 recycle to produce methanol, DME, and olefins etc. are also widely investigated, and all that presented excellent performance in CO2 emission reduction, products output increase and energy savings compared with that without CO2 recycle or with CCS processes.310–315
In summary, CO2 recycle coupled with CH4-rich gas in coal chemical engineering is a good option for dealing with deficiencies such as low efficiency and high investment cost typically associated with CO2 control and reduction. However, CH4/CO2 reforming (whether dry reforming, bi-reforming or tri-reforming) reaction is strongly endothermic. Therefore, to use this reaction for CO2 mitigation, requires a high amount of energy. As the proportion of CO2 for the CH4/CO2 reforming reaction increases, the amount of CO2 conversion is correspondingly increased and additional energy is consumed at the same time. Thus, it is important to select an appropriate CO2 recycling ratio for best trade-off of energy and resource utilization.302 More importantly, a catalyst for the CO2/CH4 reforming reaction with high activity and stability still needs to be developed, which is the key for industrialization of this recycle technology.
6.3. Biological CO2 conversion and recycle in advanced coal chemical engineering
From the viewpoint of lifecycle, biomass, a renewable energy source which indirectly comes from solar energy, incorporated with coal to produce chemical or electricity can reduce coal consumption thus results in the decrease in CO2 emission. C element released into the atmosphere in the form of CO2 fixed into biomass by photosynthesis, which completes the carbon cycle. Besides, many synergistic effects can be obtained from coal integrated biomass, e.g. biomass can provide with H2 to coal chemical conversion, and RWGS can be alleviated or even avoided; Alkalis in biomass can promote coal gasification, and high-temperature environments in coal gasification would also help to crack tar produced in biomass gasification.155,316–320 Much energy saving will be gained due to these synergistic effects and thus leads to CO2 emission reduction. A closed carbon circulation can be found in system of coal chemical engineering integrated with biomass production in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  CO2 conversion and recycle in advanced coal chemical engineering by using of a biological system. 
Because of the number of advantages based on coal chemical engineering integrated with biomass, extensive attention has been focused on the design and optimization of a newly integrated system with different feasible technologies and routes to produce chemicals or fuels, such as F–T hydrocarbons, methanol, hydrogen and electricity etc.321–325 It has been estimated that the coal/biomass co-generation system with products of F–T fuels and power can even obtain zero fossil CO2 emission and that the co-generation of liquid fuels and hydrogen from coal and municipal solid waste, whose hydrogen is generated from cellulosic-waste gasification, is economically competitive at crude oil price above 66 USD per barrel.326 The results presented clearly demonstrate the economic competitiveness of coal and biomass refineries which produce liquid transportation fuels while simultaneously reducing the life-cycle of the greenhouse gas emissions. In Muresan et al.'s LCA study,327 the CO2 emission for the cases of co-gasification of coal and biomass are greatly lower than the cases of coal gasification alone and the acidification and eutrophication potentials are lower for the co-gasification cases. This is because biomass as a feedstock in energy generation still releases CO2 back to the atmosphere. There would be an overall reduction in emissions per unit energy as the CO2 is recycled by the biomass producing the extra energy per unit of CO2 emissions. It can be assumed that the release of CO2 during biomass co-production is recycled and is reused by the biomass. Essentially the net CO2 emissions produced by biomass is zero so the net emissions remains the same while the energy output is significantly increased.
Coal chemical engineering integrated with biomass can potentially make a significant contribution to CO2 recycle through biological systems and it has many advantages over conventional carbon sequestration methods, as the CO2 is being utilized by photosynthesis to produce renewable biomass, which can be recycled into the production system for energy production. It is a more desirable method of carbon sequestration compared with geological storage where CO2 is pumped into aquifers, because even despite the concerns over leaks in the longer term it has a high cost associated with the separation of CO2 from exhaust gases without any economic gains from the process. However, there are many obstacles still to be solved. Major challenges include cost and CO2 emission reduction through breakthrough processes (culture, harvesting, drying/extraction and separation), no mature commercial operation experience for widely application of coal coupled with biomass conversion, as well as integration and optimization of the co-production system to obtain a better whole performance.
6.4. CO2 as a feedstock recycling for organic synthesis in coal chemical engineering
CO2 is a non toxic, non-flammable, abundant and economical C1 feedstock. Currently, carbon dioxide is used industrially for the synthesis of urea, salicylic acid, inorganic carbonates, methanol, cyclic carbonates and polycarbonates.35,146,328 Major emphasis is on replacing phosgene-based routes by introducing CO2 into organic substrates for synthesis of various chemicals.101 These successful cases of CO2 conversion for organic synthesis have provided huge potential with respect to CO2 recycle and reduction for coal chemical production. A concept of coal chemical engineering with CO2 recycling as a feedstock for organic synthesis is shown in Fig. 17. Chemicals such as CH3OH, C2H4, and NH3etc., are produced from coal through a series process in terms of gasification/pyrolysis, clean up, WGS, and synthesis. Unreacted gas can be used as fuel for power generation. The CO2 generated from the chemical production processes and power plants can serve as a raw material for organic synthesis to produce new chemicals. Due to the maturity of the CO2 to urea process, many studies have recently focused on CO2 recycled from chemical production, or power generation processes, to produce urea and liquid fuels or other chemicals.329–333
 Fig. 17  Concept of coal chemical engineering with CO2 recycling as a feedstock for organic synthesis. 
6.5. CO2 recycle in coal-based multifunction energy system (MES) integrated with carbon-free energy
CO2 produced from chemical production and power generation processes in coal chemical engineering can be converted into chemicals and fuels by hydrogenation, electrochemical or photochemical processes. Generally, hydrogen sources and electricity for the chemical recycling of CO2 could be generated from carbon-free energy (such as solar, wind, tidal, geothermal, nuclear etc.) by splitting water (by electrolysis or other cleavage) or generating power. An integration of CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering integrated with carbon-free energy is presented in Fig. 18. The most striking feature for this energy integration system is using CO2-free renewable energy to realize CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering, and as a result, these non-carbon renewable energy is stored in the synthesized chemicals or fuels in the form of chemical energy that is much easier to transport and use. Meanwhile, CO2, from fossil fuel, is almost totally fixed into hydrocarbons and the whole carbon resource conversion process presents near-zero CO2 emission. The net carbon neutral cycle can be achieved by recycling CO2. Further improvements in carbon neutral cycle could be possible by utilizing CO2 from the atmosphere in addition to recycling CO2 from the source. Therefore, there are ample opportunities available for coal chemical engineering integrated with carbon-free energy to co-produce hydrocarbon fuels by recycling CO2.
 Fig. 18  CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering integrated with carbon-free energy. 
There are already many possible technological pathways reported in the literature for CO2 recycling into liquid fuels such as methanol, DME, and F–T synthesis. The most apparent differences among them focus on developing and optimizing of three stages-usage of different energy feedstock, H2O and CO2 dissociation, and synthesizing various fuels (as shown in Fig. 19). Graves334 proposed possible technological pathways for recycling CO2 into sustainable hydrocarbon fuels using renewable or nuclear energy in a non-biological process. Initially, CO2 captured from large industrial sources (e.g. aluminum plants) could be utilized. In the long term, the capture of CO2 from the atmosphere would enable a closed-loop hydrocarbon fuel cycle. A “Methanol Economy” with carbon recycling has been proposed by Olah et al.64 Any available energy source (alternative energies such as solar, wind, geothermal, and atomic energy) can be used for the production of the needed hydrogen for chemical conversion of CO2 that is air-captured or by low-temperature electrolysis (as shown in Fig. 20).
 Fig. 19  The possible pathways of CO2 recycling coupled with non-carbon energy for hydrocarbon fuels or chemicals synthesis [modified from ref. 334]. 
 Fig. 20  CO2 recycling in the methanol economy (modified from ref. 335). 
Steinberg and Dang336,337 first envisioned the closed-loop version of CO2-recycled synthetic fuels with CO2 captured from ambient air in the 1970s. They explored various options to capture CO2 from the atmosphere using hydroxide or carbonate absorbents, produced H2 by water electrolysis, and synthesized methanol by reaction of CO2 with H2, with nuclear fission or fusion supplying the electricity and heat. Afterwards, Yamauchi et al.338 proposed a CO2-based methanol synthesis process using H2 from the high temperature electrolysis of H2O. Recently, Éverton Simões Van-Dal339 proposed a process for producing fuel grade methanol from CO2 captured by chemical absorption from the flue gases of coal power plant, in which the methanol production provided 36% of the thermal energy required for CO2 capture, reducing considerably the costs of the capture. The CO2 balance of the process showed that it is possible to abate 1.6 t-CO2 per t-methanol. Hashimoto340,341 described a process to produce H2 by seawater electrolysis powered by solar panels installed in the desert and to synthesize CH4 by combining the H2 with exhaust CO2 collected from industrial plants. A CO2 recycling plant for CO2 to CH4 by reaction with H2 established near the coast by Institute for Materials Research (IMR) in 1996, and it showed that 79% of CO2 emissions from a 1 GW LNG (liquefied natural gas)-combustion power plant, that is, 2.62 million tons per year, can be reduced by the global CO2 recycling when CO2 is recovered at the power plant.53,169,334,335,342–345 The CO2-based, resource-efficient production of high-value light olefins process is found to be economically valuable and contributes to the introduction of renewable energy into the chemical production chain.346
Hydrogenation of CO2 for methanol synthesis has been the subject of a large number of studies over various photo-electron-catalysts,347 and many reports continue to appear in the current literature.348 The first commercial plant for CO2 recycling to methanol was built in Iceland by the company of Carbon Recycling International. This plant is based on the conversion of CO2, a significant by-product accompanying local industrial sources. H2 is produced by water electrolysis.69 An “artificial tree” concept which is introduced by de_Richter et al. allows to reduce the levels of CO2 in the atmosphere and at the same time capturing solar power to transform it to methanol.349 The transportation fuels can be stored, used and transformed, preserving thus the large investments made on operation and transportation. The energy requirement for electrolyzing water from solar and recycle of CO2 are all reflecting an energy balance and economics. It is indicated that the solar supported electro-chemical production of methanol from CO2 and water is a preferable option.22,334,344,345 This process has a good advantage is that liquid fuels produced, via direct CO2 photo-reduction would create an essentially carbon free or at least carbon neutral fuels, as well as an energy storage option, improving the energy independence.350,351
Recently, there has been a surge of renewed interest in synthetic fuel cycles based on high temperature electrolysis of H2O, CO2, or both.352–356 All the studies have focused on the performance and durability of the electrolysis cells in the dissociation stage of the process. Fouih et al.357 have studied the technical feasibility of CO2 recycling into ethanol using solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOEC) technology and found that the total primary energy consumption and ethanol costs were higher than that of the usual ethanol production process. The same results were obtained by Fu358 and Redissi,359 who investigated the economic performance of the co-electrolysis of CO2/H2O at high temperature using SOEC for syngas production and subsequent conversion to liquid fuels by the F–T process. As an energy-intensive process, the availability of cost-effective electricity is crucial for its economic competitiveness. Preferred electricity sources are probably nuclear power and surplus wind power. Moreover, it requires more improvements in cell area amelioration, SOEC lifespan and catalyst stability, as well as energy integration to reduce energy cost and non-energy costs.
Although these processes are not yet technologically mature, they offer potentially a feasible and environmentally benign way to convert both carbon-free energy and CO2 into chemical energy stored as liquid fuels or chemicals. Success would implying wide application for CO2 recycle in the future due to excellent performance in the aspects of CO2 control and reduction. However, the technology seems to be difficult to realize commercialization in the short- or mid-term. This is because most of the cost of products are higher than that of traditional production processes, and this will be a major challenge to using renewable wind or solar technologies. Otherwise, even the energy demand and CO2 emissions for some production is higher than existing technologies in the lifecycle. The availability of water is also an important restriction condition for the development and application of these technologies. As a result, in order to introduce this CO2 recycle into coal chemical engineering and then become industrialized in the future, some improvements in energy storage device, large capacity reactor as well as high efficient and environmental photocatalyst and electrode materials should be acquired.
The above mentioned energy or chemical systems are independent one-dimensional systems with coal-feed to only single-product, such as the coal-fired power plant, IGCC power plant and coal-to-methanol plant. Low efficiency, heavy pollution and high investment of these systems are typical deficiencies, though they can be improved by implementing retrofits for process improvement and energy saving.313 By synthetically combining the utilization of coal and other different types of fuels (fossil fuels and renewable fuels), the using advanced CO2 control conversion technologies, and the co-production of alternative fuels and power, an MES can present more opportunities to simultaneously achieve higher efficiency, lower investment, and less environmental impact as compared to traditional energy systems. For this type of MES, according to the energy level and chemical characteristics, some given processes of energy and elemental conversion can be coupled together. Fig. 21 shows a conceptual scheme of MES with CO2 recycle. Moreover, different advanced CO2 control and conversion technologies (such as chemical-looping, CO2/CH4 reforming, photo/electrolysis of CO2, and hydrogenation of CO2etc.) coupled together in an MES can provide an better platform for CO2 conversion, concentration, separation and capture with low or even no energy consumption. An MES with the characteristic of multi-products can supply with more opportunities to achieve an energy savings and economic ways for CO2 recycle. Therefore, it is more efficient and economical for CO2 recycle in an MES compared with traditional coal-based energy systems. A series of existing research reports have proclaimed that the MES, including multiple CO2 conversion and recycle routes, would be the best solution to sustainable cost-efficient energy system development.53,169,334,335,342–345 Although an MES shows preferable sustainability, since material, energy and capital flows are crossing and coupling through the MES, it is much more complex than systems with single-feed single product without CO2 recycle. Except for improving CO2 conversion and utilization in unit process, configuration optimization and assessment should be conducted on the MES, which will be a topic of future work.
 Fig. 21  Diagram of MES with CO2 recycle. 
6.6. Typical cases study on CO2 recycle in advanced coal chemical engineering

6.6.1 A coal-based polygeneration system with CO2 as a gasifying agent and working medium recycle use52. 

Fig. 22 depicts the flow diagram of polygeneration system with CO2 recycle and capture (PL-CRS). A portion of the CO2 is recycled into the gasifier and gas turbine, while the rest is sequestered. The power generation system supplies power and steam that are required in the former processes. Syngas production can be enhanced by using of the recycling of CO2 into the gasifier, and a portion of CO2 can be used to replace H2O as the gasification agent. Not only water can be conserved and the carbon element utilization improved, but also the gasifier temperature can be controlled by a suitable ratio of CO2/H2O (kg/kg). At an equal methanol output the exergy efficiency of the system increases with CO2 recycling; but at a certain point, further CO2 recycling will lead to a decrease in the system exergy efficiency, primarily because the compression and cycling of syngas, unreacted gas and CO2 consumes a great deal of energy. The optimal ratio of CO2 mass flow to coal mass flow-CO2/coal (kg/kg) was determined to be 0.2, meaning that an amount of CO2 equal to 20% of the coal mass was recycled into the gasifier, while the remaining CO2 undergoes sequestration. The design requirements of a certain gasifier for temperature and coal-water-slurry concentration (58–70%) always limit the CO2/H2O (kg/kg) ratio. It follows that a suitable ratio of CO2 recycling is key to the whole system performance.
 Fig. 22  Flow diagram of the PL-CRS system.52 

Fig. 23 details the exergy distribution during various phases of the production process. The design scale for PL-CRS is 3 × 105 t-methanol per year with a net power output of 300 MW. The system experiences an exergy destruction of approximately 635.8 MW in total. The carbon flows for this system include carbon-equivalent GHG emission flows associated with activities upstream and downstream of the conversion facility. In this system, coal mining and exploration will cause equivalent carbon emissions of 101 t-C per d (ton per day) to be released into the atmosphere. As the gross flow rate of equivalent carbon of the entire system is 2981 t-C per d, and 2458 t-C per d is captured by sequestration, the system yields a net flow of 480 t-C per d of equivalent carbon emissions to the atmosphere, accounting for only 16.1% of the carbon in the entire production process.
 Fig. 23  Equivalent-carbon flow and exergy flow chart for the novel system.52 
Performance comparison between single production systems and the PL-CRS system was found that the overall exergy efficiency of the novel systems is approximately 46.3%, which is between 2% and 10% higher than the individual systems. At the same output and CO2 capture ratio (85%), the energy saving ratio based on IGCC-CCS and single methanol plant (MP) (ESR1) of the PL-CRS system is 15.8%, and the energy saving ratio based on IGCC-CRS and MP (ESR2) of the PL-CRS system is 11.1%. What's more, in comparison with these two single production systems, the PL-CRS system achieves savings in capital cost of 30.4% and 27.1%, respectively. Furthermore, the cost of CO2 avoidance of the PL-CRS is lower than the other systems by −18.93 USD per (t-CO2). The internal rate of return of PL-CRS (14.76%) is lower than that of the single methanol plant system (18.52%). However, when the single methanol plant includes CO2 capture and storage, the IRR will decrease to 11.12%. As a result, taking into account the energy, CO2 emission and economic performance for the different systems, the overall performance of PL-CRS is more favorable in all areas.


6.6.2 A coal-based polygeneration system with CO2 recycle reforming with CH4-rich gas245. 

Fig. 24 is a coal-based polygeneration system with CO2 recycle reforming with COG (D-PL-CR). Coal is gasified with steam and oxygen to produce coal gasified gas. After clean up, the clean gas is mixed with purified COG and recycled CO2 before entering the CH4/CO2 reforming unit. The resulting clean syngas is sent for methanol synthesis. After processing in the synthesis reactor, CO2, methanol (MeOH) and water are separated out from the unreacted gas. A portion of the separated CO2 (95 wt%) is recycled back into the gasifier and the remainder is used in the reforming unit.
 Fig. 24  Schematic of a dual-gas polygeneration system for power and methanol production with CO2 recycle. 
The two CO2 recycle technologies have different effects on the system. In order to find the best proportion of recycled CO2 with these two technologies to satisfy the optimal performance of the whole system referring to energy, environment and economy, we can introduce another sensitivity variable λ (λ is the mass flow of CO2 recycled to the reforming unit over the mass flow of all separated CO2 from the distillation unit) to investigate the effect of the CO2 utilized proportion on the system. λ is selected as 0.6 for the system study, which means that the recycling of 60% CO2 to the reforming unit and 40% to the gasifier will bring a better performance of the system.

Fig. 25 showed the detailed exergy distribution and CO2 emission during different production processes and the numbers in the figure express the proportion of the system energy input. The recycled system can reduce about 200 kt per year in the whole lifecycle compared with the system without CO2 recycling.245 In the respect of energy use, great changes have been aroused due to the adoption of CO2 recycles scheme. Because of CO2 recycle, the exergy destruction of the recycles system in the reforming process and synthesis process increases by 1.4% and 2.6% respectively, while combustion exergy destruction decreases from 12.7% to 7.8%, and the chemical exergy in chemical production increases from 41.5% to 53%. The new system contributes 8.4% power output from the system itself to realize the 11.5% chemical energy increase, a 33.8% CO2 emission reduction and the total effective energy of the system increases from 54.5% to 57.6%. As the CO2 concentration in exhaust gas from the distillation tower is more than 95 wt%, this system does not require CO2 separation unit. The increased chemical exergy (11.5%) in chemical production and the exergy decrement (4.9%) of combustion in the gas turbine can almost offset most of the system exergy loss (4.9%) and power output decrease (8.4%) aroused by CO2 recycles. So the system can keep thermal efficiency as high as that of a no CO2 recycle system. In addition, the CO2 recycled system shows good economic performance with IRR 18.1%. In the CO2 recycled system, the ratio of steam/water to coal was reduced by 0.10 kg kg−1, which results in a water saving as well as a reduction in the load of wastewater to be treated. According to the research results, for D-PL-CR, the system can conserve coal at a rate of 5.0 × 104 t per year and COG at a rate of 3.0 × 107 m3 per year, and reduce steam by 1.0 × 105 t per year and CO2 by 1.3 × 105 t per year.
 Fig. 25  Evaluation of a newly designed polygeneration system with CO2 recycle.245 
The system showed promising results from many of the component schemes, from CO2 recycling to the gasifier and reforming unit, reducing the amount of steam required by gasification and realizing the conversion and utilization of CH4 and CO2, rendering the conventional water gas shift process unnecessary. This not only reduces required fuel input, wastewater treatment load and greenhouse gas emissions, but also increases the utilization efficiency of carbon resources and energy. This technology, that realizes the integration among energy utilization, CO2 emission and economic benefit, is highly instructive for the development of new CO2 emission control technology.

7. Challenges and opportunities
CO2 is not just a greenhouse gas, but also an important source of carbon for making organic chemicals, materials, and carbohydrates. Hence, the captured CO2 from power plants and even from the atmosphere should be recycled to produce high-value added chemicals. As discussed above, recycling of CO2 in an advanced coal-based chemical production system could be fruitful to produce various chemicals and fuels, which should be a sustainable way in the long term, when renewable sources of energy such as biomass, solar, wind, wave and nuclear energy are used as an energy input for the chemical processing.
The technologies for CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering discussed within this review all show promise as possible CO2 conversion and mitigation technologies. However, each must overcome similar challenges before their implementation on an industrial scale. The challenges and the barriers for CO2 conversion and utilization, as outlined below, are primarily due to the lack of value-based driving forces: (1) Cost of CO2 capture, separation, purification, and transportation to the user site. (2) Energy requirements for CO2 chemical conversion (plus source and cost of H2 and/or other co-reactants if involved). (3) Market size limitations, little investment-incentives, and lack of industrial commitments for enhancing CO2-based chemicals. The technologies relevant to CO2 recycle process are still at the stage of laboratory research, pilot scale or demonstration stage, from which some knowledge and experience have been gained, however, uncertainties still exist. Especially, advanced coal chemical production processes with CO2 recycle that integrate different fuels resources and production processes into one system are lack of design and operation experience. (4) Lack of socio-economic and policy driving forces for enhanced CO2 utilization. Without policy support, CO2 recycle technological research, market development and financial support are very hard to realize. Due to little pressure on carbon emission taxes, the enterprises have no will to reduce CO2 emissions due to increase of investment. They will balance between paying emission taxes and investing in emission taxes, if emission taxes are set up.
To develop successful CO2 conversion projects, these technical and commercial barriers need to be overcome. An interdisciplinary study should consider overall design and optimization of product flow diagrams, economic analyses, risk assessment, control methods, and catalyst development. Demonstration projects for the different CO2 recycle technologies should be established to verify their feasibility and reliability. The establishment of emission rate will naturally lead to the proposal of the enterprises' emission standards and the emission quota will need to be determined by the government. Universities and research institutions supported by government agencies and industries mainly contribute to technology development. Industries are commercializing these mature technologies. Government agencies are financially supporting this research and the development of CO2 conversion technologies and will also regulate and stimulate the development of CO2 conversion technology. CO2 recycle is a viable solution for repurposing and storing greenhouse gases, and international cooperation will help to mature and apply technologies to achieve the CO2 emission utilization and control targets. Future research should also be directed toward developing and applying catalytic methods of transforming CO2 emission into value-added products. Catalysts hold the key to successful transformations. Design of new catalysts needs to focus on selectivity as well as activity such that waste production is minimized. Realizing CO2 recycle with high energy efficiency and economic benefits still needs sustained efforts.
The possible development of CO2 recycling in advanced coal chemical engineering based on the previous discussion in this review is presented in Fig. 26. The technique roadmap is devised to serve as a blueprint describing development of CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering based on technology maturity, with a short and long-term vision of a low-carbon economy. In a short-to-medium term, CO2 recycle use in chemical engineering is mainly based on coal or fossil-C energy sources via chemical conversion of CO2 due to its maturity, which has been investigated since last century, in internal coal chemical production processes. Within the same timeframe, CO2 recycling can become an important component of the strategy portfolio necessary for curbing CO2 emissions. With very optimistic assumptions, CO2 recycle can offer a potential reduction equivalent of 250–350 million tons per year in the short-to-medium term, mostly driven by methanol, DME, and DMC syntheses etc. This corresponds to about 10% of the total reduction required globally, which is at a level comparable to the expected impact of CCS technologies. Coal integrated biomass conversion to fuels is perhaps the most intensively pursued route, which is predicted to become extensively adopted in the near future, not only to mitigate CO2 emissions, but also to save coal resource. More importantly, it is significant to integrate and optimize CO2 recycle system based on coal and renewable energy sources, with combining chemical production and power generation, in which electrochemical and photochemical conversion of CO2 are used to transform CO2 into chemicals or fuels. After scaling up to commercial-sized projects, the early commercial deployment should be immediately followed. Given that early CO2 recycle projects will pave the way for large-scale deployment, and such projects will provide the early experience needed to facilitate CO2 recycle for industrial sectors, it is important in this phase to continue to invest in research, development and demonstration (RD&D) for both CO2 conversion technologies and for system integration and optimization and to explore some early low-cost CO2 recycle opportunities in coal chemical production processes.
 Fig. 26  The development route for CO2 recycle in advanced coal chemical engineering. 
In the long term, CO2 recycle could prove to be an enabling technology for the emerging low-carbon economy in coal chemical engineering. By that time, the MES with advanced CO2 conversion and recycle technologies integrated with different multi-fuels and production processes would show the huge potential of CO2 conversion and use, which was predicted to be 3–5 Gt per year, as CO2 is defined as an excellent energy-vector which stores renewable energy.328 And synthesis of chemicals and fuels from recycled CO2 offers a valuable opportunity to introduce renewable energy into the existing energy and chemical infrastructure with the benefits of lowering the carbon footprint of the whole CO2 conversion process. And it is a promising way to replace the fossil-derived fuels and simultaneously accelerate the adjustment of the current energy structure.
8. Concluding remarks
With carbon capture and sequestration (storage) becoming key elements in worldwide efforts to control/minimize its emissions, it can be anticipated that large amounts of CO2 from coal chemical engineering will become available as a feedstock for innovative conversions to synthetic fuels or chemicals. Establishment of a chemical industry based on a renewable feedstock such as CO2 is a long-standing challenge as well as a fascinating dream for synthetic chemists. Liquid fuels and fine and bulk chemicals are important synthetic targets. Faced with the great pressure of reducing carbon emissions and fossil fuel depletion, especially for coal, CO2 recycle and use coupled with coal chemical engineering will present excellent sustainability in its energy use and environmental protection.
The significance of the transformation of CO2 into useful chemicals should be attributed to the importance of utilizing a renewable feedstock. It is therefore important to increase the number of industrial applications by improving these reactions for commercialization. The conversion of CO2 and the incorporation of renewable energy have an effective impact on the reduction of GHG emissions, at least one order of magnitude higher than that for CCS. Thus the effective potential of CCR technologies in GHG control is at least similar to that of CCS technologies, and is estimated to be around 250–350 Mt per year in the short-to-medium term, which represents about 10% of the total reduction required globally and is comparable to the expected impact of CCS technologies, but with additional benefit in terms of (i) fossil fuel savings, (ii) additional energy savings (e.g., the cited insulating effect of polyurethane foams) and (iii) acceleration of the introduction of renewable energy into the chemical production and energy chains. Nevertheless, this bright prospect brought by CO2 recycle depends on technology and engineering breakthroughs such as high selectivity and activity catalysts, high CO2 conversion efficiency, low production cost of hydrogen, and system integration and optimization.
Nomenclature
Capital letters

C1CO2 emission caused by energy consumption
CALCORReforming process combined with CO2 recovery and CO purification
CANMETCanada Centre for Mineral and Energy Technology
CAPEXCapital expense
CCRCO2 capture and recycling
CCSCO2 capture and storage
CcoalCarbon cost in coal
CeThe total energy cost
CneThe total non-energy cost
CSPConcentrators of solar power
C-taxCO2 tax
DMCDimethyl carbonate
DMEDimethyl ether
D-PLDual gas polygeneration system
D-PL-CRDual gas polygeneration system with CO2 recycle
DOEDepartment of Energy
ERCElectrochemical reduction of CO2
FTFischer–Tropsch
GHGGreenhouse gas
Gt C per yearGigaton carbon per year
GTLGas-to-liquid
GTRGas-to-chemical resources
GW hGigawatt hour
HZSM-5Hydrogen zeolite Socony mobilwj-five
IGCC-CCSIntegrated gasification combined cycle with CO2 capture and storage
IGCC-CRSIntegrated gasification combined cycle with CO2 recycling and storage
IMRInstitute for Materials Research
IPCCIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRRInternal rate of return
JOGMECJapan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation
KOGASKorea gas corporation
MeOHMethanol
Mt per yearMegaton per year
MWthMegawatt thermal
OPEXOperating expense
PECPhotoelectrocatalytic
PISCapital cost saving ratio
PL-CCSPolygeneration system with CO2 capture and storage
PL-CRSPolygeneration system with CO2 recycle and storage
PVPhotovoltaic
RCO2Renewable CO2
RD&DResearch, development and demonstration
SPARGSulfur passivated reforming
USDUS dollar
UVUltraviolet

Lowercase letters


k
Distribution coefficient of carbon in products

Greek letters


λ
The mass flow of CO2 recycled to the reforming unit over the mass flow of all the CO2 separated from distillation unit

Acronyms

ASUAir separation unit
BGLBritish gas Lurgi
CACCO2 avoidance cost
CDCLCoal direct chemical-looping
CLCChemical-looping combustion
CLPCalcium-looping process
CLRChemical-looping reforming
COECost of energy
COGCoke oven gas
CTLCoal to liquid
DRIDesert Research Institute
ESREnergy saving ratio
GTGas turbine
HRSGHeat recovery steam generator
IFRFInternational Flame Research Foundation
IGCCIntegrated gasification combined cycle
IHIIshikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries
LCALifecycle assessment
LNGLiquefied natural gas
LPGLiquefied petroleum gas
LTFLow temperature flash
MESMultifunctional energy system
MPMethanol plant
NGNatural gas
NPVNet present value
ROIReturn on investment
RWGSReverse water-gas shift
SCLSyngas chemical-looping
SOECSolid oxide electrolysis cells
STSteam turbine
UNGUnconventional nature gas
WGSWater gas-shift

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51404164, 51276120, U1361202, 21376158); the Consultation Projects of Chinese Academy of Engineering (2013-ZD-14-5-2; 2013-ZD-14-7-2). Thanks Dr William A Turmelfor proofreading this paper.
References
B. P. Spigarelli and S. K. Kawatra, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 1, 69–87 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, N. Zhao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Fuel, 2013, 108, 112–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saeidi, N. A. S. Amin and M. R. Rahimpour, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 66–81 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. An, K. H. Park, M. Khraisheh and J. Tang, Catal. Today, 2014, 224, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
H. Khatib, Energy Policy, 2012, 48, 737–743 CrossRef .
G. Marland and B. Schlamadinger, Environ. Sci. Policy, 1999, 2, 111–124 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Peterson, J. Schleich and V. Duscha, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 3697–3708 CrossRef .

          W. Li, J. Feng and K.-C. Xie, Assessment of Coal-based Polygeneration System and Process Analysis, Chemical Industry Press, Beijing, China,  2011 Search PubMed .

          W. Li, Q. Yi and K.-C. Xie, A comparative study of high efficiency clean coal technologies in the US and China, Science Press, Beijing, China,  2014 Search PubMed .
T. F. Hurst, T. T. Cockerill and N. H. Florin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7132–7150 CAS .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16171–16181 RSC .
C. D. Windle and R. N. Perutz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2562–2570 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
A. Talebian-Kiakalaieh, N. A. S. Amin and H. Mazaheri, Appl. Energy, 2013, 104, 683–710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soltanieh, K. M. Azar and M. Saber, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2012, 7, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taheri Najafabadi, Int. J. Energy Res., 2013, 37, 485–499 CrossRef CAS .
H.-R. M. Jhong, S. Ma and P. J. A. Kenis, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 191–199 CrossRef .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
T. Sakakura, J.-C. Choi and H. Yasuda, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2365–2387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Dalton Trans., 2007, 2975–2992 RSC .
E. A. Quadrelli and G. Centi, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1179–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191–205 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Quadrelli, G. Centi, J.-L. Duplan and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1194–1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lal, For. Ecol. Manage., 2005, 220, 242–258 CrossRef .
J. A. Raven and P. G. Falkowski, Plant, Cell Environ., 1999, 22, 741–755 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Scholes, P. M. S. Monteiro, C. L. Sabine and J. G. Canadell, Trends Ecol. Evol., 2009, 24, 427–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. S. DOE, http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/CarbonCycle/, 2001.

          K.-C. Xie and W. Zhao, in Modern Coal Chemical Technology Books, ed. K.-C. Xie,  2012 Search PubMed .
P.-w. Dong, J.-r. Yue, S.-q. Gao and G.-w. Xu, J. Fuel Chem. Technol., 2012, 40, 897–905 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seitz, W. Heschel, T. Nägler, S. Nowak, J. Zimmermann, T. Stam-Creutz, W. Frank, J. Appelt, S. Bieling and B. Meyer, Fuel, 2014, 134, 669–676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, S. Li and H. Hu, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2012, 95, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, T. Zou, M. Zhong, Y. Zhang, R. Wu, S. Gao and G. Xu, Fuel Process. Technol., 2013, 116, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hetland and R. Anantharaman, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2009, 13, 56–63 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Zangeneh, S. Sahebdelfar and M. T. Ravanchi, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2011, 20, 219–231 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Olajire, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 74–92 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 74, 487–498 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chaiwatanodom, S. Vivanpatarakij and S. Assabumrungrat, Appl. Energy, 2014, 114, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valero and S. Usón, Energy, 2006, 31, 1643–1655 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Butterman and M. J. Castaldi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 8875–8886 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kajitani, N. Suzuki, M. Ashizawa and S. Hara, Fuel, 2006, 85, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Thanapal, K. Annamalai, J. M. Sweeten and G. Gordillo, Appl. Energy, 2012, 97, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
T. Renganathan, M. V. Yadav, S. Pushpavanam, R. K. Voolapalli and Y. S. Cho, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 83, 159–170 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Ahmed and A. K. Gupta, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 1613–1619 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mani, N. Mahinpey and P. Murugan, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2011, 66, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin and M. Strand, Appl. Energy, 2013, 109, 220–228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gonzalo-Tirado, S. Jiménez and J. Ballester, Combust. Flame, 2013, 160, 411–416 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ahmed and A. K. Gupta, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86, 2626–2634 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Irfan, M. R. Usman and K. Kusakabe, Energy, 2011, 36, 12–40 CrossRef CAS .
K. Svoboda, M. Pohořelý, M. Jeremiáš, P. Kameníková, M. Hartman, S. Skoblja and M. Šyc, Fuel Process. Technol., 2012, 95, 16–26 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Mandapati, S. Daggupati, S. M. Mahajani, P. Aghalayam, R. K. Sapru, R. K. Sharma and A. Ganesh, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 15041–15052 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, Y. Fan, W. Li and J. Feng, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 14231–14240 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
R. R. Bhosale, R. V. Shende and J. A. Puszynski, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 2924–2934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Mi, H. Liu and C. Zheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 5234–5245 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Medrano, M. Oliva, J. Ruiz, L. García and J. Arauzo, Energy, 2011, 36, 2215–2224 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abbasi and S. A. Abbasi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3034–3040 CrossRef .
W. M. Budzianowski, Heat Transfer Eng., 2012, 33, 712–721 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Budzianowski, Rynek Energii, 2010, 91, 108–115 Search PubMed .
A. Dibenedetto, A. Angelini and P. Stufano, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2014, 89, 334–353 CrossRef CAS .

          K.-C. Xie and Z. Li, Methanol and its derivatives, Chemical Industry Press, Beijing, China,  2002 Search PubMed .

          K.-C. Xie and D. Fang, Methanol technology, Chemical Industry Press, Beijing, China,  2010 Search PubMed .

          Z. Li and K.-C. Xie, Alcohol and ether fuel from coal, Chemical Industry Press, Beijing, China,  2011 Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2636–2639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, F. Li, H. Zhan, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2014, 50, 78–82 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, P. R. de la Piscina, J. Toyir and N. Homs, Catal. Today, 2015, 242(Part A), 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bonura, M. Cordaro, C. Cannilla, F. Arena and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152–153, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .

          M. K. Gnanamani, G. Jacobs, V. R. RAO, W. Pendyala and B. H. Davis, Green Carbon Dioxide: Advances in CO2 Utilization,  2014, p. 99 Search PubMed .
S. G. Jadhav, P. D. Vaidya, B. M. Bhanage and J. B. Joshi, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92, 2557–2567 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. M. Razali, K. T. Lee, S. Bhatia and A. R. Mohamed, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4951–4964 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. K. Yu, I. Curcic, J. Gabriel and S. C. E. Tsang, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 893–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saito and K. Murata, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2004, 8, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arena, K. Barbera, G. Italiano, G. Bonura, L. Spadaro and F. Frusteri, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Słoczyński, R. Grabowski, P. Olszewski, A. Kozłowska, J. Stoch, M. Lachowska and J. Skrzypek, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 310, 127–137 CrossRef .
J. Ma, N. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Shen, M. Okumura, Y. Matsumura and M. Haruta, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 213, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kim, J. Lee and D. L. Trimm, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 319–324 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Tremblay, Chem. Eng. News Arch., 2008, 86, 13 Search PubMed .
H. Schulz, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Newsome, Catal. Rev., 1980, 21, 275–318 CAS .
Y. Jin and A. K. Datye, J. Catal., 2000, 196, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
T. Riedel, G. Schaub, K.-W. Jun and K.-W. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40, 1355–1363 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Rohde, D. Unruh and G. Schaub, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 9653–9658 CrossRef CAS .
S.-r. Yan, K.-w. Jun, J.-s. Hong, S.-b. Lee, M.-j. Choi and K.-w. Lee, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 1999, 16, 357–361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nilsson, L. J. Pettersson and B. Lindström, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 2164–2169 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, J. Wang and Y. Jin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 5824–5847 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Aguayo, J. Ereña, D. Mier, J. M. Arandes, M. Olazar and J. Bilbao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 5522–5530 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Semelsberger, K. C. Ott, R. L. Borup and H. L. Greene, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 309, 210–223 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yaripour, F. Baghaei, I. Schmidt and J. Perregaard, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 542–549 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, W. Lu, M. Wang and X. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Arena, L. Spadaro, O. Di Blasi, G. Bonura and F. Frusteri, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. X. Bao and Y. Xu, Elsevier,  2004, vol. 147, pp. 385–390 Search PubMed .
W. Cho, T. Song, A. Mitsos, J. T. McKinnon, G. H. Ko, J. E. Tolsma, D. Denholm and T. Park, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Park and E. W. McFarland, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang and J. Gong, Front. Chem. Eng. China, 2011, 5, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .
F.-W. Chang, M.-S. Kuo, M.-T. Tsay and M.-C. Hsieh, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 247, 309–320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agnelli, M. Kolb and C. Mirodatos, J. Catal., 1994, 148, 9–21 CrossRef CAS .
K.-P. Yu, W.-Y. Yu, M.-C. Kuo, Y.-C. Liou and S.-H. Chien, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Kustov, A. M. Frey, K. E. Larsen, T. Johannessen, J. K. Nørskov and C. H. Christensen, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 320, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Centi, S. Perathoner and G. Iaquaniello, CO2: A Valuable Source of Carbon, Springer,  2013, pp. 27–43 Search PubMed .
M. W. Farlow and H. Adkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1935, 57, 2222–2223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2013, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Oloman and H. Li, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 385–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gassner and W. Leitner, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 1465–1466 RSC .
T. Schaub and R. A. Paciello, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7278–7282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schaub and R. A. Paciello, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 7416–7420 CrossRef .
P. G. Jessop, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 475–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tanaka, M. Yamashita and K. Nozaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14168–14169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hutschka, A. Dedieu and W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 1742–1745 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Jessop, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, Nature, 1994, 368, 231–233 CrossRef CAS .
W. Leitner, E. Dinjus and F. Gaßner, J. Organomet. Chem., 1994, 475, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
C. Federsel, R. Jackstell, A. Boddien, G. Laurenczy and M. Beller, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1048–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Federsel, A. Boddien, R. Jackstell, R. Jennerjahn, P. J. Dyson, R. Scopelliti, G. Laurenczy and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9777–9780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Federsel, A. Boddien, R. Jackstell, R. Jennerjahn, P. J. Dyson, R. Scopelliti, G. Laurenczy and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 9971–9974 CrossRef .
W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., 1995, 107, 2391–2405 CrossRef .
Y. Izumi, H. Kurakata and K.-i. Aika, J. Catal., 1998, 175, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inui, T. Yamamoto, M. Inoue, H. Hara, T. Takeguchi and J.-B. Kim, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 395–406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kusama, K. Okabe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inui and T. Yamamoto, Catal. Today, 1998, 45, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .
K. Higuchi, Y. Haneda, K. Tabata, Y. Nakahara and M. Takagawa, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 114, 517–520 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takagawa, A. Okamoto, H. Fujimura, Y. Izawa and H. Arakawa, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 114, 525–528 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kusama, K. Okabe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Energy, 1997, 22, 343–348 CrossRef CAS .
M.-L. Kontkanen, L. Oresmaa, M. A. Moreno, J. Jänis, E. Laurila and M. Haukka, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 365, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Dry, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 227–241 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song and W. Pan, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 463–484 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bitter, K. Seshan and J. A. Lercher, J. Catal., 1997, 171, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, P. Chen, H. Fang, X. Zheng and T. Yashima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 555–561 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rezaei, S. M. Alavi, S. Sahebdelfar and Z.-F. Yan, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 923–929 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, S. Li, S. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Zhou, L. Chen and X. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Bertero, A. F. Trasarti, B. Moraweck, A. Borgna and A. J. Marchi, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 358, 32–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huo, J. Jing and W. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 21015–21023 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Teuner, P. Neumann and F. Von Linde, Oil Gas Eur. Mag., 2001, 3, 44–46 Search PubMed .
J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
S.-B. Tang, F.-L. Qiu, Sh.-J. Lu and M.-M. Zhao, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 1996, 5, 327–333 CAS .
V. R. Choudhary and K. C. Mondal, Appl. Energy, 2006, 83, 1024–1032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Hu and E. Ruckenstein, Adv. Catal., 2004, 48, 297–345 CAS .
S. L. Lakhapatri and M. A. Abraham, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 364, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yagi, R. Kanai, S. Wakamatsu, R. Kajiyama, Y. Suehiro and M. Shimura, Catal. Today, 2005, 104, 2–6 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Ha, J. W. Bae, K.-J. Woo and K.-W. Jun, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1412–1417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tomishige, M. Nurunnabi, K. Maruyama and K. Kunimori, Fuel Process. Technol., 2004, 85, 1103–1120 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Song, A. F. Gaffney and K. Fujimoto, ACS Symposium Series,  2002 Search PubMed .
A. Behr and G. Henze, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 25–39 RSC .
M. R. Kember, A. Buchard and C. K. Williams, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 141–163 RSC .
R. Martin and A. W. Kleij, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1259–1263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. North, R. Pasquale and C. Young, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1514–1539 RSC .
S. N. Riduan and Y. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 3347–3357 RSC .
M. Peters, B. Köhler, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, P. Markewitz and T. E. Müller, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1216–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Li, B. Markley, A. R. Mohan, V. Rodriguez-Santiago, D. Thompson and D. Niekerk, Design Engineering of Energy and Geo-Environmental Systems Course (EGEE 580). Internal document for a course. College of Earth and Mineral Science [Links], 2006.
D. M. Alonso, S. G. Wettstein and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8075–8098 RSC .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, X. Kai, Y. Sun, Y. He and R. Li, Fuel, 2011, 90, 2454–2460 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Kai, T. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. He and S. Shen, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 83, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nzihou, B. Stanmore and P. Sharrock, Energy, 2013, 58, 305–317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Huang and Y. Fang, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 173, 11–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Morgan and R. Kandiyoti, Chem. Rev., 2013, 114, 1547–1607 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, J. Feng, M. Ji, T. Ding, Y. Qin and W. Li, Fuel Process. Technol., 2013, 115, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Seo, J. H. Goo, S. D. Kim, S. H. Lee and Y. C. Choi, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 3108–3118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, E. Velo, X. Roca, J. Manya and L. Puigjaner, Fuel, 2000, 79, 1317–1326 CrossRef CAS .
I. Aigner, C. Pfeifer and H. Hofbauer, Fuel, 2011, 90, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS .
N. Howaniec and A. Smoliński, Fuel, 2014, 128, 442–450 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Clarens, E. P. Resurreccion, M. A. White and L. M. Colosi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1813–1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and G. Barberio, Fuel Process. Technol., 2005, 86, 1679–1693 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kadam, Energy, 2002, 27, 905–922 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mallick, BioMetals, 2002, 15, 377–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Izumi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 171–186 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Aresta and A. Dibenedetto, Advances in Organometallic Chemistry and Catalysis: The Silver/Gold Jubilee International Conference on Organometallic Chemistry Celebratory Book, Wiley, November,  2013, pp. 513-527 Search PubMed.
G. Centi, S. Perathoner, G. Winè and M. Gangeri, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 671–678 RSC .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 948–961 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir and N. S. Amin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 25, 560–579 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Chen, H.-C. Chou, J. C. S. Wu and H.-Y. Lin, J. Mater. Res., 2008, 23, 1364–1370 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kočí, L. Obalová, L. Matějová, D. Plachá, Z. Lacný, J. Jirkovský and O. Šolcová, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 494–502 CrossRef .
H. Takeda, K. Koike, H. Inoue and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2023–2031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-V. Nguyen and J. Wu, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 335, 112–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamamura, H. Kojima, J. Iyoda and W. Kawai, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 225, 287–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitano, M. Matsuoka, M. Ueshima and M. Anpo, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 325, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 35–54 CrossRef .
K. Tanaka and D. Ooyama, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 226, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura, J. R. Ferrell Iii, A. V. Cugini, E. S. Smotkin and M. D. Salazar-Villalpando, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Saito, M. Takeuchi and T. Watanabe, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 218, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ganesh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 221–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Otero, B. Batanero and F. Barba, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 2171–2173 CrossRef CAS .
J. Damodar, S. R. Krishna Mohan and S. R. Jayarama Reddy, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 762–766 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bringmann and E. Dinjus, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 15, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Gu, Y. Deng and F. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2002, 274–275 RSC .
F. Köster, E. Dinjus and E. Duñach, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2001, 2507–2511 CrossRef .
K. Subramanian, K. Asokan, D. Jeevarathinam and M. Chandrasekaran, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and C. Oloman, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 1105–1115 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B42–B49 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mignard and C. Pritchard, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2006, 84, 828–836 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Energy Fuels, 2005, 20, 409–414 CrossRef .
R. P. S. Chaplin and A. A. Wragg, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 1107–1123 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Jayashree, M. Mitchell, D. Natarajan, L. J. Markoski and P. J. A. Kenis, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6871–6874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Brushett, W.-P. Zhou, R. S. Jayashree and P. J. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B565–B571 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bidrawn, G. Kim, G. Corre, J. Irvine, J. M. Vohs and R. Gorte, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B167–B170 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Hollinger, R. J. Maloney, R. S. Jayashree, D. Natarajan, L. J. Markoski and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3523–3528 CrossRef CAS .
B. Belaissaoui, G. Cabot, M.-S. Cabot, D. Willson and E. Favre, Energy, 2012, 38, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
E. Favre, R. Bounaceur and D. Roizard, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 68, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
B. Abraham, J. Asbury, E. Lynch and A. Teotia, Oil Gas J., 1982, 80, 68–70, 75 CAS .
F. Normann, H. Thunman and F. Johnsson, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheng, X. Liu, J. Si, Y. Xu, Z. Zhou and M. Xu, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2014, 27, 267–278 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Oboirien, B. C. North and T. Kleyn, Energy, 2014, 66, 550–555 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, A. Runstedtler, A. Majeski, R. Yandon, K. Zanganeh and A. Shafeen, Fuel, 2015, 140, 578–589 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, H. Sun, C. Zhao, W. Zhou and X. Chen, Fuel, 2014, 127, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Jillson, V. Chapalamadugu and B. Erik Ydstie, J. Process Control, 2009, 19, 1470–1485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu and J. Yan, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Yan, J. Yan and M. Anheden, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86, 202–213 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, L. Gao, W. Han and H. Hong, Energy, 2010, 35, 4499–4506 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wall, Y. Liu, C. Spero, L. Elliott, S. Khare, R. Rathnam, F. Zeenathal, B. Moghtaderi, B. Buhre and C. Sheng, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2009, 87, 1003–1016 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, R. Zailani and B. M. Gibbs, Fuel, 2005, 84, 2109–2115 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, R. Zailani and B. M. Gibbs, Fuel, 2005, 84, 833–840 CrossRef CAS .
B. Buhre, L. Elliott, C. Sheng, R. Gupta and T. Wall, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2005, 31, 283–307 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bhatelia, C. e. Li, Y. Sun, P. Hazewinkel, N. Burke and V. Sage, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 125, 277–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Fang, Y. Wang and D.-k. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 512–516 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koumi Ngoh and D. Njomo, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 6782–6792 CrossRef CAS .
S. Galli and M. Stefanoni, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 453–458 CrossRef .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013–4029 CrossRef CAS .
V. Utgikar and T. Thiesen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 939–944 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, H. R. Kim, D. Sridhar, F. Wang, L. Zeng, J. Chen and L. S. Fan, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4182–4189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishida, D. Zheng and T. Akehata, Energy, 1987, 12, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dewulf, H. Van Langenhove, B. Muys, S. Bruers, B. R. Bakshi, G. F. Grubb, D. Paulus and E. Sciubba, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2221–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, L. Zeng, L. G. Velazquez-Vargas, Z. Yoscovits and L.-S. Fan, AIChE J., 2010, 56, 2186–2199 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin and M. Ishida, Fuel, 2004, 83, 2411–2417 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mattisson, M. Johansson and A. Lyngfelt, Fuel, 2006, 85, 736–747 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gupta, L. G. Velazquez-Vargas and L.-S. Fan, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 2900–2908 CrossRef CAS .
H. Leion, T. Mattisson and A. Lyngfelt, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1947–1958 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, F. Li and S. Ramkumar, Particuology, 2008, 6, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Fan, F. Li, L. G. Velazquez-Vargas and S. Ramkumar, 9th International Conference on Circulating Fluidized Beds, 2008.
J. Adanez, A. Abad, F. Garcia-Labiano, P. Gayan and L. F. de Diego, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2012, 38, 215–282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chuang, J. Dennis, A. Hayhurst and S. Scott, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 3917–3927 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kolbitsch, J. Bolhar-Nordenkampf, T. Pröll and H. Hofbauer, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 5542–5547 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kolbitsch, J. Bolhàr-Nordenkampf, T. Pröll and H. Hofbauer, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2010, 4, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, J. Wu, J. Xiao, Q. Song and R. Xiao, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2498–2505 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Ströhle, M. Orth and B. Epple, Proc 1st Int Conf on Chemical Looping. Lyon, France, 2010.
S. Wang, G. Wang, F. Jiang, M. Luo and H. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1353–1360 CAS .
K. Svoboda, A. Siewiorek, D. Baxter, J. Rogut and M. Pohořelý, Energy Convers. Manage., 2008, 49, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
K. Svoboda, G. Slowinski, J. Rogut and D. Baxter, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 3063–3073 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang and Y. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 2272–2277 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fang, L. Tian, M. Fu and M. Sun, Appl. Energy, 2013, 110, 17–28 CrossRef .
S. Niu, Y. Ding, Y. Niu, Y. Li and G. Luo, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 2121–2131 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Jenkins, Energy Policy, 2014, 69, 467–477 CrossRef .
C. Lu, Q. Tong and X. Liu, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 7278–7285 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, P. Liu, J. Y. Zhang and Z. Li, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 524, 2420–2424 CrossRef .
Q. Yi, J. Feng, Y. Wu and W. Li, Energy, 2014, 66, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, B. Lu, J. Feng, Y. Wu and W. Li, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 1459–1469 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cai, H. Jin, L. Gao and H. Hong, Energy, 2010, 35, 4375–4382 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan and B. Chen, AIChE J., 2012, 58, 3370–3389 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-f. Tan, H.-j. Zhang, Q.-s. Shi, Y.-h. Song and L.-w. Ju, Energy Build., 2014, 76, 572–587 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Yang, C. Dong, T. Morosuk and G. Tsatsaronis, Appl. Energy, 2014, 115, 254–264 CrossRef .
Y. Li, S. Liao and G. Liu, Int. J. Elec. Power, 2015, 64, 167–175 CrossRef .
P. Ahmadi, I. Dincer and M. A. Rosen, Energy, 2014, 68, 958–970 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, H. Jin, L. Gao and X. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2014, 130, 552–561 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lythcke-Jørgensen, F. Haglind and L. R. Clausen, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 85, 817–827 CrossRef .
N. L. Panwar, S. C. Kaushik and S. Kothari, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2012, 4, 023111 CrossRef .
O. K. Singh and S. C. Kaushik, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2013, 51, 787–800 CrossRef .
M. Ehyaei, A. Mozafari and M. Alibiglou, Energy, 2011, 36, 6851–6861 Search PubMed .
G. D. Vučković, M. M. Stojiljković, M. V. Vukić, G. M. Stefanović and E. M. Dedeić, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 85, 655–662 CrossRef .
D. Bahrehmand and M. Ameri, Renewable Energy, 2015, 74, 357–368 CrossRef CAS .
E. Açıkkalp, H. Aras and A. Hepbasli, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 82, 146–153 CrossRef .
N. Nakaten, R. Schlüter, R. Azzam and T. Kempka, Energy, 2014, 66, 779–790 CrossRef .
R. Mikučionienė, V. Martinaitis and E. Keras, Energy Build., 2014, 76, 64–71 CrossRef .
A. Mazzucco and M. Rokni, Energy, 2014, 76, 114–129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, E. N. Pistikopoulos and Z. Li, AIChE J., 2010, 56, 1218–1234 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tsatsaronis, Energy, 2007, 32, 249–253 CrossRef .
A. Franzoni, L. Magistri, A. Traverso and A. Massardo, Energy, 2008, 33, 311–320 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tsatsaronis, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 1993, 19, 227–257 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Yucer and A. Hepbasli, Energy Build., 2012, 47, 592–599 CrossRef .
M. Rokni, Energy, 2014, 76, 19–31 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Q. Wang, M. Fang, Z. Luo and K. Cen, Appl. Energy, 2014, 113, 1301–1314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Lee, K. Y. Ahn, T. Morosuk and G. Tsatsaronis, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 85, 154–164 CrossRef .
A. Arsalis and A. Alexandrou, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2014, 21, 209–220 CrossRef .
O. K. Singh and S. C. Kaushik, Energy Convers. Manage., 2013, 71, 32–42 CrossRef .
J. L. Silveira, W. d. Q. Lamas, C. E. Tuna, I. A. d. C. Villela and L. S. Miro, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 2894–2906 CrossRef .
J.-H. Han, J.-H. Ryu and I.-B. Lee, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2013, 91, 1427–1439 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sirikitputtisak, H. Mirzaesmaeeli, P. L. Douglas, E. Croiset, A. Elkamel and M. Gupta, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 4339–4346 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, J. Feng and W. Y. Li, Fuel, 2012, 96, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Binder, J. Cleaner Prod., 2007, 15, 1596–1604 CrossRef .
L. Johnston, F. Díaz-González, O. Gomis-Bellmunt, C. Corchero-García and M. Cruz-Zambrano, Appl. Energy, 2015, 137, 660–669 CrossRef .
T. A. H. Ratlamwala, I. Dincer and M. Aydin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 18704–18712 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Dimopoulos, I. C. Stefanatos and N. M. P. Kakalis, Energy, 2013, 58, 17–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Ahamed, N. A. Madlool, R. Saidur, M. I. Shahinuddin, A. Kamyar and H. H. Masjuki, Energy, 2012, 46, 664–674 CrossRef .
C. Milan, C. Bojesen and M. P. Nielsen, Energy, 2012, 48, 118–127 CrossRef .
J.-J. Wang, Y.-Y. Jing, C.-F. Zhang and J.-H. Zhao, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2263–2278 CrossRef .
H. Ren, W. Zhou, K. i. Nakagami, W. Gao and Q. Wu, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 3642–3651 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Jing, H. Bai and J.-J. Wang, Energy, 2012, 37, 405–416 CrossRef .
G. Abdollahi and M. Meratizaman, Energy Build., 2011, 43, 3144–3153 CrossRef .
M. Ebrahimi, A. Keshavarz and A. Jamali, Energy Build., 2012, 45, 202–210 CrossRef .
B. Jabbari, N. Tahouni, A. Ataei and M. H. Panjeshahi, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2013, 61, 88–97 CrossRef .
J.-y. Wu, J.-l. Wang and S. Li, Energy, 2012, 48, 472–483 CrossRef .
G. Abdollahi and H. Sayyaadi, Energy Build., 2013, 60, 330–344 CrossRef .
K. C. Kavvadias and Z. B. Maroulis, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 945–954 CrossRef .
J. I. Manassaldi, P. L. Mores, N. J. Scenna and S. F. Mussati, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 17026–17042 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Han and I.-B. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 13435–13443 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, M. C. Georgiadis and E. N. Pistikopoulos, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 50, 4915–4926 CrossRef .
A. K. Kralj and P. Glavič, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 2892–2899 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Kralj and P. Glavič, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 6953–6962 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Xu, J. Chen and F. Yang, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 899–905 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, H. Han, M. Yuan, H. Li, F. Fang and K. Wang, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 5454–5460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yi, B. Lu, J. Feng, Y. Wu and W. Li, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 1459–1469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oki, J. Inumaru, S. Hara, M. Kobayashi, H. Watanabe, S. Umemoto and H. Makino, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 1066–1073 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Jillson, V. Chapalamadugu and B. Erik Ydstie, J. Process Control, 2009, 19, 1470–1485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Q. Yang, Y. Man, D. Xiang and Y. Qian, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 14406–14414 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kidoguchi, S. Hara, Y. Oki and S. Kajitani, ASME 2011 Power Conference collocated with JSME ICOPE 2011, 2011 2, 485–492.
D. Singh, E. Croiset, P. L. Douglas and M. A. Douglas, Energy Convers. Manage., 2003, 44, 3073–3091 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, H. Zhao, C. Zheng, Z. Liu, L. Zeng, H. Liu and J. Qiu, Fuel, 2009, 88, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Man, S. Yang, D. Xiang, X. Li and Y. Qian, J. Cleaner Prod., 2014, 71, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, W. Li and W. Zhao, Energy, 2010, 35, 4349–4355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lim, C.-J. Lee, Y. S. Jeong, I. H. Song, C. J. Lee and C. Han, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 4982–4989 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ng, N. Zhang and J. Sadhukhan, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2011, 14, 443–451 CrossRef .
H. Lin, H. Jin, L. Gao and N. Zhang, Energy, 2014, 74, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Adams Ii and P. I. Barton, Fuel Process. Technol., 2011, 92, 639–655 CrossRef .
J. M. Bermúdez, N. Ferrera-Lorenzo, S. Luque, A. Arenillas and J. A. Menéndez, Fuel Process. Technol., 2013, 115, 215–221 CrossRef .
C. He and X. Feng, Energy, 2012, 43, 344–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Man, S. Yang, J. Zhang and Y. Qian, Appl. Energy, 2014, 133, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, S. Hu, Y. Li and Q. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 136, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, S. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Chen and H. Meng, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 169, 220–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lv, M. Xu, X. Liu, Z. Zhan, Z. Li and H. Yao, Fuel Process. Technol., 2010, 91, 903–909 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han and H. Kim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 397–416 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fei, J. Zhang, F. Wang and J. Wang, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2012, 95, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Collot, Y. Zhuo, D. R. Dugwell and R. Kandiyoti, Fuel, 1999, 78, 667–679 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, E. D. Larson, R. H. Williams, T. G. Kreutz and X. Guo, Energy Fuels, 2010, 25, 415–437 CrossRef .
P. Trop, B. Anicic and D. Goricanec, Energy, 2014, 77, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Cormos, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2014, 37, 139–144 Search PubMed .
M. Ruhul Kabir and A. Kumar, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 394–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Williams, E. D. Larson, G. Liu and T. G. Kreutz, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 4379–4386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, J. Wang, Q. Cheng and D. DeVallance, Int. J. Energy Res., 2012, 36, 856–870 CrossRef CAS .
M. Muresan, C. Cormos and P. Agachi, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2014, 6, 013131 CrossRef .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 21–35 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, N. Weidou, Z. Hongtao and M. Linwei, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2003, 7, 57–62 CrossRef .
J. C. Meerman, A. Ramírez, W. C. Turkenburg and A. P. C. Faaij, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 6083–6102 CrossRef .
J. C. Meerman, A. Ramírez, W. C. Turkenburg and A. P. C. Faaij, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 2563–2587 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kaggerud, O. Bolland and T. Gundersen, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2006, 26, 1345–1352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, T. A. Adams and P. I. Barton, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 50, 5099–5113 CrossRef .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, J.-P. Jones, G. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995–8048 RSC .
M. Steinberg and V.-D. Dang, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 97–112 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Dang and M. Steinberg, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 133–140 CrossRef .

          Y. Yamauchi, Y. Tokita, N. Murakami, K. Takita, Y. Mori, K. Muraishi, S. Kaneko, S. Uchida, N. Ukeguchi and S. Shirakawa, Method for producing methanol by use of nuclear heat and power generating plant, US Pat., US5479462,  1995 Search PubMed .
É. S. Van-Dal and C. Bouallou, J. Cleaner Prod., 2013, 57, 38–45 CrossRef .
K. Hashimoto, M. Yamasaki, K. Fujimura, T. Matsui, K. Izumiya, M. Komori, A. El-Moneim, E. Akiyama, H. Habazaki and N. Kumagai, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1999, 267, 200–206 CrossRef .
K. Hashimoto, M. Yamasaki, S. Meguro, T. Sasaki, H. Katagiri, K. Izumiya, N. Kumagai, H. Habazaki, E. Akiyama and K. Asami, Corros. Sci., 2002, 44, 371–386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Perathoner and G. Centi, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1274–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Global Change, Energy Issues and Regulation Policies, Springer,  2013, pp. 143–160 Search PubMed .
A. Boretti, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 21–35 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi, G. Iaquaniello and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1265–1273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 195–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. de_Richter and S. Caillol, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. de_Richter, T. Ming and S. Caillol, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 19, 82–106 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Pearson, M. D. Eisaman, J. W. Turner, P. P. Edwards, Z. Jiang, V. L. Kuznetsov, K. A. Littau, L. Di Marco and S. G. Taylor, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 440–460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, D. Martin and J. Tang, Chin. J. Catal., 2011, 32, 879–890 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, H. Wang, Y. Shi and N. Cai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11104–11109 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim-Lohsoontorn and J. Bae, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7161–7168 CrossRef CAS .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen and M. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192, 398–403 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhan, W. Kobsiriphat, J. R. Wilson, M. Pillai, I. Kim and S. A. Barnett, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3089–3096 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen, Advances in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells IV: Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings,  2009, vol. 48, p. 273 Search PubMed .
Y. E. Fouih and C. Bouallou, Energy Procedia, 2013, 37, 6679–6686 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, C. Mabilat, M. Zahid, A. Brisse and L. Gautier, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1382–1397 CAS .
Y. Redissi and C. Bouallou, Energy Procedia, 2013, 37, 6667–6678 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Qun Yi
	Qun Yi obtained his PhD degree from Taiyuan University of Technology (TUT) in 2013. Subsequently, he joined the research group of Prof. Wenying Li to work on clean coal technology. He went to Curtin University of Technology in Australia as a visiting scholar in 2014. His research focuses on system integration and design technology of coal conversion, and the lifecycle analysis of energy conversion systems.

Wenying Li
	Wenying Li received her PhD from Dalian University of Technology in 1995. After a year as a postdoctoral researcher at Imperial College, London, UK, and after a year as Senior Visiting Scholar at the Max-Planck Institute for Coal Research, Germany, she spent the next 17 years at the faculty of TUT as a Professor of Chemical Engineering. She cooperated with the Energy Systems Analysis Group at PEI in Princeton University, USA, for 3 months in 2013. Her current research is entirely focused on enabling the discovery and design of processes and catalysts for sustainable energy, including converting coal to liquid and fuels, providing clean conversion technology from lower rank coal and poor quality coal, clean and efficient catalytic pyrolysis and the gasification of lignite and biomass, and optimizing traditional coal conversion processes and integrating a carbon-based polygeneration system of carbon mitigation initiative.

Jie Feng
	Jie Feng was born in Taiyuan, Shanxi, China. He received his bachelor's degree (1989) and PhD (1998) in Chemical Engineering and Chemical Technology from Taiyuan University of Technology. After a year as a postdoctoral researcher at the Monash University, Australia, and after a year as Senior Visiting Scholar at the University of Florida, USA, he spent the next 15 years on the faculty of TUT as a Professor of Chemical Engineering. His current research is entirely focused on the design of coal-to-liquid fuels processes and scaling-up the reactor for coal/biomass gasification and optimizing traditional coal conversion processes.

Kechang Xie
	Kechang Xie is the former Vice President of the Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE) and a professor specialized in coal and chemical engineering. He was an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering (2003) and a Foreign Associate of the NAE (2013) for understanding coal molecular structure and its reactivity and for leadership in the modern clean coal conversion industry. He graduated from Tianjin University in 1968, and gained his Master's degree at the Taiyuan Institute of Technology in 1981. From 1983 to 1985, he continued his study as a visiting scholar at the University of South Carolina in the United States. Between 1998 and 1999, he was engaged in doctoral dissertations at Shinshu University in Japan and was honored with PhD in Engineering in the field of energy.

 	Fig. 1  The fast movement of carbon between land, atmosphere, and ocean.27 (Yellow numbers are natural fluxes, and red are human contributions in gigatons of carbon per year. White numbers indicate stored carbon.)	 

Lignite	8.5–16.5
Bituminous coal	21–33.5
Anthracite	25–32.5
Oil	41–45
Natural gas	∼36
Biomass	14–18
Solar energy	16 MJ (m2 day)−1

Methane	890.3	55.5
Ethane	1558.3	51.8
Ethylene	1411	50.4
Propane	2217.8	50.4
Propylene	2049	48.8
Methanol	726.5	22.7
Gasoline	
	∼43
Diesel	
	∼46
Hydrogen	285.8	142.9

 	Fig. 2  Sustainable energy relationship between the energy grade and energy density.	 

 	Fig. 3  The routes from coal to chemicals based on differently ranked coals.	 

 	Fig. 4  The comprehensive performance of coal to chemicals.	 

 	Fig. 5  Possible routes for CO2 conversion.	 
CO2 + 3H2 = CH3OH + H2O	(1)
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O	(2)
CO + 2H2 → CnH2n + CnH2n+2 + H2O + CO2 (n = 1, 2,…)	(3)
2CH3OH → CH3OCH3 + H2O	(4)
CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O	(5)
CO2 + H2 → HCOOH	(6)
2CO2 + 6H2 ↔ C2H5OH + 3H2O	(7)
Dry reforming: CH4 + CO2 = 2CO + 2H2	(8)
Steam reforming: CH4 + H2O = CO + 3H2	(9)
Partial oxidation: CH4 + 1/2O2 = CO + 2H2	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 6  Summary of the organic chemicals produced from CO2. (Elaborated from ref. 145).	 

 	Fig. 7  Carbon cycle for the production of synthetic chemicals and fuels from biomass and coal.	 

 	Fig. 8  Proposed schematic of oxy-fuel technology.	 
H2O + CO ↔ CO2 + H2	(12)

Cost, €	1.10–1.15	1.15–1.5	3.5–2.2	2.8–4	3.8–5.2	3.5

Wind/electric	1.2
Hydroelectric	2.1
Nuclear/steam electrolysis	2
Solar thermal	2.5
Biomass	3.1
Solar photovoltaic	6.5
Methane steam reforming	12.1

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of chemical looping processes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Diagram of CO2 recycle in coal conversion process.	 

 	Fig. 11  Carbon value in the carbon conversion process and recycle.	 

Denmark	Approx. 18	2002	Levied on hydrocarbon fuels according to the level of pollution each source emits
Ireland	20	2010	Applied to kerosene, marked gas oil, liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, and natural gas
Netherlands	19.53	1992 & 1996	Collected on hydrocarbon fuels only for energy use; a 50/50 carbon/energy tax, which is assessed partly on carbon content and partly on energy content
Sweden	140	1997	Levied on transport, space heating, and non-combined heat and power generation
Norway	21	1991	Levied on hydrocarbon fuels
Switzerland	11.41	2008	Collected on hydrocarbon fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas, unless they are used for energy
Canada	15–30	2007–2008	Implemented in Quebec, British Columbia, Alberta
United States	Approx. 5	2006–2010	Implemented in Colorado, California, Maryland
South Africa	—	2010	Applied at the time of sale; 9.72 USD is added to the price for every gram of CO2 per kilometer the vehicle emits over 120 g km−1
India	$1.07 per t-coal	2010	Levied on produced or imported coal into India
Costa Rica	3.5% of fuel price	1997	Levied on hydrocarbon fuels

 	Fig. 12  Basic principles for integration of coal chemical production system with CO2 recycle.	 

 	Fig. 13  The brief flow sheet of the mathematical programming-based approach.	 

 	Fig. 14  Coal gasification with CO2 recycle for coal chemical production.	 

 	Fig. 15  Scheme of CO2 conversion and recycle in coal chemical engineering coupled with CH4-rich gas.	 

 	Fig. 16  CO2 conversion and recycle in advanced coal chemical engineering by using of a biological system.	 

 	Fig. 17  Concept of coal chemical engineering with CO2 recycling as a feedstock for organic synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 18  CO2 recycle in coal chemical engineering integrated with carbon-free energy.	 

 	Fig. 19  The possible pathways of CO2 recycling coupled with non-carbon energy for hydrocarbon fuels or chemicals synthesis [modified from ref. 334].	 

 	Fig. 20  CO2 recycling in the methanol economy (modified from ref. 335).	 

 	Fig. 21  Diagram of MES with CO2 recycle.	 

 	Fig. 22  Flow diagram of the PL-CRS system.52	 

 	Fig. 23  Equivalent-carbon flow and exergy flow chart for the novel system.52	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic of a dual-gas polygeneration system for power and methanol production with CO2 recycle.	 

 	Fig. 25  Evaluation of a newly designed polygeneration system with CO2 recycle.245	 

 	Fig. 26  The development route for CO2 recycle in advanced coal chemical engineering.	 
C1	CO2 emission caused by energy consumption
CALCOR	Reforming process combined with CO2 recovery and CO purification
CANMET	Canada Centre for Mineral and Energy Technology
CAPEX	Capital expense
CCR	CO2 capture and recycling
CCS	CO2 capture and storage
Ccoal	Carbon cost in coal
Ce	The total energy cost
Cne	The total non-energy cost
CSP	Concentrators of solar power
C-tax	CO2 tax
DMC	Dimethyl carbonate
DME	Dimethyl ether
D-PL	Dual gas polygeneration system
D-PL-CR	Dual gas polygeneration system with CO2 recycle
DOE	Department of Energy
ERC	Electrochemical reduction of CO2
FT	Fischer–Tropsch
GHG	Greenhouse gas
Gt C per year	Gigaton carbon per year
GTL	Gas-to-liquid
GTR	Gas-to-chemical resources
GW h	Gigawatt hour
HZSM-5	Hydrogen zeolite Socony mobilwj-five
IGCC-CCS	Integrated gasification combined cycle with CO2 capture and storage
IGCC-CRS	Integrated gasification combined cycle with CO2 recycling and storage
IMR	Institute for Materials Research
IPCC	Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRR	Internal rate of return
JOGMEC	Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation
KOGAS	Korea gas corporation
MeOH	Methanol
Mt per year	Megaton per year
MWth	Megawatt thermal
OPEX	Operating expense
PEC	Photoelectrocatalytic
PIS	Capital cost saving ratio
PL-CCS	Polygeneration system with CO2 capture and storage
PL-CRS	Polygeneration system with CO2 recycle and storage
PV	Photovoltaic
RCO2	Renewable CO2
RD&D	Research, development and demonstration
SPARG	Sulfur passivated reforming
USD	US dollar
UV	Ultraviolet

k
	Distribution coefficient of carbon in products

λ
	The mass flow of CO2 recycled to the reforming unit over the mass flow of all the CO2 separated from distillation unit
ASU	Air separation unit
BGL	British gas Lurgi
CAC	CO2 avoidance cost
CDCL	Coal direct chemical-looping
CLC	Chemical-looping combustion
CLP	Calcium-looping process
CLR	Chemical-looping reforming
COE	Cost of energy
COG	Coke oven gas
CTL	Coal to liquid
DRI	Desert Research Institute
ESR	Energy saving ratio
GT	Gas turbine
HRSG	Heat recovery steam generator
IFRF	International Flame Research Foundation
IGCC	Integrated gasification combined cycle
IHI	Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries
LCA	Lifecycle assessment
LNG	Liquefied natural gas
LPG	Liquefied petroleum gas
LTF	Low temperature flash
MES	Multifunctional energy system
MP	Methanol plant
NG	Natural gas
NPV	Net present value
ROI	Return on investment
RWGS	Reverse water-gas shift
SCL	Syngas chemical-looping
SOEC	Solid oxide electrolysis cells
ST	Steam turbine
UNG	Unconventional nature gas
WGS	Water gas-shift

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
