Controllable synthesis of graphitic carbon nitride nanomaterials for solar energy conversion and environmental remediation: the road travelled and the ...  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CY01061G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CY01061G
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 4576-4599Controllable synthesis of graphitic carbon nitride nanomaterials for solar energy conversion and environmental remediation: the road travelled and the way forward

        
          
            Waheed 
            Iqbal
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xu 
            Zhao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Rauf
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Waqas
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Gong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jinlong 
            Zhang
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Yanping 
            Mao
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: maoy@szu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86 755 26558094
bShenzhen Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecological Remediation, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China
cKey Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Institute of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 130-Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, P. R. China. E-mail: jlzhang@ecust.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 21 64252062;   Tel: +86 21 64252062
dKey Laboratory of Drinking Water Science and Technology, Research Centre for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China
Received 
      24th May 2018
    , Accepted 17th July 2018First published on 18th July 2018AbstractIn recent years, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has elicited interdisciplinary research attention and experienced a renaissance as a highly active metal-free and visible-light-driven photocatalyst due to it bringing about a dramatic cost-effective increase in the conversion of solar energy into electricity and fuels, along with its use under solar light for environmental purification. This is because of its appropriate electronic energy band structures, efficient optical absorption, and extraordinary thermochemical stability. In the current review, the cutting-edge research progress in the synthesis and design of high-efficiency g-C3N4-based nanomaterial photocatalysts with controllable structures and morphologies will be rationally discussed with special focus on a plenitude of not only photocatalytic applications in pollutant degradation and bacterial disinfection, but also photoredox applications towards H2 production from water splitting, photocatalytic O2 reduction to produce H2O2, N2 photofixation, and photoreduction of CO2. Finally, this critical review will conclude with a summary and some outlooks on the ongoing challenges, which provide new research opportunities for the advancement of g-C3N4-based metal-free nanomaterial photocatalysts. It is envisaged that this review article will shed light on and pave the way for new research avenues for the rational design and synthesis of the next generations of g-C3N4 heterogeneous photocatalysts for the advancement of a sustainable future.
1. Introduction
The increasing global energy shortage and deteriorating environmental situations owing to the depletion of non-renewable energy sources have aroused public attention tremendously in the last few decades. Semiconductor-based photocatalytic technologies have been widely accepted as one of the alternative modus operandi to tackle the rising energy demands and environmental challenges, and years of persistent research have been directed towards the development of this sustainable process for a profound, promising and reliable approach towards clean and green energy generation and environmental remediation after the technological breakthrough of photocatalytic water splitting using a TiO2 electrode in 1972.1–5
After this milestone in the field of catalysis, many semiconductors have been found to be promising photocatalysts under ultraviolet or visible light, for instance, TiO2,6–10 ZnO,11,12 Fe2O3,13–15 BiVO4,16,17 CdS,18–20 TaON,21,22 Ta3N5 (ref. 23) and many more. The photocatalytic chemical reaction principally comprises three steps: photon absorption, radiative charge carrier generation and separation, and surface catalytic chemical reaction. Therefore, any advancement of the photocatalytic performance needs improvement of these three processes. Recently, significant efforts have been made to advance active and stable semiconductor photocatalysts for water splitting to generate H2,24–28 carbon dioxide reduction to hydrocarbon fuels,29–34 photodegradation of noxious organic pollutants35–37 and bacterial disinfection38–40 that can work under clean and inexhaustible solar energy.
In the quest for robust and chemically stable visible-light-driven (VLD) semiconductor photocatalysts, polymeric graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a fascinating earth-abundant visible-light-driven photocatalyst, has recently gained particular attention owing to its advantageous intrinsic features, for instance, good physicochemical stability (nearly 600 °C in air), non-toxicity, unique two-dimensional structure and appealing electronic indirect bandgap (2.7 eV) semiconducting properties. These inherent characteristics make it suitable for direct application in the field of sustainable photochemistry as a multifunctional metal-free photocatalyst. Nevertheless, the utilisation of graphitic carbon nitride in the heterogeneous catalysis domain began only about 12 years ago in 2006 for catalysing the Friedel–Crafts reaction.41 The same group in 2009 revealed that g-C3N4 can be utilized as a next-generation metal-free polymeric photocatalyst for H2 production.42 However, bulk g-C3N4 has some limitations, such as expeditious recombination of radiative charge carriers, low specific surface area, and restrained visible light exploitation. Consequently, several protocols, for instance, controllable morphologies with different geometrical shapes, nanostructured design, texture modification, exfoliation strategies, elemental doping, and supramolecular preorganization have been successively applied to ameliorate the photocatalytic efficiency of bulk g-C3N4.43–50
Although remarkable developments have been made on g-C3N4-based photocatalysts in recent years, and some good reviews have been published on this hot topic elucidating the preparation techniques, distinctive features and promising applications, the prevailing prospects of g-C3N4 semiconductor nanomaterial photocatalysts are still highly unexplored.51–54 It is anticipated that studies on graphitic carbon nitride-based material photocatalysts will increase quickly over the next 5 years or beyond as is evident from the annual research progress shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, we consider that an all-encompassing critical review article on this subject is essential to expedite future advancements in this fast-developing field.
 Fig. 1  The annual collections of journal publications on “graphitic carbon nitride” since its inception as a H2 evolution material in 2009. Adapted from ISI Web of Science, dated 30th June 2018. 
In the current review, we first present a brief introduction to the general chemistry and inherent features of g-C3N4, recent progress in the controllable synthesis of nanostructured, nanoporous g-C3N4 materials, mechanistic understanding, and their potential applications in sustainable chemistry with special focus on solar energy conversions, for example, H2 evolution from photocatalytic water splitting, photocatalytic reduction of O2 to produce H2O2, N2 photofixation, CO2 reduction, visible light photodegradation of organic pollutants and bacterial disinfection. Finally, we propose detail challenges and opportunities that need to be addressed in future research which may strengthen the understanding and large-scale applications of g-C3N4-based nanomaterial photocatalysts.
2. The brief development history of g-C3N4
Carbon nitride (C3N4) is believed to be the oldest known synthetic polymer. Liebig reported the history of the carbon nitride polymer and its precursors in the year 1834.55 Melon-based carbon nitride had been ignored over an extended period of time as an unverified compound owing to its chemical inertness and insolubility in the majority of common solvents.56 Amazingly, approximately one and half centuries later, in the last decade of the 20th century, the research interest in g-C3N4 has been motivated again, inspired by the hypothetical expectations for the sp3-hybridized β-C3N4 which showed high modulus and hardness values that were analogous to or larger than that of diamond.57,58 However, the preparation of single-phase sp3-bonded β-C3N4 was extremely challenging due to its low thermodynamic stability.59
Large numbers of experiments have been carried out to understand the g-C3N4 structure fully.60,61 The comprehensive explanation about the structures of g-C3N4 has been described by Kroke,62 Antonietti,63 Semencha,64 and Matsumoto et al.65 However, the practical applications of the g-C3N4 semiconductor in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis started nearly one decade ago in 2006.41,66 Wang et al., for the first time, utilized g-C3N4 in photocatalysis for water splitting.42 This was a great paradigm shift in the research explorations from inorganic semiconductor photocatalysts to visible light active polymeric conjugated photocatalyst materials.67 After that, there has been a substantial escalation in the number of research articles since 2009 and an upsurge of interest in the expansion of metal-free semiconductor photocatalysts by exploiting the advantages of the multiuse platform of g-C3N4 photocatalysts.
The interest in the field of g-C3N4 materials has been substantially burgeoning in photocatalysis, taking into consideration the unique optical, electronic and structural attributes of these conjugated materials. This indicated the importance of g-C3N4 as an innovative research dimension for the assembly of unique photocatalytic systems, facilitating the development of a new and novel class of next-generation visible light-induced photocatalysts for applications associated with solar energy conversions and environmental remediation. However, even with all the fascinating features exhibited by g-C3N4, its real-world applications are still hampered by the numerous obstructions and limitations of bulk g-C3N4, for instance, the nominal surface area, lack of absorption above 450 nm, low electrical conductivity, and high recombination rate of the radiative charge carriers in bulk g-C3N4.
A number of modification approaches have been employed to circumvent these drawbacks systematically and to optimize the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4, involving synthesis of various g-C3N4 nanostructures with controlled morphologies,68,69 molecular self-assembly,45,70,71 noble metal deposition,72–75 elemental doping,76–80 incorporation of carbonaceous nanomaterials,81–86 exfoliation to two-dimensional nanosheets,43,87–89 coupling with other semiconductors90–95 and so on.
3. Inherent properties of g-C3N4
3.1. Thermochemical stability
Graphitic carbon nitride is a layered material analogous to graphite, wherein van der Waals forces hold its layered stacking and each layer is constituted of triazine and tri-s-triazine rings which have been studied initially as its tectonic groups and responsible for the high thermochemical stability of the polymer against acidic and alkaline environments.57 This high thermochemical stability of g-C3N4 also causes photoelectrochemical cells to be stable under air. Moreover, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of g-C3N4 revealed a sharp endothermic peak at 630 °C, equal to the sequential total weight loss which indicates that the thermal decomposition and vaporisation of the samples have commenced at this temperature. The overall decomposition of g-C3N4 happens at 750 °C, and no remains of the materials are left subsequently. Gillan hermetically sealed g-C3N4 in an evacuated silica ampoule and positioned it in a range of different temperatures. The result showed that a very gentle sublimation of g-C3N4 occurs at 450 °C and a tremendous increase at 650 °C.96 This thermal stability of g-C3N4 is the highest among those of characteristic high-temperature organic polymers, which is superb for high-temperature applications. However, the thermochemical stability of g-C3N4 is different using different preparation methods, which is affected by the various degrees of polycondensation of the g-C3N4 precursors.96–99
3.2. Optical properties
UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and photoluminescence spectroscopy typically characterize the optical features of g-C3N4. Optimizing the optical features of g-C3N4 is also of immense importance to achieve superior photocatalytic performance. It should be noted that the physicochemical properties, for instance, the bandgap energy of the state-of-the-art g-C3N4 semiconductor photocatalytic material, are correlated with the kind of precursor, condensation temperature and other related reaction parameters used, as shown in Table 1. This difference in bandgap energies is usually related to the formation of different local structures, packing motif, and defects produced in the course of the synthesis or modification procedures.
Table 1 Bandgap energy for typical g-C3N4 samples




Precursor
Reaction parameters
Bandgap [eV]
Ref.




Dicyandiamide
550 °C, 2 h, air
2.75

104



Thiourea
450 °C, 2 h, air
2.71

105



550 °C
2.58


650 °C
2.76


Urea
550 °C, 4 h, air
2.78

106



Hydrogen cyanamide
550 °C, 4 h, air
2.70

107



Guanidine thiocyanate
550 °C, 2 h, nitrogen gas
2.74

108



700 °C, 2 h, nitrogen gas
2.89


Melamine
500 °C, 2 h, air
2.80

98



H2SO4-assisted melamine
600 °C, 4 h, argon flow
2.69

109



HCl-assisted melamine
550 °C, 4 h, air
2.73

110



HNO3-assisted melamine
580 °C, 1 h, air
2.58

111



Sulphur-mediated melamine
650 °C, 2 h nitrogen gas
2.65

112



Sucrose-assisted g-C3N4
600 °C, 2 h, air
2.64

113





Also, different modifications of g-C3N4 may result in a hypsochromic shift (for instance, protonation100 or sulphur doping101) or a bathochromic shift (B and F doping102 and copolymerization with malonylurea103). The favourable electronic band structure also makes the g-C3N4 photocatalyst suitable for applications related to photoelectrochemical and solar energy conversion.81 The construction of g-C3N4 from melem units, XRD pattern and optical properties obtained using UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra are displayed in Fig. 2. Moreover, modification in the nanostructure of g-C3N4 results in a tuned electronic band structure and improved photocurrent response. For instance, mesoporous g-C3N4 can enhance the light harvesting capacity due to its larger specific surface area and multiple light-scattering effects, and consequently exhibit an improved electrical conductivity.114
 Fig. 2  (a) Construction of g-C3N4 from melem units, (b) XRD pattern of g-C3N4 and (c) UV-visible DRS of the polymeric g-C3N4. Inset: Photograph of the bulk g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Nature. 
3.3. Being a metal-free polymer semiconductor
Toxic metal leaching, as a result of photocorrosion, was considered as a substantial barrier for practical applications of metal-based photocatalysts. Graphitic carbon nitride has the advantage of being processed as a metal-free polymer semiconductor predominantly composed of carbon and nitrogen elements and nominal residual hydrogen in the defects. It is notable that the preparation of perfect polymeric g-C3N4 with a carbon-to-nitrogen stoichiometric ratio of 0.75 is very challenging. Nonetheless, the presence of a small number of defects in g-C3N4 could be advantageous for regulating its bandgap, and the existing amine groups may decrease the surface inertness of g-C3N4, which encourages its interactions with target reactants.115 This simple composition of g-C3N4 also makes the material innocuous and biocompatible even for some biological applications.116
4. Synthesis routes of g-C3N4
After the finding of Wang et al. that graphitic carbon nitride can be employed for H2 generation, numerous attempts have been made to produce g-C3N4 photocatalysts by condensation of copious and nitrogen-rich precursors comprising pre-bonded carbon–nitrogen core structures (triazine and heptazine derivatives) such as urea,117,118 thiourea,105 melamine,98,119 cyanamide,120–123 dicyandiamide,48,124–126 guanidinium chloride,127–129 guanidine thiocyanate130 and so forth (Fig. 3). Different kinds of precursors and calcination temperature can greatly affect the physicochemical features of the subsequent g-C3N4, including the specific surface area, porosity, absorption edge, photoluminescence, C/N ratio, and nanostructure design.131 The as-prepared g-C3N4 material can be characterized by numerous analytical techniques, particularly diffused reflectance spectroscopy (UV-vis DRS), XRD, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and FTIR spectroscopy.105,132–135 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are usually applied to expose the structures of the VB and CB, and in the case of g-C3N4 it is principally comprised of the nitrogen pz orbitals and carbon pz orbitals, respectively.42
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the main synthesis routes of bulk g-C3N4. Colour codes used in the demonstration of chemical structures: C, black; N, red; H, O, white blue; S, purple. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Wiley. 
Yan and co-workers synthesized the g-C3N4 photocatalyst by employing melamine as the precursor at different temperatures and found that an increase in temperature causes an increase in the C/N ratio and a lower bandgap value.98 However, an excessively low C/N stoichiometric ratio is detrimental and should be eschewed as the existence of too many defects in the g-C3N4 produced by partial thermal condensation can adversely affect the migration and separation of radiative charge carriers.
Mo et al., in another similar work, investigated the impact of different temperatures on the crystal structures, bandgap tuning, and morphology evolution of melamine-based g-C3N4.136 It was revealed that a high temperature of 500 °C resulted in fully formed g-C3N4 as demonstrated from the XRD patterns (Fig. 4a). Interestingly, the sample synthesized at 450 °C had different characteristic peaks relative to the other g-C3N4 samples that resulted in the melem derivatives. At high temperature, the g-C3N4 turned into a looser and fluffy structure with plentiful pores on its surface (Fig. 4b–d). Also, there was a noticeable change in colour from light yellow to dark orange as shown in the inset of Fig. 4e, suggesting the improved optical absorption of g-C3N4 samples with higher temperature. The bathochromic shifts in the absorption edge were the outcome of the extent of π-plane conjugations and improved condensation of g-C3N4.
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns and (b–d) TEM images of as-prepared g-C3N4 samples at different temperatures. (e and f) DRS spectra and transit photocurrent response of different samples. The inset of (e) displays the colour change of the materials at different temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The preparation of well-condensed g-C3N4 by using the inexpensive thiourea as the precursor without the assistance of any templates is of great importance among researchers. Zhang et al.105 efficiently synthesized g-C3N4 by taking advantage of a sulphur-mediated process by simply heating thiourea at different temperatures in air to enable bulk condensation and polymerization. It was observed that the existence of sulphur groups in the precursor enhanced the connectivity and packing of g-C3N4 nanosheets which play an imperative role in accelerating the degree of condensation of thiourea at elevated temperature. The high temperature facilitates the delocalization of electrons in the aromatic sheet to make the tri-s-triazine unit denser, giving rise to improved structural interactions through stronger van der Waals interactions, which results in an enhanced photocatalytic reaction.137 Also, the blue shifts in the absorption edge were examined in the sample prepared at a higher temperature which are the direct outcome of quantum confinement effects induced by the reduced size and thickness of g-C3N4 sheets. Dong et al. also observed a similar phenomenon of quantum confinement effect in their g-C3N4 material.138
The sulphur atom in thiourea can be easily substituted by the oxygen-containing compound urea which in recent years has been realized as an exceptional source for producing a g-C3N4 nanosheet-like structure with the advantage of having a porous structure and high specific surface area. For instance, Zhang et al.118 described a direct and practical approach for fabricating g-C3N4 made from urea using a self-induced gaseous template without the use of any soft and hard templates. During the thermal polymerization procedure, the evolved gases, for instance, ammonia at lower calcination temperatures (<200 °C) and carbon dioxide at higher temperatures, performed an important function in the dispensation of the favorably nanoporous g-C3N4 photocatalyst. This strategy possesses the advantage of simplicity, cost-effectiveness and environmental-friendliness without using any template in the synthesis of the nanoporous structure.
In another analogous work, Martin et al. gave a comparative study and fabricated g-C3N4 by employing a variety of different precursors, for example, dicyandiamide, urea, and thiourea.139 Intriguingly, in this experiment, the g-C3N4 derived from urea also surpassed the other two counterparts (dicyandiamide and thiourea) in the visible-light photocatalytic H2 production owing to its higher specific surface area, superior separation and transfer of radiative charge carriers and a higher degree of polymerization.
4.1. Controllable synthesis of nanoporous g-C3N4
Tailoring the structural properties of photocatalyst materials is another promising approach which results in more reactive active sites as a result of the incorporation of different structures and morphologies and ordered porosity in pristine g-C3N4 to enhance the efficiency and, in particular situations, obtain a better size and shape selectivity of the photocatalysts. A rational approach to introducing porosity into the g-C3N4 material is templating. Templating is frequently reviewed as ‘soft’ or ‘hard’. Hard and soft templating approaches are commonly applied since they permit fine-tuning of the nanoporous structures of g-C3N4 materials by employing diverse templates. In general, ‘soft’ templating refers to the use of soft structure-directing agents, for example, amphiphilic molecules, ionic liquids (ILs) and organic surfactants, which often exhibit ‘self-assembly’ characteristics, resulting in designs of g-C3N4 with favourably nanoporous structures. On the other hand, the hard-templating strategy is believed to be a pliable approach for the fabrication of nanoarchitectured g-C3N4 nanomaterials, which is nearly similar to the typical ‘nanocasting’ technique.140 The schematic illustration of the two routes is given in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of two typical synthesis pathways for ordered mesoporous materials: (a) soft-templating strategy and (b) hard-templating (nanocasting) strategy. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2. Soft templating methods
The soft templating method is often regarded as a relatively “greener” approach and has seen remarkable success in fabricating porous g-C3N4 materials.141,142 It is often challenging to determine the composition and properties of organic templates used during the development of porous structures and the precise mechanism of the templating effects.143 An important aspect that we cannot neglect through the soft templating approach is “self-assembly” in which the arrangement of the mesoporous structure is accomplished by the co-operative assembly of amphiphilic surfactant molecules and guest species, which is determined by the natural tendency of reduced interfacial energies. In the soft-templating strategy, nanoporous g-C3N4 is fabricated by means of soft structure-regulating agents, for example, surfactants, block copolymers, ionic liquids (ILs), and gaseous bubbles, resulting in the perspicacious design of g-C3N4 with a considerably porous nanostructure.144

4.2.1. Surfactants and block copolymers. 
Devising reliable and facile approaches for the synthesis of porous nanomaterials by employing surfactants and block copolymers as organic templates is of growing interest.145–148 The use of various organic surfactants to achieve diverse morphologies in crystal growth is important.149 The low chemical stability of the block copolymer during the preparation of g-C3N4 is a great challenge as the majority of these organic templates decompose prior to the polycondensation temperature of g-C3N4 (>500 °C). During the preparation of g-C3N4, a number of surfactants and block copolymers have been used as soft templates. For instance, Shen et al. successfully produced bimodal mesoporous g-C3N4 by employing TX-100 as a soft structure-directing agent and melamine and glutaraldehyde as the g-C3N4 sources via thermal condensation and carbonisation routes.150 The as-prepared porous g-C3N4 unveiled a bimodal pore size distribution of 3.8 nm in diameter.
In addition, Wang and Zhang fabricated mesostructured g-C3N4 by condensation reactions of DCDA with various structure-directing soft templates, for instance, amphiphilic block copolymers, and a variety of non-ionic and ionic surfactants.151 In this experiment, out of the wide range of surfactants used, TX-100 was observed to be excellent owing to its comparatively higher decomposition time, and the subsequent g-C3N4 materials exhibited enhanced BET surface areas, large pore volumes, and enhanced electrical conductivity. However, three drawbacks were confronted in the work mentioned above. The foremost was that only a small number of designated soft templates (TX-100 and ILS) lead to the design of mesostructured g-C3N4 along with increased BET surface areas as displayed in Fig. 6. Secondly, the mesopores in the g-C3N4 were closed, again as a result of the too early breakdown of the soft templating substrates. In addition, the surfactant pathway, as demonstrated in this work, resulted in a high residual carbon content contributed by the decomposed surfactants, which drastically interrupted the modification of the g-C3N4 nanostructure and therefore lowered the photocatalytic activity. As the doping content of carbon became high, more recombination centers for the radiative charge carriers were provided.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of nanostructured g-C3N4 solids prepared by employing a variety of soft templating agents. (a) P123, (b and c) T-X-100 and (d) BmimPF6. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Wiley. 
In another research work, Yan's group described the formation of a worm-like mesoporous g-C3N4 photocatalyst by using less reactive melamine as a precursor with P123 as a block copolymer.144 The experimental results showed that the as-obtained porous g-C3N4 had a low level of carbon dopant by avoiding direct chemical reactions of the precursor molecules with the surfactants in the course of the thermal-polymerization procedure. A moderately improved BET specific surface area of 90 m2 g−1, in contrast to that obtained without employing the surfactant (27 m2 g−1), and an effective light absorption range for H2 evolution upon visible light illumination were obtained.


4.2.2. Ionic liquids (ILs). 
Besides surfactants and block copolymers, ionic liquids (ILs) are an alternative option that can be employed as soft structure directing templates to react with the nitrogen-containing precursors to modify the g-C3N4 nanoarchitectures. As a class of new ionic solvents, ILs are liquid-state salts at comparatively low temperatures (<100 °C) and offer some characteristic physicochemical properties of high temperature templating (more than 400 °C), and hence can be heated without evaporation. Consequently, they are capable of giving good nanoporous structures with reasonable porosity.152,153 Welton proposed two principal approaches for the synthesis of ILs: the first is the metathesis of halide salts with alkaline metals or NH4+ salts of the anticipated anions; the second is acid–base neutralization.154 Wang et al. synthesized a mesoporous g-C3N4 material of 5.6 nm pore size with a specific surface area of 81 m2 g−1 by employing butyl methylimidazolium dicyanamide ionic liquid as a soft template.151 However, some portion of this carbon- and nitrogen-based ionic liquid goes into the target material upon thermal polymerization as a co-monomer, generally resulting in a different heteroatom-doped g-C3N4 photocatalytic material. This can be unfavourable, but on the other hand it also favourably broadens the range of applications, depending on the wide-range of heteroatom chemistry available in ionic liquids. In another work, the IL BmimBF4 acts as a soft template for the condensation of the precursor to remarkably modify the texture and surface morphology features of the g-C3N4 material.153 In addition to modifying the features above, the doping of elements like B and F in the g-C3N4 nanostructure was also found, which clearly tuned the optoelectronic properties of the material.
Zhang et al. fabricated a P-doped g-C3N4 material through the co-condensation approach using DCDA as a precursor and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIM-PF6) as a moderate phosphorus template. It was found that on heating, PF6− reacted with amines to incorporate into the g-C3N4 matrix, while doping not only well-retained the majority of the structural properties of g-C3N4 but also changed the optical features of the target material, displaying an improved visible light absorption, a considerable amplification in electrical conductivity (dark) up to 4 times and an enhancement in current density by a factor of up to 5 as shown in Fig. 7.155 In an alternative work, Lin et al. used a similar strategy of simultaneous texturing and doping of g-C3N4 by employing inexpensive urea as a precursor with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate to form boron- and fluorine-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets.156 This appealing research provides a good avenue for future work with ILs for the construction of g-C3N4 materials.
 Fig. 7  (a) DRS spectra. The inset shows the colour change photographs of g-C3N4 (left), P-C3N4-0.1 (middle), and P-C3N4-0.3 (right). (b) Photocurrent density of phosphorous-doped and bulk g-C3N4. (c) Current–potential curves of phosphorous-doped and bulk g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The ready incorporation of ionic liquids into the liquid precursor or the porous template is one advantage of using ILs as soft templates. The availability of a variety of heteroatoms in ionic liquids shows that they are suitable precursors for doping of g-C3N4 during the templating process. However, there are some limitations to using an ionic liquid as a soft template. The relatively high cost of ionic liquids as compared to other common solvents and the incompatibility of some ILs with water are some of the drawbacks.


4.2.3. Gaseous bubble template. 
Apart from block copolymers and ionic liquids (ILs) as soft templates, gaseous bubble template synthesis has been given special attention in modifying the conventional polymerization routes for tuning the texture and optoelectronic properties of g-C3N4 materials. Additionally, in comparison with the conventional templating strategies, it is a sustainable, cost-effective and eco-friendly approach to fabricate nanostructured g-C3N4 materials without any further post-treatment, and suitable for large-scale synthesis.113,142,157–159 For example, Zhang et al. synthesized a g-C3N4 photocatalyst that demonstrated a specific surface area of 70 m2 g−1 by directly heating urea in air.118 During the decomposition and polymerization of urea at high temperature, a considerable amount of ammonia gas and water vapour was also given off because of the existence of oxygen in the precursor. It is these bubbles of H2O vapour that are supposed to be used as a template in the proposed scheme.
He and co-workers introduced the sulphur bubble template strategy for the formation of nanoporous g-C3N4 by taking advantage of low-cost and abundant sublimed sulphur as a gaseous bubble template in the thermal-polymerization of melamine.160 The as-prepared sulphur bubble assisted g-C3N4 exhibited a porous nanostructure with an enlarged BET surface area of 46 m2 g−1 and a uniform pore size of 50 nm to expedite swifter adsorption of reactants and mass transfer and showed improved photocatalytic H2 production under visible light irradiation. The synthesis scheme designed for the construction of nanoporous g-C3N4 by a simple sulphur bubble template-assisted strategy and the porous structure are shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis scheme for the construction of the nanoporous sulphur-mediated g-C3N4 nanomaterial. (b) TEM image of the sulphur-assisted porous g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the sulphur-mediated synthesis, we successfully fabricated well-adorned mpg-C3N4 with a high specific surface area of 195 m2 g−1 and an average mesopore size of 12 nm by an eco-friendly one-step approach using NH4Cl as a gaseous bubble template and less reactive melamine as a precursor as displayed in Fig. 9.161 Ammonium chloride decomposed into gaseous bubbles in the course of the polymerization of the precursor without any need for further elimination, which facilitates the construction of the well-adorned mesoporous g-C3N4 structure. The as-produced well-adorned mesoporous g-C3N4 material demonstrated remarkable photocatalytic proficiency compared to the bulk g-C3N4 for the photodegradation of rhodamine B (RhB) and phenol under visible-light irradiation.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis scheme of well-adorned mesoporous g-C3N4 and (b and c) TEM image of NH4Cl assisted mesoporous g-C3N4 (mpg-C3N4-2). Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another similar work, by substituting ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) with ammonium sulphate (NH4(SO4)2), our group synthesized large-scale thin g-C3N4 nanosheets (g-C3N4 NSs) by a direct but efficient non-hazardous gaseous bubble templating strategy.162 The rapid and continuous evolution of NH3 (g) and SO2 (g) gases from ammonium sulphate during the thermal condensation of the g-C3N4 precursor triggered the construction of 2D g-C3N4 NSs as revealed in Fig. 10. The as-prepared g-C3N4 NSs exhibited a remarkable visible light H2 evolution rate of 9871 μmol h−1 g−1 and outstanding RhB photodegradation at a similar wavelength. The exceptionally improved photocatalytic efficiency of ammonium sulphate mediated g-C3N4 NSs is the synergistic result of the high BET surface area (75 m2 g−1) in contrast to bulk g-C3N4 (17 m2 g−1), enlarged bandgap, outstanding electron transfer ability and prolonged lifespan of photoinduced charge carriers.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis protocols of bulk g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 NSs; (b) and (c) TEM images of g-C3N4 nanosheets; (d) photocatalytic H2 production rate over the g-C3N4 nanosheets and bulk sample; (e) wavelength-dependent H2 generation rate of g-C3N4 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to ammonium chloride and ammonium sulphate as gaseous bubble templates, biopolymers are another choice of gaseous bubble template for synthesizing porous g-C3N4 materials. For example, we prepared porous thin sheet-like g-C3N4 by employing an innovative starch-mediated strategy by thermal polymerization of melamine under a continuous flow of Ar.163 In the synthesis of nanoporous starch mediated g-C3N4, the homogeneous mixture was prepared by completely dispersing starch in a water solution by the addition of the g-C3N4 precursor, followed by continuous magnetic stirring and drying in a water bath in order to allow the starch and precursor to fully interact with each other by hydrogen bonding. The in situ green starch during the polymerization of melamine decomposed and functioned as a dynamic gas template to release carbonaceous gases, which resulted in abundant holes in the g-C3N4 nanosheets. Moreover, compared to the traditional templating approach, this can prevent the incorporation of impurities in the target sample and results in an enlarged specific surface area, more visible light harvesting to generate more radiative electrons and holes and reduced resistance of charge carrier mobility as corroborated from the reduced arc diameter of the EIS Nyquist plots in the starch-mediated g-C3N4 photocatalyst.
This research work accentuates that relative to other templating strategies for the fabrication of g-C3N4, the gaseous bubble template method is facile and expedient, can be carried out in one step and has potential applications in solar energy conversion and environmental purification.

4.3. Hard templating methods
Hard templating is another promising approach focussed on nanotemplating and nanocasting to tune the structural properties as a result of the introduction of distinctive morphology and controlled and well-ordered porosity in the pristine g-C3N4 material. The hard-templating strategy is regarded as an adaptable practice for the preparation of nanoarchitectured g-C3N4 materials by controlling the morphology, porosity, specific surface area (SSA) and size by employing the relevant templates and is appropriate for numerous photocatalysis driven applications. The hard templating or nanocasting modus operandi is basically a three-step procedure involving infiltration of the precursor, conversion of the precursor to the anticipated product, and template removal, similar to the macroscopic process of casting. Each step demands cautious optimization of a number of factors to make sure that the final replication is as complete as possible, beginning with the chosen template. As compared to the soft templating method, the hard templating approach is applied to fabricate various nanostructures and geometries of g-C3N4 nanomaterials with a length scale of nanometres and micrometres, in addition to generating hierarchical nanoarchitectures, and the products obtained by utilising hard templates are comparatively simple to control, because hard templates have fixed structures.164–168 For the construction of various nanoarchitectured g-C3N4 nanomaterials, broadly discussed hard templates are silica, anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) and CaCO3 nanoparticles.

4.3.1. Mesoporous silica template. 
Mesoporous silica is a commonly used material for the hard templating approach owing to its intrinsic features, for instance, a connective pore network that facilitates the silica-enhanced mass diffusion within the structure and gives rise to an extraordinarily high surface area and enhanced light harvesting properties as a result of multiple scattering effects, easily well-controlled nanostructured morphologies and stability at high temperature.114,169–171 Mesoporous silica is classified as either a 2D or 3D template. 2D templates have a typical hexagonal pore structure that normally delivers a loose array of nanowire replicas, which in some cases contain micropores to connect the mesoporous channels and can replicate as well. 3D templates usually have a cubic structure where the mesopores are bi-continuous, constructing a replica similar to a helical structure. Some other 3D templates possess cage-like pore systems.172
Goettmann and co-workers initially fabricated mesoporous g-C3N4 by employing cyanamide and SiO2 nanoparticles of 12 nm in size as hard templates.41 It was shown that the right and appropriate surface interaction between the SiO2 nanoparticle surfaces and the nitrogen-containing aromatic groups in the precursor played a significant role in the homogenous dispersion of cyanamide monomers with the silica nanoparticle template. After thermal polymerization of cyanamide into g-C3N4, the silica template was removed by the ammonium hydrogen fluoride (NH4HF2) etchant which resulted in mesoporous g-C3N4 with sphere-shaped pores of a mean diameter of nearly 12 nm and a BET surface area of 86 to 439 m2 g−1, depending on the mass ratio of the cyanamide precursor and the silica nanoparticle template.
Qiu and co-worker synthesized 2D g-C3N4 by refluxing ethylenediamine (C2H4(NH2)2) and tetrachloromethane (CCl4) at 90 °C and thermal condensation at 600 °C under inert atmospheric conditions.173 Vinu et al., in a series of experiments, filled the above-refluxed material into an SBA-15 hard template to synthesize 2D hexagonal ordered mesostructured g-C3N4 with a pore diameter of about 9 nm and a BET surface area of 140 m2 g−1.174,175 Interestingly, the sample with a low content of nitrogen displayed an improved catalytic performance in Friedel–Crafts acylation of benzene which is possibly due to the partial condensation of the low amount of ethylenediamine, resulting in more defect sites in the pore wall. However, there was one drawback in this work: a high (C/N) ratio resulted in the catalytic product being more like an N doped carbon, rather than g-C3N4. To surmount this issue, Chen et al. used the impregnation technique for SBA-15 and cyanamide and thermally polymerized the material at 550 °C to ensure the polycondensation of cyanamide into dicyandiamide.44 The as-prepared sample then showed an optimum ratio of carbon to nitrogen of 0.72 and a high BET specific surface area.
The inadequate mass diffusion of the g-C3N4 precursors into the nanoporous templates is the limitation of the conventional hard templating approach. The trapped air in the nanochannels of the templates is also a big concern that resulted in partial infiltration of the precursor material into the structure directing templates.69,176,177 Thus, to overcome this drawback, Zhang et al. synthesized the mesostructured g-C3N4 with an elevated BET surface area of 517 m2 g−1 by simple pre-treatment of SBA-15 mesoporous SiO2 nanoparticles with dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) to ensure the interaction of the SiO2 template and the cyanamide precursor by combining the sonication and vacuum approaches together to eliminate the trapped air in the SiO2 templates through efficient diffusion of the cyanamide precursor into the pores of the template as shown in Fig. 11.178
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis scheme of hard templating used for ordered mpg-C3N4. CA represents the cyanamide precursor. (b) TEM image of the mpg-C3N4 material. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Wiley. 
Utilizing the well-ordered morphology and surface properties of the g-C3N4 nanoarchitecture nanomatrix is an efficient approach to develop g-C3N4 semiconductor photocatalysts through effective radiative charge mobility along with enhanced mass diffusion in the course of the photocatalytic chemical reactions.179 The construction of polymeric hollow nanospheres is still considered as one of the main challenges encountered by researchers due to easy damaging of the hollow g-C3N4 nanomatrix following the elimination of the solvent and template. To date, the preparation of free-standing polymeric hollow nanospheres that can endure high temperatures, which is crucial for building up the interface of the soft material, obtaining the desired texture and improving the crystallinity of the material, has remained a challenge. Recently, Zheng et al. have prepared hollow nanostructured g-C3N4 of high thermal stability of up to 550 °C using a post-annealing treatment strategy without any chemical assistance.180 The thermally stable conjugated hollow g-C3N4 nanospheres are advantageous due to the increase in interior and exterior surface areas which boosts the light capturing ability along with the spatial separation of the redox species into the nanostructure for photocatalytic reactions and will open up a new avenue in the domain of catalysis as well as other environmental applications.181,182


4.3.2. Anodic alumina oxide (AAO) template. 
In addition to the mesoporous g-C3N4 prepared using silica nanoparticles as hard templates, 1D nanostructured photocatalysts, for instance, nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, and nanobelts, have recently gained special attention due to their advantageous features of optoelectronic properties and tuneable lengths, diameters and aspect ratios which are favourable for boosting the photocatalytic efficiency of the target nanomaterials. The anodic alumina oxide (AAO) membrane, which is prepared by potentiostatic anodization of aluminium, is another choice of hard template in the fabrication of 1D nanoarchitectured g-C3N4 photocatalysts.
Li et al. successfully synthesized a well-polymerized g-C3N4 nanorod array with an average diameter of 260 nm by employing anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) as a hard template and cyanogen amide as a g-C3N4 source and demonstrated the enhancement of orientation and the crystallization of g-C3N4 as an outcome of the nanoconfinement effects of the AAO template.69 The synthesis scheme of the nanoconfined g-C3N4 nanorods and SEM images is shown in Fig. 12. The confinement effect due to the AAO template is very important for enhancing the mobility of electron and hole pairs. The resultant g-C3N4 nanorods also displayed a blue shift in absorption with a lower HOMO position than the bulk g-C3N4, thus holding a more positive valence band position, which is crucial for a strong oxidation potential.
 Fig. 12  (a) AAO templating approaches toward g-C3N4 nanorods: (1) loading of AAO templates (grey) by the precursor (white), (2) thermal calcination of the filled templates at 600 °C under an inert atmosphere, and (3) removing the templates to form CNRs (yellow). (b and c) SEM images of CNRs. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In an alternative study, Bian et al. efficiently formed well-ordered arrays of g-C3N4 nanotubes of even diameters and lengths by employing anodic aluminium oxide as a template and ethylene diamine (C2H4(NH2)2) and tetrachloromethane (CCl4) as precursors.183 The as-prepared g-C3N4 nanotubes showed good affinity for the high dispersion of platinum nanoparticles due to the rough surface of the nanotubes and the presence of two unbound nitrogen electron pairs, which can draw the Pt ions to initiate the nucleation and their subsequent growth on the g-C3N4 nanotubes.184 Such kinds of g-C3N4 nanotubes provide an ideal platform for noble metal deposition and demonstrate an excellent catalytic ability in cyclohexene hydrogenation. In spite of this, two drawbacks were confronted in this work. The first was that the specific surface areas are lower than that of mesoporous g-C3N4. Secondly, the resulting samples showed a C/N ratio of 4.9 that is considerably greater than the theoretical value of 0.75, making them N-doped carbon materials rather than g-C3N4.


4.3.3. Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) nanoparticle template. 
The above discussion has explicitly envisioned that the hard-templating strategy by applying mesoporous SiO2 and anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) is a tedious process that involves a multi-step synthetic protocol to obtain suitable hard templates for the fabrication of nanoporous g-C3N4 nanomaterials. Moreover, the hard-templating approach is environmentally disadvantageous since the synthesis protocol entailed the use of hard templates which are extremely hazardous and corrosive reagents that need to be sequentially etched again by harmful and fluoride-containing etchants, for instance, hydrogen fluoride (HF) and aqueous ammonium difluoride (NH4HF2), which further significantly restricts the real-world applications for large-scale industrial processes.
The use of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) nanoparticles as a template is another important strategy to achieve porosity in g-C3N4 photocatalysts.185,186 Recently, Wang et al. described a sustainable way to produce nanoporous g-C3N4 through using calcium carbonate (CaCO3) nanoparticles as the hard template, which are potentially ‘greener’ than conventional fluoride-containing agents and can be facilely removed with dilute HCl.187 Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) nanoparticles are comparatively cheap, abundant, and readily available, which may also offer some economic advantages. In brief, porous g-C3N4 was prepared by homogeneously mixing dicyandiamide (DCDA) with CaCO3 in different ratios followed by a two-step thermal calcination process. The schematic illustration of the synthesis route is shown in Fig. 13a. In the first step, the sample was heated at 400 °C to construct the basic scaffolds of g-C3N4 initially. Subsequently, the as-developed solids were pulverized into powder and diluted with hydrochloric acid to remove the templates, followed by additional calcination at 550 °C to produce ultimately the nanoporous g-C3N4 structure (Fig. 13b). The obtained nanoporous photocatalyst possesses not only an improved surface area but also a high cathodic photocurrent response (λ > 420 nm) of around 4.0- and 7.50-fold higher, in the biased potential of −0.2 V and 0 V, respectively, that those of pristine g-C3N4 prepared without employing the calcium carbonate template as shown in Fig. 13c. This study shows that the CaCO3 template mediated porous g-C3N4 has potential in light-driven applications and environmental purification.
 Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of synthesis of porous g-C3N4 using CaCO3 nanoparticles as the template, (b) SEM image of porous g-C3N4 and (c) the transient current response biased at 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl). Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5. Applications of g-C3N4 for solar energy conversion and environmental remediation
Although semiconductor-based photocatalysts have been studied for many decades, they have become particularly eye-catching recently due to their potential for sorting out the mounting environmental issues and energy challenges in a viable approach by only exploiting the everlasting sunlight as the driving force and eschewing secondary contamination. In this review, various photochemistry applications of g-C3N4-based nanocomposite photocatalysts are briefly summarized.
5.1. H2 evolution from photocatalytic water splitting
The advancement of green and renewable energy is an imperative approach to overcome the ever-growing worldwide energy challenges and to solve the environmental problems triggered by the burning of fossil fuels. Semiconductor-based photocatalysts have been considered a reliable choice for solar energy conversion into H2 through water-splitting techniques.188–190 For stable hydrogen production, a semiconductor photocatalytic system must satisfy the following conditions:27,191 (1) the narrow bandgap of the semiconductor is the most important requirement so that it can absorb maximum light; in the meantime, the bottoms of its conduction band (CB) has to be more negative than the reduction potentials of H2O to generate the hydrogen. (2) The semiconductor photocatalyst must show efficient radiative charge carrier mobility as well as lower recombination rates of radiative charge carriers. (3) Kinetically sustainable surface chemical reactions should occur, in conjunction with the surface reverse reactions of H2 and O2 so that H2O should be effectively suppressed.
In recent years, dramatically increased attention has been paid to g-C3N4-based nanomaterials owing to their exceptional intrinsic features and tuneable bandgap structures since the landmark study by Wang and co-workers on visible-light photocatalytic H2O splitting over g-C3N4.42 Nevertheless, the photoredox efficiency of bulk g-C3N4 cannot satisfy the requirement due to its lower specific area, fast recombination of radiative charge carriers and slow electron mobility. Consequently, photocatalytic systems based on the modified g-C3N4 semiconductor photocatalyst have been extensively studied.192 The g-C3N4 synthesized from different precursors displayed different photocatalytic H2 generation rates depending on the different morphologies, specific surface areas, and bandgap structures of the products.118,193,194 For instance, in a paper by Martin et al. a quantum yield of 26.5% at 400 nm was attained from an abundant and inexpensive urea-derived g-C3N4 photocatalyst which is considered to be much higher than those of any other bulk g-C3N4 derived precursors.139 Additionally, the sample exhibited stability for more than 30 h under visible light irradiation. In recent years, continuous research attention has been focused on the synthesis of photocatalysts with a shape-directed functionality on the nanoscale, with a particular morphology and nanostructure, which can improve the separation of radiative charge carriers and maximize the exploitation of the solar light harvesting range. In 2015, Gu et al. successfully synthesized a hierarchical porous g-C3N4 microsphere photocatalyst by a template-free hydrothermal method combined with a post-annealing approach.
The as-synthesized porous microspheres displayed red shifts in absorption and reduced resistance compared to the bulk g-C3N4 counterpart, which resulted in better separation and transferability of radiative charge carriers and improved harvesting of visible light.
Alternatively, Han et al. reported a mesoporous ‘seaweed’ like g-C3N4 nanoarchitecture by a direct but effective template-free approach by hydrothermal freeze-drying using dicyanamide as a precursor (Fig. 14).195 The as-prepared g-C3N4 “seaweed” exhibited an excellent and stable hydrogen production of 9900 μmol h−1 g−1 with an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 7.8% upon visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm) and an outstanding turnover number of 385 following 6 h of chemical reaction. The high photocatalytic activity demonstrated in this work is the result of the superior electron transfer ability and increased BET surface area which provide more active sites and improved light harvesting. In another study of morphology modulation of g-C3N4, Sun et al. reported a remarkable work in the preparation of hollow structured g-C3N4 nanospheres in the optical ranges as both visible-light-harvesting antennae and nanoporous scaffolds by using silica as a hard template.196 The thickness of the shell in the nanospheres can be well regulated from 56 nm to 85 nm without any distortion in the morphology due to heat treatment which amplifies the light harvesting through multiple scattering effects, resulting in a 25-fold higher visible light hydrogen generation rate than that of the pristine g-C3N4 with a quantum yield of 7.5% upon visible-light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation.
 Fig. 14  (a–h) High-magnification SEM and TEM morphological images of a single fiber of the freeze-dried, hydrothermally treated DCDA “seaweed”. (i) Photocatalytic activities of g-C3N4 (550) “seaweed” (i) and bulk g-C3N4 (ii) under visible-light illumination (>420). (j) Wavelength dependence of the H2 generation rate on g-C3N4 (550) “seaweed” (inset: the H2 generation under 550 nm light irradiation). Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from Wiley. 
Recently, supramolecular chemistry has gained significant interest in synthesizing g-C3N4 with an ordered structure, for instance, hollow spheres,70 hollow boxes71 and spherical macroscopic assemblies.179 This strategy is advantageous in retaining the initial morphology of the H2-bonded supramolecular network precursors through the thermal polymerization method without using any hazardous reagent and shows better photocatalytic activity. Heteroatom doping of g-C3N4 can efficiently tune the electronic bandgap structure and optical properties of g-C3N4 to enhance the visible light absorption range and further regulate the photoredox potential to facilitate H2 evolution upon visible-light irradiation. For instance, Hong et al. synthesised mesostructured g-C3N4 through an in situ sulphur doped mediated strategy by thermal polymerization of thiourea and the silica template.197 The doped sulphur is expected to replace the carbon in g-C3N4, resulting in a downshift of 0.25 eV in the CB and a narrow bandgap of 2.61 eV. Moreover, UV-vis DRS analysis revealed that the sulphur doped porous g-C3N4 exhibited enhanced and more profound visible-light absorption which boosted the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction by 30-fold compared to the bulk g-C3N4, resulting in an AQY of 5.8% at 440 nm. In alternative studies, Zhang et al. synthesized iodine doped g-C3N4 by employing ammonium iodide as an in situ dopant and dicyanamide (DCDA) as a precursor.198 It was believed from theoretical calculation that the iodine atom alternatively substituted the sp2-bonded N atom in the g-C3N4, efficiently extending the π-conjugated aromatic g-C3N4 heterocycles which improved the mobility of free radiative electron and hole pairs, increased the BET surface area, extended the optical absorption up to 600 nm and improved the charge separation for enhanced hydrogen generation.
The construction of homo and heterojunction nanohybrids is another rational and viable approach for ameliorating the photocatalytic performance through improved solar light absorption, expediting the radiative charge carrier transfer and separation to deter the undesirable recombination, and high photochemical stability through decorous surface passivation by protecting the principal functional groups and potential active sites on the surface of the semiconductor photocatalysts.199–203 For instance, Liu et al. very recently reported the construction of amorphous/crystalline g-C3N4 homojunction with a compatible phase ratio, high crystallinity and large specific surface area by two-step polymerisation of melem using crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets as seeds.204 The as-synthesized homogenous junction with a matched energy level demonstrated an exceptional photocatalytic performance for the photodegradation of organic pollutants and H2 generation under visible light illumination. Besides the construction of a homojunction, Putri and co-workers most recently have formulated an efficient 2D–2D heterojunction nanocomposite strategy by hybridising positively charged oxygen doped g-C3N4 with negatively charged boron doped rGO by utilising a collective sonication-assisted electrostatic self-assembly approach.205 The superior photocatalytic performance for H2 evolution in this work is associated with the suitable and intimate interface contact between O-g-C3N4 and B-rGO, which resulted in an efficient radiative charge carrier transfer through the nanoscale p–n heterojunction and layered 2D–2D nanocomposite.
More recently, our groups have reported a novel and efficient approach of self-modified breaking of hydrogen bonds to achieve high yield preparation of exceptionally active crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets (CCNNSs) by a two-step calcination technique without the assistance of any additive or molten-salt intercalation methods.206 It is worth mentioning that the presence of abundant hydrogen bonds due to the incomplete condensation of the precursor materials in the covalent bond dominated intralayer framework of bulk g-C3N4 resulted in high localization of radiative electron and hole pairs in the melon strand and therefore poor intralayer transport as shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 15a. The highly crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets synthesized by this simple double-calcination strategy have exhibited an outstandingly high H2 generation rate of 9578 μmol h−1 g−1 (Fig. 15b) under simulated solar light irradiation, which is not only 15.50 times higher than that of the bulk counterpart, but also superior to most of the reported CCNNS photocatalysts. Moreover, the crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets also demonstrated superior photodegradation ability for the rhodamine B (RhB) dye, wherein the apparent photodegradation rate constant K of 4.04 × 10−2 min−1 for CCNNSs was 100 times superior to that of the bulk g-C3N4 material (4.02 × 10−4 min−1) (Fig. 15c). Additionally, in this experiment for the photocatalytic production of H2, TEOA and Pt nanoparticles were employed as the h+ sacrificial agents and reaction centres, respectively. As indicated in Fig. 15d, the bulk g-C3N4 suffers from low electron mobility due to the existence of plentiful hydrogen bonds in the melon strands, which possibly introduced the recombination centers for the radiative charge carriers. On the other hand, the highly crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets (CCNNSs) with fewer hydrogen bonds in the main framework of melon strands favored the transfer of electrons to the Pt nanoparticles which is beneficial for high photocatalytic H2 production.
 Fig. 15  a) Schematic of the synthesis of crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets (CCNNSs); b) photocatalytic H2 generation reactions of as-synthesized samples and c) corresponding photocatalytic oxidation kinetic rate constants (K) for CCNNSs and BCN under simulated solar light illumination. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism of H2 production over BCN and CCNNSs. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from Elsevier. 
Recently, modifications of g-C3N4 materials with semiconductors, co-catalysts and noble-metal-free cocatalyst based photocatalysts have gained attention for H2 generation.207–210 Indisputably, cocatalysts could not only expedite the suppression of radiative charge carrier recombination but also provide potentially active reaction sites and concurrently decrease the activation energy for hydrogen generation. With the aim of by-passing the use of very costly noble-metal cocatalysts, great attempts have been made in recent years on the design of cost-effective, efficient and stable noble-metal-free cocatalysts for g-C3N4-based heterostructured materials for superior H2 generation. Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) such as Ni2P, Co2P, and FeP have gained special attention as cocatalysts for g-C3N4 for photocatalytic H2 production.211,212 For instance, Zeng and co-workers successfully embedded colloidally synthesized Ni12P5 nanoparticles into g-C3N4 nanosheets by employing a facile solution-phase approach.213 The as-synthesized photocatalysts, by depositing the optimum amount of 5 wt% of Ni12P5 nanoparticles, demonstrated excellent photocatalyst performance and an apparent quantum yield of 4.67% under visible light irradiation. The enhanced photocatalytic performance, in this case, was largely ascribed to the formation of intimate interface contacts in the Ni12P5/g-C3N4 heterostructure, along with the homogeneous distribution of cocatalyst nanoparticles on g-C3N4 nanosheets, which not only facilitate the transfer of charge carriers but also play an important role in the suppression of radiative charge carrier recombination.
In another study, the same group of researchers efficiently incorporated 1D metal phosphide (Co2P) nanorods into porous 2D g-C3N4 nanosheets.214 The smart engineering of 1D/2D Co2P/g-C3N4 heterojunction nanohybrids without the support of Pt as a noble metal cocatalyst displayed an ameliorated visible-light photocatalytic performance for hydrogen evolution.
5.2. Photocatalytic H2O2 production
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) has attracted growing attention due to its common use in virtually all industrial areas, predominantly as a new solar fuel since liquid hydrogen peroxide is easily storable and transferable and can be used in a one-compartment fuel cell to generate electricity.215 However, on the industrial scale, H2O2 is principally produced from the anthraquinone oxidation (AO) procedure which includes the sequential hydrogenation and oxidation of precursors in a mixture of organic solvents followed by liquid–liquid extraction to recover hydrogen peroxide, which can barely be reckoned as an eco-friendly method.216
The photocatalytic H2O2 production of semiconductor materials from earth-abundant H2O and O2 is one desirable artificial photosynthesis for solar fuel production. Previously, photocatalytic H2O2 synthesis with semiconductor titanium dioxide (TiO2) has also drawn much attention.217–219 The reactions are typically conducted under ultraviolet illumination (λ < 400 nm) of an O2-saturated H2O with TiO2 in the presence of alcohols as the electron and proton donors. Its efficiency is, however, very low because of the limited transfer rate of electrons to the photocatalyst's surface and the selectivity for the amount of H2O2 produced compared to the amount of alcohols utilized is ∼6%. The reduction of molecular oxygen has been acknowledged as the rate-determining step in the production of H2O2. If oxygen cannot be reduced at a high rate, the electrons amass on the photocatalysts and upsurge the recombination of radiative charge pairs, which induces a low photoactivity for producing H2O2.
In recent years, g-C3N4 based metal-free polymeric photocatalysts have been successfully employed in the photocatalytic production of H2O2.220–223 For example, Shiraishi et al. presented the highly selective production of H2O2 over g-C3N4 photocatalysts upon visible-light (λ > 420 nm) illumination in alcohol/water mixtures with O2 which proficiently produced hydrogen peroxide with superior selectivity (∼90%).224 The basic concept was established on the selective two-electron reduction of O2 on the photoinduced g-C3N4, which resulted in an advantageous photocatalytic system for H2O2 generation. Apart from that, the same group of authors discussed the impacts of surface defect formation on photocatalytic H2O2 generation by mesoporous g-C3N4 photocatalysts.225 The high photoactivity attained for the production of H2O2 was mainly ascribed to the large surface area achieved due to the silica template; however, further enlargement of the surface area decreases the activity. This is due to the fact that a too large surface area resulted in more defects which functioned as potential reactive sites for four-electron reduction of O2, hence reducing the H2O2 selectivity as well as the photocatalytic decomposition of the produced H2O2.
Very recently, Shi and co-workers described a brilliant idea for the construction of holey defective g-C3N4 photocatalysts, which are easily prepared via a novel photo-assisted heating process.226 The authors prepared a series of modified g-C3N4 samples by photo-assisted treatment of bulk g-C3N4 by using hydrazine as a reducing agent and adjusting the current output (from 7 to 21 A) under a 300 W Xe lamp. The schematic illustration of the process is displayed in Fig. 16A. The photoinduced treatment not only facilitates the generation of plentiful holes, bestowing g-C3N4 with more exposed potential photocatalytic reactive sites and shortening the geometrical diffusion distance of both reactants from the surface to the bulk and vice versa, but also sets up nitrogen vacancies in the tri-s-triazine repeating groups of g-C3N4 photocatalysts and broadens the visible-light absorption range, which result in the suppression of photo-induced charge carrier recombination. As displayed in Fig. 16a and b, the amount of H2O2 produced increases linearly as the radiation time extends, demonstrating that all the samples are capable of generating H2O2 in the photocatalytic reaction system.
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic protocol of holey defective g-C3N4 photocatalysts; (a and b) time-dependence and activity comparison of different samples for H2O2 production; (c) wavelength dependence of the H2O2 generation rate of DCN-15A; (d) recycling test of DCN-15A. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Wiley. 
The photocatalytic H2O2 generation amount is mainly dependent on the current output during the irradiation under the Xe lamp. The photocatalysts with a current output of 15 A demonstrate the maximum H2O2 generation but a further increase in the current output results in declined photoactivity which is perhaps due to the introduction of more nitrogen vacancies in the samples which cause the downshift of conduction band (CB) positions and defect states, exerting adverse effects on the reductive ability of photoinduced electrons. Moreover, the apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of the photocatalyst for H2O2 production as a function of the incident light wavelength and the good stability of the catalyst are shown in Fig. 14c and d.
In a nutshell, the research above has recognized the inexhaustible possibilities of H2O2 in energy-relevant solar fuels by employing different kinds of g-C3N4 nanomaterial photocatalysts for sustainable solar energy conversion. The current research highlights the scientific prospects of photocatalytic O2 reduction to produce H2O2 along with the progress in the g-C3N4-based photocatalytic system.
5.3. Photocatalytic N2 fixation
Nitrogen fixation is the second most important and significant chemical process on earth next to photosynthesis. However, natural N2 fixation does not fulfill the escalated requirement of modern agriculture and industries. The commonly practiced artificial approach of N2 fixation is the famous Haber–Bosch process.227 However, the main disadvantage of this process, which is usually carried out under high-temperature (∼400–500 °C) and high-pressure (∼150–250 atm) conditions, is its higher energy consumption. In recent years, the photocatalytic N2 fixation technology has witnessed thriving interest in the domain of energy and chemical fuel production due to its mild conditions, low power consumption, cost-effectivity and greener approach by simply using the inexhaustible and clean solar energy from the sun as the driving force.228
Metal-free g-C3N4 photocatalysts, particularly with nitrogen vacancies and well-matched heterojunction interfaces, have triggered great interest in N2 fixation.229–232 Nitrogen vacancies are advantageous in the selective chemisorption and activation of nitrogen due to a similar shape and size of the nitrogen atoms in dinitrogen. Dong et al. reported the incorporation of nitrogen vacancies in the g-C3N4 scaffold which can selectively photoreduce the nitrogen and significantly enhance the separation of radiative charge carriers by trapping photoinduced electrons and encouraging their subsequent transfer to the adsorbed N2.233 Apart from the incorporation of nitrogen vacancies in the g-C3N4 framework, Liu et al. very recently reported the design and synthesis of MXene-derived TiO2@C/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalysts by thermal calcination of a mixture of melamine precursor and MXene Ti3C2Tx.234 This simple synthesis approach bestows two-dimensional planar carbon nanosheet-supported TiO2 with plenty of Ti3+ species which were compactly enfolded by in situ synthesized g-C3N4 nanosheets. Interestingly, the as-synthesized heterojunction photocatalyst demonstrated excellent photocatalytic nitrogen reduction to NH3 of 250 mmol g−1 h−1 which confers marked features of sufficient surface defects, improved light harvesting, and superb charge transfer ability.
As for two-dimensional (2D) graphene, Hu and co-workers designed a metal-free 2D/2D nanohybrid heterostructure of g-C3N4/rGO by coupling rGO and protonated g-C3N4, in which reduced GO acts as a conducting substrate.235 The as-synthesized heterostructure demonstrated a five times higher NH3 production rate as compared to bulk g-C3N4, which is ascribed to the adequate interfacial contact during the electrostatic self-assembly process between rGO and pronated g-C3N4 across the g-C3N4/rGO heterojunction which efficiently suppresses the recombination of radiative charge carriers and enhances the charge transfer ability.
Apart from 2D/2D heterojunctions, multi-metal oxides with tuneable band structures match favourably through intact heterojunctions with g-C3N4 semiconductor photocatalysts. For instance, Wang et al. successfully reported g-C3N4/MgAlFeO nanorod heterojunction formation which proved to be efficient in N2 photoreduction.236 In this case, a Z-scheme heterojunction was established, as demonstrated in Fig. 17a, through which the photogenerated electrons in the CB of MgAlFeO transferred to the VB of g-C3N4 resulting in more effective separation of radiative charge carriers and faster interfacial charge transfer, which in turn result in high N2 photofixation. An analogous Z-scheme heterojunction mechanism for N2 fixation was also reported by Cao et al. in which 3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde functionalized Ga2O3/g-C3N4 (Ga2O3-DBD/g-C3N4) was fabricated by incorporating Ga2O3-DBD NPs into the g-C3N4 framework by using a facile post-grafting strategy (Fig. 17b).237 It was proposed that aromatic rings act as the electron mediators in Z-scheme heterojunctions which greatly improved the separation of photogenerated charge carriers through the formation of a well-matched interface between Ga2O3-DBD/g-C3N4 which facilitated the conversion of N2 to NH3 with the aid of the strong reducing power of CO2−, which were produced by the oxidation of CH3OH through active oxygen species as depicted in Fig. 17c.
 Fig. 17  (a) The possible Z-scheme heterojunction interface mechanism of g-C3N4/MgAlFeO. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The synthesis scheme and (c) photocatalytic N2 reduction mechanism of Ga2O3-DBD/g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier. 
The above-mentioned studies successfully established that metal-free g-C3N4 photocatalysts with the rational construction of heterojunctions and appealing morphologies can offer remarkable opportunities and an ideal platform for scientifically challenging yet environmentally friendly nitrogen photofixation technology for the sustainable growth of society.
5.4. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
In addition to photocatalytic H2 evolution and H2O2 production, photocatalytic CO2 reduction into energy-producing fuels has been deemed as an alternative modus operandi to deal with the worldwide energy shortage as well as to alleviate the greenhouse gases to accomplish solar energy conversion.238–241 This represents a “killing two birds with one stone” strategy by preserving the environment and supplying energy synchronously.242 CO2 reduction is a much more complicated and challenging reaction when compared to the H2 generation reaction since CO2 reduction demands a larger overpotential to drive the reaction at an adequate rate and is regarded as a multi-electron transfer process for converting CO2 into the desired products.243,244 Additionally, due to comparatively intricate reaction pathways, the selectivity for CO2 reduction is also a difficult process.245
Current research in this field demonstrates that g-C3N4 could play a significant role in driving the photocatalytic reaction of CO2 reduction.246–254 The conduction band edge of g-C3N4 is negative enough to facilitate the reduction of CO2 at large. Nonetheless, the fast recombination of radiative charge carriers is a big concern for the reduction of CO2 by using a g-C3N4 photocatalyst. To surmount this problem, Yu et al. deposited a Pt cocatalyst on g-C3N4 and examined its photocatalytic performance for CO2 reduction under visible-light illumination.255 The increase in Pt content caused an improved visible light absorption (Fig. 18a) and exhibited substantial impacts on the photocatalytic efficiency and selectivity of g-C3N4 samples by enabling electron transfer for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into several products (Fig. 18b).
 Fig. 18  (a) UV-vis DRS of Ptx-loaded g-C3N4 (x denotes the Pt loading amount) and (b) conversion of CO2 into CH4, CH3OH and HCHO over Ptx-loaded g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from the Pt loadings on g-C3N4, the photocatalytic efficiency of CO2 reduction could be further improved as a result of designing heterojunctions between g-C3N4 and other semiconductors with appropriate band edge potentials to build an illustrious and rational interface. Zou et al. fabricated a g-C3N4/NaNbO3 visible-light-induced heterojunction photocatalyst by employing polymeric metal-free g-C3N4 on NaNbO3 nanowires.256 It was shown that the photocatalytic activity of the g-C3N4/NaNbO3 nanohybrid nanomaterial for CO2 photoreduction was better than that of either single-phase NaNbO3 or the g-C3N4 photocatalyst. The outstanding improvement in the photocatalytic performance mentioned in this work was largely accredited to the enhanced separation and mobility of radiative charge carriers on the intimate interface heterojunctions, which basically develop from the well-coordinated superimposed band structures of g-C3N4 and NaNbO3. In another study, Maeda et al. described a heterojunction photocatalyst scheme comprised of a Ru-g-C3N4 complex that behaves as the photocatalytic and light-harvesting component.257 This heterogeneous photocatalytic system can reduce CO2 into HCOOH with turnover numbers above 1000 and an AQY of 5.7% at 400 nm which is much higher than those of heterogeneous based photocatalysts for carbon dioxide reduction under visible-light irradiation. The high quantum yield for the photoreduction of CO2 is credited to the synergetic effect of the electron transfer from excited g-C3N4 to Ru units and the improved electronic interactions of the heterojunction complex.
In another heterojunction study, Li and co-workers in 2016 synthesized mesoporous CeO2/g-C3N4 by employing silica as a hard template, and urea and cerium nitrate as the precursors of g-C3N4 and CeO2, respectively.92 The improved photoreduction of CO2 with water vapour to CO and CH4 was ascribed to the synergic effects of the intimate interface of CeO2 and g-C3N4 owing to the considerable separation of photoinduced charge pairs and CeO2 activation through the reduction of Ce4+ to Ce3+ through the entrapped electrons, as depicted in the schematic illustration in Fig. 19. Therefore, the Ce3+ integrated with CO2 to harvest CO2− and consequently increase the number of electrons, through the considerable aid of protons, carbon monoxide and methane, were produced. Consequently, the radiative charge carrier recombinations were distinctly repressed and, more favourably, the as-produced Ce3+ from Ce4+ reduction expedited the formulation of products from CO2−, hence accelerating the photoreduction processes.
 Fig. 19  (a and b) The schematic of the probable mechanism of charge carrier transfer in the CeO2/g-C3N4 heterostructure under light illumination. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier. 
5.5. Photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants
With the objective of understanding the sustainable development of human civilization and to protect the environment, photodegradation of organic contaminants ascertains significant and all-embracing apprehensions of researchers and scientists. In this regard, g-C3N4, as a visible-light active photocatalytic material, has acquired constant research attention owing to its auspicious environmental applications in photocatalysis such as photodegradation of various pollutants,258–264 air purification,265–267 and water disinfection.89,268
Organic pollutants, for instance, rhodamine B (RhB), methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO) and phenol, are extensively used for the evaluation of photocatalytic performance. From the perspective of H2O purification, hydrogen peroxide is amongst the most commonly utilized environmentally friendly oxidizing agents, which characteristically involves a photocatalyst for activation into more active oxidant species. Cui et al. described the degradation of rhodamine B by using metal-free activation of H2O2 by g-C3N4 under visible light illumination.269 It was shown that g-C3N4 was efficient for the activation of H2O2 to produce active oxy-radical species that played an imperative part in the mineralization of the dye without any apparent loss of the photocatalytic performance, demonstrating the excellent physicochemical stability of the g-C3N4 catalyst for water purification.
In the g-C3N4 photocatalytic system, two key potential active species, which are usually involved in the photodegradation of organic contaminants, are ˙O2− and h+ species. In addition to these two-reactive species, ˙OH radicals participate in the photochemical reactions. Nevertheless, pristine g-C3N4 is not efficient in inducing the photo-oxidation process of water to produce ˙OH radicals owing to its less positive valence band position than the ˙OH/H2O potential (ca. 2.27 V), which marks an inadequate oxidation ability. Yang et al. exhibited the preparation of Z-schematic plasmonic photocatalyst Ag@AgBr/g-C3N4 to additionally improve the catalytic efficiency.270 In the proposed Z-scheme system, the photodegradation of methyl orange (MO) was mainly ascribed to the photogenerated e− in the CB of g-C3N4 and h+ in the VB of AgBr that not only allows efficient spatial separation of the radiative electrons and holes, but also maintains the stronger redox ability of the photoinduced charge carriers.
Furthermore, WO3, a decent visible light photocatalyst, was also used to combine with g-C3N4. Chen et al. reported the separation mechanism of photogenerated charge carriers for the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) and fuchsine in the WO3/g-C3N4 nanocomposite.271 The separation mechanism of radiative charge carriers concerning the bandgaps of WO3 and g-C3N4 is displayed in Fig. 20a and b. In the conventional double charge transfer scheme (Fig. 20a), the formation of potential reactive species is not favourable and thus results in lower photocatalytic activities. In contrast, if the radiative charge carrier transfer occurred according to a direct Z-scheme arrangement (Fig. 20b), a fast combination was developed involving the photoinduced h+ in the valence band (VB) of g-C3N4 and e− in the conduction band (CB) of WO3 photocatalysts. In addition, a series of quenchers were employed to investigate the potential active species responsible for the photo-oxidation process. Ammonium oxalate (AO), isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and p-benzoquinone (p-BQ) were used as quenchers for photoexcited holes (h+), hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), and superoxide radicals (˙O2−), respectively. Fig. 20c exhibits the effect of different quenchers on the photodegradation activities of MB and fuchsine on the 5.0 wt% WO3/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst. According to the scavenger experiment investigations, it was established that ˙O2−, ˙OH, and h+ were the principal active species responsible for the WO3/g-C3N4 nanocomposite photocatalysts.
 Fig. 20  (a and b) Schematic diagram of radiative charge carrier separation processes. (c) The influence of a series of quenchers on the photocatalytic performance of the nanocomposite. Reproduced from ref. 271 with permission from Elsevier. 
Aside from Ag@AgBr/g-C3N4 and WO3/g-C3N4 nanohybrids, composites of g-C3N4 with other semiconductor photocatalysts, for instance, g-C3N4/TiO2,90,272 Ag3PO4/g-C3N4,273 g-C3N4/MoS2,274 CeO2/g-C3N4,275 Al2O3/g-C3N4,276 g-C3N4/CdS,277 g-C3N4/TaON,278 BiVO4/g-C3N4,279 g-C3N4/Bi2WO6,280,281 g-C3N4/BiOBr,282,283 g-C3N4/BiOI (ref. 284) and many more, have been considered as proficient photocatalysts for the photodegradation of organic pollutants in water.
Liquid phase photodegradation has also been employed for other contaminants, for instance, bisphenol A in natural water that is utilized broadly in the production of consumers products.285 Chang et al. successfully embedded Pd nanoparticles into mesoporous g-C3N4 and used them in the photodegradation of bisphenol A (BPA) in H2O.286 The improved photocatalytic activity attained in this experiment was principally ascribed to the improved light absorption and embedded Pd nanoparticles into g-C3N4 which function as electrons traps and expedite the separation of the radiative electron and hole pairs. Phenol, a major pollutant in several industrial wastewaters, is often used as a model compound in photocatalytic degradation experiments.163 Zhang et al. fabricated an agar–C3N4 nanohybrid 3D network hydrogel photocatalyst that exhibited a nearly 1.3 times better phenol removal as compared to pristine g-C3N4.287 Carbon dots (CDs) adorned on a metal-free polymeric material have also been stated to be useful in the photodegradation of phenol owing to the adequate separation of radiative charge carriers and upconverted PL character which enhanced the spectral absorption range.288
5.6. Bacterial disinfection
Water disinfection is conventionally accomplished by chlorination and ozonation, which resulted in the formation of considerably mutagenic and oncogenic disinfection by-products (DBPs), for instance, aldehyde, ketones, carboxylic acids, and bromates.289–291 In contrast, water disinfection achieved by ultraviolet irradiation is usually followed by bacterial regrowth as soon as the light treatment ended.292 Consequently, alternative nontoxic, efficient, and stable approaches to disinfect micro-organisms in polluted water are immediately required, without further stressing the biosphere or risking human health by the solution itself. Solar energy-driven photocatalytic water disinfection has attained great importance owing to its direct exploitation of solar light to attain wastewater treatment.
Recent studies have shown that g-C3N4 based photocatalysts display bactericidal effects under visible light illumination. For instance, Huang et al. reported for the first time that g-C3N4 showed an antibacterial effect on E. coli in H2O under visible-light illumination.165 The radical scavenger experiment further revealed that bacterial inactivation was assisted by the photogenerated h+ on the surface of the g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Noble metal nanoparticle deposition on two-dimensional nanosheet semiconductor photocatalysts has the potential to amplify the light energy conversion proficiency of semiconductors by enabling the formation of photoinduced electron and hole pairs and increasing the visible-light absorption range. Bing et al. efficiently embedded Ag nanoparticles into g-C3N4 nanosheets (Ag/g-C3N4).293 The as-formed Ag/g-C3N4 nanohybrids exhibited an improved visible-light-induced bactericidal activity and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in relation to bulk g-C3N4 nanosheets under visible light illumination. On the whole, the nanohybrids were proved to be effective antibacterial agents for both Gram-positive (G+) and Gram-negative (G−) bacteria under visible-light illumination.
Metal-free light-driven photocatalytic inactivation of bacteria is of significant importance because metal-induced photocatalytic applications usually involve Ag0 or Ag+ groups that are unfavourable for “green” water disinfection. Wang et al. prepared a unique class of metal-free ternary heterostructure photocatalysts by co-wrapping reduced GO and polymeric g-C3N4 sheets on a cyclooctasulfur crystal (α-S8) for photocatalytic bacterial disinfection under visible light irradiation.294 Two different heterostructures were synthesized by co-wrapping reduced GO and g-C3N4 sheets in discrete order and investigated their antibacterial photocatalytic activity towards inactivating E. coli K-12 cells (Fig. 21). In the first structure, reduced GO nanosheets were wedged between cyclooctasulfur and g-C3N4 nanosheets (CNRGOS8), whereas the second structure was the other way around (RGOCNS8). Interestingly, both frameworks displayed excellent bactericidal performance under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. This research proposes new insight into the investigation and understanding of the use of metal-free solar-driven photocatalytic water disinfection.
 Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of the mechanisms of visible-light-driven photocatalytic bactericidal activity. (a) CNRGOS8 and (b) RGOCNS8 under aerobic environments, and (c) CNRGOS8 and (d) RGOCNS8 under anaerobic environments. Reproduced from ref. 294 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
6. Conclusion and perspectives
The burgeoning expansion of nanoscale architecting of g-C3N4-based nanomaterials over the last decade has indisputably witnessed unique properties with exceptionally ameliorated photocatalytic performance and a myriad of photochemistry applications in sustainable energy conversion and environmental remediation. The captivating properties of g-C3N4, specifically as a metal-free polymer semiconductor, and its earth-abundant nature, exceptional chemical stability, appealing electronic band structure, and high redox potential, have been unanimously recognized as efficient for functioning well across a wide spectrum of photocatalytic applications, which encompass H2 and O2 generation from water splitting, H2O2 production, N2 photofixation, CO2 reduction, pollutant degradation and microbial inactivation. Since the ground-breaking work on g-C3N4 photocatalysts by Wang et al. in 2009 for hydrogen production, there has been a prolific increase in research studies on the modifications of bulk g-C3N4 to achieve a noticeably high surface area, highly porous architecture, extension of visible-light absorption to longer wavelengths for the exploitation of the entire solar spectrum, reduced bandgap energy and better separation of radiative charge carriers.
In this review, systematic discussions on the most updated developments in the controlled fabrication of nanoporous g-C3N4 with various structures and controlled morphologies with boosted photoactivity and applications in sustainable chemistry have been reviewed. It is notable that albeit considerable progress has been achieved in g-C3N4 based photocatalysts and polymeric g-C3N4 renaissance research is approaching to enter in the second decade, the studies in this field still have numerous open issues and limitations, which require further systematic investigations now and in the future. Rational designs of g-C3N4-based nanocomposites that could synchronously enable efficient visible light absorption, tuneable electronic band structures and interfacial charge transfer and separation are essential for a new generation of exceptionally efficient and robust photocatalysts.
Furthermore, the actual reaction mechanisms of improved photocatalytic performance with regard to water splitting, hydrogen peroxide production, nitrogen photofixation and carbon dioxide reduction by employing g-C3N4 based photocatalysts pursued by their respective reaction pathways have been unclear to date. In addition, it is notable that the existing apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) is even lower for meaningful large-scale practical applications. Consequently, deepened research interest can be expected in g-C3N4 materials for sustainable chemistry, and more systematic work is indispensable. It is anticipated that the relevant reaction mechanism that lies behind the improved photocatalytic efficiency should be fully investigated by coupling the experimental outcomes and computational simulations for further improvement of the photocatalytic activity in upcoming research.
Moreover, the corresponding polymeric structures of g-C3N4, for instance, poly(triazine imides), C3N3S3 and g-C4N3, which are visible-light-induced photocatalysts for numerous photoredox applications may open new prospects and opportunities by regulating the molecular structure of existing g-C3N4.295–298 Apart from this, the usually low dielectric properties of heptazine-based melon g-C3N4 give rise to potentially rich excitons. Therefore, biomimetic donor–acceptor motifs in g-C3N4 conjugated polymers are gaining importance for reinforcing exciton splitting and allowing charge separation and transfer to overcome the limit of the charge diffusion length.299 Thus, further studies on bioinspired donor and acceptor systems and homojunctions by optimizing the properties of the g-C3N4 polymer may open a new avenue for solar energy conversion applications.
In addition, the majority of the g-C3N4-derived nanomaterial photocatalysts exhibit type II heterojunctions or Z-scheme heterojunctions with outstanding efficiency in radiative charge carrier separation and strong redox ability, which have been substantiated to be excellent for potential applications related to photodegradation of organic pollutants and seldom on H2 generation. Therefore, expansion of the spectrum of photocatalytic applications of g-C3N4-based Z-scheme heterostructures is also significantly projected.
Additionally, the absence of a systematic protocol to assess the photocatalytic performance of the synthesized nanomaterials causes considerable differences, as the existing evaluation practices are diverse. Everyone states to have synthesized a material that displays photocatalytic predominance over what already has been reported. Nevertheless, such proclamations are mostly distorting to a certain degree since different starting materials and preparation methods are employed to synthesize the nanomaterials, and when it comes to assessing the photocatalytic performance, different photoreactors and light providing sources are used. Also, a photocatalyst functioning well in water decontamination possibly will display ordinary performance in air purification. This is simply to point out some of those factors which can produce totally different sets of findings from a similar nanomaterial. Consequently, devising general protocols for assessing the photocatalytic performance may provide a clear view of wherever we are standing with respect to photocatalysis for wide-ranging applications.
Finally, yet importantly, it is evident that the research progress has been terrifically excellent at this stage compared to the brief history of g-C3N4-based nanomaterial photocatalysts. It is highly anticipated that this review article will paint a clearer image to enlighten us about the exciting and brightening future of g-C3N4-based nanomaterials and to resolve the bottleneck of environmental and energy-related global issues which eventually will turn dreams into reality for heading towards a green and sustainable future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51608329), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong (2017A030313315), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Project (JCYJ20160520165135743, ZDSYS201606061530079) and the National Science Foundation of Shenzhen University (Grant No. 827-000223 and 2016008).
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Ong, Z. Lin and K. Domen, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1700451 CrossRef .
K. H. Leong, A. A. Aziz, L. C. Sim, P. Saravanan, M. Jang and D. Bahnemann, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 628 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. W. Phuan, W.-J. Ong, M. N. Chong and J. D. Ocon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2017, 33, 54–82 CrossRef .
R. Acharya, B. Naik and K. Parida, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 1448–1470 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. Li, S. Liu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2433–2441 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Waqas, Y. Wei, D. Mao, J. Qi, Y. Yang, B. Wang and D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 10, 3920–3928 Search PubMed .
W. Iqbal, B. Tian, M. Anpo and J. Zhang, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2017, 43, 5187–5201 CrossRef .
E. S. Jang, J. H. Won, S. J. Hwang and J. H. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3309–3312 CrossRef .
X. Wang, M. Liao, Y. Zhong, J. Y. Zheng, W. Tian, T. Zhai, C. Zhi, Y. Ma, J. Yao and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3421–3425 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-W. Cao and Y.-J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6253–6257 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, Q. Xu, W. Lei, T. Zhang, X. Qi, G. Liu, K. Deng and J. Yu, Small, 2014, 10, 674–679 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12820–12827 RSC .
S. Liu, K. Yin, W. Ren, B. Cheng and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17759–17767 RSC .
S.-W. Cao, Z. Yin, J. Barber, F. Y. Boey, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 4, 418–423 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, X. Gao, L. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Ning, S. Xu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 5746–5749 CrossRef .
Q. Li, X. Li, S. Wageh, A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500010 CrossRef .
B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Du, L. Fan, D. M. Xing and D. J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2684 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Qi, T. Hisatomi, Q. Ding, T. Asai, Z. Li, S. S. K. Ma, F. Zhang, K. Domen and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8498–8501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nakada, T. Nakashima, K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda and O. Ishitani, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4364–4371 RSC .
S. Chen, S. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Qi, F. Zhang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3047–3051 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi and N. Shibata, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295–295 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 897–900 RSC .
J. Mao, K. Li and T. Peng, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2481–2498 RSC .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu and Y. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Q. Xu, J. Hu, D. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Marszewski, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 261–278 RSC .
D. Chen, X. Zhang, A. F. Lee and J. Mater, Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14487–14516 Search PubMed .
C. Dong, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 608–612 RSC .
U. I. Gaya and A. H. Abdullah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 1–12 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Lang, R. Hao, L. Guo, J. Li, L. Wang and X. Han, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 8–16 CrossRef .
C. An, J. Liu, S. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Long and Y. Sun, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 204–211 CrossRef .
Q. Li, S. Mahendra, D. Y. Lyon, L. Brunet, M. V. Liga, D. Li and P. J. Alvarez, Water Res., 2008, 42, 4591–4602 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wei, W. Y. Lin, Z. Zainal, N. E. Williams, K. Zhu, A. P. Kruzic, R. L. Smith and K. Rajeshwar, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1994, 28, 934–938 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ruales-Lonfat, J. Barona, A. Sienkiewicz, M. Bensimon, J. Vélez-Colmenares, N. Benítez and C. Pulgarín, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 497–508 CrossRef .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater, 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Niu, L. Zhang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4763–4770 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y.-S. Jun, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4093–4095 CrossRef .
J. Xu, S. Cao, T. Brenner, X. Yang, J. Yu, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6265–6271 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Y. Li, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12480–12487 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, L. Liang, F. Wang, M. Liu, K. Chen, K. Sun, N. Zhang and J. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3412–3419 CrossRef .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885–6892 CrossRef .
D. Zheng, C. Pang, Y. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9706–9709 RSC .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Sharma, M. Naushad, F. J. Stadler, A. A. Ghfar, P. Dhiman and R. Saini, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 165, 431–451 CrossRef .
F. K. Kessler, Y. Zheng, D. Schwarz, C. Merschjann, W. Schnick, X. Wang and M. J. Bojdys, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17030 CrossRef .
W.-J. Ong, Front. Mater., 2017, 4, 11 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5261–5274 RSC .
J. V. Liebig, Ann. Pharm, 1834, 10 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and L. Qu, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 298–318 CrossRef .
D. M. Teter and R. J. Hemley, Science, 1996, 271, 53 CrossRef .
M. L. Cohen, Science, 1993, 261, 307–309 CrossRef PubMed .
D. C. Nesting and J. V. Badding, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1535–1539 CrossRef .
M. Döblinger, B. V. Lotsch, J. Wack, J. Thun, J. Senker and W. Schnick, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1541–1543 RSC .
X.-X. Zou, G.-D. Li, Y.-N. Wang, J. Zhao, C. Yan, M.-Y. Guo, L. Li and J.-S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1066–1068 RSC .
E. Kroke and M. Schwarz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 493–532 CrossRef .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
A. Semencha and L. Blinov, Glass Phys. Chem, 2010, 36, 199–208 CrossRef .
S. Matsumoto, E.-Q. Xie and F. Izumi, Diamond Relat. Mater., 1999, 8, 1175–1182 CrossRef .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4530–4532 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Chen, A. Thomas, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1609–1612 CrossRef .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, X. Yu, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4634–4639 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-H. Li, J. Zhang, X. Chen, A. Fischer, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4344–4348 CrossRef .
Y. S. Jun, E. Z. Lee, X. Wang, W. H. Hong, G. D. Stucky and A. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3661–3667 CrossRef .
M. Shalom, S. Inal, C. Fettkenhauer, D. Neher and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7118–7121 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhuang, L. Lin, R. Li and T. Peng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4106–4114 RSC .
S. Samanta, S. Martha and K. Parida, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1453–1462 Search PubMed .
X. Bai, R. Zong, C. Li, D. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B., 2014, 147, 82–91 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan, L. Lin, S. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062–3066 RSC .
Z. Ding, X. Chen, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 274–281 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658–11659 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, K. Kailasam, D. Hollmann, M. Schröder, A. Thomas, A. Brückner and M. Driess, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 104–107 RSC .
Z. Li, C. Kong and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 120, 56–63 CrossRef .
L.-F. Gao, T. Wen, J.-Y. Xu, X.-P. Zhai, M. Zhao, G.-W. Hu, P. Chen, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 617–624 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, Energy Environ Sci., 2011, 4, 4517–4521 RSC .
X. Bai, L. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 262–270 CrossRef .
B. Chai, X. Liao, F. Song and H. Zhou, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 982–989 RSC .
K. Dai, L. Lu, Q. Liu, G. Zhu, X. Wei, J. Bai, L. Xuan and H. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6295–6299 RSC .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7281–7285 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang and F. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 287–295 CrossRef .
X. She, H. Xu, Y. Xu, J. Yan, J. Xia, L. Xu, Y. Song, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang, H. Li and J. Mater, Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2563–2570 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14766–14772 RSC .
H. Zhao, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 46–50 CrossRef .
H. Li, L. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Lei and J. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17406–17412 RSC .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922–2929 RSC .
M. Li, L. Zhang, M. Wu, Y. Du, X. Fan, M. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Kong and J. Shi, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 145–155 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, Y. Sun and F. Dong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15–37 RSC .
W. Li, C. Feng, S. Dai, J. Yue, F. Hua and H. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168, 465–471 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Lei and Y. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 2016, 5387–5392 CrossRef .
E. G. Gillan, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3906–3912 CrossRef .
T. Komatsu and T. Nakamura, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 474–478 RSC .
S. Yan, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kawaguchi and K. Nozaki, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 257–264 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 50–51 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Di, M. Antonietti, H. Li, X. Chen and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5119–5121 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ji, F. Chang, X. Hu, W. Qin and J. Shen, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 218, 183–190 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8083–8091 RSC .
F. Dong, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, W.-K. Ho and H. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 401, 70–79 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda, X. Wang, Y. Nishihara, D. Lu, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4940–4947 CrossRef .
B. Long, J. Lin and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2942–2951 RSC .
H. Yan, Y. Chen and S. Xu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 125–133 CrossRef .
X.-S. Zhang, J.-Y. Hu and H. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 256, 230–237 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, J. Feng, S. Yan, H. Zhang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 295, 253–259 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, G. Zhang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 940–948 CrossRef .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, Y. Zheng and S. Hao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16244–16246 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 18–21 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, W. Li, L. Duan, X. Li, L. Ji, Z. Geng, K. Huang, L. Lu, L. Zhou and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5137–5142 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
J. Fang, H. Fan, M. Li and C. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13819–13826 RSC .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Nan, F. Ding, Y. Shen and Z. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1103–1112 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Sugano, D. Tsukamoto, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 774–780 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Y. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Zhao and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6965–6967 RSC .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, H. Sakamoto, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3058–3066 CrossRef .
T. Y. Ma, Y. Tang, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2014, 10, 2382–2389 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, T. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Meng, D. Hao, K. Chang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 13765–13769 CrossRef .
X. D. Sun, Y. Y. Li, J. Zhou, C. H. Ma, Y. Wang and J. H. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 451, 108–116 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, H.-T. Wu, X. Wang, B. Xue, Y.-X. Li and Y. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4510–4517 RSC .
Y. J. Chung, B. I. Lee, J. W. Ko and C. B. Park, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1560–1565 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shan, Y. Hu, Z. Bai, M. Zheng and C. Wei, Appl. Catal., B., 2016, 188, 1–12 CrossRef .
S. Yuan, Q. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Liu, J. Wang, J. Xie, M. Zhang and T. Ohno, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1826–1830 RSC .
H. Xiao, W. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Chen, K. Lv and J. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 313–318 CrossRef .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
S.-H. Yeon, H. Yoon, S.-H. Lee, J. E. Kim, S. Lim, K.-H. Shin, H. S. Park, C.-S. Jin, W. Ahn and H.-W. Cheong, Carbon, 2015, 91, 241–251 CrossRef .
P. Wu, J. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Guo and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15521–15524 RSC .
F. Dong, Y. Sun, L. Wu, M. Fu and Z. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1332–1335 RSC .
Z. Mo, X. She, Y. Li, L. Liu, L. Huang, Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Xu and H. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 101552–101562 RSC .
F. Dong, Z. Wang, Y. Li, W.-K. Ho and S. Lee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 10345–10353 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Dong, M. Ou, Y. Jiang, S. Guo and Z. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 2318–2330 CrossRef .
D. J. Martin, K. Qiu, S. A. Shevlin, A. D. Handoko, X. Chen, Z. Guo and J. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9240–9245 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, Y. Wan and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3854 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Schnepp, J. Cao, S. Ouyang, Y. Li, J. Ye and S. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2163 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Wang and Y. Zhu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 10566–10572 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Hollamby, D. Borisova, P. Brown, J. Eastoe, I. Grillo and D. Shchukin, Langmuir, 2011, 28, 4425–4433 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3430–3432 RSC .
M. Antonietti, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 6, 244–248 CrossRef .
D. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Wan, X. Tu, Y. Shi, Z. Chen, W. Shen, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1511–1519 RSC .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. McGann, M. Zhong, E. K. Kim, S. Natesakhawat, M. Jaroniec, J. F. Whitacre, K. Matyjaszewski and T. Kowalewski, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 1078–1090 CrossRef .
K. Holmberg, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 274, 355–364 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shen, L. Ren, H. Zhou, S. Zhang and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3890–3894 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and Y. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 435–439 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wasserscheid and W. Keim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3772–3789 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3356–3359 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, J. Ye and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6294 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1547–1550 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, L. Liang, F. Wang, M. Liu, T. Liang, K. Chen and J. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 63264–63270 RSC .
Y. Han, M. Fuji, D. Shchukin, H. Möhwald and M. Takahashi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3771–3775 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, J. Sun, K. Maeda, K. Domen, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 675–678 RSC .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zheng and S. Hao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 425–427 RSC .
W. Iqbal, C. Dong, M. Xing, X. Tan and J. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1726–1734 RSC .
W. Iqbal, B. Qiu, J. Lei, L. Wang, J. Zhang and M. Anpo, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10678–10684 RSC .
W. Iqbal, L. Wang, X. Tan and J. Zhang, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3500–3507 CrossRef .
K. Kailasam, J. D. Epping, A. Thomas, S. Losse and H. Junge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4668–4674 RSC .
J. Huang, W. Ho and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4338–4340 RSC .
X. Li, A. F. Masters and T. Maschmeyer, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 121–126 CrossRef .
A. H. Lu and F. Schüth, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1793–1805 CrossRef .
J. Y. Ying, C. P. Mehnert and M. S. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 56–77 CrossRef .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1789–1792 CrossRef .
N. Igarashi, K. A. Koyano, Y. Tanaka, S. Nakata, K. Hashimoto and T. Tatsumi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 59, 43–52 CrossRef .
S. N. Talapaneni, G. P. Mane, A. Mano, C. Anand, D. S. Dhawale, T. Mori and A. Vinu, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 700–708 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. A. Staggemeier, The use of mesoporous silica as a template for the nanocasting of metal oxide arrays, PhD Seminar, The University of Alabama,  2014 Search PubMed.
Y. Qiu and L. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2378–2379 RSC .
A. Vinu, K. Ariga, T. Mori, T. Nakanishi, S. Hishita, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1648–1652 CrossRef .
A. Vinu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 816–827 CrossRef .
Q. Li, J. Yang, D. Feng, Z. Wu, Q. Wu, S. S. Park, C.-S. Ha and D. Zhao, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 632–642 CrossRef .
X. Jin, V. V. Balasubramanian, S. T. Selvan, D. P. Sawant, M. A. Chari, G. E. Q. Lu and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 8024–8027 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, F. Guo and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3008–3014 CrossRef .
Y. S. Jun, J. Park, S. U. Lee, A. Thomas, W. H. Hong and G. D. Stucky, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 11289–11293 CrossRef .
D. Zheng, C. Huang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 465–470 RSC .
G. Algara-Siller, N. Severin, S. Y. Chong, T. Björkman, R. G. Palgrave, A. Laybourn, M. Antonietti, Y. Z. Khimyak, A. V. Krasheninnikov and J. P. Rabe, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 7580–7585 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6291–6297 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-W. Bian, Z. Ma and W.-G. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8668–8672 CrossRef .
H. Yoon, S. Ko and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1468–1470 RSC .
D. Chen, J. Yang and H. Ding, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 384–391 CrossRef .
I. Papailias, N. Todorova, T. Giannakopoulou, J. Yu, D. Dimotikali and C. Trapalis, Catal. Today, 2017, 280, 37–44 CrossRef .
J. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Shen, Z. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Li, W. Wei, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5126–5131 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 RSC .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Jorge, D. J. Martin, M. T. Dhanoa, A. S. Rahman, N. Makwana, J. Tang, A. Sella, F. Corà, S. Firth and J. A. Darr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7178–7185 CrossRef .
S. Martha, A. Nashim and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7816–7824 RSC .
Q. Han, B. Wang, Y. Zhao, C. Hu and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11433–11437 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1139 CrossRef .
J. Hong, X. Xia, Y. Wang and R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006–15012 RSC .
G. Zhang, M. Zhang, X. Ye, X. Qiu, S. Lin and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 805–809 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, G. Zhao, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, H. Pang, H. Zhang, D. Hao, X. Meng, P. Li and T. Kako, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6822–6829 CrossRef .
S. Martha, S. Mansingh, K. M. Parida and A. Thirumurugan, Mater. Chem. Front, 2017, 1, 1641–1653 RSC .
Y. Wu, H. Wang, W. Tu, Y. Liu, Y. Z. Tan, X. Yuan and J. W. Chew, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 347, 412 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Panneri, P. Ganguly, B. N. Nair, A. M. Peer and K. G. K. Warrier, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 212–221 RSC .
L. Jing, W.-J. Ong, R. Zhang, E. Pickwell-MacPherson and C. Y. Jimmy, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 103–109 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, G. Wang, H. S. Chen and P. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4720–4723 RSC .
L. K. Putri, B. J. Ng, W. J. Ong, H. W. Lee, W. S. Chang and S. P. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3181–3194 RSC .
W. Iqbal, B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 306–313 CrossRef .
D. Zeng, P. Wu, W.-J. Ong, B. Tang, M. Wu, H. Zheng, Y. Chen and D.-L. Peng, Appl. Catal., B., 2018, 233, 26–34 CrossRef .
N. Zhao, L. Kong, Y. Dong, G. L. Wang, X. Wu and P. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9522–9531 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Shao, Y. Shao, J. Chai, Y. Qu, M. Yang, Z. Wang, M. Yang, W. F. Ip, C. T. Kwok and X. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16748–16756 RSC .
J. Fu, C. Bie, B. Cheng, C. Jiang and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2767–2779 CrossRef .
D. Zeng, W. Xu, W.-J. Ong, J. Xu, H. Ren, Y. Chen, H. Zheng and D.-L. Peng, Appl. Catal., B., 2018, 221, 47–55 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zeng, W.-J. Ong, H. Zheng, M. Wu, Y. Chen, D.-L. Peng and M.-Y. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16171–16178 RSC .
D. Zeng, W. J. Ong, Y. Chen, S. Y. Tee, C. S. Chua, D. L. Peng and M. Y. Han, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1700251 CrossRef .
S. A. M. Shaegh, N. T. Nguyen, S. M. M. Ehteshami and S. H. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8225–8228 RSC .
J. M. Camposmartin, G. Blancobrieva and J. L. Fierro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6962 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Goto, Y. Hanada, T. Ohno and M. Matsumura, J. Catal., 2004, 225, 223–229 CrossRef .
M. Teranishi, S. Naya and H. Tada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7850–7851 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Tsukamoto, A. Shiro, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 599–603 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Chen, J. Lei and J. Zhang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 40, 4797–4802 CrossRef .
L. Yang, G. Dong, D. L. Jacobs, Y. Wang, L. Zang and C. Wang, J. Catal., 2017, 352, 274–281 CrossRef .
S. Li, G. Dong, R. Hailili, L. Yang, Y. Li, F. Wang, Y. Zeng and C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B., 2016, 190, 26–35 CrossRef .
Y. Kofuji, S. Ohkita, Y. Shiraishi, H. Sakamoto, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7021–7029 CrossRef .
Y. Shiraishi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Sugano, D. Tsukamoto, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2016, 4, 774–780 CrossRef .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, H. Sakamoto, S. Tanaka, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3058–3066 CrossRef .
L. Shi, L. Yang, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, L. Yin, X. Hai, H. Song and J. Ye, Small, 2018, 1703142 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Smil, Nature, 1999, 400, 415–415 CrossRef .
X. Chen, N. Li, Z. Kong, W. J. Ong and X. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 9–27 RSC .
X. Li, X. Sun, L. Zhang, S. Sun and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3005–3011 RSC .
H. Liang, H. Zou and S. Hu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 8920–8926 RSC .
A. Shi, H. Li, S. Yin, Z. Hou, J. Rong, J. Zhang and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 197–206 CrossRef .
S. Cao, H. Chen, F. Jiang and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 222–229 CrossRef .
G. Dong, W. K. Ho and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23435–23441 RSC .
Q. Liu, L. Ai and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4102–4110 RSC .
S. Hu, W. Zhang, J. Bai, G. Lu, L. Zhang and G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25695–25702 RSC .
Y. Wang, W. Wei, M. Li, S. Hu, J. Zhang and R. Feng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 18099–18107 RSC .
S. Cao, N. Zhou, F. Gao, H. Chen and F. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 600–610 CrossRef .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 251–259 CrossRef .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar, M. Bhardwaj, P. Yadav and S. Ogale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2667–2678 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, Y.-C. Tan, L.-L. Tan, N. Li, Y. H. Ng, X. Wen and S.-P. Chai, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1673–1696 CrossRef .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 465 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef .
L. Yuan and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 154–167 CrossRef .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
S.-W. Cao, X.-F. Liu, Y.-P. Yuan, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-S. Liao, J. Fang, S. C. J. Loo, T. C. Sum and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 940–946 CrossRef .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 530–543 CrossRef .
J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li, L. Ye and L. Zan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1253–1260 RSC .
Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, Y.-S. Liao, L.-S. Yin and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140, 164–168 CrossRef .
Y. Fang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5674–5687 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Wang, Z. Wu and L. Wang, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 160–172 CrossRef .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef .
L. K. Putri, W.-J. Ong, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 744–754 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
J. Yu, K. Wang, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11492–11501 RSC .
H. Shi, G. Chen, C. Zhang and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3637–3643 CrossRef .
R. Kuriki, K. Sekizawa, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2406–2409 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. Huang, X. Fu and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1396–1402 RSC .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Sharma, A. A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, M. Naushad, A. A. Ghfar, C. Guo and F. J. Stadler, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 339, 393–410 CrossRef .
S. C. Lee, H. O. Lintang and L. Yuliati, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 2139–2144 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Liu, M. Wang, C. Xu and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 209, 386–393 CrossRef .
P. Niu, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11013–11018 CrossRef .
L. Shi, L. Liang, J. Ma, F. Wang and J. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 7236–7244 RSC .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Sharma, A. A. H. Al-Muhase, M. Naushad, A. A. Ghfar and F. J. Stadler, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 462–478 CrossRef .
T. Sano, S. Tsutsui, K. Koike, T. Hirakawa, Y. Teramoto, N. Negishi and K. Takeuchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6489–6496 RSC .
J. Ma, C. Wang and H. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 28–34 CrossRef .
K.-i. Katsumata, R. Motoyoshi, N. Matsushita and K. Okada, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 260, 475–482 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Matsunaga, R. Tomoda, T. Nakajima and H. Wake, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1985, 29, 211–214 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, Z. Ding, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1455–1462 RSC .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, Y. Guo, Y. Zhao, X. Yuan and Y. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 271, 150–159 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Hu, S. Meng and X. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, s150–151, 564–573 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, S. Chen, H. Yu and X. Quan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 99, 50–54 CrossRef .
H. Katsumata, T. Sakai, T. Suzuki and S. Kaneco, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 8018–8025 CrossRef .
Q. Li, N. Zhang, Y. Yang, G. Wang and D. H. Ng, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8965–8972 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Li, H. Xu, Y. Xu, J. Xia, K. Wang, H. Li and X. Cheng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22269–22279 RSC .
F. T. Li, S. J. Liu, Y. B. Xue, X. J. Wang, Y. J. Hao, J. Zhao, R. H. Liu and D. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10149–10159 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fu, B. Chang, Y. Tian, F. Xi and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3083–3090 RSC .
S. Yan, S. Lv, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 1488–1491 RSC .
C. Li, S. Wang, T. Wang, Y. Wei, P. Zhang and J. Gong, Small, 2014, 10, 2783–2790 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Bai, C. Pan, J. He and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11568–11573 RSC .
Y. Tian, B. Chang, J. Lu, J. Fu, F. Xi and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7079–7085 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, J. Liu, Z. Jiang, T. Peng and L. Zan, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. Zhang, T. Xiong, Z. Zhao, F. Dong, R. Wang and W.-K. Ho, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 418, 317–323 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jiang, L. Chen, J. Zhu, M. Chen, W. Shi and J. Xie, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 15726–15734 RSC .
D. P. Subagio, M. Srinivasan, M. Lim and T.-T. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 414–422 CrossRef .
C. Chang, Y. Fu, M. Hu, C. Wang, G. Shan and L. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 553–560 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, W. Jiang, D. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 263–268 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, L. Zhao, F. Geng, L.-H. Guo, B. Wan and Y. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 656–662 CrossRef .
M. J. Nieuwenhuijsen, M. B. Toledano, N. E. Eaton, J. Fawell and P. Elliott, Occup. Environ. Med., 2000, 57, 73–85 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Huang, G.-C. Fang and C.-C. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2005, 345, 261–272 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sichel, J. Blanco, S. Malato and P. Fernandez-Ibanez, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 189, 239–246 CrossRef .
D. Haaken, V. Schmalz, T. Dittmar and E. Worch, J. Water Supply: Res. Technol.--AQUA, 2013, 62, 442–451 CrossRef .
W. Bing, Z. Chen, H. Sun, P. Shi, N. Gao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1648–1658 CrossRef .
W. Wang, J. C. Yu, D. Xia, P. K. Wong and Y. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 8724–8732 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liang, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2897–2902 CrossRef .
K. Schwinghammer, B. Tuffy, M. B. Mesch, E. Wirnhier, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, W. Schnick, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2435–2439 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Long, L. Yang, W. Chen, W. Dai, X. Fu and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1826–1830 RSC .
X. Li, S. Zhang and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7142–7146 RSC .
H. Ou, X. Chen, L. Lin, Y. Fang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 8729–8733 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The annual collections of journal publications on “graphitic carbon nitride” since its inception as a H2 evolution material in 2009. Adapted from ISI Web of Science, dated 30th June 2018.	 

Dicyandiamide	550 °C, 2 h, air	2.75	
104

Thiourea	450 °C, 2 h, air	2.71	
105

550 °C	2.58
650 °C	2.76
Urea	550 °C, 4 h, air	2.78	
106

Hydrogen cyanamide	550 °C, 4 h, air	2.70	
107

Guanidine thiocyanate	550 °C, 2 h, nitrogen gas	2.74	
108

700 °C, 2 h, nitrogen gas	2.89
Melamine	500 °C, 2 h, air	2.80	
98

H2SO4-assisted melamine	600 °C, 4 h, argon flow	2.69	
109

HCl-assisted melamine	550 °C, 4 h, air	2.73	
110

HNO3-assisted melamine	580 °C, 1 h, air	2.58	
111

Sulphur-mediated melamine	650 °C, 2 h nitrogen gas	2.65	
112

Sucrose-assisted g-C3N4	600 °C, 2 h, air	2.64	
113


 	Fig. 2  (a) Construction of g-C3N4 from melem units, (b) XRD pattern of g-C3N4 and (c) UV-visible DRS of the polymeric g-C3N4. Inset: Photograph of the bulk g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the main synthesis routes of bulk g-C3N4. Colour codes used in the demonstration of chemical structures: C, black; N, red; H, O, white blue; S, purple. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns and (b–d) TEM images of as-prepared g-C3N4 samples at different temperatures. (e and f) DRS spectra and transit photocurrent response of different samples. The inset of (e) displays the colour change of the materials at different temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of two typical synthesis pathways for ordered mesoporous materials: (a) soft-templating strategy and (b) hard-templating (nanocasting) strategy. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of nanostructured g-C3N4 solids prepared by employing a variety of soft templating agents. (a) P123, (b and c) T-X-100 and (d) BmimPF6. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) DRS spectra. The inset shows the colour change photographs of g-C3N4 (left), P-C3N4-0.1 (middle), and P-C3N4-0.3 (right). (b) Photocurrent density of phosphorous-doped and bulk g-C3N4. (c) Current–potential curves of phosphorous-doped and bulk g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis scheme for the construction of the nanoporous sulphur-mediated g-C3N4 nanomaterial. (b) TEM image of the sulphur-assisted porous g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis scheme of well-adorned mesoporous g-C3N4 and (b and c) TEM image of NH4Cl assisted mesoporous g-C3N4 (mpg-C3N4-2). Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis protocols of bulk g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 NSs; (b) and (c) TEM images of g-C3N4 nanosheets; (d) photocatalytic H2 production rate over the g-C3N4 nanosheets and bulk sample; (e) wavelength-dependent H2 generation rate of g-C3N4 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis scheme of hard templating used for ordered mpg-C3N4. CA represents the cyanamide precursor. (b) TEM image of the mpg-C3N4 material. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) AAO templating approaches toward g-C3N4 nanorods: (1) loading of AAO templates (grey) by the precursor (white), (2) thermal calcination of the filled templates at 600 °C under an inert atmosphere, and (3) removing the templates to form CNRs (yellow). (b and c) SEM images of CNRs. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of synthesis of porous g-C3N4 using CaCO3 nanoparticles as the template, (b) SEM image of porous g-C3N4 and (c) the transient current response biased at 0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl). Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–h) High-magnification SEM and TEM morphological images of a single fiber of the freeze-dried, hydrothermally treated DCDA “seaweed”. (i) Photocatalytic activities of g-C3N4 (550) “seaweed” (i) and bulk g-C3N4 (ii) under visible-light illumination (>420). (j) Wavelength dependence of the H2 generation rate on g-C3N4 (550) “seaweed” (inset: the H2 generation under 550 nm light irradiation). Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 15  a) Schematic of the synthesis of crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets (CCNNSs); b) photocatalytic H2 generation reactions of as-synthesized samples and c) corresponding photocatalytic oxidation kinetic rate constants (K) for CCNNSs and BCN under simulated solar light illumination. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism of H2 production over BCN and CCNNSs. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic protocol of holey defective g-C3N4 photocatalysts; (a and b) time-dependence and activity comparison of different samples for H2O2 production; (c) wavelength dependence of the H2O2 generation rate of DCN-15A; (d) recycling test of DCN-15A. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The possible Z-scheme heterojunction interface mechanism of g-C3N4/MgAlFeO. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The synthesis scheme and (c) photocatalytic N2 reduction mechanism of Ga2O3-DBD/g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) UV-vis DRS of Ptx-loaded g-C3N4 (x denotes the Pt loading amount) and (b) conversion of CO2 into CH4, CH3OH and HCHO over Ptx-loaded g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) The schematic of the probable mechanism of charge carrier transfer in the CeO2/g-C3N4 heterostructure under light illumination. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a and b) Schematic diagram of radiative charge carrier separation processes. (c) The influence of a series of quenchers on the photocatalytic performance of the nanocomposite. Reproduced from ref. 271 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of the mechanisms of visible-light-driven photocatalytic bactericidal activity. (a) CNRGOS8 and (b) RGOCNS8 under aerobic environments, and (c) CNRGOS8 and (d) RGOCNS8 under anaerobic environments. Reproduced from ref. 294 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
