Clean energy new deal for a sustainable world: from non-CO 2 generating energy sources to greener electrochemical storage devices  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00731E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00731E
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003-2019Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsClean energy new deal for a sustainable world: from non-CO2 generating energy sources to greener electrochemical storage devices

        
          
            Philippe 
            Poizot
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Franck 
            Dolhem
          
          
        
      b
aLaboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides, UMR CNRS 6007, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, 33 rue Saint-Leu, 80039, Amiens Cedex, France. E-mail: philippe.poizot@u-picardie.fr;  Fax: +33-322827590;   Tel: +33-322827586
bLaboratoire des Glucides, UMR CNRS 6219, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, 33 rue Saint-Leu, 80039, Amiens Cedex, France
Received 
      1st December 2010
    , Accepted 5th April 2011First published on 17th May 2011AbstractThe fundamental challenge of the 21st century that mankind has to face is definitely energy supply, its storage and conversion in a way that necessarily protects the environment. For 250 years, the tremendous development of humanity has been founded on the harnessing of fossil fuels (coal, crude oil then natural gas) as primary energy due to their high energy density values and the easiness of access. However, this global pattern of energy supply and use is unsustainable. Global warming and finite fossil-fuel supplies call for a radical change in the energy mix to favour renewable energy sources. Without being exhaustive, we tackle in this article the tricky energy question and associated environmental issues as personally perceived. The eminent role of electric energy produced from decarbonized sources in a future sustainable economy is particularly highlighted as well as the issues of its needed storage. The possible and foreseen hindrances of electrochemical energy storage devices, focusing on the lithium-ion technology, are presented in parallel with the possible pathways to make such a technology greener in synergy with the rise of a biomass-based industry.Philippe PoizotPhilippe Poizot is presently an Associate Professor of Electrochemistry at Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (University of Picardie, Amiens, France). After a Master of Science in Analytical Chemistry (1998) from the University of Paris VI, he obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science (2001) from the University of Picardie. He joined Switzer's group (University of Missouri-Rolla, USA) in 2002 as postdoctoral researcher to develop the electrodeposition of nanostructured materials and enantiospecific catalysts. His current research topics are mainly focused on the Li-ion battery R&D, electrochemical deposition, molecular electrochemistry and the development of redox-active organic electrode materials following his concept of a greener Li-ion battery based on renewable matter.Franck DolhemFranck Dolhem received his PhD in organic chemistry of natural resources in 2003 from the University of Picardie. Then he joined the group of Aloïs Fürstner at the Max Planck Institute for post-doctoral studies and during one year he was working on the total synthesis of a natural compound. After that, he spent another year at Chalmers University in 2005, this time he was preparing libraries of P-chiral ligands for homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. In 2006 he was appointed as an Associate Professor at the Laboratoire des Glucides (University of Picardie, Amiens, France). His research is mainly focused on organic renewable advanced materials issued from biomass for Li-ion battery electrodes.

Broader context
The main rise in the living quality of human kind has mainly begun with the industrial revolution thanks to prodigious scientific and technological progresses resulting in better mastery of energy. Two centuries and a half after, the threats of climate change and the issues of secure energy supply conspire to make us take another look at our current energy engineering and our consuming fashion. The electrical energy production and the sector of transportation are particularly concerned about this increasing awareness of the need for reliable, clean and safe technologies, which raises in the background the crucial question of energy storage. In this context, electrochemical storage systems could play a critical role as a power propulsion source for zero-emission (electric) vehicles, but also as a reliable buffer system to manage the intermittent renewable energy sources and ensure the global safety of the future “smart grid”. Li-ion batteries constitute an advanced technology that can meet these new requirements providing that they are themselves sufficiently eco-friendly.

1. Introduction
The routine domestic use of fire marked basically the first drastic change in terms of quality of life of early humans. The reason is that there is no substantial progress without access to an efficient energy source. Today, the development of energy technologies is essential for our industrialized societies, and a rapid overview of our modern way of life shows very explicitly how much we are tributary of them (e.g., communication, travelling, goods production, heating/cooling, lighting, etc.). Thus we are constantly more or less dependent on a continuous supply of energy. In the next 100 years, worldwide demand for energy will increase tenfold, prompted by billions of “third world” consumers acquiring access to modern products and services. In the meantime we can assert without any fear of being proved wrong that our planet will not support for much longer such exponential energy consumption because the main energy reservoir on which the global economy has been based since the 18th century consists in burning fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural gas). This stored carbon fossil has certainly the advantages of being stable and having a high energy density enabling easy storage and transport, but their massive utilization has induced two major drawbacks. The first one is that the reserves are finite with sooner or later economic and energy security issues. The second one is even more serious and concerns anthropogenic heavy greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, carbon dioxide in particular. If nothing is done to curb those emissions we will have to face the consequences of an abnormally high concentration of GHGs in the Earth atmosphere, which by non-linear amplifying effects will lead to deep alterations of the climate and in particular global warming.1–4 Most models forecast an increase in temperature from 2 to 3 °C by the end of the 21st century, which suggests dramatic consequences on the environment like the important rise in sea level with its aftermath.5 An annual average rise of 3.1 mm from August 1992 to April 1999 has already been recorded by the Topex–Poseidon satellite.6 However, given its complexities and the volumes at stake the climate system is not a machine with immediate response. This phenomenon can be appreciated with a simple example: it takes 4 to 8 years for CO2 to spread into the atmosphere but 50 to 100 years to get rid of half of it.
Within a few decades climate change could entirely reshuffle our geography, relocate industrial and farming areas, influence biodiversity, and alter the distribution of populations by causing conflicts over water and food.7 Faced with the speed and size of the anthropogenic warming, the management of this change at social and economic levels will be tricky as it seems impossible to rapidly wean this world. Without advocating a negative or zero growth (as announced in the Meadows report8), it is urgent to make the choices that will enable us to radically curb the share of fossil fuels in our energy engineering, particularly in the transportation, industry and building sectors. In the broad field of energy conversion and its modern management, the particular case of electrical energy appears highly sensitive due to its functionality indispensable for a wide range of fundamental applications for industrialized societies. Thus, decarbonizing the logistic chain of the electrical sector constitutes probably one of the basic stages towards a sustainable development. Along that line, the full integration of renewable energy sources both on- and off-the-grid as well as the transition from internal combustion engines to battery-powered electric vehicles can be viewed as critical mutations needed for mitigation.
Taking part in this background, this article will outline a personal view of how essential the global question of energy in the beginning of the 21st century is and what the mainsprings and the possible hindrances of a sustainable development based on the harvesting of electric energy produced from decarbonized sources will be. Starting by recalling what energy is in order to recap the limits of physics, this kind of peculiar overview will be marked by specific focuses on some critical points centred particularly on the electrical energy challenges. We will highlight that realizing a reliable dispatch of electrical power at various scales cannot be possible without efficient (and green) energy storage systems. Without being exhaustive, one major technological challenge in this field consists notably in designing advanced batteries to better store electric energy while being environment-friendly. However, current technologies still fall short of both sustainability and CO2 footprint criteria because active electrode materials are inorganic and basically obtained through energy-greedy mining. The second part of the paper will be also an opportunity to point out that organic-based electrode materials can bring some potentialities in the field of electrochemical energy storage such as the true possibility of being prepared from renewable resources (prompt use of biomass), which should improve the environmental footprint of a battery.
2. Energy and its secrets
To this day “Energy” remains a very puzzling notion indirectly defined, not to say a philosophical one, and is probably closely linked to the origin of Life itself. In the field of Science, the concept of energy is one of the most abstract and multifaceted, although being only 150 years old.† Behind its complexity and its abstract nature lies a ubiquitous entity embodied in everything and involved in any kind of action. As scientists, one can obviously perceive energy as a basic ingredient in the Life establishment driving each physical process. Thus, what most clearly separates the living from the non-living is the fact that Life uses energy to maintain itself.9 But for pragmatic people, energy is correlated to material wellbeing. Basically, all technologies and devices that were invented by Man throughout the centuries to make his everyday life easier and safer (generating more free time and more entertainments in the existence) indubitably depended on an energy access. It is now established that the quality of life as well as the economic development are strongly correlated with energy consumption.10,11 Thus the life expectancy drastically decreases when the energy consumption per inhabitant is lower than 1600 kWh per year. For comparison, the metabolic needs are close to 880 kWh per year with a daily food intake of about 2 kWh (∼7 MJ) for a normal adult. In short, to be able to master an abundant energy source, of convenient access and safe use, probably constitutes the greatest challenge for scientists and finally a key point in the development of humanity. However, before searching for alternative energy technologies a few statements around the concept of energy—and its physical limitations—have to be highlighted to exploit in a judicious and sustainable way both the potential of all energy resources and means to implement them.
Without going more thoroughly into the thermodynamic principles, which is clearly beyond the scope of the present article, we have to recall that the multifaceted nature and the abstract character of energy have necessitated a mathematical realization based on principles, that is to say assertions that do not need to be explained, if not through the coherence and the exactness of the resulting consequences. Thus, the fundamental aspect governing all natural phenomena that are known to date is the conservation of energy (called the First law) that states: “in any process in an isolated system (like the Universe), the total energy remains the same”. According to this law, energy can neither be created (produced) nor destroyed‡ by itself but can only be transformed, which enables to establish the equivalence of the different forms of energy (radiant, chemical, physical, electrical, and thermal) and the possibility of changing from one form to another with the help of a device (energy converter). Fig. 1 depicts these few limited forms of energy with a few examples of converters to use energy in practice while pointing out how the mastering of energy converters constitutes the crucial point beyond the considered energy source.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the six forms of energy and related examples of their interconversions. 
Mathematically, this First law is controlled by the internal energy state function (denoted U) that refers to the total energy contained or “stored” in a specific system, which can be defined on the microscopic scale as being the sum of all kinetic energies associated with the movements of the particles and all potential energies associated with their interactions, at the level of molecules, atoms, electrons and nuclei. So, the first limitation of the concept of energy is that the entire Universe has a finite stock of energy to which Man has very partial access on Earth via three main reservoirs according to our current knowledge: solar radiation, gravity and the energy stored in our planet itself (i.e., geothermal and geological stocks/reserves of chemical matter). To the above considerations, we have to add the Second law controlled by the concept of entropy (denoted S), which is also essential and critical to people manipulating energy like mechanical engineers, heat engineers or electrochemists, for example. The second law stipulates that the total entropy of a system plus its environment cannot decrease; it can remain constant for a reversible process but must always increase for an irreversible process. A reversible process in thermodynamics is one in which no energy is dissipated without degradation of energy; this is basically this kind of transformation (process) that we have to favour. However, transformations occurring in isolated systems like the Universe or our current environment are generally irreversible because natural (spontaneous) transformations cannot occur along a reversible way indubitably inducing dissipative effects like heat or other kinds of increases in disorder and energy with 100% efficiency cannot be recovered in another form. We will see later that only a few energy conversions enable to reach near-reversibility.
Like for the First law, the second one expresses a limitation to what Nature can allow, which defines the operational limits that cannot be overcome during manipulations of energy. Consequently, “thermodynamically” spinning out our energy resources goes through favouring transformations closest to reversibility in order to reach the highest efficiencies and limit the entropic loss. The use of converters able to do so while involving a safe primary energy source constitutes an important link to promote sustainable energy supply and a first fundamental statement to keep in mind.
3. Current energy usage and global issues
For reasons of simplicity and easy access, our energy technology has always been based on heat production that induces, as the first negative point, a continuous creation of entropy. One can historically understand this trend by keeping in mind our basic needs with the use of combustion as the first convenient means for cooking, heating and lighting. But so far, we have followed the same path by favouring mainly fuel combustion as a facile means to produce primary energy. So, the second outstanding step forward for mankind began just in the 18th century with the Industrial Revolution thanks to both the mastery of fossil fuels (coal, crude oil then natural gas) as primary energy sources and the discovery of several new energy converters. This started with the famous Watt steam engine followed in the 19th century by the internal combustion engine developed by E. Lenoir and the wonderful mastery of large-scale electrical power generation thanks to both the dynamo and the alternator inventions. Finally, in the middle of the 20th century, we entered the nuclear energy era by taking benefit from the huge amount of heat produced from fission reactions to power steam turbines/alternators to produce electricity again due to the particular interest in this energy form as we will see later (Section 4). However, in all of these significant energetic processes, chemical energy like nuclear energy must then be considered as irreversibly degraded but also irreversibly consumed since coming typically from limited geological resources (i.e., part of this finite internal energy stored in our planet).
Today, the burning of fossil fuels for transportation, thermal power plants or domestic heating represents more than 80% of the world primary energy production. By adding the nuclear part, we nearly reach 87%.12,13 Obviously, the energy consumption trend is expected to largely increase14 (projections give nearly 700 quadrillion of BTU in 2030 against 400 in 2005)15 for two main reasons:
1. The constant increase in the world population (predictions estimate around 10 billion by the year 205016), which amounts to an increase in consumers.
2. As natural evolution, human beings aspire to a better life, which amounts to higher energy needs (as previously stated in Section 110,11).
It is worth noting that the second point also induces a higher energy demand to develop countries in the near future (which represents 79% of humanity's load) in order to reach the living standard of modern societies.
For a nearly closed system like the Earth, this energy management is exposing our planet to major issues as it is mainly based on primary heat production obtained from the use of limited geological resources. These issues are overpopulation (with dangerous disparities in terms of life quality), decrease in arable lands (consecutive to the development of infrastructures), oceans and soils pollution generated by wastes from humanity and its activities (with impact on crop production, fisheries, fresh water supply and biodiversity), exhaustion of our chemical energy reserves (inducing the energy crisis and economic consequences), and so on.12 Along that line Wackernagel et al.17 have recently assessed that human demand may well have exceeded the biosphere's regenerative capacity since the 80's. But the most serious consequence, which itself exacerbates these previous series of critical issues, is that mankind has remorselessly disturbed the climate system by releasing huge amounts of GHGs and particularly carbon dioxide by this massive fossil fuel combustion. Just for the 90's, one estimates at 6.3 GtC per year the releases due to the combustion of fossil fuels coupled to an extra 1.6 GtC per year due to the burning of forest vegetation.18 As stated above, the consequence is an anomalous and dangerous climate change with global and regional disastrous effects.1–4,19 Some have already been observable for more than ten years, namely the widespread retreat of glaciers and icecaps,20,21 the rising sea level,22 the increase in forest fires or the intensity of extreme weather events such as hurricane Katrina in 2005.7 The current consensus in both the scientific and political communities is that climate change constitutes probably the most serious menace facing humanity, and that both reducing and sequestering GHGs is a top priority. It is important to note that the efficiency of the natural sinks of CO2 in oceans and lands already declines, increasing the rate of GHG concentration rises.23,24 Consequently, changes need to be made towards energy technology and engineering but also in our everyday lives to sustain the environment for future generations.
To evaluate the efforts to be made and make energy transition a reality, it is quite interesting to refer to “Kaya identity” (eqn (1)) especially because this equation can be applied, on different scales, from local areas to the whole world.25–27 (1)
For instance, the total CO2 emission level (F) can be expressed for a given year as the product of four inputs: the product of population (N) per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP/N), primary energy intensity (E/GDP) and carbon intensity (F/E); E being the global primary energy production. A simple analysis of this equation allows relevant conclusions. On the world scale, since N cannot be under control due to a lack of appropriate demographic global policies the GDP/N ratio indubitably increases with the economic development. Thus, opportunities for emission reductions consist first in decreasing the carbon intensity (F/E) of the global energy mix; that means producing energy without the use of fossil carbon unless sequestrating the harmful GHG releases.28,29 A second essential action aims at diminishing the E/GDP term by saving energy in general. The latter, which is included in the European directive 2005/32/EC,30 consists in promoting technologies displaying lower energy consumption and better efficiencies (as previously stated in Section 2) to produce what is now called “negawatts”. Let us remind that the global energy efficiency of converting primary energy into useful energy is about one third, the rest being dissipated in the conversion process mostly as low-temperature heat (entropic loss).12
To sum up, the most effective way to address the harmful climate change while preserving a modern society is to adopt a sustainable development§ pathway, by shifting to environmentally sustainable technologies and promoting the efficiency of resource usage, favouring renewable energies and transformations closest to reversibility as well as a responsible behaviour in our consuming fashion. The role of education, particularly of the young generation, is vitally important as well as public awareness. This evolution also requires adaptation, coordinated actions at regional and global levels, long-term financial support for innovative research, and probably the use of economic instruments, international standards and global environmental policies in the manner of the Agenda 21 program33 or the Kyoto protocol. Along that line, several governments have already brought legislations in favour of mandating increases in energy production from renewable sources.34–36
4. Particular interest in electricity and its related storage challenge
Among the various energy forms, Fig. 1 clearly shows that electricity itself is the most convenient form of energy, easy to distribute, giving by simple conversion processes (and apparently a simple switch) light, heat, cooling, motion, communication, … without dangerous leaks or strong harmful scattering. The physical access to electricity (via mobile sources or power grid) particularly increases the standard of living with a significant improvement in the indicators relating to literacy and access to tap water.10–12 For developed countries, this has become an everyday life necessity since the second half of the 20th century and much more so these last ten years with the digital technologies boom. The recent blackout episode, which occurred in the USA and Canada on August 14th, 2003, left an estimated 50 million people in a critical situation demonstrating how life can get somewhat cumbersome without electrical energy. As previously mentioned, electric generation on a large scale is currently produced by electro-mechanical generators driven by steam produced from non-renewable sources such as fossil-fuel combustion or the heat released from nuclear fission, which correspond to ∼80% of electricity production (∼15% of the total primary energy supply).13 In such a mix, electrical production itself also implies a negative impact on the environment mainly due to the massive CO2 releases but we have also to keep in mind the huge risks of nuclear power and radioactive waste disposal. By adding the evolution of our transportation mode in favour of (zero-emission) electric vehicles, precisely to reduce the GHG emissions and other pollutions, electric power is expected to be the fastest-growing source of end-use energy supply throughout the world. Recent data show that electricity production has recently increased a lot with an average value of 4.2% per year from 2001 (4.5% between 2004 and 2005).13 Note that it does not take into account that nearly two billion people still have no access to this energy yet.
To satisfy our electrical needs both on- and off-the-grid and faced with a total lack of universal solution, any safe, clean and reliable way to generate operative electricity could find a practical application from terawatts to nanowatts production. Along that line, nuclear energy (fission and hopefully fusion) as well as renewable energy resources (hydropower, geothermal, ocean energy, biomass, solar and wind energy) are expected to play a fundamental role in the massive generation of decarbonized electricity in the coming decades. An additional tool can be seen in the development of smart devices to harvest energy to produce local electricity. Unexpected solutions arise such as the harvesting of biomechanical energy while walking37 or ambient vibrations energy.38 Individually, the electricity generation is quite low but perspectives on a large scale development would bring us quite a large “negawatts” production. Thus, it seems that harvesting energy could also become a mandatory option in the future which cannot be ignored, and that all innovation will be welcome.
Behind the apparent versatility of electrical energy two essential limitations do exist. First, beyond the formation of lightning during a storm or the β-decay process of naturally occurring radionuclides (i.e., 40K decay to 40Ca being a textbook case), spontaneous production of an electron flow does not exist on Earth; electricity generation must necessarily come from the conversion of another form of energy (Fig. 1). Second, electricity cannot be stored as it is. In all cases its generation (or its storage) requires the use of one or more converters with again more or less dissipation effects as a counterpart. Those physical limitations come from the fact that electricity is not a fuel but an energy carrier, and they have serious consequences on our energy engineering. The most vivid example deals with the power grid management because balance between electricity production and consumption is mandatory contrary to a water conveyance network, a crucial point generally ignored. If not, multi-level disjunctions operate leading to a blackout episode. To keep the grid stable is therefore a difficult task requiring sophisticated systems of control because our needs very much vary within a day, a month, or a year. Predictions are thus calculated everyday on the base of several relevant parameters such as the time, the weather or vacation periods.39 The importance of matching generation with demand is currently complicated by the use of grid-connected intermittent energy sources, which induce problematic fluctuations in power. Energy storage is inescapable to absorb energy when the generated power exceeds the need and by covering the shortfall when the generated power is less than needed. The future “smart grid” using a digital technology, and because it is connected to complex storage buffer systems with net-metering, is supposed to keep track of all electricity flowing in the system as well as the capability of integrating renewable electricity.40 Therefore there is no doubt that vast amounts of energy storage units will be present in the future electrical grid from bulk generation to decentralized productions. Thus the development of effective and large spectrum electrical energy storage (EES) systems, for both energy and power density applications, constitutes one major technological challenge in the field of electrical management and can be viewed as a critical technology need for decarbonizing the logistic chain of the electrical sector. Note that beyond the grid stabilization and the power propulsion source for electric-powered vehicles (plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) and/or full electric vehicles (EVs)) other important technologies requiring EES systems do exist such as portable electronic equipment, backup power supplies, integrated systems to harvest energy, and so on.
Basically, the EES systems are devices or physical media that store electricity after its conversion in some other forms of energy that can be converted back to electricity to perform some useful operation at a later time. Different technologies have been developed within the energy framework reported in Fig. 1 such as pumped hydroelectric storage (potential energy, quite interesting on a large scale), flywheel energy storage, compressed air energy storage, high temperature storage of liquids (heat conveying fluid), electrochemical energy storage and so on. Characteristics and comparisons of numerous EES have been recently reviewed by Ibrahim et al.41 including their field of application (permanent or portable, long- or short-term storage, maximum power required, etc.). Among the various types of storage methods, systems based on chemical energy storage are very attractive. A storage system of particular interest in many respects is the use of secondary galvanic cells, also called accumulators as well as secondary or rechargeable “batteries” by misuse of language (see Section 5). Day and night, in stationary or portable mode, on large or very small scale, accumulators can directly convert almost reversibly stored chemical energy into direct current (Fig. 1, red highlight) thanks to the simultaneous action of two antagonistic invertible electrochemical reactions, one occurring at the positive electrode and the other at the negative one. Compared to supercapacitors (capacitive energy storage), which are a related technology able to provide peaks of high power density,42 the use of pure electrochemical reactions makes the energy delivery at a near constant output voltage possible (except at the state of charge approaching 0 or 100%), which greatly facilitates the power regulation. But the most important point is that charge/discharge processes are interestingly characterized by very low dissipation due to good coulombic efficiency for low overpotential values (i.e., the two invertible electrode reactions being almost reversible). Therefore, an efficient accumulator being not subject to the Carnot cycle limitations of heat engines makes the direct use of the chemical energy possible, without first turning it into heat, thus reducing dissipation. This leads to consider at least chemical energy as “noble” energy and not as a heat production source.
Thus it appears clear that the development of efficient EES systems is vitally important to promote non-CO2 generating electricity and that potentialities offered by the use of electrochemical storage systems could play a crucial role in the future. Fig. 2 summarizes the numerous possible applications of secondary galvanic cells. These include particularly the MWh range for storage units both on- and off-the-grid (e.g., peak shaving, load levelling, uninterrupted power supply), battery packs for PHEVs and EVs (e.g., cars, shuttles and other public transportations by road) and smaller capacity units of mWh range typically for portable applications and microelectronics.41,43,44 This incredible large range of stored energies characterized by several orders of magnitude constitutes a considerable asset. This versatility in stored energy is made possible by the fact that different types of accumulators exist with various possible designs (coin-cells and cylindrical or prismatic shape cells) but above all by the possibility of operating parallel and series combinations following common electrokinetic rules to provide the necessary voltage, energy, and power for the application. However, rechargeable batteries are inherently complex involving subtle interactions with heterogeneous systems and advances are quite slow. The next section will draw a brief overview of some selected commercial technologies and related chemistries.
 Fig. 2  Illustration showing the various applications of rechargeable battery technologies in the logistic chain of electric power with the corresponding ranges of stored energy. 
5. Common rechargeable batteries and related chemistries
Whatever the considered technology, and like in a primary galvanic cell (non-rechargeable or voltaic cell, as first discovered by A. Volta in 1800), a secondary galvanic cell produces DC-current for an output voltage of a few volts maximum by direct conversion of chemical energy through a very clever use of oxidation–reduction (redox) reaction, workhorse of the electrochemist. Let us remind that a redox reaction remains a peculiar chemical reaction in which electrons (quantum particles) are directly transferred in the bulk from a reducing species Red2 to an oxidizing agent Ox1 in physical contact (with or without the help of auxiliary substances for which the oxidation state does not change) when change in Gibbs free energy ΔrG for the considered reaction is negative. This chemical situation producing the respective Red1 and Ox2 leads to a global zero-current reaction and the “loss” of the exchanged current between the reacting species. However, by means of ingenious spatial separation of reductant Red2 and oxidant Ox1 (note that different technical solutions exist) and both an ionic and electric connection closing the circuit (electrolytic junction plus two current collectors), the spontaneous redox reaction can also occur but with an electric flow different from 0 because the as-produced electrons are channelled in the external electric circuit via the two electrodes (Fig. 3). In such a situation, the two half redox reactions are called “electrochemical reactions”. The principal function of the electrolyte is to ensure the ionic current between the two electrodes within the cell maintaining the ionic charge balance, but these ions can also participate in the electrode reaction as an auxiliary species. Therefore, the discharge of a galvanic cell implies two separate electrochemical reactions, one involving the release of electrons at the negative electrode material (anode) and one involving the take-up of electrons at the positive electrode material (cathode).
 Fig. 3  Scheme showing the general architecture of a galvanic cell whatever the considered technology. Note that additional electrolyte can be stored externally then pumped through the cell in the particular case of a flow battery (more explanation in the text). 
As previously mentioned, such electrochemical reactions can occur in the reverse directions in a secondary galvanic cell during the charge process (electrolysis: non spontaneous chemical reactions) by applying a proper external electromotive force (EMF); this is done with a generator which takes electrons out of the electroactive compound at the positive electrode (becoming anode) and puts them back into the one at the negative electrode (becoming cathode). The figure of merit of an electrochemical cell is notably characterized by a series of electrical criteria such as the output voltage in operation (EMF under current), its faradic stored capacity denoted Q typically normalized either per unit of mass (Ah kg−1) or volume (Ah L−1), and the corresponding stored energy density (Wh kg−1 or Wh L−1). Let us remind that 1 Ah is the same as 3600 coulombs. As previously indicated, such cells can be connected together in parallel and series combinations to provide the necessary voltage, energy, and power for the application. Consequently, a proper “battery” consists of multiple cells.¶ The oldest form of rechargeable battery still used nowadays is the wet cell lead-acid battery invented in 1859 by G. Planté and all accumulators used today are more or less simple variations of this early battery; the changes mainly relate to the chemical nature of the active electrode materials, the electrolyte composition and the design to get better performances for a specific application. However, in spite of 150 years of intensive research and innovations, there is still no universal accumulator providing all possible requirements, and in practice, there are several types of rechargeable batteries on the market today, each having certain advantages and specific characteristics depending on the aimed application. Detailed characteristics and comparisons of several battery technologies (being beyond the scope of this paper) can be found, for example, in ref. 41,43–45. In this section, we will simply dwell on commercial systems involved in selected advanced applications (Table 1).
Table 1 Examples of common secondary batteries with the corresponding electrode reactions and EMF value. For the Ni–MH cell, “M” represents a metal alloy (AB2 or AB5 class of alloys) and “MH(s)” the resulting hydride




Type of secondary battery
Galvanic cell chemistry
EMF/V





                  Lead-acid
(+): PbO2(s) + 2e− + SO42− + 4H+ ⇆ PbSO4(s) + 2H2O
∼2 43


(−): Pb0 + SO42− ⇆ PbSO4(s) + 2e−



                  Sodium–sulfur (300–350 °C)
(+): xS + 2e− ⇆ Sx2−
∼2 43


(−): 2Na0 ⇆ 2Na+ + 2e−



                  Nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd)
(+): NiOOH(s) + e− + H2O ⇆ Ni(OH)2(s) + OH−
∼1.2 43


(−): ½Cd0 + OH− ⇆ ½Cd(OH)2(s) + e−



                  Nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH)
(+): NiOOH(s) + e− + H2O ⇆ Ni(OH)2(s) + OH−
∼1.2 43


(−): “MH(s)” + OH− ⇆ “M(s)” + H2O + e−



                  Vanadium
                  redox flow battery (VRB)
(+): VO2+ + e− + 2H+ ⇆ VO2+ + H2O
∼1.4 47


(−): V2+ ⇆ V3+ + e−



                  Li-ion battery (Sony, 1991)
(+): Li1−xCoO2(s) + xe− + xLi+ ⇆ LiCoO2(s)
∼3.6 50


(−): LixC ⇆ C + xe− + xLi+




Whether one starts with large-scale power storage units used for grid stabilization or grid support, current battery technologies consist typically of large stationary installations of lead-acid and sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries46 because these electrochemical systems are robust and mature, qualities obviously required for such critical applications. Vanadium redox flow batteries and other types of flow batteries are beginning to be used for energy storage both on- and off-the-grid.46 Actually, a flow battery is a particular form of rechargeable battery in which the electrolyte containing one or more dissolved electroactive species flows through an electrochemical cell. As the additional electrolyte is stored externally, generally in tanks, the flow battery is an interesting flexible technology displaying adjustable energy requirements, quick response and long life cycles since no electroactive solid phase is involved (diffusion in solids being typically low rate processes).43,47 Note that flow batteries have to be distinguished from fuel cells because the electrochemical reactions involved are typically invertible. Nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd) batteries are also used for large-scale stationary storage as, for example, in Fairbanks (Alaska, USA) where a 27-megawatt unit based on 13760 nickel-cadmium cells assembly was installed to stabilize voltage at the end of a long transmission line.46 This latter technology was also an early form of portable rechargeable battery, particularly for first nomadic devices (wireless communications and mobile computing), and had been the only suitable technology for many years but the high toxicity of cadmium has led to search for alternative negative electrode materials. The nickel–metal hydride technology (Ni–MH) was then promoted because of better energy densities thanks to the metal hydride negative electrode higher capability and longer life cycle compared to Ni–Cd batteries. However, the nickel electrode suffers from appreciable limitations especially for portable applications such as a relatively low energy density (aqueous system), a self-discharge phenomenon and more particularly what is termed “memory effect” (i.e., a voltage depression) when the cell is not fully discharged prior to a new recharge.43 The first consumer grade Ni–MH cells for smaller applications appeared on the market in 1989. During the same period, the lithium-ion battery (LIB) technology emerged as a competing system. Its related chemistry, which derives from an electrochemical intercalation phenomenon, is based on the use of insertion materials (for both the positive and the negative electrodes) able to accommodate near reversibly Li+ ions in their own crystallographic structure as the electrochemical reaction proceeds, and for quite different Fermi levels. This so-called “rocking-chair” technology was first demonstrated in the laboratory by Murphy et al. and then by Scrosati and Lazzari.48,49 However, the first operative lithium-ion battery (LIB) was commercialized by Sony Corp. in 1991 only50 taking benefit of the elaboration of an efficient carbonaceous-based negative electrode material displaying a low-potential Li insertion/de-insertion electrochemical process. Coupled with LiCoO2 as positive electrode compound, this type of Li-ion cell exhibits an EMF value exceeding 3.6 V, three times higher than that of a Ni–MH cell. Since then it has been rapidly growing and gaining popularity, and a large part of research led in the field of accumulators is now focusing on LIBs. Indeed, the as-obtained energy densities are the highest among the other chemistries because lithium is the lightest metal (M = 6.94 g mol−1) and sufficiently electropositive to be a strong reducing agent making its corresponding oxidized Li+ form quite stable over a large potential window. Using non-aqueous electrolytes, LIBs offer high energy density values, no memory effect, longer shelf life and a self-discharge less than half compared to the Ni–Cd and Ni–MH. However, LIBs were initially used in mobile phones, laptop computers, digital cameras and other kinds of high-end electronics until becoming a mature enough technology to be considered for advanced systems. Thus, the first evolutions of our transportation mode in favour of hybrid or full electric vehicles, precisely to reduce the GHG emissions and other pollution, used Ni–MH batteries cheaper than LIBs. Today, thanks to substantial improvements and the discovery of new insertion compounds (e.g., LiFePO4, LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3, Li4Ti5O12), LIB is becoming a flagship technology possibly able to power an increasingly diverse range of applications from microchips to the emerging large-scale application markets of electric vehicles and maybe grid storage devices. Recent reviews on LIBs can be found in ref. 43,51–54, for instance.
To conclude this section, it can be useful to compare the relevant performances of these different common rechargeable batteries in a normalized way. To this end, Fig. 4 shows a so-called Ragone plot, which reports energy density (specific energy) vs. power density (specific power) in log scale as a function of the applied rate.55 Note that Ragone plots display typically a hooked shape whatever the considered technology that corresponds to a fall-off of energy density as power density is increased during the discharge of the battery. One notices at a glance the actual superiority of LIBs (orange domain) compared to other electrochemical systems both in energy and in power densities. Tremendous research effort is notably devoted to increasing the energy density of batteries. Beyond LIBs the concept of the Li-metal rechargeable battery is still under development through either the common system based on Li and an insertion compound as positive electrode (with an appropriated polymeric electrolyte)51 or more recently the lithium/air cell.56 In the latter case, intensive research to improve the electrochemical performances of the rechargeable Li/O2cell both in organic and aqueous electrolytes is in progress boosted by the enormous expected theoretical capacities.44,45 Nevertheless, the safety aspect in the use of metallic lithium as negative electrode material is still unclear to date.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of different common types of battery regarding their normalized electrical performances also called Ragone chart. (Reprinted from ref. 55, with permission from Elsevier.) 
6. Environmental issues of accumulators and alternative chemistries to promote greener Li-ion batteries
In view of the preceding comments, the accumulator is for sure quite an important converter in many respects. Nevertheless and beyond the fact that none seems capable of meeting our ongoing energy storage requirements, some structural drawbacks do exist. One is that current technologies display low durability for large-amplitude cycling. No more than 100 to 1000 charge/discharge cycles can be reached compared to millions for supercapacitors.42 The second and most questionable point could be nestled in their environmental footprint itself even if secondary batteries can be considered to be more environmentally friendly than primary (disposable) batteries. Indeed, faced with a production of several billions a year one has to consider their environmental burden from “cradle-to-grave” like other goods in agreement with the ISO 14040 framework. Along that line, the increasing public concern about the environment has already induced stricter regulations in many countries regarding the spent batteries management, stating that batteries must be recycled (or properly disposed of), mainly to prevent them from being harmful to the environment and human health.57 This policy has positively forced producers to look for technical alternatives to treat more efficiently spent batteries and favour the metal recovery for re-introduction into the production chain. For instance, the European directive 2006/66/EC58 states first that at least 50% by average weight of battery waste should be recycled by 2011 into materials for their original purpose or for other purposes, and second, encourages technological developments that improve the environmental performance of galvanic cells, in general, throughout their entire life cycle. A brake in making greener batteries is probably related to the chemistries used in all commercialized accumulators until now that have finally not changed substantially in nearly 150 years. For example, whatever the considered technologies, common electrode reactions (Table 2) involved redox-active inorganic matter especially metal-based electroactive components provided through destructive mining operations.59 Moreover, the scarcity of these elements in the earth crust makes them energy intensive and more and more costly, which is going to increase with rarefaction in the future. For instance, the advanced Li-ion battery technology relies on the use of 3d-based metal oxides/phosphates as typical positive electrode materials. Thus, 25% of the world cobalt production is funnelled into this production,60 which has induced a serious pressure on this metal quotation (e.g., a 100% increase between 1998 and 2002). Obviously, inorganic materials still fall short of both the sustainability and CO2 footprint criteria because they are basically prepared from non-renewable resources (ores) and high temperature synthesis reactions (T ≈ 600 °C). To that must be added their high chemical stability making their recycling processes difficult and energy-greedy60–65 although improvements are in progress prompted by these established new regulations, as recently demonstrated by international companies like RECUPYL66 or Umicore.60,66 Note that recent attempts for life cycle assessments of current LIBs confirm involvements of quite high flows of exergy from “cradle to grave” mainly due to the chemical nature of the used materials.55,60,67
Table 2 Classification of common electrode reactions used in secondary batteries. “M” is a metal, “A” is a non-metal simple body, Xp−/Yq− are non-metal anionic simple body or polyanionic inorganic structures whereas 〈H〉 represents a solid inorganic host structure




Class of electrode
Related electrode reaction




First kind electrode

                  Mn+ + ne− ⇆ M0


(A0 + ne− ⇆ An−)


M0 + xM′m+ + xme− ⇆ MM′x(s)


Second kind electrode

                  Mn+xXyp− + ne− ⇆ xM0 + yXp−



                  Mn+xXy(s)p− + ne− ⇆ xM0 + yXp−


Third kind electrode

                  Mm+ + ne− ⇆ M(m−n)+


(Am− + ne− ⇆ A(m+n)−)


Third kind electrode (with solid phases)

                  Mm+xXy(s)p− + ne− + zYq− ⇆ M(m−n)+xYq−z(s) + yXp−



                  Insertion
                  electrode


                  〈H〉 + xe− + x/nMn+ ⇆ 〈Mx/nnH〉



                  〈Xx/pH〉 + xe− ⇆ 〈H〉 + x/pXp−




As highlighted in this article, decreasing the consumption of non-renewable resources, the amount of waste produced or the energy consumption is on the verge of becoming mandatory, and searching to deeply improve the environmental footprint of rechargeable batteries (LIBs, in particular) will probably be required for the near future to sustain the benefit of using this class of energy converters. It is important to state that the “greenness” of a battery does not only depend on what kind of materials is used in the battery, but also on how well the battery is managed throughout its life.68 But until now this issue has probably not been viewed with the seriousness it calls for. Aware of this potential hindrance, one of us proposed a couple of years ago an alternative concept for Li-ion cells consisting (ideally) in switching from inorganic to organic matter-based electrode materials thus giving them the true possibility of being prepared from renewable resources and eco-friendly processes coupled with a simplified recycling management.69 Indeed, organics are typical fuels that can be easily consumed by combustion at medium temperatures producing heat (energy recovery) but also Li-based ashes able to be re-introduced into the battery production chain (when lithiated organic materials are used). An illustration comparing the cycle life of the current Li-ion technology and an organics-based (renewable) Li-ion battery is shown in Fig. 5. Additionally, if such an organic battery is inadvertently not collected at the end of its life (spread out in the wild) the loss of scarce and costly metallic chemical is notably reduced compared to the current LIBs technology. Note that such a concept is able to fulfil requirements detailed in directive 2006/66/EC.58
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration comparing a simplified cycle life of a “greener” Li-ion battery taking benefit of redox-active organic electrode materials deriving typically from biomass with (adapted from ref. 69). (b) Current technology using metal-based electrode materials. 
Strictly speaking, the use of organics as electrode materials for Li-based battery application is obviously not a new idea. The electroactivity of certain organic functions has been recognized for a long time although involving different electrode reactions compared to redox-active inorganic compounds previously listed in Table 2. Indeed, organic electrochemistry deals with peculiar organic intermediates such as radicals, radical ions, carbocations, and carbanions because electrons can be added to electron-poor functional groups or removed from electron-rich functional groups. The next section will recap the principal developments regarding redox-active organics and opportunities given by some of them to promote electrode materials displaying a lower environmental burden.
7. Overview of redox-active organic electrode materials vs.Li and first “renewable” Li-ion battery
Looking back on the historic developments of electrode materials for Li-based batteries and in comparison with inorganic compounds that benefit from decades of intensive years of research, the use of organics was just sporadically studied and as cathodic materials only. However, the thought of using organics as electrode materials started 40 years ago when Williams et al.70 proposed dichloroisocyanuric acid as a high energy density material for primary lithium batteries. Around the 80's, different organic molecules were also rapidly evaluated but for secondary lithium battery applications.71–73 Thereafter, rather redox-active organic polymers, more stable towards the electrolytes, were tested as electrode materials, with some of them like polyaniline (PANI) being commercialized (PANI/LiAl cell74). The electrochemical activities of polyacetylene (PAc), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PT), polyparaphenylene (PPP), polydimercaptothiadiazole (poly(DMcT)) and some others have been studied and excellently reviewed earlier.75 Note that the electrochemical insertion process of such conjugated polymers involves mainly the ingress of the electrolyte anion (and not Li+) from the neutral discharge states to compensate for the positive charge created by oxidation of the redox backbone. Generally speaking, earlier studies to promote organics as electrode materials lagged far behind the ones of their successful inorganic homologues. It is true that organic materials also present some structural drawbacks such as relatively low thermal stability, low packing density and appreciable solubility in common organic electrolytes as compared to the inorganic cathode materials. At the beginning of the century76 a new class of polymers able to store electric energy has been disclosed and consists of a stable organic polymeric chain bearing stabilized nitroxyl radicals like 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-N-oxy (TEMPO) radicals. These studies have led to the development of the so-called organic radical batteries (ORBs).77–100Fig. 6 presents a few polymers issued from this family: poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy methacrylate) PTMA,76–80,87 a TEMPO-modified polynorbornene84,88 and polygalvinoxylstyrene.81,97 Depending on the design, these materials can involve either insertion of cations (like Li+) or anions and give typically very high rate capability and good cyclability owing to the fast electrochemical reaction of such radicals (Fig. 6b and c). Nishide et al. have shown the possibility of building devices capable of a charging/discharging cyclability of 104 times at 100 mA.101 Limitations usually come with the poor electric conductivity of the radical polymers inducing quite high amounts of added carbon (∼50% in mass) and relatively low specific capacity values due to the appreciable content of electrochemically “dead matter”. Nevertheless, organic radical polymers display clear potentialities such as physical characteristics facilitating their battery manufacture82,83,89 with the opportunity to design a flexible ORB, for example.88,95 Radical polymers are also reported as non-toxic and thermally destroyable with no odour or ash formation.83 Finally, an ORB free of metal has recently been proposed and presented.97,102
 Fig. 6  (a) Typical polymers used as electroactive materials in ORBs with the redox reactivity of (b) the nitroxide and (c) the phenoxyl radicals. 
In the restricted family of redox-active hetero-atoms, sulfur is one of the few non-metal simple bodies displaying an amphoteric character making it electrochemically interesting. As previously shown for inorganic-based systems (Table 1), the sodium–sulfur (Na–S) technology is already used for large stationary installations whereas the Li/S battery is currently re-evaluated (in parallel of Li/O244,45,56) due to its low equivalent weight, low cost and high capacity values.54,103,104 In organic structures, sulfur atoms could be linked onto a carbon backbone75,105,106, allowing, for instance, the use of the redox-active disulfide bond possible107–117 like in polydimercaptothiadiazole75,118–120 (Fig. 7). The theoretical capacity of disulfide electrodes tested vs.Li is also usually quite high but when the polymeric network is based on S–S bonds (case of poly(DMcT)), soluble anionic monomeric moieties are produced upon reduction by cleavage and a rapid capacity fading is usually observed. To tackle this fundamental issue carbon–carbon based polymeric backbones have been proposed like poly(anthrabistrithiapentalene) (PABTH)108,113,116 or poly(dihydrotetrathiaanthracene) (PDTTA)114 (Fig. 7). To exploit sulfur properties at best while trying to avoid its main drawbacks recent works have taken benefit of the redox activity of the C–S–C (thioether bond)121–129 like in PT. Derivatives of PT like poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)75,123 and poly[3,4-(ethylenedithio)thiophene] (PEDTT)126 have shown promising results vs.Li (Fig. 8). Poly(tetrahydrobenzodithiophene) (PTBDT) (Fig. 8a) owing to the possibility of multiple formations of thioether cations (Fig. 8b) has a maximal capacity of 820 mAh g−1 but with a restricted cyclability.128 On the contrary poly(tetrathionaphthalene) (TTN, Fig. 8a) exhibits a less impressive capacity but quite a good capacity retention (over 180 cycles) at an average potential of 3.8 V leading to a practical capacity of 122 mAh g−1.129 Note that the disulfide bonds were not reduced in TTN.
 Fig. 7  (a) Relevant examples of redox-active disulfide-based compounds tested vs.lithium with their theoretical specific capacity values. (b) Typical redox reactivity of the disulfide bridge. 
 Fig. 8  (a) PT derivatives and other related organic materials involving thioether bonds with their theoretical specific capacity values. (b) Proposed redox reactivity of the thioether bond according to ref. 128. 
Another highly interesting and common organic redox centre consists in the carbonyl group (Fig. 9a). When stabilized by conjugation, the redox system is most often reversible, be it in solution or in solid state. Quinone-type structures are the most common and before 2008, a few articles announced interesting electrochemical properties vs.Li for cathode materials like poly(2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone-3,6-methylene) (PDBM)130 (Fig. 9b). Regarding carbonylated aromatic compounds, 3,4,9,10-perylene-tetracarboxylicacid-dianhydride sulfide polymer (PTCDA/S)131 maintained a stable capacity retention of about 130 mAh g−1 for an average potential value of 2.5 V (Fig. 9b). Additionally, numerous organic structures characterized by multiple adjacent carbonyl groups were patented132,133 and in particular a broad series of salts and related polymers (e.g., oxocarbons derivatives) by M. Armand et al.134Fig. 9b shows these various structures involving adjacent carbonyl groups in different environments with some of their relevant characteristics.
 Fig. 9  (a) Typical redox reaction involving a carbonyl centre and (b) some carbonylated chemical structures proposed as positive electrode materials with their theoretical specific capacity values.135,136 
It is worth noting that the redox activity of quinone-type structures is intimately involved in living organisms for bioenergetic processes such as respiration and photosynthesis while in connection with natural oxygen-containing compounds such as carbohydrates unlike the other electroactive organic structures previously described, obviously more difficult to synthesize from renewable raw compounds. Consequently, our research effort to promote “green” organic-based electrode materials was rather centred on this class of redox-active compounds, with the aim to grasp the relevant parameters that affect the redox potential of an organic electroactive material, its reactivity, its stability upon cycling, and so on. First, for the past few years, we have been revisiting selected organic structures based on carbonyl functionalities69,137–141 to create a reliable experimental database of model chemical structures, in relation to their solid state electrochemical behaviour in order to identify stable and efficient redox-active organic structures reacting at both high and low potentials vs.Li+/Li0. For instance, Li-rhodizonate (Li2C6O6),69Li-chloranilate (Li2C6O4Cl2),137Li-terephthalate (Li2C8H4O4),138tetralithium salt of tetrahydroxybenzoquinone (Li4C6O6)139 and more recently pyromellitic diimide dilithium salt (Li2C10H2N2O4)141 have demonstrated quite interesting electrochemical properties vs.Li (Fig. 10a). These results coupled with others coming from the literature enable to pinpoint two general families of organic architectures possessing (i) a quasi-systematic reversible electrochemical activity vs.Li and (ii) some possibilities to tune the properties of the related structure (redox potential, stability towards the electrolyte,…) by specific substitutions (Fig. 10b). Note that both terephthalate and tetrahydroxybenzoquinone organic structures could also be classified as sustainable materials since the former can be produced from the recycling industry of polyethylene terephthalate plastic (PET bottle recycling)138 whereas the latter can readily be produced in aqueous solution in high yield like dilithium rhodizonate69 from myo-inositol, a natural compound widely present in plants as phytic acid (i.e., a renewable raw material source).139 Additionally, the amphoteric redox property of Li4C6O6, exhibiting an intermediate oxidation state between Li2C6O6 and the fully reduced Li6C6O6 form, makes the design of a symmetrical Li-ion cell possible and finally the elaboration of “all organic renewable” Li-ion batteries with a modest but promising 1 V output voltage.139
 Fig. 10  (a) Selection of model chemical structures based on redox-active carbonyl functionalities displaying interesting electrochemical properties vs.Li. (b) Resulting identification of two key organic backbones (note that further poly-aromatic groups or conjugated system can be considered in place of the phenyl group). 
In the continuity of research devoted to carbonyl containing molecules, multiple interesting structures were proposed or older ones revisited these last two years142–152 demonstrating the real interest in organic matter. But the true “green” potential of certain redox-active organics to act as a sustainable electrode material is just about to be revealed and a lot of efforts have to be done to promote operative Li-ion batteries (or others) displaying an acceptable environmental burden. It is worth noting that promoting renewable chemical resources (and other by-products) as raw materials for electrode production appears also in good synergy with the proper rise of 2nd and 3rd generations of biorefineries based on lignocellulosic biomass and/or micro-algae processing.153–155 Indeed, biomass potential has also an eminent role to play for mitigation because this is a huge and sustainable reservoir of hydrocarbons and related chemicals.156 Transformation of biomass products is first the only current renewable source of liquid fuels (also called biofuels)157–160 necessary for the transportation sector, which itself accounts for 19% of the world's total energy demand.161 The second important role of biomass, which is maybe not stressed enough, is its capability to supply carbon-based chemicals. Let us recall that the carbonaceous raw materials necessary to the chemical industry currently comes from crude oil (i.e., fossil and concentrated biomass) consuming about 10% of the production.162 However, to be efficient, biorefineries will need to combine the production of high volume/low value products like sustainable bio-fuels and low volume/high value bio-based chemicals.163 This economic goal will be achieved through the difficult identification of the right platform chemicals either to substitute the existing products or to create new markets. Along that line, this attractive potential in processing biomass to produce organic-based electrode materials could be one of these new markets.
8. Concluding remarks
Each generation is basically confronted with new challenges and new opportunities. The 20th century generations have particularly succeeded in deeply modernizing the world, bringing innovations, social progress and a better quality of life thanks to the black gold engineering. Today, climate changes and energy shortages are confronting our current society with significant technological, economic, health, safety, and national security challenges. An emergency door can be viewed in a “green revolution” characterized by the abandonment of old traditional ways of thinking to rather promote the sustainability and maybe a new economic model based on concrete richness like the annual capability of the biosphere to provide safe food and fresh water, for instance. Some necessary actions include judicious regulations, global energy/demography policies as well as making people aware of the future issues. Along that line, education is vitally important especially for young people and generations to come. But as scientists, we do have the duty to lead the way by searching for better energy technologies, finding innovative solutions capable of solving the energy problem at its root. Obviously, breakthroughs in energy technologies will require strengthening interdisciplinary cooperation.
In this peculiar journey to the universe of energy, we have chosen in this article to pinpoint that harnessing energy with a low environmental footprint is not that obvious due to the scarcity of the energy sources, a few inner limitations linked to physics and the necessity to operate with energy storage systems, an essential link that completes the logistic chain of the energy sector. We have also attempted to highlight that secondary batteries constitute efficient storage devices in many respects (even if all possible requirements are not fulfilled) and important tools for mitigation provided they are themselves sufficiently eco-friendly. To some extent organic matter-based electrode materials represent the possibility of integrating the concept of “renewable” in electrode material design and the prospect of realizing green and sustainable batteries within the next decade (maybe prompted with the rise of the new biorefinery industry). It is however true that organics display more modest properties notably lower density values coupled with some solubility issues in regard to the present Li-ion technology. Nevertheless, in the future, the essential may no longer be just a question of energy density and power capability at any price and the race for high voltage cells could no longer be an ultimate goal. Indeed, new concerns are coming up like life cycle assessments, cost effectiveness, recyclability and safety of the materials and devices. A relevant example can be found with the development of aqueous rechargeable LIBs. This technology proposed in mid-90s by Dahn's group164 involves common lithium-insertion compounds as electrode materials but an alkaline or neutral aqueous electrolyte, which is greener and safer compared to flammable organic electrolytes. Encouraging electrochemical performances have been recently obtained for an average output voltage around 1.5 V.165 Finally, searching for redox-active organic compounds stable/insoluble towards a liquid electrolyte induces to rule out numerous chemical structures of interest. A potential alternative could be seen in designing protective interphases (coating) by grafting the particle surface of valuable organics, for instance. On the other hand, the redox flow system (where the electroactive matter is typically soluble) appears also an interesting technology for stationary applications and soluble organics displaying high redox potentials could be used as well, as recently proposed by Xu et al.166 Thus, although chemistry really does not have a good reputation among people, it can also resolve environmental problems.
To sum up, changing the historic roadmap followed by the R&D of energy technologies is nowadays mandatory in the general interest. An interesting example can be viewed in the aeronautics domain with the supersonic Concorde passenger airliner that became operational in 1976 and continued commercial flights for 27 years. To this day, there is no direct replacement, and it seems that Concorde will remain the greatest plane that the aviation industry has ever built, and probably for many years to come. The reason is that the heavy costs of running the service outstrip the revenue it can generate, and it is just far more efficient (sustainable) to fly much larger numbers of people across the Atlantic sub sonically in 7 hours rather than 3, with lower energy consumption and harmful exhausts.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Région Picardie and the GCEP program from Stanford University for support and thank their colleagues from LRCS/LG for fruitful discussions, S. Renault and P. Berrezig for valuable comments and M. Nelson for helpful assistance.
References
M. E. Mann, R. S. Bradley and M. K. Hughes, Nature, 1998, 392, 779 CrossRef CAS .
S. Levitus, J. I. Antonov, J. Wang, T. L. Delworth, K. W. Dixon and A. J. Broccoli, Science, 2001, 292, 267 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Barnett, D. W. Pierce and R. Schnur, Science, 2001, 292, 270 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Mann, Z. Zhang, M. K. Hughes, R. S. Bradley, S. K. Miller, S. Rutherford and F. Ni, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 13252 CrossRef CAS .

          Assessment Report (AR4), Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report, Summary for Policymakers, IPCC Plenary XXVII (Valence, Spain, 12–17 November 2007), http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_spm.pdf, accessed June 2010 Search PubMed.
The Topex/Poseidon satellite was launched on 10 August 1992 with the objective of “observing and understanding the ocean circulation”. A joint project between NASA, the US space agency, and CNES, the French space agency, see http://topex-www.jpl.nasa.gov/, accessed June 2010.
Climate Change Science Compendium 2009, UNEP, 2009, http://www.unep.org/pdf/ccScienceCompendium2009/cc_ScienceCompendium2009_full_en.pdf, accessed June 2010.

          D. H. Meadows, D. L. Meadows, J. Randers and W. W. Behrens, III, The Limits to Growth, Universe Books, New York,  1972. (Authors have created a computing model which took into account the consequences of a rapidly growing world population and finite resource supplies) Search PubMed .
A. A. Bhosale and K. Sundaram, Int. J. Recent Trends Eng., 2009, 1, 77 Search PubMed .
M. S. Alam, A. Roychowdhury, K. K. Islam and A. M. Z. Huq, Energy, 1998, 23, 791 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pachauri and D. Spreng, Econ. Polit. Wkly., 2004, 39, 271 Search PubMed .

World Energy Assessment: Overview—2004 Update, ed. J. Goldemberg and T. B. Johansson, United Nations Development Programme, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .

Key World Energy Statistics, International Energy Agency, Paris,  2009, http://www.iea.org/textbase/nppdf/free/2009/key_stats_2009.pdf, accessed June 2010 Search PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides and G. W. Crabtree, Science, 2007, 315, 796 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Holditch and R. R. Chianelli, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 317 CrossRef .
V. Smil, Nature, 1999, 401, 429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wackernagel, N. B. Schulz, D. Deumling, A. C. Linares, M. Jenkins, V. Kapos, C. Monfreda, J. Loh, N. Myers, R. Norgaard and J. Randers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 9266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sathaye, P. R. Shukla and N. H. Ravindranath, Curr. Sci., 2006, 90, 314 .
J. B. Smith, S. H. Schneider, M. Oppenheimer, G. W. Yohe, W. Hare, M. D. Mastrandrea, A. Patwardhan, I. Burton, J. Corfee-Morlot, C. H. D. Magadza, H.-M. Füssel, A. B. Pittock, A. Rahman, A. Suarez and J.-P. Ypersele, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 4133 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Pritchard, R. J. Arthern, D. G. Vaughan and L. A. Edwards, Nature, 2009, 461, 971 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Steig, D. P. Schneider, S. D. Rutherford, M. E. Mann, J. C. Comiso and D. T. Shindell, Nature, 2009, 457, 459 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Domingues, J. A. Church, N. J. White, P. J. Gleckler, S. E. Wijffels, P. M. Barker and J. R. Dunn, Nature, 2008, 453, 1090 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Canadell, C. Le Quéré, M. R. Raupach, C. B. Field, E. T. Buitenhuis, P. Ciais, T. J. Conway, N. P. Gillett, R. A. Houghton and G. Marland, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 18866 CrossRef CAS .
C. Le Quéré, C. Rödenbeck, E. T. Buitenhuis, T. J. Conway, R. Langenfelds, A. Gomez, C. Labuschagne, M. Ramonet, T. Nakazawa, N. Metzl, N. Gillett and M. Heimann, Science, 2007, 316, 1735 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Kaya, Impact of Carbon Dioxide Emission Control on GNP Growth: Interpretation of Proposed Scenarios (IPCC Response Strategies Working Group Memorandum),  1989 Search PubMed .
M. I. Hoffert, K. Caldeira, A. K. Jain, E. F. Haites, L. D. D. Harvey, S. D. Potter, M. E. Schlesinger, S. H. Schneider, R. G. Watts, T. M. L. Wigley and D. J. Wuebbles, Nature, 1998, 395, 881 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Waggoner and J. H. Ausubel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 7860 CrossRef CAS .
S. Benson and F. M. Orr, Jr, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 303 CAS  , and other places of this special issue.
N. MacDowell, N. Florin, A. Buchard, J. Hallett, A. Galindo, G. Jackson, C. S. Adjiman, C. K. Williams, N. Shah and P. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1645 RSC .
Directive 2005/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-using products, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do%3Furi%20%3D%20OJ%3A%20L%3A2005%3A191%3A0029%3A0058%3Aen%3APDF, accessed June 2010.

          G. Brundtland, Our Common Future: The World Commission on Environment and Development, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1987 Search PubMed .

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brasilia,  1992, http://www.un.org/documents/ga/conf151/aconf15126-1annex1.htm, accessed June 2010 Search PubMed .
Agenda 21 is a program run by the United Nations (UN) related to sustainable development. The full text was revealed at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Earth Summit), held in Rio de Janeiro on June 14, 1992. See http://www.un.org/esa/dsd/agenda21/res_agenda21_00.shtml, accessed June 2010.

Renewable Energy Road Map,  2007, http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/energy/renewable_energy/l27065_en.htm, accessed June 2010 Search PubMed .
Promotion of the Use of Energy from Renewable Sources, directive 2009/28/EC, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do%3Furi%20%3D%20OJ%3A%20L%3A2009%3A140%3A0016%3A0062%3AEN%3A%20PDF, accessed June 2010..

Renewable 2010 Global Status Report (revised), REN21,  2010, http://www.ren21.net/Portals/97/documents/GSR/REN21_GSR_2010_full_revised%20Sept2010.pdf, accessed April 2011 Search PubMed .
J. M. Donelan, Q. Li, V. Naing, J. A. Hoffer, D. J. Weber and A. D. Kuo, Science, 2008, 319, 807 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Guan and W. H. Liao, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, 498 CrossRef CAS .
For instance, see http://clients.rte-france.com/lang/an/visiteurs/vie/courbes.jsp for methodology of forecasts and daily load curves regarding the demand for electricity in mainland France.
M. Amin and J. Stringer, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 399 CrossRef .
H. Ibrahim, A. Ilinca and J. Perron, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1221 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries, McGraw-Hill, New York, 3rd edn,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. R. Palacín, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565 RSC .
X.-P. Gao and H.-X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 174 RSC .
D. H. Doughty, P. C. Butler, A. A. Akhil, N. H. Clark and J. D. Boyes, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2010, 19(3), 49 Search PubMed .
T. Nguyen and R. F. Savinell, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2010, 19(3), 54 Search PubMed .
D. W. Murphy, F. J. DiSalvo, J. N. Carides and J. V. Waszczak, Mater. Res. Bull., 1978, 9, 1395 CrossRef .
M. Lazzari and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 773 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, Prog. Batteries Sol. Cells, 1990, 9, 209 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691 CrossRef CAS .
P. Van den Bossche, F. Vergels, J. Van Mierlo, J. Matheys and W. Van Autenboer, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 913 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bernardes, D. C. R. Espinosa and J. A. S. Tenório, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 586 CrossRef CAS .
Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do%3Furi%20%3D%20OJ%3A%20L%3A2006%3A266%3A0001%3A0014%3AEN%3A%20PDF, accessed June 2010.
G. Hilson, Land Use Policy, 2002, 19, 65 CrossRef .
J. Dewulf, G. Van der Vorst, K. Denturck, H. Van Langenhove, W. Ghyoot, J. Tytgat and K. Vandeputte, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2010, 54, 229 CrossRef .
A. M. Bernardes, D. C. R. Espinosa and J. A. S. Tenório, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 291 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lupi, M. Pasquali and A. Dell'Era, Waste Manage., 2005, 25, 215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nan, D. Han and X. Zuo, J. Power Sources, 2005, 152, 278 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dorella and M. B. Mansur, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H. R. Thomas, R. W. Francis, K. R. Lum, J. Wang and B. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 512 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.recupyl.com/%3B%20http%3A//www.batteryrecycling.umicore.com/download/show_URSdetailed.pdf–the closed loop solution: Val'eas® process (accessed June 2010).
D. A. Notter, M. Gauch, R. Widmer, P. Wäger, A. Stamp, R. Zah and H.-J. Althaus, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 6550 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Lankey and F. McMichael, Rechargeable Battery Management and Recycling: A Green Design Educational Module, Green Design Initiative Technical Report, Carnegie Mellon University,  1999, http://www.ce.cmu.edu/GreenDesign/gd/education/Battery.pdf, accessed June 2010 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 4, 348 CrossRef .
D. L. Williams, J. J. Byrne and J. S. Driscoll, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 2 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, H. Wakamatsu, Z. Takehara and S. Yoshizawa, Electrochim. Acta, 1979, 24, 723 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tobishima, J. Yamaki and A. Yamaji, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 57 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Foos, S. M. Erker and L. M. Rembetsy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 836 CAS .

          H. Matsunaga, T. Daifuku, T. Nakajima, T. Kawagoe, Polymers for Advanced Technologies, VCH Publishers, Inc., New York,  1990, vol. 1, p. 33 Search PubMed .
P. Novák, K. Müller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, S. Iwasa, M. Satoh, Y. Morioka, J. Iriyama, M. Suguro and E. Hasegawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 359, 351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Iriyama, K. Nakahara, S. Iwasa, Y. Morioka, M. Suguro and M. Satoh, IEICE Trans., 2002, E85–C6, 1256 Search PubMed .
L.-F. Deng, X.-H. Li, L.-X. Xiao and Y.-H. Zhang, J. Cent. South Univ. Technol., 2003, 10, 190 Search PubMed .
H. Nishide, S. Iwasa, Y.-J. Pu, T. Suga, K. Nakahara and M. Satoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 827 CrossRef CAS .
M. Satoh, K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa and M. Suguro, IEICE Trans., 2004, E87–C12, 2076 Search PubMed .
T. Suga, Y.-J. Pu, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 2203 CrossRef CAS .
M. Satoh, NEC J. Adv. Technol., 2005, 2, 262 Search PubMed .
H. Nishide and T. Suga, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2005, 14, 32 Search PubMed .
T. Katsumata, M. Satoh, J. Wada, M. Shiotsuki, F. Sanda and T. Masuda, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, T. Katsumata, M. Satoh, J. Wada, J. Igarashi, K. Mizoguchi and T. Masuda, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 7965 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suguro, S. Iwasa, Y. Kusachi, Y. Morioka and K. Nakahara, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1929 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bugnon, C. J. H. Morton, P. Novák, J. Vetter and P. Nesvadba, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2910 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, H. Konishi and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1730 RSC .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1110 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 870 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, Y.-J. Pu, S. Kasatori and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, R. Morita, M. Satoh, J. Wada, F. Terakura, K. Mizoguchi, N. Ogata and T. Masuda, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3250 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, T. Suga, K. Yoshimura and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6646 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, G. Cheruvally, G. S. Chauhan, J.-W. Choi, D.-S. Kim, H.-J. Ahn, S. H. Lee and C. E. Song, Met. Mater. Int., 2009, 15, 77 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, H. Ohshiro, S. Sugita, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1627 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nesvadba, L. Bugnon, P. Maire and P. Novák, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 783 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ibe, R. B. Frings, A. Lachowicz, S. Kyo and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3475 RSC .
S. Komaba, T. Tanaka, T. Ozeki, T. Taki, H. Watanabe and H. Tachikawa, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6212 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, A. Hatemata, W. Choi and H. Nishide, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5404 RSC  , and references cited therein.
K. Koshika, N. Chikushi, N. Sano, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1573 RSC .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Kolosnitsyn and E. V. Karaseva, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2008, 44, 506 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Visco, C. C. Maihe, C. de Jonghe and M. B. Armand, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 661 CAS .
M. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1896 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inamasu, D. Yoshitoku, Y. Sumi-otorii, H. Tani and N. Ono, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A128 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Xue, J. X. Li, S. Q. Hu, M. X. Zhang, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 903 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Lee, K. S. Ryu and S. H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119-121, 321 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Zhan, L. Zhou, S. Deng, Z. Li and Y. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 515 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsutsumi, H. Higashiyama, K. Onimura and T. Oishi, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Liu, L. B. Kong, L. M. Wang, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2005, 8, 269 CAS .
Z. J. Liu, L. B. Kong, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1302 CrossRef CAS .
S.-R. Deng, L.-B. Kong, G.-Q. Hu, T. Wu, D. Li, Y.-H. Zhoua and Z.-Y. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2589 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Trofimov, G. F. Myachina, I. V. Rodionova, A. G. Mal'kina, I. A. Dorofeev, T. I. Vakul'skaya, L. M. Sinegovskaya and T. A. Skotheim, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 107, 784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhan, L. Kong, C. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1217 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Zhang, L. Zhang, W.-K. Wang and W.-J. Xue, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2041 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama and O. Hatozaki, Macromol. Symp., 2000, 156, 171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kiya, A. Iwata, T. Sarukawa, J. C. Henderson and H. D. Abruna, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. B. Kong, L. Z. Zhan, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, L. Kong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. Zhan, React. Funct. Polym., 2008, 68, 1408 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhan, Z. Song, J. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. Zhan, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 8319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Kong, L. Zhan, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. Zhan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhan, Z. P. Song, J. Y. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 1691 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z.-P. Song, N. Shan, L.-Z. Zhan, J.-Y. Zhang, H. Zhan, Y.-H. Zhou and C.-M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 1434 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Z. Song, L. Zhan, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 186, 496 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhan, Z. Song, N. Shan, J. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou, Z. Li and C. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 859 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sarukawa and N. Oyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, F23 CrossRef CAS .
T. Le Gall, K. H. Reiman, M. C. Grossel and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119-121, 316 CrossRef .
X. Han, C. Chang, L. Yuan, T. Sun and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1616 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Noai, S. Suematsu, A. Manago, J. Kurihara, T. Nishiyama, G. Harada, S. Okada and K. Sakata, US Pat., US 6277518 B1,  2001 .

          T. Umemoto, US Pat., 6737193 B2,  2004 .

          M. Armand, C. Michot and N. Ravet, Canadian Pat., CA 2223562,  1997 .
D. Häringer, P. Novák, O. Haas, B. Piro and M.-C. Pham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 1393 .
J. Xiang, C. Chang, M. Li, S. Wu, L. Yuan and J. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 280 CrossRef .
H. Chen, P. Poizot, F. Dolhem, N. I. Basir, O. Mentré and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribière, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. Armand, M. Courty, M. Jiang, C. P. Grey, F. Dolhem, J.-M. Tarascon and P. Poizot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng, J.-P. Bonnet, S. Renault, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1929 RSC .

          S. Renault, J. Geng, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot, Chem. Commun.,  2011472414 10.1039/c0cc04440g, in press.
N. Oyama, T. Sarukawa, Y. Mochizukia, T. Shimomura and S. Yamaguchi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, Y. Zhou and H. Zhan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 448 RSC .
K. Liu, J.-M. Zheng, G.-M. Zhong and Y. Yang, Dianhuaxue, 2009, 15, 245 Search PubMed .
W. Walker, S. Grugeon, O. Mentré, S. Laruelle, J.-M. Tarascon and F. Wudl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6517 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Wang, Y.-Y. Zhang, A.-B. Wang, Z.-B. Yu, M.-F. Han and Y.-S. Yang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2010, 26, 47 Search PubMed .
M. Yao, H. Senoh, S.-I. Yamazaki, Z. Siroma, T. Sakai and K. Yasuda, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8336 CrossRef CAS .
B. Genorio, K. Pirnat, R. Cerc-Korosec, R. Dominko and M. Gaberscek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7222 CrossRef CAS .
R.-H. Zeng, X.-P. Li, Y.-C. Qiu, W.-S. Li, J. Yi, D.-S. Lu, C.-L. Tan and M.-Q. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1253 CrossRef .
M. Yao, M. Araki, H. Senoh, S.-I. Yamazaki, T. Sakai and K. Yasuda, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 950 CrossRef CAS .
W. Walker, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, M. Armand, J.-M. Tarascon and F. Wudl, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8444 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kamm and M. Kamm, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2004, 64, 137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fernando, S. Adhikiri, C. Chandrapal and N. Murali, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 1727 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Carney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick, Jr, J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta, J. R. Mielenz, R. Murphy, R. Templer and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484 CrossRef .

Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply, US Department of Energy and US Department of Agriculture,  2005, http://http%3Afeedstockreview.ornl.gov/pdf/billion_ton_vision.pdf, accessed June 2010 Search PubMed .
L. Petrus and M. A. Noordermeer, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 861 RSC .
G. W. Huber and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber and A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stöcker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9200 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Carpenter, Jr, J. Gibbs, A. A. Pesaran, L. D. Marlino and K. Kelly, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 439 .
S. M. Glueck, S. Gümüs, W. M. F. Fabian and K. Faber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 313 RSC .
J. J. Bozell and G. R. Petersen, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 539 RSC .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115 CAS .
H. Manjunatha, G. S. Suresh and T. V. Venkatesha, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 431 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Xu, Y. Wen, J. Cheng, Y. Yanga, Z. Xie and G. Cao, World Non Grid-Connected Wind Power and Energy Conference, NanJing, WNWEC,  2009, p. 1 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† The word “Energy”, as we know it today, appeared in England in 1850 and in France in 1875. The concept of Energy was introduced by Hermann Von Helmholtz.‡ Strictly speaking, the common use of energy “production” and “consumption” terms is thus inappropriate.§ A concept of the public interest was proposed by the Brundtland Commission31 more than twenty years ago, included in the Principle 3 of the Rio Declaration32 and developed in Agenda 21,33 and stating that “Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. This is also the right model to soften disparity among the Earth's inhabitants.¶ However, for the sake of simplicity, the term battery (when used) will refer to a secondary galvanic cell in the following pages.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Philippe Poizot	Philippe Poizot is presently an Associate Professor of Electrochemistry at Laboratoire de Réactivité et Chimie des Solides (University of Picardie, Amiens, France). After a Master of Science in Analytical Chemistry (1998) from the University of Paris VI, he obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science (2001) from the University of Picardie. He joined Switzer's group (University of Missouri-Rolla, USA) in 2002 as postdoctoral researcher to develop the electrodeposition of nanostructured materials and enantiospecific catalysts. His current research topics are mainly focused on the Li-ion battery R&D, electrochemical deposition, molecular electrochemistry and the development of redox-active organic electrode materials following his concept of a greener Li-ion battery based on renewable matter.
Franck Dolhem	Franck Dolhem received his PhD in organic chemistry of natural resources in 2003 from the University of Picardie. Then he joined the group of Aloïs Fürstner at the Max Planck Institute for post-doctoral studies and during one year he was working on the total synthesis of a natural compound. After that, he spent another year at Chalmers University in 2005, this time he was preparing libraries of P-chiral ligands for homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. In 2006 he was appointed as an Associate Professor at the Laboratoire des Glucides (University of Picardie, Amiens, France). His research is mainly focused on organic renewable advanced materials issued from biomass for Li-ion battery electrodes.

Broader context
The main rise in the living quality of human kind has mainly begun with the industrial revolution thanks to prodigious scientific and technological progresses resulting in better mastery of energy. Two centuries and a half after, the threats of climate change and the issues of secure energy supply conspire to make us take another look at our current energy engineering and our consuming fashion. The electrical energy production and the sector of transportation are particularly concerned about this increasing awareness of the need for reliable, clean and safe technologies, which raises in the background the crucial question of energy storage. In this context, electrochemical storage systems could play a critical role as a power propulsion source for zero-emission (electric) vehicles, but also as a reliable buffer system to manage the intermittent renewable energy sources and ensure the global safety of the future “smart grid”. Li-ion batteries constitute an advanced technology that can meet these new requirements providing that they are themselves sufficiently eco-friendly.


 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the six forms of energy and related examples of their interconversions.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Illustration showing the various applications of rechargeable battery technologies in the logistic chain of electric power with the corresponding ranges of stored energy.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scheme showing the general architecture of a galvanic cell whatever the considered technology. Note that additional electrolyte can be stored externally then pumped through the cell in the particular case of a flow battery (more explanation in the text).	 


                  Lead-acid	(+): PbO2(s) + 2e− + SO42− + 4H+ ⇆ PbSO4(s) + 2H2O	∼2 43
(−): Pb0 + SO42− ⇆ PbSO4(s) + 2e−

                  Sodium–sulfur (300–350 °C)	(+): xS + 2e− ⇆ Sx2−	∼2 43
(−): 2Na0 ⇆ 2Na+ + 2e−

                  Nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd)	(+): NiOOH(s) + e− + H2O ⇆ Ni(OH)2(s) + OH−	∼1.2 43
(−): ½Cd0 + OH− ⇆ ½Cd(OH)2(s) + e−

                  Nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH)	(+): NiOOH(s) + e− + H2O ⇆ Ni(OH)2(s) + OH−	∼1.2 43
(−): “MH(s)” + OH− ⇆ “M(s)” + H2O + e−

                  Vanadium
                  redox flow battery (VRB)	(+): VO2+ + e− + 2H+ ⇆ VO2+ + H2O	∼1.4 47
(−): V2+ ⇆ V3+ + e−

                  Li-ion battery (Sony, 1991)	(+): Li1−xCoO2(s) + xe− + xLi+ ⇆ LiCoO2(s)	∼3.6 50
(−): LixC ⇆ C + xe− + xLi+

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of different common types of battery regarding their normalized electrical performances also called Ragone chart. (Reprinted from ref. 55, with permission from Elsevier.)	 

First kind electrode	
                  Mn+ + ne− ⇆ M0
(A0 + ne− ⇆ An−)
M0 + xM′m+ + xme− ⇆ MM′x(s)
Second kind electrode	
                  Mn+xXyp− + ne− ⇆ xM0 + yXp−

                  Mn+xXy(s)p− + ne− ⇆ xM0 + yXp−
Third kind electrode	
                  Mm+ + ne− ⇆ M(m−n)+
(Am− + ne− ⇆ A(m+n)−)
Third kind electrode (with solid phases)	
                  Mm+xXy(s)p− + ne− + zYq− ⇆ M(m−n)+xYq−z(s) + yXp−

                  Insertion
                  electrode
	
                  〈H〉 + xe− + x/nMn+ ⇆ 〈Mx/nnH〉

                  〈Xx/pH〉 + xe− ⇆ 〈H〉 + x/pXp−

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration comparing a simplified cycle life of a “greener” Li-ion battery taking benefit of redox-active organic electrode materials deriving typically from biomass with (adapted from ref. 69). (b) Current technology using metal-based electrode materials.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Typical polymers used as electroactive materials in ORBs with the redox reactivity of (b) the nitroxide and (c) the phenoxyl radicals.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Relevant examples of redox-active disulfide-based compounds tested vs.lithium with their theoretical specific capacity values. (b) Typical redox reactivity of the disulfide bridge.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) PT derivatives and other related organic materials involving thioether bonds with their theoretical specific capacity values. (b) Proposed redox reactivity of the thioether bond according to ref. 128.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Typical redox reaction involving a carbonyl centre and (b) some carbonylated chemical structures proposed as positive electrode materials with their theoretical specific capacity values.135,136	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Selection of model chemical structures based on redox-active carbonyl functionalities displaying interesting electrochemical properties vs.Li. (b) Resulting identification of two key organic backbones (note that further poly-aromatic groups or conjugated system can be considered in place of the phenyl group).	 
Footnotes
† The word “Energy”, as we know it today, appeared in England in 1850 and in France in 1875. The concept of Energy was introduced by Hermann Von Helmholtz.
‡ Strictly speaking, the common use of energy “production” and “consumption” terms is thus inappropriate.
§ A concept of the public interest was proposed by the Brundtland Commission31 more than twenty years ago, included in the Principle 3 of the Rio Declaration32 and developed in Agenda 21,33 and stating that “Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. This is also the right model to soften disparity among the Earth's inhabitants.
¶ However, for the sake of simplicity, the term battery (when used) will refer to a secondary galvanic cell in the following pages.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
