Biomimetic transparent and superhydrophobic coatings: from nature and beyond nature  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC06868H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC06868H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1775-1794Biomimetic transparent and superhydrophobic coatings: from nature and beyond nature

        
          
            Shen 
            Yu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhiguang 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Weimin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      b
aHubei Collaborative Innovation Centre for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, People's Republic of China
bState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou, 730000, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zguo@licp.cas.cn;  Fax: +86-931-8277088;   Tel: +86-931-4968105
Received 
      1st September 2014
    , Accepted 17th October 2014First published on 17th October 2014AbstractIt is well known that high optical transparency is one of the most crucial criteria for the overwhelming majority of optical devices and correlative functions, including smart windows, camera lenses, solar cell systems and optoelectronic devices. With the frequent exposure of this equipment to all sorts of environments, such as outdoor conditions, a surface with self-cleaning properties can guard against fouling, humidity, bacterial growth and so forth. That is one type of application of the big family of superhydrophobic coatings. Therefore, integrating high transparency with self-cleaning characteristics is of great importance for such applications. In this review, the recent developments in designing, synthesizing and manufacturing transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces are reviewed. Firstly, the established theoretical aspects of surface wetting properties are summarized and then several natural and bio-inspired superhydrophobic surfaces of diverse microcosmic structures are presented as representative examples. With a focus on distinctively employed materials and the corresponding fabrication of superhydrophobic coatings with high transparency, the promising research directions and application prospects of this rapidly developing field are briefly addressed as well.
Shen Yu
Mr Shen Yu joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at the University of Hubei in 2013 in pursuing his PhD degree. His current scientific interests are devoted to studying the transparency behaviors of biomimetic superhydrophobic surfaces and their corresponding interfacial behaviors.
Zhiguang Guo
Professor Zhiguang Guo received his PhD from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2007. After that, he joined Hubei University. From Oct. 2007 to Aug. 2008, he worked at the University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, as a post-doctoral researcher. From Sep. 2008 to Mar. 2011, he worked in Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Chargé de recherche”. From Feb. 2009 to Feb. 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. Now he is a full professor in LICP financed by the “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. To date, he has published more than 80 papers about the interfaces of materials.
Weimin Liu
Professor Weimin Liu, received his PhD with a major in Lubricating Materials and Tribology from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1990. After that, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication (LSL), Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics. From June 1993 to June 1994, he worked as a Visiting Scholar in Pennsylvania State University, USA. In 1996, he was promoted to Professor, and nominated as Head of the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication in 2000. From 2005–2012, he was the Director of the LICP. In 2013, he was elected as a fellow of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Up to now, he has published more than 500 papers. Currently, his research interests mainly focus on space lubrication and high performance lubricants.
Introduction
In nature, there exists a vast range of biological surfaces exhibiting superhydrophobicity and other properties, such as self-cleaning abilities. As we all know, these surfaces, including lotus leaves,1 butterfly wings,2 gecko feet,3 the Namib desert beetle4 and water strider,5 are defined as surfaces with a water contact angle greater than 150° and a sliding angle lower than 5°. During the rolling off process on some surfaces of plants, along with the waterdrop, the hydrophilic contaminants on the surface can be easily removed, due to the minimized contact area and tight connection between resting contaminants and water. Thus, the photosynthesis of such plants proceeds normally, thanks to the free carbon dioxide exchange guaranteed by the clean surfaces. In terms of insect integuments, superhydrophobicity is also observed and utilized by water striders' legs for rapid locomotion on water,6 by butterflies to prevent the self-matting of wings,7 by moths and butterflies to reduce the blurring of eyesight due to dew condensation on the compound eyes,8 and by shark skins to reduce the body drag force9
Up until very recently, superhydrophobic surfaces have attracted significant attention both in scientific research and applications in daily life all over the world based on their unique properties, such as self-cleansing, anti-sticking, anti-icing, anti-biofouling, water and bacteria proofing, drag reduction, humidity proof coatings on glass and metals, etc.10–14 In order to make the change from natural superhydrophobic surfaces to artificial superhydrophobic surfaces, both the surface chemical compositions and morphology should be taken into consideration. As a matter of fact, the influence of the hierarchical structure and surface energy on the wettability of natural or biomimetic surfaces has been confirmed by Li and Amirfazli from a theoretical perspective.15–17 To be more specific, the superhydrophobic nature of as-prepared coatings is ascribed to the multiscale roughness (ranging from microscale to nanoscale), and also due to the chemical property of low surface energy of the applied materials.18–21
For example, on the lotus leaf surface, it has been observed and attested that each micrometer-sized papilla is covered with fine nanostructures (at the scale of 100 nm) and is accompanied by 3D epicuticular wax crystals. The coexistence of two scales of roughness contributes significantly to the quality of the superhydrophobicity.22–29 Actually, such structures are believed to be the cause of achieving both a high water contact angle and a low contact angle hysteresis. In the case of the common lotus leaf, the advancing angle is almost 160° with the receding angle being larger than 150°, which increases the waterdrop’s mobility. On account of the usual multifunctionality that superhydrophobic surfaces possess, such surfaces have attracted great interest for many potential applications, including anti-fouling and drag-force reduction of ship hulls, combustion engines, anti-contamination packaging, self-cleaning windshields for automobiles, airplanes and buildings, anti-fouling and non-wettable clothing, droplet transfer in microfluidics,30–35 and freeze-delay or anti-frost/anti-icing.36–51
In particular, the applications based on such superhydrophobic surfaces in the field of energy production have stimulated more research in developing coatings with both self-cleaning properties and transparency. For instance, it is well known that the development of solar cells is based upon increasing their energy efficiency, and normally reflectance varies from 4% to over 6.5% of the incident light on each air/substrate interface, which considerably dissipates the energy transmitted to the solar cell system due to multiple reflections. One efficient way to solve this problem is to keep the solar cell surfaces clear of the accumulation of snow, dust, ice, plant matter and bird droppings, thus the surfaces can stay clean and transparent and decrease the waste of the sunlight energy. Moreover, light scattering is a function of the roughness size and the refractive index of the materials, which evidently leads to the two vital factors for obtaining both a high transparency and superhydrophobicity—the surface roughness and the applied materials. When increasing the surface roughness appropriately for superhydrophobicity, opacity may also be generated owing to the needless light scattering. Therefore, it is obvious that from the perspective of surface roughness, superhydrophobicity and transparency are generally two competitive properties. For the purpose of guaranteeing that the coatings are transparent and superhydrophobic simultaneously, the precise manipulation of roughness size and the selection of coating materials are extremely crucial.
Apart from the challenge of balancing the high surface roughness demanded for superhydrophobicity and the low surface roughness required for optical transparency, the water repellent capability gradually degrades during long-term outdoor exposure as well, which is the problem that currently hinders the practical applications of superhydrophobic coatings.52
This review is not intended to be exhaustive in the vast body of the published literatures. Rather, we want to highlight those materials that have been commonly applied and represent a great advance in their respective fields in recent years, and which may be of significant importance for future applications. In this review, the overall layout is as follows. We first summarize the established theoretical aspects of surface wetting properties, which include not only various theoretical wetting models corresponding to different states of surfaces (smooth or rough), but also the influence on the optical properties by Mie scattering and Rayleigh scattering. This is followed by discussions on several biologically inspired superhydrophobic surfaces due to their diverse surface structures. For the next part, the emphasis is put on raw materials to achieve both transparent and superhydrophobic coatings and the outstanding features of these materials. Then we discuss the potential applications of materials suitable for industrial production, and the prospects and future directions for such transparent and superhydrophobic coatings afterwards. Finally, we briefly present our personal view of the remaining challenges for the future within this field of biomimetic research.
Basic theories about surface wettability
Smooth surface
Some basic laws were formed for ideal solids, both flat and chemically homogeneous, at the very beginning. Young and Laplace noted that surfaces usually carry a specific energy, the so-called surface tension, which reflects the cohesion of the underlying condensed phase (either solid or liquid). γIJ is used to signify the quantity for an interface between phases I and J (which represent S, L and V for solid, liquid, and vapor, respectively). Surface tension is measured in force per unit length, or of energy per unit area. This force applies along the IJ surface, so as to minimize the corresponding (positive) surface energy.53
Assuming that a waterdrop falls on an ideal solid surface, there are three surface tensions that need to be considered: solid–liquid(γSL), liquid–vapor(γLV), and solid–vapor(γSV), as shown in Fig. 1a. Young's equation gives the relation between the equilibrium contact angle θeq the drop makes with the surface and the three surface tensions as: γSV = γSL + γLV cosθeq(1)where θeq is the equilibrium contact angle on a smooth solid surface, or Young's contact angle. In many common situations, this angle lies between 0° and 90° (i.e., in the case of hydrophilic surfaces). Very qualitatively, the solid/liquid surface tension (between two condensed phases) tends to be smaller than the solid/air one (with only one condensed phase), because the phases differ less in the first case. Hence, a positive cosine in eqn (1) results, implying an acute angle of θeq. Besides, for an ideal solid surface, the influence of roughness, chemical heterogeneity, surface reconstruction, swelling and dissolution are neglected. Among these, surface roughness is thought to be a parameter controlling the surface contact angle.
 Fig. 1  (a) Three surface tensions of a waterdrop on a smooth surface; (b) a liquid drop penetrates into the spikes (Wenzel state); (c) a liquid drop supported on the spikes (Cassie–Baxter state). 
In fact, very few solids are molecularly flat. In these situations, the molecularly flat solids have commonly resulted from the solidification of a liquid film, either free or supported on another liquid. The roughness can correspond to the thermal roughness of a liquid interface under such circumstances, generally of the order of a few angstroms. Taking the fabrication of glass as an example, it is usually solidified from its molten state after deposition onto a bath of molten tin.53
Inversely, the bulk of solids are rough at the micrometric scale by nature. In the processes of fabrication (such as lamination), striations or microgrooves may be engendered and be the reason that roughness is generated. Coating may bring about roughness likewise, peculiarly when the coating dewets, thus producing microdrops at the surface.
Rough surface
On a rough surface, θeq is the most vital factor that determines the special wettability, such as hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity. Two distinct models are commonly employed to correlate the surface roughness with the apparent contact angle: the Wenzel model54 and the Cassie–Baxter model.55

Contact angle hysteresis (CAH). 
Gibbs indicated that flaws on a solid can pin a contact line. Therefore, this makes droplets on a slope stay at rest; due to the front and rear contact nonwetting and wetting defects, respectively.56 This dissymmetry in contact angles produces a Laplace pressure difference between the front (of high curvature) and the rear (of smaller curvature). Thus, provided that the drop is small enough, this force can resist gravity.57 Moreover, both chemical heterogeneities and roughness can act as pinning sites.
Even on a chemically homogeneous surface, the edge of the defect can make the contact angle variable. A groove that stops the front of a liquid drop and a tip that has the opposite effect can make a solid possessing both kinds of defect yield small and large contact angles as well.
Accordingly, contact angles generally depend on the process of liquid deposition. Surrounded by nonwetting flaws, a gently deposited drop spreads and then stops, which undoubtedly prevents it from probing the surface further. A short while later, as the drop evaporates, its configuration will be that of a drop that is pinned on wetting defects. If a small enough amount of liquid is added to the drop, the contact line will still be pinned and the contact angle will increase; similarly, if a small enough amount of liquid is removed from the drop, the contact line will still be pinned and the contact angle will decrease. Hence, the way to quantify this contact angle hysteresis is composed of two parts: (1) by slowly increasing the volume of a drop the contact line remains stuck before it exceeds a critical volume abruptly, then the line suddenly depins and moves toward the next series of pinning flaws. Under such circumstances, the maximum observed angle is the so-called advancing contact angle θa. (2) On the other hand, by sucking liquid from the drop to flatten it until it depins and retracts to the next wetting series of events, which stop and pin the line, the minimum corresponding angle, namely the receding contact angle θr, can be observed. The Young equilibrium contact angle is somewhere between those values, and the contact angle hysteresis is normally defined as Δθ = θa − θr.
Contact angle hysteresis can be regarded as beneficial or detrimental under differing conditions. Therefore it is of great importance to have a better understanding of it, but the debate about the laws that link the microscopic picture (the pinning situation for a single defect) with the macroscopic observations (gauging the hysteresis for many flaws and its corresponding average value) still exists. Generally, the contact angle hysteresis Δθ = θa − θr varies remarkably from almost zero to an immense value of the order of θa itself on a rough solid.58


The Wenzel model. 
Wenzel suggested that if liquid contact followed the profile of a rough surface then the effect of roughness should be to emphasize the intrinsic wetting tendency towards either film formation or an enhanced contact angle.54 As illustrated in Fig. 1b, part of the liquid thoroughly fills the valleys of the rough surface right at the place it contacts. The water droplets are pinned to the surface in a wet-contact mode, and high contact angle hysteresis is observed as a consequence. By virtue of the water droplets being unable to slide on the surface, the sliding angle becomes a deficient measurement of the high contact angle hysteresis. On this sort of surface, the contact angle is given by Wenzel's equation, cosθw = rcosθeq(2)where θw stands for the Wenzel contact angle and θeq means the equilibrium contact angle on a smooth surface of the same material. And r, which is larger than 1 in eqn (2), is the roughness factor and is defined as the ratio of the true surface area to the apparent surface area. The contribution from the roughness is contained within r and the effect of the surface chemistry in θeq.59 From eqn (2), it is clear that a hydrophobic surface (θeq > 90°) will become more hydrophobic when the degree of roughness increases, while a hydrophilic surface (θeq < 90°) will become more hydrophilic with the introduction of the same type of roughness. To sum up: the introduction of surface roughness will undoubtedly lead to an enhancement in the inherent wetting properties of the smooth surface material. Nevertheless, for some surfaces with high roughness or porous structures, the absolute value of the right side in eqn (2) may be greater than 1. Obviously, on such occasions the Wenzel model is inadequate and the Cassie–Baxter model will thus predominate.


The Cassie–Baxter model. 
In the Cassie–Baxter case,55 chemical heterogeneities of the surface have a considerable effect on the equilibrium contact angle. Assuming that the liquid only contacts the top of the asperities of the solid, and simultaneously the air pockets get stuck beneath the liquid, a multiple state surface of solid and air is formed, as shown in Fig. 1c. In such a multiple state surface, the air-related parts of the surface can be considered to be in a state of non-wetting. Under such circumstances, a waterdrop can roll off easily owing to the low adhesive force. Here, the sliding angle can reflect the contact angle hysteresis well. Lotus leaves, which exhibit a high CA and very low CAH, are examples clearly suitable for the Cassie–Baxter model, showing superhydrophobicity and a further self-cleaning effect under plentiful observations. In the Cassie–Baxter model, the apparent contact angle, θCB, can be defined as: cosθCB = f(cosθeq + 1) − 1(3)where f is the area fraction of the liquid–solid contact on the surface, and f is numerically smaller than 1. By defining a threshold contact angle through cosθt = (f − 1)(r − f), a composite contact condition can be established when θeq > θt. Extra energy is a requisite for pressing the droplet down and forming a wetting contact, namely, the Wenzel model. On a surface of moderate hydrophobicity (90° < θeq < θt), the two states may coexist, and a metastable Cassie–Baxter non-wetting state can also be converted into a stable Wenzel wetting state.
Moreover, a recent alternative criterion for the Cassie–Baxter state asserts that the Cassie–Baxter state exists when the following 2 criteria are met: (1) fluid contact line forces overcome the body forces of unsupported droplet weight and (2) the microstructures are tall enough to prevent the liquid that bridges the microstructures from touching the base of the microstructures.60
Additional surface roughness will impact on any liquid contact angle. As a consequence, the angles greater than 90° on a flat surface always have an increase and those less than 90° will potentially move in either direction. Usually surfaces that match the total wetting Wenzel model show “sticky” properties, hence waterdrops tend to adhere to such surfaces more than a flat surface of the same material. However, those on a “slippery” surface that conforms to the Cassie–Baxter model will roll off more easily than those on an equivalent level surface.61 By using a surface with high inherent contact angle hysteresis, it is likely that a “sticky” surface will be created, but that it will accord with the Cassie–Baxter model concurrently.62,63
The combined Cassie–Baxter/Wenzel state can also have large hysteresis, as the interfacial area between the solid and liquid can be at least as large as that on a flat surface.62–65 Under such circumstances, contact angle hysteresis cannot act as a good evaluation criterion for the surface wetting state. Many surfaces exhibit a Cassie–Baxter bridging structure, on which waterdrops roll off easily with just a slight incline. However, when waterdrops fall from a height, they may fill the valleys and become trapped. The intrinsic hydrophobicity of the surface, and the distance between and shape of the roughness features jointly have a great effect on the change from a Cassie–Baxter state to a wetted Wenzel state.


The transition between Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter state. 
Generally speaking, droplets in the Wenzel state manifest stronger contact angle hysteresis when compared with the Cassie–Baxter state.66–68 In real life, the solid/liquid contact mode will go through a transition from the Cassie–Baxter state to the Wenzel state under the conditions of droplet press, impact or vibration.68–71 Apart from undergoing state transitions, the two states can also coexist on a nanopillared surface as mentioned. The experiment was conducted by Zeng et al.72via molecular dynamics simulations of the coexistence and transition between the Cassie–Baxter and Wenzel states on a periodic nanopillared hydrophobic surface. Finally, they revealed that the physical conditions have a great impact on the transition between the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter state, including the height of the pillars, the spacing between pillars, the intrinsic contact angle, and the impinging velocity of the water nanodroplet.


The two competitive characters: transparency and superhydrophobicity. 
Superhydrophobicity and transparency are two generally competitive properties from the perspective of surface roughness. Usually, the WCA increases in the wake of an increase in the roughness on a hydrophobic surface, while the transparency decreases accordingly, owing to the scattering of light from the rough surface.
Academically, the light scattering behavior can be depicted by the Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering theories. Assuming that surface roughness is created simply by spherical, non-absorbing (dielectric) particles capable of redirecting the incident light, by differing the roughness size the two theories can apply to disparate ranges.73
The obscure phenomenon of the effect of surface roughness mainly arises from the Mie scattering effect. Rayleigh scattering is the elastic scattering of light or other electromagnetic radiation by scattering particles much smaller than the wavelength of the incident light. Usually, the transparency of the film will increase if the roughness dimensions are far smaller than the wavelength of the light. The increase of the ratio of particle size to wavelength will prompt a rapid augmentation of the intensity of the Rayleigh scattering radiation. In consequence, most researchers prefer the roughness to be on the sub-100 nm scale for higher transparency in visible light.74
As to Rayleigh's theory, assuming that light passes through a surface with roughness dimensions smaller than the wavelength of the light, the intensity of the scattered light, I, is given by: (4)where I0 is the intensity of the incident light, R is the distance between the particle and the detector, d is the diameter of the particle and λ is the wavelength of the incident light. Supposing that the diameter of the particle on a binary structural surface is about 120 nm and the wavelength of the incident light is 532 nm for the sake of an easier calculation, then the Raleigh scattering is: (5)
It can be obviously observed that the contribution of Raleigh scattering is negligible in the visible region.
However, when roughness size is comparable to or greater than λ, Mie scattering prevails instead of Raleigh scattering and the total scattering cross sections can be signified as:73,75 (6)In this equation, am and bm are the Mie coefficients, which represent the magnetic and electric multipoles of order m separately. They are functions of d and n, and n is the index of refraction of the particle. Eqn (6) can be substituted by σM = πr2K[α,n] when applied to a system of spherical particles in air with α = 2πr/λ representing the size parameter.74,76 Here, K can be calculated by eqn (7): (7)and K is the total Mie scattering coefficient which can be acquired by mathematical calculation. Yudi Rahmawan et al.77 calculated the total Mie scattering cross section of different particle sizes of various materials and obtained results that reveal that the total Mie scattering increases exponentially by increasing the particles’ diameter. The growth of n contributes to the coefficient of the exponential increase of the Mie scattering as well.
It is noted that the above results are based on the hypothesis that particles are spherical in air, but in the real system, owing to the irregular shapes of the surface and obliquity of the refractive index of the materials, the scattering phenomenon will obviously be much more complex. Nonetheless, the discussions above provide a reference for obtaining both transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces to some extent.

Superhydrophobic surfaces in nature
Plants
It is well known that biological surfaces provide multifunctional interfaces to their environment, such as the water repellent surfaces which have been found on growing leaves and some wetland plants. These sorts of surface are micro-structured by convex or papillose cells, whose surfaces are densely covered with three-dimensional waxes.78 Studies on the development from natural surfaces to biomimetic surfaces have attracted much interest for both fundamental research and practical applications recently. Fig. 2 shows some successful and classical bio-archetypes that have inspired researchers to develop such multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces.
 Fig. 2  (a) Shows the natural lotus leaf with waterdrops on it, (b) and (c) show the SEM images of a lotus leaf with low and high magnifications, respectively, and the inset of (c) shows a waterdrop on it with a CA of 162°.79 (d) Shows the underside of a Ramee leaf and (e) and (f) are the SEM images of the underside of a Ramee leaf with low and high magnifications, respectively, and the inset of (f) shows a waterdrop on it with a CA value of about 164°.79 
When referring to the superhydrophobic surfaces in nature, there are many representatives, encompassing some plant leaves, insect wings, legs, eyes and so on.
The lotus leaf, as an emblematic example for plants (see Fig. 2a), exhibits a hierarchical micro- and nanostructure on the surface, which is covered with a thin two-dimensional wax film or by a relatively low amount of three-dimensional waxes. According to the research conducted by Guo et al.,79 the surface of a lotus leaf is uniformly textured with 3–10 μm sized protrusions and valleys, and it has been observed that these are decorated with 70–100 nm particles of a hydrophobic wax-like material (Fig. 2b). Furthermore, it has been revealed that many nano-sticks whose diameter averaged about 50 nm are randomly distributed on the subsurface layer (Fig. 2c). These special hierarchical surface structures, together with the hydrophobic wax-like material, are believed to be the reason for the superhydrophobicity. On the rice leaf surface, a structure was found that is highly similar to the surface structure of the lotus leaf. Inspired by the self-cleaning effect of lotus leaves, a great variety of artificial superhydrophobic self-cleaning surfaces have been fabricated by creating appropriate surface chemical compositions and hierarchical surface geometrical structures.80 For example, Wei et al.81 utilized styrene and 2,2,3,4,4,4-hexafluorobutyl methacrylate copolymers to create superhydrophobic films with a lotus leaf-like binary hierarchical structure through the phase separation technique.
Besides the hierarchical structures mentioned above, there still exist unitary structures that can make a contribution to the formation of superhydrophobic surfaces. In this group, there are the underside of a Ramee leaf (see Fig. 2d), as well as the Chinese watermelon surface. It was observed that many quite slick fibers with diameters from 1 to 2 μm were uniformly distributed on the underside of a Ramee leaf, therefore forming a unitary structure (see Fig. 2e and f). This observation indicates that the hierarchical structure is not an indispensable condition to achieve superhydrophobicity on surfaces in nature.
Insects
Apart from several superhydrophobic plant leaves referred to above, an exhaustive review of insect integuments contributing to insects' abilities for locomotion on liquid surfaces has been written by Bush et al.82
Similar to the superhydrophobic leaves, insect cuticles are also covered with a layer of epicuticular wax that renders the exterior hydrophobic and prevents the penetration of water. Some investigations revealed that most water-repellent insects present a rough integument comprising of a thick, dense layer of microhair.83 An epitome of this characteristic is the water strider, which is known to stand with ease and glide and leap rapidly on water surfaces owing to its water-resistant legs (see Fig. 3a). For the leg and body of a strider, a hairy layer is found to cover the surface. Their non-wetting pilose legs have been shown to have contact angles above 150°, and to provide a maximal supporting force of 152 dyn for each leg, which effectively enables water striders to stand and walk on water.6 Further reports indicated that there are two sets of hair on the strider's abdomen, macrotrichia and microtrichia. Moreover, the microtrichia, which are adjacent to macrotrichia (about 20–30 μm in length and 1 μm in diameter) are approximately 2 μm long and 100 nm wide (see Fig. 3b and c). The randomly oriented microtrichia are denser than macrotrichia. The dimensions of the legs’ hair is comparable to those of the macrotrichia, where the tips bend inwards, preventing them from piercing the water surface. The hair is also patterned with nanoscaled grooves with widths of around 400 nm, thus providing a structure with hierarchical roughness.
 Fig. 3  (a) Shows a water strider resting on the water surface, (b) and (c) are SEM images of the hair layer of the water strider's body. (b) The hair on a strider's abdomen is tilted at around 30–45° relative to the body surface. (c) The hair on a strider's leg.83 (d) Shows the surrounding hairs nucleating many drops, so that the surface of the eyes remains dry and clear. (e) And (f) are SEM images of hcp microhemispheres (ommatidia) and hexagonally ncp nanonipples covering an ommatidial surface, respectively.84 
In nature, the eyes of a mosquito are another typical example exhibiting superhydrophobicity and additional antifogging properties (see Fig. 3d). The mosquito eye is a compound structure composed of hundreds of microscale hemispheres, which act as individual sensory units, called ommatidia.84 These ommatidia arranged in a hexagonally close packed (hcp) order have equal diameters of 26 μm (Fig. 3e). The surface of each micro-hemisphere is covered with numerous nanoscale nipples, whose diameters average about 101.1 ± 7.6 nm, together with an interparticle spacing of 47.6 ± 8.5 nm. Nevertheless, the nanoscale nipples are organized in an approximately hexagonal non-close-packed (ncp) array (Fig. 3f) which is distinct from the arrangement of the ommatidia. It is believed that through the cooperation of the hexagonally ncp nipples preventing microscale fog drops from condensing on the ommatidial surface and the hcp ommatidia efficiently preventing drops of water from fog from being trapped in the voids between the ommatidia, the prominent superhydrophobicity and antifogging properties are achieved on the surface of mosquito eyes.
Natural biological systems have developed a number of micro- and nanostructures resulting in striking optical effects by many years of evolution.85 In terms of natural superhydrophobic surfaces, the wings of several insects are visually transparent, such as the wings of some species of dragonfly and cicada. Fig. 4 shows some photographs and SEM images of the wings of a dragonfly and cicada. Moreover, these wings are often congenitally endowed with additional properties.
 Fig. 4  (a) Shows a photograph of a cicada and an SEM image of its wing,88 and (b) shows a photograph of a dragonfly and (c) is the SEM image indicating the nanostructure of the membrane of its wing.94 
As an example, the wings of a cicada possess anti-reflective properties. Generally, anti-reflective microstructures with a period smaller than the propagating wavelength could lead to an effective refractive-index gradient between air and the substrate, which could suppress the Fresnel reflection and improve the transmission of light at the interface.86 It was found that the natural microstructures of cicada wings consist of ncp, hexagonally ordered nipple-shaped protrusions.87,88 Inspired by the special structure of the cicada wing, several methods have been proposed to replicate the anti-reflective nanostructures on the surfaces of cicada wings, including replica molding and nanoimprint lithography.89–91 For instance, Guo et al.92 developed a template rolling press method to fabricate well-aligned hydrophobic polycarbonate nanopillar arrays using porous anodic alumina film as a template, which showed remarkable structural similarity to the wings of a cicada.
According to the research of Byun et al.,93 the wings of all their tested species are classified into one of four general cuticular structures: layered cuticles, fractal structures, denticles and setae. The Odonata (e.g. dragonflies) are highly representative in the group of fractal structures. Dragonfly wings consist mainly of veins and membranes, both sides of the dragonfly wing surface are covered with a layer of waxy covering and geometric non-smooth structure in the form of columnar papillae.94 The diameter of column papillae ranges from 66.90 nm to 200.73 nm, their spacing varies from 20.00 nm to 650.00 nm, and their average height is about 0.3 μm.95 Inspired by the co-coupling of the non-smooth structure and the waxy layer inducing the superhydrophobicity of the dragonfly wing surface, Wang and co-workers96 grew Ag nanorods on a highly ordered anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) surface by a galvanic reduction approach. Through post-treatment with perfluorodecanethiol, the modified AAO–Ag multilayer becomes superhydrophobic.
From the research conducted by Nosonovsky and Bhushan, the effects of unitary structures (micro or nano roughness) and hierarchical structures (micro roughness covered with nano roughness) on superhydrophobicity were finely revealed.97 They found that a hierarchical structure was not only a requirement for a high contact angle but also imperative for stable water–solid and water–air interfaces (the composite interface). A standing capillary wave can form at the liquid–air interface due to exterior interference. Supposing that the amplitude of the capillary wave is greater than the height of the asperities, the liquid can thus contact the valley between the asperities. The superhydrophobic state, corresponding to the composite interface, is likely to exist just for hydrophobic materials, or it is more profitable for the liquid to fill the valley. The effect of capillary waves is more conspicuous when the asperities are small enough, with their heights comparable to the wave amplitude. That is, in the case of unitary roughness, the height of the asperities is too low to generate a high likelihood of the unitary interface being stable. That is where the reason for the more frequent use of hierarchical structures in artificial superhydrophobic surfaces lies.
Various materials for transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces
It is highly significant that mimicking nature can greatly inform the development of multifunctional superhydrophobic surfaces.2,32,98–103 Moreover, great efforts have been made to advance the whole fabrication process of artificial materials with biomimetic morphology via various fabrication techniques for the purpose of endowing such artificial materials with surface properties or functions similar to, or even better than, those of natural matter. From the papers published in recent decades, generally the applied materials for transparent and superhydrophobic coatings can be divided into three categories; including the inorganic materials, the organic materials, and the hybrid materials (see summary in Table 1), in which the “materials” are the parts that play the core role in the chemical deposition of the corresponding surface.
Table 1 A not-so-comprehensive summary of various materials used to create transparent superhydrophobic surfaces




 
Material
Transmittance
Hydrophobilization step
Method
Ref.




Inorganic materials
Silica-based
Up to 100%
Yes
Nanoparticle assembly, sol–gel, templating

74 and 104–113



ZnO
Up to 85%
Optional
Spray pyrolysis technique, sputtering

117 and 118



TiO2
Up to 80%
Optional
Nanoparticle assembly, electrophoretic deposition

119 and 120



Ta2O5
About 70%
Yes
Anodization

121



Co3O4
Up to 88.2%
Yes
Hydrothermal method

123



SnO2
Up to 60%
No
Hydrothermal method

132



ITO
About 85%
Yes
RF magnetron sputtering deposition

133



BN
>70%
Yes
RF magnetron sputtering deposition with plasma etching

138



CNT
Up to 83.5%
Yes
Nanoparticle assembly

139







Organic materials
PDMS
About 90%
Optional
Soft lithography

141



p(V4D4-co-PFDA)
>98%
No
Initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD)

142



PDVB
Up to 95%
Optional
Solvothermal method, in situ polymerization

143 and 144



PMMA
Up to 95%
Yes
Plasma etching

145



PS
Up to 90%
Yes
Plasma etching

147



PE
About 85%
Yes
Plasma etching

148



PET
>90%
Yes
Plasma etching with CVD

149



PC
No precise data
Yes
Plasma etching

150



PANI
Up to 62.6%
Yes

In situ deposition

151



PTFE
>90%
No
RF magnetron sputtering method and catalytic CVD

157



Nafion
>95%
No
Ion irradiation method

158



Cellulose
Up to 87%
Yes
Vacuum filtration

159







Hybrid materials
PDMS + silica NPs
Up to 93%
Yes
Spin coating

161



PMMA + MTMS
About 91%
No
Sol–gel with dip coating

162



CNT + siliane
>90%
Dependent on silane
Sol–gel with spray coating

163





The inorganic materials

Silica-based materials. 
It is well known that silica-based materials are the most commonly used materials in the area of biomimetic superhydrophobic surfaces. And Si/SiO2-based nanomaterials, such as silica nanoparticles, are used to finely control film thickness and surface roughness due to their excellent optical properties and the convenient further chemical treatment. Of course, owing to the fact that silica NPs are intrinsically hydrophilic, the direct use of silica NPs and silica NPs originating from the Stöber method requires their further modification.
A general method to fabricate a transparent and superhydrophobic surface is the assembly of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles, whose surfaces are modified with a variety of low surface energy materials. For example, via spray-coating stearic acid (STA) and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perflurooctyltriethoxysilane (POTS) co-modified hollow silica nanoparticles (SPHSNs) on a glass substrate, it was reported by Gao et al.104 that a superhydrophobic coating with high transparency was easily obtained. When the coating was dried at 150 °C for 5 h, the water contact angle was as high as 160°, with a sliding angle just lower than 1°, achieving excellent superhydrophobicity. Moreover, the maximum transmittance of the coating could reach up to 89% in the infrared spectral range. In addition to the superhydrophobicity and high transparency achieved, the coating was robust both to the impact of water droplets (297 cm s−1) and to acidic (pH = 1) and basic (pH = 14) droplets as well. A similar procedure for a silica-based transparent superhydrophobic coating applied to the paper industry was demonstrated by Li et al.105 Through a one-step process, which involved the immobilization of octadecyltrichloro groups on silica nanoparticles and subsequent spray procedure, the required coating was achieved. Fig. 5a shows an image of water droplets on the as-prepared superhydrophobic SiO2 paper. It shows that approximately spherical water droplets are formed on the treated paper, with a high water contact angle (163 ± 1°) and low water sliding angle (3°), and the letters underneath the coating remain visible as well. Therefore, such coatings could be a good candidate for protecting paper files and corrosion inhibition.
 Fig. 5  (a) Shows a photograph of water droplets on the SiO2 transparent superhydrophobic paper coating.105 (b) Shows UV-vis spectra of superhydrophobic films formed by two different sizes of nanoparticles with different sequences of dip coating and compared to bare glass.74 
Rather than making use of a single diameter of silica nanoparticles, Karunakaran et al.74 created a highly transparent superhydrophobic surface with dual-scale roughness on the nanoscale via a simple and versatile method. In the experiment, they firstly made silica NPs with different diameters (100 ± 3, 20 ± 3 nm) functionalized with 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTS). Then dip coating was utilized for the deposition of two layers of the NP films. In order to improve the mechanical robustness and the adhesion between the NPs and the substrate, they annealed the films. Then, after hydrophobilization of the film with (heptadecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrodecyl)trichlorosilane for 30 min or longer, the surface became superhydrophobic, with an advancing water contact angle of greater than 160° and a water droplet (10 μL) roll-off angle of less than 5°. Due to the small particle size, the glass coated with dual-scale nanoparticles (20 and 100 nm) showed almost 100% transmittance in the visible region, which was similar to that of the bare glass substrate (Fig. 5b).
The templating method, as another way to fabricate superhydrophobic surfaces, has been applied to achieve transparent and superhydrophobic coatings. According to a recent paper by Chen et al.,106 a highly transparent superhydrophobic surface covered with hollow silica spheres was fabricated through a carbon template route. The general fabrication protocol of such glass is illustrated in Fig. 6. The effect of the raspberry-like structure in causing superhydrophobicity and the fact that a calcination process could bring high transmittance to the coating in the synthesis of hollow spheres altogether make the porous silica capsules the key components. During the experiment process, after several treatments on the surface of the glass substrate, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of (1,1,2,2H-perfluorooctyl)-trichlorosilane (PFTS) was performed, in order to endow the surface with superhydrophobicity. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the thickness of the coating affected the transmittance and wettability in a control experiment. When the surface was created through one cycle of dip-coating, it showed a static contact angle of 152° and a sliding angle less than 8°, with a high transmittance that could reach as high as 90%. However, when the number of cycles of dip-coating was increased to five, the water contact angle accordingly increased to 160° while the transmittance evidently decreased from 90% to 75%. By coating a porous deposit of candle soot with a nanometer scale silica shell on a glass slide and sequentially calcinating the hybrid carbon–silica network to remove the carbon core, Deng et al.107 created robust, transparent, and superamphiphobic coatings. For the coating procedure, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) catalyzed by ammonia was utilized and the aim of the calcination was to endow the coating with high transparency. To reduce the surface energy, the hydrophilic silica shells were coated with a semi-fluorinated silane by CVD as well. Ultimately, it was observed that the as-prepared surface produced a static contact angle of 165 ± 1° with a roll-off angle lower than 1°. In the meantime, the obtained coating exhibited up to 80% transmittance.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the procedure used to prepare the transparent superhydrophobic surface.106 
For silica nanoparticle-based transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces obtained in recent years, there are plenty of examples using different methods with consequent additional properties. Budunoglu et al.108 reported the preparation of highly transparent, flexible, and thermally stable superhydrophobic organically modified silica (ORMOSIL) aerogel thin films by a simple, large area and inexpensive sol–gel method. The superhydrophobic ORMOSIL aerogel thin films were prepared from ORMOSIL dispersions in methanol, which were obtained by using an inherently hydrophobic organo-silane monomer (MTMS). Further characterizations indicate that the as-prepared films have high contact angles (up to 179.9°) and low sliding angles (<5°) caused by two scales of roughness, and exhibit high transparency (up to 87.6% at 650 nm) which can be further improved by calcinations (up to 92.1% at 650 nm) at higher temperatures.
Lin et al.109 created a highly transparent superhydrophobic organic–inorganic nanocoating from the aggregation of silica nanoparticles via a simple sol–gel dip-coating method. By adding the aggregated agent 3-aminopropyltriethoxylsilane (APTEOS) to the process, a nanocoating possessing hierarchical sub-100 nm roughness leading to high transparency was fabricated. The general schematic of the preparation process can be seen in Fig. 7. Moreover, the modifying agent cetyltrimethoxylsilane (CTMS) rendered the nanocoating superhydrophobic, with a high water contact angle (>160°) and a low sliding angle (<5°). In addition, the as-prepared transparent superhydrophobic nanocoating can maintain its superhydrophobicity even after exposure to ambient conditions for 1 month, indicating good moisture resistance.
 Fig. 7  A general schematic of the preparation of the transparent superhydrophobic nanocoating.109 
Several compounds, such as TEOS, MTES, TMMS, MTMS and so forth, often act as one essential part of the reaction system for obtaining transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces. Owing to the fact that most of these compounds are similar to ordinary organic compounds, being colourless, flammable, hydrophobic and stable, they have been applied in this area. Moreover, the Stöber method is the one most commonly used for generating silica NPs. Wang et al.110 have successfully fabricated a kind of silica-based film exhibiting high transparency and superhydrophobicity via a sol–gel technique. In the process, tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) was firstly hydrolyzed in an acidic solution and successively reacted with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) and, importantly, no additional surface chemical modification was needed. By fulfilling the conditions that TEOS was hydrolyzed with acidic water at pH 1.2 at 70 °C and the sol–gel was aged at 20 °C for 48 h, high transparency (up to 90.9%) and superhydrophobicity were achieved simultaneously.
A simple dip coating method with single step sol–gel processing was employed in fabricating a thermally stable, transparent superhydrophobic hybrid coating on a glass substrate at room temperature by Mahadik et al.111 The coating alcosol was prepared by keeping the molar ratio of methyltriethoxysilane (MTES), trimethylmethoxysilane (TMMS), methanol (MeOH) and water (H2O) constant at 1:0.09:12.71:3.58, respectively, with 13 M NH4OH throughout the experiments, with the film deposition time varying from 5 to 25 h. For the purpose of gaining an improvement in the hydrophobicity of the as-deposited silica films, the films were subsequently derivatized with 10% trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) as a silylating agent in a hexane solvent for 24 h. After surface derivatization, the films obtained manifested a maximum static water contact angle (172°) and minimum sliding angle (2°), after 25 h of deposition time, that identify them as superhydrophobic. From the experimental observations, the hydrophobicity of the surface increased with an increase in the deposition time from 5 h to 25 h. However, the optical transparency was found to slightly decrease from 90.45% to 90.22% in the visible wavelength range. The same process was applied to fabricate optically transparent superhydrophobic silica-based films at room temperature (27 °C). The molar ratio of MTMS:MeOH:H2O (5 M NH4OH) was kept at 1:10.56:4.16, constantly. Through altering the surface modifying agents, the effect of each agent on the hydrophobic behavior of the films was researched by Rao et al.112 It was found out that the trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) modified films exhibited a very high water contact angle (166 ± 2°) when compared with the hexamethyldisilazane (HMDZ) (138 ± 2°) modified films. Even after exposure to humid surroundings for nearly 30 days, the CA of the surface stayed at 159°, which was slightly decreased. Furthermore, the optical transmission spectra of the HMDZ and TMCS modified silica films showed that both of the films are quite transparent, as a result of not absorbing visible light. The HMDZ modified films showed 92% transmission, whereas the TMCS modified films showed an optical transmission of 98%.
Through the synergism of silica-based material and other inorganic materials, Yanagisawa et al.113 have successfully prepared a superhydrophobic transparent coating via the combination of a rigid silica-based film with crater-like hemispherical holes and acicular nanoparticles. In the process, acicular boehmite (AlOOH) powder was used to bring about a high contact angle on the film surface. Meanwhile, the rigid base film with crater-like hemispherical holes inhibits the rapid decrease of the contact angle by surface rubbing. It was verified from the paper that through combining different degrees of roughness, the improvement of the abrasion resistance of superhydrophobic films was achieved. Due to its good abrasion resistance with the maintenance of transparency and superhydrophobicity, this coating can be expected to be applied for practical applications in the future.
The utilization of silica NPs with an appropriate particle size can usually give the as-prepared coatings relatively high transparency. Moreover, in terms of synthetic techniques, various methods are applicable, including sol–gel, nanoparticle assembly, templating, chemical vapor deposition and so forth.


Metallic oxides. 
Certain inorganic materials have also been frequently made into superhydrophobic surfaces. As one such species—the metallic oxides, such as ZnO, TiO2, Ta2O5, Co3O4, SnO2 and ITO, are widely employed in the area of biomimetic surfaces to render the surfaces both highly transparent and superhydrophobic, in particular.
Several transparent superhydrophobic coatings based on zinc oxide (ZnO) have been created in recent years using both the physical and chemical methods on glass substrates. It is well-known that ZnO has a direct and wide band gap (∼3.37 eV) with a wurtzite structure, which makes it one of the most important oxide semiconductor materials. In the past years, ZnO has attracted considerable attention due to its several favorable properties, including good transparency, high electron mobility, wide band gap, and strong room-temperature luminescence. Those properties are used in emerging applications for transparent electrodes in liquid crystal displays, in energy-saving or heat-protecting windows, and in electronics as thin-film transistors and light-emitting diodes. It can also be utilized in diverse areas such as optoelectronics,114 solar cells115 and gas sensors.116
A superhydrophobic and transparent zinc oxide (ZnO) thin film has been deposited by a simple and cost effective spray pyrolysis technique (SPT) onto a glass substrate at 723 K from an aqueous zinc acetate precursor solution, as presented by Tarwal et al.117 Both of the properties could be tailored merely by varying the concentration of the precursor solution, according to the whole experimental process. The synthesized films were found to be specular and highly transparent, with an average transmittance of about 85%. Among the studied precursor concentrations, the optimum was found when the film was prepared at 0.4 M concentration (sample Zn 0.4), which finally exhibited a high contact angle (154°) and a comparable transmittance (82%) of the corresponding as-prepared film. The superhydrophobicity coupled with high transparency is of great importance in commercial applications, such as transparent surfaces with self-cleaning, anti-fog, and anti-snow properties, as well as fluid microchips and microreactors.
Barshilia et al.118 reported the fabrication of a nanometric, multiscale, rough, transparent and anti-reflective zinc oxide (ZnO) superhydrophobic coating on a TiAlN/TiAlON/Si3N4 spectrally selective solar absorber surface. They deposited ZnO coatings with varying thicknesses (300–1800 nm) by sputtering a Zn target in Ar plasma followed by 1 h oxidation at 350 °C in an O2 environment. ZnO coatings prepared under these conditions were further annealed for 2 h at 450 °C under vacuum to improve the optical transparency. In addition to the extraordinary water repellency (having a contact angle > 155°), the ZnO superhydrophobic coating on the absorber surface also has improved absorbance (>0.96) and superb broadband anti-reflection in the visible range of the solar spectrum. Furthermore, this multi-functional ZnO coating was stable even when the temperature reached up to 450 °C (in air and vacuum), indicating its reliability for high temperature photothermal conversion applications.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2), as another active ingredient for forming transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces, has been widely employed in recent years. By spin-coating a TiO2 slurry on a glass substrate and hydrophobically modifying the resultant film with fluoroalkylsilane (FAS) molecules, a transparent superhydrophobic TiO2 film was easily prepared with additional photo-patternable properties.119 This film exhibited light transmittance of >78% in the visible light region (400–800 nm) and a high water contact angle of 165°. Furthermore, this film was able to be conveniently patterned with ultraviolet light to produce a superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surface micropattern. This can be used to site-selectively immobilize biomolecules, such as proteins and nucleotides, cells, hydrophilic polymers, and functional metal or semiconductor nanoparticles, for lots of applications. Besides bare TiO2, some TiO2-based materials, such as titanate particles, came into use generally for more extensive applications. For instance, a stable titanate nanobelt (TNB) particle suspension was prepared by a hydrogen-bond-driven assembly of pre-hydrolysed fluoroalkylsilane (FAS) on its surface, as shown in Fig. 8a. Using this kind of TNB/FAS nanobelt, a one-step electrophoretic deposition process was applied by Lai et al. to fabricate a cross-aligned superhydrophobic film with high transparency (up to 80%) on an indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrate.120 Through controlling the deposition time, they showed the transition between a “sticky” hydrophobic state (high contact angle with strong adhesion) and a “sliding” superhydrophobic state (high contact angle with weak adhesion). Furthermore, the as-prepared coating displayed high chemical stability in a wide range of pH solutions and good self-cleaning ability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic drawing of the synthesis and hydrogen-bond driven stabilization of titanate nanobelts.120 (b) Superhydrophobic properties (contact angle and self-cleaning phenomenon) of the post-annealed ITO nanorod film after surface modification with a low surface-energy material.133 
Tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5) is a transparent, low absorption, high refractive index material, which can be utilized for optical coatings from near ultraviolet (350 nm) to infrared (>8 μm). Manakasettharn et al.121 fabricated transparent and superhydrophobic Ta2O5 nanostructured thin films via a combination of the nanostructured surface obtained by a multi-step anodization process and the deposition of a hydrophobic CFx coating. The multi-step anodization process of the tantalum (Ta) thin films is shown in Fig. 9. It was observed that the contact angle of water on the Ta2O5 nanostructured surface with the hydrophobic coating was 155 ± 2°, with a hysteresis of 20 ± 2°, and so superhydrophobicity had been achieved. Furthermore, the transmittance curves showed that in the visible region its average was 70%, which could nearly be considered transparent.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the multi-step anodization process of an Al–Ta bilayer.121 
Although superhydrophobic nanostructured cobalt oxide (Co3O4) films have been fabricated in the literature,122 no transparent and superhydrophobic films were prepared using micro-scale Co3O4 until Li et al.123 presented a simple and effective synthetic route employing wax-gourd-like Co3O4 microfibers. Further characterization indicated that this unitarily-structured film showed distinct superhydrophobicity (contact angles up to 165° and sliding angles as low as 8°) with a preferable optical transparency of up to 88.2%.
Tin oxide (SnO2) is an important wide band gap semiconductor, which is well-known for its excellent transparency and conductivity, and has been widely used in many fields, such as optoelectronics,124 gas sensors,125–127 energy storage,128,129 and energy conversion.130,131 SnO2 nanorod films with switchable superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity have been successfully prepared via low temperature hydrothermal methods by Zhu and co-workers.132 This smart surface property is realized by alternating UV-irradiation and storage in the dark. The as-prepared films also exhibit semiconductivity and 60% transmittance in the visible region. SnO2 nanorod films with such special properties are significant in realizing smart switches on transparent and conductive surfaces, which can meet the demands of intelligent microfluidic devices and expand the applications of SnO2.
Indium tin oxide (ITO), being a transparent conducting oxide, finds its use in many optoelectronic devices, such as polymer light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs), inorganic/organic light-emitting diodes, solar cells and flat panel displays. Due to the properties that ITO possesses, Park et al.133 have created large-scale multifunctional transparent ITO nanorod films that exhibit extreme wetting states (superhydrophobicity or superhydrophilicity), high transmittance, a low resistivity that confers antistatic properties, antifogging, and self-cleaning properties via radio frequency (RF)-magnetron sputtering deposition. When the ITO nanorod film was prepared at 500 °C for 60 min followed by a coating process using fluoroalkylsilane, the as-obtained film exhibited excellent transparency (an average of 85% transmittance at 500 nm) and stable superhydrophobic characteristics (a high water contact angle of 172.1°, a near-zero sliding angle, and self-cleaning capabilities) (Fig. 8b). As a result, the large-scale multifunctional transparent ITO nanorod films demonstrated in this work are expected to extend the frontiers in the area of novel optoelectrical applications.
Generally, making use of metallic oxides, especially their corresponding nanoparticles, can improve the physical and mechanical properties of fabricated surfaces. In addition to the inorganic materials referred to above, researchers have also capitalized on BN, CNT and other materials in fabricating superhydrophobic films with high transparency.
Boron nitride (BN) films that are transparent, as well as thermally and chemically stable, have been reported.134–136 However, the weak adhesion of cubic boron nitride (c-BN) makes it less applicable,137 for this reason Li selected to use hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) films. Then, for the purpose of attaining superhydrophobicity on the surfaces of boron nitride films, they were deposited firstly on a Si(100) and quartz substrate using a radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering system, and then the surfaces of the films were modified systematically using CF4 plasma treatment. The resultant films fabricated by Li et al.138 exhibited a water contact angle on their surfaces that rose up to 159° after the corresponding modification. The surfaces of the films were observed to consist of uniform micro-features, which could be responsible for the superhydrophobicity obtained. The optical transmittance spectra of the films revealed that all the samples were transparent when the light wavelength was larger than 400 nm. Such BN films are very significant for anticipated applications on microfluidic chips integrated with optical devices and other applications on transparent surfaces used under corrosive watery conditions.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), with high electrical and thermal conductivities, are of great interest in research due to their excellent behavior in practical applications. In particular, the dispersibility and wettability of CNTs are crucial factors for their performance in the preparation of thin films. In order to improve the two properties, many investigators have endeavored to fabricate superhydrophobic CNT surfaces. Meng et al.139 triumphantly prepared multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) thin films on glass substrates with transparency, conductivity, and superhydrophobicity. Firstly, MWCNTs were dispersed in fluoropolymer (FP) solutions to modify the surface through the grafting of FPs (Fig. 10). A subsequent dip-coating process was used to prepare the films at a continuous speed and with different numbers of coatings. When the volume ratio of MWCNTs/FP was 10:3 and the number of coatings was 7, the film exhibited up to 83.5% transmittance and a high contact angle of 160.2°.
 Fig. 10  Preparation procedure of FP modified MWCNTs.139 
Due to the strong bonding within boron nitride hexagonal networks, the films fabricated with boron nitride possess stronger mechanical properties and additional chemical stability compared to films with carbon nanotubes (CNTs).

The organic materials

Polymers. 
When taking biocompatibility and nontoxicity into consideration, a simple, harmless, and widely feasible method for surperhydrophobic surface fabrication is strongly desired for the facile control of surface wettability. Hierarchical nanoporous polymers, which have both the multiscale roughness and low surface energy required for superhydrophobicity have been considered as an alternative solution.
Silicone elastomers, as one kind of polymer, are widely used in many fields, such as high-voltage outdoor insulation, anti-fouling coatings, biomedical applications, encapsulation, seal rings and superhydrophobic materials.140 PDMS, as the most widely used silicone, can readily be made into transparent superhydrophobic surfaces for applications like contact lenses, thanks to its intrinsic deformability, optical clarity and hydrophobic properties. By making use of an underexposed and underbaked positive photoresist (PR) mold, Yoon and co-workers141 created an optically transparent superhydrophobic polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) thin film. A 100 nm-thick fluorocarbon film was optionally deposited on the broccoli-shaped PDMS film to further enhance its superhydrophobicity. The advancing and receding angles for a 4 μL water droplet on the film were found to be 161.33 ± 0.763° and 133.33 ± 0.29°, respectively, indicating superhydrophobicity. It was also found that the optical transmittance at around 550 nm for this PDMS film was approximately 90%.
Yoo et al.142 fabricated a robust superhydrophobic fabric via depositing a stacked polymer film composed of a poly(1,3,5,7-tetravinyl-1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane) (p(V4D4)) layer and a poly(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecylacrylate) (p(PFDA)) layer. In all probability, these two polymeric layers would form covalent bonds at their interface, and thus the stacked polymer film was characterized by both superhydrophobicity and enhanced mechanical robustness originating from highly cross-linked p(V4D4) and p(PFDA). The chemical formulae of p(V4D4) and p(PFDA), and a schematic diagram of the structure of the stacked polymer, p(V4D4-L-PFDA), coated fabric are shown in Fig. 11a. Furthermore, the as-prepared film was of high transparency (more than 98%) in the wavelength range from 380 nm to 780 nm with its thickness of 700 nm (Fig. 11b). Since the environmental issues of perfluorocarbon materials have frequently been raised, in this work they found that the p(PFDA) was strongly bound to the p(V4D4) layer, resulting in the environmental issues of the former being minimized. As a consequence of the properties referred to above, this robust superhydrophobic coating with high transparency produced via an iCVD method will provide a breakthrough for the commercialization of self-cleaning and anti-contamination fabrics with sufficient durability against various common environmental stresses.
 Fig. 11  (a) Shows a schematic diagram of the structure of the stacked polymer, which is composed of p(V4D4) and p(PFDA), coated fabric. (b) Shows the transmittance of a 700 nm-thick p(V4D4-LPFDA) stacked polymer coated PET film. The inset image of (b) is a digital camera image, which shows that the substrate maintains the same features and color but displays superhydrophobicity after p(V4D4-L-PFDA) stacked polymer coating.142 
The intrinsic hydrophobicity of silicone makes it an appropriate candidate in the fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces, and several topographies can be created on the surface to acquire high transparency concurrently.
Zhang et al.143 utilized nanoporous polydivinylbenzene (PDVB), synthesized by a solvothermal method, as a polymer chalk to paint superhydrophobic surfaces on different kinds of surfaces, such as transparent polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). The further characterization showed that a contact angle as high as 156 ± 1° could be produced, which can classify this surface as a superhydrophobic surface. The average thickness of the PDVB layer on the PDMS slice was measured to be ∼3 μm from the SEM image and the small pore size, which turned out to be much smaller than the wavelength of the light, contributed to avoiding the scattering of visible light and consequently led to high transparency. Moreover, the nanoporous polymer chalk can impart water-resistance to almost any nonplanar surface, such as paper, and even human skin, while retaining its feature of transparency. Using the same material—PDVB, Fréchet and co-workers144 fabricated superhydrophobic nanoporous polymer layers through the in situ polymerization of divinylbenzene in the presence of a porogenic solvent. By simply tuning the composition of the mixture used in the preparation, the average globule size of the porous polymers decreased from 486 nm to 45 nm, and this morphological change resulted in a significant improvement of the transparency of the polymer layers.
It is well-known that poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) is a common organic material with a certain transparency that has been widely applied in daily life. Recently, via dry etching with CF4 plasma and a subsequent hydrolysis process with water immersion, Her et al.145 notably created a superhydrophobic transparent surface of nanostructured PMMA, as shown in Fig. 12. A hydrolysis process was applied to this surface to remove the capping layers of metal fluoride, which finally caused the transparency increase (up to 95%). In order to improve the self-cleaning ability of the surface, a hydrophobic coating of hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDSO) with a low surface energy was then formed on the nanopillar surfaces. As a result, this method, which improves the self-cleaning ability and maintains a high transparency, can expand the applications of PMMA in various fields, such as smart windows, solar cell panels, and biomedical devices. Gou et al.146 developed a technique for electrically controlling the reflectance at an interface when fabricating transparent superhydrophobic films with a Teflon AF coating, which has turned out to be a commonly available process. In the process, the superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared by coating Teflon AF in solution onto the etched PMMA films. Moreover, this spin-coating process was repeated four times to deposit four coatings of Teflon AF on the etched PMMA surface. The obtained transparent superhydrophobic surface has an initial contact angle of 159 ± 1°, an advancing (or maximal) contact angle of 162 ± 1°, and a receding (or minimal) contact angle of 156 ± 1° and was 88% transmissive to visible light.
 Fig. 12  A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for superhydrophobic, transparent PMMA surfaces. Water immersion was employed to remove the capping layer (colored in white).145 
Polystyrene (PS) is a popular polymer, especially for utilization in the production of microfluidic devices, which requires the development of easy processes to achieve superhydrophobicity. Moreover, imparting self-cleaning properties to the surface of the plastic can expand its areas of application. A simple way of producing a superhydrophobic surface on polystyrene has been reported by Mundo and co-workers.147 This method involved plasma etching procedures accompanied by a roughening and fluorinating action synchronously. The optimal time for the use of high input power was as short as 5 min, which produced an advancing angle of 162° with a sliding angle of 25° and hysteresis of 2°. Furthermore, the intrinsic transparency of the substrates was not altered by the process, due to the properly configured roughness. Additionally, PS is also frequently utilized as a template for superhydrophobic and transparent surfaces.
Recently, two routes have been proposed for the synthesis of stable and transparent polymeric superhydrophobic surfaces: the first one corresponds to a one-step synthesis (CF4 plasma modification of low density polyethylene (LDPE)), and the second one involves two steps (O2 plasma treatment followed by the CF4 plasma modification of LDPE). For the latter route, the O2 plasma allows a variable roughness to be created, while CF4 plasma emphasizes this roughness and creates the apolar layer. Both types of plasma treatment mentioned above were used by Fresnais et al. to produce superhydrophobic surfaces.148 Nevertheless, the one-step treatment leads to a lesser number of samples being produced, due to their strong dependence on the plasma conditions, while the two-step synthesis allows for a greater number of samples to be produced, due to the different plasma parameters. Furthermore, the two-step treatment gives a surface with a higher contact angle and increased roughness, indicating that superhydrophobicity is obtained. And, in their case, the treated LDPE can remain transparent to visible light unless the roughness size is smaller than 50 nm, and could therefore be applied in many optical fields.
In daily life, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is used in synthetic fibers; beverage, food and other liquid containers; thermoforming applications; and so forth. Teshima et al.149 reported a two-step dry process which can provide ultra-water repellency to PET substrates without damaging the optical transparency of the substrates. The process consists of an oxygen plasma treatment for proper nanotextures and a subsequent thin film coating for hydrophobicity. Either low-temperature chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD) is employed to incorporate hydrophobic functional groups onto the nanotextured surfaces. Consequently, the modified PET substrates are transparent and superhydrophobic, exhibiting a contact angle greater than 150° and transparency over 90% in the visible range.
The polycarbonates (PC) are a group of thermoplastic polymers, due to their properties of being easily worked, molded and thermoformed, they are particularly appealing for several applications, from automobile/airplane glasses to medical devices, lenses, and optics. By employing versatile plasma processes with a post-coating step in preparing stable nano-textured PC surfaces, Palumbo and co-workers150 successfully created transparent and superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surfaces that differ in their texturing time and coating material.
Polyaniline (PANI) has been extensively studied for potential applications because of its high conductivity, easy preparation and very good chemical stability. In particular, PANI polymerized on solid surfaces has attracted much interest in recent years. Through a dilute polymerization method with a synchronous stirring process, a thin film of PANI nanofibers was triumphantly polymerized onto multifold substrates, such as glass slides, PET, and PS. Then a subsequent procedure of depositing copper oxide (CuO) nanoparticles on the surface of the PANI nanofibers by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method for 10 h was conducted. Subsequently, with the purpose of reducing the surface energy, the surfaces were modified with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecanethiol for 24 h. Through the processes above, transparent superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by Wang et al. by decorating CuO nanoparticles over PANI nanofibers.151 When the polymerization time was 10 h, the highest transmittance reached 62.6%, and simultaneously the CA reached as high as 167° and the SA was as low as 4°, indicating that the resultant films emerged with superhydrophobicity, conductivity and good transparency.
Investigations on the hydrophobic properties of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) thin films deposited by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) system or the physical vapor deposition (PVD) system, such as sputtering and e-beam evaporation, have been reported.152–155 And also, initial reports on PTFE thin films with high thermal stability and hydrophobicity using a hot-filament CVD (HFCVD) system were first reported by Prof. Gleason et al. of MIT group.156 PTFE is a kind of polymer material that has high mechanical strength, thermal and chemical stability, and excellent insulation properties with a low dielectric constant. Owing to the advantages, the PTFE film has been widely studied in various fields, such as anti-fouling coatings for windows or displays, hydrophobic textiles, etc. Recently, a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) film with a highly transparent and superhydrophobic surface has been fabricated by Kim and co-workers.157 In this process, a PTFE thin film was firstly prepared as a buffer layer using the rf-magnetron sputtering method to improve its adhesion on the glass substrate, before coating the PTFE film using the Cat-CVD system. By varying the thickness of the Cat-CVD PTFE films coated on the rf-sputtered PTFE film, the wettability and optical transparency could be altered (Fig. 13a). Finally, the as-prepared film showed a contact angle higher than 150° and a very high transmittance, with an average of over 90% in the visible range.
 Fig. 13  (a) WCA changes and optical transmission spectra of the CVD-PTFE films with various thicknesses on the rf-sputtered PTFE film with 450 nm thickness.157 (b) Photographs of a transparent film made from ENCC.159 
Another inherently transparent polymer—Nafion, which is widely utilized in many membrane applications at room temperature, came into use in obtaining surfaces that possess both high transparency and superhydrophobicity. Ghosh et al.158 reported a facile and fast ion irradiation method to fabricate highly transparent and flexible anti-reflective nanocone arrays on the surface of Nafion. Owing to the intrinsic transparency of Nafion, creating nanostructures on its roughened surface with a low surface energy is the chief component of this paper. In this regard, cone-shaped structures were chosen because their unique geometry is better suited to achieving enhanced anti-reflection properties and superhydrophobicity. Eventually, the superhydrophobicity and high transparency of the as-obtained surfaces were achieved without the aid of any harmful chemicals, and characterization indicated that a water contact angle exceeding 150° and transmittance of higher than 95% existed concurrently.
Cellulose is the most abundant organic polymer on Earth, and many researchers concentrate on employing its derivatives or cellulose itself in various areas. Using vacuum filtration, Yang et al.159 have created films prepared from modified ENCC, which stands for electrosterically stabilized nanocrystalline cellulose. Furthermore, although the original cellulose is hydrophilic, these films also exhibited a certain hydrophobic behavior. Then, through subsequent treatment with trichloromethylsilane, the surfaces of the films become superhydrophobic. And on the basis of the results from UV spectra, the transmittance of these films was as high as 87%, with the letters underneath the films remaining visible, as shown in Fig. 13b.
Generally, the cooperation of polymers is another way of creating superhydrophobic and transparent surfaces, just like the stacked polymer (p(V4D4) and p(PFDA)) mentioned above.
A low surface energy statistical copolymer of 3-[tris[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]-silyl]propylmethacrylate (SiMA) and methylmethacrylate (MMA) was prepared by free-radical polymerization under a nitrogen atmosphere.160 In this system, the SiMA component of the copolymer endows the as-prepared film with hydrophobicity, whereas the MMA groups impart rigidity. Then a one-step facile spray-deposition process utilizing this copolymer is undertaken to fabricate the new superhydrophobic surface with high transparency. The resulting surface has superior superhydrophobicity (a water contact angle of up to 178° and low contact angle hysteresis). Moreover, the obtained surfaces are transparent in the visible wavelength range.
Though many polymers are very commonly applied in creating transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces in daily life, their experimental processes are more complicated and costly compared to those of inorganic materials. However, because the selected polymers suitable for the etching method are mostly rigid and transparent to begin with, the optical transparency of the coatings is very high in general.

The hybrid materials
He et al.161 provided an effective method to fabricate a transparent superamphiphobic coating with superhydrophobicity and near-superoleophobicity, the finished coating also showed improved stability under various conditions. To make this, a transparent superhydrophobic coating was first prepared with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and hydrophobic silicon dioxide (SiO2) nanoparticles. Then the coating was sintered to degrade the PDMS into SiO2 before it was further oxidized into silanol (Si–OH). Finally, the coating was treated with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl-trichlorosilane (PFTS). The PFTS treated coating showed good transparency, superhydrophobicity with a water contact angle of 152.7 ± 2.1° and near-superoleophobicity with a diiodomethane contact angle of 140.7 ± 3.2°. The droplets of water and diiodomethane could simultaneously slide off the surface with a sliding angle of less than 6°. Moreover, the PFTS treated coating showed a higher stability than the PDMS/SiO2 coating fabricated by spin coating under various environmental conditions. The PFTS treated coating also shows quite good stability in a high temperature environment. The superamphiphobic properties, transparency and improved stability of the PFTS treated coating were systemically discussed and the results showed that the obtained coating may be appropriate for many outdoor applications.
Recently, attempts have been made to increase the hydrophobicity and optical transparency of methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS) based silica coatings by applying polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) to the chemical reaction, instead of routine methods like surface modification using silylating reagents. It was reported by Kavale et al.162 that transparent, superhydrophobic and adherent silica coatings with low thermal conductivity were fabricated on a glass substrate at a low processing temperature, utilizing MTMS as a precursor with the PMMA polymer, by a simple dip coating method without any silylation process. Compared to the reaction system using only MTMS, the waterdrop contact angle for these coatings was found to be dramatically augmented from 116 ± 1° to 171 ± 1° when the weight percentage of PMMA increased to 7%. What is more, from the optical transmission study, the coatings prepared with PMMA (7%) showed about 91% optical transparency in the visible region.
Nowadays, transparent conducting films based on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are receiving a considerable amount of attention in various fields, including display technologies, solar cells, flexible electronic devices, automobiles, and optical devices. In order to broaden their future practical applications, additional special wettabilities, such as superhydrophobicity or superhydrophilicity, can be taken into consideration. Regarding the control of wettability and optical properties, Lee and co-workers163 utilized a mixture of CNTs and a silane sol as a promising candidate for producing a superhydrophobic and transparent coating. The whole scheme is shown in Fig. 14. In the experiment, the wettability of the obtained films can be varied from superhydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity by varying the chemical functionality of the silane sol. Moreover, by introducing nanoparticles in the coating solution, the transparency (>90%) and superhydrophobicity of the CNT-based conductive layers can be enhanced.
 Fig. 14  (A) Scheme of the hydrogen bond-driven stabilization of a CNT solution. (B) Image of a stabilized t-MWNT–silane sol solution. (C) FESEM image of a spray-coated t-MWNT–silane hybrid film. (D) Water droplets on this film.163 
A multifunctional flame soot deposited silicone coating was successfully fabricated using a butane flame along with a deposition process of flame soot, which was reported by Shen et al.164 The surfaces of the as-prepared flame soot deposited silicone coatings exhibit tree branch-like heterogeneous structures with micro- and nanoscale roughness, which have a vital effect on the wettability. Meanwhile, the flame soot can stably deposit on the silicone coatings during the water-flow impact test, highlighting its potential for industrial applications. The coating with a total deposition time of 20 s was endowed with superhydrophobicity (a water contact angle of 168 ± 2° with a sliding angle less than 1°) and a high level of transparency (up to nearly 80%) for wavelengths above 500 nm. However, with the extension of the deposition time from 20 s to 40 s, the superhydrophobicity increased just a little, while the transmittance was reduced to less than 50%. It was believed that extending the deposition time makes the flame soot layer thicker and pack more closely at the expense of transmittance.
Jiang et al.165 spin-coated trimethylsiloxane functionalized SiO2 (TMS-SiO2) solutions onto a pre-coated polyurethane (PU) layer to prepare a superhydrophobic surface with high transparency. By incorporating a fluorescent europium (Eu) complex into the surface, the surface also exhibited excellent fluorescence properties (Fig. 15a). In the experiment, the PU solution was first spin-coated three times. Then, the TMS-SiO2 solutions were spin-coated on the previously coated PU layers, and the PU layer was considered as the binder layer. The CA of the PU/TMS-SiO2 coating with 3 wt% TMS-SiO2 was as high as 166.2° and the SA was 6.6°. Synchronously, the coatings possessed a good transmittance of above 70% in the visible light region (400–800 nm). With an increase in the TMS-SiO2 content, the transmittance of the surface was decreased slightly.
 Fig. 15  (a) The photograph of the PU/TMS-SiO2 coating with red fluorescence and high transparency (taken under UV light).165 (b) Digital photographs of water droplets on bare glass after HMDS treatment.166 
Using a facile and green method, an organic–inorganic complex coating with superhydrophobic properties and transparency was fabricated on a glass substrate by Zhang et al.166 (Fig. 15b). In their experiment, the glass surface was firstly treated by the incorporation of a polyethylene glycol (PEG) and SiO2 organic–inorganic solution, which turned out to cause the surface roughness that enhanced the hydrophobicity, and then 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) was utilized as a modifying agent, leading to a high water contact angle (168°). Meanwhile, the further material characterization proved that the coating showed excellent transparency as well. Owing to the properties mentioned above, glass with this coating could be used for automobile windshields, outdoor building materials, and so forth.
In hybrid coating systems, as well as the main Si-containing component, some additives are important for imparting special wettabilities, optical properties or mechanical properties, such as MMA (PMMA) for rigidity or transparency and so forth. The cooperation effects of such a system can enhance the needed properties to some extent, thus expanding the range of possible future applications.
Potential applications
Recent active research on superhydrophobic materials has undoubtedly generated more possibilities for their practical applications in both daily life and industry. Inherited from the core properties of water repellency, superhydrophobic surfaces have achieved many additional capabilities effortlessly, for instance, self-cleaning, icephobicity, anti-corrosion, anti-fogging and drag reduction properties. The interest in one of these functions, self-cleaning, has been motivated by the appetency to manufacture surfaces for satellite antennae, solar energy panels, photovoltaics, outward architectural glass, greenhouses, and heat transfer surfaces in air conditioners. Moreover, the phenomenon that liquid in contact with such a surface slides with lowered friction implies wider applications for microfluidics, pipes or tubes, boat hulls and so on. Such properties are of great importance for applications in microfluidics, including enabling a new polydopamine-based microfluidic system, which is a truly pump-free and gravity-based automated device reported by Lee et al.34 and porous polymer films with superhydrophilic–superhydrophobic patterns on them that act as microfluidic channels, where water solutions are confined in the channels solely by the difference in surface tension.35 Besides the very central water-repellent character, other inherent properties arise out of the tanglesome construction, such as the transparency and color, anti-reflection, anisotropy, reversibility and flexibility that have also been incorporated into superhydrophobic surfaces.167 Among these superhydrophobic surfaces, those with simultaneously high transparency can be further applied to some specific domains.
When synthetic superhydrophobic surfaces are applied to prevent the adherence of fog and snow and to resist oxidation, their optical transmittance may be unimportant. Nevertheless, when employing the films to a solar cell system, automobile glass, smart windows, greenhouses, camera lenses, optoelectronic devices and photoelectric elements or even textiles, they must be transparent to achieve ultimate practicability. For instance, one application of embedding silica nanoparticles onto a glass substrate with subsequent fluoroalkylsilane coating is the development of transparent superhydrophobic coatings for car windshields and self-cleaning windows.168 Constantly, the coatings possessed both of superhydrophobicity and high transparency are endowed with other particular functions because of the applied materials or specific additives. For example, superhydrophobic anti-reflective coatings with a transmittance of higher than 96% were fabricated on glass substrates by Wang et al.169 through the LBL deposition of polyelectrolytes followed by spin-coating a kind of superhydrophobic sol–gel. In this experiment, the role of the polyelectrolytes was to bring anti-reflective properties to the film. As another example of a coating suited to particular applications, such as high temperature photothermal conversion devices, Barshilia et al.118 synthesized a nanometric multiscale rough, transparent and anti-reflective zinc oxide (ZnO) superhydrophobic coating. The additional high thermal stability is what is needed for photothermal conversion applications.
Generally, in reports, the artificial superhydrophobic and transparent coatings are deposited on some flat and rigid slices made of glass or polymers. However, when we take the feasibility of any other unusual substrates into consideration, those with non-flat or soft character, such as fabric,142,170 paper,105,143,171 flexible solar panels172 or even human skin143 (see Fig. 16), just a few instances of suitable coatings exist.
 Fig. 16  (a) Colored water droplets sitting on OTES–TEOS-treated cotton fabrics, and the transparency doesn't change after coating.170 (b) The photograph shows an area modified with silica nanoparticles at a concentration of 1.2 wt% and an unmodified area nearby.171 (c) Superhydrophobic fingers. Insets: photograph (top) and SEM image (bottom) of nanoporous polymer chalk.143 
By utilizing a facile ultrasound-assisted approach, the synthesis of silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) functionalized with octyltriethoxysilane and their in situ incorporation into cotton fabrics was achieved.170 Additionally, this superhydrophobic coating obtained was highly transparent. The image of the created fabric with colored waterdrops on it is shown in Fig. 16a.
A sort of superhydrophobic paper was prepared by a dip coating process using hexadecyltrimethoxysilane-modified silica nanoparticles dispersed in ethanol.171 In this case, the initial cellulose fibers, as micro-sized templates, were covered with silica nanoparticles to form a composite hybrid microstructure. Fig. 16b shows a photograph consisting of an area modified with silica nanoparticles at concentrations of 1.2 wt% and an unmodified area nearby. Moreover, the superhydrophobic paper showed flexibility in its initial state, and the hydrophobicity still remained, even after touching or folding. Therefore, the superhydrophobic paper is suitable for some practical applications, such as those requiring antibacterial, antifouling, and anticorrosion properties.

Fig. 16c shows that human fingers coated with nanoporous PDVB exhibit excellent superhydrophobicity.
Outlook and conclusions
In this review, the recent developments in materials for creating transparent and superhydrophobic surfaces have been described. Considering the diverse characters of the materials used in superhydrophobic surfaces, there will be more interesting and novel features. Different materials have their own advantages in conferring multifunctional properties to the artificial coatings, as briefly concluded below.
In the group of metallic oxides, ZnO, TiO2, Ta2O5, Co3O4, SnO2 and ITO are frequently applied. In addition to their optical properties and special wettability, the obtained coatings have the advantage of exhibiting a variety of extraordinary properties that are suitable for corresponding applications due to their own inherent merits.
ZnO is an interesting material exhibiting a wide range of surface morphologies, such as nanorods, nanonails, nanoneedles and nanowires. On account of its large band gap (∼3.3 eV), ZnO shows very high transmittance in the visible region and high absorption in the UV region. Of course, the optical properties of nanostructured ZnO vary significantly with the defect density and the microstructure. It was found that the addition of ZnO can bring thermal stability, anti-reflectivity, etc.; TiO2-containing films are often endowed with conductivity, a high refractive index and so forth; the existence of Ta2O5 is of importance due to its several advantages, such as robustness, resistance to dissolution and high dielectric constant for obtained coatings; introducing SnO2 to a coating system may bring about conductivity, electricity and gas sensitivity; the ITO films have multifunctional properties, such as high or low resistivity, conductivity and so on.
Compared with inorganic films, polymer films of high transparency and superhydrophobicity have their own advantages, such as structural flexibility, simple fabrication, and controllable toughness and moduli.173,174 Silicones, as a sort of extraordinary polymer, are widely used due to their attractive combination of excellent material properties, such as their ability to repel water, thermal stability, low chemical reactivity, low toxicity, high electrical resistance, constant and high ductility over a wide range of temperatures, long-term endurance, microbiological growth resistance and flexibility for processing techniques. When made into coatings, silicone films can be applied to such silica-based substrates as glass to form a covalently bonded hydrophobic coating. Many fabrics can also be coated or impregnated with silicone to form a strong, waterproof composite, such as silnylon.
As for common polymers, in order to obtain such surfaces, the plasma etching method is deemed suitable for inherently transparent and rigid polymers, like PMMA, PS, PE, PET, etc. Other polymers, such as PDVB, PANI, PTFE and Nafion, are utilized to create the required coatings by diverse methods including soft lithography, ion irradiation, in situ polymerization and so on.
Compared with polymers and other NPs (e.g., ZnO, TiO2), silica NPs offer advantages in terms of their simplicity, low cost, tunable size and remarkable scratch resistance. In particular, silica NPs with a size ≤100 nm are readily available commercially with an easy surface modification by silane chemistry. And making use of polymers usually demands costly top-down lithographic techniques. Using various common coating methods, such as spin coating, dip coating and spray coating, the silica NPs can all be conveniently coated on flat and microstructured substrates over large areas. Therefore, silica NPs are excellent candidates for generating a highly transparent and superhydrophobic surface. Moreover, the nanoparticle self-assembly method, among other methods, is particularly preferred for the reason that the particle size and surface chemistry can be fine-tuned to balance the forces in colloidal systems, which mainly determines the morphology and uniformity of such coatings.
Research on bio-inspired superhydrophobic and transparent surfaces is not only of interest in understanding the fundamental principles involved, but also because of the materials’ promising practical applications in micro- and nanomaterials and some particular devices, which has become an increasing hotspot in research. Though there is a great diversity of materials and approaches that have been utilized to fabricate functional surfaces with special wettability, most of them are temporarily confined to laboratory studies and inadequate for industrial large-scale production. This is because of such problems as the film stability, cost of the employed materials, expenses and complexity of approaches and so forth. Generally speaking, these pieces of research are comparatively novel and devoid. Hence, concentration should be directed towards further fundamental investigations to discover both suitable materials and industrially compatible approaches to achieve super-repellent surfaces possessing good transparency. In terms of obtaining a high transmittance in the visible wavelength region, an additional challenge is raised in creating the superhydrophobicity without damaging this optical property, which requires (1) the roughness size to be sub-wavelength, preferably falling in the range of ∼30–100 nm,175 for anti-scattering and (2) the refractive index of the coating to be low for anti-reflection.77 Apart from this, the long-term durability of the nanostructures against mechanical wear, shear and liquid flow is of the greatest importance to apply such fabricated surfaces in practical applications, which remains a challenge up to now. However, it was found that while an increase in the structure bonding strength can enhance the robustness it may generate a reduction in roughness due to surface area losses. That is, robustness and roughness are two competing properties from the perspective of surface structure. So, optimizing the trade-off of both conditions is highly crucial. There is no doubt that the mechanical stability plays a decisive role in determining the applications of the coating, therefore the adhesive strength between the coating and the substrate matters the most. For industrial implementation, the coatings must be easily fabricated with low energy consumption and must be durable during service to extend their working life. We believe that the development of technology coupled with the creativity of researchers will eventually solve the existing problems, thus making a significant change across the whole world.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 11172301 and 21203217), the “Funds for Distinguished Young Scientists” of Hubei Province (2012FFA002), the “Western Light Talent Culture” Project, the Co-joint Project of Chinese Academy of Sciences and the “Top Hundred Talents” Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences and the National 973 Project (2013CB632300) for financial support.
Notes and references

  (a) G. Y. Wang, Z. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, J. Bionic Eng., 2014, 11, 325–345 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Wang, W. X. Liang, Z. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014 10.1039/C4CS00220B .
Y. B. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Shi, J. Li and Z. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 799–815 RSC .
J. Xu and Z. G. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 406, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhai, M. C. Berg, F. C. Cebeci, Y. Kim, J. M. Milwid, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1213–1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Lamoral, Ann. Natal Mus., 1968, 20, 151–193 Search PubMed .
X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Guo, F. Zhou, J. C. Hao, Y. M. Liang, W. M. Liu and W. T. S. Huck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 081911 CrossRef .
D. G. Stavenga, S. Foletti, G. Palasantzas and K. Arikawa, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2006, 273, 661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Jung and B. Bhushan, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 035104 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Genzer and K. Efimenko, Biofouling, 2006, 22, 339–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huan, Z. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3900–3913 RSC .
D. Quéré, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 2495 CrossRef .
B. Wang, Y. B. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Li and Z. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20112–20127 RSC .
P. N. Manoudis, A. Tsakalof, I. Karapanagiotis and C. Panayiotou, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 203, 1322 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li and A. Amirfazli, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 292, 195–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and A. Amirfazli, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 132, 51–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and A. Amirfazli, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 462–466 RSC .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79, 667 CrossRef .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 201, 1 CrossRef .
W. Lee, M. K. Jin, W. C. Yoo and J. K. Lee, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Guo, F. Zhou, J. C. Hao and W. M. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15670–15671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Minko, M. Müller, M. Motornov, M. Nitschke, K. Grundke and M. Stamm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Patankar, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale, M. I. Newton, C. Chabrol and C. C. Perry, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1929 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Guo, F. Zhou, J. C. Hao and W. M. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 303, 298–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Guo, W. M. Liu and B. L. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 201909 CrossRef .
B. Bhushan and Y. C. Jung, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2758 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nosonovsky, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Monatsh. Chem., 2001, 132, 31 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, D. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1350 RSC .
K. S. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3240 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Li, G. Y. Wang, W. X. Liang, Y. B. Zhang, L. Shi, Z. G. Guo and W. M. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1827–1839 CAS .
I. You, S. M. Kang, S. Lee, Y. O. Cho, J. B. Kim, S. B. Lee, Y. S. Nam and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zahner, J. Abagat, F. Svec, J. M. J. Frechet and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3030–3034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Saito, K. Takai and G. Yamauchi, Surf. Coat. Int., 1997, 80, 168 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Cao, A. K. Jones, V. K. Sikka, J. Z. Wu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 8153 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kulinich, S. Farhadi, K. Nose and X. W. Du, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kulinich and M. Farzaneh, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 2011, 65, 60 CrossRef .
K. K. Varanasi, T. Deng, J. D. Smith, M. Hsu and N. Bhate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 234102 CrossRef .
S. Farhadi, M. Farzaneh and S. A. Kulinich, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 6264 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, M. Dorrestijn, D. Raps, A. Das, C. M. Megaridis and D. Poulikakos, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, M. J. Hu, S. P. Yi, X. H. Liu, H. B. Li, C. Huang, Y. B. Luo and Y. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 5644 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, G. G. He and Q. Q. Tian, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhang, X. Q. Yu, H. Wu and J. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 8253 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bahadur, L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, J. A. Taylor, J. Aizenberg and T. Krupenkin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kim, T. S. Wong, J. Alvarenga, M. J. Kreder, W. E. Adorno-Martinez and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mishchenko, B. Hatton, V. Bahadur, J. A. Taylor, T. Krupenkin and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. VenkateswaraRao, S. S. Latthe, D. Y. Nadargi, H. Hirashima and V. Ganesan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 332, 484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Quéré, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2008, 38, 71 CrossRef .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546 RSC .
C. G. L. Furmidge, J. Colloid Sci., 1962, 17, 309 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. B. Dussan and R. T. P. Chow, J. Fluid Mech., 1983, 137, 1 CrossRef .
R. E. Johnson and R. H. Dettre, Adv. Chem. Ser., 1964, 43, 112 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3240 RSC .
C. W. Extrand, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Quéré, A. Lafuma and J. Bico, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 1109 CrossRef .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale, M. I. Newton and C. C. Perry, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5013 CrossRef .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, S. Aqil, C. Evans, G. McHale, M. I. Newton, C. C. Perry and P. Roach, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2004, 14, 1384 CrossRef .
E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, G. Whyman and M. Erlich, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao and T. J. McCarthyM, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dupuis and J. M. Yeomans, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Barbieri, E. Wagner and P. Hoffmann, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Reyssat, J. M. Yeomans and D. Quéré, Europhys. Lett., 2008, 81, 26006 CrossRef .
D. Bartolo, F. Bouamrirene, É. Verneuil, A. Buguin, P. Silberzan and S. Moulinet, Europhys. Lett., 2006, 74, 299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Jung and B. Bhushan, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Koishi, K. Yasuoka, S. Fujikawa, T. Ebisuzaki and X. C. Zeng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 8435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Kerker, The Scattering of Light and Other Electromagnetic Radiation, Academic Press,  1969 Search PubMed .
R. G. Karunakaran, C. H. Lu, Z. Zhang and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Cho, I. I. Liaw, A. H. F. Wu and R. N. Lamb, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11228 CAS .
R. B. Penndorf, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1957, 47, 1010 CrossRef .
Y. Rahmawan, L. Xu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2955 CAS .
K. Koch, B. Bhushan and W. Barthlott, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2009, 54, 137 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Guo, W. M. Liu and B. L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Li, D. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1350 RSC .
Z. J. Wei, W. L. Liu, D. Tian, C. L. Xiao and X. Q. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 3972 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Bush, D. L. Hu and M. Prakash, Adv. Insect Physiol., 2007, 34, 117 Search PubMed .
S. H. Hsu, K. Woan and W. Sigmund, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2011, 72, 189 CrossRef .
X. F. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. H. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Srinivasarao, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Xi, M. F. Schubert, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert, M. Chen, S. Y. Lin, W. Liu and J. A. Smart, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 176–179 CAS .
G. S. Watson and J. A. Watson, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 235, 139 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, M. K. Jin, W. C. Yoo and J. K. Lee, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7665–7669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Y. Xie, Z. F. Liu and H. B. Shao, Small, 2006, 2, 1440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Xie, G. M. Zhang, F. Lin, J. Zhang, Z. F. Liu and S. C. Mu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095605 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kostovski, D. J. White, A. Mitchell, M. W. Austin and P. R. Stoddart, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 1531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Guo, L. Feng, J. Zhai, G. J. Wang, Y. L. Song, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Byun, J. Hong, Saputra, J. H. Ko, Y. J. Lee, H. C. Park, B. K. Byun and J. R. Lukes, J. Bionic Eng., 2009, 6, 63–70 CrossRef .
C. Y. Gao, G. X. Meng, X. Li, M. Wu, Y. Liu, X. Y. Li, X. Zhao, I. Lee and X. Z. Feng, Surf. Interface Anal., 2013, 2, 650–655 CrossRef .
Y. L. Wan, Q. Cong, X. J. Wang and Z. Yan, J. Bionic Eng., 2008, 5, 40–45 CrossRef .
X. J. Wang, W. Song, Z. S. Li and Q. Cong, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 4635–4640 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 382 CrossRef .
C. G. Du, F. Xia, S. T. Wang, J. X. Wang, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2010, 31, 421–431 CAS .
E. K. Her, T. J. Ko, K. R. Lee, K. H. Oh and M. W. Moon, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2900–2905 RSC .
W. L. Song, D. D. Veiga, C. A. Custodio and J. F. Mano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1830 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Sun, L. Feng, X. F. Gao and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 644–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Wang, Y. Z. Zhang, S. T. Wang, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 405–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6786–6790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao and J. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 396, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Wan, Y. Ye, H. Zhou and J. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 261, 470 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Li, Y. Xin, T. Yang and Z. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 033701 CrossRef .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Budunoglu, A. Yildirim, M. O. Guler and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 539 CAS .
J. Lin, H. Chen, T. Fei and J. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 421, 51 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Wang and S. S. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5443 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Mahadik, M. S. Kavale, S. K. Mukherjee and A. V. Rao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Venkateswara Rao, S. S. Latthe, D. Y. Nadargi, H. Hirashima and V. Ganesan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 332, 484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yanagisawa, A. Nakajima, M. Sakai, Y. Kameshima and K. Okada, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 161, 36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Kong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1625 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Paul, R. Ghosh, S. K. Bera, S. Bandyopadhyay, T. Sakurai and K. Akimoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 463, 117 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Gurav, V. J. Fulari, U. M. Patil, C. D. Lokhande and O. S. Joo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2680 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Tarwal and P. S. Patil, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 7451 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Barshilia, S. John and V. Mahajan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 219 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Kono, Z. Liu, S. Nishimoto, D. A. Tryk, T. Murakami, H. Sakai, M. Abe and A. Fujishima, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4949 RSC .
Y. Lai, Y. Tang, J. Gong, D. Gong, L. Chi, C. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420 RSC .
S. Manakasettharn, T. H. Hsu, G. Myhre, S. Pau, J. A. Taylor and T. Krupenkin, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 214 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang and J. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2012, 67, 334 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Xu, B. Wang and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tatsuyama and S. Ichimura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 15, 843 CrossRef CAS .
M. Su, S. Li and V. P. Dravid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Harrison and M. J. Willett, Nature, 1988, 332, 337 CrossRef .
G. J. Li, X. H. Zhang and S. Kawi, Sens. Actuators, B, 1999, 60, 64 CrossRef CAS .
Y. ldota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395 CrossRef .
P. R. Bueno, E. R. Leite, T. R. Giraldi, L. O. S. Bulhoes and E. Longo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Benkö, P. Myllyperkiö, J. Pan, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1118 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, X. Feng, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2753 RSC .
H. K. Park, S. W. Yoon, W. W. Chung, B. K. Min and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5860 Search PubMed .
X. Jiang, J. Philip, W. J. Zhang and P. Hess, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1515 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pastorelli, P. M. Ossi and C. E. Bottani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2168 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. A. Dekempeneer, S. Kuypers, K. Vercammen, J. Meneve, J. Smeets, P. N. Gibson and W. Gissler, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1998, 100–101, 45–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, S. H. Song and L. Q. Weng, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 4737 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Li, Y. Liu, B. Wang, X. M. Song, E. Li and H. Yan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 5299 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Meng and S. J. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Oláh, H. Hillborg and G. J. Vancso, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 239, 410 CrossRef .
Y. Yoon, D. W. Lee and J. B. Lee, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2013, 22, 1073–1080 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoo, J. B. You, W. Choi and S. G. Im, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1664 RSC .
Y. L. Zhang, J. N. Wang, Y. He, Y. He, B. B. Xu, S. Wei and F. S. Xiao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Levkin, F. Svec and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Her, T. J. Ko, B. Shin, H. Roh, W. Dai, W. K. Seong and M. W. Moon, Plasma Processes Polym., 2013, 10, 481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gou, M. Mossman and L. Whitehead, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51, 1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Di Mundo, F. Palumbo and R. d'Agostino, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fresnais, J. P. Chapel and F. Poncin-Epaillard, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 5296 CrossRef CAS .
K. Teshima, H. Sugimura, Y. Inoue, O. Takai and A. Takano, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 244, 619 CrossRef CAS .
F. Palumbo, R. Di Mundo, D. Cappelluti and R. d'Agostino, Plasma Processes Polym., 2011, 8, 118 CAS .
G. Wang, W. Liang, B. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Li, L. Shi and Z. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 203703 CrossRef .
P. Smith and P. J. Lemstra, J. Mater. Sci., 1980, 15, 505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, R. Wang, B. Yang, T. J. Li, D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and D. B. Zhu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 73 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura and T. Watanabe, Nature, 1997, 388, 431 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, TiO2 photocatalysis: fundamentals and applications, BKC Incorporated,  1999 Search PubMed .
H. G. Pryce Lewis, J. A. Caulfield and K. K. Gleason, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7652 CrossRef .
H. M. Kim, S. Sohn and J. S. Ahn, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 228, S389 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ghosh, S. Satou, H. Nakamori, T. Noda, I. Daisuke and M. Tanemura, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2012, 6, 430 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, A. Tejado, N. Alam, M. Antal and T. G. van de Ven, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Hwang, N. H. Kim, S. G. Lee, D. Y. Lee, K. Cho and I. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3(7), 2179–2183 CAS .
Z. He, M. Ma, X. Lan, F. Chen, K. Wang, H. Deng, Q. Zhang and Q. Fu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 6435 RSC .
M. S. Kavale, D. B. Mahadik, V. G. Parale, P. B. Wagh, S. C. Gupta, A. V. Rao and H. C. Barshilia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 158 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. S. Woo and G. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3724 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, W. Wang, H. Ding and Q. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 651 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Q. Wang and T. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 2959 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Li, F. Huang, S. Li, Y. Shen, A. Xie and F. Wang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2013, 110, 397 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma and R. M. Hill, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 11, 193 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Su, J. Li, H. B. Geng, Q. J. Wang and Q. M. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 2633 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Wang and Y. Y. Shu, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2013, 10, 527 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Yazdanshenas and M. Shateri-Khalilabad, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 12846 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, S. Nan, T. Wang, Y. Chen, F. Yu, G. Zhang and M. Pei, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15571 RSC .
A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Monatsh. Chem., 2001, 132, 31 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yabu and M. Shimomura, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, K. Kim, N. Y. Lee, K. Shin and Y. S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2237 RSC .
A. Nakajima, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1365 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Shen Yu
	Mr Shen Yu joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at the University of Hubei in 2013 in pursuing his PhD degree. His current scientific interests are devoted to studying the transparency behaviors of biomimetic superhydrophobic surfaces and their corresponding interfacial behaviors.

Zhiguang Guo
	Professor Zhiguang Guo received his PhD from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2007. After that, he joined Hubei University. From Oct. 2007 to Aug. 2008, he worked at the University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, as a post-doctoral researcher. From Sep. 2008 to Mar. 2011, he worked in Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Chargé de recherche”. From Feb. 2009 to Feb. 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. Now he is a full professor in LICP financed by the “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. To date, he has published more than 80 papers about the interfaces of materials.

Weimin Liu
	Professor Weimin Liu, received his PhD with a major in Lubricating Materials and Tribology from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1990. After that, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication (LSL), Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics. From June 1993 to June 1994, he worked as a Visiting Scholar in Pennsylvania State University, USA. In 1996, he was promoted to Professor, and nominated as Head of the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication in 2000. From 2005–2012, he was the Director of the LICP. In 2013, he was elected as a fellow of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Up to now, he has published more than 500 papers. Currently, his research interests mainly focus on space lubrication and high performance lubricants.
γSV = γSL + γLV cosθeq	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Three surface tensions of a waterdrop on a smooth surface; (b) a liquid drop penetrates into the spikes (Wenzel state); (c) a liquid drop supported on the spikes (Cassie–Baxter state).	 
cosθw = rcosθeq	(2)
cosθCB = f(cosθeq + 1) − 1	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Shows the natural lotus leaf with waterdrops on it, (b) and (c) show the SEM images of a lotus leaf with low and high magnifications, respectively, and the inset of (c) shows a waterdrop on it with a CA of 162°.79 (d) Shows the underside of a Ramee leaf and (e) and (f) are the SEM images of the underside of a Ramee leaf with low and high magnifications, respectively, and the inset of (f) shows a waterdrop on it with a CA value of about 164°.79	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Shows a water strider resting on the water surface, (b) and (c) are SEM images of the hair layer of the water strider's body. (b) The hair on a strider's abdomen is tilted at around 30–45° relative to the body surface. (c) The hair on a strider's leg.83 (d) Shows the surrounding hairs nucleating many drops, so that the surface of the eyes remains dry and clear. (e) And (f) are SEM images of hcp microhemispheres (ommatidia) and hexagonally ncp nanonipples covering an ommatidial surface, respectively.84	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Shows a photograph of a cicada and an SEM image of its wing,88 and (b) shows a photograph of a dragonfly and (c) is the SEM image indicating the nanostructure of the membrane of its wing.94	 

Inorganic materials	Silica-based	Up to 100%	Yes	Nanoparticle assembly, sol–gel, templating	
74 and 104–113

ZnO	Up to 85%	Optional	Spray pyrolysis technique, sputtering	
117 and 118

TiO2	Up to 80%	Optional	Nanoparticle assembly, electrophoretic deposition	
119 and 120

Ta2O5	About 70%	Yes	Anodization	
121

Co3O4	Up to 88.2%	Yes	Hydrothermal method	
123

SnO2	Up to 60%	No	Hydrothermal method	
132

ITO	About 85%	Yes	RF magnetron sputtering deposition	
133

BN	>70%	Yes	RF magnetron sputtering deposition with plasma etching	
138

CNT	Up to 83.5%	Yes	Nanoparticle assembly	
139



Organic materials	PDMS	About 90%	Optional	Soft lithography	
141

p(V4D4-co-PFDA)	>98%	No	Initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD)	
142

PDVB	Up to 95%	Optional	Solvothermal method, in situ polymerization	
143 and 144

PMMA	Up to 95%	Yes	Plasma etching	
145

PS	Up to 90%	Yes	Plasma etching	
147

PE	About 85%	Yes	Plasma etching	
148

PET	>90%	Yes	Plasma etching with CVD	
149

PC	No precise data	Yes	Plasma etching	
150

PANI	Up to 62.6%	Yes	
In situ deposition	
151

PTFE	>90%	No	RF magnetron sputtering method and catalytic CVD	
157

Nafion	>95%	No	Ion irradiation method	
158

Cellulose	Up to 87%	Yes	Vacuum filtration	
159



Hybrid materials	PDMS + silica NPs	Up to 93%	Yes	Spin coating	
161

PMMA + MTMS	About 91%	No	Sol–gel with dip coating	
162

CNT + siliane	>90%	Dependent on silane	Sol–gel with spray coating	
163


 	Fig. 5  (a) Shows a photograph of water droplets on the SiO2 transparent superhydrophobic paper coating.105 (b) Shows UV-vis spectra of superhydrophobic films formed by two different sizes of nanoparticles with different sequences of dip coating and compared to bare glass.74	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the procedure used to prepare the transparent superhydrophobic surface.106	 

 	Fig. 7  A general schematic of the preparation of the transparent superhydrophobic nanocoating.109	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic drawing of the synthesis and hydrogen-bond driven stabilization of titanate nanobelts.120 (b) Superhydrophobic properties (contact angle and self-cleaning phenomenon) of the post-annealed ITO nanorod film after surface modification with a low surface-energy material.133	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the multi-step anodization process of an Al–Ta bilayer.121	 

 	Fig. 10  Preparation procedure of FP modified MWCNTs.139	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Shows a schematic diagram of the structure of the stacked polymer, which is composed of p(V4D4) and p(PFDA), coated fabric. (b) Shows the transmittance of a 700 nm-thick p(V4D4-LPFDA) stacked polymer coated PET film. The inset image of (b) is a digital camera image, which shows that the substrate maintains the same features and color but displays superhydrophobicity after p(V4D4-L-PFDA) stacked polymer coating.142	 

 	Fig. 12  A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for superhydrophobic, transparent PMMA surfaces. Water immersion was employed to remove the capping layer (colored in white).145	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) WCA changes and optical transmission spectra of the CVD-PTFE films with various thicknesses on the rf-sputtered PTFE film with 450 nm thickness.157 (b) Photographs of a transparent film made from ENCC.159	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Scheme of the hydrogen bond-driven stabilization of a CNT solution. (B) Image of a stabilized t-MWNT–silane sol solution. (C) FESEM image of a spray-coated t-MWNT–silane hybrid film. (D) Water droplets on this film.163	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The photograph of the PU/TMS-SiO2 coating with red fluorescence and high transparency (taken under UV light).165 (b) Digital photographs of water droplets on bare glass after HMDS treatment.166	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Colored water droplets sitting on OTES–TEOS-treated cotton fabrics, and the transparency doesn't change after coating.170 (b) The photograph shows an area modified with silica nanoparticles at a concentration of 1.2 wt% and an unmodified area nearby.171 (c) Superhydrophobic fingers. Insets: photograph (top) and SEM image (bottom) of nanoporous polymer chalk.143	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
