Inclusion of organic species in exfoliated montmorillonite nanolayers towards hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SM00975C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SM00975C
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2021, 17, 9819-9841Inclusion of organic species in exfoliated montmorillonite nanolayers towards hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures

        
          
            Xi Xi 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jia Hui 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Alfin 
            Kurniawan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ke Jin 
            Li
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chun Hui 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *ab
aResearch Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Chemistry-Synthesis Technology, College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310032, China. E-mail: clay@zjut.edu.cn
bQing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals, You Hua, Qing Yang, Chi Zhou 242804, China
Received 
      1st July 2021
    , Accepted 9th October 2021First published on 11th October 2021AbstractMontmorillonite (Mt) can readily undergo spontaneous delamination or exfoliation into nanolayers by various physical and chemical processes, which allow various strategies to engineer hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures. This review aims to discuss the recent progress in the liquid-phase exfoliation of Mt into individual nanolayers and the inclusion chemistry of functional organic species, ions, or molecules into the exfoliated Mt nanolayers to produce hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures. The exfoliation methods include mechanical force, ultrasonication, and intercalation-assisted exfoliation. Techniques for quickly assessing the quality of the exfoliated Mt nanolayers are still needed. Layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition, template, and evaporation-induced inclusions are examined to fabricate hierarchical Mt–organic species nanocomposites with unique functionalities and properties. The nanocomposites can be produced as multilayered porous films, brick-and-mortar coatings, hydrogels with a house-of-cards structure, core–shell materials, and hollow and mesoporous spherical nanocomposites, which exhibit significant potential for adsorption, catalysis, targeted delivery and controlled drug release, highly sensitive sensors, flame retardant coatings, and thermal energy storage and release (i.e. phase change materials). Finally, the challenges and prospects for the future development of hierarchical nanocomposites of exfoliated Mt nanolayers and organic species, particularly in hierarchical supramolecular nanostructured composites, are highlighted.
Xi Xi Chen
Xi Xi Chen is currently a researcher at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Henan Institute of Science and Technology. Her research presently centers on nanostructured clay mineral-, calcium carbonate-based colloidal system under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui ZHOU. The work is also partly supported by Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals (QYIM).
Jia Hui Liu
Jia Hui Liu is currently a candidate for the degree of PhD at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in applied chemistry from Anhui Jianzhu University. Her research presently focuses on colloid and surface chemistry of clay minerals and related hydrogels and nanostructured functional composites and their applications in health care, adsorption and catalysis under the supervision of Prof. Chun-Hui Zhou. She has authored and co-authored several scientific papers in respected peer-reviewed international journals.
Alfin Kurniawan
Dr Alfin Kurniawan is currently a Postdoc at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. His research presently centers on nanostructured clay minerals-, calcite-, and dolomite-based catalysts and heterogeneous catalysis under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou. The work is also partly supported by Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals (QYIM). He received his PhD at the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, China, in 2018. He has published tens of papers in the field of green catalysis, water and wastewater treatment and electrospinning fabrication.
Ke Jin Li
Ke Jin LI is currently a postgraduate student at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. His research presently centers on clay minerals-based nanostructured catalysts and related surface plasmonic catalysis for catalytic glycerol conversion in microfluidic reactors to value-added chemicals under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou. The work is also partly supported by Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals (QYIM).
Chui Hui Zhou
Dr Chun Hui Zhou, born and brought up in Miaoqian, Qingyang, Anhui, is Professor of Chemical Engineering and Leader of Research Group for Advanced Materials and Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), Zhejiang University of Technology. He is Director of Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals. He acts as AIPEA Councilor (2017–2022). He also serves as Associate Editor of Clays and Clay Minerals, Associate Editor of Clay Minerals and Editorial Member of Applied Clay Science (Elsevier), Journal of Porous Materials (Springer) and Materials Research Innovations (Taylor and Francis). He worked as a visiting academic at the University of Queensland (2006–2007) and as a visiting professor at the University of Western Australia (2010). His R&D centers on advanced clay minerals-based nanomaterials, hydrogels, catalytic conversion of biochemicals and biomass. He teaches Catalysis, Materials Science and Engineering, and Scientific Literacy.
Introduction
The inclusion of organic guest species (molecules or ions) in exfoliable two-dimensional (2D) materials represents an attractive strategy for constructing novel hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanocomposites for various applications, such as selective absorption,1 high-performance catalysis,2 molecular recognition,3 and electrochemical energy storage devices.4 Of the various inorganic 2D layered materials, montmorillonite (Mt), a ubiquitous, nontoxic, and low-cost hydrated aluminosilicate clay mineral comprising a tetrahedral–octahedral–tetrahedral (T–O–T) sandwich structure (Fig. 1a), can be spontaneously delaminated or deliberately exfoliated into individual, atomically thin nanolayers with a thickness of ∼0.96 nm and lateral sizes of ∼100 nm.5,6
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication of hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures through inclusion of organic species in exfoliated Mt nanolayers. (a) Top and side views of layered Mt. (b) Liquid-phase exfoliation of bulk Mt into individual nanolayers. (c) Various hierarchical inorganic–organic nanostructures obtained by the inclusion of organic molecules in exfoliated Mt nanolayers. (d) Potential applications of hierarchical Mt–organic species nanocomposites. 
The as-exfoliated Mt nanolayers exhibit large specific surface areas and abundant hydroxyl groups, which can be employed as versatile 2D building blocks for designing a wide variety of nanostructures. Over the past decades, several approaches have been developed to exfoliate layered Mt into individual nanolayers, of which mechanical force-,7 ultrasonication-, and intercalation-assisted exfoliation8 are three of the most widely utilised methods (Fig. 1b).
The exfoliation of Mt was previously studied as a model system for the rheological behaviour of colloids9 and as thixotropic and rheological additives for paint and paste.10 At present, exfoliated Mt nanolayers have been extensively utilised as inorganic building blocks to prepare hierarchical nanostructured composites through various methods, including layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition, template, and evaporation-induced strategies. In the LbL approach, the inclusion of organic species in Mt nanolayers was conducted on planar substrates to produce multilayered films. Electrostatic interaction,11 hydrogen bonding,12 and covalent bonding13 are the driving forces for the formation of LbL nanocomposite films. In addition to LbL deposition, evaporation-induced inclusion of organic species in Mt nanolayers on planar substrates has also been employed to produce porous films. Template methods using templates with various geometric shapes have been actively pursued to fabricate three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical Mt–organic species nanocomposites. Such inclusion approaches have led to the discovery of a wide range of hierarchical Mt–organic species nanostructures with various morphologies, such as core–shell, hollow and mesoporous, brick-and-mortar, and house-of-cards architecture (Fig. 1c).
Mt has been frequently used as an adsorbent, catalyst, and carrier for therapeutic drugs. From these traditional applications, it is thought that inclusion chemistry should be introduced into the fine processing of Mt nanolayers to produce a wider range of multifunctional nanocomposites. The strategic inclusion of organic species by Mt nanolayers not only enriches the inclusion chemistry, but also significantly expands the applications of Mt nanolayers to sensors, flame retardant materials, and phase change materials (PCMs) (Fig. 1d).
This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the inclusion strategies of organic species in exfoliated Mt nanolayers towards hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures. Special attention has also been paid to various liquid-phase exfoliation methods of Mt to obtain high-quality individual nanolayers. The main advantages and limitations of each exfoliation and inclusion technique are thoroughly discussed, and some rational suggestions are proposed to address some of these challenges. Furthermore, the potential applications of Mt–organic species nanocomposites, such as adsorption, catalysis, drug delivery, sensing, and thermal energy store and release, are discussed. This review aims to elucidate the vast opportunities for the inclusion of organic molecules and ions in Mt nanolayers, and to provide new ideas for the fabrication of hierarchical inorganic–organic nanocomposites with multifunctional properties.
Exfoliation chemistry of montmorillonite
The exfoliation of layered Mt into colloidally dispersed nanolayers is of significant interest for the development of high-performance nanocomposites in many applications. In its bulk form, the unit cell of Mt particles comprises one octahedral alumina (AlO6) sheet sandwiched between two tetrahedral silica (SiO4) sheets, in which the 2D layered assembly is held together by weak electrostatic and van der Waals forces. Similar to other layered materials, such as graphite14 and transition metal dichalcogenides,15 the delamination or exfoliation of Mt into individual free-standing nanolayers involves the application of external forces to disrupt these interlayer interactions. In this regard, mechanical forces and ultrasonication have been extensively used to weaken the layer-stacking combination of Mt layers. Another typical intercalation-assisted exfoliation strategy involves the insertion of large organic ions or molecules between the weakly bonded Mt layers through an ion exchange mechanism.16 As the direct exfoliation of solid Mt is difficult, exfoliation is mostly conducted by first dispersing the Mt particles in liquid media, such as water, followed by mechanical treatment, such as ultrasonication or intercalation.
The exfoliation degree of Mt was closely related to the surface charge density on the basal plane. In this context, the highly charged Mt appears easier to exfoliate than low-charged ones. The electrostatic interaction and hydration energies of the interlayer cations were influenced by the charge amount on the Mt layers. Furthermore, the surface charge density of Mt can be adjusted by blocking or neutralising the net negative layer charges with cationic organic species through an ion-exchange reaction. For example, tetraethylenepentamine copper(II) ([Cu(tetren)]2+) has been employed as an intercalating agent to modulate the charge amount on the Mt layers because of its high affinity for Mt layer surfaces.17 In addition, the molecular dynamics simulation results showed that the resultant intercalated Mt with three different charge amounts for Mt were −1 e per unit cell (Al3Mg1), −0.66 e per unit cell (Al10Mg2), and −0.5 e per unit cell (Al7Mg1) (AlxMgy represents the degree of isomorphic cation substitution of Al by Mg atoms in the octahedral layers), respectively. From this study, the energies required to exfoliate these negatively charged Mt with 30 interlayer water molecules were 584.26, 602.51, and 687.15 kcal mol−1. Thus, the above results indicate that the more negatively charged Mt requires less energy for exfoliation. Therefore, the exfoliation degree of Mt is proportional to the charge amount on the Mt layers.
In addition to the layer charge, several studies have revealed that the exchangeable cations in the interlayer space of Mt, such as Na+ and Ca2+, play an important role in the exfoliation of layered Mt into nanolayers, which are associated with the interlayer binding energy distribution and the in-plane bonding intensity of Mt layers. Therefore, Ca2+ with greater charge density provides a lower exfoliation degree, owing to the stronger electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged Mt layers and the interlayer water with the surrounding interlayer Ca2+ and in-plane atoms.18,19 Moreover, the strong attractive interaction between the interlayer Ca2+ and in-plane atoms can cause disruption of the produced exfoliated nanolayers. Compared to calcium Mt (Ca–Mt), sodium Mt (Na–Mt) exhibits weaker interaction forces between the interlayer and can be exfoliated more readily in liquid media into individual nanolayers with high aspect ratios (i.e. the ratio of lateral size to the thickness, lateral size: width, and length).
Mechanical force-assisted liquid exfoliation
The cationic species in the interlayer space of Mt exist in the hydrated form, where each cation is different. As mentioned in the classical Hofmeister ion series, the strength of different cations has a prominent effect on the solubility of proteins in aqueous solutions and in many other systems.20 Different cations in the interlayer space of Mt have different hydration, leading to varying sizes of hydrated cations and its interaction.21–23 The interlayer cations with stronger hydration ability (Lu > Sm > La > Mg > Ca > Sr > Ba > Li > Na > K > Rb > Cs) possess a greater negative adsorption energy for water molecules.22,24 These hydrated cations force the Mt layers to expand in a direction perpendicular to the layers. Such hydration is conducive to the exfoliation of Mt into nanolayers. The appropriate selection of cationic species in the interlayer space of Mt is crucial for achieving a high exfoliation degree.
However, delamination usually only occurs under spontaneous hydration and expansion, but it is far from the well-exfoliated state. To achieve fully exfoliated Mt layers, an external mechanical force is typically applied during the exfoliation process, which is commonly achieved by ball milling25 and shear force26 (Fig. 2). The application of these external mechanical forces aims to disrupt the interaction between the two adjacent layers, resulting in the exfoliation of Mt.
 Fig. 2  Schematic drawings showing the use of mechanical force to exfoliate layered Mt into individual nanolayers. (a) Ball milling-assisted exfoliation. (b) Shear force-assisted exfoliation. (Adapted from ref. 27 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
During ball milling, the collision or vertical impacts generated from fast-moving balls on the Mt particles produce friction and impact, which eventually breaks the aggregated Mt particles into nanoparticles and nanocrystal-like particles (Fig. 2a). Provided that the collision force is sufficiently strong, Mt nanolayers can also be achieved.7 During ball milling, the Mt layers are broken to some extent under a large impact force perpendicular to the layer direction, resulting in nanolayers with smaller lateral sizes.28 In addition, the exfoliation of Mt under high-speed ball milling conditions results in the formation of nanolayers with significant disorder and defects. For example, Mt can be exfoliated under mild ball milling conditions: a time of 3 h, milling speed of 40 rpm, and ball-to-powder mass ratio of 20:1. In contrast, under harsher conditions (i.e. 1 h, 400 rpm milling speed, and 5:1 ball-to-powder mass ratio), Mt can still be exfoliated, but the use of a higher milling speed caused more disorder, delaminated particles, and some distortion and fragmentation of the Mt layers into small nanoparticles (<50 nm).29 These small Mt nanoparticles contain tens of layers and are not exactly individual Mt nanolayers in a strict sense.
By continuous stirring, hundreds of watts are delivered into a few litres of liquid, resulting in the exfoliation of Mt. In this process, shear force plays a leading role in exfoliating Mt (Fig. 2b). Ideally, the shear force is applied to Mt in a direction parallel to the layers. It is expected that shear force-assisted exfoliation can produce large quantities of defect-free nanolayers.26 The Mt nanolayers produced by stirring exhibited high aspect ratios. However, the required stirring time is long, and the yield of Mt nanolayers is relatively low. For instance, Mt nanolayers with a lateral size of ∼200 nm and a thickness of ∼15 nm was obtained by continuous stirring of the Mt dispersion at 1200 rpm for 7 d. The dispersion of 5 mg mL−1 treated Mt nanolayers was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 min to remove possible remaining non-exfoliated bulk Mt particles, and the concentration of Mt nanolayers in the dispersion was only ∼0.40 mg mL−1.30 The yield of the Mt nanolayers was only 8%. Shearing can be incorporated as part of the Mt exfoliation process.
Ultrasonication-assisted liquid exfoliation
Ultrasonication provides vigorous vibration and acoustic waves that provide and transmit high energy. In particular, sound wave-induced cavitation microbubbles in the liquid surround the Mt layers. Such microbubbles can instantaneously collapse into high-energy jets to break up the aggregated Mt and subsequently exfoliate them into nanolayers (Fig. 3).31,32 For example, in a study from Bai et al.,19 upon ultrasonication19 at a strength of 267 W cm−2 (40%) for 8 min, the average thickness of Na–Mt and Ca–Mt decreased from 27.8 and 31.4 nm to 1.3 and 1.69 nm, respectively. In addition to the layer thickness, the average lateral sizes of Na–Mt and Ca–Mt also reduced from 274 to 153.5 nm and 390 to 137.3 nm, respectively, thus yielding Mt nanolayers with high aspect ratios of 109.6 and 81.2, respectively. Moreover, the lateral size of the Mt nanolayers can be further decreased by prolonging the ultrasonication time. Although ultrasonication treatment provides a simple, low-cost, and effective route to exfoliate Mt, the use of high ultrasonic power may destroy the structure of Mt nanolayers.33 Hence, the ultrasonic time and power should be controlled to prevent breaking of the nanolayers.
 Fig. 3  Schematic drawings of the ultrasonication method to exfoliate layered bulk Mt into individual nanolayers. (Adapted from ref. 27 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
The combination of ultrasonication treatment and wet ball milling has also been explored for enhanced exfoliation of Mt. For example, Na–Mt dispersion in ethanol was ball-milled at a speed of 300 rpm for 10 h and ultrasonically treated at 40 kHz for 10 h to obtain nanolayers with an average particle size of ∼307.9 nm and a layer thickness of ∼4 nm. Compared to ultrasonication alone, this combined method enables thinner nanolayers, whereas the nanolayers thickness can be further reduced by increasing the sonication power intensity.34,35 In addition, the combination of ultrasonication and shear force to exfoliate bulk Mt can also overcome some of the limitations of each method, such as the processing time of wet ball milling and structural damage of the Mt nanolayers at high ultrasonic power. In the study reported by Zhao et al.,36 the Mt dispersion was pretreated by sonication with Vernon Hills Illinois CP505 ultrasonic instrument (40 kHz) at 400 W for 3 min, followed by shearing using a high speed Fluko FA25 mixer at 10000 rpm for another 3 min, resulting in Mt nanolayers with a high aspect ratio (>100), an average thickness of 0.95 nm, and a lateral size of 97.24 nm. After shearing, the unexfoliated Mt particles were removed by centrifugation to yield highly pure concentrated nanolayers dispersions. The yield of Mt nanolayers was 42.66%. Moreover, the exfoliation degree of Mt can be tuned by controlling the ultrasonication time and shearing treatment. For instance, the thickness decreased from ∼193.8 nm for Mt to 1.44 nm for Mt nanolayers after combined treatment with a Vernon Hills Illinois CP505 ultrasonic instrument (40 kHz) at a constant ultrasonic intensity of 450 W for 4 min and a Fluko FA25 high-speed mixer (10000 rpm) for 1 min. The as-produced Mt nanolayers also exhibited a uniform thickness distribution of 56% at 1–2 nm and 93.4% at <10 nm.37 Given the large aspect ratios of the as-exfoliated Mt nanolayers, as well as the good exfoliation degree, the combination of ultrasonication and shearing is one of the most frequently used strategies for preparing high-quality Mt nanolayers.
Recent studies have also demonstrated that ultrasonication can be combined with the freeze–thaw method to exfoliate Mt. In the freeze–thaw method, the volume of interlayer water molecules gradually expands during freezing, owing to the formation of an ordered structure, then gradually shrinks during the thawing process because of the disappearance of the ordered structure.38 For instance, the Mt dispersion was first frozen at −20 °C for 24 h and subsequently thawed at 20 °C for 24 h. After two freeze–thaw cycles, the proportion of Mt nanolayers with thicknesses ranging from 1 to 2 nm increased from 2% to 15.77%, whereas thicker nanolayers (>10 nm) decreased from 58.67% to 22.46%. In general, although the freeze–thaw process exhibits low efficiency for Mt exfoliation, this approach offers several advantages (Fig. 4): (1) the treatment technology is clean and easily operated, and (2) the original lateral sizes of pristine Mt can be well retained. To obtain a more homogeneous size distribution of the Mt nanolayers, the nanolayers obtained after two freeze–thaw cycles were further treated using the same ultrasonic processor at various operating power intensities (i.e. 150 and 300 W) for 4 min. The results revealed that the use of ultrasonic power enhanced the freeze–thaw exfoliation degree of Mt, in which the fraction of exfoliated nanolayers with thicknesses of 1–2 nm increased to 34% and 62% at power intensities of 150 and 300 W, respectively. However, the proportion of Mt nanoparticles with a thickness of >10 nm decreased significantly to ∼4.0% and 1.3%, respectively. Thus, the combination of ultrasonication and freeze–thaw represents a simple and efficient route for Mt exfoliation. Moreover, the combination of different freeze–thaw cycles and ultrasonic power could also be employed to achieve the same exfoliation degree. However, it should be noted that reasonable control of the freeze–thaw cycles and ultrasonic power intensity are required to prevent fragmentation of the original nanolayers caused by high ultrasonic power; thus, large-sized 2D Mt nanolayers can be facilely prepared.33
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of clean and efficient exfoliation of layered Mt through freeze–thaw cycles and sequential ultrasonication treatment. (Adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.) 
Intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation
Intercalation-assisted exfoliation is one of the simplest and most widely used methods for the inclusion of molecules or ions into the interlayer space of Mt. Typically, a new guest species is introduced or inserted into the interlayer space of Mt as the host via an ion exchange reaction.39 In the case of Mt, the penetration of intercalating moieties weakens or destroys the van der Waals and electrostatic forces between the Mt layers, thus expanding the interlayer space. When the interlayer spacing between the Mt layers is expanded to the limit, Mt is exfoliated into individual nanolayers. As mentioned previously, the efficiency of intercalation-assisted exfoliation processes can be enhanced by the simultaneous combination of mechanical treatments, such as ball milling, shearing, and ultrasonication.
Many organic cations are larger than inorganic cations, making them widely employed as intercalating agents for liquid-phase exfoliation of Mt. In addition, cations are easier to exchange with interlayer cations in Mt than anions, zwitterions, and nonions due to the permanent negative charge on the surface of the Mt layer. For these reasons, organic cations are often used to increase the interlayer space of Mt.40 In this context, cationic quaternary ammonium surfactants, such as dioctadecyldimethyl ammonium ions (DODA+), methacrylatoethyltrimethyl ammonium ions (MT+),41 and propylbis(octadecyldimethyl) ammonium ions,42 are some most commonly used intercalants for Mt exfoliation. Following the insertion of these cations, the interlayer spacing of Mt can expand from 1.25 to up to 4.4 nm.40 The length of the alkyl chain of the organic modifiers affects the interlayer expansion degree of Mt. For example, dioctadecyldimethylammonium chloride with long alkyl chains can expand the interlayer space of Mt more effectively than methacrylamidopropyl trimethylammonium (MAPTA) cations with shorter carbon chains.41 In another report by Zhuang et al.,43 Mt intercalated with cationic surfactants, N,N-dimethyl-N-octadecyl chloride (C18-B) and dimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium chloride (DC18), shows an enlarged basal spacing of 3.64 and 4.06 nm, respectively. The alkyl chains of the cationic surfactants generally appear in the interlayer space of Mt in a parallel, disordered, or paraffin-type arrangement. In this regard, the arrangement of the intercalated cationic guests is related to the layer charge of Mt and the alkyl chain length. Longer chain organic cations lead to a more ordered arrangement because of the larger molecular size and closer arrangement in the nano-interlayer gallery of Mt.40 These studies suggest that the larger the size of the organic cations, the larger the expansion of the interlayer space.
Another factor to be considered in the intercalation-assisted exfoliation of Mt is the liquid medium. For example, the intercalation of Mt not only causes expansion of the interlayer space, but also renders the Mt layer surface hydrophobic.34 In ethanol medium, the non-polar group of ethanol can interact with CTA+ cations, and the polar group of ethanol can be inserted into the edge of the Mt layers through hydrogen bonding, which facilitates the exfoliation of Mt. However, the broken bond of the fractured Mt layers caused by ball milling may also interact with the polar hydroxyl group of ethanol.44 Under ball milling, ethanol as a medium is not conducive to the exfoliation of organically modified Mt (OMt) (i.e. intercalated or exfoliated) compared with water as a medium.
In addition to organic cations, anionic, zwitterionic, and nonionic organic molecules have also been explored as the intercalation agents for modifying the interlayer space of Mt. For example, the intercalation of lauryl sulfonate anions leads to an increase in the interlayer spacing of Ca–Mt from 1.21 to 1.52 nm.45 The zwitterionic surfactant, oleamidopropyl betaine (OAPB), was successfully inserted into the Na–Mt interlayer through cation exchange, resulting in an expanded interlayer spacing of 3.66 nm.46 Yan et al.47 reported the intercalation of nonionic surfactant octyl phenyl polyoxyethylene ether (OPP) into the Na–Mt interlayer space by a wet ball milling process in which the interlayer spacing was expanded from 1.2 to 1.76 nm. Such organic modifiers intercalate into Mt layers, which expands the interlayer space of Mt and makes it easy for the intercalated Mt to exfoliate into individual nanolayers.
In addition to single species, two or more organic guest species can also be co-intercalated into the Mt interlayers to achieve an even larger expansion of the interlayer space. For example, Yin et al.48 demonstrated that CTA+ and nonionic alkylphenol ethoxylates (OP-10) can be intercalated into the interlayer space of Ca–Mt. The cationic CTA+ (1.59 mmol) and OP-10 (5.31 mmol) co-intercalated Ca–Mt exhibited an expanded interlayer spacing (d-value) of 4.11 nm at 2θ = 2.12° and 1.83 nm at 2θ = 4.83°, which is much larger than those of the CTA+-intercalated Mt (d-value = 1.61 nm) and OP-10-intercalated Mt (d-value = 1.6 nm) samples. In general, the organic cations and polymer co-intercalation-assisted exfoliation technology can be divided into two steps, namely the intercalation and nanocomposite steps (Fig. 5). Organic intercalants intercalated into the Mt layers and thus increased the interlayer space of Mt. Then, the polymer intercalated into the Mt layers, leading to the exfoliation of Mt by aggregation and host–guest interactions.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the co-intercalation-assisted exfoliation of Mt into nanolayers. (Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the Spring Nature, copyright 2021.) 
In a study from Ding et al.,50 the interlayer space of Mt was first expanded via the intercalation of octadecyl dimethyl allyl ammonium cation, yielding an interlayer spacing of 2.99 nm at 2θ = 3.15° and 1.97 nm at 2θ = 4.23°. Following the intercalation of octadecyl dimethyl allyl ammonium cation, the resultant OMt was further exfoliated by the intercalation of a polyethyl-phosphate glycol ester (Exolit OP 550) polymer under slight shearing for 3 min at 25 °C. In this method, the aggregation of the Exolit OP 550 polymer within the interlayer space of OMt during the static ripening process plays a leading role in Mt exfoliation.50 Such a co-intercalation strategy employing polymers can be applied to effectively expand the interlayer space of Mt and shorten the exfoliation time. However, Mt cannot be completely exfoliated in most cases.
Recently, supramolecular exfoliation of bentonite (Bent: a natural clay containing Mt as the main mineral constituent) into single nanolayers was successfully achieved by the intercalation of cationic pillar[5]arene and host–guest interactions between cationic pillar[5]arenes and poly(ethylene glycol).49 Pillar[5]arene functionalised with 10 cationic substituents (CnP5A, where n denotes the number of carbons in the substituent group) was intercalated into the interlayer space of Bent by the cation exchange reaction between the alkylammonium cations and Na+. Owing to the symmetrical structure of the guest molecules, the intercalated C12P5A aggregated on the Bent layers. C12P5A interacts with Bent more strongly because it has ten cationic moieties. The intercalation of C12P5A resulted in an increase in the interlayer space of Bent. Then, poly(ethylene glycol) penetrated the ring structure of C12P5A due to the host–guest interaction, causing Bent to be exfoliated. After intercalation, no free Bent nanolayers were produced, but a highly aggregated material packed with organic cations was tightly held together by crosslinking polymers. Results demonstrated that Bent could be perfectly exfoliated by supramolecular exfoliation.
The use of large quantities of harmful and expensive solvents in the exfoliation of Mt is not environmentally friendly and may incur additional costs to recover the solvent. Thus, an alternative solvent-free exfoliation process based on the heating/gasifying approach to obtain Mt nanolayers was described by Liu et al.51 In this process, Mt was heated for 10 min at 100 °C, then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen until all the liquid nitrogen evaporated completely. After one cycle of heating and gasification treatment, the interlayer spacing of Mt increased from 1.24 to 1.59 nm. By increasing the number of heating/gasifying cycles to three, a larger increase in the interlayer spacing of Mt from 1.59 to 1.8 nm was observed. In this heating/gasifying method, interlayer water molecules were gasified at 100 °C, which promotes penetration of the liquid nitrogen molecules through the Mt interlayer during gasification and disrupts the interlayer force of Mt. The heating/gasifying method is relatively simple and low cost, thus offering great potential for the large-scale production of Mt nanolayers.
Measurement techniques for the quality of Mt nanolayers
The characteristics of the exfoliated Mt nanolayers are essential to evaluate the efficiency of the exfoliation process, as well as for the effective inclusion of organic species to prepare hierarchical inorganic–organic nanocomposites with improved properties. In this regard, the quality of the Mt nanolayers can be judged based on two parameters: (1) the exfoliated structure and (2) the exfoliation degree. The exfoliated structure and exfoliation degree of the Mt nanolayers are generally determined using multiple techniques, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method, viscosity, and turbidity.
XRD is one of the most used techniques for characterising the exfoliated structure of Mt nanolayers. XRD can be used to determine the exfoliation of the original Mt and observe the exfoliated structure of the Mt nanolayers. For example, Ding et al.50 conducted XRD analysis of OMt/Exolit OP 550 nanocomposites to determine the structure of OMt within the nanocomposite matrix. The results demonstrated that the main intercalation diffraction peak disappeared, and a weak diffraction peak was observed, indicating that the OMt particles were exfoliated into individual nanolayers and distributed throughout the organic matrix. A similar XRD feature was reported by Chen et al.,33 where the basal plane (001) reflection of treated Mt disappeared, confirming that Mt had exfoliated through a comparative XRD analysis of the pristine Mt. However, the determination of the exfoliated structure of Mt nanolayers by XRD alone is often not conclusive enough, and thus should be used in conjunction with other complementary techniques, such as electron microscopy. TEM and SEM can be employed to directly observe the internal structure, spatial distribution, and morphology of the Mt nanolayers. From visual inspection of the nanolayers by TEM and SEM, several characteristics of Mt nanolayers have been reported, such as thin and transparent,52 complete and uniform,50 and agglomerated and poor dispersion.51 In addition, the crystal and amorphous domains of the Mt nanolayers can also be visualised. However, TEM uses probes of a very small volume because of its extremely high resolution. Therefore, the obtained micrographs may not always be representative. The combination of TEM, SEM, and XRD methods is suggested to provide compelling evidence for the exfoliated structure of Mt nanolayers.
AFM has been widely recognised as an essential characterisation tool in 2D material research. In this context, AFM was used to observe the microstructure of Mt nanolayers, including thickness, lateral size, and size distribution, which provide important information regarding the aspect ratios. In a recent study by Huang et al.,52 AFM images of Mt nanolayers revealed that the average thickness was approximately 1.8 nm, with lateral sizes ranging from 400 to 800 nm, thus yielding an extremely high aspect ratio (up to over 400). Chen et al.33 also successfully measured the thickness and distribution of the thickness and lateral size and observed the surface morphology of Mt nanolayers obtained by freeze–thaw and ultrasonication treatment using AFM. AFM images can accurately show the thickness and lateral size of Mt nanolayers; hence, the aspect ratio can be calculated.
Although there have been many studies on the liquid-phase exfoliation of Mt, little attention has been paid to the exfoliation degree of Mt nanolayers. The exfoliation of bulk Mt into nanolayers causes characteristic changes in the specific surface area, viscosity, and turbidity. Accordingly, the BET, viscosity, and turbidity methods can be used to investigate the exfoliation degree of Mt nanolayers. For instance, Liu et al.51 measured the specific surface area of pristine and exfoliated Mt nanolayers using nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms using the BET method. The Mt nanolayers exhibited a considerably higher specific surface area than that of bulk Mt, and the increased BET surface area was proportional to the exfoliation degree. However, the BET method has limitations, such as the limited number of solid particles and time consumption.
Viscosity and turbidity methods can also be applied to evaluate the exfoliation degree of Mt in aqueous media. The exfoliation degree of the Mt nanolayers can be determined by measuring the viscosity of the aqueous dispersions before and after exfoliation.36 Meanwhile, the turbidity of the Mt dispersion is related to the number of particles in the dispersion. Previous reports have explored the relationship between the exfoliation degree and turbidity of Mt particles in aqueous media, and investigated the exfoliation degree of Mt in aqueous media using the turbidity method.53 The exfoliation degree increased with the number of Mt nanolayers formed from the exfoliation of bulk Mt. It is important to mention that the Mt nanolayers dispersion needs to be stabilised by the addition of chemicals, such as to prevent coagulation and settling down of the particles during the turbidity measurement. In addition, the pH of the Mt nanolayers dispersion should be adjusted to the range of 4–10 and a solid concentration of <2% w/v to obtain reliable and accurate turbidity measurements.
Layer-by-layer inclusion towards multilayered montmorillonite nanolayers–organic species films
LbL assembly is a versatile method for the preparation of highly ordered and multilayered films and/or coatings with tailored properties through successive deposition of alternate layers of inorganic and organic moieties onto planar substrates.54 LbL assembly has been developed for the formation of 3D DNA crystals,55 and this technique has been widely adopted to fabricate multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species films. In the LbL assembly process of multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species films, several solution-based deposition routes have been described, such as immersive coating, fluidic coating, spin coating, and spray coating. In the formation of such multilayered inorganic–organic films, the chemical driving forces include electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and covalent bonding between Mt nanolayers and oppositely charged organic species, as discussed in more detail below.
Routes to layer-by-layer inclusion
The LbL assembly of multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species films is generally achieved through consecutive deposition or coating processes. The four frequently used methods for LbL deposition are immersive coating, spin coating, spray coating, and fluidic coating. In LbL deposition, the structure, thickness, and surface roughness of the multilayered film can be accurately tailored by the selected cycle number for the repeated deposition step, the concentrations of the Mt nanolayers dispersion, and the organic precursor solution.
Immersion coating (also referred to as solution immersion) is usually conducted by alternating immersion of a planar substrate into the Mt nanolayers dispersion and organic precursor solution (Fig. 6a).10 Between each deposition step, washing and drying steps were performed to remove the weakly adsorbed materials and prevent cross-contamination.56 Alternatively, the coated substrates were immersed in a buffer solution. This immersion coating method has been used to fabricate various supramolecular-assembled films and coatings, such as Mt nanolayers–chitosan film,57 Mt nanolayers–polyethyleneimine (PEI) film,58 Mt nanolayers-ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer (EVOH), and polyethyleneimine–Mt nanolayers–polyacrylic acid (PEI–Mt–PAA) coating.59 The resultant films exhibit some intriguing characteristics and properties, such as enhanced thermal stability,57 mechanical strength,58 and improved gas barrier.60 Although immersion coating technology is straightforward and widely accessible, this method still has several limitations. For example, because of the negatively charged nature of the Mt nanolayers, the deposited Mt nanolayers may exert repelling effects on the LbL inclusion of nanolayers. To address this issue, an external parallel electric field is usually applied to weaken the repelling effects and facilitate the formation of a layer of tightly stacked Mt nanolayers on the substrate.12 In addition, the immersion coating process is time consuming and requires many materials for each deposition step.
 Fig. 6  Schematic drawings to various LbL inclusion approaches of organic species in Mt nanolayers for the preparation of multilayered films through (a) immersion coating, (b) and (c) spin coating, (d) spray coating and (e) fluidic coating processes. (From ref. 10. Adapted with permission from AAAS.) 
Spin coating refers to the process of alternately casting Mt nanolayers dispersion and organic species in solution onto a spinning flat substrate, leading to the formation of multilayered films (Fig. 6b). It can also be conducted by casting a mixed solution of Mt nanolayers and organic species onto a fixed flat substrate and then rotating the substrate (Fig. 6c).61 However, because the Mt nanolayers dispersion must be mixed with the solution of organic species before spin coating, the uneven mixing of the Mt nanolayers dispersion and organic species in solution will result in unevenness of the prepared films.62 In contrast, the former spin coating method  (Fig. 6b) is often used in the fabrication of multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species composites. The thickness of the films can be controlled by the rotating speed, concentration of the Mt nanolayers dispersion, solution of organic species, and number of spin coatings. In spin coating, centrifugal force is the driving force in the spread and arrangement of Mt nanolayers and organic species. Compared with immersion coating, films fabricated by spin coating are more homogenous, thinner, and transparent. However, because a large substrate requires a higher rotating speed, the substrates in spin coating should be small. Spray coating refers to alternately spraying Mt nanolayers dispersion and the solution of organic species onto the substrate (Fig. 6d). By spray coating, some films with unique properties have been fabricated, such as high-performance homogenised nanofibrillated cellulose-Mt nanolayers barriers63 and high-performance flame retardant Mt nanolayers–chitosan coating.64 Spray coating technology has a fast fabrication process. Moreover, spray coating technology is scalable and easy to industrialise.
Compared with immersion, spin, and spray coating techniques, fluidic coating is applied to the fabrication of multilayered materials on the channel walls (Fig. 6e). In this process, the inclusion of organic species by Mt nanolayers was achieved by injecting a solution containing Mt dispersion and organic species into the fluidic channel.65 Pressure or vacuum is used to sequentially move the Mt dispersion, the organic species in solution, and the washing solution through the channels. The channels can be pipes, capillaries, or designed microfluidic reactors. By reasonably designing various microfluidic environments, the fluidic coating technique can accurately control the inclusion of Mt nanolayers and organic species. Fluidic coating technology can be applied to construct “surface-mimetic micro-reservoirs” to study many subsurface energy and environmental issues.66 Compared to conventional batch platforms, microfluidics has some advantages, including reduced sample and reagent consumption, shortened sample processing time, and continuous and automatic processing to reduce human intervention or error.
Driving force and interactions
As discussed earlier, the formation of multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species films by the LbL assembly technique is based on a series of deposition processes involving ionic electrostatic,57 hydrogen bonding12 and covalent bonding interactions.67 These interactions can contribute independently or synergistically to the LbL assembly process to form multilayered films. By deliberately using the driving force, different surface structures and morphologies of the multilayered films can be rationally designed and prepared.
Electrostatic attraction between negatively charged Mt nanolayers and positively charged organic species is regarded as the most common phenomenon in the formation of hierarchical inorganic–organic nanocomposites. Positively charged organic species, such as chitosan57,60 and cellulose nanocrystals (CNC),11 have been incorporated in a LbL manner into Mt nanolayers through electrostatic attraction. In the LbL inclusion of Mt nanolayers and chitosan, the charge density of chitosan is related to pH, owing to the protonation and deprotonation behaviour of primary amine groups (–NH2). Chitosan with high pH (pH = 6) and low pH (pH = 3) has low and high charge densities, respectively.68 In contrast, the deposition of high-pH (pH = 6) chitosan was less uniform, and the formed surface was rougher.57 This nanoscopic roughness provides a greater surface area for the deposition of Mt nanolayers. Therefore, the higher Mt nanolayers concentration at pH = 6 results in a higher density of the films and thicker Mt nanolayers–chitosan films. In summary, the strength of electrostatic attraction between Mt nanolayers and organic species affects the thickness and surface roughness of the resultant LbL films.
Interestingly, the negatively charged surface of Mt nanolayers can be positively charged by the surface immobilisation of positively charged organic species and then include negatively charged organic species to form Mt nanolayers–organic species composites. Such a change in surface charge can be achieved by modifying Mt with cetyltrimethylammonium cation (CTA+).34 CTA+ intercalated into the Na–Mt layers by the cation exchange reaction between Na+ and CTA+ and is absorbed on the surface of Mt nanolayers by electrostatic attraction. For instance, because of the negatively charged sulfate groups on the surface of CNC, the 2D positively charged OMt nanolayers and the one-dimensional (1D) negatively charged CNC can adsorb each other. Such interactions lead to the formation of a 3D nanohybrid through the LbL inclusion of CNC by Mt nanolayers (Fig. 7a).11
 Fig. 7  Several driving forces in the LbL inclusion of organic ions and molecules by Mt nanolayers. (a) LbL inclusion driven by electrostatic interaction. (Adapted from ref. 11, Copyright 2020, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) (b) LbL inclusion driven by covalent bonding and electrostatic interaction. (Adapted from ref. 13 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (c) LbL inclusion driven by covalent bonding and hydrogen bonding. (Adapted from ref. 67, Copyright 2018, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) CNC: cellulose nano-crystals, CNER: tricomponent composite multilayer (poly[(o-cresyl glycidylether)-co-formaldehyde]), CTAB: cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, PAH: poly(allylamine hydrochloride), PEI: polyethyleneimine, QD: quantum dots, TGA: thioglycollic acid. 
Hydrogen bonding enabled many neutral organic species to be included in Mt nanolayers to form multilayered films. For example, ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer (EVOH) can be included in Mt nanolayers via hydrogen-bonded LbL deposition under an external parallel electric field.12 The hydroxyl groups (–OH) on EVOH and Mt formed intermolecular hydrogen bonds. However, because hydrogen bonding is sensitive to pH, temperature, and solution concentration, the structure of the fabricated multilayered film based on the hydrogen-bonded LbL inclusion can easily change or even dissociate. Covalent bonding was stronger than electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding. Compared with the LbL inclusion driven by electrostatic interaction or hydrogen bonding, that driven by covalent bonding can prevent the dissociation of multilayers due to the change in pH. Therefore, multilayered films prepared by LbL deposition based on covalent bonding exhibit good stability.
It should be emphasised that in many cases, the LbL inclusion of organic species in Mt nanolayers does not merely involve electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, and covalent bonding alone. Instead, they occur simultaneously and play a synergistic role in the fabrication of multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species films.13,67 In multilayered and ultra-thin Mt nanolayers–CdTe quantum dots (Mt nanolayers–CdTe QDs) films, the driving forces are covalent bonds between the carboxylic acid groups (–COOH) of thioglycolic acid (TGA) and the amino groups (–NH2) of poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) with the help of carbodiimide as a mediator in the formation of amide bonds, and electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged Mt nanolayers and positively charged PAH-CdTe QDs (Fig. 7b).13 The LbL inclusion driven by hydrogen bonding and covalent bonding can also produce multilayered films with long-term stability. The multilayered inorganic–organic nanocomposites were fabricated using poly[(o-cresyl glycidyl ether)-co-formaldehyde] (CNER) with amino groups, amino-Mt (NH2-Mt), and polyethyleneimine (PEI) with epoxy functional groups.67 The covalent bonding formed between the epoxy groups (–CH(O)CH–) of CNER and the amine groups (–NH2) of NH2-Mt, the hydrogen bonding formed between the amine groups (–NH2) of PEI and the hydroxyl groups (–OH) of NH2-Mt (Fig. 7c). The combination of hydrogen bonding and covalent bonding makes the fabricated films have a hardness of 1.9 GPa and significant resistance against alkaline and tetrahydrofuran organic solvents.
Evaporation-induced inclusion of organic species into montmorillonite nanolayers
Evaporation-induced inclusions occur at the liquid–air and solid–liquid–air interfaces, where the lifting force generated by the evaporation of liquid medium induces the formation of thin films. Mt nanolayers can be alone or together with inorganic and organic species to form thin films induced by solvent evaporation. This evaporation method is feasible and environmentally friendly. Moreover, because the adsorption process is no longer governed by diffusion, but by evaporation, the evaporation method can reduce the inclusion time. Notably, the evaporation rate is a key factor in determining the quality of the resultant films.
A homogeneous thin film of Mt can be formed via the evaporation of an aqueous dispersion of Mt nanolayers. By controlling the evaporation rate of water, the dispersed Mt nanolayers can be assembled into free-standing thin films with a highly regular layered structure comprising alternating layers and voids.69 In such a multilayered film, the air pockets are trapped between the neighbouring Mt layers during the evaporation of water, leading to the formation of macrovoids, which enable toluene to permeate, and microvoids, which are impenetrable to toluene molecules. The resultant porous Mt thin films exhibited low thermal conductivity and flame retardant properties owing to the combination of regular nanostructures and voids.
Thin films generated by the evaporation-induced inclusion of Mt nanolayers and inorganic and organic species have smoother surfaces than those of pristine Mt films. In this process, by slowly evaporating the water in the Mt nanolayers-LAPONITE® (LAP) dispersion at an ambient temperature of 25 °C and relative humidity of 50%, the state of the composites changed from gel phase to film.70 The increase in gel concentration during evaporation led to the formation of thinner electrical double layers, which resulted in a weaker repulsion. This weaker repulsive effect can facilitate the arrangement of the layers through van der Waals attraction. In this regard, Mt nanolayers are self-assembled during slow evaporation owing to the interfacial force of the liquid along the radial direction. Crystalline domains were created in the dried state of the film. In the central region of the film, evaporation occurs vertically and the crystalline domains are randomly orientated. By controlling the evaporation rate, the arrangement of Mt nanolayers and the size and direction of the films can be finely controlled. LAP particles mostly enter the voids created by Mt nanolayers, thereby reducing the ripples of the layers and the surface roughness. Through the evaporation-induced inclusion process, nanocomposite films of other layered clay minerals combined with organic species can also be fabricated. A thin and flexible LAP nanodiscs/carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) film with a local brick-and-mortar structure was fabricated by a water evaporation-induced self-assembly process.71 The resultant nacre-mimetic LAP nanodiscs/CMC films exhibited exceptional shape-persistent flame retardancy, excellent glass-like transparency, and enhanced mechanical and thermal properties.
Recently, Arabkhani et al.72 synthesised a 3D multilayered film with a thickness of approximately 1.5 nm comprising graphene oxide (GO), Na–Mt nanolayers, and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) by solution-mixing-evaporation-induced inclusion (Fig. 8). The main interaction in the formation of this multilayered film is hydrogen bonding between GO and Na–Mt, GO and PVA, and PVA and Na–Mt. The solution-mixing-evaporation technique is simple and environmentally friendly, and the GO–Mt nanolayers–PVA films prepared by this technique have been successfully used as highly efficient adsorbents for the removal of malachite green dye from synthetic and real water matrices.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram illustrating evaporation-induced inclusion of Na–Mt nanolayers, graphene oxide (GO), and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to form free-standing films. (Adapted from ref. 72, Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier.) GO: graphene oxide,  PVA: polyvinyl alcohol. 
Template inclusion of organic species into montmorillonite nanolayers
The LbL and evaporation-induced inclusion techniques are simple and versatile processes for producing multilayered Mt nanolayers–organic species films. Meanwhile, to direct the formation of more hierarchical Mt nanolayers–organic species composites, templates are usually required. Both hard templates with rigid spherical structures and soft templates with relatively flexible shapes (e.g. surfactant molecules) have been widely used to incorporate functional organic species into Mt nanolayers for the design of complex nanostructures with well-defined shapes and sizes, such as core–shell,37 hollow porous spheres,73 house-of-cards architecture,74 and brick-and-mortar nanostructures.75 In such complex-shaped nanostructures, hard templates generally serve as stable supports. Removal of the hard template following the formation of nanostructures can give rise to nanostructures with different morphologies and functions. Hard templates are generally removed by chemical etching or calcination. Soft templates generally act as structure-directing agents to assist the inclusion of Mt nanolayers and organic species, and do not need to be removed. Compared with the soft templating approach, the use of hard templates allows better control over the morphology and size uniformity of the hierarchical nanostructures.
Hard templating
Hard templating is one of the most important synthetic routes towards hierarchical porous nanostructures, which commonly involve the adsorption of Mt nanolayers and organic species on the surface of the template. Spherical materials, such as stearic acid (SA)37 and polystyrene latex particles,73 are among the most widely used hard templates for the preparation of hierarchical core–shell nanostructures. The Mt nanolayers were anchored onto the template surface by electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding. To facilitate the immobilisation of Mt nanolayers and organic species, the template surface is usually functionalised with surfactants, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and chitosan.
Electrostatic interaction is the interaction most commonly applied in hard templating for preparing Mt nanolayers–organic species composites. In the case of SA latex particles as a hard template, the surface of SA is usually modified by coating with negatively charged species, such as surfactant SDS molecules as stabilisers.37 For example, in the case of SA latex particles as a hard template, the Mt nanolayers-SA core–shell composite can be readily formed via electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged SDS-modified SA and the positively charged surface of CTA+-intercalated Mt nanolayers. Thus, the SA latex particles were tightly confined within the Mt nanolayers, resulting in the formation of a well-defined framework. The resulting SA-Mt core–shell composite exhibited robust stability and retained its structure, even after filtration, washing, and drying. Moreover, Mt nanolayers encapsulated SA latex particles also exhibited enhanced thermal energy storage properties compared to pristine SA.
The template inclusion of organic species in Mt nanolayers can be used to form hierarchical composites with core–shell structures and hollow mesoporous sphere structures by removing the hard template. For instance, Chen et al.73 demonstrated a hard templating strategy for preparing hollow porous Mt nanolayers–chitosan composites. In this study, chitosan was immobilised onto the surface of polystyrene particles to endow the template particles with negative charges. The intercalation of chitosan particles into the CTA+-functionalised Mt layers was driven by electrostatic interactions. By calcinating the polystyrene core template in N2 at 500 °C, a hollow porous nanostructure was produced (Fig. 9a). Following calcination, the hollow porous Mt nanolayers–chitosan composites retained their spherical structure with almost no collapse, and the gaps between the Mt nanolayers also formed mesoporous channels. These nanostructures possess abundant inner and outer active sites, leading to wide applications in adsorption, catalysis, and drug delivery.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram showing the hard templating strategy for the preparation of Mt nanolayers–organic species composites. (a) Fabrication of core–shell and/or hollow mesoporous nanostructures by utilizing chitosan-functionalized polystyrene latex particles latex spheres as a hard template. (Adapted from ref. 73, Copyright 2019, with permission from Elsevier.) (b) Fabrication of COP with layered structure using Mt nanolayers as a hard template. (Adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic diagram to inclusion of AA and Am monomers into the house-of-cards nanostructured Mt as a hard template. (Adapted from ref. 74, Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.) AA: acrylic acid, Am: acrylamide, COP: covalent organic polymer, K10: Mt, TPP: tetraphenylporphyrin. 
Mt nanolayers have also been employed as a hard template to prepare hierarchical nanocomposites owing to the nanoscale interlayer space and space confinement effect. For example, 2D covalent organic polymers (COPs) were successfully fabricated by the polymerisation of tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP) molecules in layered confined spaces of K10 (i.e. Mt with a unique layered structure and ordered porosity), followed by chemical etching in an aqueous HF solution for 12 h at room temperature to remove the K10 template76 (Fig. 9b). In this template inclusion method, the confined space of K10 contributed to reducing the layer stack effect. Moreover, the precise geometries of the intercalated products can be finely controlled by adjusting the interlayer space of Mt. For example, Xu et al.77 prepared large-size single- or few-layer graphene sheets by calcining asphaltene-intercalated Mt nanocomposites. The interlayer space of pristine Mt restricts the growth of graphene, whereas the insertion of asphaltene molecules provides an appropriate interlayer space to facilitate graphene growth. After washing the resulting Mt-graphene nanocomposites using an acid solution containing 10 wt% HF and 10 wt% HCl, the Mt template was completely removed, and purified graphene sheets were obtained. The fabricated graphene sheets exhibited a length of 10.9 μm, a width of 6–7 μm, a thickness of ∼1.81 nm, and a smooth and continuous morphology with few defects. By employing Mt as the hard template, the above results demonstrate that the resulting nanostructures with well-defined sizes and shapes can be obtained by adjusting the interlayer space of Mt.
In addition, the house-of-cards structure of the exfoliated Mt nanolayers can serve as a hard template, providing a framework for the Mt nanolayers–organic species composites. For example, the in situ copolymerisation of acrylic acid (AA) and acrylamide (Am) monomers on the house-of-cards Mt assemblies can form hydrogel74 (Fig. 9c). The house-of-cards structure of Mt nanolayers provided a structural template for the hydrogels, leading to outstanding mechanical strength and toughness of the hydrogel.
Although the template inclusion method exhibited widespread success for the controlled synthesis of nanostructured materials, an important challenge remains in the template removal method without causing detrimental effects on the morphology and/or introducing impurities to the original nanostructures. In a study by Meyers et al.,78 low-temperature carbon materials were synthesised using combinations of zeolite and Mt templates with acrylonitrile, furfuryl alcohol, pyrene, and vinyl acetate as carbon precursors. The templates were removed by acid demineralisation. However, surface alcohols and other oxidation products were inadvertently introduced during the template removal process. In a recent study by Peng et al.,79 a nacre-inspired polydimethylsiloxane-Mt layered nanocomposite with high stiffness and toughness was successfully developed using an ice-templating technique. The resultant nanocomposite exhibits mechanical properties similar to those of natural soft materials and is thus expected to have potential applications in wearable devices, tissue engineering, and other related fields. However, several defects, bridges between the layers and ridges on the layer, are formed during removal of the ice template.
Soft templating
The inclusion of organic species into Mt nanolayers by soft templating has been widely employed to prepare supramolecular dendrimers and brick-and-mortar nanostructures, which mainly involve hydrogen bonding, covalent bonding, and chelation mechanisms.
Supramolecular dendrimers have received extensive attention because of their highly branched and well-defined radial structure with abundant surface-exposed terminal groups, which exhibit significant potential in various biomedical applications. For example, the cationic surfactant 3-aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES) can be used as a soft template to connect Mt nanolayers and β-cyclodextrin (CD) via hydrogen bonding between the ethoxy of APTES and the –OH on Mt nanolayers and the nucleophilic substitution reaction between mono-6-(p-toluenesulfonyl)-6-deoxy-b-CD (Ts-CD) and an amino group of APTES.80 The Mt nanolayers–CD composites were then further assembled into supramolecular dendrimers by intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl groups of the CD and the oxygen atoms of the SiO4 tetrahedrons on the Mt layer surface. The as-fabricated supramolecular dendrimers demonstrated great potential as excellent drug carriers with a high payload capacity.
Apart from supramolecular dendrimers, a soft templating approach has been successfully employed to prepare nanocomposites with nacre-like brick-and-mortar structures, which are durable and well controlled with an in-plane orientation. The nacre-like brick-and-mortar structure possesses excellent mechanical, toughness, and barrier properties owing to the highly orientated individual Mt layers at the inorganic–organic interface.75,81–83 For example, Takahashi et al.75 used an acrylic polymer as a soft template (or cross-linker) to enhance the connectivity between glycol-modified biomass lignin (GL) and lithium-montmorillonite (Li-Mt) nanolayers to form a film with a brick-and-mortar structure (Fig. 10a). In this film, the oxazoline groups in the side chains of the cross-linked acrylic polymer and the surface phenolic-OH (or carboxyl) groups of GL underwent a cross-linking polymerisation reaction. The stacking nature of the Mt nanolayers resulted in the formation of a brick-and-mortar structure. Zhang et al.84 used glutaraldehyde (GA) as a soft template to facilitate the interactions between the –OH groups of the PVA chains and the hydroxyl groups on the Mt nanolayers through the formation of covalent acetyl bridges, which could further increase the inclusion of PVA and Mt nanolayers. Dopamine (DA) has also been demonstrated as a soft template to link Mt nanolayers via catechol/Al ion chelation and hydrogen bonding, and links carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) by the formation of amide bonds between the carboxyl and amine groups85 (Fig. 10b). This brick-and-mortar structure endows the resulting Mt nanolayers–organic species films with enhanced thermal durability, low thermal expansion, oxygen barrier below the measurable limit, good stability, and high tensile strength.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the formation of Mt nanolayers–organic species composites with a brick-and-mortar structure using soft templating inclusion approach. (a) Preparation of the Mt nanolayers-GL film with acrylic polymer as a soft template. (Adapted from ref. 75, Copyright 2017, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) (b) Fabrication of the DA-CMC/Mt film with a brick-and-mortar structure using DA as a soft template. (Adapted from ref. 85 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) CMC: carboxymethyl cellulose, DA: dopamine, GL: glycol-modified biomass lignin. 
A combination of soft and hard templating has also been shown for the inclusion of organic species into Mt nanolayers. For instance, Wang et al.86 demonstrated the preparation of mesoporous carbon nanolayers through a confinement assembly of resol and F127 unimers in the interlayer space of Mt. F127 unimers and Mt functioned as soft and hard templates, respectively. The F127 micelles@Resol were assembled and arranged tightly and orderly between the Mt layers by vacuum evaporation at room temperature and subsequent thermal polymerisation at 100 °C. The nanoscale confined interlayer space of Mt allowed both resol molecules and F127 micelles to be assembled on the same plane, resulting in the formation of ordered mesopores perpendicular to the carbon nanosheets (OMCNS). The weight of Mt influenced the alignment of F127 micelles@Resol and consequently the structure of OMCNS. It was found that a slight excess of Mt was beneficial for forming an ordered structure. The driving force in this confinement assembly process of Mt-F127 micelles@Resol is hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl group of F127 micelles@Resol and the terminating oxygen groups of the Mt layer surface. The resultant carbon nanosheets with a monolayer-ordered mesoporous structure were obtained after carbonisation, followed by acid washing to completely remove the Mt template (Fig. 11). The monolayer-ordered mesoporous carbon nanosheets with a high graphitisation degree exhibited efficient ion diffusion and fast electrode material routes, which have potential applications in electrochemical energy storage devices.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram illustrating the preparation of mesoporous carbon nanosheets through the confinement assembly of F127 micelles@Resol as a soft template into the interlayer space of Mt as a hard template. (Adapted from ref. 86, Copyright 2018, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) OMCNS: ordered mesopores perpendicular to the carbon nanosheets. 
Potential applications of hierarchical montmorillonite–organic species nanocomposites
Adsorbents
The inclusion of organic species into Mt nanolayers is a simple and efficient strategy for preparing inorganic–organic gel-based adsorbents with a well-defined 3D network structure. Because the Mt nanolayers possess a high surface energy, cation exchange capacity, and abundant surface hydroxyl groups as adsorption sites, the gels exhibit enhanced mechanical properties and excellent adsorption capacity towards various organic molecules. Hydrogels formed from Mt nanolayers and organic species exhibit high and selective adsorption towards organic dyes, e.g. Mt nanolayers–chitosan gel, whose 3D network is constructed by hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions between the Mt nanolayers and chitosan.87 The composite hydrogels can effectively adsorb methylene blue (MB) molecules via cation exchange and hydrogen bonding interactions. Furthermore, the structure of the Mt nanolayers–chitosan hydrogels can be engineered by simply varying the loading amounts of Mt nanolayers, which impact the adsorption capacity of the dye. For example, the Mt nanolayers–chitosan gels with a low concentration (15 g L−1) of Mt nanolayers (LG-15) exhibited a looser stratified structure than the gels containing high concentrations (45 g L−1) of Mt nanolayers (HG-45). The results revealed that the as-prepared LG-15 gels with a looser structure provided more exposed adsorption sites, thus increasing the probability of contact between the MB molecules and the gel surface, leading to an increase in the removal. Therefore, LG-15 exhibited a greater adsorption capacity for MB molecules in water than HG-45.
The well-exfoliated Mt nanolayers can provide electronegative high-layer surfaces and fully exposed reaction sites for the removal of MB and act as a support for the gels. Wang et al.88 demonstrated that an Mt nanolayers–poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) gel can also adsorb MB. AM connected AA through polymerisation to form a reticular framework with a free entrance for macromolecules, and Mt nanolayers connected AM through hydrogen bonding to support and maintain the reticular framework (Fig. 12). The resultant gels possessed abundant functional groups, such as amino, carboxyl, and hydroxyl (–NH2, –COOH, –OH) and channels over 10 μm in size, allowing the MB molecules to easily enter and combine with reactive sites on the surface and interior surface. Such functional groups would give out protons as the pH increased, leading to an enhanced adsorption capacity for MB. Under the same conditions (pH = 8, hydrogel dosage = 0.5 g L−1, initial MB concentration of 200 mg L−1, and temperature of 30 °C), the pristine gel without Mt nanolayers could only remove 37.8% of MB, whereas the gel containing 33.3% Mt nanolayers achieved 97% removal capacity. The removal capacity can be improved continuously with increasing amounts of Mt nanolayers in the hydrogel. The adsorptive removal of Mt nanolayers–organic species gels has also been tested for toxic heavy metal ions, such as Pb2+,89 Cu2+,74 and Ni2+90via ion exchange, electrostatic interactions, and complexation mechanisms. In this case, the Mt nanolayers–chitosan hydrogels with a high specific surface area and porous structure could adsorb Pb2+ through cation exchange with Na+ present in Mt nanolayers.89 The porosity of the gel can be controlled by adjusting the ratio of Mt nanolayers–chitosan. Of the prepared gels with different Mt nanolayers–chitosan mass ratios of 3:1, 5:1, and 10:1, the one with a mass ratio of 10:1 possessed the loosest structure with a maximum adsorption capacity of 76.74 mg g−1 at 25 °C.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the preparation of 2D Mt nanolayers–poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) hydrogels. (Adapted from ref. 88, Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.) AA: acrylic acid, AM: acrylamide, MB: methyl blue, PAA: polyacrylic acid, PAM: polyacrylamide. 
In another report, Zhou et al.74 prepared 2D Mt nanolayers–poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) hydrogels for the Cu2+ removal. Both the carboxyl groups of AA and the negatively charged surface of the Mt nanolayers act as binding sites for Cu2+. Furthermore, shaping the Mt nanolayers–poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) gel into beads resulted in an improved metal uptake capacity. In this context, the bead structure may provide a higher contact surface area and a shorter diffusion pathway for Cu2+ contacting the inner sorption sites within the bead. The adsorption capacities of the gel beads with 20 wt% AA and 4 wt% AM were 105.99, 123.65, and 136.23 mg g−1 at 25, 35, and 45 °C, respectively, which shows 2.5 times the uptake capacity of bulk hydrogel. Therefore, this report showed that the design of gels to gel beads is an effective way to enhance the adsorption capacity of composites.
Catalysts
The 2D Mt nanolayers–organic species composites have also been utilised as supports for various noble and transition metal nanostructures, solid acids, and sulfides to facilitate their uniform distribution within the matrix and thus enhance their catalytic performance.
Among a wide range of catalytically active metals, gold nanoparticles are of significant interest and importance in various liquid-phase catalytic reactions, such as oxidation,91 reduction,92 rearrangement,93 and C–C coupling reactions.94 Although gold nanoparticles show intrinsic activity in these reactions, unsupported colloidal Au nanoparticles have a strong tendency to grow and agglomerate into larger particles or clusters, leading to their poor dispersion and loss of catalytic activity. In this regard, the incorporation of Au nanoparticles into Mt nanolayers–organic species composites can be a facile approach to prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles and achieve uniform dispersion, thus maintaining a high catalytic activity.95 The hydrogen bonding interactions between the oxygen atoms of citrate-stabilised Au nanoparticles and the hydrogen atoms of the polyaniline (PANI) polymer can facilitate the effective anchoring of Au nanoparticles on the Mt nanolayers–PANI nanoflakes.96 The small and well-dispersed Au nanoparticles of Mt nanolayers–PANI nanoflakes endow the resultant nanocomposites with superior catalytic activity towards the reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol by sodium borohydride (NaBH4). Moreover, the Au nanoparticles/Mt nanolayers–PANI nanoflakes also exhibited good reusability in consecutive reaction cycles.
Solid heteropolyacids, such as 12-molybdophosphoric (PMo) and tungstophosphoric (PW) acids, have also been loaded into Mt nanolayers–organic species composites to produce highly acidic catalysts. Due to the solubility of acids in many solvents, their use has been limited. For example, Farahani et al.97 reported the incorporation of Keggin-type PMo moieties onto the CTA+-intercalated Mt to produce an Mt-supported (CTA)3PMo catalyst for the green and efficient synthesis of 2,4,5-trisubstituted imidazoles under solvent-free conditions. The existence of intercalated CTA+ in the interlayer space of Mt imparts hydrophobicity to the catalyst, which promotes the accessibility of hydrophobic reactant molecules to the active sites during the catalytic reaction. Moreover, the as-prepared nanocomposite demonstrated good stability and reusability without a significant structure. The amount of loaded PMo from 0.031 to 0.021 mmol g−1 after five catalytic runs. Owing to the high solubility of solid heteropolyacids, such as PMo, in various solvents, it is difficult to separate and recover PMo from the reaction mixture for practical applications. However, the Mt nanolayers-supported (CTA)3PMo catalyst can be easily separated from the reaction mixture, which has advantages of using heterogeneous catalysts in various catalytic syntheses.
Mt nanolayers–organic species composites can also be used as a support for nanolayered sulfides. For example, MoS2 nanolayers exhibit many active sites, large surface areas, and large surface energies.98 However, MoS2 nanolayers easily agglomerate into clusters owing to their hydrophobicity. MoS2 was loaded onto the Mt nanolayers with porous 3D house-of-cards structures by in situ hydrothermal synthesis. Thus, the active sites on MoS2 were well preserved and MoS2 was well dispersed in the aqueous phase.99 The 3D house-of-cards structure provided more surfaces for the loading of MoS2. The catalyst maintained a high and stable catalytic performance for the decomposition of methyl orange dye after five regeneration cycles.
Drug vehicles
Mt nanolayers–organic species composites can also be employed as potential carriers for various therapeutic agents to achieve targeted and controlled drug delivery templates with enhanced efficacy and reduced systemic toxicity in vivo.100 For example, nanocomposites comprising self-assembling cyclodextrin, functionalised Mt nanolayers, and organic species exhibit controlled and targeted release of the chemotherapy drug 5-fluorouracil. The Mt nanolayers could offer intercalation opportunities for 5-fluorouracil, whereas CD could form inclusion complexes with 5-fluorouracil by the entrance of 5-fluorouracil into the cavity, and the dendrimer-like composite could encapsulate 5-fluorouracil, resulting in Mt nanolayers–CD supramolecular dendrimer-like composites. The resultant nanocomposites exhibited a high 5-fluorouracil loading capacity of 25.87% in the pH range of 5–11 at 80 °C and sustained drug release over 120 h. In addition, the 5-fluorouracil loaded Mt nanolayers–CD supramolecular composites could be internalised by human ovarian cancer cells through endocytosis.
The administration of oral drugs is subject to physiological constraints imposed by the gastrointestinal tract and can cause irritation to the gastrointestinal mucosa. To address this issue, a robust carrier must be developed. An Mt nanolayers-zeolitic imidazolate framework (Mt-ZIF-8) was developed in a successive one-pot fabrication of ZIF-8 encapsulated medicine, followed by Mt coating to yield a core–shell nanoplatform.101 The Mt nanolayers-ZIF-8 can act as an oral nanoplatform for gastrointestinal drug delivery. The Mt coating could enhance the mucous-adhesive capacity and thus retard the collapse of ZIF-8 in the stomach via ion exchange to prolong the release time of drugs. The release time of aspirin from Mt nanolayers-ZIF-8 was twice that of ZIF-8. By controlling the content of Mt nanolayers, a new core–shell nanoplatform that accommodates various target molecules can be successfully formed with modulated release profiles.
Antibiotics can also be successfully loaded into the Mt nanolayers–organic species composites to achieve targeted and sustained drug release, which have potential use in medical implants or devices. For example, Xu et al.102 demonstrated the fabrication of antibacterial multilayered films comprising Mt nanolayers and poly-L-lysine (PLL) via an LbL technique for on-demand drug release. In this study, gentamicin sulfate (GS), a broad-spectrum antibiotic used to treat skin infections, was embedded into the Mt-PLL multilayered films during self-assembly through electrostatic interactions with Mt nanolayers. When the GS-loaded Mt-PLL multilayered film was in contact with chymotrypsin or bacterial microenvironment, the gradual degradation of the PLL layer in the film triggered the controlled release of GS from the substrate, exhibiting on-demand self-defence antibiotic release characteristics and long-term antibacterial properties.
Sensors
Mt nanolayers–organic species composites can also be used as colorimetric sensors for food quality control during the storage and transportation of food. For example, an Mt nanolayers-EVOH multilayered film coated with mulberry anthocyanin (MBA) was fabricated using the LbL technique.12 The addition of Mt can improve the oxygen barrier of the resulting multilayered film, which can effectively prevent the oxidation of MBA from atmospheric oxygen. Typically, the (Mt nanolayers-EVOH)40-MBA3 (20 cycles of Mt nanolayers-EVOH each and 3 layers of MBA colorimetric coating) film exhibited a pH-dependent colour change that could be readily observed by the naked eye. Such films have been successfully used to monitor the quality of shrimp products.
Mt nanolayers–organic species composites have also been widely used as electrochemical sensors for clinically important biomolecules, such as glucose,103 uric acid,56 and DA.104 DA is an important neurotransmitter that regulates various physiological functions of the central nervous system, including cognition, movement, memory, attention, motivation, and learning. Abnormal DA levels in the human body can induce various neurological disorders, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases, schizophrenia, addiction, and bipolar disorder. Therefore, monitoring is important for maintaining normal functions in human beings. Electrochemical sensors based on the LbL-assembled films of Na–Mt nanolayers and nickel phthalocyanine (NiTsPc) have been reported for the detection of DA at micromolar concentrations.56 The synergistic effect between the Mt nanolayers and NiTsPc in the LbL film could enhance the adsorption capacity of Mt nanolayers and the catalytic activity of NiTsPc. In the presence of common interferents, such as ascorbic acid and uric acid, the fabricated sensor exhibited a low detection limit of 1.0 μmol L−1 and a wide linear range of 5–150 μmol L−1. Moreover, the practical analytical utility of the Mt nanolayers–NiTsPc LbL film-based sensor has been demonstrated for the detection of human urine samples spiked with 3.0 μmol L−1 of DA with good sensitivity and accuracy.
The immobilisation of enzymes on the Mt nanolayers–organic species matrix represents another strategy for the fabrication of robust biosensors.105 For example, a highly selective and robust glucose biosensor was fabricated by anchoring a glucose oxidase enzyme on a platinum nanoparticle/Mt nanolayers–PANI matrix.106 The network-like structure of the platinum nanoparticle/Mt nanolayers–PANI composite was found to be beneficial for the entrapment and immobilisation of high enzyme loading. Because of the synergy block of Mt nanolayers–PANI composites towards various interfering species, including glycine (Gly), D-galactose (D-Gal), urea (Urea), L-phenylalanine (L-Phe), and L-tyrosine (L-Tyr), the fabricated sensor exhibited high selectivity and excellent anti-interference to these six interfering substances. In addition, the biosensor demonstrated good repeatability in the linear concentration range from 10 μmol L−1 to 1.94 mmol L−1, with a low detection limit of 0.1 μmol L−1. In another study, Mt nanolayers-4-aminothiophenol composites as a matrix for biosensors can protect the enzyme from leakage and maintain enzyme bioactivity.107 The 4-aminothiophenol intercalated Mt with an amino functional group (–NH2) could immobilise the enzyme pyranose oxidase by covalent bonding; immobilisation using covalent bonding exhibited longer stability. The pyranose oxidase/Mt nanolayers-4-aminothiophenol-based biosensor exhibited a wide linear concentration range of 0.01–0.5 mmol L−1, with a low detection limit of 1.0 μmol L−1 towards glucose molecules. Moreover, the fabricated biosensor can be used for the practical detection of glucose in human blood serum.
Flame retardant coatings
Flame retarded plastics have been widely used in electrical and electronic equipment to improve consumer fire safety. However, the addition of flame retardants to the plastic matrix by physical blending or chemical reactions may adversely affect the mechanical properties of the substrates. In contrast, the deposition of flame retardant coatings on the surface of the substrates is an effective strategy to improve the flame retardancy of substrates without compromising the inherent mechanical properties of the plastic. Mt nanolayers–organic species coatings have been explored in flame retardant materials.
The combination of Mt nanolayers and chitosan biopolymers has been widely investigated as flame retardant coatings. In this case, chitosan acts as mortar and the Mt nanolayers act as bricks to form a coating with a well-defined brick-and-mortar structure. The synthesised Mt nanolayers–chitosan coating can provide extremely zigzag paths for the permeation of oxygen molecules across the membrane, and thus exhibits low oxygen permeability and flame retardancy.108 In addition, the thermal treatment process of the Mt nanolayers–chitosan coating can form a thermal insulation carbon layer that inhibits the heat from being transferred to the internal substrate. The Mt nanolayers–chitosan coating can be applied to various substrates with planar and curved surfaces, such as sisal fibre cellulose microcrystals,60 Chinese Xuan paper,109 polylactic acid film, and polyurethane foam.57 Moreover, the deposition of Mt nanolayers–chitosan coating on these substrates may also impart or reinforce the properties of these film substrates.
Ternary coatings containing PVA, ammonium polyphosphate, and Mt nanolayers have also exhibited excellent flame retardant properties. The deposition of an Mt nanolayers–PVA coating on the flexible polyurethane foam surface can protect the unburned polyurethane foam owing to the two inhibition effects.110 First, high-level orientation and densely accumulated Mt nanolayers can serve as protective layers to prevent oxygen and heat from entering the polyurethane foam during combustion. Second, Mt nanolayers can be stacked with the carbonaceous material produced by PVA and polyurethane stacked together to suppress and trap the rising gas generated by the decomposition of the polyurethane foam during the surface burning process.
The coating has also been applied to bio-based and inexpensive cellulosic paper. Natural cellulose is well known for its flammable property, which can occur under intense decomposition reactions, such as pyrolysis and oxidation reactions. By coating Mt nanolayers–ammonium polyphosphate composites on cellulose paper, the resultant coated paper demonstrated enhanced thermal stability and flame retardancy properties.111 Cellulose can be used as a carbon source and ammonium polyphosphate produces in situ phosphoric acid and serves as a foaming agent, contributing to char formation between Mt nanolayers–ammonium polyphosphate and cellulose. The intumescent char protects the cellulose fibres from further oxidation and decomposition. When the Mt nanolayers–ammonium polyphosphate content exceeded 10%, the flame retardant paper self-extinguished immediately after ignition.
Phase change materials
PCMs are materials that can reversibly store and release large amounts of thermal energy within a constant or narrow temperature range; they exhibit promising applications in solar energy storage,112–115 thermal management,116 heating and cooling systems in vehicles and buildings,117 and food.118 However, conventional PCMs have several limitations, such as low thermal storage capacity, poor solar absorption, low thermal conductivity, and leakage of PCMs during the phase change process, thus limiting their applications in real scenarios. One potential approach to overcome such limitations is the addition of materials with high conductivity to PCMs. In this regard, Mt possesses both high thermal conductivity and excellent absorbability, and PCMs were included by Mt nanolayers, which is an effective method for addressing the above challenges.119
Mt-SA-based PCMs prepared by liquid-phase intercalation have recently demonstrated the ability to control the phase transition temperature of SA molecules. The Si4+/Al3+ ratio of Mt was tailored by acidification to modulate its layer charge density, which impacted the energy storage performance of the composite system. Because the electrostatic interaction between positively charged SA molecules and negatively charged central Si hexagonal ring in Mt increases with increasing layer charge density, the layer charge of Mt can affect the arrangement and loading amount of SA molecules in the interlayer space, which also regulates the intercalated interlayer amount of SA, and thus adjust the phase change temperature of the resultant Mt-SA-based PCMs (Fig. 13a). The results demonstrated that the exothermic phase change temperature of the Mt-SA-based PCMs decreased from 50.5 to 32 °C compared to that of pristine SA molecules,120 making it suitable for low-temperature energy storage systems. However, the PCMs obtained by the intercalation of SA molecules in the interlayer space of Mt experience limitations such as low loading capacity of the material and low thermal storage capacity (151 J g−1). To address this issue, a core–shell 2D Mt nanolayers-SA PCM, which exhibits a high latent heat storage capacity, excellent structural stability, and outstanding cycling performance, was produced (Fig. 13b). Encapsulation of the SA with Mt nanolayers can prevent the leakage of PCMs, and thinner Mt nanolayers can reduce the volume of the shell and increase the mass fraction of SA in PCM.121 The weight fraction (82.11%) of SA in the PCM yielded a latent heat storage capacity of 184.88 J g−1. Owing to the high thermal conductivity of the Mt nanolayers, the thermal conductivity of the PCM reached 159.46% SA. Additionally, the fabricated PCMs exhibited good shape stability after 50 heating/cooling cycles.37
 Fig. 13  Three models of forming PCMs based on Mt and SA encapsulated Mt nanolayers. (a) Intercalation of SA molecules in the interlayer space of Mt. (Adapted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.) (b) 2D Mt nanolayer-encapsulated SA. (Adapted from ref. 37, Copyright 2019, with permission from Elsevier.) (c) 3D Mt framework-encapsulated SA. (Adapted from ref. 122, Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.) SA: stearic acid. 
The use of a 3D network framework as a supporting material can be employed to encapsulate a higher loading of PCM (Fig. 13c). The inclusion of Mt nanolayers and chitosan can form a 3D structure of house-of-cards, and the peculiar structure can encapsulate 95.2 wt% SA to produce a PCM with high thermal energy storage capacity (198.78 J g−1).113 The 3D-Mt nanolayers framework provided a massive pore structure for loading SA, a framework for retaining the shape stability of the PCM, and interconnected conductive pathways for improving the heat transfer ability and photothermal conversion performance. Because SA can be trapped inside the 3D-Mt nanolayers framework, the PCM showed stable cycling performance after 100 heating/cooling cycles. The 3D-Mt nanolayers-SA PCM exhibits great potential in sustainable energy fields and storage.
Conclusions
To the best of our knowledge, this review conceives and highlights, for the first time, the processing of Mt nanolayers with guest ions and molecules to form hierarchical nanostructured composites from the perspective of inclusion chemistry rather than intercalation chemistry. The inclusion strategies of organic or inorganic ions and molecules into the exfoliated nanolayers lead to a wide range of hierarchical nanostructured composites. The strategies include LbL deposition, evaporation, and hard and soft templating processes. In addition to these approaches to preparing hierarchical Mt–organic species nanocomposites, supramolecular assemblies have recently attracted significant attention as an alternative approach. Emphasizing the concept of inclusion chemistry of layered clay minerals are believed to be able to stimulate researchers' interest in developing new hierarchical functional Mt–organic species nanocomposites.
In the context of hierarchical Mt–organic species nanocomposites, well-exfoliated Mt nanolayers are first needed to ensure proper surface and interface interactions with the species, thus leading to enhanced performance or properties. Although extensive progress has been made towards improving the efficiency of exfoliation processes for high productivity of individual Mt nanolayers, future efforts are required to focus on the following aspects: (1) to conduct an in-depth investigation into the relationships between mechanical forces and chemical interactions during exfoliation; (2) to appropriately select mechanical forces, alone or in combination with chemical reactions, to improve the exfoliation efficiency of Mt nanolayers of high quality without breakage of the Mt layer and creation of defects in the crystalline structure; (3) to seek an efficient and scalable method for the sustainable large-scale production of defect-free Mt nanolayers; (4) to find a way to quick evaluation of the quality of the exfoliated Mt nanolayers, including the measurement of thickness, lateral size, and defect content.
The appropriate selection of liquid-phase inclusion techniques for organic species in Mt nanolayers is crucial to production of inorganic–organic composites with hierarchical nanostructures and enhanced functionalities. In LbL deposition techniques, spray coating remains the preferred choice for the preparation of Mt nanolayers–organic species thin films because of its easy operation, time-saving, and minimal material consumption compared to other film formation methods. In the case of templating approaches, the possibility of creating hierarchical Mt–organic species nanostructures with novel and more complex architectures can be accomplished by employing hard templates with special geometric shapes. However, it should also be noted that the final morphology and properties of the resultant inorganic–organic nanocomposites could be adversely affected by the template removal process.
Considering many functional organic compounds available, it is reasonable to expect that the inclusion strategies discussed above will lead to the development of many novel supramolecular Mt–organic species nanostructures with unique morphologies and properties. In particular, the research of inclusion chemistry of Mt nanolayers will have a wide range applications in drug delivery, sensing, PCMs, and wearable devices. Moreover, it might deepen the understanding of many natural phenomena, such as the nitrogen fixation by soil and the preservation of organic matter in atmospheric and cosmic dust. Besides, considering that there are also many 2D layered materials, advances in the inclusion chemistry of Mt nanolayers have great implications for engineering many other 2D layered materials into novel hierarchical nanocomposites.
Author contributions
X. X. Chen: investigation, methodology, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing; J. H. Liu, A. Kurniawan & K. J. Li: writing – review & editing; C. H. Zhou: conceptualization, supervision, writing-review & editing, project administration, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Scientific Foundation of China (22072136, 41672033), the Zhejiang 151 Talents Project, The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Green Chemistry-Synthesis Technology, The Zhejiang University of Technology (GCTKF2014006), Engineering Research Center of Non-metallic Minerals of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Institute of Geology and Mineral Resource, Hangzhou 310007, China (ZD2020K09). CHZ dedicates this work to the memory of his father Jun Hai ZHOU (1943.2.22-2021.9.5), who passed away on Sunday, September 5, 2021, the day CHZ was handling the revision of the manuscript.
References
V. Jayaraman and A. Mani, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 235, 116242 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Shifa, F. M. Wang, Y. Liu and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. W. Jiao, Y. Wang, Y. C. Wang, C. Shen, H. Qi and A. D. Shen, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, L. L. Hou, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600671 CrossRef .
T. T. Zhu, C. H. Zhou, F. B. Kabwe, Q. Q. Wu, C. S. Li and J. R. Zhang, Appl. Clay Sci., 2019, 169, 48–66 CrossRef CAS .
C. Swearingen, S. Macha and A. Fitch, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 199, 149–160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yi and Z. G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11700–11715 RSC .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
G. Z. Zhuang, Z. P. Zhang, S. M. Peng, J. H. Gao and M. Jaber, Appl. Clay Sci., 2018, 161, 505–512 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tomczak, J. Łopiński, K. Kowalczyk, B. Schmidt and J. Rokicka, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 126, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. He and B. Huang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 49263 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Kang, H. L. Wang, M. Guo, L. D. Zhang, M. M. Chen, S. W. Jiang, X. J. Li and S. T. Jiang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 13268–13276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhou, W. J. Guan and C. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11370–11373 RSC .
S. S. Xu, Q. Xu, N. Wang, Z. M. Chen, Q. G. Tian, H. X. Yang and K. X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3262–3272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Huang, X. L. Deng, H. Wan, F. S. Chen, Y. F. Lin, X. J. Xu, R. Z. Ma and T. Sasaki, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5227–5237 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lin, C. C. Chu, M. L. Chiang and W. C. Tsai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18115–18120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Chen, Y. Yuan, Y. L. Zhao, F. Rao and S. X. Song, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 548, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Yi, H. Y. Bai, Y. Y. Zhao, F. F. Min and S. X. Song, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 41471–41478 RSC .
H. Y. Bai, Y. L. Zhao, W. Wang, T. T. Zhang, H. Yi and S. X. Song, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 17054–17063 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hofmeister, Arch. Exp. Pathol. Pharmakol., 1888, 24, 247–260 Search PubMed .
K. Yotsuji, Y. Tachi, H. Sakuma and K. Kawamura, Appl. Clay Sci., 2021, 204, 106034 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Boek, P. V. Coveney and N. T. Skipper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12608–12617 CrossRef CAS .
Tim J. Tambach, Peter G. Bolhuis, Emiel J. M. Hensen and B. Smit, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1223–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Sun and T. Tsukahara, ACS Earth Space Chem., 2020, 4, 535–544 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Lei, V. N. Mochalin, D. Liu, S. Qin, Y. Gogotsi and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O’Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarsk, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O’Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J. Pennycook, C. Downing, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Cai, Y. T. Luo, B. L. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6224–6266 RSC .
H. C. Tao, Y. Q. Zhang, Y. N. Gao, Z. Y. Sun, C. Yan and J. Texter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 921–960 RSC .
A. R. Ramadan, A. M. K. Esawi and A. A. Gawad, Appl. Clay Sci., 2010, 47, 196–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wan, A. L. Yan, H. Xiong, G. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. J. Cao and X. H. Liu, Appl. Clay Sci., 2020, 194, 105695 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Santos, E. Bischoff, S. A. Liberman, M. A. S. Oviedo and R. S. Mauler, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, H. Ding, A. T. Smith, X. H. Jia, S. Chen, L. Liu, S. E. Chavez, Z. L. Hou, J. J. Liu, H. F. Cheng, Q. F. Liu and L. Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14089–14096 RSC .
T. X. Chen, Y. Yuan, Y. L. Zhao, F. Rao and S. X. Song, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 2368–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Li, H. Lu, Y. Y. Lin, X. L. Xie and L. J. Wang, Bull. Chin. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 35, 1372–1377 Search PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. Zhao and S. Song, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 525, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
Y. l. Zhao, H. Yi, F. F. Jia, H. L. Li, C. S. Peng and S. X. Song, Powder Technol., 2017, 306, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, W. Q. Zhan, Y. L. Zhao, S. G. Qu, W. Wang, P. Chen and S. X. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 192, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
Z. l. Zhang and Z. D. Cui, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 2018, 145, 185–196 CrossRef .
Q. Y. Zhang, L. Mei, X. H. Cao, Y. X. Tang and Z. Y. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15417–15444 RSC .
Y. X. Guo, J. H. Liu, W. P. Gates and C. H. Zhou, Clays Clay Miner., 2021, 68, 601–622 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Su, J. H. Shan and J. P. Zheng, Polym. Compos., 2016, 37, 1705–1714 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, M. Xia, F. Wang, P. Li and M. Shi, Appl. Clay Sci., 2021, 207, 106086 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Zhuang, H. X. Zhang, H. Wu, Z. P. Zhang and L. B. Liao, Appl. Clay Sci., 2017, 135, 244–252 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Jones, Clay Miner., 1983, 18, 399–410 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yu, Y. C. Ke, Q. C. Deng, S. C. Lu, J. Q. Ji, X. Hu and Y. Zhao, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 964 CrossRef .
G. Lazorenko, A. Kasprzhitskii and V. Yavna, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 692, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Yan, P. Zhang, X. Q. Chen, C. L. Bao, R. Zhao, J. S. Hu, C. Liu and Q. Lin, Appl. Clay Sci., 2020, 189, 105519 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Yin, Z. P. Zhang, S. Q. Wu, J. L. Tan and K. Meng, Mater. Express, 2015, 5, 180–190 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kakuta, Y. Baba, T. A. Yamagishi and T. Ogoshi, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 10637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Ding, J. Li, B. W. Zhang and Y. J. Luo, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 17083–17092 RSC .
R. J. Liu, S. X. Li, T. A. Otitoju, S. Wang, A. L. Zhang and L. N. Zhang, Appl. Nanosci., 2021, 11, 1427–1436 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Huang, Y. Chen, X. Yan, X.-J. Guo, L. Dong and W.-Z. Lang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 614, 118540 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Zhao, F. Rao and S. Song, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 40823–40828 RSC .
R. K. Iler, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 569–594 CrossRef CAS .
R. McNeil Jr and P. J. Paukstelis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701019 CrossRef PubMed .
N. C. de Lucena, C. M. Miyazaki, F. M. Shimizu, C. J. L. Constantino and M. Ferreira, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 436, 957–966 CrossRef CAS .
G. Laufer, C. Kirkland, A. A. Cain and J. C. Grunlan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1643–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, X. L. Liu, M. L. Geier, J. J. McMorrow, D. Jariwala, M. E. Beck, W. Huang, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 63–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mentbayeva, S. Sukhishvili, M. Naizakarayev, N. Batyrgali, Z. Seitzhan and Z. Bakenov, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 366, 137454 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, S. H. Zeng, Y. Y. Tan, W. Wang, J. Lv and H. X. Liu, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 2015, 1–7 CrossRef .
J. J. Richardson, M. Bjornmalm and F. Caruso, Science, 2015, 348, aaa2491 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Zhou, Z. F. Shen, L. H. Liu and S. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15132–15153 RSC .
K. Shanmugam, S. Ang, M. Maliha, V. Raghuwanshi, S. Varanasi, G. Garnier and W. Batchelor, Cellulose, 2020, 28, 405–416 CrossRef .
K. W. Choi, J. W. Kim, T. S. Kwon, S. W. Kang, J. I. Song and Y. T. Park, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, E. Kim, G. W. Rubloff, W. E. Bentley and G. F. Payne, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5817–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Zhang, A. Sanati-Nezhad and S. H. Hejazi, Lab Chip, 2018, 18, 285–295 RSC .
S. Batool, R. Gill, M. Arshad, H. M. Siddiqi and S. S. Qureshi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 46079 CrossRef .
A. Simchi, F. Pishbin and A. R. Boccaccini, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 2253–2256 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Wang, T. K. Huang, S. H. Tung, T. M. Wu and J. J. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2621 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Pujala, M. P. Kumar and S. Dhara, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 304003 CrossRef .
P. Xu, T. Erdem and E. Eiser, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 5497–5505 RSC .
P. Arabkhani, A. Asfaram and M. Ateia, J. Water Process. Eng., 2020, 38, 101651 CrossRef .
P. Chen, Y. L. Zhao, T. X. Chen, T. T. Zhang and S. X. Song, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2019, 35, 2325–2330 CrossRef .
Q. Zhou, Y. Li, H. Liu and X. J. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 598, 124836 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, R. Ishii, T. Nakamura, A. Suzuki, T. Ebina, M. Yoshida, M. Kubota, T. T. Nge and T. Yamada, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606512 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Cheng and Z. Xiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7871–7877 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Z. C. Xiong, X. Y. Shi, X. L. Wu, X. Chen, X. B. Liao, B. J. Ma, H. W. Zhai and Y. S. Xu, J. Nanomater., 2019, 2019, 1–6 CrossRef .
C. J. Meyers, S. D. Shah, S. C. Patel, R. M. Sneeringer, C. A. Bessel, N. R. Dollahon, R. A. Leising and E. S. Takeuchi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2143–2152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, A. P. Tomsia, L. Jiang, B. Z. Tang and Q. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Yu, L. J. Pan, L. L. Sun, J. Li, J. C. Shang, S. R. Zhang, D. Q. Liu and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 9043–9052 RSC .
G. E. Pander. and N. Beecher, Polym. Eng. Sci., 1970, 10, 185–193 CrossRef .
F. Barthelat, C.-M. Li, C. Comi and H. D. Espinosa, J. Mater. Res., 2006, 21, 1977–1986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, H. P. Zhao, X. Q. Feng and H. J. Gao, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2012, 60, 1400–1419 CrossRef .
B. Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y. X. Zhang, W. Q. Gao, Y. C. Hou and G. X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18046–18051 RSC .
T. Y. Guo, L. H. Gu, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, B. Jiang, H. F. Zhao, Y. C. Jin and H. N. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14033–14041 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. L. Xu, B. Ding, Z. Chang, X. G. Zhang, Y. Yamauchi and K. C. W. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2894–2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Kang, Y. L. Zhao, W. Wang, T. T. Zhang, T. X. Chen, H. Yi, F. Rao and S. X. Song, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. G. Wang, Y. L. Zhao, H. Y. Bai, M. Y. Huang, T. T. Zhang and S. X. Song, Environ. Pollut., 2020, 257, 113574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. L. Zhao, H. Yi, T. X. Chen, S. C. Kang, T. T. Zhang, F. Rao and S. X. Song, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 128, 85–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kameda, R. Honda, S. Kumagai, Y. Saito and T. Yoshioka, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 236, 121784 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, Z. Z. Chen, C. Wei, X. K. Wan, W. Z. Li and Q. Z. Lin, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 11510–11518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, N. Shafiei, M. Eslamipanah, P. Fakhri, B. Jaleh, Y. Orooji and R. S. Varma, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2020, 22, 1715–1724 CrossRef CAS .
I. Fratoddi, S. Cerra, T. A. Salamone, R. Fioravanti, F. Sciubba, E. Zampetti, A. Macagnano, A. Generosi, B. Paci, F. A. Scaramuzzo, R. Matassa, G. Familiari, C. Battocchio, M. Marsotto, P. Papa and A. Bearzotti, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 2930–2940 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Yu, H. Su, G. Y. Zhai, S. N. Zhang, L. H. Sun, J. S. Chen and X. H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 741–744 RSC .
H. B. Yao, L. B. Mao, Y. X. Yan, H. P. Cong, X. Lei and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8250–8260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Xia, T. J. Li, C. Ma, C. Gao and J. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20516–20520 RSC .
M. M. Farahani, A. Ezabadi, R. Mazarei, P. Ataeinia, S. Shahsavarifar and F. Mousavi, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34, 8 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Qiao, Z. W. Zhang, F. Y. Tian, D. F. Hou, Z. F. Tian, D. S. Li and Q. C. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 3538–3547 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Q. M. Wang, J. R. Rangel-Mendez, F. F. Jia, S. X. Song and B. Q. Yang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 246, 122829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayrajsinh, G. Shankar, Y. K. Agrawal and L. Bakre, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2017, 39, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhao, H. S. Ye, J. Zhou, G. P. Tang, Z. Y. Hou and H. Z. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49431–49441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. W. Xu, X. Li, Y. Y. Jin, L. Sun, X. X. Ding, L. Liang, L. Wang, K. H. Nan, J. Ji, H. Chen and B. L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19245–19254 RSC .
X. X. Zhu, Y. Xue, S. Han, W. Chen, M. Fu, Y. Gao, S. M. Nie, Q. Y. Liu, X. X. Zhang and X. Zhang, Appl. Clay Sci., 2020, 195, 105718 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yadav, P. Singh, V. Ganesan, R. Gupta, P. K. Sonkar and D. K. Yadav, Electroanalysis, 2019, 32, 248–257 CrossRef .
N. An, C. H. Zhou, X. Y. Zhuang, D. S. Tong and W. H. Yu, Appl. Clay Sci., 2015, 114, 283–296 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, M. K. Liu, Z. P. Yan and J. F. Chen, Microchem. J., 2020, 152, 104266 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Yilmaz, E. E. Yalcinkaya, D. O. Demirkol and S. Timur, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 307, 127665 CrossRef .
S. D. Jiang, Z. M. Bai, G. Tang, L. Song, A. A. Stec, T. R. Hull, Y. Hu and W. Z. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14076–14086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Fang, X. H. Liu, H. L. Zheng and W. C. Shang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 235, 115782 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Ding, J. J. Liu, S. S. Zeng, Y. Xia, K. M. Wells, M. Ping Nieh and L. Sun, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1701212 CrossRef PubMed .
P. F. Qin, D. Q. Yi, J. Xing, M. Z. Zhou and J. W. Hao, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2021, 245 DOI:10.1007/s10973-020-10427-1 .
X. M. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z. Q. Zhai and J. Y. Qiu, Energy Build., 2020, 228, 110405 CrossRef .
X. C. Zhou, X. L. Zhang and Q. Y. Zheng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 217, 110725 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Liu, B. T. Tang and S. F. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 216, 110678 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Huang, Q. T. Li, Y. B. Yang, S. Wei, R. Ji, Q. F. Zhang, Y. C. Zhu, H. Z. Zhang, F. Xu, L. X. Sun and Y. P. Xia, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5203–5214 RSC .
A. Hassan, A. Wahab, M. A. Qasim, M. M. Janjua, M. A. Ali, H. M. Ali, T. R. Jadoon, E. Ali, A. Raza and N. Javaid, Renewable Energy, 2020, 145, 282–293 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xie, J. M. Luo, Z. P. Li, Z. W. Huang, X. N. Gao, Y. T. Fang and Z. G. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 189, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
R. Anish, V. Mariappan and S. Suresh, Sustainable Cities Soc., 2019, 44, 253–264 CrossRef .
P. Z. Lv, C. Z. Liu and Z. H. Rao, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 707–726 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Wu, Y. T. Duan, L. N. Chen, N. Tang, J. H. Li, Q. H. Qian, Q. Wang and G. C. Lv, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 5684–5692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yi, W. Q. Zhan, Y. L. Zhao, X. Zhang, F. F. Jia, W. Wang, Z. Ai and S. X. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109935 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, Z. Ai, Y. L. Zhao, X. Zhang and S. X. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 204, 110233 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Xi Xi Chen
	Xi Xi Chen is currently a researcher at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Henan Institute of Science and Technology. Her research presently centers on nanostructured clay mineral-, calcium carbonate-based colloidal system under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui ZHOU. The work is also partly supported by Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals (QYIM).

Jia Hui Liu
	Jia Hui Liu is currently a candidate for the degree of PhD at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. She received her Bachelor's Degree in applied chemistry from Anhui Jianzhu University. Her research presently focuses on colloid and surface chemistry of clay minerals and related hydrogels and nanostructured functional composites and their applications in health care, adsorption and catalysis under the supervision of Prof. Chun-Hui Zhou. She has authored and co-authored several scientific papers in respected peer-reviewed international journals.

Alfin Kurniawan
	Dr Alfin Kurniawan is currently a Postdoc at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. His research presently centers on nanostructured clay minerals-, calcite-, and dolomite-based catalysts and heterogeneous catalysis under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou. The work is also partly supported by Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals (QYIM). He received his PhD at the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, China, in 2018. He has published tens of papers in the field of green catalysis, water and wastewater treatment and electrospinning fabrication.

Ke Jin Li
	Ke Jin LI is currently a postgraduate student at Research Group for Advanced Materials & Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), College of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology (ZJUT), Hangzhou, China. His research presently centers on clay minerals-based nanostructured catalysts and related surface plasmonic catalysis for catalytic glycerol conversion in microfluidic reactors to value-added chemicals under the supervision of Prof. Chun Hui Zhou. The work is also partly supported by Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals (QYIM).

Chui Hui Zhou
	Dr Chun Hui Zhou, born and brought up in Miaoqian, Qingyang, Anhui, is Professor of Chemical Engineering and Leader of Research Group for Advanced Materials and Sustainable Catalysis (AMSC), Zhejiang University of Technology. He is Director of Qing Yang Institute for Industrial Minerals. He acts as AIPEA Councilor (2017–2022). He also serves as Associate Editor of Clays and Clay Minerals, Associate Editor of Clay Minerals and Editorial Member of Applied Clay Science (Elsevier), Journal of Porous Materials (Springer) and Materials Research Innovations (Taylor and Francis). He worked as a visiting academic at the University of Queensland (2006–2007) and as a visiting professor at the University of Western Australia (2010). His R&D centers on advanced clay minerals-based nanomaterials, hydrogels, catalytic conversion of biochemicals and biomass. He teaches Catalysis, Materials Science and Engineering, and Scientific Literacy.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication of hierarchical functional inorganic–organic nanostructures through inclusion of organic species in exfoliated Mt nanolayers. (a) Top and side views of layered Mt. (b) Liquid-phase exfoliation of bulk Mt into individual nanolayers. (c) Various hierarchical inorganic–organic nanostructures obtained by the inclusion of organic molecules in exfoliated Mt nanolayers. (d) Potential applications of hierarchical Mt–organic species nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic drawings showing the use of mechanical force to exfoliate layered Mt into individual nanolayers. (a) Ball milling-assisted exfoliation. (b) Shear force-assisted exfoliation. (Adapted from ref. 27 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic drawings of the ultrasonication method to exfoliate layered bulk Mt into individual nanolayers. (Adapted from ref. 27 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of clean and efficient exfoliation of layered Mt through freeze–thaw cycles and sequential ultrasonication treatment. (Adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the co-intercalation-assisted exfoliation of Mt into nanolayers. (Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the Spring Nature, copyright 2021.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic drawings to various LbL inclusion approaches of organic species in Mt nanolayers for the preparation of multilayered films through (a) immersion coating, (b) and (c) spin coating, (d) spray coating and (e) fluidic coating processes. (From ref. 10. Adapted with permission from AAAS.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Several driving forces in the LbL inclusion of organic ions and molecules by Mt nanolayers. (a) LbL inclusion driven by electrostatic interaction. (Adapted from ref. 11, Copyright 2020, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) (b) LbL inclusion driven by covalent bonding and electrostatic interaction. (Adapted from ref. 13 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (c) LbL inclusion driven by covalent bonding and hydrogen bonding. (Adapted from ref. 67, Copyright 2018, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) CNC: cellulose nano-crystals, CNER: tricomponent composite multilayer (poly[(o-cresyl glycidylether)-co-formaldehyde]), CTAB: cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, PAH: poly(allylamine hydrochloride), PEI: polyethyleneimine, QD: quantum dots, TGA: thioglycollic acid.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram illustrating evaporation-induced inclusion of Na–Mt nanolayers, graphene oxide (GO), and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to form free-standing films. (Adapted from ref. 72, Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier.) GO: graphene oxide,  PVA: polyvinyl alcohol.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram showing the hard templating strategy for the preparation of Mt nanolayers–organic species composites. (a) Fabrication of core–shell and/or hollow mesoporous nanostructures by utilizing chitosan-functionalized polystyrene latex particles latex spheres as a hard template. (Adapted from ref. 73, Copyright 2019, with permission from Elsevier.) (b) Fabrication of COP with layered structure using Mt nanolayers as a hard template. (Adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic diagram to inclusion of AA and Am monomers into the house-of-cards nanostructured Mt as a hard template. (Adapted from ref. 74, Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.) AA: acrylic acid, Am: acrylamide, COP: covalent organic polymer, K10: Mt, TPP: tetraphenylporphyrin.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the formation of Mt nanolayers–organic species composites with a brick-and-mortar structure using soft templating inclusion approach. (a) Preparation of the Mt nanolayers-GL film with acrylic polymer as a soft template. (Adapted from ref. 75, Copyright 2017, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) (b) Fabrication of the DA-CMC/Mt film with a brick-and-mortar structure using DA as a soft template. (Adapted from ref. 85 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.) CMC: carboxymethyl cellulose, DA: dopamine, GL: glycol-modified biomass lignin.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram illustrating the preparation of mesoporous carbon nanosheets through the confinement assembly of F127 micelles@Resol as a soft template into the interlayer space of Mt as a hard template. (Adapted from ref. 86, Copyright 2018, with permission from John Wiley and Sons.) OMCNS: ordered mesopores perpendicular to the carbon nanosheets.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the preparation of 2D Mt nanolayers–poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) hydrogels. (Adapted from ref. 88, Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.) AA: acrylic acid, AM: acrylamide, MB: methyl blue, PAA: polyacrylic acid, PAM: polyacrylamide.	 

 	Fig. 13  Three models of forming PCMs based on Mt and SA encapsulated Mt nanolayers. (a) Intercalation of SA molecules in the interlayer space of Mt. (Adapted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.) (b) 2D Mt nanolayer-encapsulated SA. (Adapted from ref. 37, Copyright 2019, with permission from Elsevier.) (c) 3D Mt framework-encapsulated SA. (Adapted from ref. 122, Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.) SA: stearic acid.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
