Advanced Pt-based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline medium  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NR01940C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NR01940C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 11759-11776Advanced Pt-based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline medium

        
          
            Wei 
            Ma
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xueyuan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenya 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Menggai 
            Jiao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lili 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Renzhi 
            Ma
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zhen 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a
aInterdisciplinary Research Center for Sustainable Energy Science and Engineering (IRC4SE2), School of Chemical Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China. E-mail: mgjiao@zzu.edu.cn; llzhang@zzu.edu.cn
bInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0040, Japan
Received 
      26th April 2023
    , Accepted 14th June 2023First published on 14th June 2023AbstractWater electro-splitting driven by renewable energy is significant in energy conversion for the development of hydrogen energy sources. The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) directly generating hydrogen products occurs in cathode catalysis. Over the years, significant progress has been made to boost the HER efficiency by exploratively designing highly active and economical Pt-based electrocatalysts. However, there are still some urgent problems to be solved for Pt-based HER catalysts in more economical alkaline electrolytes, such as the slow kinetics caused by additional hydrolysis dissociation steps, which greatly hinders the practical application. This review systematically summarizes several strategies for optimizing alkaline HER kinetics and provides direct guidelines for the design of highly active Pt-based electrocatalysts. Specifically, the intrinsic HER activity in alkaline water electrolysis can be boosted by accelerating the water dissociation, optimizing the hydrogen binding energy or modulating the spatial dimensions of the electrocatalyst based on the HER mechanism. Finally, we prospect the challenges for the alkaline HER on novel Pt-based electrocatalysts, including the active site study, the HER mechanism exploration and the extensible catalyst preparation technologies.Wei MaWei Ma received his Bachelor's degree in Inorganic Nonmetal Materials Engineering from Central South University, China, in 2009, followed by his PhD in Mineral Materials Science from the same university in 2015. During his doctoral studies, he spent two years (2013 to 2015) at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, as a joint PhD student. Since 2016, he has been a faculty member at Zhengzhou University, China, where he is now an associate professor at the School of Chemical Engineering. His research focuses on the development of advanced nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.Xueyuan ZhangXueyuan Zhang is a graduate student at the School of Chemical Engineering, Zhengzhou University, China, having earned her Bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Henan Polytechnic University, China, in 2020. Her current research focuses on the development of efficient catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion.Menggai JiaoMenggai Jiao received her B.S. degree in applied chemistry from Yanshan University in 2010 and Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2016. She continued her studies as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Zhen Zhou's group at Nankai University. Since 2021, she has been working at Zhengzhou University. Her current research interest focuses on the theoretical investigation and design of high-efficiency electrocatalysts for energy storage and conversion.Lili ZhangLili Zhang received her Ph.D. degree in 2019 from the South China University of Technology, China. Since 2019, she has been working at Zhengzhou University. Her current research interest focuses on electrocatalysis and energy materials, including water splitting, nitrogen reduction reaction, and oxygen reduction reaction.Zhen ZhouZhen Zhou received his B.S. (in Applied Chemistry in 1994) and Ph.D. (in Inorganic Chemistry in 1999) degrees from Nankai University, China. He joined the faculty at Nankai University as a lecturer in 1999. Two years later, he began to work as a postdoctoral fellow at Nagoya University, Japan. In 2005, he returned to Nankai University as an associate professor and was promoted to a full professor in 2011. In 2021, he moved to Zhengzhou University, China, as Distinguished Professor, and he is now the Dean of the School of Chemical Engineering. His main research interest includes the design, preparation, and application of materials for energy storage and conversion.
1. Introduction
Worldwide research has been focused on the development of sustainable green energy to solve the energy crisis and serious environmental challenges caused by the dependence on fossil fuels.1,2 Hydrogen energy, a carbon-free energy with high energy density, is a promising alternative candidate to promote the transformation of the energy structure under the implementation of global government strategies, such as China's carbon peaking and carbon neutrality. In particular, electrocatalytic water splitting powered by renewable energy (such as wind energy, solar energy, etc.) has been a much anticipated clean hydrogen production technology due to its eco-friendly process and high H2 purity compared to industrial hydrogen production.3,4 The produced green hydrogen can be used for fuel cell electric vehicles, rocket engines, carbon-free home heating, etc. Besides, green hydrogen without separation and purification also can be used as a raw material for producing chemicals, such as ammonia fertilizer, methanol, etc. (Fig. 1).5–7 In short, green hydrogen is an irreplaceable part of the development of sustainable energy in the future.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of using renewable energy to drive alkaline water electrolysis and applications of H2. 
Significantly, water splitting exhibits different kinetic mechanisms in acidic and alkaline electrolytes.8 Producing H2 from alkaline aqueous solutions has attracted considerable attention, with the electrolytic cell based on cation exchange membranes in alkaline electrolytes being more economical than a proton exchange membrane-based acidic system. Moreover, the acid mist generated by gas diffusion in acidic medium affects the purity of H2, and water splitting in alkaline electrolytes can overcome this challenge.9–11 Thus, alkaline water electrolysis is a more popular technology for generating green hydrogen in terms of economic benefit and safety assurance. As the efficiency of hydrogen production by water electrolysis is closely related to the activity of the cathode electrode, it is essential to prepare an efficient electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). So far, Pt-based nanomaterials with almost zero onset potential are considered to be the most efficient electrocatalysts for the acidic HER. However, the kinetics of the alkaline HER is 2–3 orders of magnitude slower than that of the acidic HER mainly due to the sluggish dissociation of water generating active H* intermediates.12–14 Although the transition metal materials, particularly Ni-based electrocatalysts, possess strong water dissociation ability, their adsorption of hydrogen intermediates is too strong, which is unfavorable for hydrogen synthesis.15 In contrast, while Pt has a relatively weak water dissociation ability, it is the known metal with the optimal hydrogen binding energy, and the HER activity of Pt-based catalysts in alkaline medium is expected. Therefore, extensive studies have focused on optimizing the reaction kinetics of the alkaline HER by preparing novel, highly active, and low-cost Pt-based catalysts to promote the economical production of green hydrogen.
Several theories have been proposed for the origin of slow alkaline HER kinetics, and the reaction mechanism of the alkaline HER is important. Thus, an in-depth and comprehensive understanding of the HER under alkaline conditions is crucial for designing excellent Pt-based HER electrocatalysts. Considerable studies have shown that many factors can affect the HER process on the cathode surface in alkaline electrolytes, with some interpretations being proposed to explain interfacial electrocatalysis. Arising from the synergistic effects among the structure, composition and electronic effects of the electrocatalyst, the regulated adsorption strength of various reaction intermediates on the catalyst surface determined the kinetics of the HER. That is, the HER activity mainly depends on the possible steps including water dissociation, hydroxyl desorption, H* adsorption and H2 desorption.16–20 In this review, we briefly introduced the reaction mechanisms of the alkaline HER, and then discussed the influences of water dissociation capability, hydrogen binding energy and spatial dimensions on the performance of Pt-based electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER. In particular, we summarized the corresponding strategies to prepare advanced Pt-based electrocatalysts used in alkaline electrolytes. This review will provide some recommendations and insights into the design of Pt-based electrocatalysts for green hydrogen production.
2. HER in alkaline electrolytes
2.1 Mechanisms
The HER mechanisms in alkaline electrolytes have been extensively studied by theoretical calculations and experimental measurements. Compared with acidic medium, there is a lack of ingenerate hydrogen protons (or hydronium ions) in alkaline electrolytes. Thus, the first step is water dissociation (Volmer step), that is, the cleavage of the H–OH bond primarily occurs to provide indispensable hydrogen intermediates (H*, where * represents an adsorption site) on the active surface (eqn (1)).9,21 Afterwards, another water molecule attacks the absorbed H* to form a hydrogen molecule (Heyrovsky step, eqn (2)) or two absorbed H* directly combine into molecular hydrogen (Tafel step, eqn (3)). Thus, the alkaline HER proceeds following either the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway or the Volmer–Tafel pathway, as shown in Fig. 2a.22,23 According to the reaction mechanisms, the intrinsic activity of the HER in alkaline electrolytes mainly depends on two aspects, the ability to crack the H–OH bond and the binding energy of hydrogen intermediates. Volmer step: H2O* + e− → H* + OH−/OH*(1) Heyrovsky step: H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−(2) Tafel step: 2H* → H2(3)
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic pathways for the HER under alkaline conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright, 2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Simulated and experimentally measured HER activity. Adapted with permission from ref 24. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature Limited. (c) Volcano plot of exchange current density (j0) as a function of DFT-calculated Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) of adsorbed atomic hydrogen on pure metals. Adapted with permission from ref 27. Copyright 2015 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2 Descriptors
The dissociation of the H2O molecule and the adsorption strength of H* are key factors determining the kinetics of the HER in alkaline medium. Generally, the adsorption-free energy of H2O or OH* (ΔGH2O/ΔGOH*) on the active sites calculated using density functional theory (DFT) serves as a descriptor to evaluate the energy barrier of water dissociation (EH2O), and the more negative the values of ΔGH2O/ΔGOH*, the lower the EH2O. Whereas, excessively negative ΔGH2O/ΔGOH* may lead to strong adsorption of the OH* generated by water dissociation on active sites.24,25 Thus, it is of great significance to regulate the adsorption-free energy of H2O/OH* on the catalyst surface, promoting the HER process. McCrum et al.24 found that the HER activity is correlated with the OH* adsorption strength (ΔGOH*) on active sites. As shown in Fig. 2b, the weak ΔGOH* on Pt (111) leads to poor water dissociation ability on the Pt surface. The rational design of Pt-based electrocatalysts will generate the competitive adsorption of the enriched hydroxyl group in alkaline medium. Therefore, adjusting the ΔGOH*/ΔGH2O on active Pt sites is an appropriate strategy to build up a Pt-based interface with the lowest water activation barrier, then effectively improving the HER activity.
According to the HER mechanism, the binding energy between the active surface and H* is also closely related to the acceleration of the formation kinetics of hydrogen molecules and the HER activity of catalysts.26 Regulating the hydrogen binding energy (HBE) to be neither too strong nor too weak can achieve high HER activity, which is known as the Sabatier Principle in catalysis. Generally, the HBE on an active surface can be evaluated through the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen intermediates (ΔGH*) calculated using DFT. As shown in Fig. 2c, Pt is located almost on the top of the volcano plot compared to other metals, suggesting that the noble metal Pt as the HER catalyst has favorable HBE theoretically.27 However, the ideal HBE on active sites is close to zero (ΔGH* = 0), which demonstrates that ΔGH* on the Pt (111) surface is not infinitely close to the optimal value of ΔGH*. In other words, the hydrogen adsorption energy on the Pt surface can be further optimized to speed up the alkaline HER kinetics.
2.3 Electrochemical parameters
The ability of H2O or OH* adsorption (ΔGH2O/ΔGOH*) and ΔGH* are important descriptors to evaluate the HER performance of electrocatalysts. A more intuitive evaluation of actual performance depends on some electrochemical polarization parameters. Generally, the electrochemical parameters mainly include the overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 (η10), Tafel slope, electrochemical active area (ECSA), transition frequency (TOF) and stability. In more detail, η10 can be used to evaluate the HER activity. The Tafel slope is determined by the linear portions at a low overpotential fitted to the Tafel equation (η = blogj + a, where η is the overpotential, j is the current density, and b is the Tafel slope). Moreover, the Tafel slope can help identify the type of the reaction mechanism (Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel) by comparing it with theoretical values of the Tafel slope (Volmer step: 120 mV dec−1, Heyrovsky step: 40 mV dec−1 and Tafel step: 30 mV dec−1).28 The ECSA represents the available surface/interface, and the TOF rigorously reflects the intrinsic activity of the active centers on a catalyst. Stability is commonly used to evaluate practical long-term performance.29,30 Moreover, for noble metal Pt-based catalysts, the ECSA can be obtained by integrating the area of hydrogen adsorption and desorption in cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves. Notably, mass activity based on Pt loading is more practical for evaluating the HER performance of Pt-based catalysts, and high ECSA and excellent activity per Pt site may lead to outstanding mass activity and cost-effective water electrolysis. Over the years, with the development of synthetic strategies and nanotechnology, many advanced Pt-based electrocatalysts have been designed for the HER, which exhibited excellent performance with low overpotential, accelerated kinetics, high current density or long-term durability in alkaline medium. These provide a theoretical basis and technical support for future research.
3. Pt-based electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER
Based on the key factors affecting the kinetics of the HER under alkaline conditions, we summarized several effective strategies to design advanced Pt-based catalysts with improved HER activity. Fig. 3 shows three common strategies to fabricate excellent electrocatalysts, including initiating factors, electronic effects and dimension regulation for lowering EH2O, optimizing ΔGH* and maximizing the HER performance of Pt-based electrocatalysts, respectively. In general, the water activation ability on the Pt (111) surface is too weak to effectively cleave the H–OH bond. Many studies have proved that the energy barrier of water dissociation can be reduced by introducing oxophilic (the ability to bind to oxygen atoms) components into catalysts.31,32 Hence, combining Pt atoms with oxophilic components that can act as initiating factors is a reasonable trend to reduce the energy barrier induced by extra water dissociation, and then improve the HER activity in alkaline electrolytes.24
 Fig. 3  Strategies to improve the HER activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes. 
Besides, it is well known that HER activity is closely dependent on the HBE of the catalyst surface. To further promote the HER kinetics of Pt-based nanomaterials, the binding energy of H* on active Pt sites also needs to be optimized, which is as significant as resolving the energy barrier of water dissociation. It has been reported that the binding energy of H* can be optimized by electronic effects derived from composition regulation, such as surface modification, alloying, doping, etc. Additionally, designing different structures of Pt-based nanomaterials to increase the ECSA, promote mass transfer or improve mechanical stability is crucial to ameliorate the HER performance for practical applications. Considerable Pt-based nanomaterials with appropriate spatial dimensions, such as one-dimensional nanostructures, two-dimensional nanosheets, three-dimensional self-supported structures, and single atoms (SAs), have been successfully synthesized.33–35 In brief, the above strategies for fabricating excellent catalysts can be summarized as optimizing the intrinsic activity of Pt sites and increasing the number of active sites. The HER performance of Pt-based electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes can be significantly improved by simultaneously applying these strategies. In the following sections, we specifically discuss several practical strategies that have been used to design novel, highly active and low-cost Pt-based electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER.
3.1 Lowering EH2O by introducing initiating factors
It is generally accepted that the cleavage of the H–OH bond to generate hydrogen protons (H*) occurs first in the alkaline electrolytes for hydrogen evolution. Unfortunately, the kinetics of water dissociation is relatively sluggish on the Pt surface as the rate-determining step, resulting in the poor HER activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts in alkaline water electrolyzers. From the perspective of catalyst design, strategies for enhancing alkaline HER performance should aim at achieving the goal of lowering the water dissociation energy barrier. Research has shown that materials with suitable oxophilicity were used as initiating factors of water activation to construct catalysts with excellent HER activity.24,25 That is, combining Pt with oxophilic components can reduce the water activation barrier on the Pt surface, which is an effective strategy to accelerate the HER kinetics. As shown in Fig. 3, the commonly implemented measures for introducing initiating factors with certain oxophilicity include alloying with oxophilic metals, introducing hydroxides and using oxophilic components as carriers.

3.1.1 Oxophilic metal alloying. 
In alkaline electrolytes, the poor adsorption energy of water molecules on the Pt surface is responsible for the sluggish kinetics of water dissociation. Oxophilic metals, such as Ru, Ni, and Co, can moderate the adsorption energy of water molecules for effective water dissociation. Hence, alloying these oxophilic metals with Pt atoms can generate suitable catalyst/water interfaces for water dissociation to promote the alkaline HER efficiency.36,37 Using simulation calculations, McCrum et al.24 proved that integrating Ru with Pt can lower the water dissociation energy barrier by strengthening the water adsorption energy on the catalyst surface. Therefore, Ru is a suitable material for preparing Pt-based binary alloy catalysts. Experimentally, Li et al.38 synthesized PtRu bimetallic nanoparticles supported on carbon cloth (PtRu/CC1500) by a new and simple electrochemical deposition method. The PtRu/CC1500 electrocatalyst exhibited higher mass activity than Pt/C for the HER over a wide pH range. DFT calculations showed that, in alkaline medium, Ru (101) has a lower H2O dissociation barrier than the pure Pt (111) surface, but too strong adsorption of oxygen-containing species is not conducive to hydrogen evolution. Interestingly, the PtRu/CC1500 catalyst possessed suitable water dissociation energy by combining the chemical properties of these two metals with an adjusted atomic ratio (Fig. 4a). Pang et al.39 synthesized PtRu alloy with isolated Pt atoms anchored on the Ru host surface (PtRu/mCNTs) by a laser-assisted strategy. The PtRu/mCNTs catalyst had a low overpotential of 15 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is much smaller than that of commercial Pt/C. DFT calculations indicated that Ru atoms serve as the OH* adsorption sites to decrease the water dissociation energy barrier of the PtRu/mCNT catalyst. Therefore, the PtRu/mCNTs catalyst showed outstanding HER catalytic activity in 1.0 M KOH.
 Fig. 4  (a) Gibbs free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution over different metal surfaces in alkaline solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2020 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Free energy diagram of the alkaline HER on PtNi3(111) and Pt (111) surfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2022 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Illustration showing the Volmer–Tafel mechanism on the Pt–Ni(OH)2 bifunctional model catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Adsorption free energy diagram for the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Free energy diagram of Pt–Co and Pt–Co/CoOx. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Free energy diagram of the alkaline HER on (f) Pt43/NC and (g) Pt (111). Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. 
Although PtRu alloys exhibit excellent HER activity in alkaline media, the high price of noble metal catalysts increases the cost of hydrogen production. To meet this challenge, engineering the Pt surface by alloying with oxophilic and economical transition metals is an essential way to prepare highly active and low-cost Pt-based electrocatalysts. Alloying Ni or Co with Pt can greatly lower the kinetic energy barrier by accelerating water dissociation to facilitate H* generation in alkaline electrolytes because of the strong water adsorption capacity of Ni and Co.36 Guo et al.40 synthesized PtNi alloy supported on N-doped carbon (PtNi-NC-900) by a simple pyrolysis method. The PtNi-NC-900 catalyst achieved outstanding HER performance with an overpotential of 37.4 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution, outperforming those of commercial 20 wt% Pt/C (43.7 mV) and Pt-NC-900 (84.2 mV). DFT calculations showed that the adsorption of water molecules on the PtNi-NC-900 catalyst with an appropriate amount of oxophilic Ni atoms is more thermodynamically supported than that on a pure Pt surface. Moreover, the PtNi-NC-900 catalyst exhibited a lower energy barrier of water dissociation than the pure Pt catalyst, changing the rate-determining step of the HER process (Fig. 4b). Compared with the Pt-based binary alloys, alloying Pt with multi-metallic elements is more advantageous because of the stronger synergistic catalytic effect and more economical application. Chen et al.41 successfully prepared a trimetallic PtNiCo hollow alloy 3D multipod (PtNiCo HAMPs) electrocatalyst by a one-pot solvothermal method coupled with an acid etching strategy. Acid etching can expose more surface area for intermediates. In the KOH solution (1.0 M), the PtNiCo HAMPs catalyst exhibited excellent HER performance with a low overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 (20 mV), superior to those of homemade PtNi HAMPs (23 mV), PtCo NCs (24 mV) and commercial Pt/C catalyst (38 mV). According to the experimental results, the excellent HER activity of PtNiCo HAMPs is mainly related to the synergistic catalytic effect of multi-metallic oxophilic elements, reducing the energy barrier of water dissociation.


3.1.2 Introducing hydroxides. 
Introducing hydroxides (such as TM(OH)x, TM: Fe, Ni, Co) as the initiating factors promoting water dissociation is another strategy to reduce the energy barrier of water dissociation into H*.42,43 Ni(OH)2, as an effective catalyst for activating water decomposition, has been widely introduced in Pt-based composite materials to achieve high efficiency hydrogen evolution. Ruqia et al.44 summarized the catalytic surface specificity of Pt and Pt–Ni(OH)2 materials to improve the understanding of the alkaline HER kinetics on Ni(OH)2-modified Pt surfaces. The well-established reaction mechanism for the alkaline HER on the Pt (111)–Ni(OH)2 surface is shown in Fig. 4c, where Ni(OH)2 accelerates the Volmer step and Pt active sites catalyze the coupling of hydrogen intermediates to generate H2.45,46 Yu et al.47 reported the interaction between alpha- or beta-nickel hydroxide (α or β-Ni(OH)2) nanostructures and the Pt electrode. The β-Ni(OH)2/Pt electrocatalyst was obtained by loading β-Ni(OH)2 nanostructures on the surface of the Pt electrode. Electrochemical test results showed that a β-Ni(OH)2/Pt electrocatalyst exhibited higher HER activity in 0.1 M KOH electrolytes than α-Ni(OH)2/Pt and pure Pt electrodes. As discussed using DFT calculation results, β-Ni(OH)2/Pt has a lower ΔGH2O value (−0.56 eV) than α-Ni(OH)2/Pt (−0.2 eV), indicating that β-Ni(OH)2/Pt enhanced water dissociation ability compared to α-Ni(OH)2/Pt (Fig. 4d). Therefore, β-Ni(OH)2 modification was the preferred initiating factors in lowering the water dissociation energy barrier to improve the HER performance. Xing et al.48 synthesized a Pt–Co(OH)2/CC catalyst by electrochemical deposition, where a carbon cloth supported Earth-abundant Co(OH)2 nanosheet array is used as an ideal 3D substrate. In alkaline electrolytes (1.0 M KOH), the Pt–Co(OH)2/CC catalyst achieved outstanding HER performance with a low overpotential of 32 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is more efficient than the Pt/C/CC catalyst (38 mV). Impressively, based on the normalized HER current densities by the electrochemical surface area, the HER activity of the Pt–Co(OH)2/CC catalyst is 4.8 times greater than that of Pt/C/CC. The excellent catalytic performance of the Pt–Co(OH)2/CC catalyst is mainly attributed to the synergic catalytic effect between Co(OH)2 and Pt, triggering and accelerating the process of water dissociation.
Compared with general metal hydroxides, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) have become more considerably used compounds in electrocatalytic processes in recent years. LDHs with lamellar structures have abundant metal-coordinating hydroxyl groups on their surfaces, which can promote the kinetics of H2O dissociation.49 Jang et al.50 synthesized a nanometer-thin and nanoporous 2D Pt electrocatalyst supported on NiFe-LDH nanosheets (2D-Pt/NiFe-LDH). The 2D-Pt/NiFe-LDH electrocatalyst showed a high specific activity (2.87 mA cm−2), which is significantly superior to that of 20% Pt/C (0.15 mA cm−2) at −0.07 V vs. RHE. Theoretical calculations revealed that, in a 2D-Pt/NiFe-LDH catalyst, NiFe-LDHs serve as active sites for water dissociation and hydroxyl adsorption, significantly decreasing the energy barrier of the rate-limiting step to accelerate the alkaline HER. Wu et al.51 prepared a self-supported layered double hydroxide electrocatalyst (Pt-CoFe(II) LDH) by a novel and simple spontaneous redox synthesis strategy. In 1.0 M KOH, the Pt-CoFe(II) LDH achieved superior catalytic activity with an overpotential (15 mV) of 10 mA cm−2. Therefore, the synergistic effect of CoFe LDH reduced the energy barrier of water dissociation, and improved the HER catalytic activity of the Pt-CoFe(II) LDH electrocatalyst.


3.1.3 Oxophilic carriers. 
Recently, metal oxides (such as CoOx, MnOx, NiOx) and nitrogen-doped carbon materials have been considered popular carriers and applied in the alkaline HER because of their suitable oxophilicity. In alkaline electrolytes, oxophilic carriers can enhance the water dissociation ability by providing separate hydroxyl adsorption sites. Specifically, metal oxides, the initiating factors to adsorb water molecules, as carriers can accelerate the cleavage of H–OH in water.52–54 Among these metal oxide carriers, amorphous CoOx with abundant defects and active sites have received extensive research and attention. Wang et al.55 successfully designed a Pt–Co/CoOx catalyst by an in situ constructing interface between the Pt–Co alloy and the amorphous CoOx carrier. The Pt–Co/CoOx catalyst exhibited excellent HER activity in alkaline electrolytes. As shown in Fig. 4e, DFT calculations indicated that the Pt–Co/CoOx electrocatalyst shows more negative adsorption free energy of H2O (ΔGH2O = −0.99 eV) than PtCo (ΔGH2O = −0.70 eV). It was proved that the water dissociation energy barrier of the Pt–Co/CoOx catalyst is lower than that of the PtCo catalyst. Therefore, amorphous CoOx as an oxophilic carrier accelerated the kinetics of water dissociation to promote the intrinsic activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER.
Additionally, among the hybridized metal catalysts, carbon materials are usually used for loading noble metals. Many studies have shown that doping nitrogen atoms enhance the oxygen affinity of carbon materials. Therefore, nitrogen-doped carbon materials activate water molecules to accelerate the dynamics of water dissociation.56,57 Li et al.58 synthesized Pt nanoclusters (∼1.6 nm) anchored on ordered macroporous nitrogen-doped carbon support (Pt43/NC) via a polystyrene sphere template method. In alkaline electrolytes, Pt43/NC exhibited excellent HER performance and 10 times higher mass activity than commercial 20 wt% Pt/C. DFT calculations indicated that the H2O molecule adsorbed on Pt43/NC sites, and the H2O molecules were spontaneously dissociated into *H and *OH species (Fig. 4f). In contrast, the Pt (111) surface suffered from a higher energy barrier for dissociating H2O into *H and *OH (Fig. 4g). It has been proved that the nitrogen-doped carbon greatly reduced the water dissociation energy barrier to accelerate the alkaline HER activity of the Pt43/NC catalyst. The work presented an efficient strategy to rationally design highly active Pt-based catalysts by speeding up water dissociation using nitrogen-doped carbon materials as supports.

3.2 Optimizing the HBE by electronic effects
According to the HER mechanism in alkaline medium, combining Pt with oxophilic components as initiating factors can accelerate the Volmer step by reducing the energy barrier of water dissociation. In addition, optimizing the HBE also has a great influence on the HER activity. Theoretical calculation indicated that electronic effects can influence the bond energy of Pt–H*, and then indirectly affect ΔGH* to enhance the reaction kinetics of the alkaline HER.18,25 Therefore, regulating the electronic effect is a promising strategy for improving the HER activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts. Current research has shown that surface modification, alloying, doping, intermetallic compounds, interfacial engineering or electronic metal–support interactions can optimize ΔGH* by tuning the electronic structure of the active sites. The regulation strategies form synergistic catalytic effects by regulating the electron cloud density or altering the d-band center of the Pt surface to optimize the HBE. Recently, researchers have synthesized many Pt-based HER electrocatalysts with high activity through the above strategies, with the electronic effect being an effective way to construct highly efficient HER Pt-based catalysts in alkaline medium.

3.2.1 Surface modification. 
Surface modification has been considered an effective strategy for ameliorating the electronic structure and physicochemical properties of electrode materials. Among the strategies of surface modification, constructing surface defects or atom vacancies is a commonly used method to enhance the HER activity by influencing the surface charge distribution of active sites. Thus, introducing defects or atom vacancies has great influences on the physicochemical properties of electrocatalysts, such as the electronic structure, geometric structure, light absorption properties and surface adsorption properties of active sites.59,60 Introducing oxygen vacancies is an effective way to promote the alkaline HER catalytic performance by regulating the density of the electron cloud on the surface of active sites. Besides, other atom vacancies, such as S, Se, Te, and P vacancies were commonly used to regulate the electronic structure of Pt-based electrocatalysts.61,62 Chang et al.63 showed that Se vacancies in defect PtSe2 (d-PtSe2) can dramatically enhance the intrinsic HER activity in 1.0 M KOH. DFT results showed that the defects in the d-PtSe2 electrocatalyst optimized the ΔGH* on the Pt surface, which is the main contribution to the improvement of catalytic activity for hydrogen evolution.
Vacancies can also limit the particle size and inhibit the agglomeration of the catalyst. Thus, the rational use of vacancies can further enhance the catalytic activity and stability of HER catalysts. Jing et al.64 systematically explored the effects of intrinsic defects on the HER activity using the first principles calculations. As plotted in Fig. 5a, these donor defects, including CV, OV, and Pt–O vacancy, can significantly optimize the free energy of H* to remarkably enhance the HER activity. In particular, the case of Pt–O vacancy can optimize ΔGH* closer to zero. Additionally, compared with defect-free carbon materials, carbon materials with abundant defects have lower power functions and higher reduction ability. These characteristics make it easier for defective carbon to absorb and reduce Pt ions than defect-free carbon materials, which is conducive to the synthesis of high-efficiency Pt-based catalysts. Yang et al.65 created carbon vacancies in graphene by pyrolyzing, and then trapping isolated Pt atoms onto the defective graphene support (Pt@DG). Pt atoms were easily embedded into the lattice of graphene because of the enriched carbon vacancies anchoring single vacancy coordinated Pt sites to form a Pt–C3 structure. The Pt@DG catalyst exhibited exceptionally high mass activity (∼6.5 A mgPt−1) in 1.0 M KOH, approximately 13 times higher than that of commercial 20 wt% Pt/C (∼0.5 A mgPt−1) at the same overpotential. As demonstrated using DFT calculations, the Pt–C3 sites were the actual active sites and displayed moderate hydrogen absorption energy, which exhibits improved HER performance. These studies confirmed that using suitable surface modification strategies, such as vacancies or atom defects, the HBE on active sites can be optimized to improve alkaline HER activity.
 Fig. 5  (a) Free energy profiles of the HER for various defects. Adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019 AIP Publishing LLC. (b) DFT simulated Gibbs free energy diagram for the alkaline-HER over PtNi5 and the Pt-surface. Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) HER polarization curves and (d) HER polarization curves of BPed-Pt/GR with different contents of Pt–P bonds after iR correction in 1.0 M KOH at 25 °C normalized by the geometrical area of the disk, (e) high-resolution valence-band Pt VB XPS spectra of Pt relative to the Fermi level as an analogue of the density of states with the black lines indicating the position of the d-band centers, and (f) current densities at 70 mV vs. RHE and free-energy diagram for the HER at the potential U = 0 relative to the standard hydrogen electrode with different Pt–P contents. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


3.2.2 Alloying and doping. 
It has been found that heteroatom alloying or doping can regulate the electronic state and energy band structure of active sites to optimize the hydrogen adsorption energy.38,66 Hence, alloying and doping have been considered as attractive approaches to promote the intrinsic HER activity of catalysts. Over the years, alloying Pt with metal heteroatoms or doping non-metal atoms in the Pt lattice has become a promising strategy for the development of advanced Pt-based electrocatalysts with superior intrinsic HER activity under alkaline conditions.
3.2.2.1 Alloying. 
As mentioned above, the strategy of alloying Pt atoms with oxophilic metals can accelerate water dissociation by facilitating the Volmer step. Moreover, the heteroatoms alloying with Pt can optimize the HBE on the Pt surface by creating lattice strain or regulating the electron cloud density of active sites. Thus, alloying is an effective strategy to optimize the adsorption of hydrogen intermediates to accelerate the evolution of H2 in alkaline electrolytes.37 In virtue of the excellent electroconductivity, corrosion resistance and economic efficiency of transition metals (TMs), alloying inexpensive TMs with noble metals has been recognized as an appropriate method to enhance the catalytic activity and stability and further reduce the cost of the catalyst. Forming alloys by modifying TM atoms into the Pt lattice can modulate the electronic structure and charge transfer dynamics on the Pt surface, and then enhance the alkaline HER intrinsic activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts.66 In particular, Ni element can be easily embedded into the Pt lattice to form Pt–Ni alloy. Zhang et al.67 designed bimetallic PtNi5 nanoalloys by utilizing a H2in situ induction strategy on the Pt surface. DFT calculations demonstrated that combined alloys with a surface segregation strategy can optimize the HER kinetics by reducing ΔGH* on the Pt surface (Fig. 5b). As a result, the PtNi5 nanoalloys exhibited excellent HER performance compared to the pure Pt-surface. Chen et al.68 used a modified coprecipitation method to obtain a disordered PtNi alloy electrocatalyst (D-PtNi/C). In an Ar-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution, the D-PtNi/C catalyst exhibited superior alkaline HER activity with a small overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 (39.7 mV), which is superior to that of commercial Pt/C (63.1 mV). DFT calculations indicated the change in the local electron coordination state near Pt sites and the optimized Pt–H* binding strength resulting from the modified Pt lattice structure by Ni alloying. Therefore, D-PtNi/C showed excellent catalytic performance for hydrogen evolution.
3.2.2.2 Non-metallic doping. 
Generally, non-metallic atoms tend to lose electrons due to the negative charge effect. Doping non-metallic atoms can modify the d-band center and regulate the adsorption behavior of H* on active sites.38,67 Therefore, non-metallic atoms, including N, P and S, are commonly used to optimize ΔGH* on Pt active sites and further ameliorate the catalytic behavior. In particular, the P atom is the common proton acceptor because of its unsaturated outermost electrons.69 The adsorption energy of non-metallic atoms (such as N, S, P, and Cl) on Pt was investigated by Wang et al.70 through DFT calculations. The most negative adsorption energy (−5.51 eV) indicated the strongest adsorption between the P and Pt (111) surfaces. Then Wang et al.70 synthesized a BP-activated Pt/GR catalyst (BPed-Pt/GR) to demonstrate the strong activation effect of P on the Pt surface. Electrochemical results showed that the specific activity of the BPed-Pt/GR catalyst (154.70 mA cm−2 at 100 mV) is approximately 3.5 times as high as that of Pt/GR (44.2 mA cm−2 at 100 mV) in 1.0 M KOH, and obvious activity differences can be observed from BPed-Pt/GR with different Pt–P contents (Fig. 5c and d). DFT calculation results showed that doping P atoms can change the position of the d-band center (Fig. 5e). Further computational results revealed that ΔGH* on Pt active sites can be optimized by the contents of the Pt–P bond. Notably, the BPed-Pt/GR catalyst with 18%–25% Pt–P bonds has the largest current densities (82.89 mA cmdisk−2) at an overpotential of 70 mV and the lowest ΔGH* value (−0.02 eV) (Fig. 5f), indicating that the content of Pt–P bonds affects the catalytic activity of hydrogen evolution. That is, P doping is an effective strategy to regulate ΔGH* on the Pt surface to remarkably improve the reactivity toward the alkaline HER. Using alloying and non-metallic doping simultaneously may further increase the utilization of active sites and optimize the intrinsic reaction kinetics of the HER. Wang et al.71 designed phosphorus-modified Pt2Ni3 nanowires (Pt2Ni3-P NWs). In 1.0 M KOH, the Pt2Ni3-P NWs electrocatalyst displayed excellent specific activity with a lower HER overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 (44 mV) than Pt2Ni3 NWs (51 mV) and commercial Pt/C (82 mV). The experimental results indicated that P atoms in Pt2Ni3-P NWs as the OH− adsorption sites prevent hydroxyl groups from burying the H* adsorption sites on the Pt surface. Moreover, Ni atoms in Pt2Ni3-P NWs changed the electron cloud density around Pt atoms, and then synergistically accelerated the evolution of hydrogen molecules on vacant Pt sites. The successful synthesis of these highly active Pt-based alloy catalysts confirmed the efficient improvement in alkaline HER performance by optimized alloying and doping strategies.


3.2.3 Intermetallic compounds. 
Compared with conventional metal alloy catalysts, intermetallic compounds possess an atomically ordered arrangement of constituent elements, and demonstrate higher electrocatalytic performance and durability.72–74 Many studies have shown that intermetallic compound catalysts prepared by combining Pt with other metals exhibited superior HER activity compared to conventional alloys. This phenomenon is attributed to the fact that non-similar adjacent atoms can lead to stronger heteroatomic interactions in intermetallic compounds, facilitating electronic structure modulation and optimal metal-H* binding energy.75 In addition, the ordered distribution of atoms within the intermetallic compounds can result in a more homogeneous distribution of active sites.76 These advantages make the Pt-based intermetallic electrocatalysts show great potential for application in the HER.
Santos et al.77 synthesized three different Pt-rare intermetallic electrodes, including Pt–Ce, Pt–Sm and Pt–Ho. Electrochemical test results showed that these Pt-rare intermetallic electrodes showed enhanced HER kinetics compared to the pure Pt electrode, and the Pt–Sm electrode showed the highest catalytic activity. Furthermore, Santos et al.78 synthesized platinum–dysprosium (Pt–Dy) electrodes with different Dy contents, and the experimental results showed that the HER kinetics of platinum–dysprosium (Pt–Dy) electrodes were enhanced in alkaline medium compared to the monometallic Pt electrode. Tetteh et al.79 presented a new nanowire catalyst (PtCo/C NW) consisting of an L10 (face-centered cubic) ordered intermetallic PtCo core and compressively strained high-index Pt (221) facets in a Pt-rich shell. STEM-EDS mapping images showed the core–shell structure of the PtCo/C NW catalyst and the uniform distribution of Pt and Co elements (Fig. 6a–e). PtCo/C NW demonstrated excellent HER activity. In 1.0 M KOH, the PtCo/C NW required an overpotential of 32.7 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6f), which is smaller than that of commercial Pt/C (45.7 mV). DFT calculations indicated that the intermetallic PtCo-induced high Miller index-related strain can optimize ΔGH* on the Pt (221) surface (Fig. 6a). These experimental results suggest that synthesizing Pt-based intermetallic electrocatalysts is an effective strategy to enhance the HER performance in alkaline medium.
 Fig. 6  (a) High-resolution STEM image, (b–d) STEM–EDS mapping images of a PtCo/C NW, indicating Pt, Co, and the combination, (e) corresponding line scan profile, (f) histogram of overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH and (g) HER activity estimated by the hydrogen adsorption free energy. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Interface engineering. 
Interface engineering has been regarded as an effective method to affect the electronic structure of the catalysts and accelerate the alkaline HER kinetics because of its effective regulation in the interfacial atomic arrangement and tune the physicochemical properties of catalysts.80 The interface modulating electronic interactions, interfacial bonding, or engineering upgraded the intrinsic activities of active sites by lattice strain at the heterointerface. As shown in Fig. 7a, interface engineering can indirectly enhance the HER intrinsic activity by regulating the electronic structure of the Pt surface.81 The heterogeneous interface as an active site for the intermediate interaction will effectively improve the overall catalytic activity. Hence, the nanoscale heterostructure catalysts with multiple active sites on the heterogeneous interface surface showed remarkable advantages in improving the activity of alkaline hydrogen evolution.
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration for improving the intrinsic activity by interface engineering. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. (b–d) HRTEM of PtCo@PtSn, (e) ΔGH* calculated at adsorbed sites for all catalysts, insets: schematic illustration of H adsorption and (f) PDOS analysis of Pt and other samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) SAED patterns of NiPt3@NiS matching clearly with reported NiPt3 (green box), (h) HR-TEM image of NiPt3@NiS that distinguishes between the crystalline NiPt3 phase (green) and amorphous NiS (violet) phase, (i) SAED patterns obtained for NiPt3@NiS indicating an amorphous nature (violet box). Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (j) The mechanism of the PtSA–NiO/Ni network as an efficient catalyst toward large-scale water electrolysis in alkaline media, (k) HAADF-STEM image of PtSA–NiO/Ni. (l) Adsorption free energies of H* on the surface and (m) calculated Pt 5d band of the PtSA–NiO/Ni, PtSA–NiO, and PtSA–Ni catalysts, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited. 
Chen et al.82 synthesized a PtCo@PtSn heterojunction with high activity for pH-universal H2 evolution through a multi-step synthesis strategy. As shown in Fig. 7b–d, the heterojunction between PtCo and PtSn can be clearly observed, which can improve the electronic structure of the Pt surface to optimize ΔGH* for further enhancing the activity for the HER. DFT simulations demonstrated that interfacial engineering changes the partial density of states (PDOS) on the Pt surface and optimizes the strength of the Pt–H bond to obtain a suitable ΔGH* (0.03 eV) (Fig. 7e and f). As a result, the PtCo@PtSn heterostructure catalyst exhibited excellent catalytic activity in hydrogen evolution in a wide pH range. Heterostructure catalysts synthesized by combining Pt and transition metal compounds (such as oxides, nitrides and sulfides) through interfacial engineering can improve the catalytic performance and reduce the cost of catalysts.83 Panda et al.84 synthesized a NiPt3@NiS hetero-nanostructure by the approach of a low-temperature molecular single-source precursor. In 1.0 M KOH solution, the NiPt3@NiS electrode delivered excellent HER activity with overpotentials of 12 mV and 73 mV at current densities of 10 mA cm−2 and 100 mA cm−2, respectively, which is superior to those of the Pt/NF catalyst (η10 = 22 mV, η100 = 107 mV). The structure of the NiPt3@NiS catalyst was characterized by TEM (Fig. 7g–i), and the NiPt3@NiS catalyst had a distinct heterointerface between NiPt3 and NiS. The improvement of hydrogen evolution activity was attributed to the heterogeneous structure enhancing the intrinsic activity of the catalyst through electronic effects. Zhou et al.85 successfully synthesized an isolated Pt immobilized NiO/Ni heterostructure catalyst (PtSA–NiO/Ni). The PtSA–NiO/Ni had excellent alkaline HER performance and stability. As shown in the schematic diagram, the NiO/Ni heterogeneous interface as hydroxyl adsorption sites facilitated the water dissociation rate on the surface of the PtSA–NiO/Ni catalyst (Fig. 7j). The TEM image also efficiently confirmed the interfacial coupling of a Pt single atom with NiO/Ni (Fig. 7k). DFT calculations proved that the NiO/Ni heterostructure changed the d-band center and optimized ΔGH* on Pt active sites (Fig. 7l and m). Thus, heterointerface engineering can effectively improve the alkaline HER catalytic performance of Pt-based catalysts by regulating the electronic effects.


3.2.4 Electronic metal–support interactions. 
For some supported metal catalysts, the interfaces not only disperse and stabilize metal nanoparticles but also generate strong interactions between the support and the metal (MSI) to change the electronic structure of active sites. According to the reported literature, there are different types of metal–support interactions. In particular, electronic metal–support interactions (EMSIs) have been proven to be an effective strategy to enhance the catalytic activity by regulating the electronic structure of the Pt surface. Pt-based HER catalysts can be designed more rationally by understanding the interaction mechanism between the supports and metal atoms. As shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 8a, EMSIs cause the rearrangement of electric charge at the interface between the metal and the support.86 As a result, EMSIs altered the electron cloud density and the d-band center of the Pt surface, then indirectly affecting the hydrogen binding energy on Pt atoms.87 Therefore, modulating the EMSI between Pt atoms and supports can change the electronic structure of the Pt surface to prepare a series of low Pt-based catalysts with high electrocatalytic efficiency for the HER under alkaline conditions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of strong electronic metal–support interactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Normalized XANES spectra at the Pt L3-edge, (c) first-shell fitting of EXAFS spectra and of Pt foil, PtO2, Pt-SAs/MoS2, and Pt-SAs/MoSe2 and (d) relationship between H adsorption ability and their corresponding acid/alkaline HER activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited. 
Metal dichalcogenides offer a unique combination of electronic and optical properties and hold the potential to enable a host of supported metal catalysts.88 In particular, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, such as MoS2 and MoSe2) have been extensively used as supports to load and stabilize metal particles.89 Shi et al.90 reported single-atom Pt catalysts loaded on four different TMD supports using an electrochemical deposition strategy. X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) spectra showed that the white-line intensity of Pt-SAs/MoSe2 is stronger than that of Pt foil, demonstrating that the Pt surface of the Pt-SAs/MoSe2 catalyst existed more unoccupied 5d orbitals due to EMSIs (Fig. 8b). Similarly, the extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectra (EXAFS) of Pt-SAs/MoSe2 demonstrated the existence of Pt–Se bonds, which also proved the strong EMSIs between Pt–SAs and MoSe2 (Fig. 8c). Electrochemical tests showed that the types of TMDs had a significant influence on the HER activity of Pt–SA catalysts in 1.0 M KOH electrolytes. Notably, Pt-SAs/MoSe2 possessed a small overpotential (η10, 29 mV) and 73.4 times higher mass activity (34.4 A mgPt−1) than commercial Pt/C (0.47 A mgPt−1). DFT calculation results showed that the EMSI improved the HER catalytic activity of Pt-SAs/MoSe2 by affecting the adsorption energy of hydrogen intermediates (Fig. 8d). Han et al.91 synthesized Pt nanoparticles (NPs) supported on CoS2 nanosheet arrays, using carbon cloth as the current collector (Pt–CoS2/CC). Pt L3-edge XANES spectra proved that there were electronic interactions between Pt nanosheets and CoS2. Electrochemical test results showed that Pt–CoS2/CC has excellent mass activity compared with PtC/CC. The projected density-of-states calculations revealed a downward shift in the d-band structure of Pt–CoS2/CC and confirmed the EMSI effect between CoS2 and Pt, resulting in the optimized HBE on Pt (111) active sites. As a result, the Pt–CoS2/CC electrode demonstrated excellent HER activity in alkaline electrolytes. The successful synthesis of these highly active TMD-supported Pt-based catalysts indicated that constructing EMSIs is an effective way to improve the catalytic properties of hydrogen evolution by changing the HBE on the Pt surface.

3.3 Spatial dimension regulation
The intrinsic alkaline HER activity can be improved by lowering EH2O and optimizing the HBE based on the mechanism. In addition, the dimension of the catalyst had an important effect on the electrocatalytic activity of nanomaterials. Generally, regulating the dimension of the catalyst can optimize the surface area and the number of active sites to improve the catalytic activity. However, different dimensions have distinguishing electronic interactions and charge transfer pathways.92 Therefore, preparing nano-catalysts with appropriate dimensions can improve the catalytic activity and stability based on the characteristics of Pt-based nanomaterials. To expose more active sites, accelerate HER reaction kinetics or enhance durability, a series of Pt-based catalysts with different dimensions (such as nanowires93/porous or hollow tubes,94 nanosheets,95 self-supported structures96 or single-atom catalysts97) have been prepared to demonstrate the excellent alkaline HER performance (Fig. 9a).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustrations of 1D nanowire/hollow tubes, 2D nanosheets, 3D self-supported structures and single-atoms. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image of PtNiP NWs and (c) Stability tests of PtNiP NWs in 1.0 M KOH without iR correction for 10000 cycles, insets: chronopotentiometric curve. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. (d) TEM image of R-PtOx/CNTs and (e) Pt-based mass activities of R-PtOx/CNTs, PtOx/CNTs and 20 wt% Pt/C at an overpotential of 0.1 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. (f) TEM image of the BC3N@Pt and (g) Cdl value converted from cyclic voltammetry data. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) SEM image of Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF and (i) chronoamperometric test of Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF in 1.0 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. 

3.3.1 One-dimensional nanostructures. 
One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, such as nanowires or hollow tubes, are widely used in the synthesis of electrocatalysts, because 1D structures usually possess a high aspect ratio and structural anisotropy.93,98 For Pt-based catalysts, the 1D nanowire is more inclined to expose the active surface of Pt (111), which is beneficial for improving the HER activity of catalysts.99 The structure anisotropy of the 1D nanowire can improve the electrical conductivity and reduce the impedance to improve the catalytic activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts. The 1D nanowire structure also has excellent stability in alkaline medium since it can avoid the use of a carbon material as a carrier. Besides, 1D hollow tubes with a porous structure can facilitate gas diffusion and further enhance the utilization of interfacial active sites of the Pt-based catalysts.100 Hence, designing Pt-based catalysts into 1D nanowire/nanotube structures, simultaneously combining with other intrinsic activity regulation strategies, can effectively improve the HER performance. Until now, many one-dimensional Pt-based nanocatalysts with excellent HER catalytic activity and stability have been successfully synthesized.
Chen et al.101 prepared a PtNiP ultrathin nanowire (PtNiP NW) catalyst using a two-step hydrothermal method (Fig. 9b). In alkaline electrolytes (1.0 M KOH), the PtNiP NWs exhibited extraordinary HER activity with an overpotential of only 9 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The EIS fitting result showed that the ultrathin nanowire structure reduced the electron transfer resistance (Rct) of PtNiP NWs compared with commercial Pt/C. The large TOF value of PtNiP NWs (125 H2 S−1) proved that the nanowire structure can enhance the catalytic activity of each active site. The PtNiP nanowire structure had excellent stability at a high current density (50 mA cm−2) and cycling stability under alkaline conditions (Fig. 9c). Wang et al.102 reported ultrafine Pt–Ir distorted nanowires (Pt–Ir DNWs) as a bifunctional catalyst for water splitting to produce green hydrogen. The electrochemical experiment results showed that the Pt–Ir DNWs catalyst has a smaller Rct value than Pt/C, indicating the fast electron transfer of the Pt–Ir DNWs catalyst. Feng et al.94 designed an ultra-small PtOx nanoparticle with hybrid Pt on carbon nanotubes (R-PtOx/CNTs) as a highly efficient alkaline HER catalyst (Fig. 9d). It is demonstrated that the synthesis of R-PtOx/CNTs by loading metal Pt on 1D carbon nanotubes can increase the utilization of Pt atoms with an enhanced ECSA and enhance the performance of the HER in alkaline medium. As shown in Fig. 9e, R-PtOx/CNTs with a 1D nanotube structure showed a high mass activity of 5.56 A mgPt−1 at 0.1 V in 1.0 M KOH, which is higher than that of commercial Pt/C (0.52 A mgPt−1). As a whole, the Pt-based electrocatalyst with 1D nanostructures exhibited improved hydrogen evolution activity and enhanced stability, which can be attributed to the optimized charge transfer and enhanced exposed active sites. Therefore, Pt-based HER catalysts with 1D nanostructures are promising electrodes to accelerate the efficiency of molecular hydrogen generation and improve the stability under harsh conditions.


3.3.2 Two-dimensional nanosheets. 
Two-dimensional (2D) materials, especially nanosheet structures, have shown unique features in electrocatalysts. Firstly, nanosheet structures can confine electrons in 2D planes to optimize the electronic properties of the catalytic active sites. Secondly, nanosheet structure materials possess an extremely large plane size, which can maintain the atomic thickness of the catalyst. Catalysts with nanosheet structures usually have a large active surface area.103,104 Thus, preparing Pt-based catalytic materials with a 2D nanosheet structure or dispersing Pt atoms on ultrathin nanosheets can increase the ECSA and the number of active sites to improve the efficiency of hydrogen evolution. Although 2D materials still have some problems that need to be solved, especially the controllable preparation of 2D layered structures,105 a series of Pt-based catalysts supported on 2D nanosheets have been synthesized for efficient alkaline electrocatalytic water splitting.
Black phosphorus nanosheets (BP NSs) have a unique honeycomb structure, volatile electronic properties, and a large specific surface area. Thus, BP NSs are a promising candidate for supporting metal catalysts. Li et al.106 prepared a PtRu nanocluster loading on black phosphorus nanosheets (PtRu NCs/BP). In 1.0 M KOH, the PtRu NCs/BP demonstrated an excellent HER catalytic activity of 88.5 mA cm−2 at −70 mV, which is about 10.2 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C. The sheet-like structure of BP offered a large specific surface area for anchoring active sites to accelerate the kinetics of hydrogen evolution. As shown in the TEM image (Fig. 9f), Zhao et al.107 prepared Pt nanoparticles with high dispersion and a small particle size on the nanosheet-like BC3N matrix catalyst (named BC3N@Pt) by an in situ method. The BC3N@Pt catalyst showed excellent HER performance with an overpotential of only 26.1 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in the electrolytes with pH = 14. The specific activity of BC3N@Pt was about 4 times higher than that of commercial 20 wt% Pt/C. As shown in Fig. 9g, BC3N@Pt also exhibited high double-layer capacitance, suggesting a large ECSA. Notably, the BC3N@Pt catalyst still exhibited better specific activity than 20 wt% Pt/C via normalizing the current density by the ECSA, indicating the improved intrinsic catalytic activity of BC3N@Pt. Therefore, preparing two-dimensional layered Pt-based catalysts is an effective strategy to design high-performance and low-cost electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER.


3.3.3 Three-dimensional self-supported structures. 
Three-dimensional (3D) materials have unique advantages over low-dimensional catalysts. 3D structures, including nanocages, nanoframes, core–shell structures or 3D self-supported structures, generally have a large specific surface area, high porosity, and outstanding stability.108 In particular, 3D self-supported catalysts synthesized by assembling low-dimensional materials on conductive substrates have been widely used to design Pt-based catalysts with high activity and stability. Compared with other traditional 3D catalysts, 3D self-supported catalysts can directly grow low-dimensional structures (such as 1D nanotubes, 2D nanosheet arrays) on conductive substrates (such as Ti, NF) by hydrothermal or electrodeposition methods.109 As a result, 3D self-supported catalysts generally have the virtues of low-dimensional structure and exhibit better stability than low-dimensional catalysts. For instance, Yan et al.110 synthesized a 3D self-supported monolithic catalyst by dispersing Pt atoms on sulfur-doped titanium nitride nanotubes (S-TiN NTs) encapsulated in polyaniline (PANI) on Ti mesh (PANI@Pt/S-TiN NTs/Ti). In 1.0 M KOH, the PANI@Pt/S-TiN NTs/Ti catalyst showed high HER activities with only 25 mV overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and ultrahigh mass activity (5.7 A mgPt−1), which is 22.4 times higher than that of the Pt/C/CC electrode. Furthermore, the PANI@Pt/S-TiN NTs/Ti catalyst sustained excellent stability for more than 25 h. The excellent catalytic performance is mainly attributed to its 3D self-supported structure, which increased the number of active sites and improved the mechanical stability during long-term operation. As mentioned above, Ni(OH)2 nanosheets can be used as an initiator to promote the water dissociation activation of Pt-based catalysts for the alkaline HER. Kong et al.96 prepared Pt-decorated TiO2/β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheet arrays on a Ni foam catalyst (Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF) under mild conditions by integrating electrodeposition and hydrothermal processes (Fig. 9h). For the Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF catalyst, β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheets provide a large ECSA. As shown in Fig. 9i, the Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF catalyst showed excellent durability at ultrahigh current densities (j = 1420 mA cm−2), which mainly depends on the stable self-supporting structures. Yuan et al.111 reported Pt-modified Ni(OH)2 on a 3D nickel foam catalyst (Pt–Ni(OH)2/NF) by a one-step galvanic replacement reaction. The Pt–Ni(OH)2/NF catalyst had improved HER activity and stability owing to a 3D self-supported structure with a large ECSA and good electrical conductivity of NF. These 3D self-supported Pt-based catalysts with high HER activity effectively enhanced the durability compared with low dimensional catalysts, attributed to the reduced dependence on the binder and overcoming the occupation of active sites during electrode preparation.


3.3.4 Single-atom catalysts. 
The morphology and atomic size can affect the activity and selectivity of electrocatalysts. In terms of the geometric structure, the decrease of the metal particle size and the low coordination atoms on the metal surface will increase the proportion of the exposed active center. The size effect also can change the crystal plane index of metal particles to influence the reactivity of the catalyst.112 Compared with metal clusters, single-atom catalysts (SACs) possess a highly active area, high atomic utilization, and a definite active center. Benefiting from these advantages, SACs usually have high mass activity. Thus, lowering the size of Pt particles to single atoms (SAs) can reduce the consumption of noble metals and decrease the cost of application for supported Pt-based catalysts113 So far, researchers have devoted themselves to developing cost-effective Pt-based SACs for the alkaline HER.
Yang et al.114 reported PtCo alloy and Pt SAs loaded on a N-doped porous carbon framework electrocatalyst (CoPt PtSA/NDPCF). The Fourier transform of the Pt L3-edge EXAFS spectrum of CoPt-PtSA/NDPCF revealed a lower R position (2.24 Å) than that of Pt foil (2.52 Å), mainly attributed to the alloying of Pt and Co atoms. Moreover, there is no scattering path of Pt–Pt in the EXAFS spectrum of CoPt-PtSA/NDPCF, indicating the formation of isolated Pt sites. In the fitted EXAFS spectrum of CoPt-PtSA/NDPCF, the small peaks correspond to Co–N (1.16 Å) and Co–Pt (2.82 Å), which confirms the coordination of Co with N and Pt. As a result, the CoPt-PtSA/NDPCF catalyst with a Pt loading of 0.4 wt% exhibited an ultrahigh mass activity (7.5 A mgPt−1) in 1.0 M KOH benefiting from the electron effect, leading to a great improvement of the utilization efficiency of Pt atoms. As shown in Fig. 10a, Wang et al.115 adopted a facile in situ strategy to synthesize Pt SAs loaded on layered α-Ni2/3Fe1/3(OH)2 (Pt-Ni2Fe1). The Pt-Ni2Fe1-24 catalyst, which was obtained by in situ oxidation for 24 hours, exhibited substantially enhanced OER and HER kinetics in a 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution. The successful synthesis of Pt SAs can be demonstrated by the unique scattering path of Pt–O in the Pt L3-edge EXAFS spectrum of Pt-Ni2Fe1-24 (Fig. 10b and c). The polarization curves in Fig. 10d showed that Pt-Ni2Fe1-24 possessed much higher mass activity (∼7.5 mA mgPt−1) for the HER than 20 wt% Pt/C (∼1.2 mA mgPt−1) at an overpotential of 50 mV, which is attributed to the increased intrinsic activity of each single-atomic Pt site. Mosallanezhad et al.116 synthesized the Pt@CoS catalyst by loading Pt SAs on cobalt sulfide support. The Pt L3-edge EXAFS spectrum demonstrated that Pt atoms mainly existed as isolated SAs via forming Pt–S bonds in a Pt@CoS catalyst. The Pt@CoS exhibited a remarkable current density of 6.8 A mgPt−1 at an overpotential of 100 mV, which is about 45 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C in 1.0 M KOH, indicating that Pt single atom modification on CoS greatly enhanced the Pt utilization. These Pt-based SACs with ultrahigh mass activity demonstrated that anchoring Pt SAs on suitable supports is an effective approach to address the unsatisfactory utilization and alkaline HER activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of Ni–Fe hydroxides with Fe vacancies or Pt single atoms via oxidation by O2 or H2PtCl6. (b) Pt L3-edge and (c) radial distance χ(R) space spectra with Pt foil and PtO2 as references. (d) Mass-specific activities of the catalysts for the HER. Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

4. Conclusions and perspective
Preparing novel alkaline HER electrocatalysts with high activity and low cost has vital significance for the development of green hydrogen energy and the transformation of the energy structure. In this review, we briefly discussed the alkaline HER mechanism, and the relationship between the catalyst structure and activity. More importantly, we systematically summarized the design strategies of Pt-based catalysts for efficient alkaline HER processes, including lowering the water dissociation energy barrier, optimizing the hydrogen binding energy and adjusting the dimensions of electrocatalysts. The recent advances of typical Pt-based catalysts for the alkaline HER are listed in Table 1. In conclusion, in alkaline media, integrating initiating factors that possess excellent water dissociation ability with active Pt sites with an optimal HBE, and then preparing Pt-based catalysts into a suitable structure with a high specific surface area and fast mass/electron transfer, is the most prevailing strategy for designing cost-effective Pt-based HER catalysts. However, designing alkaline HER Pt-based catalysts with excellent performance often involves multiple regulatory strategies and complicated synergistic effects, and the inner mechanism of HER dynamics needs to be further explored.
Table 1 Summary of HER activities of Pt-based catalysts in alkaline system




Strategy
Catalyst
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)

η
100 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Mass activity
Ref.




Lowering EH2O by introducing initiating factors
PtRu/CC1500
1.0 M KOH
8.0
52.0
28.0
65.0 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

38



PtRu/mCNTs
1.0 M KOH
15.0
152.0
33.5
1.0 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

39



PtNi-NC-900
1.0 M KOH
37.4
70.0
43.2
3.8 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

40



PtNiCo HAMPs
1.0 M KOH
20.0
120.0
46.3
0.44 A mgPt−1at 100 mV

41



β-Ni(OH)2/Pt
0.1 M KOH
92.0
—
42.0
—

47



Pt–Co(OH)2/CC
1.0 M KOH
32.0
110.0
70.0
—

48



N-LDH/2D-Pt
1.0 M KOH
31.0
61.0
32.3
2.43 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV

50



Pt–CoFe(II) LDHs
1.0 M KOH
15.0
70.0
45.3
—

51



Pt–Co/CoOx
1.0 M KOH
28.0
—
29.3
1.36 A mgPt−1at 50 mV

55



Pt43/NC
1.0 M KOH
19.5
—
40.8
2.97 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

58



Optimizing the HBE by electronic effects
d-PtSe2
1.0 M KOH
59.0
195.0
88.0
—

63



Pt@DG
1.0 M KOH
61.0
245.0
80.0
7.2 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV

65



PtNi5
1.0 M KOH
26.8
90.0
19.2
2.36 A mgmetal−1 at 70 mV

67



D-PtNi/C
1.0 M KOH
39.7
—
55.0
1.03 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV

68



BPed-Pt/GR
1.0 M KOH
21.0
80.0
46.9
5.81 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV

70



Pt2Ni3-P NWs
1.0 M KOH
44.0
—
66.0
—

71



PtCo/C NW
1.0 M KOH
32.7
150.0
33.9
—

79



PtCo@PtSn
1.0 M KOH
25.0
—
24.0
7.5 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

82



NiPt3@NiS/NF
1.0 M KOH
12.0
73.0
24.0
—

84



PtSA–NiO/Ni
1.0 M KOH
26.0
85.0
27.1
20.6 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV

85



Pt-SAs/MoSe2
1.0 M KOH
29.0
100.0
28.0
34.4 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV

90



Pt-CoS2/CC
1.0 M KOH
24.0
105.0
49.0
2.1 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV

91



Spatial dimension regulation
PtNiP NWs
1.0 M KOH
9.0
44.0
30.5
6.28 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV

101



Pt–Ir DNWs
0.1 M KOH
26.0


20.9



102



R-PtOx/CNT
1.0 M KOH
27.8
—
34.6
5.56 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV

94



PtRu NCs/BP
1.0 M KOH
22.0
—
19.0
5.4 A mgmetal−1 at 70 mV

106



BC3N@Pt
1.0 M KOH
26.1
130.0
42.6
5.56 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV

107



Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF
1.0 M KOH
26.0
80.0
38.9
—

96



PANI@Pt/S-TiN NTs/Ti
1.0 M KOH
24.0
98.0
31.2
—

110



Pt–Ni(OH)2/NF
1.0 M KOH
38.0
203.0
17.0
49.0 A mgPt−1at 100 mV

111



CoPt-PtSA/NDPCF
1.0 M KOH
31.0
95.0
43.7
19.3 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

114



Pt–Ni2Fe1
1.0 M KOH
80.0
350.0
67.0
7.5 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV

115



Pt@CoS
1.0 M KOH
28.0
76.0


6.8 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV

116





 (1) The in situ techniques can be used to in-place monitor the local structures and properties of catalysts, thus providing important insights into the clarification of the electrochemical reaction mechanism and the identification of active centers. Some in situ techniques have been applied in alkaline water electrolysis, including XAS, electrochemical transmission electron microscopy (EC-TEM), Raman spectroscopy, etc. For example, with in situ XAS, the structural and oxidation states, and local coordination environment of metal sites can be determined. This facilitates clarifying the reason for increased catalytic activity. However, in situ XAS still has disadvantages, such as high testing cost and radiation damage to the catalyst structure. Although in situ EC-TEM can analyze the structural changes of the catalyst during alkaline water electrolysis, problems such as insufficient lattice resolution, electron beam-induced damage and bubble formation still existed in liquid electrolytic cells. The surface changes of the HER catalysts can be monitored at different voltages or temperatures using in situ Raman techniques, but the interpretation of Raman peak positions and intensities remains challenging due to the disturbance of electrolytes. In addition, the experimental setups and in situ procedures are different among various in situ techniques, especially in terms of the electrocatalytic device associated with the distance of the electrodes, three-phase interfaces, etc. Therefore, it is still a pressing challenge to achieve a comprehensive overview of the dynamic changes during alkaline water electrolysis. Fortunately, by combining advanced theoretical methods (such as machine learning) with advanced in situ techniques, a more accurate and comprehensive interpretation of the microscopic processes of the alkaline HER at the electrode interface is expected.
 (2) An advanced and comprehensive theoretical model is crucial to understand the complicated interactions between active sites and intermediates on Pt surfaces involved in the hydrogen evolution process. At present, the exploration of the HER mechanism is based on traditional DFT thermodynamic calculations. For example, DFT calculations can be used to calculate ΔGH2O/ΔGH* on Pt (111) surfaces. However, it is difficult to achieve a precise simulation of reactant transfer and quantitatively assess the critical factors affecting the HER mechanism using traditional DFT calculations. Thus, advanced theoretical calculation methods are urgently needed to establish more reasonable and comprehensive theoretical models. In particular, combining advanced theoretical models with the advantages of in situ spectroscopy may provide deeper insight into HER mechanisms in alkaline media.
 (3) Exploring the properties of the electric double layer (EDL) is significant to study the mechanism of the polarization reaction during hydrogen evolution. In the actual HER polarization, the catalytic activity of active sites can be affected by the external environment, such as pH, ions, and temperature. Notably, some electrochemical processes that occur in the EDL, such as ion transfer, charge transfer of intermediates, desolvation of hydrated cations, and impedance resulting from mass transfer in the EDL are accountable for the increase of the HER overpotential. Thus, it is significant to analyze the interface electrochemistry, especially exploring the interaction between the electrode and the electrolyte in the EDL, to comprehend the mechanism and improve the HER performance. Some significant studies117 have provided instructive work on the interfacial water effect by combining in situ Raman and quantum mechanics molecular dynamics (QMMD) calculations with other characterization techniques, such as FTIR, XAS, CO stripping, voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy. Considerable attention should be devoted to revealing the structural influence relationships between EDL properties and HER performance.
 (4) Commercial application requires cost-effective Pt-based electrocatalysts prepared by facile and extensible technologies. It is well known that high current density and long-term durability are important evaluation criteria for applying catalysts to the practical electrolytic cell. However, the attractive performance of many Pt-based catalysts is limited by the laboratory level with lower current and durability than application requirements and complex preparation processes. Therefore, more attention should be paid to meeting the operation standard for future advanced Pt-based electrocatalysts and extensible and facile preparation technologies in industrial applications. In short, huge efforts are still needed to realize the large-scale commercialization of Pt-based catalysts and bridge the academia-to-industry gap.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22208322).
References
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Y. Zhao, H. Wu, Y. Gao, Z. Chen, W. Jin, J. Wang, T. Ma and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010437 CrossRef CAS .
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Jiang, W. Ma and Z. Zhou, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1433–1443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, B. Xi, R. Wei, Q. Fu, Y. Qain and S. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8375–8383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, M. Zhou, A. Long, Y. Xue, H. Liao, C. Wei and Z. J. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, K. Duanmu, C. Wan, T. Cheng, L. Zhang, S. Dai and X. Duan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Q. Jin, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Cui and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38771–38778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kou, S. Wang and Y. Li, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 224–234 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ishaq, I. Dincer and C. Crawford, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 26238–26264 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Holladay, J. Hu, D. L. King and Y. Wang, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 244–260 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Zhao, J. Yu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .
C. Li and J. B. Baek, ACS Omega, 2019, 5, 31–40 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Song, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Shai and Y. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129842 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zhu, H. Yang, W. Zhang, Y. Mao, S. S. Lyu and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1892–1899 RSC .
S. Anantharaj, S. Noda, V. R. Jothi, S. Yi, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18981–19006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. S. Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 RSC .
M. Gong, D. Y. Wang, C. C. Chen, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 28–46 CrossRef CAS .
C. Walter, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 8603–8631 RSC .
H. Wu, C. Feng, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 4, 473–507 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. McCrum and M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 891–899 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, B. Chen, D. Mei and X. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5475–5481 RSC .
Y. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Song, Q. Li, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20794–20812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Qin, W. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Luo, H. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903120 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Gao, J. Chen, X. Wang, H. Chang, B. Li, D. Song, J. Li, H. Li and N. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 48591–48597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, L. Huang, M. Wei, P. Tsiakaras and P. K. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119460 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kepp, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9461–9470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Oh, J. Y. Sa, H. Hwang, H. Baik, J. Kim, B. Kim, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16379–16386 RSC .
Q. Zeng, J. Song, P. Cui, H. Liu, L. Tian, D. Che and J. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2022, 61, 7529–7536 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, P. Lu, Y. Luo, J. Y. Zheng, W. Ma, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9609–9615 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Y. Su, X. Quan, W. Choi, G. Zhang, N. Liu, B. Kim, S. Chen, H. Yu and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104409 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. Chang, Y. Cheng, H. Liu, J. Li, Y. Ai, Z. Hu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Liang, Y. Yang and H. Sun, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 965–971 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Shi and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 2, 2515–2523 CAS .
L. Li, G. Zhang, B. Wang, T. Yang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2090–2098 RSC .
B. Pang, X. Liu, T. Liu, T. Chen, X. Shen, W. Zhang, S. Wang, T. Liu, D. Liu, T. Ding, Z. Liao, Y. Li, C. Liang and T. Yao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 102–108 RSC .
J. Guo, J. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Guan, M. Zeng, J. Shen, J. Zou, Q. Chen, T. Wang and D. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13727–13734 RSC .
H. Y. Chen, H. J. Niu, Z. Han, J. J. Feng, H. Huang and A. J. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 570, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Liang, Y. Liu, X. Ai, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002435 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Shen, B. A. Lu, X. M. Qu, J. Y. Ye, J. M. Zhang, S. H. Yin, Q. H. Wu, R. X. Wang, S. Y. Shen, T. Sheng, Y. X. Jiang and S. G. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ruqia and S. I. Choi, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2643–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, F. Liu, J. Dou and Q. Zhao, ChemCatChem, 2021, 13, 5078–5083 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hall, D. J. Lockwood, C. Bock and B. R. MacDougall, Proc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 2015, 471, 20140792 Search PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Zhao, L. R. Zheng, Y. Tong, M. Zhang, G. Xu, C. Li, J. Ma and G. Shi, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 237–244 CrossRef .
Z. Xing, C. Han, D. Wang, Q. Li and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7131–7135 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Jang, S. Dutta, A. Kumar, Y. R. Hong, H. Kang, S. Lee, S. Ryu, W. Choi and I. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10578–10588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Z. Nie, R. Xie, X. Hu, Y. Yu and N. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2022, 532, 231353 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, M. Klapproth, A. Sagaltchik, S. Li and A. Thomas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2249–2256 RSC .
J. Gan, Z. Huang, W. Luo, W. Chen, Y. Cao, G. Qian, X. Zhou and X. Duan, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 52, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Ye, X. Chen, L. Zhang, G. Liu, S. Wang and L. X. Ding, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1511–1519 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Wu, R. Chen, C. Lin, S. Mu and N. Cheng, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 4958–4964 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1919–1923 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Tan, F. Wen, Z. Zhou, M. Zhu, S. Yin and H. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6167–6176 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Liu, C. Chen, J. Guo, R. Bi, S. Chen, L. Zhang and M. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 436, 135186 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beltrán-Suito, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15749–15756 RSC .
S. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Wu and Q. Zhang, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 3380–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zong, Y. Fang, C. Zhu, X. Zhang, L. Wu, X. Hou, Y. Tao and J. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 42852–42860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, Z. Tian, K. Dai, Y. Ye and C. Liang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 553, 126–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, P. Zhai, J. Hou, J. Zhao and J. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102359 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jing, D. Liang, J. Hao, M. Deng and S. Cai, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 024702 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yang, H. Liu, P. Jia, Y. Yuan, L. Zhuang, H. Zhang, X. Yan, G. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. Liu, S. Wei, L. Song, Q. Wu, B. Ge, L. Zhang, K. Wang, X. Wang, C. R. Chang and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 2171–2178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, M. D. Porosoff and J. G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5780–5817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, X. Liang, R. Xu, C. Dai, B. Wu, G. Yu, B. Chen, X. Wang and N. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008298 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, G. Wang, T. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Liao, X. Guo, H. Li, R. Liu, M. Dou, S. Nan and Q. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5036–5045 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ledezma-Yanez, W. D. Z. Wallace, P. Sebastián-Pascual, V. Climent, J. M. Feliu and M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Lu, X. Zhang, D. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wamg, P. K. Chu, S. Ramakrishna and X. F. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 19236–19242 CrossRef .
P. Wang, Q. Shao, J. Guo, L. Bu and X. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3144–3149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Kim, J. M. Kim, Y. Ha, J. Woo, A. Byun, T. J. Shin, K. H. Park, H. Y. Jeong, H. Kim, J. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11242–11254 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, G. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Yang, Y. Sun and C. Felser, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5042–5048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lim, C. Y. Chan, K. T. Chen and H. Y. Tuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 288–296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mondal, S. Sarkar, D. Bagch, T. Das, R. Das, A. K. Singh, P. K. Prasanna, C. P. Vinod, S. Chakraborty and S. C. Peter, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2202294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2207–2221 RSC .
D. M. F. Santos, C. A. C. Sequeira, D. Macciò, A. Saccone and J. L. Figueiredo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3137–3145 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. F. Santos, B. Šljukić, C. A. C. D. Macciò, A. Saccone and J. L. Figueiredo, Energy, 2013, 50, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Tetteh, C. Gyan-Barimah, H. Y. Lee, T. H. Kang, S. Kang, S. Ringe and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 25246–25256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng and F. Zaera, Top. Catal., 2019, 62, 838–848 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, Y. Jiang, S. X. Dou, W. Sun and H. Pan, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 85–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, G. Qian, H. Zhang, S. Feng, Y. Mo, L. Luo and S. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2107597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Kong, D. Zhao, H. Wang and C. Selomulya, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 26–55 CrossRef CAS .
C. Panda, P. W. Menezes, S. Yao, J. Schmidt, C. Walter, J. N. Hausmann and M. Driess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13306–13310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Zhou, Z. Wang, C. B. Han, X. Ke, C. Wang, Y. Jin, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, W. H. Li, S. Tan, K. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 19233–19239 CrossRef .
M. Ahmadi, H. Mistry and B. Roldan Cuenya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3519–3533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, M. Gobbi, Y. Zhao, C. Backes and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6845–6888 RSC .
S. Wei, X. Cui, Y. Xu, B. Shang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Fan, L. Zheng, C. Hou, H. Huang, S. Wen and W. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 368–374 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, Z. R. Ma, Y. Y. Xiao, Y. C. Yin, W. M. Huang, Z. C. Huang, Y. Z. Zheng, F. Y. Mu, R. Huang, G. Y. Shi, Y. Y. Sun, X. H. Xia and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Wu, Y. Deng, J. Liu, J. Lu, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800935 CrossRef .
L. Li, S. Wang, L. Xiong, B. Wang, G. Yang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12800–12807 RSC .
H. Niu, C. Xia, L. Huang, S. Zaman, T. Maiyalagan, W. Guo, B. You and B. Y. Xia, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1459–1472 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feng, H. Zheng, D. Zhang, G. Yuan, L. Y. Chang, Y. Chen and J. Zhong, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 58, 364–369 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Guo and B. Y. Xia, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 1831–1840 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kong, M. Peng, M. Liu, Y. Lv, H. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Liu, Y. Fu, W. Li and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 316, 121654 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, N. Fu, S. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 18155–18174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600380 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bu, Y. Feng, J. Yao, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2811–2821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. Liu, J. Xu, C. Xia, P. Wang, B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan and X. Wang, Small Struct., 2022, 4, 2200130 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, B. Wei, Y. Wei, P. Zhai, W. Liu, X. Gu, Z. Yang, J. Zou, R. Zhang and Y. Gong, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 301, 120754 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, M. Wang, C. Zhan, H. Geng, Y. Li, X. Huang and L. Bu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18972–18977 RSC .
T. Chen, M. Qian, X. Tong, W. Liao, Y. Fu, H. Dai and Q. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 29889–29895 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Pei, J. He, K. Liu, W. Qi, X. Gao, S. Zhou, H. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Gao, J. He, J. Zhao, J. Hu, T. S. Chan, Z. Li, G. Zhang and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10870–10875 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Zheng, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16427–16435 RSC .
G. Braesch, A. G. Oshchepkov, A. Bonnefont, F. Asonkeng, T. Maurer, G. Maranzana, E. R. Savinova and M. Chatenet, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1789–1799 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, M. Driess and P. W. Menezes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2170153 CrossRef .
J. Yan, Z. Xi, L. Cong, K. Lv, R. Xin, B. Cao, B. Liu, J. He and J. Zhang, Small, 2022, 18, 2205603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yuan, B. Wen, Y. Hu, G. Zeng, W. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Zhang and Q. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 14258–14265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Durst, C. Simon, A. Siebel, P. J. Rheinländer, T. Schuler, M. Hanzlik, J. Herranz, F. Hasché and H. A. Gasteiger, ECS Trans., 2014, 64, 1069 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 539–573 CrossRef .
W. Yang, P. Cheng, Z. Li, Y. Lin, M. Li, J. Zi, H. Shi, G. Li, Z. Lian and H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2205920 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Wan, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Jiang, J. Y. Zheng and Z. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2203342 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mosallanezhad, C. Wei, P. A. Koudakan, Y. Fang, S. Niu, Z. Bian, B. Liu, T. Huang, H. Pan and G. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 135, 121534 CrossRef .
C. Y. Li, J. B. Le, Y. H. Wang, S. Chen, Z. L. Yang, J. F. Li, J. Chen and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 697–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Wei Ma	Wei Ma received his Bachelor's degree in Inorganic Nonmetal Materials Engineering from Central South University, China, in 2009, followed by his PhD in Mineral Materials Science from the same university in 2015. During his doctoral studies, he spent two years (2013 to 2015) at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, as a joint PhD student. Since 2016, he has been a faculty member at Zhengzhou University, China, where he is now an associate professor at the School of Chemical Engineering. His research focuses on the development of advanced nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.
Xueyuan Zhang	Xueyuan Zhang is a graduate student at the School of Chemical Engineering, Zhengzhou University, China, having earned her Bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Henan Polytechnic University, China, in 2020. Her current research focuses on the development of efficient catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion.
Menggai Jiao	Menggai Jiao received her B.S. degree in applied chemistry from Yanshan University in 2010 and Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2016. She continued her studies as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Zhen Zhou's group at Nankai University. Since 2021, she has been working at Zhengzhou University. Her current research interest focuses on the theoretical investigation and design of high-efficiency electrocatalysts for energy storage and conversion.
Lili Zhang	Lili Zhang received her Ph.D. degree in 2019 from the South China University of Technology, China. Since 2019, she has been working at Zhengzhou University. Her current research interest focuses on electrocatalysis and energy materials, including water splitting, nitrogen reduction reaction, and oxygen reduction reaction.
Zhen Zhou	Zhen Zhou received his B.S. (in Applied Chemistry in 1994) and Ph.D. (in Inorganic Chemistry in 1999) degrees from Nankai University, China. He joined the faculty at Nankai University as a lecturer in 1999. Two years later, he began to work as a postdoctoral fellow at Nagoya University, Japan. In 2005, he returned to Nankai University as an associate professor and was promoted to a full professor in 2011. In 2021, he moved to Zhengzhou University, China, as Distinguished Professor, and he is now the Dean of the School of Chemical Engineering. His main research interest includes the design, preparation, and application of materials for energy storage and conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of using renewable energy to drive alkaline water electrolysis and applications of H2.	 
Volmer step: H2O* + e− → H* + OH−/OH*	(1)
Heyrovsky step: H* + H2O + e− → H2 + OH−	(2)
Tafel step: 2H* → H2	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic pathways for the HER under alkaline conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright, 2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Simulated and experimentally measured HER activity. Adapted with permission from ref 24. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature Limited. (c) Volcano plot of exchange current density (j0) as a function of DFT-calculated Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) of adsorbed atomic hydrogen on pure metals. Adapted with permission from ref 27. Copyright 2015 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Strategies to improve the HER activity of Pt-based electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Gibbs free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution over different metal surfaces in alkaline solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2020 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Free energy diagram of the alkaline HER on PtNi3(111) and Pt (111) surfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2022 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Illustration showing the Volmer–Tafel mechanism on the Pt–Ni(OH)2 bifunctional model catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Adsorption free energy diagram for the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Free energy diagram of Pt–Co and Pt–Co/CoOx. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Free energy diagram of the alkaline HER on (f) Pt43/NC and (g) Pt (111). Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Free energy profiles of the HER for various defects. Adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019 AIP Publishing LLC. (b) DFT simulated Gibbs free energy diagram for the alkaline-HER over PtNi5 and the Pt-surface. Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) HER polarization curves and (d) HER polarization curves of BPed-Pt/GR with different contents of Pt–P bonds after iR correction in 1.0 M KOH at 25 °C normalized by the geometrical area of the disk, (e) high-resolution valence-band Pt VB XPS spectra of Pt relative to the Fermi level as an analogue of the density of states with the black lines indicating the position of the d-band centers, and (f) current densities at 70 mV vs. RHE and free-energy diagram for the HER at the potential U = 0 relative to the standard hydrogen electrode with different Pt–P contents. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) High-resolution STEM image, (b–d) STEM–EDS mapping images of a PtCo/C NW, indicating Pt, Co, and the combination, (e) corresponding line scan profile, (f) histogram of overpotentials at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH and (g) HER activity estimated by the hydrogen adsorption free energy. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration for improving the intrinsic activity by interface engineering. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. (b–d) HRTEM of PtCo@PtSn, (e) ΔGH* calculated at adsorbed sites for all catalysts, insets: schematic illustration of H adsorption and (f) PDOS analysis of Pt and other samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) SAED patterns of NiPt3@NiS matching clearly with reported NiPt3 (green box), (h) HR-TEM image of NiPt3@NiS that distinguishes between the crystalline NiPt3 phase (green) and amorphous NiS (violet) phase, (i) SAED patterns obtained for NiPt3@NiS indicating an amorphous nature (violet box). Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (j) The mechanism of the PtSA–NiO/Ni network as an efficient catalyst toward large-scale water electrolysis in alkaline media, (k) HAADF-STEM image of PtSA–NiO/Ni. (l) Adsorption free energies of H* on the surface and (m) calculated Pt 5d band of the PtSA–NiO/Ni, PtSA–NiO, and PtSA–Ni catalysts, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of strong electronic metal–support interactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2021 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Normalized XANES spectra at the Pt L3-edge, (c) first-shell fitting of EXAFS spectra and of Pt foil, PtO2, Pt-SAs/MoS2, and Pt-SAs/MoSe2 and (d) relationship between H adsorption ability and their corresponding acid/alkaline HER activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustrations of 1D nanowire/hollow tubes, 2D nanosheets, 3D self-supported structures and single-atoms. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image of PtNiP NWs and (c) Stability tests of PtNiP NWs in 1.0 M KOH without iR correction for 10000 cycles, insets: chronopotentiometric curve. Adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V. (d) TEM image of R-PtOx/CNTs and (e) Pt-based mass activities of R-PtOx/CNTs, PtOx/CNTs and 20 wt% Pt/C at an overpotential of 0.1 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2021 Elsevier B.V. (f) TEM image of the BC3N@Pt and (g) Cdl value converted from cyclic voltammetry data. Adapted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2021 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) SEM image of Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF and (i) chronoamperometric test of Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF in 1.0 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2022 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of Ni–Fe hydroxides with Fe vacancies or Pt single atoms via oxidation by O2 or H2PtCl6. (b) Pt L3-edge and (c) radial distance χ(R) space spectra with Pt foil and PtO2 as references. (d) Mass-specific activities of the catalysts for the HER. Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

Lowering EH2O by introducing initiating factors	PtRu/CC1500	1.0 M KOH	8.0	52.0	28.0	65.0 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
38

PtRu/mCNTs	1.0 M KOH	15.0	152.0	33.5	1.0 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
39

PtNi-NC-900	1.0 M KOH	37.4	70.0	43.2	3.8 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
40

PtNiCo HAMPs	1.0 M KOH	20.0	120.0	46.3	0.44 A mgPt−1at 100 mV	
41

β-Ni(OH)2/Pt	0.1 M KOH	92.0	—	42.0	—	
47

Pt–Co(OH)2/CC	1.0 M KOH	32.0	110.0	70.0	—	
48

N-LDH/2D-Pt	1.0 M KOH	31.0	61.0	32.3	2.43 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV	
50

Pt–CoFe(II) LDHs	1.0 M KOH	15.0	70.0	45.3	—	
51

Pt–Co/CoOx	1.0 M KOH	28.0	—	29.3	1.36 A mgPt−1at 50 mV	
55

Pt43/NC	1.0 M KOH	19.5	—	40.8	2.97 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
58

Optimizing the HBE by electronic effects	d-PtSe2	1.0 M KOH	59.0	195.0	88.0	—	
63

Pt@DG	1.0 M KOH	61.0	245.0	80.0	7.2 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV	
65

PtNi5	1.0 M KOH	26.8	90.0	19.2	2.36 A mgmetal−1 at 70 mV	
67

D-PtNi/C	1.0 M KOH	39.7	—	55.0	1.03 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV	
68

BPed-Pt/GR	1.0 M KOH	21.0	80.0	46.9	5.81 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV	
70

Pt2Ni3-P NWs	1.0 M KOH	44.0	—	66.0	—	
71

PtCo/C NW	1.0 M KOH	32.7	150.0	33.9	—	
79

PtCo@PtSn	1.0 M KOH	25.0	—	24.0	7.5 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
82

NiPt3@NiS/NF	1.0 M KOH	12.0	73.0	24.0	—	
84

PtSA–NiO/Ni	1.0 M KOH	26.0	85.0	27.1	20.6 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV	
85

Pt-SAs/MoSe2	1.0 M KOH	29.0	100.0	28.0	34.4 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV	
90

Pt-CoS2/CC	1.0 M KOH	24.0	105.0	49.0	2.1 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV	
91

Spatial dimension regulation	PtNiP NWs	1.0 M KOH	9.0	44.0	30.5	6.28 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV	
101

Pt–Ir DNWs	0.1 M KOH	26.0	
	20.9	
	
102

R-PtOx/CNT	1.0 M KOH	27.8	—	34.6	5.56 A mgPt−1 at 70 mV	
94

PtRu NCs/BP	1.0 M KOH	22.0	—	19.0	5.4 A mgmetal−1 at 70 mV	
106

BC3N@Pt	1.0 M KOH	26.1	130.0	42.6	5.56 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV	
107

Pt/TiO2/Ni(OH)2/NF	1.0 M KOH	26.0	80.0	38.9	—	
96

PANI@Pt/S-TiN NTs/Ti	1.0 M KOH	24.0	98.0	31.2	—	
110

Pt–Ni(OH)2/NF	1.0 M KOH	38.0	203.0	17.0	49.0 A mgPt−1at 100 mV	
111

CoPt-PtSA/NDPCF	1.0 M KOH	31.0	95.0	43.7	19.3 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
114

Pt–Ni2Fe1	1.0 M KOH	80.0	350.0	67.0	7.5 A mgPt−1 at 50 mV	
115

Pt@CoS	1.0 M KOH	28.0	76.0	
	6.8 A mgPt−1 at 100 mV	
116


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
