Efficient vacuum deposited p-i-n and n-i-p perovskite solar cells employing doped charge transport layers   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE02100J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE02100J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3456-3463Efficient vacuum deposited p-i-n and n-i-p perovskite solar cells employing doped charge transport layers†

        
          
            Cristina 
            Momblona‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Lidón 
            Gil-Escrig‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Enrico 
            Bandiello
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eline M. 
            Hutter
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michele 
            Sessolo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kay 
            Lederer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Blochwitz-Nimoth
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Henk J. 
            Bolink
          
        
      *a
aInstituto de Ciencia Molecular, Universidad de Valencia, C/Catedrático J. Beltrán 2, 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain. E-mail: henk.bolink@uv.es
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Van der Maasweg 9, 2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands
cNOVALED GmbH, Tatzberg 49, 01307 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: jan.bn@novaled.com
Received 
      20th July 2016
    , Accepted 20th September 2016First published on 20th September 2016AbstractMethylammonium lead halide perovskites have emerged as high performance photovoltaic materials. Most of these solar cells are prepared via solution-processing and record efficiencies (>20%) have been obtained employing perovskites with mixed halides and organic cations on (mesoscopic) metal oxides. Here, we demonstrate fully vacuum deposited planar perovskite solar cells by depositing methylammonium lead iodide in between intrinsic and doped organic charge transport molecules. Two configurations, one inverted with respect to the other, p-i-n and n-i-p, are prepared and optimized leading to planar solar cells without hysteresis and very high efficiencies, 16.5% and 20%, respectively. It is the first time that a direct comparison between these two opposite device configurations has been reported. These fully vacuum deposited solar cells, employing doped organic charge transport layers, validate for the first time vacuum based processing as a real alternative for perovskite solar cell preparation.

Broader context
High efficiency perovskite solar cells are mostly prepared using solution based processes. Solution based processing, if carried out in air on a large area and using benign solvents, can be a very cost-efficient production method. On the other hand, vacuum based coating techniques have a higher initial cost, yet at high production volumes the depreciation of the equipment becomes a small fraction of the total photovoltaic module cost. In fact, vacuum deposition is a widely used technique in the electronic and photovoltaic industry. Additionally, it allows for conformal and additive coatings, which is beneficial for flexible or tandem device structures. As no (toxic) solvents are employed in vacuum processes, ultra-dry films are obtained. In this study, we have prepared planar solar cells employing a 500 nm layer of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite absorber, sandwiched in between small molecular weight organic charge transport molecules, using only vacuum based processes. Both of the commonly used perovskite device architectures, p-i-n and n-i-p, in which the polarity of the front contact is inverted with respect to each other have been prepared. By rational combination of intrinsic and molecularly doped charge transport layers, we obtain hysteresis-free planar solar cells with power conversion efficiencies up to 20% for 0.1 cm2 and 15% for cell areas close to 1 cm2. These results validate vacuum techniques as a production method for high efficiency perovskite solar cells.

Thin-film photovoltaics is a promising technology for low-cost and sustainable renewable energy sources. Organic–inorganic (hybrid) lead halide perovskite solar cells have recently aroused wide interest in photovoltaic applications because of their impressive power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), now exceeding 21%.1–3 Importantly, the perovskite thin-film absorber can be deposited using low-cost and abundant starting materials, hence with a large potential for the preparation of inexpensive photovoltaic devices.4 High PCEs are the result of a very high absorption coefficient and mobilities of the photogenerated electrons and holes of the hybrid perovskites.5,6 While the use of the archetype perovskite, methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3), can lead to high efficiency devices,7,8 a further decrease of the bandgap by incorporation of formamidinium (FA), allows for the harvesting of additional near-infrared photons.9 When such a mixed organic cation perovskite is further stabilized by replacing part of the iodide with bromide, and/or by partial cesium incorporation, the champion materials for perovskite cells are obtained.3,10–12 Two main solar cell architectures have been used so far. One of them is derived from dye-sensitized solar cells, and consists of a transparent conductive substrate coated with a mesoporous/planar TiO2 layer (n-type, hence acting as the electron transport layer, ETL) into/onto which the perovskite absorber is applied.13–15 A hole transport layer (HTL, p-type), usually consisting of organic semiconductors, is then deposited on top of the perovskite and the device is completed with an evaporated top electrode. The second common configuration is inverted compared to the one mentioned above, and the conductive substrate is coated with a HTL, followed by the perovskite absorber and an ETL, coated with a suitable evaporated top electrode.16,17 While in the perovskite solar cell literature these two device configurations have been referred to as “conventional” and “inverted”, a less confusing nomenclature, n-i-p and p-i-n, will be used throughout this manuscript. Recently, Chen et al. demonstrated that the PCE in planar devices can be improved by increasing the conductivity of the metal oxide layers by incorporating heteroatoms with different valences.18 The increase in the conductivity was limited, however (approximately one order of magnitude), limiting the thickness of the metal oxide layers to 20 nm. An alternative strategy to improve the conductivity of charge transport layers is the use of doped organic semiconductors. These materials have been widely studied for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and small molecular weight organic solar cells (OPVs). In these applications they have proven to enhance charge carrier injection as well as transport, and more manufacturing oriented properties such as large area uniformity and yield.19–21 In doped organic semiconductors the conductivity can be varied over several orders of magnitude by varying the doping concentration, yet without an associated strong increase in the optical absorption of the layer. This is advantageous because it allows the use of rather thick (100 nm) doped layers generating additional freedom to design/fine-tune the device architecture.
Most reported solar cells using a vacuum deposited perovskite layer still employ charge transport layers processed from solution.22–24 Fully vacuum deposited perovskite devices would offer the additional advantage of being compatible with temperature-sensitive substrates, allowing for conformal coatings on non-planar substrates and for the straightforward implementation into tandem solar cells.25 Additionally, vacuum processing is an established technique in the electronic industry demonstrating high throughput and reliability.26 In principle, solution processing of the semiconductor can be an inexpensive alternative to vacuum deposition, however, the impact of processing costs is very limited on the overall module price, which is dominated by the material cost. Polander et al. were the first to demonstrate fully vacuum deposited cells where open circuit voltages (Voc) as high as 1.1 V were obtained.27 The highest efficiency (15.4%) reported for fully vacuum deposited perovskite solar cells was produced from a device with rather high hysteresis, which used undoped organic molecules as the charge extraction materials.28,29
Here, we present fully vacuum deposited planar perovskite solar cells in which the perovskite layer is sandwiched in between two charge extraction double-layers. The latter consist of a thin layer of pristine organic charge transport molecules and a thicker layer of the same molecules that are partially oxidized (in the case of the hole transporter) or reduced (in the case of the electron transport layer). The partial oxidation or reduction of the charge transport molecules leads to p- and n-type doped layers, respectively, with a significantly enhanced conductivity. These multi-layer solar cells have been prepared in both the p-i-n and n-i-p architectures, allowing for a direct comparison between these two designs. We demonstrate that the presence of thin undoped layers is beneficial for device performance. Average power conversion efficiencies of 15% and 18% are obtained for the p-i-n and n-i-p architectures, respectively, bringing vacuum deposited perovskite solar cells closer to their solution-processed equivalents.
The MAPbI3 perovskite thin films were prepared by co-evaporation of the two starting compounds, CH3NH3I and PbI2. Details of the experimental conditions for the perovskite layer have been described previously and are presented in the ESI.†23 Out of the two perovskite precursors, CH3NH3I and PbI2, the first is somewhat complicated to sublime. However, once properly outgassed (using the high vacuum of the evaporation chamber) the material is sublimed similarly to small molecular weight organic molecules, that is, the rate of evaporation is stable as monitored by the microbalance crystal sensors that are positioned in the chamber. These films were characterized using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD), showing the typical diffraction pattern for this material which is independent of the type of under-layer employed (Fig. S1a in the ESI†). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images both of the perovskite surface (Fig. S1b in the ESI†) and of the device cross-section (Fig. 1) show a dense packing of crystals, virtually without any pinholes, that have an average domain size of approximately 100 nm. The surface is homogeneous and smooth with a roughness (root mean square), estimated using atomic force microscopy over an area of 25 μm2, of only 10.1 nm (Fig. S2 in the ESI†). The optical absorption spectra of these films show the expected MAPbI3 band-to-band transition at 780 nm and high absorbance over the whole visible spectra (Fig. S1c in the ESI†). The perovskite film formation is very reproducible and the layer properties did not change over a period of 6 months during which the experiments described in this manuscript were performed. Planar diodes were prepared by sandwiching a 500 nm thick perovskite layer in between organic HTLs and ETLs, initially, the former on top of a pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrate and by thermally evaporating a metal top contact on the latter. A vacuum evaporated MAPbI3 layer of 500 nm was selected as it was shown that almost all sub-bandgap sunlight is absorbed and all the charge carriers can still reach the respective interfaces.30 Both organic charge transport layers were prepared by vacuum sublimation of the corresponding organic molecules to a layer thickness of 10 nm. The hole transport molecule we selected is a derivative of an arylamine, N4,N4,N4′′,N4′′-tetra([1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-diamine (TaTm) (Fig. 1) and was chosen due to its very stable sublimation conditions and tendency to form completely amorphous films. The fullerene C60 was selected as the electron transport molecule as it is also easy to sublime and has proven to be an efficient electron acceptor in perovskite solar cells.29,31 To ensure sufficient statistics for each device configuration mentioned in this report, at least 2 different devices each containing 4 cells were evaluated, while for top performing configurations at least 5 different devices with a total of 20 cells were characterized. The device area used, defined as the aperture of the shadow mask, was 1 mm2 and for top performing devices, larger areas of 10, 27 and 85 mm2 were also used.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM cross-section and schematics of a completed p-i-n solar cell (scale bar 200 nm). (b) Flat band energy diagrams of the materials employed (the electron affinity, EA, and ionization potential, IP, of the dopants are also reported). (c) Chemical structures of the organic molecules used to prepare the charge transport layers. 
Using the architecture described above, employing single layers of hole and electron extraction molecules (without any electrical dopant), the photovoltaic performance of the diodes under 1 Sun illumination was rather poor, due to a pronounced s-shape of the current density (J) versus voltage (V) curve, leading to poor fill factors (FF) and hence low PCE values (Fig. S3 and Table S1, in the ESI†). This indicates that the extraction of the charge carriers is severely hindered, either due to the high resistance of the organic charge transport layers or to the presence of an extraction barrier at the electrode interfaces. To reduce the series resistance of the charge transport layers and to ensure an ohmic contact between them and the electrodes we prepared partially oxidized and reduced HTL and ETL, respectively, by co-evaporation of the charge transport molecules with a suitable reactant (see Fig. 1). This method allows for precise control of the ratios of each molecule in the sublimed film by carefully monitoring the evaporation rate using micro-balance sensors during the evaporation process. Here we selected molecular dopants due to their intrinsic advantages over inorganic reactants,32i.e. the molecular dopants that typically evaporate in a suitable temperature range between 100 °C and 400 °C are less prone to oxidation when handling in air and are more diffusion stable inside the organic layers. For the HTL we used 2,2′-(perfluoronaphthalene-2,6-diylidene) dimalononitrile (F6-TCNNQ) as the organic dopant whereas for the C60 ETL, N1,N4-bis(tri-p-tolylphosphoranylidene)benzene-1,4-diamine (PhIm) (Fig. 1) was employed. In OPVs, the presence of a thin layer of pure, undoped charge transport molecules in between the doped layers and the light-absorber is often found to be beneficial. Therefore, we used this device architecture (Fig. 1) as the starting point to study the effect of dopant concentration on device performance.
To verify the optimum dopant concentration in the p-HTL we first kept the dopant concentration in the n-ETL constant at 30 wt%. The main effect of an increasing F6-TCNNQ concentration is the increase in the FF from 55% for a F6-TCNNQ concentration of 3 wt% to a maximum of 74% at an F6-TCNNQ concentration of 11 wt%. This trend reflects the increased conductivity of the p-HTL for increasing doping levels, as measured by depositing co-evaporated films on interdigitated electrodes (Fig. S4 in the ESI†). Hence, charges are extracted more efficiently as the p-HTL conductivity increases. The open circuit voltage (Voc) increases as well with increasing F6-TCNNQ concentration going from 1053 mV to 1082 mV. This effect is likely to be a consequence of a reduction in the charge recombination due to the more efficient charge carrier extraction from the perovskite to the external contacts. The short-circuit current density (Jsc), however, decreases when the F6-TCNNQ concentration is increased. This is due to the higher absorbance of the p-HTL (Fig. S5 in the ESI†), diminishing the light intensity reaching the perovskite absorber and hence decreasing the device EQE (Fig. 2a).
 Fig. 2  (a) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of F6-TCNNQ concentration for the p-i-n solar cells (the integrated photocurrent with the AM1.5G solar spectrum is shown on the right axis). (c) Evolution of the key parameters deduced from the J–V curves, Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE, as a function of F6-TCNNQ concentration. 
Due to this reduction in Jsc we found an optimum in the average PCE of 15.4% at a F6-TCNNQ concentration of 11 wt%. Once established, the optimum dopant concentration in the p-HTL at 11 wt%, the amount of dopant in the n-ETL was varied. The effect of the dopant concentration in the n-ETL on the photovoltaic performance is not very pronounced (Fig. S6a in the ESI†). This indicates that in the dopant range studied, the conductivity of the n-ETL is sufficiently high to ensure an efficient electron extraction to the electrodes. Indeed, even for rather low PhIm concentrations, the conductivity of the n-ETL is already higher than that of the p-HTL (Fig. S4 in the ESI†) which supports this assumption. Importantly, the efficiency of the p-i-n devices is essentially unvaried (we observe only a small reduction of the FF) when the thickness of the doped transport layers is increased from 40 to 90 nm (Fig. S6b in the ESI†).
One of the benefits of vacuum deposition is the insensitivity towards the substrate to be coated, which allows preparation of inverted devices (n-i-p) using the same materials and layers as described above, simply by evaporating them in the reverse order. The only difference is the top metal electrode, Ag for the p-i-n cells and Au for the n-i-p cells (Au was used for its higher work function). The n-i-p devices are particularly interesting as to date most perovskite solar cells in this configuration employ metal oxides as the ETL, and only very few reports used a purely organic electron acceptor below the perovskite layer.29
In Fig. 3, a cross-sectional SEM image of a completed n-i-p solar cell is depicted, showing a dense perovskite film with low roughness and a conformal coating of the thin organic charge transport layers. The J–V characteristics under 100 mW cm−2 illumination employing a fixed F6-TCNNQ concentration of 11 wt% in the p-HTL and with varying PhIm (n-dopant) concentrations are shown in Fig. 3b. The Jsc increases slightly with increasing PhIm content and reaches an average of 20 mA cm−2 for the highest n-dopant concentration. This is a consequence of the reduced C60 content and the subsequently reduced optical absorbance of the n-ETL (Fig. S5b in the ESI†), here used as the front contact. The higher transmittance is also the origin of the observed increase in the EQE with increasing PhIm content (Fig. 3c). The Voc and FF do not change significantly in the n-dopant range evaluated, maintaining values as high as 1.1 V and 80%, respectively. These parameters lead to PCEs of 18% on average (Fig. S7 in the ESI†) with one pixel exceeding 20% for the record n-i-p cell (Fig. S8 in the ESI†) obtained with a PhIm concentration of 60 wt%. These efficiency values might be surprising considering the rather small crystal size observed in our MAPbI3 thin films (50–200 nm), and somehow contradict the accepted view for the need for large crystals in order to have long charge diffusion length and efficient charge collection.33 Hence, we estimated the charge carrier diffusion length by means of time resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurements on MAPbI3 films deposited on quartz substrates (see ESI† for details on the characterization). The samples were illuminated with a 650 nm laser, and the excitation intensity was tuned in order to obtain a charge concentration of approximately 1015 cm−3, which is comparable to excitation under standard AM1.5 illumination.34 Under these conditions, the effective mobility was determined to be 3.9 cm2 (V s)−1, with a half lifetime of 210 ns (Fig. S9 in the ESI†). Considering these parameters, the charge carrier diffusion length is determined to be ∼1.5 μm, in agreement with previous estimations on solution-processed MAPbI3 films.35,36 Besides the impact of the grain size on the carrier diffusion length, the nature of the grain boundaries and defects in perovskite will have a substantial influence as well. Many reports have highlighted that grain boundaries in perovskites are substantially benign, since they do not generate any states within the bandgap of MAPbI3.37 Such effects might be responsible for the high charge diffusion length observed here, leading to efficient solar cells even with perovskite films composed of relatively small crystals.
 Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a completed n-i-p solar cell (scale bar 200 nm). (b) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and (c) EQE spectra (the integrated photocurrent with the AM1.5G solar spectrum is shown on the right axis) as a function of PhIm concentration. 
Motivated by the high PCE obtained for the n-i-p devices, a series of cells with increasing area (for both the electrode overlap and the shadow mask aperture, see the Experimental part in the ESI† for details) were prepared. The FF decreases with increasing area, causing the PCE to drop from 19.7% to 15.0% when going from 0.1 to 0.85 cm2 (Fig. S10 in the ESI†), in agreement with similar larger cells.18 The performance of the n-i-p solar cells is strongly improved compared to that of the devices in the p-i-n configuration (Fig. S7 in the ESI†), primarily due to an increase in the FF, which is above 80% regardless of the PhIm concentration (Fig. S11b in the ESI†). The reason for the enhanced FF, when going from the p-i-n to the n-i-p configuration, is probably related to the difference in conductivity of the doped charge transporting layers at the front contact. The n-ETL conductivity is two orders of magnitude higher compared to the p-HTL, for the different dopant concentrations evaluated (Fig. S4 in the ESI†). The FF of the p-i-n cells increases at lower light intensities, even for cells using the optimum 11 wt% dopant concentration. Yet, in contrast, in n-i-p devices, the effect of the PhIm dopant concentration on the FF is present only at low illumination intensity, becoming virtually concentration independent when the light intensity increases (Fig. S11a and b in the ESI†). This, therefore, confirms that in the p-i-n configuration a barrier for hole extraction exists, also in agreement with the recent estimation of carrier collection efficiency on vacuum deposited perovskite cells (using solution processed charge transport layers).38 Those devices, besides showing PCEs of approximately 15% (similar to the p-i-n cells presented here), suffered from hindered and spatially inhomogeneous charge transport, which was suggested to be at the front contact, i.e. at the hole transport interface. Measurement of the electroluminescence of the p-i-n devices (Fig. S11c and d in the ESI†) show that the radiant flux saturates at about 1.7 V and then starts to decrease, whereas the n-i-p devices show enhanced electroluminescence with no saturation. This confirms a more efficient and balanced charge carrier injection which translates in a higher FF for the n-i-p devices. The ability to efficiently inject holes when the doped p-HTL is placed in between the HTL and the metal electrode (as in n-i-p devices) can be understood considering that the metal electrode is evaporated on top of the p-HTL which leads to an improved contact (metal atoms slightly penetrate the soft organic layer) and potentially to an increased conductivity. It is worth mentioning that the EQE for electroluminescence of the best performing n-i-p cell is among the highest reported (EQE = 0.36, Fig. S12 in the ESI†) for light-emitting diodes employing MAPbI3 as the emitting layer.12,32 Very small hysteresis between the forward (negative to positive bias) and reverse J–V scans was observed only for the p-i-n devices (Fig. S13a in the ESI†), where small fluctuations in the Voc and FF were present due to the extraction issues at the ITO/p-HTL contact (the overall variation of the PCE was limited to 0.1%). On the other hand, the n-i-p devices were essentially hysteresis-free, independently of the scan speed used (Fig. S13b and Table S2 in the ESI†).
The initial device configuration with the undoped HTL and ETL in between the perovskite and the doped charge transport layers was chosen to prevent any negative interaction between the radical cations and anions that are present in the doped charge transport layers, and the photogenerated charge carriers in the perovskite. However, it is not obvious whether such a negative interaction in fact occurs, since in perovskites the electrons and holes are spontaneously formed after photon absorption without long living intermediate excitonic states and, additionally, the absorber layer is very thick compared with the organic photovoltaic devices. Therefore, two series of devices without undoped interlayers were prepared and evaluated; the first, without the undoped HTL and the second without the undoped ETL. We first examined the p-i-n configuration, where the dopant concentrations were fixed at the optimum 11 and 30 wt% for the p-HTL and n-ETL, respectively. In Fig. 4b, the J–V curves of these two series of devices are compared with the reference cell in which both undoped layers are present. The performance of the devices without the undoped ETL is significantly worse than the reference cell, due to a lower Jsc, Voc and, most pronouncedly, a lower FF. Without the C60 ETL, the perovskite film is in direct contact with the conductive doped n-ETL; therefore electron–hole recombination can occur at this interface causing the simultaneous reduction of all the performance indicators of the solar cells. In contrast, the cells without the undoped TaTm HTL perform only slightly worse compared to the reference cells, with a small reduction in the Jsc and Voc. Most likely, due to the low dopant content and hence low conductivity of the p-HTL (when compared to the n-ETL), this layer can still efficiently confine the electrons in the perovskite absorber and inhibit charge recombination at the p-HTL/MAPbI3 interface. The slight decrease in Voc observed upon the removal of the non-doped TaTm layer can be attributed to the lower Fermi level of the p-HTL compared to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of TaTm. Additionally, we have studied the effect of the selective removal of one of the doped organic layers on the device performances. As clearly observed in Fig. S14 (ESI†), both the doped p-HTL and n-HTL are required to avoid severe charge extraction issues. However, in accordance with previous reports,23,24 devices with only a thin layer of pure C60 and no doped layer between the fullerene and the metal show lower (FF especially) but still appreciable photovoltaic behavior. This effect originates from the dipole which is created at the interface between the noble metals (Au and, as in our case, Ag) and C60, enhancing electron extraction.39 Also, in the n-i-p configuration the effect of the undoped charge transport layers was evaluated. Fig. 4c shows the J–V characteristics of the cells without one of the undoped charge transport layers and the reference n-i-p cell. As observed in the p-i-n configuration, the removal of the undoped layers leads to a decrease in device performance. The effect of the removal of the C60 in between the n-ETL and the perovskite substantially reduces the Voc and the FF, while the removal of the undoped HTL has a limited effect on the device performance, in agreement with what was observed for p-i-n devices and with the conductivity trend among the p-HTL and the n-ETL. Hence, independently of the device configurations, the presence of undoped layers in between the perovskite and the doped charge transport layers is required for high efficiency cells.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves for the n-i-p and p-i-n solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (b) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination for the p-i-n devices without one of the undoped charge transport layers. (c) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination for n-i-p devices without one of the undoped charge transport layers. (d) Stability under approximated 100 mW cm−2 illumination. 
To obtain an indication of the stabilities of different cell configurations, they were analyzed during prolonged exposure to white LED light (spectra in Fig. S15 in the ESI†). The light intensity was adjusted by setting the Jsc of the solar cells equal to the value obtained under 1.5 AM illumination. The temperature of the cells during this test reached approximately 40 °C in the first 10 minutes and remained constant afterwards in part due to the LED lights used that radiate less heat than incandescent lamps. The setup consisted of 8 test positions installed inside a nitrogen filled glovebox (with oxygen and H2O levels below 1 ppm). All cells were illuminated under short-circuit conditions without encapsulation and positioned within a few days after preparation. At fixed time intervals J–V scans were taken to deduce the key performance indicators of the cells (Fig. S16 in the ESI†) from which the evolution of the PCE was derived (Fig. 4d). From our first indicative analysis on the stability, it appears that no substantial difference in the PCE lifetime exists among the p-i-n and n-i-p configurations. However, the parameters causing PCE decay in the p-i-n cells is the current density, which monotonically diminishes during the measured time span, while the performance degradation observed in the n-i-p devices is caused mainly by the decrease of the FF. Interestingly, a lower PhIm doping concentration in the n-ETL of the n-i-p cells was observed to partially stabilize the cell performance (Fig. S17 in the ESI†). Further optimization of the dopant and charge transport molecules and their ratios is expected to lead to improved stabilities, in analogy to what is obtained in OLEDs and organic small molecular weight PV modules. The implementation of modified perovskite absorbers with a slightly lower bandgap is expected to further enhance the device PCE.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated fully vacuum deposited perovskite solar cells by depositing methylammonium lead iodide in between intrinsic and doped organic charge transport molecules. Two configurations, one inverted with respect to the other, p-i-n and n-i-p, were prepared and optimized leading to planar solar cells without hysteresis and with high efficiencies, 15% and 18% on average, respectively. It is the first time that a direct comparison between these two opposite device configurations has been reported. These fully vacuum deposited solar cells allow fine tuning of the device properties by controlling at will the individual layer thicknesses and composition for specific applications including tandem configurations.
Author contributions
JBN and HJB conceived the idea. CM and LG prepared and characterized the devices. EB collected the SEM images and characterized the devices. MS, KL, JBN and HJB designed and supervised the experiments. All authors analyzed the results. MS and HJB wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Jorge Ferrando for his assistance with the sample characterization. The Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) via the Unidad de Excelencia María de Maeztu MDM-2015-0538 and MAT2014-55200, PCIN-2015-255 and the Generalitat Valenciana (Prometeo/2016/135). C. M., E. B. and M. S. thank the MINECO for their pre- and post-doctoral (JdC) contracts.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Berry, T. Buonassisi, D. A. Egger, G. Hodes, L. Kronik, Y.-L. Loo, I. Lubomirsky, S. R. Marder, Y. Mastai, J. S. Miller, D. B. Mitzi, Y. Paz, A. M. Rappe, I. Riess, B. Rybtchinski, O. Stafsudd, V. Stevanovic, M. F. Toney, D. Zitoun, A. Kahn, D. Ginley and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5102–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldan-Carmona, P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, G. Grancini, P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550–3556 CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mohammad K, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 Search PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Jeng, Y.-F. Chiang, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Walzer, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1233–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. J. Gaspar and E. Polikarpov, OLED Fundamentals: Materials, Devices, and Processing of Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, CRC Press,  2015 Search PubMed .
I. Salzmann and G. Heimel, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2015, 204(Part A), 208–222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Glowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, M. R. Leyden, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6693–6713 CAS .
L. E. Polander, P. Pahner, M. Schwarze, M. Saalfrank, C. Koerner and K. Leo, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081503 CrossRef .
B.-S. Kim, T.-M. Kim, M.-S. Choi, H.-S. Shim and J.-J. Kim, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, G. Fang and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23888–23894 CAS .
C. Momblona, O. Malinkiewicz, C. Roldán-Carmona, A. Soriano, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, M. Scheepers, E. Edri and H. J. Bolink, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081504 CrossRef .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
A. Genco, F. Mariano, S. Carallo, V. L. P. Guerra, S. Gambino, D. Simeone, A. Listorti, S. Colella, G. Gigli and M. Mazzeo, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500325 CrossRef .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Hutter, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks and T. J. Savenije, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3082–3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218–6227 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. El-Hajje, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Avila, T. Guillemot, J.-F. Guillemoles, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. Lombez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2286–2294 CAS .
S. C. Veenstra, A. Heeres, G. Hadziioannou, G. A. Sawatzky and H. T. Jonkman, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2002, 75, 661–666 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02100j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
High efficiency perovskite solar cells are mostly prepared using solution based processes. Solution based processing, if carried out in air on a large area and using benign solvents, can be a very cost-efficient production method. On the other hand, vacuum based coating techniques have a higher initial cost, yet at high production volumes the depreciation of the equipment becomes a small fraction of the total photovoltaic module cost. In fact, vacuum deposition is a widely used technique in the electronic and photovoltaic industry. Additionally, it allows for conformal and additive coatings, which is beneficial for flexible or tandem device structures. As no (toxic) solvents are employed in vacuum processes, ultra-dry films are obtained. In this study, we have prepared planar solar cells employing a 500 nm layer of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite absorber, sandwiched in between small molecular weight organic charge transport molecules, using only vacuum based processes. Both of the commonly used perovskite device architectures, p-i-n and n-i-p, in which the polarity of the front contact is inverted with respect to each other have been prepared. By rational combination of intrinsic and molecularly doped charge transport layers, we obtain hysteresis-free planar solar cells with power conversion efficiencies up to 20% for 0.1 cm2 and 15% for cell areas close to 1 cm2. These results validate vacuum techniques as a production method for high efficiency perovskite solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM cross-section and schematics of a completed p-i-n solar cell (scale bar 200 nm). (b) Flat band energy diagrams of the materials employed (the electron affinity, EA, and ionization potential, IP, of the dopants are also reported). (c) Chemical structures of the organic molecules used to prepare the charge transport layers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of F6-TCNNQ concentration for the p-i-n solar cells (the integrated photocurrent with the AM1.5G solar spectrum is shown on the right axis). (c) Evolution of the key parameters deduced from the J–V curves, Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE, as a function of F6-TCNNQ concentration.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a completed n-i-p solar cell (scale bar 200 nm). (b) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and (c) EQE spectra (the integrated photocurrent with the AM1.5G solar spectrum is shown on the right axis) as a function of PhIm concentration.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves for the n-i-p and p-i-n solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (b) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination for the p-i-n devices without one of the undoped charge transport layers. (c) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination for n-i-p devices without one of the undoped charge transport layers. (d) Stability under approximated 100 mW cm−2 illumination.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee02100j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
