Boosting sluggish photocatalytic hydrogen evolution through piezo-stimulated polarization: a critical review  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1MH01899J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1MH01899J
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 1332-1355Boosting sluggish photocatalytic hydrogen evolution through piezo-stimulated polarization: a critical review

        
          
            Ritik 
            Mohanty
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sriram 
            Mansingh
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kaushik 
            Parida
          
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Kulamani 
            Parida
          
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Siksha ‘O’Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar-751030, Odisha, India. E-mail: kulamaniparida@soa.ac.in; paridakulamani@yahoo.com
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University Singapore, 50 Nanyang Avenue 639798, Singapore
cInstitute of Nano Science and Technology, Knowledge City, Sector 81, SAS Nagar, Mohali, Punjab 140306, India. E-mail: kaushik.parida@inst.ac.in
Received 
      23rd November 2021
    , Accepted 25th January 2022First published on 9th February 2022AbstractTo address the growing energy demand, remarkable progress has been made in transferring the fossil fuel-based economy to hydrogen-based environmentally friendly photocatalytic technology. However, the sluggish production rate due to the quick charge recombination and slow diffusion process needs careful engineering to achieve the benchmark photocatalytic efficiency. Piezoelectric photocatalysis has emerged as a promising field in recent years due to its improved catalytic performance facilitated by a built-in electric field that promotes the effective separation of excitons when subjected to mechanical stimuli. This review discusses the recent progress in piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution while elaborating on the mechanistic pathway, effect of piezo-polarization and various strategies adopted to improve piezo-photocatalytic activity. Moreover, our review systematically emphasizes the fundamentals of piezoelectricity and piezo-phototronics along with the operational mechanism for designing efficient piezoelectric photocatalysts. Finally, the summary and outlooks provide insight into the existing challenges and outline the future prospects and roadmap for the development of next-generation piezo-photocatalysts towards hydrogen evolution.
Ritik Mohanty
Ritik Mohanty is currently a PhD scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, S‘O’A Deemed to be University. He obtained his Integrated Master of Science degree in Applied Physics from the College of Engineering and Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. During his masters, he was also a summer project student at the National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar. His research focuses mainly on piezo-assisted energy generation and electrochemical energy storage systems.
Sriram Mansingh
Dr Sriram Mansingh received his BSc Hons. (2nd Rank), MSc, and MPhil (1st Rank) from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, India. Then, he completed his PhD degree from the Siksha O Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, India under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. His current research mainly focuses on the development of nanostructured materials such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, phosphides, layered materials and their application towards water splitting, N2 fixation, and organic/inorganic pollutant detoxification.
Kaushik Parida
Dr Kaushik Parida received his Master's degree from the School of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science of the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India. He received his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Pooi See Lee at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Recently, he has joined the Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Mohali as a scientist. His research focuses on deformable electronics, piezoelectrics and triboelectric energy harvesters.
Kulamani Parida
Prof. Kulamani Parida is working as a Distinguished Professor in Chemistry and the Director, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, Deemed to be University, he worked for 37 years at CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in different capacities, and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry Department. His current research is focused on developing nano-structured functional materials to manage energy and environmental issues.
1. Introduction
Expeditious urbanization along with a steep rise in the economy and population has led to a vast demand for energy. Adding to this, a majority of global energy needs are being satisfied via fossil fuel feedstock combustion, which has serious catastrophic environmental consequences.1–4 Further, its non-renewable nature, excessive extraction/use and irregular geographical distribution add to the concerns. Hence, there is a longstanding demand for developing a suitable alternative energy source that is sustainable (zero carbon footprint), economically viable, and environmentally benign, which must be used to fulfil the booming energy needs.5,6 Among the various non-renewable technologies, hydrogen fuel has emerged as an ideal, clean, and environmentally friendly technology owing to its high energy density per unit mass (140 MJ kg−1) and its ability to produce clean water as a by-product on combustion. For decades, hydrogen (H2) has been primarily produced by coal gasification and steam reforming methods, which normally operate under harsh condition and use fossil fuels as the main precursor. This results in the emission of deleterious gases, less pure hydrogen products, and inefficient energy generation, thus diminishing the environmentally benign nature of hydrogen fuel technology. Moreover, it is still a daunting challenge to produce H2 rapidly and efficiently by utilizing non-polluting, cheap and energy-saving techniques.7–9 To address these challenges, scientists have adopted the most promising method for H2 evolution, i.e., the water-splitting reaction.10,11 Several techniques have been developed such as artificial photocatalysis,10 electrocatalysis,12 photoelectrochemical water splitting,13 thermal decomposition of water,14 nanogalvanic aluminium alloy powder15 and radiolysis.16 Among the various methods, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis have emerged as the most widely used techniques. Electrocatalysis is a complex and cost-intensive process due to the use of external potential biasing, precise catalyst preparation, complex reaction setup and costly electrodes.12 On the other hand, photocatalytic water reduction provides a much cheaper and cleaner alternative for hydrogen production as it utilizes solar light (a renewable energy source). Although remarkable progress has been made in the domain of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, it suffers from low and sluggish production rate. Thus, there is an urgent need for better alternatives to improve the H2 evolution rate.
In order to address these problems, piezo-photocatalysis, which explores the ability of materials to collect solar and mechanical energy (vibrational energy) collectively to produce hydrogen via water splitting, has emerged as a viable alternative. Piezo-photocatalysis is a two-way integrated mechanism; first, the photons of appropriate energy excite the electrons from the valence band to the conduction band; secondly, mechanical energy induces a built-in-electric field that suppresses charge recombination and facilitates the diffusion of photoelectrons from the bulk to the surface, triggering the water reduction reaction. In the past decade, extensive efforts have been made to develop several inherent piezo-photocatalytic materials and hybrid material systems with superior hydrogen evolution reaction.17–19 A few of those reported in the literature for piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution are highlighted herein but the details of the study are discussed in the respective section. In this context, H. A. Abbood et al. coupled the piezo-polarization and photocatalytic behavior of ultraslim 2D-CdS nanosheet toward H2 evolution reaction.20 Further, cobalt-doped MoS2 reported by Lui and group showed a 4.84 times enhancement in the H2 evolution rate than of pristine MoS2.21 In another experiment, X Huang's group studied the piezo-photocoupling effect in the PbTiO3/CdS binary composite.22 In addition, Jia et al.,23 Z L Wang and co-workers proved the rise in the catalytic activity with excellent stability and reusability.24 In addition, Zhao and co-workers also demonstrated the ability of CdS nanorods to use both light and acoustic energy toward productive hydrogen evolution.25 Adding more to the survey, the work of Yan Zhao et al. on ultrathin CdS sheets, which possess both photocatalytic and piezoelectric properties, shows an H2 evolution of 633 μL h−1.26 In another investigation, Gau et al. combined the effect of LSPR and piezoelectric polarization toward enhanced catalytic activity.27 Similarly, Mengye Wang et al. showed H2 evolution using CH3NH3PbI3.28 Moreover, our group has extensively worked in this domain to develop several functional photocatalytic materials for water splitting reactions such as metal oxide, sulphides, phosphides, layered double hydroxide, MOFs, and g-C3N4 with superior catalytic efficiency.29–39 Thus, it should be acknowledged that piezoelectric materials having photocatalytic activity can employ the piezoelectric field directly for segregating charge carriers using light and mechanical energy. Therefore, piezo-polarization seems to be a reliable and feasible solution for serving a long-range ordered electric field over the whole of materials via piezo-photocatalysis encouraging the H2 evolution rate. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no review article articulating the development in the domain of piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution; thus, we believe that this review can act as a guiding tool for researchers to develop next-generation materials by coupling piezo and photocatalytic properties to further boost the sluggish photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.
In this review, we discuss about the recent advances in the field of piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, specifically focusing on the basic fundamental mechanism of piezoelectricity, piezo-phototronics, and piezo-photocatalysis. The review also elaborates on effective exciton transfer induced by the change in the surface charge energy and charge carrier separation at the bulk and interfacial region via piezo-polarization. Further, it describes various sources for creating piezo-polarization, the science of contact formation, band bending, and charge carrier dynamics in an explicit manner including the reported pristine and hybrid piezo-photocatalytic systems. Finally, the summary highlights the challenges and future outlooks associated in this area of research.
2. Conceptual insights into piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
2.1. Piezoelectricity
“Piezoelectricity” means the generation of electricity by the unification of mechanics and electric polarization. This effect only happens below the Curie temperature (Tc), but when the temperature (T) is raised beyond Tc, these materials lose their piezo property due to zero spontaneous polarization.40 Basically, non-centrosymmetric materials (having no inversion symmetry) are suitable candidates for designing piezocatalysts. Most commonly, 1D and 2D nanostructures of deformed morphology have been extensively studied in this field, but it is not a prerequisite requirement as many other morphology-oriented systems can also be applied toward piezocatalysis.
We can understand the piezo mechanism from the aforementioned Fig. 1, where the applied mechanical energy causes a deformation in these materials, resulting in induced built-in-electric field for the augmentation of the energetics of both bound and free charges all through the material. From the reported literatures, we can roughly say that by imposing severe to moderate strain, these materials can generate potentials from 10 to 100 V.40 Piezomaterials that do not possess ferroelectric properties display no internal dipole subjected to zero strain (Fig. 1a). But when strain is applied, the resultant lattice displacement causes the dipole moments. Fig. 1b and c show the influence stress and stretch on the materials by exhibiting different direction of polarization. Thus, due to this polarization potential, free electrons and holes or excitons are separated and enforced to move in the reverse direction.40 Therefore, charge recombination is hindered and more number of charge carriers reach at the surface active sites of the catalyst to carry out the redox reaction.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of piezoelectric materials (a) without any applied stretch and strain, with (b) applied stretch and (c) applied stress. 
Moreover, as polarization is the key concept of piezoelectric effect, so, localization of charges plays a vital role inside the materials. Thus, by making changes in the local polarization, it is possible to lower the carrier concentration, which may boost the piezoelectric property of the species. Normally, the property of the materials is always dependent upon its crystal symmetry. Thus, for a material to be piezoelectric, it must have a bandgap greater than zero along with the non-centrosymmetric crystal structure. The non-centrosymmetric nature determines the improvement in the optical and piezoelectric moduli. However, miniaturizing some materials mislays their center of inversion, which simultaneously increases the anisotropy and makes the material ready for showing piezoelectric behavior (i.e., loss of centrosymmetry). 2H MoS2 and hBN are examples of this class of materials.41 Surface modification plays a vital role in piezoelectricity as the mechanical stress subjected to the material surface generates electricity. Therefore, the material horizon is highly sensitive and equally responsible for intensifying the piezoelectric effect. Further, it can be inferred that the lattice plane and domain orientation will be responsible for exhibiting better piezoelectric property. Facet-oriented materials exhibit promising piezoelectric property as the facets are directly exposed to the applied mechanical stimuli. In this regard, Yun Liu and his co-workers investigated the impact of domain orientation on the piezoelectric effect. They have experimented on lead composite single crystal material in three different crystal orientations such as (111), (001), and (110) and found that the piezoresponse on the (110) crystal plane is more than that of (111) and (001), respectively. They also described the effect of coercive voltage (applied voltage in ferroelectric hysteresis loop) in the crystal plane orientation system and reported the effective piezo coefficient (d33, effective) for the (110), (001), and (111) planes as 40 pm V−1, 20 pm V−1, and 3 pm V−1, respectively.42
2.2. Piezo-phototronics
Conventional electronics basically rely on electrostatic coupling, but piezo-phototronics is a completely new branch that involves the combined study of semiconductor physics, photoexcitation, and piezoelectric science. The key domain of the piezo-phototronic effect is the utilization of localized piezoelectric polarization to modulate the generation, separation, transportation, and recombination processes of the carriers at the junctions and interfaces.43–45 In this effect, the localized charges at the junction created by a piezopotential may significantly affect the behavior of the corresponding charge carriers and amplify the inherent optical traits. Moreover, from various theoretical aspects proposed to date, in piezo-phototronics, the major considered assumptions are: (i) these materials possess large dimensions, (ii) have abrupt depletion layer, (iii) the piezoelectric charges are distributed in the interface of the material within a finite width, and (iv) most are non-degenerated semiconductors.46,47 In short, we can conclude in a generic way that for piezo-phototronic materials, piezo-polarization charges result in a shift of the depletion region, creation of a charge channel at the interface, and homojunction formation is potentially more favorable than the heterojunction structure. Again, the efficiency and performance of the catalysts can be modified and tuned by proper regulation in the applied external mechanical stimuli, which give rise to many scientific aspects.46 Besides, many reports have already been published using the piezo-phototronic concept toward catalytic application, especially for H2 evolution and dye degradation. For a better fundamental understanding of piezo-phototronics in the context of photocatalytic hydrogen generation, Schottky and p–n junction mechanism are discussed profoundly in hybrid photocatalytic system sections of this present review. Adding to this, current-density equations, piezoelectric equations, continuity equations, and electrostatic equations are applied as rudimentary governing equations for describing piezo-phototronics in various applications such as photodetectors, solar cells, LEDs, pressure imaging, and sensors,43,48,49 but in the catalytic theme, to date, no such strong theoretical support by means of an equation has been reported.
2.3. Adapting the piezo-polarization concept in the arena of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
The historic discovery of Fujisima and Honda in 1972, i.e., photoelectrocatalytic water-splitting reaction over UV-active TiO2, lead the foundation stone for exploring this science toward sustainable energy production over semiconducting materials.50 In brief, visible-light-driven semiconductor-based photocatalyst with appropriate band edge potential, low cost, non-toxicity, and extraordinary durability illustrates convincing performance for hydrogen evolution reaction under ambient conditions as it can absorb a broad range of photons as well as behave as a redox catalyst.51,52 The process involves the absorption of photon energy greater than the bandgap of the semiconducting materials, which initiates/triggers the generation of electron–hole pairs; afterward, these excitons diffuse to the surface of the semiconductor where the redox reaction takes place, i.e., water reduction on the conduction band (H2 gas and highly negative reduction potential than H2O/H2 (0 V) vs. NHE at pH = 0) and water oxidation at the valence band (O2 formation and highly positive oxidation potential O2/H2O (1.23 V) vs. NHE at pH = 0), respectively.53–55 But no such single semiconducting material has been recognized to possess all these desirable characteristics to deliver the benchmark catalytic activity. Thus, various attempts have been made for enhancing the performance of the material, which includes using multiple semiconductor systems (interfacial junction), doping (metal/non-metal), nanostructure maneuvring (morphology/dimensional), defect engineering, modification by carbonaceous material, and noble metal loading.56–60 However, complex synthetic methods, expensive noble metal use, faster charge-carrier recombination, and inefficient interfacial charge transfer rate are not fully addressed, which plague the overall catalytic efficiency and limit the industrialization process. Fig. 2 depicts the schematic representation of piezo-photocatalytic H2 evolution.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the coupling effect of photocatalysis and piezocatalysis towards H2 evolution. 
To overcome this issue and target dominant conversion/photocatalytic efficiency, researchers utilize the advantageous features of piezopotential and polarization for the efficacious diffusion of electron–hole pairs both in the bulk and on the surface of the material. Interestingly, polarization field engineering in piezomaterials has attracted substantial attention in the research society as a structured tactic toward effective charge carrier separation. Usually, in non-centrosymmetric materials, macroscopic spontaneous polarization takes place, which generally arises from the directional accumulation of polar domains and the generation of the internal electric field.61,62 Since the pioneering discovery of the piezoelectronic and piezo-phototronic effect by Wang's group in the year 2010, this field of science has gone through rapid development and attracted huge attention in both the energy and environmental avenues.63 The mounting interest of scientists in this emerging research area can be observed from the increasing number of publications and average citation index (i.e., 32.2 per item) obtained from the Web of Science database.18 Further, by blending piezoelectric polarization and the photoelectric effect (piezo-phototronics/piezotronic), it is possible to tune the optoelectronic properties of the photocatalyst, which finally improves and facilitates the charge-carrier separation and transport characteristic in the designed direction at the junction interface and bulk phase due to the development of the internal built-in-electric field. The piezoelectric effect is observed in noncentrosymmetric semiconducting materials.46 Combining the piezoelectric phenomenon and semiconductor physics, several piezo-phototronic hybrid materials have been designed. Piezo-phototronic effect acts as a guide manual for the proper alloying of piezo-polarization and semiconductor property toward energy generation applications. Band edge alignment and piezopotential in piezoelectric semiconductors mainly rely on the density of filled electronic levels and the number of free charges. In detail, the applied mechanical stress/strain deforms the material and creates electric signals, which further produces a piezoelectric field, thus causing the simultaneous development of several positive and negative charges on the opposite edge surface of the material, which induces a built-in-electric field, called as piezoelectric polarization. Further, when this piezoelectric polarization is coupled with the photoexcitation process, the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs significantly decreases, whereas exciton generation and transport process at the interface is largely improved, which leads to excellent optoelectronic properties. Because of these beneficial properties, piezo-phototronic science is considerably applicable to various fields such as pressure sensors, solar-cells, and photodetectors.64,65 Intriguingly, this effect is explored toward enhancing artificial photocatalysis and called as piezo-photocatalysis. It was observed that the internal built-in-electric field due to piezo-polarization facilitates better charge separation and transport, resulting in extraordinary catalytic efficiency for boosting the sluggish photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Further, piezo-photocatalysis can be termed as a clean and sustainable technique as both mechanical and light energy used in this process may be obtained from renewable sources such as wind, tide, sound, and solar irradiation.
3. Piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
For photocatalytic water splitting, semiconducting materials should have a favorable bandgap, effective charge separation/migration, minimum overpotential, and necessary band edge potential. As none of the semiconducting materials possesses such traits, so we have to adopt an innovative and sustainable technique to get rid of this problem. As in piezo-photocatalysis, the piezo-polarization effects boost the energetics, which helps electrons at the surface of the materials to take part in the reduction reaction quickly; as a result, the charge recombination rate is suppressed. Thus, the materials that can possess the capability to collect solar and vibrational energy (mechanical energy) have been explored in recent years and been used commonly to produce hydrogen by water splitting. Piezo-photocatalysis exhibits two integrated pathways for harvesting energy; first, the solar energy/photon does the work of exciting the electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, and secondly, mechanical energy generated the piezopotential, which relocates the energetics so that it can overcome the interface and trigger the redox reaction at the surface to produce H2.
Before thoroughly describing piezo-photocatalysis, we have enlightened briefly about piezocatalysis. In piezocatalysis, we can enhance the electrochemical activity with the use of the potential, where the reacting medium interacted firmly with the electronic state of the material as well as the strain-induced piezopotential. The strained piezomaterials develop counter charges in the two opposite sides of the material due to polarization. Due to applied strain, there will be a change in the energy level of the material inside the solution, which facilitates the movement of the conduction band (CB) to a lower position and the valence band (VB) to a higher position. As a result, the electron flow will be easier from the solution side to the surface of the materials or vice versa. The built-in internal field acts as a bias to alter the change at the surface skin of the materials.18,19 The above-discussed mechanism acts within the catalyst and encourages the water-splitting process to produce hydrogen.
3.1. Source for creating piezopotential
Mechanical stress provided by ultrahigh frequency sonication, high-rate mechanical stirring, low frequency vertex shear force, physical bending/mechanical sliding/brushing, and thermal stress are efficient strategies to enhance the catalytic activity of semiconductors.18,19,66–68
In detail, ultrasonic irradiation is the most widely applied approach to generate the external strain periodically on piezoelectrics and deform them efficiently by the thrilling acoustic pressure of ultrasonic waves and the native high pressure (>100 MPa) induced by the collapse of active bubbles. The internal mechanical stress field strength can be effortlessly altered by monitoring the ultrasonic frequency and power to augment the reaction parameters. Further, the ultrasound frequency-assisted photocatalytic reaction system can be easily fabricated by placing a photoreactor in an ultrasonic cleaner. In this tied system, the applied frequency can favor the deformation, which leads to the deviation of positive and negative charge centers in the unit cell. Therefore, a polarization-induced built-in-internal electric field is created to stimulate the migration of photogenerated electrons and holes in the opposite directions, and remarkably increases the photocatalytic performance. Therefore, piezoelectrics with one/two-dimensional (1D/2D) structures that are more easily deformed can trigger much greater piezopotentials inside the materials.17,66,67
Even though ultrasonication is widely used in piezo-photocatalysis, due to its non-directional and random nature, it is very problematic to control bending, polarization, and deformation. In that case, the total piezophototronic effect can be somehow lessened. On the other hand, the high-rate mechanical-stirring instigates pressure inside water, which can simultaneously bend the piezomaterial by creating the piezopotential. The movement of water by simple stirring can disrupt the uninterrupted piezoelectric field in a single direction, giving the advantage of tuning the direction and rate of stirring. As we know, the stirring rate and direction possess an excessive impact on water splitting. Thus, mechanical stirring can be adopted as a very facile and hopeful approach to generate the piezopotential for photocatalysis.40,68
Again, employing vortex science, the shear force is applied to the materials to unveil its piezo property. In brief, vortex is the fluid mechanical energy (in the form of whirling water/fluid/air) applied over the material by an external fluid flow or the motion or periodic irregularities. Furthermore, vortex-induced vibration gives low frequency shock to the attached systems; thus, only highly sensitive piezo as well as photocatalytic materials possessing hierarchical structures can give rise to optimum catalytic efficiency.18,19
However, ultrasound is difficult to apply in large-scale industrial applications owing to its extreme input energy, thus restricting its commercial entry. Developing additional systems of mechanical stress, such as mechanical-stirring-induced shear force to enhance photocatalytic performance is of important practical significance. Various forms of ultrasonic pulsations and fluid-generated pressure are of relatively much weaker frequency and hence unable to trigger large potential in piezoelectric semiconductors. Hence, by utilizing piezoelectric materials owing to superior mechanical sensitivity, it is possible to harvest low-frequency disturbances effectively, which is an accessible approach for these stirring-assisted photocatalytic reactions. As the above discussed forms of applying mechanical stress are effortlessly instigated without any complicated reaction setup, the intensity of stress applied on the surface of the material cannot be maintained meticulously. Moreover, to find an exact and appropriate model for mechanical stress field-assisted photocatalytic processes, many special devices such as cantilever attached to the piezoelectric material were fabricated. Herein, the piezoelectric semiconductors must be mounted onto a flexible device, which will experience compression, sliding, brushing, and shaking where the basic mechanism is physically bending.17,67,68
Recently, Wang and co-workers applied thermal internal stress to piezoelectric materials for enhancing their catalytic activity, as temperature can intensely influence the carrier density of a semiconductor.69 In this investigation, the method of cooling down the hybrid photocatalysts from a very high temperature to room temperature with various rates based on the mismatched thermal expansion coefficients of the two species are adopted, which can also act as an eloquent approach for piezo-photocatalytic applications.18
3.2. Adopted strategies to tune the piezoelectric property
The net energy drift across the piezomaterial due to the polarization is a key parameter in deciding the optimum catalytic activity by facilitating the charge separation process. The creation of polarization is strongly associated with the piezopotential. The direction-dependent piezopotential can be attributed to the growth of the crystal along the polarization direction, and the enhancement of the polarity owing to the aligned crystal domain facilitated by various techniques such as electrical poling and stretching.18,19 Various techniques have been employed to improve the piezoelectric effect, such as direction-controlled applied strain, broadening of the depletion region, lowering of the barrier height, strain engineering of the bandgap, polling under an electric field, and creation of spontaneous polarization along their c-axis direction. Doping has been utilized to enhance the piezoelectric effect of various intrinsic materials; for example, Yang Zhang et al. employed halogen elements such as chlorine, fluorine, bromine, and iodine as a dopant to enhance the piezoelectric property of ZnO-based flexible nanogenerator.70 As the ionic radii of these halogens are different from that of oxygen, thus, it will create either compressive or tensile lattice strain in the material, which will amplify the piezoelectric effect. The creation of controlled lattice strain along the polar c-axis, which will form static polarization and opposite piezo charges at the two ends, can be considered as an effective approach to tune the piezoelectric property of the wurtzite-type materials. The abovementioned techniques can be considered as an alternative approach to improve the piezoelectric effect, which will in turn boost the sluggish catalytic activity.
Furthermore, nanomaterials of various morphologies such as nanowires and nanorods have been utilized to improve the piezoelectric effect owing to the strain confinement effect, which can simultaneously enhance both the optical and electrical properties of the materials or, in other words, it encourages faster charge diffusion process from the bulk to the surface. 1D morphology has a greater curvature of deformation as it can be easily twisted under pressure; thus, by controlling the directional crystal growth with polarization, a larger piezopotential can be achieved for accelerated charge separation during the catalytic process.71 Moreover, the annealing treatment of these materials can induce thermal motion, which improves the polarization and piezoelectric properties of the materials.72 The well-aligned polarized direction exhibits extraordinary piezoresponse, which can modulate the catalytic activity effectively due to the enhancement of the local polarity and dipole alignment.73,74 In addition, the change in the phase of the materials subjected to any mechanical stress (called as morphotropic phase boundary) often leads to an enhancement in the catalytic activity due to the slight difference in the free energy for both the phases.75 Also, the engineering of free charge carriers also plays a key factor in piezoresponse modulation along with enhanced catalytic activity. Considering the concept of piezo-phototronics, the induced positive polarization charge in the piezomaterial will create downward band bending of the surface energy level. Thus, the surface potential will be more than before, which decreases the reductive potential and favors free electron migration to the solution for the water reduction reaction. Apart from this, several groups have adopted the strategy of noble metal deposition76 to magnify the catalytic activity by the tuning of electric field and energy bands due to the development of the Schottky junction. The formed Schottky junction promotes charge separation in the catalytic system, where the noble metal serves as an electron sinker. Furthermore, the enhancement in the piezophototronic effect can be greatly enhanced at a low temperature.77 This enhancement can be attributed to the decrease in the mobility of charge carriers at a relatively low temperature and to the reduction in the screening effect, which promotes the segregation efficiency of light-induced excitons. The above discussed techniques in the section can be considered as an alternative approach to maximize the utilization of piezoelectric field, which will in turn boost the sluggish catalytic activity by improving the charge separation.
3.3. Piezo-photocatalytic systems developed so far toward hydrogen evolution
In this section, we have classified the piezo-photocatalytic materials into two groups for describing the H2 evolution activity, i.e., pristine piezo-photocatalytic system (single neat material) and hybrid/composite piezo-photocatalytic system (two-component materials). However, this field of piezo-photocatalytic water splitting is still at the infancy and not explored much. Fig. 3 represents the schematic of different piezo-photocatalytic systems developed so far toward the water reduction reaction.
 Fig. 3  Schematic outline of the systems proposed to date regarding piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. 

3.3.1. Pristine Piezo-photocatalytic system. 
For establishing extrinsic or built-in fields to boost the light-generated charge segregation and to subdue the recombination process, which minimizes the overall efficiency of the photocatalytic system, piezo-photocatalysis is an efficient approach for getting higher quantum yield. In piezo-photocatalysis, the piezopotential causes band bending in the materials, which can be considered as the main reason behind effective charge migration to the surface. The piezopotential is defined as the potential created inside the crystal by the charges of ions in the process of polarization subjected to any external mechanical force (strain). In a hybrid piezo-photocatalyst, two phenomena operate, namely, (i) band bending and (ii) raise in the Schottky barrier height. Here, contact formation is achieved through the semiconductor, metal, or electrolytes. Besides this, an integrated piezo-photocatalyst is constructed only by coupling the light and vibration energy as a catalyst. When visible light is irradiated, the light-induced electrons and holes are created in the conduction and valence band, respectively. Due to the rapid recombination of electron–hole pairs (as well as on the surface and the bulk), the production of hydrogen is low through the photocatalytic route only. However, when external stimuli such as ultrasonic vibration/water flow/palm pressure are applied to the material, stretching and bending happens, which will be observed by the deformation from the pristine shape.18 This deformation constitutes too many negative and positive charges on the surface as a process of polarization, resulting in the formation of the built-in electric field (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Scheme of a pristine semiconducting material showing piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution subjected to solar irradiation. Here, the blue dotted curves represent the material structure before strain. 
The negative photogenerated charges move in the opposite direction of the built-in electric field, whereas the positive ones migrate toward the direction of the field. The transfer of the photogenerated electrons and holes are achieved by the periodic mechanical stimuli/force. When both the photon and sonication is applied concurrently, the electric field is generated within the material, where the bottom surface is the positive electrode and the top surface becomes the negative electrode. Under the implementation of an electric field, the electrons and holes migrate toward the bottom and top, respectively, which will increase the regional electron density. This built-in electric field facilitates better segregation/separation of charge carriers, which will simultaneously increase the sluggish hydrogen evolution rate. This pristine material-based piezo-photocatalytic water-splitting reaction is gaining attention nowadays but not fully explored, the details of which are discussed in the following section.


3.3.2. Advances in pristine piezo-photocatalytic system. 
After the remarkable discovery of the piezo-phototronic effect by Wang et al., several research groups have picked this concept to enhance the catalytic activity.63 For the past 2–3 years, research has been focused on hydrogen production by the water splitting reaction incorporating piezo-photocatalysis. It has increased due to its large scalability, renewability, and environment-friendly nature. As this field is new and currently fact-finding has been focused, therefore, only a few pieces of literature have been reported, which are discussed thoroughly.
Cadmium sulphide (CdS)-based nanosystems. 
To start with, CdS has been widely used for various photocatalytic applications, but owing to its wurtzite structure, a greater degree of non-centrosymmetricity and modulated piezo-polarization nature enables CdS as a promising material for piezo-photo-assisted water-splitting reaction. In this context, Ping Liu and his research group for the first time prepared 1D CdS nanorod array (400 nm diameter) grown vertically (Fig. 5a) over the FTO surface via the hydrothermal method as the piezo-photocatalytic material to perform water reduction reaction in the absence of the co-catalyst and the sacrificial agent.25 The main intention of CdS alignment on the FTO substrate was to retain the stress-induced piezoelectric field, which otherwise gets cancelled when the unaligned nanorods are directly dispersed in water. For studying the piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, the experiment was carried out in an argon atmosphere subjected to 100 W ultrasonication and 300 W Xenon lamp irradiation (420 nm cut-off filter) (Fig. 5b). It was observed that the nanorod array shows an excellent hydrogen evolution rate of 20 μL h−1 at 27 kHz (optimum frequency), which is much higher than the unsupported CdS rod. It was inferred from Fig. 5c that light and acoustic energy together catalyze the water reduction reaction more efficiently compared to ultrasonic vibration or light irradiation. The reason behind such improved catalytic performance was verified by considering two assumptions: (i) the enhancement in the production is either by the generation of some active oxygen species such as H2O2 along with H2 during water sonication, which acts as a sacrificial agent and scavenges the photogenerated holes, which results in the availability of more number of electrons for water reduction or (ii) by the induction of built-in internal piezoelectric field, which separates the photogenerated excitons in the opposite direction and increases the local electron density at the surface of CdS. However, H2O2 formation is not the main cause of increment in the CdS catalytic performance, as verified from the performed experiments; rather, piezo-polarization is the only reason for the enhancement in the H2 evolution rate over the CdS nanorod. Further, to figure out the resonance frequency of nanorods, the experiment was conducted in different sonication frequency and it was observed that 27 kHz is the resonant frequency where the best H2 evolution was encountered due to the maximum deformation of the CdS nanorods array (Fig. 5d). In addition, CdS nanorods show excellent durability up to 4 h with little decrease in the activity; however, afterward, there is a marginal reduction in H2 production, as visualized from the reusability test.
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM images of CdS. (b) Schematic of the proposed mechanism of piezo-photocatalytic performance under light and ultrasonication. (c) Rate of production of hydrogen in different conditions. (d) The frequency-dependent difference in H2 production rate standardized by acoustic intensity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
Further, Zhao et al. took the single component cadmium sulphide ultrathin sheet, which can efficiently superpose acoustic vibration and light energy, and achieved a hydrogen production velocity of 633 μL h−1, which is much higher (2.1 times) than light and sonication alone (Fig. 6a). The ultrathin CdS possesses superior traits such as ultralarge and unique specific surface structure, dense catalytic active sites, and non-centrosymmetricity, which enables the material to productively utilize vibrational and photon energy to produce molecular hydrogen, eliminating the concept of composite formation or external biasing. Further, the ultrathin framework promotes faster charge diffusion from the bulk to the surface. Here, single-crystalline CdS is synthesized via a low-temperature hydrothermal route along with oil bath treatments. Further, the performed XRD characterization signifies the high purity of the sample and also indicates the growth of the (002) facet, which suggests superior piezoelectric properties having a piezocoefficient of 10.32 pC N−1.26
 Fig. 6  (a) Rate of H2 evolution subjected to different conditions. (b) Hysteresis loop (phase). (c) Butterfly loop (amplitude) of the prepared sample on the FTO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Local piezoresponse is obtained by the hysteresis loop (Fig. 6b) and the amplitude vs. voltage curve, which is familiarly called a butterfly loop (Fig. 6c), is observed. This characterization implies distinct polarization switching and the ferroelectric domains are observed in the CdS nanosheet. Amplitude and phase map well coincide with each other by confirming the piezo behavior of the prepared sample. The water reduction reaction is performed under various conditions such as the superposition of acoustic vibration and light, only vibration, and only visible light irradiation, but the maximum yield is observed at a synergetic system of applied stimuli and visible light. In brief, the deformation in the sample by the ultrasonication causes the photo-induced holes and electrons to migrate in the reverse direction of the piezoelectric field via the developed built-in electric field, encouraging effective electron–hole separation, which results in a huge amount of photoelectrons in the CdS nanosheet surface to overcome the sluggish H2 evolution. After Yan Zhao's experimental analysis, H. A. Abood et al. fabricated a series of two-dimensional square CdS nanosheet by the conventional hydrothermal method, varying the concentration of DL-dithiotheriotol (structural directing chemical) for getting CdS nanosheets of different thickness.20 In particular, 28 nm thin nanosheets (4CdS) were obtained in the 2:1 molar ratio of DL-dithiotheriotol to cadmium, which shows an optimum H2 evolution rate. CdS is visible active (2.42 eV) and has a non-centrosymmetric character, making it a promising piezo-photocatalytic material. The thickness of the sheet plays a vital part in deciding the piezo-photo synergistic coupling for the enhanced water reduction reaction. Having this unique morphology, the square CdS sheets offer more active surface sites for exhibiting superior surface reaction along with good twisting property, subjected to mechanical stimuli, which induce piezo-polarization. It can create a built-in potential (polarization under stress), which is indirectly related to the sheet thickness to magnify the photocatalytic ability by efficaciously separating the photogenerated charges and preventing the recombination process. Further, the piezo-photocatalytic reaction was performed inside a 100 mL Pyrex reactor having 80 mL of lactic acid (10%) as a sacrificial agent along with the prepared samples. Nanosheets with different thicknesses were examined subject to photon incidence (λ = 420 nm) and ultrasonication of 45 kHz; the results were analyzed. It was observed that the thinnest sample (4CdS) shows the optimum hydrogen evolution of 1293.62 μmol g−1 h−1, which is 4.5 times more than that of the 0-CdS micro-sheets (284.26 μmol g−1 h−1) and depicts a quantum efficiency of 11.72% at 440 nm. Besides this, the reduction process was scrutinized using different sacrificial agents (CH3OH, glycerine, lactic acid, Na2S, and Na2SO3) but maximum hydrogen evolution was obtained with lactic acid. In addition, a recycling test (3 cycles of 6 h each) was performed over 4CdS and the obtained data manifests that the sample is extremely stable, i.e., up to three consecutive cycles with a loss of 12% of initial activity, which is due to photocorrosion, which decreases the lattice stress and holes. When the square nanosheets are subjected to periodic mechanical stress, two kinds of deformations take place, i.e., vertical stretching and horizontal bending, which leads to the formation of many charge carriers on the nanosheet surface because of the piezoelectric effect. Further, under the combined effect of ultrasonication and photon irradiation, an electric potential is created within the CdS sheet (positive electrode pointing downward), which direct the photoexcited electrons to the bottom side, intensifying the surface electron density and photogenerated holes to the upper surface. If we ignore the carcinogenic and bio-incompatibility trait of CdS, it can bring significant improvement in the sluggish hydrogen evolution rate via the piezo-photocatalytic mechanism.
Perovskite-based nanosystems. 
Using perovskite-structured materials in the piezoelectric as well as photocatalysis arena has grabbed considerable research attention owing to their impressive traits. In addition, Yang Chai and his group amplified the hydrogen evolution rate of organolead halide perovskites, i.e., CH3NH3PbI3 synthesized by the anti-solvent approach, via the judicious integration of the piezoelectric and photoactive character of the perovskite.28 Non-centrosymmetric nature, tuneable direct bandgap, high ambipolar mobility, defect tolerance, broadband absorption, and appealing optoelectronic property make it a promising candidate for piezo-photocatalytic applications. Further, piezo force microscopy (PFM) measurements confirm the piezo behavior of the prepared material and its high −ve conduction band potential favor an effective proton reduction reaction. 0.7 × 0.7 μm2 surface area is scanned by the cantilever tip with the external load, which results in the three-dimensional image of the surface topography along with the amplitude response/piezo potential (Fig. 7a and b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Surface topography. (b) PFM amplitude of MAPbI3. (c) Time-dependent H2 evolution comparing the piezo, photo and piezo-photocatalytic technique. (d) The calculated density of states along with the band alignment of MAPbI3 subjected to different mechanical pressures. (e) Cycling performance test evaluation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
Thereafter, piezo-photocatalytic H2 evolution test was performed in an H-shaped cell taking 15 mL (57 wt%) of HI in each compartment purged with argon gas at 28 °C. 500 W tungsten halogen lamp was used as a visible light source having a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Varied (50–90 W) ultrasonic power was used to agitate the photocatalyst (MAPbI3) and it was observed that 70 W ultrasonication results in optimal hydrogen evolution of 23.30 μmol h−1 in this system, which is much higher than solely piezo- and photo-produced H2, i.e., 2.21 and 3.42 μmol h−1, respectively, and also their sum (5.63 μmol h−1) (Fig. 7c). The better catalytic activity is due to an increase in the deformation under ultrasonication power, which creates a built-in electric field to prevent the charge recombination process. Under light irradiation, the hydrogen bond between MA+ and Pb–I moiety of MAPbI3 becomes weak, resulting in the formation of the charged or polarized framework of MA+ ion, which encourages the anti-recombination process, leading to superior activity. Further, Jiang et al. investigated the pressure dependency on polymorphism and tuning of the bandgap, which inferred that the exposure of the sample toward high power sonication generating high pressure converts the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 to the orthorhombic phase.78 This dependency was also confirmed by the DFT (Density functional theory) calculations. Similarly, in this case, the author observed that with an increase in the sonication power (70 W to 80 W), there is a decrease in the catalytic activity, which is due to the transfer of the tetragonal to the orthorhombic form and the ortho-phase does not exhibit piezoelectricity. Again, from the density of states (DOS) study, there was a change in the bandgap from 1.5 eV to 1.65 eV subjected to 2 Gpa pressure, which decreases the light absorption range, resulting in low catalytic efficiency (Fig. 7d). In addition, when the ultrasonic power reaches 90 W, there was a sharp decrease in the catalytic activity as it separates MAPbI3 to its crystalline and amorphous forms.79 The above discussion gives the cause of a decrease in the H2 evolution rate and the factors affecting it. It was confirmed from the reusability test (3 catalytic cycles of 5 h each (i.e., in Fig. 7e)), and the XRD and TEM characterization before and after that the photocatalyst shows long term stability and reusability. Owing to the water stability issues of this kind of halide perovskites, there is a lack in its application to pure water splitting to generate hydrogen fuel.
Apart from this, Yu-Chun Wang and J M Wu for the first time studied the piezo-photocatalytic response of ferroelectric R3C ZnSnO3 nanowires synthesized hydrothermally with a post-thermal annealing process (varying time) under a hydrogen environment and examined its catalytic ability toward the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). The prepared catalyst showed the optimal H2 evolution rate of approximately 3453.1 μmol g−1 h−1 subjected to sole piezo-induced HER.80 Further, under the synergistic piezo-phototronic route, the HER rate was significantly improved, i.e., 6000 μmol g−1 in 7 h (Fig. 8a–d), which demonstrates the importance of both mechanical and photon energy. Importantly, the vibrational force-induced spontaneous polarization acts as a charge carrier separator by migrating the electron and hole in opposite directions in ferroelectric ZnSnO3, which reduces the charge recombination rate and simultaneously enhances the redox mechanism. Again, through the theoretical study, the team describes the effect of controlled oxygen vacancy (Ov) and the critical role of Ov in increasing the catalytic performances of ferroelectric materials. Even though oxygen vacancies may faintly subdue the spontaneous polarization of ZnSnO3 NWs, these defect sites act as charge carrier trapping centers and under mechanical stress (piezo polarization), during photon illumination, suppress the charge recombination process, which ultimately increases the carrier density that encourages the surface catalytic reactions. Hence this theoretical and experimental analysis illustrates the importance of controlled oxygen vacancy in ferroelectric semiconductors for overcoming the sluggish photocatalytic H2 evolution.
 Fig. 8  H2 evolution of ZnSnO3 for each annealed condition (a) under only light, (b) under only sonication, and (c) under the synergistic effect of light and ultrasonication. (d) Stability test of the 3H–ZnSnO3 NW sample for 7 h of the reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) H2 yield for Pt/Bi4NbO8Br and Pt/Bi4NbO2 Br–S with Pt-deposited subjected to light and light with ultrasonication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
Furthermore, Cheng Hu and team prepared piezoelectric single crystal nanoplates of Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl, Br) via the flux method and tested its catalytic activities under various conditions (i.e., light, ultrasonic, and light + ultrasonic) toward reactive oxygen species generation, oxygen reduction reaction, and H2 evolution reaction (noble metal as the co-catalyst). The group observed that the piezo-catalytic efficiency of the designed material is far better than many other reported state-of-the-art catalysts subjected to similar conditions. The enhanced activity is due to the directional separation of charge carriers along specific facets (110, 001), encouraging benchmark catalytic efficacy. This effective charge separation is largely guided by polarized electric field and band bending effect. In addition, the enrichment in reductive active sites through the piezo-photo deposition of Pt over all the facets of the designed material leads to the highest H2 evolution rate of 203.7 μmol g−1 h−1, which was achieved for the ultrasonic-photodeposited Pt/Bi4NbO8Br, which his 28.7-fold more that of photodeposited Pt/Bi4NbO8Br–S (7.1 μmol g−1 h−1) and 23.6 times higher than that of ultrasonic-photodeposited Pt/Bi4NbO8Br–S (8.6 μmol g−1 h−1), and is also more than that of the photodeposited Pt/Bi4NbO8Br (143.2 μmol g−1 h−1) (Fig. 8e).81 Apart from this, the team also observed that the well-developed (001) facets promote H2O or H+ adsorption along with selective charge separation, ultimately increasing the rate of H2 evolution.
In addition, Zhao et al. designed a Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3 (BNT) catalyst through the hydrothermal method, and gave a new direction in the piezo-photocatalytic field by closely observing the effect of the parameters such as particle size, vibration frequency, electrical conductivity, piezoelectric coefficient, and mechanical power. As high electrical conductivity can accelerate the rate of charge transfer, resulting in improved catalytic activity, thus, in this case, BNT shows enhanced activity due to its high electrical conductivity of (∼10−5 Sm−1) and relatively moderate piezoelectric property having a d33 value of ∼58 pC N−1, respectively. Further, the piezoelectric behavior of the designed material is characterized via the piezoresponse force microscopy technique and its piezo/ferroelectric feature is confirmed by amplitude–voltage butterfly and phase-reversal hysteresis loop subjected to 6 V direct current (Fig. 9a). It is worth mentioning that H2 evolution via piezo-photocatalysis was improved significantly, reaching 773 μmol g−1 for BNT-1 after 5 h, which is twice the value obtained under light irradiation alone (Fig. 9b).82 Also, the catalyst depicts extraordinary stability up to 15 h without any significant reduction of the H2 evolution rate (Fig. 9c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Piezoresponse phase hysteresis loop and amplitude butterfly loop for BNT. (b) H2 evolution under different reaction conditions. (c) Cyclic performance test for piezo-photocatalytic H2 evolution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic synthetic procedure for ultrathin g-C3N4. (e) H2 evolution rate. (f) Production rate for bulk and ultrathin g-C3N4 subjected to light, ultrasonication and both light and ultrasonication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)-based nanosystem. 
g-C3N4 possesses uniformly distributed triangular nanopores in its tri-s-triazine layers, which creates strong flexo-electricity and in-plane piezoelectricity in the tri-s-triazine plane. Owing to its piezo and photocatalytic nature, Hu et al. prepared ultrathin g-C3N4 (UT-gCN) nanosheets via the direct thermal oxidation etching of bulk gCN in an open air environment, followed by sonication to get the exfoliated and well-dispersed gCN nanosheets (Fig. 9d). It displayed a superb piezo-photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 12.16 mmol g−1 h−1 (glucose as the sacrificial agent and the absence of the co-catalyst), which is significantly higher compared to bulk g-CN and under sole ultrasonic vibration condition (Fig. 9e and f).83 The observed higher H2 evolution of UT-g-C3N4 corresponds to its highly responsive mechanical vibration and larger piezoelectricity. Again, the charge trapping tests demonstrates that the photo-piezocatalytic activity of the catalyst largely decreases upon the addition of AgNO3 (negative charge trapping agent (q−)), which clearly pointed out the vital role of piezoelectrically-generated q− in the performed photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction. Moreover, if we overcome the properties such as low specific surface area, fewer active sites, and insufficient visible absorption of g-C3N4, this piezo-photocatalytic material can be used to a great extent for producing cleaner and greener hydrogen energy.


3.3.3. Hybrid piezo-photocatalytic system. 
To overcome the hindrance offered by the pristine system, various techniques have been embraced such as contact formation, noble metal loading, and preparation of carbonaceous composites. The contact formation includes the science of band bending and Schottky barrier height (SBH); to understand the concept thoroughly, we have precisely discussed these mechanisms, followed by the recent state-of-the-art materials. Here, contact signifies semiconductor–semiconductor and semiconductor–metal type catalytic systems. Further, doping and defect engineering are also adopted to enhance the piezo-photocatalytic performance of the material. The details regarding the various types of hybrid systems are discussed below.
Semiconductor–semiconductor contact. 
Here, one semiconducting piezomaterial is connected to another semiconducting material (maybe piezo or not), establishing junction-based systems such as p–p, n–n (homojunction type), and the p–n heterojunction type where the charge flow/migration may include either Z-scheme or type-II double charge transfer mechanism. In this type of contact, the depletion region plays an important role in the diffusion of electron and holes via the interfacial zone, which boosts the built-in electric field. Thus, the piezoeffect along with the semiconducting property can manipulate the charge migration, which is a very essential part for its improved catalytic activity. Here also, an interfacial barrier is formed due to the alignment of the Fermi level in the contact region for two different kinds of semiconductors having a distinct work function. Due to the polar directive nature, the field of piezoelectric materials is always along the semiconductor direction.
In Fig. 10a and b (both), a p-type non-piezoelectric semiconductor is connected to an n-type piezoelectric semiconductor where tensile and compressive strain is applied to it, respectively. The tensile strain produces positive piezoelectric charges in the n-type material, which attract the migrating electron from the nearby surface, resulting in downshift band bending (Fig. 10a). The space charge region can be tuned by the positive polarized charges (at the junction point), which travel from the n-type to the p-type region by hindering the carrier transfer. On the other hand, when compressive strain is applied at the junction, negative polarization is induced, repelling the electrons and causing upward band edge bending. This indicates the enhanced migration of the photoexcited charge carriers (Fig. 10b). Further, a similar type of band-bending chemistry and charge transportation is also valid for type-II heterojunction-based systems.18 Adding more to the text, for the Z-scheme-oriented band structure, the left semiconductor should have a higher Fermi level, valence band (VB), and conduction band (CB) from the contacted right semiconductor. When they come in touch with each other, thermal equilibration of the Fermi level takes place, which results in a downward band edge shifting of the right semiconductor and upward band bending of the left one (Fig. 10c). The dotted lines signify the bending band edge after the contact. Thus, the built-in electric field formed at the interface favors charge recombination, i.e., holes from the left one and electrons from the right semiconductor projecting highly oxidative holes and reductive electrons, which can participate in the surface redox reaction, are found to be in the right and left semiconductor, respectively. Further, the Z-scheme-type charge dynamics can be tuned if one of the semiconductors (let say right one) has the piezotronic property.84,85Fig. 10c demonstrates that the formed positive polarization under tensile strain facilitates the downshift of the band edge in the right semiconductor, promoting the recombination of the right conduction band electron with the left valence band hole. However, when compressive strain is applied, negative polarization is induced, which suppress the Z-scheme charge transfer dynamic (Fig. 10d). Thus, for tuning the piezo property, the highly dependent factors are the polarization charges, sign and magnitude of the applied strain, and the Fermi level position of the combining semiconducting material.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of the piezoeffect at the p–n or type II junction corresponding to (a) tensile strain and (b) compressive strain. Effect of (c) tensile strain and (d) compressive strain in a Z-scheme-based p–n junction. Here, the dashed grey line represents the initial band edge without any strain while the solid blue line represents the band edge under strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
Metal–semiconductor contact. 
When a semiconductor is brought in close contact with a metal with a larger work function, the free electrons will glide from the semiconductor to the metal side through the interfacial region till the alignment of the Fermi level. This process leads to an upward band bending of the semiconductor and the formation of the Schottky barrier at the metal–semiconductor junction, which acts as a potential energy barrier for the electrons. The entity ϕB (Schottky barrier height, i.e., SBH) is the primary parameter associated with it, which purely rely on the combination of the semiconductor and metals. In the concept of SBH, it is assumed that there should be no impurities, no interdiffusion, and no interlayer about the junction/interface area. Further, the work function plays a viable role in SBH, which is the difference between the work function of the metal and the semiconductor.86,87 To participate in surface redox reaction, the photoinduced electron must have a greater energy than the SBH to step over the barrier interface. Here, piezoelectric semiconductors are widely used because we can tune the SCH by the induction of mechanical energy, which creates either positive or negative polarization.
In Fig. 11, the metal is attached with an n-type semiconductor through various processes such as metal doping, noble metal deposition (Au, Ag), or heterojunction formation. Fig. 11a signifies that when tensile strain is applied, the downshift of the band edge position takes place along with the creation of the positive polarization. The formed positive polarization charges attract the free electron at the material interface, which facilitates the smooth flow of electrons. In Fig. 11b, compressive strain is applied on the n-type semiconductor, which results in the upward movement of the band edge as well as a rise in the barrier height. As a negative charge is induced due to strain, it prevents electron transfer in the material interface from the semiconductor to the metal.18 Here, the enhanced electronic transport properties can be attributed to the combined mechanism of both positive and negative polarization subjected to tensile and compressive strain, respectively. Here, this two-way polarization effect can be used in a complementary way to control the charge transport at the junction interface. As the incident photon does the work of the exciting electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, so the modification in the materials can cause the transfer of the electron rapidly, avoiding the recombination of electron–hole pair; therefore, several electrons participate at the surface to perform water-splitting, thus generating hydrogen. Besides composite formation, many groups have adopted techniques such as modified structures, morphology, defect management, and single-phase formation to overcome the sluggish photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, which is described below.
 Fig. 11  Piezo effect at the metal–semiconductor contact corresponding to (a) tensile strain and (b) compressive strain. Here, the dashed grey line represents the initial band edge without any strain while the solid blue line represents the band edge under strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2021, Wiley. 


3.3.4. Advances in hybrid piezo-photocatalytic system. 
Molybdenum disulphide (MoS2)-based nanohybrids. 
Two-dimensional transition metal sulphides such as molybdenum disulphide possess some extraordinary traits, which enable their research focus in various opto-electronics applications. In this particular concept, Shou-Quing Liu and his co-workers reported an enhanced hydrogen evolution of 1.84 mmol from Co-doped MoS2 (12.78%-doped Co) by the piezo-photocatalysis route from the aqueous ammonia borane, which is nearly 4.84-fold higher than that of pristine MoS2 (0.38 μmol) under ultrasonic and infrared irradiation.21 Thin-layered MoS2 is chosen as the catalytic system because it can harvest IR-radiation (bandgap ∼1.3 eV) and simultaneously show piezoelectric property. The H2 evolution activity is observed for both pristine MoS2 along with Co doping in MoS2 systems (varying concentration of Co doping). It is inferred that the doping of Co increases the piezo-photocatalytic behavior of MoS2, resulting in higher production of H2. However, the production rate shows a downward trend, as observed from Fig. 12a, when the doping amount goes beyond 12.8%, which implies that the optimum doping of Co in the MoS2 lattice has been achieved.
 Fig. 12  (a) Effect of cobalt doping on MoS2 towards hydrogen evolution. (b) Blank and controlled test towards hydrogen yield 1-without catalyst, 2-only catalyst without NIR and sonication, 3-catalyst + NIR, 4-catalyst + sonication, and 5-catalyst + sonication + NIR. (c) Piezo-current signals (I–t curve) by setting the potential of the top electrode as 0 V vs. the working electrode or reference electrode a-MoS2 (Co doped), b-MoS2 (pristine). Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
This doping/metal loading increases the charge carrier movement, which propels the electrons to the surface to participate in the reaction. This mechanism is highly influenced by ultrasonication, which creates polarization inside the materials for suppressing the charge recombination and Co doping improves the piezopolarization ability of MoS2. A blank and controlled test toward hydrogen evolution is also demonstrated, which shows the optimum yield when the catalyst is subjected to both sonication and near-infrared irradiation (Fig. 12b). Further, the reusability test ascertains the high stability of doped MoS2 as it retained the activity (1.83 μmol) until the 5th run. The near-infrared irradiation response and piezocurrent measurements are performed for the prepared samples. The piezocurrent was measured via electrochemical workstation by placing the sample between the two ITO electrodes. The applied force (via hand pressing of a clincher) on the sample is 1.2 ± 0.1 kg, which results in the 8 μA cm−2 piezocurrent for neat MoS2 and −60 μA cm−2 for Co-doped MoS2 (Fig. 12c). As the piezocurrent is 8 times more than that of the un-doped MoS2, it can be confirmed that the employment in the piezo behavior enhances the sluggish hydrogen evolution.
In another investigation, Jia et al. fabricated a potent binary heterojunction composed of piezoelectric KNbO3 nanowires and ultrathin MoS2 by a two-step hydrothermal technique. Here, the synergetic effect of internal piezopolarization via the applied mechanical force and heterojunction formation leads to productive excitons separation, which ultimately results in benchmark H2 evolution velocity, i.e., 96 μmol g−1 h−1 (KN/MS-30).23 As there has been no remarkable photocatalytic activity shown by these semiconducting materials due to faster electron–hole recombination, piezopolarization science was integrated to stamp out the charge recombination process and simultaneously boost the water reduction ability. These non-centrosymmetric piezomaterials generally possess the ability to separate the charge carriers via the piezoelectric effect MoS2 provides the active edges, broad visible light absorption, and better conductivity, but suffers from faster charge recombination, which reduces its photocatalytic efficiency. In this system, a few-layered MoS2 nanosheet was grown around the KNbO3 single-crystal nanowires (Fig. 13a), which provide the effective separation of electron and holes through the piezoelectric property of both layered MoS2 and KNbO3. In this case, three types of samples were prepared by varying the weight of MoS2.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the KNbO3/MoS2 heterostructure exhibiting piezo-photocatalysis. (b, c) H2 evolution for different samples under different conditions. (d) Mechanism displaying the charge flow dynamics and band bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The H2 evolution reaction was studied for 6 h subject to simulated solar light irradiation and light + ultrasonic vibration separately. Only light irradiation produces hydrogen of 305 μmol g−1 for the KN/MS-30 sample, which is far more than that of the pristine MoS2 sheet (284 μmol g−1) and KNbO3 wire (203 μmol g−1). However, a higher MoS2 loaded sample, i.e., KN/MS-50 exhibits low activity (126 μmol g−1) due to the shielding effect and the creation of unwanted recombination sites. By coupling light and ultrasonic vibration, the best sample (KN/MS-30) shows a H2 yield rate of 96 μmol g−1 h−1, which is thrice that of the sample irradiated by solar light alone (Fig. 13b and c). For the stability test, three repeated cycles are performed, which signifies that it is stable and recyclable as there is no loss in the evolution rate. The depicted mechanism of the synergic coupling of piezo and photocatalytic behavior is depicted in Fig. 13d. When solar light irradiation is imposed on the prepared material, photoexcited electrons and holes are formed in the conduction band and the valence band, respectively. The band-edge bending happens in the KNbO3 due to polarization, which forces the charge carriers to move in a converse direction and hinders the charge recombination rate. In addition, KNbO3 transfers its photoinduced electrons and holes to MoS2, which acts as a co-catalyst. When sonication is applied to the binary composite, the deformation of KNbO3 nanowire occurs, resulting in enormous positive and negative charges on the opposite edge surface of the wires through the piezoelectric effect. Thereafter, band bending is also observed, which plays the role of facile channelization of the electrons and holes. Again, few or single-layer MoS2 nanosheet offers better deformation behavior, which can be attributed to the creation of substantial piezoelectric potential, which simultaneously enhances the photocatalytic activity. Therefore, the observed superior, adequate catalytic activity for the KNbO3/MoS2 heterostructure is also due to the piezoelectric response of MoS2. The mentioned results clarify that forming the heterojunction and the mechanical stimuli-induced polarization promotes the charge separation, which enhances the photocatalytic water reduction by overcoming the sluggish hydrogen evolution rate.
Zinc oxide (ZnO)-based nanohybrids. 
On this heterojunction concept, Zijan Wang and his co-workers synthesized piezocatalytic TiO2/ZnO nanowire arrays of length 9 μm and diameter of 600 nm on stainless steel mesh, which couples mechanical and solar energy to produce molecular hydrogen, i.e., 15.259 μmol g−1 in 5 h.24 Here, the formed heterojunction ZnO/TiO2 nanowires along with the piezoelectric effect lowers the electron–hole recombination rate. As ZnO possesses piezoelectric property, thus, under stress, polarization is created in ZnO, which successfully separates the photogenerated charge carriers and increases the charge density. Moreover, the ZnO/TiO2 composite possess excellent stability and recyclability along with conventional and low-cost synthesis route, which makes it a promising piezo-photocatalytic system. Here, Wang et al. synthesized the binary hybrid over steel mesh via a two-step hydrothermal method (Fig. 14a). Initially, ZnO nanowires are grown on the mesh substrate and then the TiO2 shell was coated over the ZnO nanowires. In brief, a 50 W Xenon lamp is used as a light irradiation source (200–2500 nm) and acoustic mechanical vibration is applied by the 50 W ultrasonication (40 kHz) (Fig. 14b). Different reaction conditions are adopted to scrutinize H2 evolution such as only light irradiation, acoustic vibration alone, and light-sonication combined.
 Fig. 14  Schematic of (a) the synthesis process of TiO2/ZnO on mesh substrate. (b) Reactor design. (c, d) Mechanism of piezo-photocatalysis showing band alignment. (e, f) H2 evolution curves of the samples under different reaction conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
At the interface of TiO2 and ZnO, a type II heterojunction is created with the built-in electric field (depletion zone) directed from TiO2 to ZnO. Applying Xenon lamp (UV light source) electrons of both, TiO2 and ZnO migrate from respective valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) by leaving holes in the VB (Fig. 14c and d).88 These light-induced electrons drift from the CB of ZnO toward the CB of TiO2 while the photogenerated holes travel (VBTiO2 to VBZnO) in the opposite direction. Therefore, light-induced holes and electrons are effectively segregated by the heterojunction potential, which suppresses the charge recombination. The piezoelectric field due to the deformation of ZnO nanowires in the composite further reduces the recombination process, resulting in an excellent H2 evolution rate as the piezoelectric field drives the light-induced excitons toward the negative and positive surface of the piezo potential, respectively. Furthermore, contact formation results in downward/upward band bending due to positive/negative polarization charges, which effortlessly allows the migration of electrons and holes from the CB of ZnO to TiO2 and the VB of TiO2 to ZnO, respectively, leading to productive carrier separation.89 The H2 evolution for TiO2/ZnO under synergetic ultrasonic and solar environment shows the optimum production of 15.259 μmol g−1 (for 5 h), which is comparatively much greater than only solar light (9.923 μmol g−1). The recyclability test for the TiO2/ZnO nanowire is evaluated by performing 25 h of reaction with confined evacuation every 5 h and after the reaction, the SEM image along with 1%∼ weight loss in the sample confirms that the prepared material has superior stability and recyclability (Fig. 14d and e). But owing to its feeble charge transfer and carrier mobility, this materials system lacks practical application. Further, the mechanism of hydrogen evolution (3.052 μmol h−1 g−1) over TiO2/ZnO under methanol sacrificial agent is discussed below.
Step-1  
Step-2  
Step-3  
Barium titanate (BaTiO3)-based nanohybrids. 
Water splitting reaction driven by non-noble metal-based plasmonic catalysis has gathered huge attention in recent years. Here, Z. L. Wang and his co-workers reported enhanced H2 evolution of 657 μmol h−1cm−2 on plasmonic Al/BaTiO3 heterostructure prepared on the Ti foams substrate by the piezo-photocatalytic technique.27 Generally, plasmonic heterostructuring offers localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), which provides the tuning of absorption in the near-infrared and visible region.90,91 This phenomenon offered by the noble metals, which have high surface charge concentration to cause resonance, were subjected to irradiated light. Here, non-precious, earth-abundant, and photo-stable aluminium is the plasmonic material that shows an impressive LSPR effect and wide light absorption range extending from the UV to the Vis region. Besides this, BaTiO3, which is a non-centrosymmetric piezoelectric material (confirmed by PFM analysis), can give rise to built-in polarization, which can modulate the charge segregation. In addition, the oxygen defects on the surface of the nanoscaled BaTiO3 (BTO) with excess dopant electrons modulate the band structure and BTO exhibits partial semiconducting property.90 Further, piezoelectric BTO with semiconducting character shows photocatalytic activity under UV light illumination. Thus, combining piezoelectric BaTiO3 possessing partial semiconducting property with Al plasmonic material results in extraordinary H2 evolution as observed in the present case. The group hydrothermally synthesized BaTiO3 nanocavity array on Ti foam with Al nanoparticles distributed periodically (Fig. 15a). Furthermore, the BTO cavity acts as a suitable dielectric shell for Al plasmonic effect.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the Al/BaTiO3 heterostructure. (b) H2 evolution rate. (c) Working mechanism of the Al/BaTiO3 heterojunction showing the polarization. (d) Recycling performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Graphical design concept of the hybrid piezo-photocatalyst. (f) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Thus, without applying any mechanical vibration, the heterostructure shows the H2 evolution of 327 μmol h−1cm−2. But under the synergetic effect of photon and acoustic vibration energy, Al/BTO shows an H2 evolution of 657 μmol h−1cm−2, which is more than 50% that of light alone and also comparable to the hydrogen evolution ability of some reported plasmonic materials (Fig. 15b and c). Further, the stability test is performed (Fig. 15d) to know the durability of the material, which reveals that the catalyst shows 90% retention activity even after a 30 h-run, which implies that the hybrid material can be used as a highly active piezo-photocatalytic agent. If we ignore the facts such as wide bandgap and more recombination centers, it can not only boost the sluggish evolution rate and efficiency but also reduce the material cost.
Cadmium sulphide (CdS)-based nanohybrids. 
Qi An's group designed a highly sensitive hybridized soft piezo-photocatalyst, which can be driven by mild mechanical turbulences. Here, the material design plays a vital role in determining the enhanced performance as the semiconducting material is placed on a self-powered energy cushion of porous graphene–polymeric film composite (rGO–F/PVDF–HFP), which is driven by gentle mechanical vibrations from water flows. The porous self-powered cushion provides more specific surface area for catalyst loading, increases the sensitivity of bending to electricity conversion, and further, the surface modification helps in the high catalytic activity (Fig. 15e). Three types of catalysts such as TiO2 (UV active), BiOI (narrow band visible active), and CdS (H2 evolution) were deposited on the flexible cushion and the hydrogen evolution test was conducted. Among the CdS-modified systems, CdS@rGO–F/PVDF–HFP showed the best hydrogen evolution rate, i.e., 10.4 μmol h−1 g−1, which is 4 times than that of CdS loaded on an inert substrate (Fig. 15f).92 However, the efficiency is not up to the mark due to the opaque nature of the porous energy cushion, which unavoidably reduces the light penetration inside the reaction. However, the enhanced activity is attributed to the electrophotocatalytic process, where the stirring and shaking of water causes the deformation in the composite film and creates a built-in electric potential and electric charges in the interface, which reduces the charge recombination rate. Furthermore, without the application of any external input, the piezoelectric–dielectric polymer/inorganic–semiconductor composite catalytic systems can be attributed as a future solution for clean energy production.
In addition, another type-II heterojunction was designed by Xueyan Huang, where the group synthesized single-domain PbTiO3 coated with CdS particles by the hydrothermal and chemical bath method, which gave enhanced hydrogen evolution of 849 μmol h−1g−1.22 Here due to the non-centrosymmetric (PbTiO3) and visible light active (CdS) nature, the binary material shows effective response toward both the mechanical stimuli and light irradiation. As most of the non-centrosymmetric material possesses a wide-bandgap that can absorb only 4% of the solar light (i.e., UV light), it shows low efficiency. Thus, here CdS being a visible light photoactive material is chosen with the highly polarizable PbTiO3 to enhance the light-responsive characteristics with electric polarization to produce a higher quantity of H2. Here, the type II heterojunction is formed between PbTiO3 and CdS, which obstructs electron–hole recombination. This can be further manifested by introducing piezopolarization via ultrasonication. Further, the carried-out finite element simulation study indicates that binary composite shows better piezoactivity compared to the neat counterpart. The composite response toward only light is low due to low carrier mobility and faster recombination. When ultrasonication is applied, it creates built-in polarization to suppress the recombination rate of electron and holes. The higher catalytic activity observed for PbTiO3/CdS (10% CdS loading) composite is 849.0 μmol h−1 g−1, which outstrips the behavior of response on only piezo (400.6 μmol h−1 g−1) and only solar irradiation (98.9 μmol h−1 g−1). Here, they noticed that the excessive loading of CdS resulted in the reduction of the catalytic activity due to its stacked structure, which reduces the surface area.
Thus, the summary and timeline along with the recent progress toward piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution is described in Table 1 and Fig. 16, which gives an insight toward designing non-centrosymmetric photoactive materials that can match the desired requirement toward using them in practical applications.
Table 1 Recent advancements in piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution




Category of Piezo-photocatalytic system
Materials category
Catalyst design
Novelty of the material
Synthesis condition
Source for creating piezo potential
Efficiency and result
Enhancement in activity
Reference




Pristine
Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs)
CdS nanorod array on FTO substrate
Narrow band gap with excellent visible light/NIR region
Hydrothermal
Ultrasonication (27 kHz)
20 μL h−1
1.5

25



Pristine
TMCs
CdS sheets
Large specific surface area, more catalytic active sites, non-centrosymmetricity
Low-temperature hydrothermal along with oil bath treatments
Ultrasonication (50 kHz)
633 μL h−1
2.1

26



Pristine
TMCs
CdS nanosheets having thickness of 28 nm
Redox reaction active
Hydrothermal
Ultrasonication (45 kHz)
1293.62 μmol g−1 h−1
4.2

20



Pristine
Perovskites
Organo lead halide perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3)
Non-centro symmetry, defect tolerance, high ambipolar mobility, tuneable optoelectronic property, and bandgap
Anti-solvent approach
Ultrasonication
23.30 μmol h−1
6.8

28



Pristine
Perovskites
Ferroelectric R3C ZnSnO3 Nanowires
lead-free nontoxic, high spontaneous polarization value along the z-axis
Hydrothermal followed by post calcination in H2 atmosphere.
Ultrasonication
6000 μmol g−1 in 7 h
—

80



Pristine
Carbon nitride
Ultrathin graphitic carbon nitride nanosheet
Proper bandgap and band edge potential, stable, easy synthesis, strong flexo-electric property, and in-plane polarization and high piezo-electric coefficient.
Direct thermal oxidation followed by ultrasonic exfoliation
Ultrasonication
12.16 mmol g−1 h−1
1.35

83



Pristine
Sillen-Aurivillius structured perovskites
Polar Single Crystal of Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl, Br)
Lead-free non centro-symmetric materials, intense visible light absorption capacity
Co-precipitation, followed by calcination
Ultrasonication
203.7 μmol g−1 h−1
28.7

81



Pristine
Perovskites
Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3 nanospheres
Lead-free, conductive, lower toxicity
Hydrothermal method
Ultrasonication (20–80 kHz)
158 μmol g−1 h−1
2.6

82



Hybrid (Doping)
TMCs
Co-doped MoS2
Non-toxicity, highly stable, narrow bandgap for NIR region (∼1.3 eV)
Solvothermal
200 W power + 40 kHz frequency from an ultrasonic generator
1.84 mmol
4.84

21



Hybrid (Heterostructure design)
TMCs
KNbO3 nanowire coated with MoS2 nanosheet
Single crystal KNbO3 (effective charge separation) and MoS2 (visible light absorption capacity, abundant active edge sites and highly conductive)
Two-step hydrothermal
Ultrasonication
305 μmol g−1
2

23



Hybrid (Heterojunction)
Metal oxides
TiO2/ZnO nanowires
Environment-friendly, high photocatalytic efficiency, low cost
Twostep hydrothermal
Ultrasonication of 50 W power having 40 kHz frequency
15.259 μmol g−1
1.54

24



Hybrid (Heterostructure)
Metal oxide
Plasmonic heterostructure of Al/BaTiO3 on Ti foams
Plasmonic material, tunable optical property, high surface charge carrier concentration
Hydrothermal
Vibration from motor coupling with a magnet
657 μmol h−1 cm−2
2

27



Hybrid (Composite)
Metal oxide
Single-domain PbTiO3 coated with CdS
Non-centrosymmetricity and more visible light photoactive component
Hydrothermal and chemical bath method
Ultrasonication
849.0 μmol h−1 g−1
8.5

22



Hybrid (Composite)
Polymer/inorganic-semiconductor composite
CdS@rGO–F/PVDF–HFP
Porous self-powered cushion, more specific surface area, sensitive toward bending to electricity conversion, and surface modification
Dipping hydrolysis method
Mild stirring and shaking in water
10.4 mmol h−1 g−1
4

92





 Fig. 16  Scheme representing the timeline of recent progress along with the future outlook. 

4. Summary and Future outlook
In this review, we have outlined the recent advancements in the domain of piezo-photo-assisted hydrogen generation. We have extensively discussed various fundamental aspects such as piezoelectric polarization, piezocatalysis, piezo-photocatalysis and piezo-phototronic. The detailed mechanism of the utilization of localized piezoelectric polarization to modulate the generation, separation, transportation, and recombination processes of the carriers at the junctions and interfaces has been explained in detail. In addition, various sources of mechanical perturbation such as ultrahigh frequency sonication, high-rate mechanical stirring, low-frequency vertex shear force, physical bending/mechanical sliding/brushing, and thermal stress utilized to create the piezoelectric potential has been discussed. Most importantly, various strategies utilized to boost the sluggish photocatalytic hydrogen evolution have been extensively covered.
Although remarkable progress has been recently made on piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen generation, it is still in the early stages of development. Furthermore, deeper understanding is needed to be developed about various fundamental aspects affecting piezophotocatalysts, modulation, and tuning of band edge positions. We envision that for the further development in this field, extensive efforts have to be made to develop novel highly efficient piezo-photocatalytic materials, which are supersensitive to the applied mechanical stimuli. Novel strategies such as elemental substitution, surface decoration, and microstructure modulation can be adopted to design material systems with improved piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Moreover, further studies are required on the selective deposition/engineering of photoactive semiconductors onto piezoelectric materials, where the sluggish photocatalytic activity can be effectively tuned by the inherent polarization effect of piezomaterials. This will facilitate the effective separation of excitons and exposure of abundant active sites having excellent light absorption capability of photoactive materials. Advance in situ characterization techniques need to be developed to understand the reaction mechanism, real-time effect of generation of charge carriers, recombination, and separation when manipulated by a built-in electric field when subjected to mechanical perturbation. Furthermore, the effect of temperature needs to be understood as all of the piezoelectric materials are pyroelectric in nature and mechanical stimuli such as sonication increase the thermal energy of the materials. Various fundamental aspects of piezo-phototronic effect, such as the height of the Schottky barrier, contact formation, defects, and thickness of space charge region at the contact interface that can also affect the efficiency of the piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution should be explored. Thus, the future development of the field demands effective collaboration among researchers to a develop deeper understanding of the underlying mechanism, create novel and efficient material system, and develop technology to further improve the domain of hydrogen evolution.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to S‘O’A (Deemed to be University) management for their constant support and motivation.
References
C. Zou, Q. Zhao, G. Zhang and B. Xiong, Nat. Gas Ind. B, 2016, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
A. Azam, M. Rafiq, M. Shafique, H. Zhang, M. Ateeq and J. Yuan, Sustainable Energy Technol. Assess., 2021, 44, 100991 CrossRef .
O. B. Popovicheva, E. D. Kireeva, N. K. Shonija and T. D. Khokhlova, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 10503–10511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, Y. Xiong, R. Hai, F. Yu and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 4554–4563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Laurent, S. I. Olsen and M. Z. Hauschild, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 4100–4108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ruiz, L. Rincón, R. R. Contreras, C. Sidney and J. Almarza, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 19003–19012 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Wallace and C. A. Ward, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1983, 8, 255–268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and S. K. Ghoshal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 1151–1158 CrossRef CAS .
I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. Velazquez Abad, P. Balcombe, P. E. Dodds, P. Ekins, N. Shah and K. R. Ward, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 463–491 RSC .
T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 387–399 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pornrungroj, V. Andrei, M. Rahaman, C. Uswachoke, H. J. Joyce, D. S. Wright and E. Reisner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2008182 Search PubMed .
Z. Ni, H. Wen, S. Zhang, R. Guo, N. Su, X. Liu and C. Liu, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 4962–4999 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srivastava, J. P. Thomas, M. A. Rahman, M. Abd-Ellah, M. Mohapatra, D. Pradhan, N. F. Heinig and K. T. Leung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11891–11898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Srinivasan and J. V. Michael, Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 2006, 38, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Wang, D. Y. C. Leung, M. K. H. Leung and M. Ni, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 845–853 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chang and J. A. LaVerne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8267–8271 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, S. Tu, N. Tian, T. Ma, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 16309–16328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, S. Sun, Y. Chen, P. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tu, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Hu, T. Zhang, T. Ma and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005158 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Abbood, A. Alabadi, A. B. Al-Hawash, A. A. Abbood and K. Huang, Catal. Lett., 2020, 150, 3059–3070 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Q. Liu, K.-Z. Huang, W.-X. Liu, Z.-D. Meng and L. Luo, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 14291–14298 RSC .
X. Huang, R. Lei, J. Yuan, F. Gao, C. Jiang, W. Feng, J. Zhuang and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jia, Y. Su, B. Zhang, Z. Zhao, S. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Li, M. Xu and R. Ren, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7690–7700 RSC .
Z. Wang, T. Hu, H. He, Y. Fu, X. Zhang, J. Sun, L. Xing, B. Liu, Y. Zhang and X. Xue, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10162–10172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z.-B. Fang, W. Feng, K. Wang, X. Huang and P. Liu, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3397–3401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Huang, F. Gao, L. Zhang, Q. Tian, Z.-B. Fang and P. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9085–9090 RSC .
L. Guo, C. Zhong, J. Cao, Y. Hao, M. Lei, K. Bi, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 513–520 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Zuo, J. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Shen, B. Qiu, L. Cai, F. Zhou, S. P. Lau and Y. Chai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901801 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Das, S. Patnaik, S. Mansingh, A. Behera, A. Mohanty, C. Acharya and K. M. Parida, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 551–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Babu and B. Naik, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 10824–10834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Swain, S. Sultana and K. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9941–9955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kandi, S. Martha, A. Thirumurugan and K. M. Parida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4834–4849 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martha, S. Mansingh, K. M. Parida and A. Thirumurugan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1641–1653 RSC .
S. Mansingh, D. K. Padhi and K. M. Parida, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 14133–14146 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Sahoo, S. Patnaik, D. Rath, B. Nanda and K. Parida, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 112602–112613 RSC .
G. Mishra, K. M. Parida and S. K. Singh, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Subudhi, G. Swain, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 9824–9837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nashim and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18405–18412 RSC .
S. Patnaik, D. P. Sahoo, L. Mohapatra, S. Martha and K. Parida, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1687–1701 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, B. Wang, F. Huang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7526–7536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Ghasemian, T. Daeneke, Z. Shahrbabaki, J. Yang and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2875–2901 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. Liu, R. L. Withers, Y. Wan, Z. Li and Z. Xu, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 52006 CrossRef .
J. Sun, Q. Hua, R. Zhou, D. Li, W. Guo, X. Li, G. Hu, C. Shan, Q. Meng, L. Dong, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4507–4513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Q. Yang, S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 257–275 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4632–4646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16031 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, M. Chen, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11341–11354 RSC .
C. Pan, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9303–9359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, D. Li, Q. Hua, K. Ji, W. Sun, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 4062–4070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Singh and S. Dutta, Fuel, 2018, 220, 607–620 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marzo, S. K. Pagire, O. Reiser and B. König, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10034–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kumar, U. Maitra, V. I. Hegde, U. V. Waghmare, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10512–10519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vishnoi, U. Gupta, R. Pandey and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6631–6637 RSC .
S. R. Lingampalli, U. K. Gautam and C. N. R. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3589–3594 RSC .
M. Rahman, H. Tian and T. Edvinsson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16278–16293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ganguly, M. Harb, Z. Cao, L. Cavallo, A. Breen, S. Dervin, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1687–1709 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, K. H. Chu, B. Wang, D. Wu, H. Xie, G. Huang, H. Y. Yip and P. K. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11657–11660 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Wei and W. Shangguan, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6177–6189 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Thornton and D. Raftery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2426–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cui, F. Xue, W.-J. Hu and L.-J. Li, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 18 CrossRef .
Y. Tokura and N. Nagaosa, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3740 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 540–552 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808214 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, S. Bae, W. Kim, M. J. Jeong, S. H. Lee, C.-L. Lee, W. K. Choi, J. Y. Hwang, J. H. Park and D. I. Son, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 258–266 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, H. Huang, L. Guo, Y. Zhang and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10061–10073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1063–1079 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2014, 1, 62–90 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2636–2643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Liu, J. Xiong, J. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Peng, A. Yu, A. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1381–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, S. Niu, Y. Ding, L. Dong, R. Yu, Y. Liu, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3302–3307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cao, X. Xie, Y. Zeng, S. Shi, G. Wang, L. Yang, C.-Z. Wang and S. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 550–558 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, M. Peng, A. Yu, J. Liu, M. Song, Y. Zhang and J. Zhai, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Ding, M. Wu, Y. Zhou, C. Diao, H. Zheng, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10723–10732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, D. Lin, Z. Chen, Z. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Li, Z. Xu, Q. Huang, X. Liao, L.-Q. Chen, T. R. Shrout and S. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 349–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lan, J. Feng, Y. Xiong, S. Tian, S. Liu and L. Kong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 6560–6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, X. Wang, W. Wu, C. Pan, Y. Bando, N. Fukata, Y. Hu, W. Peng, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5277–5284 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, Y. Fang, R. Li, H. Xiao, J. Crowley, C. Wang, T. J. White, W. A. Goddard III, Z. Wang, T. Baikie and J. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6540–6544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, B. Daiber, J. M. Frost, S. A. Mann, E. C. Garnett, A. Walsh and B. Ehrler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 509–515 RSC .
Y.-C. Wang and J. M. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907619 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, H. Huang, F. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Yu and T. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, L. Wei, S. Li, L. Zhu, Y. Su, Y. Liu, Y. Bu, Y. Lin, W. Liu and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16238–16245 RSC .
C. Hu, F. Chen, Y. Wang, N. Tian, T. Ma, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-J. Ng, L. K. Putri, X. Y. Kong, Y. W. Teh, P. Pasbakhsh and S.-P. Chai, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1801294 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, Y. Yin, J. Peng, Y. Wu, G. G. Andersson and F. J. Beck, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2001121 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Maijenburg, E. J. B. Rodijk, M. G. Maas, M. Enculescu, D. H. A. Blank and J. E. ten Elshof, Small, 2011, 7, 2709–2713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, W. Zang, P. Deng, Q. Wang, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 414–422 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, N. Qin and D. Bao, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R.-S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 46401 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, W. Zhou, Z. Li, S. Koul, A. Kushima and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6335–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tong, Y. Zhang, H. Huang, K. Xiao, S. Yu, Y. Zhou, L. Liu, H. Li, L. Liu, T. Huang, M. Li, Q. Zhang, R. Du and Q. An, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 513–523 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Ritik Mohanty
	Ritik Mohanty is currently a PhD scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at the Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, S‘O’A Deemed to be University. He obtained his Integrated Master of Science degree in Applied Physics from the College of Engineering and Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. During his masters, he was also a summer project student at the National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar. His research focuses mainly on piezo-assisted energy generation and electrochemical energy storage systems.

Sriram Mansingh
	Dr Sriram Mansingh received his BSc Hons. (2nd Rank), MSc, and MPhil (1st Rank) from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, India. Then, he completed his PhD degree from the Siksha O Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, India under the guidance of Prof. Kulamani Parida. His current research mainly focuses on the development of nanostructured materials such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, phosphides, layered materials and their application towards water splitting, N2 fixation, and organic/inorganic pollutant detoxification.

Kaushik Parida
	Dr Kaushik Parida received his Master's degree from the School of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science of the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India. He received his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Pooi See Lee at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Recently, he has joined the Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Mohali as a scientist. His research focuses on deformable electronics, piezoelectrics and triboelectric energy harvesters.

Kulamani Parida
	Prof. Kulamani Parida is working as a Distinguished Professor in Chemistry and the Director, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, Deemed to be University, he worked for 37 years at CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in different capacities, and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry Department. His current research is focused on developing nano-structured functional materials to manage energy and environmental issues.

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of piezoelectric materials (a) without any applied stretch and strain, with (b) applied stretch and (c) applied stress.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the coupling effect of photocatalysis and piezocatalysis towards H2 evolution.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic outline of the systems proposed to date regarding piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.	 

 	Fig. 4  Scheme of a pristine semiconducting material showing piezo-photocatalytic hydrogen evolution subjected to solar irradiation. Here, the blue dotted curves represent the material structure before strain.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM images of CdS. (b) Schematic of the proposed mechanism of piezo-photocatalytic performance under light and ultrasonication. (c) Rate of production of hydrogen in different conditions. (d) The frequency-dependent difference in H2 production rate standardized by acoustic intensity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Rate of H2 evolution subjected to different conditions. (b) Hysteresis loop (phase). (c) Butterfly loop (amplitude) of the prepared sample on the FTO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Surface topography. (b) PFM amplitude of MAPbI3. (c) Time-dependent H2 evolution comparing the piezo, photo and piezo-photocatalytic technique. (d) The calculated density of states along with the band alignment of MAPbI3 subjected to different mechanical pressures. (e) Cycling performance test evaluation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  H2 evolution of ZnSnO3 for each annealed condition (a) under only light, (b) under only sonication, and (c) under the synergistic effect of light and ultrasonication. (d) Stability test of the 3H–ZnSnO3 NW sample for 7 h of the reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) H2 yield for Pt/Bi4NbO8Br and Pt/Bi4NbO2 Br–S with Pt-deposited subjected to light and light with ultrasonication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Piezoresponse phase hysteresis loop and amplitude butterfly loop for BNT. (b) H2 evolution under different reaction conditions. (c) Cyclic performance test for piezo-photocatalytic H2 evolution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic synthetic procedure for ultrathin g-C3N4. (e) H2 evolution rate. (f) Production rate for bulk and ultrathin g-C3N4 subjected to light, ultrasonication and both light and ultrasonication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of the piezoeffect at the p–n or type II junction corresponding to (a) tensile strain and (b) compressive strain. Effect of (c) tensile strain and (d) compressive strain in a Z-scheme-based p–n junction. Here, the dashed grey line represents the initial band edge without any strain while the solid blue line represents the band edge under strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  Piezo effect at the metal–semiconductor contact corresponding to (a) tensile strain and (b) compressive strain. Here, the dashed grey line represents the initial band edge without any strain while the solid blue line represents the band edge under strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Effect of cobalt doping on MoS2 towards hydrogen evolution. (b) Blank and controlled test towards hydrogen yield 1-without catalyst, 2-only catalyst without NIR and sonication, 3-catalyst + NIR, 4-catalyst + sonication, and 5-catalyst + sonication + NIR. (c) Piezo-current signals (I–t curve) by setting the potential of the top electrode as 0 V vs. the working electrode or reference electrode a-MoS2 (Co doped), b-MoS2 (pristine). Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the KNbO3/MoS2 heterostructure exhibiting piezo-photocatalysis. (b, c) H2 evolution for different samples under different conditions. (d) Mechanism displaying the charge flow dynamics and band bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of (a) the synthesis process of TiO2/ZnO on mesh substrate. (b) Reactor design. (c, d) Mechanism of piezo-photocatalysis showing band alignment. (e, f) H2 evolution curves of the samples under different reaction conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the Al/BaTiO3 heterostructure. (b) H2 evolution rate. (c) Working mechanism of the Al/BaTiO3 heterojunction showing the polarization. (d) Recycling performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Graphical design concept of the hybrid piezo-photocatalyst. (f) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

Pristine	Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs)	CdS nanorod array on FTO substrate	Narrow band gap with excellent visible light/NIR region	Hydrothermal	Ultrasonication (27 kHz)	20 μL h−1	1.5	
25

Pristine	TMCs	CdS sheets	Large specific surface area, more catalytic active sites, non-centrosymmetricity	Low-temperature hydrothermal along with oil bath treatments	Ultrasonication (50 kHz)	633 μL h−1	2.1	
26

Pristine	TMCs	CdS nanosheets having thickness of 28 nm	Redox reaction active	Hydrothermal	Ultrasonication (45 kHz)	1293.62 μmol g−1 h−1	4.2	
20

Pristine	Perovskites	Organo lead halide perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3)	Non-centro symmetry, defect tolerance, high ambipolar mobility, tuneable optoelectronic property, and bandgap	Anti-solvent approach	Ultrasonication	23.30 μmol h−1	6.8	
28

Pristine	Perovskites	Ferroelectric R3C ZnSnO3 Nanowires	lead-free nontoxic, high spontaneous polarization value along the z-axis	Hydrothermal followed by post calcination in H2 atmosphere.	Ultrasonication	6000 μmol g−1 in 7 h	—	
80

Pristine	Carbon nitride	Ultrathin graphitic carbon nitride nanosheet	Proper bandgap and band edge potential, stable, easy synthesis, strong flexo-electric property, and in-plane polarization and high piezo-electric coefficient.	Direct thermal oxidation followed by ultrasonic exfoliation	Ultrasonication	12.16 mmol g−1 h−1	1.35	
83

Pristine	Sillen-Aurivillius structured perovskites	Polar Single Crystal of Bi4NbO8X (X = Cl, Br)	Lead-free non centro-symmetric materials, intense visible light absorption capacity	Co-precipitation, followed by calcination	Ultrasonication	203.7 μmol g−1 h−1	28.7	
81

Pristine	Perovskites	Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3 nanospheres	Lead-free, conductive, lower toxicity	Hydrothermal method	Ultrasonication (20–80 kHz)	158 μmol g−1 h−1	2.6	
82

Hybrid (Doping)	TMCs	Co-doped MoS2	Non-toxicity, highly stable, narrow bandgap for NIR region (∼1.3 eV)	Solvothermal	200 W power + 40 kHz frequency from an ultrasonic generator	1.84 mmol	4.84	
21

Hybrid (Heterostructure design)	TMCs	KNbO3 nanowire coated with MoS2 nanosheet	Single crystal KNbO3 (effective charge separation) and MoS2 (visible light absorption capacity, abundant active edge sites and highly conductive)	Two-step hydrothermal	Ultrasonication	305 μmol g−1	2	
23

Hybrid (Heterojunction)	Metal oxides	TiO2/ZnO nanowires	Environment-friendly, high photocatalytic efficiency, low cost	Twostep hydrothermal	Ultrasonication of 50 W power having 40 kHz frequency	15.259 μmol g−1	1.54	
24

Hybrid (Heterostructure)	Metal oxide	Plasmonic heterostructure of Al/BaTiO3 on Ti foams	Plasmonic material, tunable optical property, high surface charge carrier concentration	Hydrothermal	Vibration from motor coupling with a magnet	657 μmol h−1 cm−2	2	
27

Hybrid (Composite)	Metal oxide	Single-domain PbTiO3 coated with CdS	Non-centrosymmetricity and more visible light photoactive component	Hydrothermal and chemical bath method	Ultrasonication	849.0 μmol h−1 g−1	8.5	
22

Hybrid (Composite)	Polymer/inorganic-semiconductor composite	CdS@rGO–F/PVDF–HFP	Porous self-powered cushion, more specific surface area, sensitive toward bending to electricity conversion, and surface modification	Dipping hydrolysis method	Mild stirring and shaking in water	10.4 mmol h−1 g−1	4	
92


 	Fig. 16  Scheme representing the timeline of recent progress along with the future outlook.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
