The potential sunlight harvesting efficiency of carbon nanotube solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE41731J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE41731J
(Analysis)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2572-2577Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThe potential sunlight harvesting efficiency of carbon nanotube solar cells†

        
          
            Daniel David 
            Tune
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Joseph George 
            Shapter
          
        
      
Centre for Nanoscale Science & Technology, School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, The Flinders University of South Australia, SA 5042, Australia. E-mail: daniel.tune@flinders.edu.au;  Fax: +61 8201 3031;   Tel: +61 8201 3038
Received 
      21st May 2013
    , Accepted 3rd July 2013First published on 3rd July 2013AbstractElsewhere, laboratory-scale solar cells have been demonstrated which show clear evidence of the successful exploitation of semiconducting single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) as primary absorbers of sunlight energy. The unique properties of SWNTs may allow for high efficiency solar cell devices however little progress has been made to quantify this. Herein we provide an in-depth analysis of the potential of SWNTs to harvest sunlight, using the best currently available data to simulate the absorption properties of different semiconducting SWNT species and thus calculating a species-dependent potential sunlight harvesting efficiency. The same model is then used to simulate relevant tandem cell scenarios, predicting a conservative estimate of the sunlight harvesting potential of ∼28% for a multijunction device absorbing in the visible and ∼19% for a similar device absorbing primarily in the infrared, whilst minimising absorption in the visible.

Broader context
The performance and cost limitations of silicon-based photovoltaics are well known and understood and great effort is being devoted to the development of alternative or complementary technologies. In recent years the potential of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) to be used as light harvesting elements in photovoltaic systems has been broadly alluded to in many research papers, and has indeed been demonstrated in several complete solar cell devices. SWNTs are incredibly resistant to physical or chemical degradation and the potential performance and cost advantages of using this material for future solar cell applications are numerous. However the optical absorption properties are fundamentally different to those of other photovoltaic materials and this is complicated by the large number of unique nanotube species, each with own peculiar optical absorption spectra.

Shockley and Queisser used detailed balance calculations to establish a thermodynamic limit to the power conversion efficiency of a single junction, bulk semiconductor solar cell and determined the dependence of this limit on the semiconductor bandgap.7 However, two of the assumptions upon which those calculations are based do not apply in the case of semiconducting SWNTs (s-SWNTs). The first is that all photons with energy greater than the semiconductor bandgap are absorbed. This assumes a smooth continuum of states above and below the gap, which is the case for bulk semiconductors such as silicon but not so for s-SWNTs which exhibit sharp Van Hove singularities (VHS) in their one dimensional density of states (DOS), yielding multiple discrete optical transitions between complementary states above and below the gap. Such transitions are denoted Sii, where ii denotes a transition from the ith VHS below the gap to the ith VHS above it i.e. S11, S22, etc. The second assumption is that the absorption of one photon produces one exciton. Whilst this is true for bulk semiconductors, s-SWNTs have been shown to exhibit quantum efficiencies greater than unity, indicating multiple exciton generation from single photons.8,9
Among other factors, the breakdown of the Shockley–Queisser model due to the non-monotonic nature of the SWNT DOS limits us in establishing a detailed balance limit of efficiency for SWNT-based solar cells. However, the absorption properties of SWNTs are known, as is the spectrum of terrestrial solar radiation. Thus, with some reasonable assumptions, it is possible to use a much simplified model to estimate the proportion of the solar spectrum that can be harvested by each s-SWNT species. There not only exists a variety of s-SWNT species with bandgaps within the useful range of the Sun's radiation but this range is spanned almost entirely by the different species' individual absorption features. This suggests the possibility of tailoring a SWNT-based solar cell's absorption profile to suit demand, if functional solar cell device architectures can be engineered to exploit SWNTs for light harvesting. For us, a candidate structure was the carbon nanotube-silicon solar cell,10 but we have recently reported measurements indicating that the nanotubes do not contribute to photocurrent generation in these devices.11 Meanwhile, interest in using SWNTs directly for light harvesting in other solar cell device architectures is on-going12 and significant progress is being made in this rapidly emerging field.1–6,13 Considering the recent successful realisation of SWNT-based solar cells, the inadequacies of the SQ model for SWNT-based photovoltaics and the growing interest in the field, there is a clear need for quantitative analysis and comparison of the potential of different s-SWNT species to absorb sunlight.
This work presents a numerical simulation of s-SWNT absorption properties, based on empirical measurement, and then a careful analysis of the overlap between the simulated absorption properties of 70 different s-SWNTs and the terrestrial solar spectrum. The word ‘efficiency' is used in this work, but it must not be confused with the wavelength resolved internal or external quantum efficiency, which are assumed to be one for all energies (see Method). Rather, it is the maximum power conversion efficiency of a carbon nanotube solar cell calculated from the spectral overlap. The simulation is then used to predict the optimal (n,m) species composition of two carbon nanotube based tandem solar cells with real world significance. An analysis of critical photovoltaic device parameters such as the open circuit voltage, exciton dissociation probability, series resistance, etc., would also be helpful but such parameters are very much device and architecture-specific, whereas this work is necessarily device-independent. For example, the exciton dissociation probability will depend on the nature, geometry and quality of the junction where exciton dissociation occurs, and on the physical and electronic characteristics of whatever material the other element of the junction is composed of. The component of the series resistance arising due to the nanotube layer(s) will depend on such things as the thickness, density, composition, metallicity and degree of alignment of the nanotubes and, of course, the component of the series resistance arising due to the other components of a particular device in question will depend on what those components are and how they are physically and electronically related to the nanotubes. Other characteristics of a carbon nanotube based solar cell device will similarly depend greatly on the specific photovoltaic architecture employed in fabrication e.g. photoelectrochemical, organic, polymer, solid state, etc. The absorption characteristics of the nanotubes as simulated, the relative differences between the different nanotubes species, and their overlap with the terrestrial solar spectrum should, however, be the same whatever the particular device structure.

Fig. 1A shows an example of the simulation output, using one of the most commonly purified and investigated s-SWNT species – the (6,5) nanotube. Combining the simulation results from all 70 species, and considering only S11 absorption (Fig. 1B), there is an obvious dependence of the potential sunlight harvesting efficiency on bandgap energy, with the higher bandgap species generally exhibiting a greater harvesting potential. This is expected since the power contained in the solar radiation is more concentrated in the higher energy region. However, there are some significant deviations from the trend. For example, the (n,m) species found in a vertical line from (13,0) to (9,8) (roughly corresponding to SWNTs of the same diameter/bandgap) show markedly reduced sunlight harvesting potential compared to their adjacent species. These species all have a tube diameter of ∼1 nm and bandgap of ∼0.9 eV, which overlaps the region where there is reduced irradiance due to atmospheric absorption effects (water and CO2) in the terrestrial solar spectrum. A consideration of only S22 absorption (Fig. 1C) also shows a strong dependence on the transition energy. More so than for S11, there are some species for which the transition energy is high enough into the blue/UV region to elicit a reduced harvesting potential due to overlap with the region of the terrestrial solar spectrum where irradiance is reduced by ozone. Naturally, when combining S11 and S22 (Fig. 1D), there is the dependence on transition energy and the species which exhibited a poor harvesting potential in one or both of the previous analyses are similarly poor in the combined analysis.
 Fig. 1  (A) The simulation output for the (6,resistance arising due to the nanotube layer(s) will depend on such things as the thickness, density, composition, metallicity and degree of alignment of the nanotubes and, of course, the component of the series resistance arising due to the other components of a particular device in question will depend on what those components are and how they are physically and electronically related to the nanotubes. Other characteristics of a carbon nanotube based solar cell device will similarly depend greatly on the specific photovoltaic architecture employed in fabrication e.g. photoelectrochemical, organic, polymer, solid state, etc. The absorption characteristics of the nanotubes as simulated, the relative differences between the different nanotubes species, and their overlap with the terrestrial solar spectrum should, however, be the same whatever the particular device structure.5) nanotube species showing both S11 and S22 absorption features overlaid with the terrestrial solar reference spectrum (AM1.5G). The apparent height of the S22 peak is much larger than S11, however this is simply due to the nanotube absorptance being multiplied by larger values of the spectral irradiance in the higher energy region. A full graphical list of the simulation output for all of the (n,m) species considered herein can be found in Fig. S1.† Note that the nanotube absorption profile is necessarily expressed as absorptance (see Method). Inset shows the same nanotube absorption profile presented on the more familiar logarithmic absorbance scale. (B) The potential efficiency, or percentage of AM1.5G sunlight harvested, as a function of (n,m) species for carriers photogenerated via the S11 optical transition. Inset shows a schematic of the one dimensional density of states of a semiconducting single walled carbon nanotube showing the S11 optical transition between the upper valance band (v1) and lower conduction band (c1). (C) The efficiency as a function of (n,m) species for carriers photogenerated via the S22 optical transition (then relaxed back to S11 before extraction). Inset shows a schematic of the one dimensional density of states of a semiconducting single walled carbon nanotube showing the S22 optical transition between the second valance (v2) and conduction (c2) bands. (D) The efficiency as a function of (n,m) species, if the solar cell is considered to be capable of simultaneously extracting carriers photogenerated via both the S11 and S22 optical transitions. Inset shows a schematic of the ideal s-SWNT solar cell considered in the model, consisting simply of a s-SWNT absorber layer, a mechanism for separating photogenerated excitons into free electrons and holes and a mechanism for extracting these into an external circuit to do work. 
The dependence of the potential power conversion efficiency on diameter (Fig. 2A) clearly illustrates large deviations from the familiar bandgap/diameter relationship seen in the Kataura plot (Fig. 2B). In fact, although the combination of S11 and S22 reduces the difference between the extremes found when considering only S11 or S22, it has exaggerated the differences between some SWNTs with almost identical diameters. This large difference in sunlight harvesting potential between SWNTs of almost identical diameter dramatically demonstrates the importance of choosing appropriate (n,m) species to maximise performance in solar cell applications. Since the difference is caused by the absorption of different regions of the solar spectrum, this could be advantageous in the context of providing a degree of choice in the absorption profile whilst maintaining compatibility with other elements of a solar cell which may limit the range of SWNT diameters that can be used e.g. ensuring steric compatibility with wrapping polymers in organic photovoltaics.
 Fig. 2  (A) The dependence of the potential sunlight harvesting efficiency on s-SWNT diameter. (B) The dependence of the S11 and S22 transition energies on s-SWNT diameter. 
It is necessary for the SWNT absorber layer not to contain species of differing bandgap or, depending on the structure of the particular device in question, either all carriers will be extracted at a maximum electric potential corresponding to the lowest bandgap (after losing any extra energy) or the species with the smallest gap will act as a recombination trap for the others.13 Thus, mixing species to increase the absorption range of a single absorber layer is unhelpful. However, SWNTs could be deployed in multijunction devices, either with other absorber layers composed of different (n,m) species, or in conjunction with entirely different absorbing materials. For example, a SWNT based solar cell composed of the appropriate (n,m) species could be fabricated behind an organic bulk heterojunction solar cell to scavenge energy from regions of the solar spectrum that cannot be captured by the primary cell, or to recapture a portion of the energy lost from the primary cell via electroluminescence.14 Clearly, the large range of nanotube species allows for a high degree of flexibility in matching absorption profiles to maximise overall device efficiency.
To examine the multijunction proposition, two s-SWNT tandem solar cells were simulated (Fig. 3), with component species chosen for either maximum power absorption, with no constraint on the wavelength range, or infrared-only absorption. It is important to note here that although there will be an unavoidable recombination rate that will lower overall device efficiency, there will be no further losses associated with the relaxation of excitons to the fundamental band edge as with bulk semiconductors. This is because, naturally in the case of S11, this is not an issue and, in the case of S22, such relaxation losses have already been taken into account in the simulation. It must also be noted that the model is deliberately conservative in setting the optical depth, τ = 1.36 and keeping the fwhm of the absorption features to a minimum corresponding to a singly dispersed approximation. In a real device, such single tube dispersion is unlikely and any bundling of nanotubes will significantly increase the fwhm. A doubling of τ in the first tandem cell, corresponding to increasing the thickness or nanotube density of the absorber layers in a real device, would increase the potential sunlight harvesting efficiency to 41.9% whilst a tripling would yield 49.5%. A doubling of τ in the second tandem cell would increase the calculated efficiency from 19.0% to 30.0%, without significantly altering the range of the absorption, although it would also increase undesirable S33 absorption in the visible. A tripling of τ in this case would yield 35.7%.
 Fig. 3  (A) A tandem solar cell consisting of four individual cells of different (n,m) species, where the combination of species has been chosen to provide maximum power absorption, yielding a calculated potential sunlight harvesting efficiency of 28.3% in this analysis. (C) A similar tandem solar cell to (A), but where the combination of species has been chosen to maximise absorption in the infrared, yielding 19.0% efficiency, whilst minimising absorption of visible light (remembering that there will still be some absorption in the visible due to S33 which is not considered herein). This is not possible with bulk semiconductors since, if the bandgap is in the IR, then the material will be opaque to visible light. Such capability could allow for the fabrication of IR absorbing, building integrated photovoltaic windows. (B) and (D) show the contributions of the different component nanotube species which give rise to the combined tandem cell absorption profiles shown in (A) and (C), respectively. 
Considering the deliberately conservative nature of the model used and the ease with which the absorption by SWNTs could be increased in real devices, the simulated tandem solar cell efficiencies clearly demonstrate the impressive sunlight harvesting potential of SWNTs for solar cell applications. This is in addition to an already well-established range of desirable characteristics and the on-going development of new and refined processes and material configurations, for example, the large scale separation of single species material15,16 and the fabrication of super aligned nanotube films.17–19 Of course, the widespread availability of single species material will finally allow the full potential of single walled carbon nanotubes to be unlocked in a variety of fields, not to mention being essential for the application of the work presented here. Nanotube film super alignment will likely lead to new or highly improved bulk properties arising from the added dimension of periodicity in the material due to extension of the 1D confinement of the nanotube wavefunction in a very highly aligned film of homogeneous (n,m) species composition; no longer a collection of randomly aligned ‘wires’ but still not quite a bulk crystalline material either. We anticipate that the future development of aligned nanotube materials will bring many exciting new possibilities in this and other fields.
Whilst these simulations are, to the best of our knowledge, the first attempts to quantify the potential of the different s-SWNT species to harvest sunlight they do not, and are not intended to, provide a definitive limit on SWNT-based solar cell efficiency. Rather, they constitute a comparison between species to inform and direct future research in this area. Among the many practical challenges to realising the promise of SWNT-based solar cells indicated in this work are; refining and scaling up the processes to separate nanotubes by (n,m) species,15,16 incorporating the effects of the observed transition energy red shifts and peak broadening for SWNTs in bundles20 and the necessary control of these in real devices via bundle size optimisation, as well as suppression or exploitation of the efficient nonradiative exciton recombination pathways that lead to the observed low quantum yields in s-SWNT photoluminescence21 and will presumably hamper efforts to obtain high quantum efficiencies from solar cell devices. However, despite these challenges, the simulations presented herein indicate great potential and we hope that this Analysis further stimulates work in this exciting new field, as well as providing a powerful resource for the practical development of future SWNT-based photovoltaics.
Method
Sunlight (AM1.5G) was modelled according to the ASTM G-173-03 reference solar spectral irradiance data set.22 An ideal solar cell was considered, consisting of a s-SWNT absorber layer, a mechanism for separating photogenerated excitons into free electrons and holes and a mechanism for extracting these into an external circuit to do work. The solar cell was considered to be optically transparent and have zero reflectivity in the modelled range of the Sun's output except for the absorption profile of the absorber layer. Neither electrical nor recombination losses were considered thus the quantum efficiency was one at all energies. All s-SWNTs with bandgaps greater than 0.7 eV and diameters greater than 0.45 nm were modelled, with the transition energies E(n,m)11 and E(n,m)22 taken from ref. 23 and 24, respectively. As per ref. 25, each nanotube absorption peak corresponding to an optical transition was modelled in energy space as a Voigt line profile (V(n,m)ii(E)); a convolution of a Lorentzian (L(n,m)ii(E)), representing natural line broadening due to uncertainty in particle lifetimes, and a Gaussian (G(n,m)ii(E)), representing Doppler broadening due to the distribution of particle velocities. These were expressed as  where γ is the half-width-at-half-maximum (hwhm) and  where σ is the standard deviation. The transition energy, E(n,m)ii, is thus the median of the Lorentzian component and the mean of the Gaussian component. The full-width-at-half-maxima (fwhm) of the Gaussian (ΓG,ii) and Lorentzian (ΓL,ii) components are related to the fwhm of the Voigt (ΓV,ii) by:26. The broadening processes are energy dependent however the fwhm of nanotube absorption peaks are not explicitly known thus we have set, empirically, ΓV,ii = 0.067 × E(n,m)ii−0.02 yielding ∼27 meV for E(n,m)ii = 0.7 eV, increasing to ∼114 meV for E(n,m)ii = 2 eV, which is in agreement with ref. 27. Each nanotube absorption peak was thus simulated as; V(n,m)ii(E) = wl × L(n,m)ii(E)+wg × G(n,m)ii(E) where wl and wg are the weightings of the Lorentzian and Gaussian components, respectively, and we have set wg = 0.4 as an empirical fit to measurements. An assumption that must be made is the optical depth, τ, of the absorber layer (at E(n,m)ii). A semi-infinite τ could be chosen so as to maximise absorption in the simulation but this would be impractical in a real device. One could simply set τ equal to unity however a more realistic situation would be that an optically deeper absorber layer is used such that the maximum absorption is more than that required to absorb all incident radiation at the peak energy, thus we have set τ = 1 + 1/e (τ ∼ 1.36). The S11 and S22 optical transitions were considered, thus the absorption profile of the s-SWNT absorber layer is; χ(n,m)SWNT(E) = α11 × V(n,m)11(E)+α22 × V(n,m)22(E) where α11 is a scaling factor applied such that V(n,m)11(E)max = τ and where the total absorptance at any energy could, of course, have a maximum value no greater than one. Note that the absorption profile is necessarily expressed as absorptance – the direct ratio of absorbed to incident radiation, not absorbance – the negative logarithm of the transmittance. This is because the simulation multiplies the solar spectral irradiance at each energy by the nanotube absorption to yield the power harvested at that energy and thus requires the linear absorptance scale. The more familiar absorbance plot is commonly used in optical transmittance measurements to enhance peak to valley ratio of smaller features. In ref. 25 the ratio of S11/S22 peak heights was determined to show some dependence on (n,m) species, however the dependence was not quantified for all the (n,m) species considered in this work and neither was a general form of the relationship determined (or indeed apparent) thus we could not incorporate it into the present model. We assume that the ratio of S11/S22 peak heights is constant for all (n,m) species. Thus the scaling factor α22 was applied such that  where the ratio 7/8 on an absorptance scale is that value which gives an empirically determined ratio of ∼2/7 on an absorbance scale. Because the relaxation of the S22 exciton to S11 occurs on the picosecond to sub-picosecond timescale28 and involves energy loss, and since the solar cell is considered to be optimised for extraction of carriers from S11, the energy harvested from carriers photogenerated via S22 was considered to be no more than from an S11 carrier. Due to the oscillator strength of the S33 exciton being small compared to S11 or S22, and since a complete dataset of the S33 transition energies is unavailable, light harvesting through S33 was not considered in this work. For the purposes of this analysis, the nanotubes were considered to be in the isolated, or debundled state, thus we assume no energy-dependent scattering processes contributing to a sloping background and since only s-SWNTs were considered then we also assume no broad m-SWNT π–π* contribution either, giving a flat background29 upon which χ(n,m)SWNT(E) was superimposed. The simulation of tandem cells involved simple addition of the component χ(n,m)SWNT(E) to yield χ(Tandem)SWNT(E) whilst still allowing the combined absorptance to have a maximum value no greater than unity. Only nanotube species which are known to be stable in the isolated form (not as inner walls of multi-walled nanotubes) were considered for inclusion in the tandem cells (see Fig. S1 for list†). The multijunction model does not include the effects of optical shadowing by nanotube S33 absorption which would reduce the irradiance impinging on the underlying absorber layer, thus reducing the harvesting potential. However, if the resulting excited states decay radiatively then some of the emitted photons may be recaptured via S22 or S11 in adjacent nanotubes in the same absorber layer or another. The shadowing is not an issue in the simulated tandem cells as the energies of the S33 transitions (known or predicted) are, by design, outside the range of any of the S22. Similarly, although electron–hole recombination would reduce the efficiency, since these are tandem cells the resulting electroluminescence could allow that loss to be partially regained. The model also does not include shadowing by, or sunlight harvesting due to, other solar cell elements which may be present such as fullerenes,1,3–6 silicon nanocrystals2 or organic polymers12,13 and which could significantly increase the harvesting potential if the SWNTs are correctly matched to the absorption profile of these elements. To find the portion of the solar spectrum that could potentially be harvested by a particular (n,m) species (or tandem cell), the spectral irradiance of the Sun was multiplied by the nanotube absorptance at each energy and then integrated over all energies; P(n,m)SWNT = ∫ESuneλ(E) × χ(n,m)SWNT(E)dE. The integration was performed numerically as a middle Riemann sum with a partition width equivalent to 0.5 nm, over the region 0.309 eV < E < 4.428 eV (280–4000 nm). The ASTM G-173-03 reference was linearly interpolated as required to obtain a solar spectral irradiance dataset with the necessary 0.5 nm resolution.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Dr Benjamin Flavel for providing spectral data of ultra-high purity (6,5) nanotubes used to verify the accuracy of the simulations, and Dr Adam Blanch for valuable discussions regarding s-SWNT species and the origins of their optical spectra.
Notes and references
D. J. Bindl, M.-Y. Wu, F. C. Prehn and M. S. Arnold, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 455–460 CrossRef .
V. Švrček, S. Cook, S. Kazaoui and M. Kondo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1646–1650 CrossRef .
R. M. Jain, R. Howden, K. Tvrdy, S. Shimizu, A. J. Hilmer, T. P. McNicholas, K. K. Gleason and M. S. Strano, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4436–4439 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Ramuz, M. Vosgueritchian, P. Wei, C. Wang, Y. Gao, Y. Wu, Y. Chen and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10384–10395 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bindl, M. J. Shea and M. S. Arnold, Chem. Phys., 2013, 413, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bindl and M. S. Arnold, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2390–2395 CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Gabor, Z. Zhong, K. Bosnick, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2009, 325, 1367–1371 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Khafizov, X. Tu, M. Zheng and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2381–2386 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Tune, B. S. Flavel, R. Krupke and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1043–1055 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Tune, F. Hennrich, S. Dehm, M. F. G. Klein, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, J. G. Shapter, U. Lemmer, M. M. Kappes, R. Krupke and B. S. Flavel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201200949 .
S. Cataldo, P. Salice, E. Menna and B. Pignataro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5919–5940 CAS .
R. D. Mehlenbacher, M.-Y. Wu, M. Grechko, J. E. Laaser, M. S. Arnold and M. T. Zanni, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1495–1501 CAS .
A. D. Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839 CrossRef .
H. Liu, T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1996–2003 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Flavel, M. M. Kappes, R. Krupke and F. Hennrich, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3557–3564 CrossRef CAS .
M. Engel, J. P. Small, M. Steiner, M. Freitag, A. A. Green, M. C. Hersam and P. Avouris, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2445–2452 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Jung, K. Sakimoto, T.-H. Goh, M. A. Reed and A. D. Taylor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 879–887 CAS .
G. Giancane, A. Ruland, V. Sgobba, D. Manno, A. Serra, G. M. Farinola, O. H. Omar, D. M. Guldi and L. Valli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2481–2488 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fantini, A. Jorio, M. Souza, M. S. Strano, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. A. Pimenta, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 147406 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kinder and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 155429 CrossRef .
ASTM G-173-03 Standard Tables for Reference Solar Spectral Irradiances,  2008.
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maultzsch, H. Telg, S. Reich and C. Thomsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 205438 CrossRef .
N. Nair, M. L. Usrey, W.-J. Kim, R. D. Braatz and M. S. Strano, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 7689–7696 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Olivero and R. L. Longbothum, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 1977, 17, 233–236 CrossRef .
S. Ohmori, T. Saito, M. Tange, B. Shukla, T. Okazaki, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10077–10081 CAS .
Y.-Z. Ma, J. Stenger, J. Zimmermann, S. M. Bachilo, R. E. Smalley, R. B. Weisman and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3368–3373 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Naumov, S. Ghosh, D. A. Tsyboulski, S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1639–1648 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee41731jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
The performance and cost limitations of silicon-based photovoltaics are well known and understood and great effort is being devoted to the development of alternative or complementary technologies. In recent years the potential of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) to be used as light harvesting elements in photovoltaic systems has been broadly alluded to in many research papers, and has indeed been demonstrated in several complete solar cell devices. SWNTs are incredibly resistant to physical or chemical degradation and the potential performance and cost advantages of using this material for future solar cell applications are numerous. However the optical absorption properties are fundamentally different to those of other photovoltaic materials and this is complicated by the large number of unique nanotube species, each with own peculiar optical absorption spectra.


 	Fig. 1  (A) The simulation output for the (6,resistance arising due to the nanotube layer(s) will depend on such things as the thickness, density, composition, metallicity and degree of alignment of the nanotubes and, of course, the component of the series resistance arising due to the other components of a particular device in question will depend on what those components are and how they are physically and electronically related to the nanotubes. Other characteristics of a carbon nanotube based solar cell device will similarly depend greatly on the specific photovoltaic architecture employed in fabrication e.g. photoelectrochemical, organic, polymer, solid state, etc. The absorption characteristics of the nanotubes as simulated, the relative differences between the different nanotubes species, and their overlap with the terrestrial solar spectrum should, however, be the same whatever the particular device structure.5) nanotube species showing both S11 and S22 absorption features overlaid with the terrestrial solar reference spectrum (AM1.5G). The apparent height of the S22 peak is much larger than S11, however this is simply due to the nanotube absorptance being multiplied by larger values of the spectral irradiance in the higher energy region. A full graphical list of the simulation output for all of the (n,m) species considered herein can be found in Fig. S1.† Note that the nanotube absorption profile is necessarily expressed as absorptance (see Method). Inset shows the same nanotube absorption profile presented on the more familiar logarithmic absorbance scale. (B) The potential efficiency, or percentage of AM1.5G sunlight harvested, as a function of (n,m) species for carriers photogenerated via the S11 optical transition. Inset shows a schematic of the one dimensional density of states of a semiconducting single walled carbon nanotube showing the S11 optical transition between the upper valance band (v1) and lower conduction band (c1). (C) The efficiency as a function of (n,m) species for carriers photogenerated via the S22 optical transition (then relaxed back to S11 before extraction). Inset shows a schematic of the one dimensional density of states of a semiconducting single walled carbon nanotube showing the S22 optical transition between the second valance (v2) and conduction (c2) bands. (D) The efficiency as a function of (n,m) species, if the solar cell is considered to be capable of simultaneously extracting carriers photogenerated via both the S11 and S22 optical transitions. Inset shows a schematic of the ideal s-SWNT solar cell considered in the model, consisting simply of a s-SWNT absorber layer, a mechanism for separating photogenerated excitons into free electrons and holes and a mechanism for extracting these into an external circuit to do work.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) The dependence of the potential sunlight harvesting efficiency on s-SWNT diameter. (B) The dependence of the S11 and S22 transition energies on s-SWNT diameter.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) A tandem solar cell consisting of four individual cells of different (n,m) species, where the combination of species has been chosen to provide maximum power absorption, yielding a calculated potential sunlight harvesting efficiency of 28.3% in this analysis. (C) A similar tandem solar cell to (A), but where the combination of species has been chosen to maximise absorption in the infrared, yielding 19.0% efficiency, whilst minimising absorption of visible light (remembering that there will still be some absorption in the visible due to S33 which is not considered herein). This is not possible with bulk semiconductors since, if the bandgap is in the IR, then the material will be opaque to visible light. Such capability could allow for the fabrication of IR absorbing, building integrated photovoltaic windows. (B) and (D) show the contributions of the different component nanotube species which give rise to the combined tandem cell absorption profiles shown in (A) and (C), respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee41731j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
