Water-oxidation photoanodes using organic light-harvesting materials: a review   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05709A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05709A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19560-19592Water-oxidation photoanodes using organic light-harvesting materials: a review†

        
          
            Joel T. 
            Kirner
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Richard G. 
            Finke
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523, USA. E-mail: jtkirner@gmail.com; rfinke@lamar.colostate.edu
Received 
      1st July 2017
    , Accepted 10th August 2017First published on 14th August 2017AbstractSolar energy conversion and storage by photoelectrochemical water splitting has garnered significant research attention in recent years. While the majority of water-splitting systems are composed of inorganic semiconductor light-harvesting materials, an increasing amount of research has studied the use of earth-abundant organic semiconductors and dyes as an inexpensive alternative. Herein, we provide a comprehensive review of published water-oxidizing photoanodes that employ organic light-harvesting materials, including both organic thin-film and dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell architectures. We highlight the different materials that have been employed, summarize recent advancements, and provide insights for future improvements of device efficiencies and stabilities.Joel T. KirnerJoel Kirner received his B.S. in Chemistry from the University of Northern Iowa in 2010. He graduated with Honors with Distinction, while also receiving the HM/ICUC Award for Excellence in First Year Undergraduate Chemistry, the ACS Award in Analytical Chemistry, the Outstanding Inorganic Chemistry Student Award, the Outstanding Organic Chemistry Student Award, and the Purple and Old Gold Meritorious Scholarship Award. He subsequently earned his Ph.D. in Materials Chemistry from Colorado State University in May 2017, under the co-direction of Professors R. G. Finke and C. M. Elliott (deceased). His current research interests include dye-sensitized solar cells, water-oxidizing photoelectrolysis cells, and electrochemical energy storage.Richard G. FinkeRichard Finke is a Professor of Chemistry at Colorado State University. He received his B.A. with Distinction from the University of Colorado, and his Ph.D. in Chemistry from Stanford University in 1976 under Professors James P. Collman and John I. Brauman. He was a NSF postdoctoral fellow in 1977, also at Stanford University, and his awards include A. P. Sloan, Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar, and Guggenheim Fellowships. His current research interests focus on catalysis, kinetics and mechanism, artificial photosynthesis for fuel-forming reactions, water-oxidation catalysis involving polyoxometalates and metal-oxide nanoparticles, and a variety of other topics related to catalysis. These topics include fundamental kinetic and mechanistic studies of nanoparticle formation involving nucleation, growth, and agglomeration, and answering the related question of “who is the true catalyst?” in reactions that could be either homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysis. In the past he has also contributed to bio-inorganic chemistry, especially that involving coenzyme B12, to organo-lanthanide and -actinide chemistry, and to multi-electron-transfer electrochemistry.
1. Introduction
Meeting mankind's thirst for sustainable energy is one of the scientific grand challenges of our time.1–4 The harvesting of sustainable solar energy and its conversion into useful electricity or heat is one promising strategy.1,3 However, solar energy is diffuse, making it challenging to collect efficiently. Furthermore, solar energy is not always available on demand due to the diurnal cycle of the sun and intermittent cloud cover. Therefore, there is a need to efficiently store solar energy when it is available so that the energy can be used when needed. The conversion of solar energy into solar fuels can be achieved by artificial photosynthetic water splitting, which includes the steps of light capture, charge separation, water-oxidation catalysis (WOC), and CO2 or proton-reduction catalysis.4–10 In this way, solar energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the hydrogen and oxygen products of the water-splitting reaction. The stored energy can then be released as heat by combustion, or as electricity in a fuel cell.3,8
The two half cells that make up the water-splitting reaction are the hydrogen-evolving reaction (HER) and the oxygen-evolving reaction (OER) (eqn (1) and (2), respectively). The OER requires the reaction of two water molecules with four hole equivalents to form O2, and is well-established to be the kinetic bottleneck of water-splitting catalysis.10 Hence, the OER takes on additional importance and significance in energy storage research. The net electrochemical water-splitting reaction (eqn (3)) stores 237 kJ per mole of H2,4,6,7,10 which corresponds to an electromotive force for the cell reaction, Erxn, of −1.23 V by the equation ΔG = −nFErxn,11 where n is the number of electrons transferred (n = 2 in eqn (3)) and F is Faraday's constant. According to the Plank–Einstein relation (E = hc/λ, where E is photon energy, h is Plank's constant, c is the speed of light, and λ is the photon wavelength), the energy (1.23 eV) required to transfer an electron from half cell (2) to (1) can be provided by electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths smaller than ∼1010 nm. However, electron–hole recombination reactions and concentration gradients during these multiple-electron reactions often necessitate ≥400 mV of overpotential beyond the thermodynamic limit of 1.23 eV in order to maintain the reactions at reasonable rates,12 even in the presence of efficient catalysts. As a result, the energy required to perform water splitting is often at least 1.6 eV,1,12 corresponding to light with wavelengths ≤775 nm. Fortunately, this wavelength range includes ∼60% of the incident solar power at the earth's surface, as calculated from the air mass 1.5 global (AM1.5G) solar reference standard (ASTM G173-03).13 Therefore, light-driven water splitting is a promising strategy to help mankind meet its energy needs. 2H+ + 2e− → H2(1) H2O → ½O2 + 2H+ + 2e−(2) H2O → H2 + ½O2(3)
1.1. Light-driven water-splitting strategies
Solar energy storage through light-driven water splitting can be achieved by a number of strategies,6,7,10,14 three of which are depicted in Fig. 1 in order to clarify the focus of this review. Perhaps the easiest method to conceptualize is simply to wire a p–n junction photovoltaic (PV) device (or multiple PV cells in series to provide sufficient voltage) to a commercial electrolyzer (Fig. 1, left). Alternatively, light-driven water splitting can be accomplished by an integrated photoelectrochemical cell (Fig. 1, center), wherein the light-collecting panel (a single-bandgap semiconductor (SC) film, a PV film, or multiple SC or PV films integrated together) is submerged directly in aqueous solution. In this strategy, the water-splitting half reactions to produce H2 and O2 occur directly at the semiconductor–liquid junction (SCLJ). A third strategy is to prepare the light-harvesting materials as tiny particulates to be suspended in solution as a colloid (Fig. 1, right). Such photocatalytic (suspended colloid) systems generate H2 and O2 at the SCLJ throughout the bulk of the solution, often within the same compartment.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of various water splitting engineering strategies: (left) a photovoltaic (PV) cell (or multiple cells in series) wired to an electrolyzer; (center) a submerged (integrated) photoelectrolysis cell (PEC) wherein water-splitting reactions occur at the surface of a semiconductor panel in solution; (right) a suspended colloid (photocatalytic) system wherein water-splitting reactions occur at the surface of semiconductor particles throughout solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
While the PV/electrolyzer strategy is well-established, it has been proposed7,10,14 that the strategy will remain too costly for broad commercialization because of the need for (historically) relatively expensive solar power, the use of noble metal water-splitting catalysts, and because of the costs associated with wiring the devices together. However, recent work has focused on lowering the costs of PV/electrolyzer systems by employing inexpensive organic solar cells in series15 or triple-junction configurations.16,17 A recent 2016 study has also demonstrated a PV/electrolyzer system composed entirely of inexpensive, earth-abundant inorganic materials, and which is capable of 14.2% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency18 (above the threshold for practical commercialization of 10%).7
The photoelectrochemical strategy (the focus of this review) has the advantage of avoiding the costs associated with wiring the PV and electrolyzer together, but has the added challenging requirement that the light-harvesting cell must be stable against photo-corrosion under harsh water-splitting conditions.6,19,20 A promising strategy to protect the light-absorbing semiconductor against photo-corrosion is to coat the material with thin layers of metal oxide or metal catalysts.6,7,10 On the other end of the spectrum, the photocatalytic (colloidal) strategy shows promise for low cost, but has yet to be demonstrated on a large scale. A number of review articles have highlighted the strategies and materials used in photocatalytic water-splitting systems.21–26
Published analyses have compared the promise and challenges of the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water-splitting strategies from engineering and economic perspectives.27,28 Such studies have confirmed that the estimated cost for hydrogen production is significantly lower for the photocatalytic strategy compared to the photoelectrochemical strategy.28 However, the photocatalytic strategy is a largely unproven technology, and often has the added safety concern of co-generating H2 and O2 gases in the same compartment, creating a flammable mixture (the flammable range of H2 is 4–75% in air or 4–94% in O2 at standard temperature and pressure).29 Importantly, the above economic analysis also concluded that the cost of hydrogen produced by photoelectrochemical strategies could be significantly reduced by increasing the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency beyond 10% and by lowering the cost of the panel-based photoelectrochemical cells.28 The latter goal of reducing cost has motivated many researchers to study organic light-harvesting materials in photoelectrochemical cells, which is the focus of this review. Before continuing, we next describe several different configurations for photoelectrochemical water-splitting cells.
1.2. Water-splitting photoelectrolysis cell (PEC) configurations
An integrated PEC can take on many forms. The simplest is a single-bandgap SC photoelectrode (n-type photoanode or p-type photocathode) submerged in an electrolyte solution with a metal counter electrode, sometimes called a Schottky-type PEC.6 This name arose because the device is functionally similar to a Schottky-barrier solar cell,30 which is composed of a semiconductor sandwiched between two metal contacts. A SCLJ behaves similarly to a SC–metal junction in that they both form a Schottky barrier, the physics of which are described in detail elsewhere.6,10 Briefly, charges transfer across the interface in order to reach thermodynamic equilibrium, resulting in the buildup of a space-charge layer within the SC near the interface. The electric field in the space-charge region affects the local energy of electrons, which is expressed as band bending in an energy band diagram (Fig. 2). For an n-type semiconductor (n-SC), bands are bent upwards at the SCLJ (Fig. 2a). When illuminated, this band bending causes photogenerated holes in the valence band to migrate towards the SCLJ where they can induce oxidation reactions, and electrons in the conduction band to migrate towards the bulk of the SC where they can be collected by the conductive substrate.
 Fig. 2  Representative band diagrams of various liquid-junction water-splitting systems: (a) a single-bandgap, n-type semiconductor photoanode with metal cathode (n-SC PEC); (b) a dual bandgap (tandem) cell with n-type photoanode and p-type photocathode (p/n tandem PEC); (c) a dye-sensitized metal-oxide photoanode with metal cathode (DS-PEC); (d) a submerged p–n junction photovoltaic photoanode with metal cathode (PV-PEC). 
For a single semiconductor (Schottky-type PEC) to achieve unassisted light-driven water splitting (Fig. 2a), it must have a band gap energy, Eg, ≥∼1.6 eV (to provide sufficient kinetic overpotential, see above), and the bands must also be appropriately positioned relative to the half-cell reactions. The electrochemical potential of the SC conduction band (ECB) must be positioned more negative than the proton-reduction reaction (eqn (1), by definition 0 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE), and the SC valence band potential (EVB) must be positioned positive of the OER (eqn (2), +1.23 V vs. RHE). It has proved quite difficult to find SC materials that meet all the above requirements, let alone the additional requirement of stability against photo-corrosion.6,19,20 Of the dozens of materials that were the subject of early studies, only a handful of n-type metal oxides met all the above criteria, including SrTiO3, KTaO3, Ta2O2, and ZrO2.6 Of these, only the former two successfully confirmed unassisted (no applied bias) light-driven water splitting.31,32 Unfortunately, these materials also have Eg ≥3.4 eV, and therefore can only absorb light with wavelengths ≤365 nm. This includes only ∼4% of the incident power in the AM1.5G solar reference standard.13
To avoid placing all the above requirements on one semiconductor material, a common strategy is to employ a tandem10,33 (or p/n-type6,34) PEC (Fig. 2b). A tandem PEC is a dual bandgap configuration employing both an n-SC photoanode and p-SC photocathode. These systems allow the use of materials with smaller and complementary bandgaps (absorbing complementary wavelength ranges of light) compared to single-bandgap systems, and therefore have a higher theoretical water-splitting efficiency as a result of absorbing more of the incident solar radiation.12 An example band diagram of a p/n-PEC is shown in Fig. 2b. In this configuration, two photons (one at each electrode) must be absorbed to generate each usable electron–hole pair, where holes reach the SCLJ of the photoanode to oxidize water, and electrons reach the SCLJ of the photocathode to reduce protons. Therefore, the photoanode must have a VB more positive than the potential of the OER, and the photocathode must have a CB more negative than the potential of the HER.
An alternative strategy to improve the visible absorptivity of a stable, wide-bandgap SC is dye sensitization, wherein dye molecules at the SC surface absorb visible light (dependent on the dye's absorbance spectrum) followed by a rapid charge-transfer reaction between the photoexcited dye and one of the SC energy bands.6,7 This dye sensitization strategy was studied as early as 1968 by Gerischer et al.35 but resulted in sub-nanoampere photocurrent, likely because sensitization only occurs from a monolayer of dye molecules adsorbed to the planar semiconductor surface,36 achieving a visible absorptance of only ∼1%.37 Tsubomura et al. later tried enhancing light absorption by employing thicker films of insoluble dye, but this strategy failed to enhance photocurrent because the dye layers were electrically insulating.37
A breakthrough came in 1976 when Tsubomura et al. demonstrated a photoelectrochemical cell with greatly improved power efficiency by employing a high-surface-area electrode of sintered ZnO powder coated with dye adsorbed from solution, thus allowing a “large total absorption of light”.37 Furthermore, their use of iodide as a redox mediator in solution allowed for the rapid regeneration of photo-oxidized dye at the surface, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of 1.5%.37 This strategy was significantly enhanced in 1991 by O'Regan and Grätzel, who employed a porous film of sintered TiO2 nanoparticles (15 nm average diameter) with an internal surface area ∼780 times that of a planar surface.38 When these films were sensitized by adsorption of a Ru-based organometallic dye with carboxylic acid anchor groups and submerged in electrolyte containing iodide redox mediator, a 97% incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was achieved at the λmax of the dye, with an overall solar conversion efficiency of over 7%.38 Such an accomplishment demonstrated the commercial promise of the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC),39,40 opening up a huge field of research with >22500 journal publications as of January, 2017.41
In a DSSC, the reduction reaction at the cathode is simply the reverse of the oxidation reaction at the anode, both of which involve a redox mediator in solution. A DSSC is therefore a photoelectrochemical photovoltaic cell, which converts light energy into electrical power.6 Dye-sensitized films of sintered colloidal metal oxides (MOx) can also be decorated with water-splitting catalysts for use as photoelectrolysis cells, wherein light energy is collected and stored in the chemical bonds of the H2 and O2 solar fuels.6 Such water-splitting dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cells (DS-PECs) have been the subject of several recent reviews.42–52 The band energy diagram of an n-type DS-PEC is shown in Fig. 2c. In this case, the photoexcited dye injects an electron into the CB of the MOx, after which the photo-oxidized dye must accept an electron from a water-oxidation catalyst (WOCatalyst) to avoid the back-electron-transfer recombination reaction.
A fourth type of PEC, Fig. 2d, consists of a p–n junction PV in solution to provide the photovoltage required to split water. One could also use multiple PV in tandem, or a PV integrated in series with a single SC photoanode/cathode.10 In such integrated devices, the PV cell is considered to be a “buried” photoelectrochemical junction, because it is not in direct contact with the electrolyte, and can be classified as a photovoltaic photoelectrolysis cell (PV-PEC).10 Tandem and integrated PECs can also be prepared in a wireless configuration where each component is sandwiched together by ohmic contacts. Such cells are often referred to as photochemical diodes, monoliths, or artificial leaves,6,10,53 and have the potential for low-cost manufacturing. However, it is common to study the photoanodes and photocathodes in separate Schottky-type PECs before they are integrated into a tandem device.
To summarize, a variety of configurations are possible for water-splitting photoelectrochemical cells. When highlighting specific systems from the literature below, we will reference Fig. 2 when needed to clarify the specific configuration being used.
1.3. A focus on organic light-harvesting materials
Since Fujishima and Honda demonstrated the first example of photoelectrochemical water splitting by a TiO2 photoanode and Pt cathode (n-SC–PEC) under UV light,54 hundreds of other inorganic SCs have been studied for PECs21,22,55 (most of which require UV light and/or sacrificial reagents to function). A select few PEC systems56–59 have achieved solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies, ηSTH,60 above the threshold for practical commercialization of 10%.7 However, those systems often exhibit poor long-term stability and are composed of rare and expensive elements (In and Ga, for example).56–59 These features are likely to limit their commercial application.61,62 Therefore, many researchers have focused their studies on water-splitting PECs composed of inexpensive, earth-abundant materials (Fig. 3), especially the light-harvesting SC materials and water-splitting catalyst(s).
 Fig. 3  “Periodic table of the elements with data for production, price and implied value for the year 2010. The colour coding (green, light-green, orange and red) corresponds to overall production level (medium to high, low, very low and extremely low, respectively). Solid colour is used for elements which are chiefly main economic products of their respective ores while a diagonal gradient in colour is used for elements which are mostly by-products of other elements.” Figure and caption reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Organic semiconductor (OSC) materials show promise for electronic and light-harvesting applications because of their low cost, earth-abundance, low-temperature manufacturing processes, and perhaps especially because of the structural tunability of their properties by well-established organic synthesis techniques.63,64 The present review is the first to highlight the rapidly growing literature of water-splitting systems that employ organic semiconductors and dyes as light-harvesting materials in light-driven water-splitting cells. These will include organic dye molecules, organometallic complexes with earth-abundant transition metals, and polymer materials. Our focus is photoelectrochemical systems; photocatalytic (suspended colloid) systems that employ organic SC polymers65–70 or dye-sensitized colloid systems70,71 will not be covered. We further narrow our focus to the more kinetically limiting OER by giving preferential attention to PEC photoanodes that have confirmed WOC by the direct detection of O2 product. We have made our best effort to be comprehensive in our inclusion of such systems, and we apologize in advance to the authors of any important systems that we may have inadvertently missed.
1.4. Properties of organic semiconductors (OSCs)
Before continuing, it is prudent to highlight some of the major differences between molecular and polymeric organic semiconductors and more traditional inorganic semiconductors. Perhaps the most important difference between OSCs and inorganic SCs is the low dielectric constant of OSC materials.64 Organic materials are composed primarily of second-row elements where valence shell electrons are held more tightly to the nuclei than in lower-row elements, making organic materials less polarizable and therefore less efficient at shielding electric fields between charges. As a result, light absorption by OSCs generally leads to the formation of excitons (coulombically bound electron–hole pairs).64 By contrast, the higher dielectric constant of inorganic semiconductors generally allows for the photo-generation of free charge carriers (i.e., thermal energy even at room temperature is sufficient to overcome the binding energy between electrons and holes). In order to generate usable charge carriers in OSCs, photo-generated excitons must diffuse to a heterojunction interface with a band energy offset sufficient to overcome the exciton binding energy.64
A second major difference is the relatively weak electronic coupling between neighboring molecules in an organic film when compared to the coupling between covalently bound atoms in inorganic semiconductors.64 This results in relatively narrow valence and conduction bands, more localized charge carriers, lower carrier mobilities, and anisotropic carrier mobilities.64 Such mobility limitations only allow excitons in organic materials to diffuse a short distance before relaxing (typically on the order of tens of nanometers), and often the diffusion distance is much shorter than the depth that light can penetrate into the film (a function of the material's wavelength-dependent extinction coefficient).64 If excitons are generated by light absorption too far from a materials heterojunction, they will relax before dissociation and their energy is wasted. In planar heterojunction configurations, the thickness of organic thin-films is therefore limited to roughly the exciton diffusion length, greatly limiting the light absorption efficiency. A common strategy to overcome this limitation is to nanostructure the interface.64
1.5. Device architectures for PECs composed of organic light-harvesting materials
Modern studies of PECs employing organic light-harvesting materials generally come in one of two main architectures, both of which are based on emerging PV technologies: organic photovoltaics (OPVs)64,72,73 and DSSCs.39,40 Both OPVs and DSSCs have recently reached PV efficiencies nearing 12%.74 If the energy bands of such PV devices are appropriately positioned for one or both of the half-cell reactions for water splitting, the cells can potentially be decorated with water-splitting catalysts and submerged in aqueous solutions as PECs. We will refer to OPV-type water-splitting architectures as organic thin-film photoelectrolysis cells (OTF-PEC), and DSSC-type architectures as dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cells (DS-PEC). Simplified representations of each architecture are provided in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Schematic cross-sections of two common device architectures for PECs composed of earth-abundant materials. (a) Organic-thin-film photoelectrolysis cells (OTF-PEC); (b) dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cells (DS-PEC). 
The OTF-PEC architecture (Fig. 4a) is composed of a planar thin-film of OSC(s). This thin-film may be composed of a single OSC material, or may contain two different OSC materials arranged with a planar bilayer heterojunction, a bulk heterojunction wherein the two OSC materials are mixed with nanoscale phase domains, or a trilayer junction wherein a blended bulk heterojunction layer is sandwiched between two single-OSC layers. The DS-PEC architecture (Fig. 4b), on the other hand, is typically composed of a sintered nanoparticle (NP) film of semiconducting MOx (with resulting internal surface area often 1000-times larger than a planar surface, depending on thickness)40 which is then sensitized to visible light by adsorption of a monolayer of dye. When illuminated, the photoexcited dye can inject a charge carrier into the MOx, where the carrier then diffuses through the interconnected nanoparticle film to be collected at the conductive substrate, and the dye is subsequently regenerated by charge transfer from a water-splitting catalyst.
2. Performance metrics
The water-oxidizing photoanode systems highlighted in this review will be compared by a number of performance metrics. To our knowledge, none of the OTF-PEC or DS-PEC photoanodes studied to date achieve sufficient photovoltage to perform overall water splitting without additional applied bias. As a result, photoelectrochemical measurements are typically made in a 3-electrode configuration (with potential applied relative to a reference electrode), and photoanodes would require a complementary photocathode in a tandem configuration (Fig. 2b) in order to achieve unassisted water splitting (a few examples of tandem OTF-PEC75 and DS-PEC76,77 devices for unassisted light-driven water splitting have emerged in the literature,75–77 although most photoanodes are still at early, fundamental stages of research). As such, the overall solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, ηSTH,60 is not a relevant (or possible) metric of comparison for these individual photoanode systems. It has recently been highlighted that photolysis cells measured in a 3-electrode configuration can still be compared using “intrinsic solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency”78 or “ratiometric power saved”79 metrics. While such measurements and calculations have not been reported by the systems highlighted in this review, they are important metrics for researchers to report in the future.
The most widely reported performance metric for water-oxidizing photoanodes is the photocurrent density, J (μA cm−2), taken as the difference in current density at the working electrode measured under illumination and in the dark. The measurement is typically done in a 3-electrode configuration,60 wherein currents are measured between the (working) photoelectrode and a metal counter electrode as a function of potential applied to the photoelectrode vs. a reference electrode (typically Ag/AgCl or saturated calomel electrode, SCE). Photocurrents are obtained from separate J–V experiments performed in the dark and under illumination, or from one J–V experiment with intermittent illumination (where a light source is chopped on and off at regular intervals throughout the scan). In the latter case, currents often show a spike-like behavior, wherein the current peaks when the light is turned on and quickly decays towards a steady-state value over the course of seconds (see, for example, Fig. 6 and 11 in the following section). In such cases, we report the steady-state photocurrent value. Of course, photocurrent depends highly on the measurement conditions,60,80 so herein we report both the measured photocurrent density for each system as well as the specific conditions for the measurement, including solution pH, electrolyte identity, applied potential, illumination intensity, and illumination wavelength distribution.
For direct comparison across different systems we convert applied potentials reported vs. various reference electrodes to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) by the conversion factors to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) shown in Table 1:11
Table 1 Conversion factors for applied potential vs. various reference electrodes to NHE11




Reference electrode
Conversion to NHE




Ag/AgCl (sat. KCl)
+0.197 V


Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl)
+0.210 V


SCE
+0.241 V


RHE
−(0.0591 V × pH)




Conveniently, this conversion allows for the comparison of applied potentials to the thermodynamic potential required for water oxidation (+1.23 V vs. RHE, independent of pH). Efficient photoanodes should reach peak water-oxidation photocurrent at applied potentials well-negative of +1.23 V vs. RHE.
A major concern with organic light-harvesting materials is that they may not have sufficient photo- and oxidative stability for high-turnover WOC. Therefore, an especially important metric of such systems is the faradaic efficiency, or the fraction of the photocurrent that actually corresponds to O2 production. For inorganic systems, this is typically done by the quantitative detection of O2 product in the gas phase above solution by gas chromatography.60 For organic systems, which typically exhibit lower and less-stable photocurrent, O2 quantification is often measured in solution using commercial probes based on fluorescence-quenching81 by O2 or by electrochemical methods such as Clark electrodes82 or a generator–collector method83–86 (see details in Section 4.1 below). By tracking both the O2 concentration and the current passed by the photoelectrode over time, the faradaic efficiency can then be calculated.
A final performance metric we will use for comparison is the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency, IPCE.60 The IPCE spectrum is calculated from a photocurrent action spectrum experiment, wherein amperometric photocurrent (J–t) is measured as a function of monochromatic illumination wavelength. By measuring the power of the incident light at each wavelength step, the photon flux can be calculated. Subsequently, dividing the steady-state photocurrent by the incident photon flux yields the IPCE value at each wavelength.60 The IPCE of a device is a combination of several characteristic efficiencies,60 including light-harvesting efficiency (and therefore the IPCE spectrum is expected to correspond well to the photoelectrode light-absorptance spectrum), charge-separation efficiency (exciton dissociation), charge-transport efficiency through the material to the SCLJ, and charge-transfer efficiency across the SCLJ.60 Individual components can be partially deconvoluted by a combination of action spectrum experiments with and without a facile redox couple, and the UV-vis absorptance (1 − transmittance) spectrum of the photoelectrode.60 As mentioned above, the photoanodes highlighted in this review do not have sufficient reducing potential to carry out overall water splitting. IPCE measurements for such systems are generally performed with an applied bias in order to provide additional potential to the counter electrode to carry out the HER and/or to provide sufficient electric field for efficient carrier collection at the working photoelectrode.60 As such, we report both the maximum IPCE value achieved by each system (usually at the λmax of the organic light collector) and the applied potential vs. RHE.
3. Water-oxidizing organic thin-film photoelectrolysis cells (OTF-PECs)
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to review literature examples of water-oxidizing OTF-PECs. Many of these systems employ classic organic semiconductor materials64,72,73 including phthalocyanine derivatives (Pc), porphyrin derivatives (Por), or perylene derivatives, as well as the classic fullerene, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). The former three classes of molecules garnered early attention because of their high molar extinction coefficients, high chemical and thermal stabilities, and strong π-stacking in the solid state resulting in beneficial charge-transport properties.64 Furthermore, Por and Pc molecules can be considered as synthetically tractable analogues of chlorin, the core structure found in chlorophyll pigments used by many photosynthetic systems in nature.87 On the other hand, fullerenes such as PCBM are far and away the most common acceptor materials in OPVs because of their positive redox potentials, and their spherical structure results in small reorganization energies upon electron transfer and direction-independent accepting ability.64,72,73 Of course, a challenge associated with employing OSCs for water oxidation is that their valence band energy (HOMO) must be positive of the OER, +1.23 V vs. RHE.
Literature examples of OTF-PECs fall within two sub-categories. The first is based on classic OPVs,64,72,73 wherein free charge generation is presumably achieved at the materials heterojunction between two OSCs. The second type is composed of a single-bandgap OSC thin-film material, and may be considered as a Schottky-type PEC6,30 such as that in Fig. 2a (see the discussion at the end of Section 3.2 below). We will introduce literature examples of water-oxidizing OTF-PEC systems historically and separated by device sub-category. A summary of the highlighted systems is provided in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the 6 presently known OTF-PEC water-oxidizing photoanodes




Systema
WOCatalysta
Max steady-state photocurrent (conditions)b
Faradaic efficiency
Max IPCE (appl. bias)b,c
Corresponding author(s)





a Abbreviations are defined throughout the text and summarized at the end of the review.
b Applied bias has been converted to the RHE reference electrode for direct comparison between systems.
c Note that IPCEs measured under applied bias ≠ ηSTH.






PTCBI/H2Pc bilayer
Nf–IrO2
6 μA cm−2 (+1.19 V vs. RHE, pH 10 KOH, ∼70 mW cm−2)
≥90%
0.04% (+1.2)
Abe & Nagai88



PTCBI/CoPc bilayer

CoPc

20 μA cm−2 (+1.25 V vs. RHE, pH 11 NaOH, ∼70 mW cm−2)
ND
ND
Abe & Nagai89


PTTh:MnPor

MnPor

23 μA (+1.51 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Na2SO4, irradiance not reported)
ND
ND
Chen & Swiegers90



PTCDA/PTCDA:PCBM/PCBM trilayer
Unknown
110 μA cm−2 (+1.16 V vs. RHE, pH 2 KNO3/H2SO4, ∼110 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm)
ND
1.2% (+1.16 V)
Zhao91



PMPDI single layer
CoOx
150 μA cm−2 (+1.56 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi, ∼100 mW cm−2, λ = 315–710 nm)
80 ± 15%
0.12% (none)
Gregg & Finke82


BBL polymer single layer
ALD TiO2/Ni–Co
20 μA cm−2 (+0.90 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Na2SO4/KPi, 100 mW cm−2)
82 ± 16%
1.0% (+1.23 V)
Sivula92




3.1. Organic heterojunction photoelectrolysis cells
In 2006, the corresponding authors Abe and Nagai (et al.) published an OPV-PEC system88 (Fig. 2d) composed of an organic thin-film bilayer of the electron acceptor material 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic bis(benzimidazole) (PTCBI, hereafter, we will abbreviate specific molecules in bold), and the electron donor material 29H,31H-phthalocyanine (H2Pc), Fig. 5a. The OPV was prepared on indium tin oxide-coated glass (ITO) by vacuum vapor deposition of PTCBI (450 nm) followed by H2Pc (160 nm). Subsequently, the film was “coated” (by an unspecified procedure) with finely-ground IrO2 powder as a WOCatalyst (∼1.2 × 10−5 mol cm−2), which was then immobilized by a top coating of ∼30 nm-thick water- and proton-permeable Nafion membrane (Nf, a copolymer of tetrafluoroethylene and sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene). These ITO/PTCBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 photoanodes were immersed in pH 10 (KOH) aqueous solution for photoelectrochemical studies.88 A schematic energy diagram of the system (Fig. 5b) shows that light absorption in either of the OSC layers should drive electrons to transfer towards the ITO interface (from H2Pc donor to PTCBI acceptor) and holes to transfer towards the SCLJ. Furthermore, holes in the H2Pc VB should be sufficiently oxidizing for the OER.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of PTCBI and H2Pc, and a device schematic for O2 production from an organic bilayer photoanode modified with Nafion-covered IrO2 catalyst. (b) An approximate energy diagram for the ITO/PTCBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 bilayer device. Figures reprinted from ref. 88, copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier. 
Control experiments showed that the Nf–IrO2 layer was necessary to observe photocurrent, indicating that IrO2 catalyzes the WOC reaction (faradaic efficiencies were ≥90% as determined by gas chromatography of the head space gasses after 1.5 h of photolysis).88 Additional controls found that ITO/PTCBI/Nf–IrO2 films (without the H2Pc layer) were able to achieve comparable photocurrent, but for unknown reasons no O2 was detected.88 When illuminated with 70 mW cm−2 white light from a halogen lamp and held at +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.19 V vs. RHE), ITO/PTDBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 photoanodes achieved steady-state photocurrent of ∼6 μA cm−2. During intermittent photocurrent experiments in which the light source is repeatedly switched on and off, the photocurrent spiked and quickly decayed towards steady-state values over tens of seconds, Fig. 6. The authors interpreted this behavior as indicating that the water-oxidation reaction at the SCLJ was kinetically slow, in spite of the well-established, highly-active IrO2 WOCatalyst.88
 Fig. 6  Oxidative photocurrent produced at an ITO/PTCBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 anode under intermittent illumination with an applied potential of +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in pH 10 KOH. Film thicknesses were 450 nm (PTCBI)/160 nm (H2Pc) coated with 1.2 × 10−5 mol IrO2. Reprinted from ref. 88, copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier. 
Action spectra for the ITO/PTDBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 system at +1.19 V vs. RHE indicated a maximum IPCE value of ∼0.04%. Interestingly, the action spectrum was not a match for the absorption spectrum of the PTCBI/H2Pc bilayer OPV, but was closer to that of the PTCBI layer alone. In other words, only excitons generated by light absorbed in the PTCBI layer apparently contribute to photocurrent, in contrast to comparable dry-type OPV cells.88 The authors hypothesized that this was likely because the overall kinetics of the PEC system are limited by the electrochemical process at the SCLJ.88 In the end, Abe et al. proposed that the use of a more efficient WOCatalyst would be the most promising route to improving the photolysis efficiency of their device.88 However, given that IrO2 is among the most active of heterogeneous, metal oxide WOCatalysts,93 an alternative hypothesis is that the above kinetic bottleneck is more likely related to a low catalyst surface area or the efficiency of charge transfer (i.e., the electronic coupling) from the H2Pc layer to the IrO2 WOCatalyst than to the turnover frequency of the catalyst itself.
In the same year, Abe and Nagai et al. published a subsequent paper describing an analogous OPV-PEC system in which the IrO2 WOCatalyst was omitted, and instead cobalt(II) phthalocyanine (CoPc) was used as the p-type OSC89 (Fig. 7). As before, the OPV was prepared by the vacuum vapor deposition of PTCBI, followed by CoPc. When submerged in pH 11 (NaOH) aqueous solution and illuminated with ∼70 mW cm−2 white light, ITO/PTCBI/CoPc electrodes exhibited photocurrent on the order of ∼20 μA cm−2 at an applied bias of +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.25 V vs. RHE).89 Controls showed essentially no current in the dark, and negligible photocurrent for single-layer ITO/CoPc films or ITO/PTCBI/H2Pc films without cobalt. This work from Abe and Nagai et al.89 is the first example in the literature of photoelectrochemical WOC claiming CoPc as the likely WOCatalyst. An important, yet untested, alternative hypothesis from subsequent literature94–97 is that labile Co(II) may have leached from the CoPc film and re-deposited on the electrode as heterogeneous CoOx.
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of PTCBI and CoPc, and a schematic illustration of the ITO/PTCBI/CoPc organic bilayer thin-film photoanode and testing apparatus for photoelectrochemical measurements. Reprinted from ref. 89 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH. 
Importantly, photoelectrochemical WOC by ITO/PTCBI/CoPc electrodes was confirmed by the detection of O2 formed in the headspace by gas chromatography, although the faradaic efficiency was not reported.89 Furthermore, isotopic studies in H218O produced only 18O2 product, demonstrating that all O2 produced originated from water.89 Extended electrolysis studies showed that O2 was still being produced well beyond 3 h (with a CoPc turnover number >35000 estimated under the assumption that only CoPc on the surface participates), indicating a relatively stable performance for the ITO/PTCBI/CoPc system. IPCE measurements (under applied bias and with the sacrificial electron donor triethylamine, TEA) were again a closer match for the absorbance spectrum of the PTCBI portion of the film alone, suggesting that light absorption by the CoPc layer does not contribute to photocurrent. Instead, the authors suggested that the CoPc layer must aid in exciton dissociation at the p–n interface, allow hole conduction to the SCLJ, and also act as a catalyst through the inner-sphere interaction between CoIIIPc (hole-doped CoIIPc) and OH−.89 Importantly, this publication presented the first example in the literature of a water-oxidizing OTF-PEC system composed entirely of earth abundant elements (excluding the indium in the ITO substrate), including both the light-harvesting material and the WOCatalyst.
In early 2012, the groups of Chen and Swiegers et al. published a second example of a water-oxidizing organic heterojunction thin-film system composed entirely of earth-abundant materials.90 Specifically, their thin-film consisted of an anionic Mn–porphyrin dispersed throughout a poly(thiophene) film (poly(thiophene) being one of the most-studied conducting polymers due to its high stability and structural versatility98). In their system, thin-films were formed by the oxidative electrochemical polymerization of terthiophene to poly(terthiophene) (PTTh) on ITO substrates in ethanol–dichloromethane (1:1) solution, while in the presence of the dissolved 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-sulfonophenyl)porphyrin tetrasodium salt (MnPor, Fig. 8). The resulting ITO/PTTh:MnPor film was characterized by SEM to show a porous surface structure and a film thickness of ∼500 nm. EDX-mapping showed that the MnPor was uniformly distributed throughout the film, and elemental analysis suggested a ratio of 1:3 MnPor:terthiophene monomer.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the OTF-PEC photoanode studied in ref. 90. The thin-film was deposited by electrochemical polymerization of poly(terthiophene) (PTTh) in the presence of 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-sulfonophenyl)porphyrin tetrasodium salt (MnPor). 
When submerged in pH 7, 0.1 M Na2SO4 and held at +0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.51 V vs. RHE), ITO/PTTh:MnPor anodes showed practically zero current in the dark and photocurrent as high as 23 μA (not normalized for surface area) when illuminated with a halogen lamp (light irradiance was not reported).90 Furthermore, when submerged in pH 8.6 filtered sea water and held at +0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.60 V vs. RHE), ITO/PTTh:MnPor films exhibited sustained photocurrent of ∼7.5 μA. Surprisingly, after 24 h of photolysis in sea water, analysis by GC-MS and analytical test strips revealed O2 product but no Cl2 was detected, despite the fact that the overpotential required for Cl− oxidation is far less than WOC on most known catalysts.90 Hence, the apparent selectivity of the PTTh:MnPor film for H2O over Cl− oxidation is noteworthy, but merits independent verification and explanation.
The action spectrum of an ITO/PTTh:MnPor anode was generally featureless, with a maximum current at 375 nm, decaying to near zero by 550 nm.90 While the authors claimed that the action spectrum was in good agreement with light absorption from one band of MnPor,90 the overall action spectrum was not a match for MnPor nor the PTTh:MnPor composite film. Nevertheless, control experiments attempting photolysis using bare ITO and dissolved MnPor showed no photocurrent. Additional controls of ITO/PTTh with p-toluenesulfonate (to mimic the hydrophilic groups of MnPor) showed only small photocurrent of ∼1 μA. Therefore, Chen and Swiegers et al. concluded that MnPor is indeed required for photolysis of water.90 Upon illumination, they suggest that MnPor must donate an electron into the PTTh matrix, which then conducts the electron to the ITO substrate, and the photo-oxidized MnPor must then oxidize water (Fig. 8).90 We note, however, that the band energies of PTTh and MnPor were not provided to confirm that the proposed electron transfer is thermodynamically favored. This is of particular interest because the poly(thiophene) derivative P3HT, or poly(3-hexylthiophene), is one of the most common electron donor materials in polymer–fullerene solar cells,72,73 and has also been used as an electron donor material in a bilayer device with a Por derivative accepter.99 That being said, the energy bands of poly(thiophene) are expected to be slightly more positive than P3HT,100 and can vary depending on preparation method, extent of polymerization, film thickness, and even substrate electrode.98
As for the proposed water oxidation by MnPor, a previous study found that covalently bound dimers of analogous manganese porphyrins do function as water-oxidation catalysts, while individual monomers do not101 (suggesting a bimolecular mechanism). Therefore, Chen and Swiegers et al.90 proposed that water oxidation in their system occurs by a bimolecular interaction between two neighboring MnPor molecules, which were at high concentration within the PTTh film. They also hypothesized that the hydrophilic sulfonic acid groups of MnPor may be beneficial because they could be providing H+-conduction pathways throughout the film.90
Later in 2012, the Zhao group published an additional example of a water-oxidizing OPV-PEC photoanode composed entirely of earth-abundant elements.91 In that study, the researchers prepared OPV films by vacuum vapor deposition of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) and/or [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) on ITO (Fig. 9). Notably, PCBM is being used as a donor material in this study, whereas it is the most common acceptor material in OPVs.72,73 Several compositions for the organic thin-film were tested, including: single layers of PTCDA or PCBM; a mixed (bulk heterojunction) PTCDA:PCBM layer; a bilayer PTCDA/PCBM heterojunction; a three-layer PTCDA/PTCBA:PCBM/PCMB film consisting of an initial layer of PTCDA (20 nm), followed by a bulk heterojunction of PTCBA:PCBM (35 nm, 11.6:1 molar ratio), and finally a thin layer of PCBM (3 nm). For electrochemical testing, these films were submerged in aqueous solution containing 35 mM KNO3 and adjusted to pH 2 with H2SO4, and illuminated with a halogen lamp (110 mW cm−2) through a UV filter (λ > 420 nm).
 Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of PTCDA and PCBM. (b) The trilayer film configuration PTCDA/PTCDA:PCBM/PCBM. Also shown are two possible charge separation mechanisms under light illumination: (1) electron transfer from the LUMO of excited PCBM to the LUMO of PTCDA (yellow arrows); (2) hole transfer from the HOMO of excited PTCDA to the HOMO of PCBM (green arrows). Both processes would produce free charge carriers. Reprinted from ref. 91 (copyright 2011, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg) with permission from Springer. 
Current–voltage curves for all films showed negligible current in the dark. In the light, most of the films showed photocurrent up to tens of μA cm−2. Of all the films tested, the trilayer (ITO/PTCDA/PTCDA:PCBM/PCBM) film showed the largest photocurrent, reaching as high as 110 μA cm−2 at an applied potential of +0.8 V vs. SCE (+1.16 V vs. RHE). This presents a significant improvement relative to the previous planar bilayer systems from Abe et al.88,89 Interestingly, when Zhao et al. tested a planar-heterojunction, bilayer film (ITO/PTCDA/PCBM) similar to the architectures used by Abe et al.,88,89 it showed the worst performance of all films tested, reaching only ∼5 μA cm−2.91 This seems to indicate that, relative to the planar-heterojunction, the increased surface area of the bulk heterojunction in the trilayer film significantly enhances the exciton dissociation efficiency. Furthermore, the use of the thin PCBM film at the SCLJ of the trilayer film likely helped with the preferential collection of holes at that interface (in comparison to the single-layer heterojunction, ITO/PTCDA:PCBM).91
The stability of the system was probed by extended photolysis experiments. First, in the presence of a redox mediator, KI, the trilayer film (held at +1.16 V vs. RHE) exhibited an initial photocurrent spike which decayed over the course of ∼200 s to a steady-state value of 150 μA cm−2. The authors attributed this spike/decay behavior to “photoelectrical charging” of the film.91 The steady-state current then remained unchanged throughout 50 min of illumination. In the absence of a sacrificial reductant, the authors were able to use a Clark electrode to detect O2 product in solution (a faradaic efficiency was not reported). The formation of O2 is surprising, given the fact that no known WOCatalyst was deposited on the film. Interestingly, a recent study has detected light-induced water oxidation by a colloidal suspension of PTCDA nanorods, even in the absence of intentionally added WOCatalyst102 (although this does not rule out the possible catalytic involvement of trace metal impurities).103 It has also been shown that PCBM can be chemically oxidized when illuminated in air104 and even by water vapor in the dark.105 It is therefore conceivable that PTCDA, some oxidized decomposition product of PCBM, or trace metal impurity103 may be functioning as a WOCatalyst in this system,91 hypotheses which merit further experimental investigation.
During extended photolysis in the absence of a sacrificial reductant, photocurrent gradually decayed by ∼50% over the first 15 min of illumination before reaching a steady state.91 Despite this, the O2 evolution rate over time appeared to increase slightly over 100 min of illumination. After extended electrolysis, the UV-vis spectrum of the film had decreased by less than 10% relative to before electrolysis, indicating the relatively high stability of the film. However, mass spectrometry did indicate some destruction of an unspecified “small quantity”91 of the PCBM. The IPCE spectrum indicates that light absorption from both film components, PTCDA and PCBM, likely contribute to photocurrent. At an applied bias of +1.16 V vs. RHE, a maximum IPCE value of 1.2% was reached at the λmax of PCBM,91 which is somewhat surprising given the low extinction coefficient and low mass loading of PCMB in the film relative to PTCDA. Overall, this system demonstrates that a trilayer OPV architecture with a bulk heterojunction provided superior performance to a planar, bilayer heterojunction.
A final example of an OPV-PEC meriting mention came from Gustafson et al. in 2014,75 although we do not include their results in Table 2 because water-splitting catalysis was not confirmed by the direct detection of H2 and O2 products. Their system was composed of a model polymer–fullerene OPV cell72,73 printed on ITO-coated plastic, Fig. 10. They used the common OPV active materials of P3HT and PCBM in a 1:1 weight ratio to form a bulk heterojunction film, which was printed from an organic-solvent ink onto either a hole-accepting (electron-blocking) interfacial layer (PEDOT:PSS) for photocathodes or an electron-accepting (hole-blocking) interfacial layer (ZnO) for photoanodes. The interfacial layers served to ensure the desired electron flow direction in each bulk heterojunction electrode (Fig. 10). Next, these films were sputter-coated with Pt to function as water-splitting catalyst and films were laminated with plastic except for a small window to allow contact with solution. In this way, these cells can be considered as “buried junction” OPV-PECs,10 where none of the OSC materials are in direct contact with solution.
 Fig. 10  Water-splitting photoelectrodes composed of a bulk-heterojunction organic active layer containing PCBM and P3HT (structures shown in red). The photocathode (a) includes a PEDOT:PSS hole-accepting interfacial layer, and the photoanode (b) contains a ZnO electron-accepting layer. Arrows indicate electron and hole pathways. Reprinted from ref. 75, copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier. 
When submerged in pH 7 phosphate buffer and illuminated by 300–400 mW cm−2 white light, their photocathode achieved photocurrent densities of 10 μA cm−2 with an applied bias of +0.51 V vs. RHE, and their photoanode achieved photocurrent densities of 77 μA cm−2 with an applied bias of +1.31 V vs. RHE.75 However, without the detection of water-splitting products, H2 and O2, it is not known if these photocurrents truly correspond to the HER and OER, respectively. This is especially crucial because EVB of the P3HT polymeric electron donor (hole acceptor) material is not innately positive enough to drive the water-oxidation reaction.106,107 Hence, further investigations of this interesting system are warranted, especially those focusing on photolysis products, and perhaps also on band bending and band edge positions during operation.
Importantly, Gustafson et al. also noted a degradation in electrochemical response over time.75 They measured an increasing resistance across their cells as a function of time soaked in water, which they interpreted as possible ITO delamination and/or morphological changes to the active layer as a result of swelling from electrolyte intake.75 This brings up a serious concern for PECs based on traditional OPV materials, especially since it is well-documented in the OPV literature that exposure to water vapor and O2 leads to accelerated device degradation caused by oxidation of the active materials and conductive contacts as well as morphological changes and delamination of films.105,108–111 Clearly, the application of such technology to photoelectrochemical water oxidation will require either extremely effective encapsulation methods or the engineering of alternative materials that are compatible with water and oxygen.
3.2. Single organic semiconductor photoelectrolysis cells
As described in Section 1.2, PECs composed of a single-bandgap (inorganic) semiconductor (Fig. 2a) are often referred to as Schottky-type PECs6 because of their parallel structure to a Schottky-barrier solar cell.30 Early studies of photoelectrochemical cells employing porphyrin and phthalocyanine thin-films were also well-explained by semiconductor band-bending phenomena of Schottky junctions at the substrate and/or electrolyte interfaces.112–118 Significantly, one example from the Armstrong group demonstrated the first example of light-assisted hydrogen evolution by a single organic-semiconductor thin-film, specifically, a chlorogallium phthalocyanine film decorated with Pt.115
To our knowledge, the first example of a water-oxidizing single-layer OTF-PEC (composed entirely of earth-abundant materials) came in 2014 from Gregg and Finke et al.82 In that system, the authors designed and synthesized a novel perylene diimide (PDI) dye derivative with phosphonate groups under the hypothesis that it should enhance coupling between the organic light-harvesting material and a popular, earth-abundant, heterogeneous WOCatalyst, CoOx (CoPi).119 Previous studies had shown that this CoOx catalyst film contains phosphate groups as a disordered component of the structure when formed electrochemically from phosphate-buffered solution.120 The OTF-PEC was prepared by spin coating the phosphonate-derivatized PDI dye, N,N′-bis(phosphonomethyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide (PMPDI, Fig. 11a), from basic aqueous solution onto ITO, then dipping the film in acidic solution to protonate the phosphonate groups and render the dye film insoluble in neutral water. These 40–50 nm-thick films were then submerged in pH 7 potassium phosphate (KPi)-buffered aqueous solution containing 1 mM Co(NO3)2. With white light illumination and an applied bias of +0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl (providing a driving force for electron collection but below the oxidation potential of CoII), CoII in solution could be oxidized by photogenerated holes in the PMPDI valence band and CoOx was therefore photoelectrochemically deposited throughout the film. XPS studies confirmed that cobalt was retained by the film after rinsing.82
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the ITO/PMPDI/CoOx OTF-PEC photoanode, where PMPDI is N,N′-bis(phosphonomethyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide. (b) J–V curve with intermittent illumination for ITO/PMPDI/CoOx (red line), ITO/PMPDI (green line), and bare ITO (blue line) in pH 7 KPi buffer, 5 mV s−1 scan rate starting from 0.0 V with 5 s light transients. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The J–V curve for these ITO/PMPDI/CoOx anodes submerged in pH 7 KPi with intermittent illumination by a Xe arc lamp (100 mW cm−2, λ = 315–710 nm) reveal anodic photocurrent with initial spikes that then decay to steady-state values over the course of several seconds (Fig. 11b, red trace). The authors attributed this behavior to a balance between the rates of exciton dissociation, charge recombination, and WOC reactions.82 As the applied bias to the ITO substrate was increased, both the spike and steady-state photocurrent steadily increased, likely a result of enhanced rates of exciton dissociation and decreased rates of recombination reactions. The steady-state anodic photocurrent reached as high as 150 μA cm−2 at +0.95 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.56 V vs. RHE).82 According to Table 2, this is the highest water-oxidizing photocurrent reached by an OTF-PEC, which is somewhat surprising given the simple composition of the device. Control experiments with bare ITO (Fig. 11b, blue trace) showed photocurrent <1 μA cm−2, and ITO/PMPDI films without CoOx (Fig. 11b, green trace) showed photocurrent <10 μA cm−2, indicating that CoOx was indeed necessary to improve the efficiency of the OER, and must be electronically coupled with the PMPDI film for charge transfer to occur.
During the scan, dark cathodic current spikes were present for ITO/PMPDI/CoOx anodes but not for ITO/PMPDI controls without CoOx (Fig. 11b). At higher applied potentials, these spikes decrease. This suggests that recombination reactions with hole equivalents stored in the CoOx catalyst are kinetically competitive with the desired OER, but become less favored at higher applied potentials. Steady-state dark current was negligible at potentials up to +1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl (1.61 V vs. RHE). At higher potentials, anodic dark current flowed, corresponding to the onset potential for direct electrochemical WOC by the CoOx catalyst.82 Taken together, these data suggest that the PMPDI film is porous, with CoOx catalyst near to the ITO substrate. Therefore, one hypothesis is that the hydrophilic, anionic phosphonate groups of PMPDI provide H+-conduction channels throughout the organic film, similar to those proposed above for sulfonate groups in the PTTh:MnPor system by Chen and Swiegers et al.90
IPCE experiments were performed in a 2-electrode configuration at short-circuit with a Pt wire counter electrode. The resulting action spectrum was a good match for the absorptance spectrum of the PMPDI film, and reached a maximum IPCE of 0.12%. Unfortunately, given that the ECB of the PMPDI film is not sufficiently negative for the HER,82 the photocurrent flowing during the IPCE measurements could not have corresponded to the overall water-splitting reaction (i.e., the reduction reaction at the Pt counter electrode is unknown, and may have been limiting photocurrents). However, IPCE measurements with added sacrificial reductants such as K4Fe(CN)6 or hydroquinone (H2Q) also matched the PMPDI absorptance spectrum, and reached IPCE values of 0.32% and 0.69%, respectively.82
Importantly, extended photolysis experiments were performed for ITO/PMPDI/CoOx photoanodes at a bias of +1.51 V vs. RHE and O2 product was detected by a Clark electrode with a faradaic efficiency of 80 ± 15%.82 During such experiments, steady-state photocurrent gradually decayed by ∼30% within only 5 min, suggesting some unknown, gradual deactivation of the system that remains to be characterized. In an efficiency analysis, it was determined that the ITO/PMPDI/CoOx system is most limited by the efficiency of charge dissociation and transport82 (i.e., recombination reactions dominate), which may explain why such high applied potentials were needed to reach maximum photocurrents (Fig. 11b). Performance was also significantly limited by the low light absorption by the thin PMPDI films. Thicker films showed worse performance, likely due to the longer exciton diffusion distance.82 In the end, the authors predicted that their system may be improved by employing PMPDI in a DS-PEC architecture (such as those in the following section) due to improved light absorption and possibly decreased recombination.82 A subsequent paper testing this hypothesis will be described in the following section.121
A second example of a water-oxidizing single-layer OTF-PEC system was recently published by Sivula et al. in 2015.92 This system is based on the n-type conjugated polymer poly(benzimidazobenzophananthroline) (BBL, structure shown in Fig. 12). In that study, two separate film deposition methods were used to test the effect of film morphology. In one strategy, films were dip coated onto conducting fluorine-doped tin oxide-coated glass (FTO) from a BBL solution in methanesulfonic acid. In a second strategy, an aqueous solution of BBL nanofibers was prepared by a “wet spinning” method, which was then spray-coated onto a hot FTO substrate. The different film morphologies are shown in SEM images in Fig. 12. The dip-coated film shows homogeneous coverage of the FTO with globular BBL particles ranging from 100–500 nm, whereas the spray-coated films show a rough, interconnected network of BBL nanofibers.92 We note that the nano-structure and film porosity of the latter architecture could potentially result in (i) fully depleted, electric field-free semiconductor and (ii) facile electrolyte transport throughout the film. Both of these factors could eliminate the contribution of charge-carrier migration influenced by macroscopic electric fields, leaving diffusion as the major charge transport process, similar to charge transport within the nanoporous metal oxides in DSSC devices.122,123
 Fig. 12  SEM images of BBL films on FTO prepared by dip-coating (a) and spraying (b), along with optical images of each electrode (c). Panel (d) shows J–V curves for a sprayed film (blue line) and a dip-coated film (red line) in sacrificial electrolyte (0.5 M Na2SO3, pH 7) while under intermittent illumination to the substrate. Scan rate was 10 mV s−1. Reprinted from with permission ref. 92. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
When the two FTO/BBL films of similar thickness (∼40 nm) and similar light absorptance were submerged in pH 7 electrolyte with the sacrificial reductant Na2SO3, J–V curves with intermittent illumination (100 mW cm−2 white light) revealed that photocurrent from the spray-coated film was 6.5-fold higher than the dip-coated film. This suggests that the nanofiber morphology offers advantages of shorter exciton transport distances and higher surface area at the SCLJ where hole transfer occurs.92 In this way, it may be more appropriate to consider such an architecture as an “organic semiconductor–electrolyte bulk heterojunction” rather than a typically planar, Schottky-type PEC. In the absence of sacrificial reductant, thicker spray-coated BBL films (still without WOCatalyst) were subjected to electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and Mott–Schottky analysis in aqueous solutions of varying pH. The results showed evidence for the formation of a depletion region at high applied potentials, and that band energies were approximately constant within the pH range of 3.5 to 10.5.92 As such, the higher photocurrent observed for FTO/BBL anodes in higher-pH solutions is consistent with a higher thermodynamic driving force for the OER (the potential of which shifts negatively with increasing pH).92
IPCE measurements for FTO/BBL anodes in pH 7 buffer with an applied bias of +1.23 V vs. RHE matched the absorptance spectrum of the BBL film. However, no O2 product was detected by GC analysis of the headspace gases under these conditions, so photocurrent observed from the FTO/BBL films could not be attributed to the desired OER. In pH 7 buffer without a sacrificial reductant, a fluorescence probe technique provided evidence that illumination of FTO/BBL anodes generated trace hydroxyl radical, a possible byproduct of photoelectrochemically generated H2O2.92 This suggests that BBL may be capable of the direct (i.e., without an added WOCatalyst) photo-oxidation of water to H2O2, a reaction which requires a higher thermodynamic potential than the OER, but which involves only two electrons instead of four. These FTO/BBL films in pH 7 buffer were subjected to extended photolysis for at least 120 min. Photocurrent decayed by 43% within the first 10 min, then stabilized at a steady-state value. Over the extended electrolysis, the film passed more charge than would have been theoretically required to oxidize the entire BBL film, suggesting that current did not originate from BBL degradation.92 Furthermore, SEM and Raman characterizations of the film before and after the extended photolysis revealed no discernible morphological or structural changes by those physical methods.
In order to catalyze the desired OER, ∼230 nm-thick BBL films were decorated with an earth-abundant Ni–Co WOCatalyst. Attempts to load the catalyst directly onto the BBL surface did not produce O2, possibly due to poor adhesion and/or poor electrical contact. However, when the BBL films were first coated with a thin-film (1 nm) of TiO2 by atomic layer deposition (ALD), then spin coated with nickel and cobalt salts and annealed, a successful interface was achieved.92 In pH 7 buffer, such “buried junction”10 FTO/BBL/TiO2/Ni–Co films reached steady-state photocurrents as high as ∼20 μA cm−2 at an applied potential of +0.9 V vs. RHE. While the application of the TiO2 and Ni–Co catalyst did not significantly enhance photocurrent, they were necessary to observe O2 product, with a faradaic efficiency of 82 ± 16%.
Overall, the Sivula et al. system provides important evidence that the morphology of the OSC film and SCLJ can significantly affect photoelectrochemical performance. Specifically, the small domain size of BBL nanofibers achieved by “wet spinning” and spray-coating appear to enhance the charge-collection efficiency by decreasing the distance that excitons had to travel in order to dissociate at the SCLJ. The high surface area of the SCLJ also likely enhances the efficiency of hole transfer across that interface. Furthermore, BBL exhibits promising stability for an organic material, with no detected evidence for oxidative degradation after 120 min of photolysis. Finally, the use of ALD TiO2 proved to be an effective method to couple the WOCatalyst to the organic dye. Still, Sivula et al. hypothesized that performance was likely limited by interfacial exciton dissociation, and suggested that improvements might be achieved through the use of a solid-state semiconductor heterojunction or charge-separating overlayers.92
Before continuing, we would like to point the interested reader towards additional OTF-PEC photocathodes for the HER,67,75,106,107,115,124–134 although it is beyond the scope of this review to detail each specific system. These include single-bandgap OSC thin-films67,115,126 as well as organic-bilayer heterojunctions124,125 and bulk-heterojunction systems.75,106,107,127–134 This field has benefitted from the fact that the model polymer–fullerene (P3HT:PCBM) bulk-heterojunction OPV has appropriate band energies to drive the HER, which has led to faster progress relative to OTF-PEC photoanodes. Major improvements in cell performance and stability have been achieved not by making significant changes to the light-absorbing layers, but by judicious selection and application of various interfacial layers to enhance charge-collecting efficiencies.75,107,127–133 Additional systems of note include multi-junction OPV/electrolyzer systems,15,16 as well as a (buried) triple-junction OPV artificial leaf.17 Such multi-junction architectures allow for the generation of sufficient photovoltage for overall water splitting.
4. Water oxidizing dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cells (DS-PECs)
Compared to water-oxidizing OTF-PECs, far more DS-PEC systems have been published, and are the subject of several recent review articles.42–52 However, the vast majority of DS-PECs employ RuII(bpy)3-type sensitizer dyes (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) which are historically popular and well-understood in DSSC studies.39,40,135 Indeed, the two top-performing water-oxidizing DS-PECs employ TiO2 nanoparticle films with surface-anchored RuII(bpy)3-type dyes and Ru-based organometallic WOCatalysts.136,137 These cells exhibit steady-state photocurrent as high as ∼1100 μA cm−2 and maximum incident photon-to-current efficiencies (IPCEs)60 as high as 14% (still requiring an applied electrochemical bias and under ∼3 sun, 300 mW cm−2 illumination).136,137 Unfortunately, these Ru-based dyes and catalysts depend on a low-abundance, relatively expensive transition-metal.61 Therefore, this review will highlight the important fundamental studies that have tested DS-PECs containing all-organic sensitizer dyes or organometallic dyes containing first-row transition metals (although most systems to date still employ WOCatalysts composed of rare and expensive metals, see below).
Many all-organic dyes have been studied in DSSCs,40,135,138 as well as dye-sensitized photocatalytic (colloidal suspension) systems.71 Broadly, organic dyes tend to have higher molar extinction coefficients than organometallic complexes, but are more prone to aggregation on the nano-MOx surface, which can enhance non-radiative relaxation processes and result in poor excited-state-injection efficiency.40,135,138 To alleviate aggregation, co-adsorber molecules are sometimes added to the dying solution, or molecular engineering of the dye can include sterically bulky groups to make π-stacking unfavorable.40,135,138 However, it should be noted that examples exist where aggregation has enhanced efficiency due to improved light absorption by the dye aggregates.139
Organic dyes have also been employed in water-splitting DS-PECs, which, of course, has the added requirement that the dye's HOMO energy lies positive of the OER, +1.23 V vs. RHE. In what follows, we will highlight literature examples of water-oxidizing DS-PEC photoanodes in semi-historical order, but organized by sensitizer type. A summary is provided in Table 3. Before continuing, we again point the interested reader towards several published DS-PEC photocathodes for the HER,77,140–148 including many that employ earth-abundant sensitizer dyes.77,141–143,145–148 We note, however, that the performance of DS-PEC photocathodes tend to lag behind that of photoanodes,52 largely due to the lack of an efficient hole-conducting nano-porous substrate, the most common being NiO.40
Table 3 Summary of the known DS-PEC water-oxidizing photoanodes using organic sensitizers




Sensitizera
WOCatalysta
Substrate
Max steady-state photocurrent (conditions)b
Faradaic efficiency
Max IPCE (appl. bias)b,c
Corresponding author(s)





a Abbreviations are defined throughout the text and summarized at the end of the review.
b Applied bias has been converted to the RHE reference electrode for direct comparison between systems.
c Note that IPCEs measured under applied bias ≠ ηSTH.






ZnPor1


Cp*Ir

TiO2
30 μA cm−2 (+0.91 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Na2SO4, 200 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm)
ND
ND
Schmuttenmaer, Crabtree, & Brudvig149


H2Por(s)
IrO2 NPs
TiO2
40 μA cm−2 (+0.70 V vs. RHE, pH 6.8 NaPi, “AM 1.5”, λ > 410 nm)
102 ± 5%
0.036% (+0.70 V)
Mallouk150



ZnPor2


Ru–bda1 (covalent dyad)
TiO2
110 μA cm−2 (+0.23 V vs. RHE, pH 7.3 NaPi, 35 mW cm−2, λ > 380 nm)
33%
17 ± 1% (+0.42 V)
Sun & Imahori151



SubPor


Ru–bda2

TiO2
60 μA cm−2 (+0.64 V vs. RHE, pH 7.3 NaF, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm)
64%
6% (+0.64 V)
Sundström, Sun, & Imahori152



TEPDI

IrO2 NPs
WO3
70 μA cm−2 (+0.92 V vs. RHE, pH 3 NaClO4, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 435 nm)
ND
0.8% (+0.92 V)
Prato, Caramori, & Bignozzi153



PMI


Cp*Ir-Sil

TiO2/Al2O3 core/shell
15 μA cm−2 (+0.71 V vs. RHE, pH 5.8, KNO3, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm)
20%
ND
Wasielewski154



PMPDI

CoOx
SnO2
20 μA cm−2 (+0.82 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi, 45 mW cm−2, λ = 400–710 nm)
31 ± 7%
ND
Kirner & Finke121



D–A


Ru–pdc1

TiO2
300 μA cm−2 (+0.61 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm)
73%
ND
Sun77



D–π–A


Ru–bda3

SnO2/TiO2 core/shell
100 μA cm−2 (+0.86 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Pi, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm)
8.2%
ND
Meyer155


g-C3N4
IrO2 NPs
TiO2
120 μA cm−2 (+1.42 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Pi, λ > 420 nm)
19%
7 ± 1% (+1.42 V)
Beranek81,156


g-C3N4
CoOx
TiO2
100 μA cm−2 (+1.23 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Pi, λ = 315–710 nm)
ND
5.4 ± 0.4% (+1.11 V)
Beranek157,158




4.1. Aromatic macrocycle dyes
As mentioned above, porphyrin and phthalocyanine derivatives have long been studied as light collectors in OPVs, DSSCs, and PECs, in part because of their similarity to chlorophyll pigments used in natural photosynthesis.87 In fact, a porphyrin derivative is responsible for the top-performing DSSC to date.159 As such, it is not surprising that the first example of an organic dye used in a water-oxidizing DS-PEC was a porphyrin, published in 2011 from the groups of Schmuttenmaer, Crabtree, and Brudvig.149 Their system employed a zinc-porphyrin sensitizer dye (ZnPor1, Fig. 13) anchored on the surface of a sintered TiO2 nanoparticle (NP) film. To our knowledge, this was also the first example in the DS-PEC literature to use the strategy of co-loading the nano-TiO2 film with an anchored, molecular WOCatalyst. The specific catalyst employed was an Ir complex with a carboxylic acid anchor group (Cp*Ir, Fig. 13), belonging to a class of Cp*Ir-type WOCatalyst160 originally developed by the groups of Eisenstein, Crabtree, and Brudvig.161 The specific Por dye was functionalized with pentafluorophenyl electron-withdrawing groups (Fig. 13) in order to shift the oxidation potential (HOMO) of the dye sufficiently positive to oxidize the Ir-complex WOCatalyst upon illumination.149
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the water-oxidizing DS-PEC employing a high-potential Zn-porphyrin (ZnPor1) and Ir organometallic WOCatalyst (Cp*Ir), co-anchored on a sintered TiO2 nanoparticle film. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When submerged in pH 7, 0.1 M Na2SO4 and illuminated with 200 mW cm−2 white light (through a 400 nm-long pass filter, to eliminate direct bandgap excitation of TiO2 by UV light), TiO2 films that were co-loaded with both ZnPor1 and the Cp*Ir WOCatalyst (TiO2/ZnPor1:Cp*Ir) exhibited photocurrent of ∼30 μA cm−2 at an applied bias of +0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+0.91 V vs. RHE). Controls with only ZnPor1 or Cp*Ir anchored to TiO2 both reached photocurrent of only ∼5 μA cm−2. Rotating ring-disc experiments were used to confirm O2 production by TiO2 films loaded with Cp*Ir WOCatalyst under electrochemical conditions, albeit not for the full device under photoelectrochemical conditions. The authors concluded that the photocurrent controls were consistent with light-activation of the catalyst by electron injection from the photoexcited dye into the TiO2 CB, followed by hole transfer from the photo-oxidized dye(s) to Ir sites.149 Overall, this system constitutes the first example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC employing a dye composed only of earth-abundant elements, and also the first example of any DS-PEC using the strategy of co-anchoring a molecular WOCatalyst.149
In 2015, the Mallouk group reported the results of a study in which they employed a series of metal-free porphyrin derivatives (H2Por) as sensitizers on TiO2 films, along with co-loaded IrO2 NP WOCatalyst.150 Following a previous study,85 citrate-capped IrOx NPs (∼2 nm diameter) were loaded onto bare TiO2 films (prior to dye loading) by soaking from colloidal solution, followed by calcination at 450 °C to burn off the ligands and crystallize the IrO2 NPs. Such crystalline IrO2 particles are more active WOCatalyst, but their location directly on the surface of TiO2 makes the scavenging of TiO2 CB electrons by the catalyst the dominant recombination pathway.85 To minimize recombination, the concentration of IrO2 NPs was kept low. However, this strategy adds the requirement that the dye monolayer be conductive to holes in order for the highly dispersed catalyst to regenerate as many surrounding, photo-oxidized dye molecules as possible (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Schematic of the DS-PEC system composed of H2Por-sensitized TiO2 co-loaded with IrO2 nanoparticle WOCatalyst. The scheme displays various electron transfer processes: (i) injection, (ii) recombination, (iii) hole migration, (iv) regeneration of oxidized sensitizer, and (v) electron diffusion to the FTO substrate. Reproduced from ref. 150. 
The series of porphyrin derivatives included differing numbers and positions of sterically bulky mesityl (electron donating) groups, as well as a few derivatives with multiple carboxylate (electron withdrawing) groups. These varying substitutions shifted the oxidation potentials of the dyes over a range of roughly 200 mV.150 In pH 6.8 sodium phosphate (NaPi) buffer and illumination by a Xe arc lamp through AM1.5 and 410 nm long-pass filters, TiO2/H2Por:IrO2 photoanodes exhibited peak photocurrent spikes followed by steady, gradual decay. The best porphyrin dye reached a peak photocurrent spike of ∼85 μA cm−2, which decayed down to ∼40 μA cm−2 after 15 s and down to ∼10 μA cm−2 after 10 min.150 Other dyes in the series exhibited photocurrents within the same order of magnitude. Differences in performance were somewhat less pronounced than expected by the varying electronic properties. The authors rationalized this result based on energetic tradeoffs: dyes with more negative HOMO and LUMO energies had a higher driving force for electron injection into TiO2, but a lower driving force for the OER.150 Most of the TiO2/H2Por:IrO2 anodes studied showed no appreciable change in the UV-vis spectra after 10 min of electrolysis, indicating their general stability at least over that timescale. IPCE values were estimated by the lamp power and the integrated current collected over 10 min, reaching only 0.036 ± 0.007% at best.150
The faradaic efficiency for O2 production measured for one representative dye was 102 ± 5%.150 For this calculation, O2 product was detected electrochemically in solution by a previously developed generator–collector method83–86 wherein a planar, platinized electrode (collector) is sandwiched several mm away from the working electrode (generator) and held at a potential sufficient to reduce any O2 that diffuses from the working electrode. While this technique is not rigorously selective for O2 (any chemical species that reaches the collector and that can also be reduced at the applied potential could also contribute to collector current), controls using various applied potentials for both generator and collector electrodes can improve confidence that O2 is the product being detected.162 Furthermore, the high collection efficiency (i.e., high sensitivity) achievable by the generator–collector method makes it especially useful to the DS-PEC field where photocurrents are often quite small and can decay quickly.
As an important control, results for the H2Por dyes were compared to the better-studied [RuII(bpy)2(4,4′-(PO3H2)2bpy)]2+ dye (RuP hereafter) under the same conditions.150 Despite absorption of a wider portion of visible light by the H2Por dyes and comparable dye surface loading, photocurrents for the H2Por dyes were roughly half those achieved by the RuP dye. The authors determined that this result was at least partially caused by (i) lower excited-state electron-injection efficiencies (approximated by the absorbed photon-to-current efficiencies of 2.4 to 7.4% for the various H2Por dyes vs. 21% for RuP), despite similar thermodynamic driving force for injection of ∼130 mV, and (ii) low hole diffusion coefficients through the dye monolayer (not detectable, <10−11 cm2 s−1 for the H2Por dyes compared to 10−9 to 10−10 cm2 s−1 typically for RuP).150 All in all, this valuable study demonstrated that a variety of all-organic H2Por dyes are capable of photoelectrochemically-driven water oxidation in DS-PEC architectures, and with IrO2 NP WOCatalyst.
In early 2016, the groups of Sun and Imahori co-published a third example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC employing an aromatic macrocycle sensitizer dye, specifically another Zn-Por derivative.151 This group used an alternative strategy wherein the sensitizer and the WOCatalyst are covalently attached as a molecular dyad (Ru-ZnP, Fig. 15). The chosen WOCatalyst has the [Ru(bda)(pic)2] structural motif160 (bda = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate, pic = 4-picoline) developed by the Sun group,163 structures which have among the highest water-oxidation turnover frequencies for molecular catalysts.160 Hereafter, we will use the nomenclature of Ru–bda to describe this class of catalyst which contains both bda and pic ligands, either of which may be functionalized with anchor or linking groups. Note that in Table 3, we refer to the Ru-ZnP dyad as separate components ZnPor2 and Ru–bda1 to indicate the respective molecular components. The molecular dyad strategy follows from the hypothesis that a covalent linkage will ensure that the WOCatalyst is always in close proximity to the sensitizer dye and should promote rapid electron transfer from the WOCatalyst to the photo-oxidized dye after excited state electron injection into the TiO2 CB (Fig. 15). Such a configuration should also negate the need for extended hole conductivity across the dye monolayer, as required for the previous system depicted in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 15  (upper) A schematic diagram of the DS-PEC composed of a molecular sensitizer–catalyst dyad (Ru-ZnP) anchored to nano-TiO2. (lower) The current–time responses for TiO2/Ru-ZnP (black), TiO2/ZnP-ref:Ru-ref (blue), TiO2/ZnP-ref (red), and TiO2/Ru-ref (green) electrodes under intermittent white light illumination in pH 7.3 buffer and at +0.23 V vs. RHE. Reproduced from ref. 151-published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When submerged in pH 7.3, 0.1 M NaPi buffer and illuminated with a halogen lamp (35 mW cm−2, λ > 380 nm; note the possible direct bandgap excitation of TiO2) and held at a potential of +0.23 V vs. RHE, a TiO2 film dyed with the molecular dyad (Ru-ZnP) exhibited a peak photocurrent of ∼180 μA cm−2, which quickly decayed to ∼110 μA cm−2 after 10 s of illumination. At the end of two additional 10 s light transients, steady-state photocurrent had decayed by ∼35% to 70 μA cm−2 (Fig. 15). The photocurrent action spectrum was a good match for the dye's absorptance spectrum, with a maximum IPCE value of 17% at the λmax of the dye. Notably, this maximum IPCE value for the TiO2/Ru-ZnP system is higher than the best-performing (highest photocurrent) water-oxidizing DS-PEC to date,136 which used the common RuP dye with a co-anchored Ru–bda catalyst (TiO2/Ru(bpy)3:Ru–bda).136 That system reached an IPCE of 14%, although with a higher faradaic efficiency of 83% (ref. 136) (see below).
As an important control, individual molecular analogues of the individual components of the Ru-ZnP dyad were also prepared (ZnP-ref and Ru-ref, respectively, as notated in Fig. 15).151 Control photoanodes were prepared by adsorbing only ZnP-ref, only Ru-ref, or co-adsorbed ZnP-ref:Ru-ref in a 1:1 molar ratio. Under the same conditions as above, TiO2/ZnP-ref anodes without catalyst showed steady-state photocurrents of ∼30 μA cm−2 and TiO2/Ru-ref anodes without dye showed steady-state photocurrents of ∼10 μA cm−2 (Fig. 15). Surprisingly, co-adsorbed TiO2/ZnP-ref:Ru-ref anodes showed no photocurrent enhancement relative to the TiO2/Zn-ref anode (Fig. 15), which suggests inefficient intermolecular electron transfer from the Ru–bda WOCatalyst to the ZnPor dye when they are not covalently linked.151
The rapid decay in photocurrent for the TiO2/Ru-ZnP anode shown in Fig. 15 suggests some instability to the system. Consistent with this, O2 detection experiments found a faradaic efficiency of only 33% during 1 h of photolysis with a turnover number of only 1.3 per Ru-ZnP dyad. UV-visible, IR, and XPS studies of the films before and after 1 h of photolysis gave no indication that the Ru-ZnP dimer degraded or desorbed, but the Ru component had evolved to higher oxidation states. Therefore, the authors concluded that the Zn-Por dye was not sufficiently oxidizing to generate the higher oxidation states of Ru at appreciable turnover rates.151 An alternative hypothesis for the low faradaic efficiency is oxidation of the poly(ethylene glycol) chains of the dye structure (Fig. 15, the purpose of which were not discussed in the paper, but may have alleviated dye aggregation), a conceivable degradation pathway that may not have been detectable by the characterization methods employed.
Near the end of 2016, the groups of Sundström, Sun, and Imahori published an additional DS-PEC system which employed a novel subporphyrin sensitizer dye, SubPor.152SubPor incorporates a carboxyphenyl electron-withdrawing anchor group and two triphenylamine electron-donating groups (Fig. 16). The molecule can therefore be considered a donor–acceptor (D–A) type dye, or “push–pull” dye, wherein the electron density of the HOMO is spatially distributed closer to the triphenylamine groups and the electron density of the LUMO is spatially distributed closer to the anchor group.152 This type of electronic engineering of the dye is expected to enhance electron injection from the excited state into TiO2via the anchor group, and decrease recombination because the hole (empty HOMO) is distributed further away from the TiO2 surface. Anodes were prepared by stepwise co-adsorption of SubPor and a Ru–bda type WOCatalyst (Ru–bda2, Fig. 16) in a ratio of 7.5:1. Importantly, the groups of Gao and Sun had previously found that using a propylene spacer between the Ru–bda WOCatalyst and the phosphonate anchor group showed superior performance relative to a methylene spacer.164 This may be a result of enhanced linker flexibility improving the efficiency with which the catalyst can regenerate surrounding photo-oxidized dye, or possibly a result of a decreased rate of recombination between the catalyst and the CB electrons in the MOx because of the increased linker distance.
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the DS-PEC system composed of a “push–pull” subporphyrin sensitizer dye (SubPor) and a Ru–bda type WOCatalyst (Ru–bda2) co-anchored on nano-TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 152-published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When submerged in pH 7, 0.1 M NaF solution (this electrolyte showed a ∼50% improvement in photocurrent relative to NaPi) and illuminated with white LED light (100 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm), anodes with co-loaded TiO2/SubPor:Ru–bda2 exhibited photocurrents which stabilized at ∼60 μA cm−2 after 30 s. Controls using anodes with only SubPor or only Ru–bda2 loaded on TiO2 showed photocurrents of 6 and 0 μA cm−2, respectively. The action spectrum for TiO2/SubPor:Ru–bda2 anodes was a close match for the absorptance spectrum of SubPor, with a maximum IPCE of 6% at the λmax of the dye. Oxygen gas was measured by GC after 1 h of photolysis with a faradaic efficiency of 64% and a catalytic turnover number of 27 ± 4. H218O labeling studies showed 18O2 product as well as trace 18O-labeled CO2, suggesting that oxidative decomposition of SubPor and/or the Ru–bda2 catalyst occurred along with water oxidation.164
Importantly, transient-absorption spectroscopy experiments helped elucidate some of the kinetics of the relevant electron-transfer processes. The formation of photo-oxidized SubPor on TiO2 (without catalyst) was observed with a time constant of 800 fs after a pump light pulse, providing evidence for the expected rapid electron injection from photoexcited SubPor* into TiO2. The oxidized dye was returned to the ground state (by back-electron-transfer) with a half-life on the order of tens of ns, despite the push–pull dye engineering. However, the rate constant fitted to the ground-state recovery trace was accelerated 85% in the presence of co-adsorbed Ru–bda2 catalyst, indicating competitive electron transfer from the catalyst to the oxidized dye. The authors concluded that undesired rapid back-electron-transfer from TiO2 to the photo-oxidized dye greatly limits the water-splitting efficiency, and as such, improving electron–hole separation should be the focus of future systems.164
In early 2016, the Jiang group published a rather non-conventional DS-PEC,165 in that the high-surface-area, charge-transporting substrate was composed of carbon nanotubes (CNTs, rolled sheets of graphene) instead of sintered MOx nanoparticles. CNTs are known to have excellent charge transport properties due to their high conductivity and high aspect ratios.165 Previously the Jiang group also showed that multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs, concentric tubes) with 2–3 walls showed promising electrochemical water-oxidation activity relative to those with higher numbers of walls or single-walled nanotubes.166 In the current study, commercial MWCNTs (5–30 μm length) were purified and separated into fractions by a series of acid washes with sonication, and then suspended in ethanol solutions with 10% Nafion and various dyes: zinc(II) phthalocyanine (ZnPc), cobalt(II) phthalocyanine (CoPc), and [RuII(bpy)3]2+. These solutions were pipetted onto FTO glass and dried to form photoactive films of ∼1 μm thickness, containing dye adsorbed on CNTs suspended within the water-and H+-permeable Nafion matrix. A representative film was 60 wt% ZnPc, which was uniformly adsorbed onto MWCNTs by π–π stacking as determined by STEM-EDS.165
The ZnPc dye on MWCNTs showed a relatively weak light-absorption band in the visible region with λmax of 665 nm, but strong absorption at λ < 350 nm. Light absorption by dyed CNT films was a distinct function of the nanotube composition (i.e., the average number of CNT walls in the sample), with the highest light absorption by samples composed of mostly 3-walled CNTs (57% 3-walled CNTs, 20% 4-walled CNTs, and 19% 5-walled CNTs).165,166 This phenomenon was not explained, but may be a result of the differing surface areas of the CNT films,166 differing electronic coupling between the dyes and CNTs as a function of CNT diameter, or possibly a combination of the two. When submerged in 1 M KOH (pH 14) and illuminated with intermittent white light from a xenon arc lamp (100 mW cm−2, λ > 250 nm), FTO/CNT/ZnPc anodes showed varying photocurrents, which were also a function of the CNT film composition. Consistent with the light absorption trends, FTO/CNT/ZnPc samples composed of mostly 3-walled CNTs showed the highest photocurrents of 280 μA cm−2 at +1.2 V vs. RHE, which is quite high compared to other water-oxidizing DS-PEC systems (Table 2). By contrast, FTO/CNT/ZnPc films composed of mostly single-walled CNTs showed roughly 2.5-fold lower photocurrents, and those composed of CNTs with >12 walls showed 4-fold lower photocurrents. Bubbles were observed on CNT/ZnPc films during photolysis, although analysis of the evolved gas to confirm O2 product was not reported.165
For comparison, un-dyed CNT films containing mostly 3-walled CNTs displayed photocurrents of <50 μA cm−2 at +1.2 V vs. RHE. Films dyed with CoPc or [Ru(bpy)3]2+ dyes showed photocurrents that were roughly 2-fold lower and 2-fold higher, respectively, when compared to ZnPc-dyed CNT films at +1.2 V vs. RHE.165 The authors hypothesized that the films composed of mostly 3-walled CNTs showed the highest PEC activity because of enhanced electron–hole separation, as represented in Fig. 17. They propose that electron injection from the photoexcited dye to the outer CNT is followed by rapid electron tunneling to the inner tube(s), where the electron then diffuses to the conductive FTO substrate.165 Given the previously demonstrated activity of MWCNTs for WOC,166 the authors hypothesized that the outer-most CNT may transfer an electron to regenerate the photo-oxidized dye, and the OER may occur on the CNT surface.165 Additional studies are needed to confirm that these proposed electron-transfer processes are energetically favorable.
 Fig. 17  Scheme for a PEC composed of a film of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) sensitized with a zinc-phthalocyanine (ZnPc) dye. Electron injection is postulated to occur from the photoexcited dye into the outer carbon nanotube, followed by electron tunneling to the interior of the nanotube providing electron–hole separation. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Finally, we would like to draw attention to an alternative, noteworthy strategy for preparing a water-oxidizing DS-PEC. Instead of sensitizing nanostructured anodes with molecular analogues of the natural water-oxidizing photosystem II (PSII), several research groups have extracted the actual PSII complexes from biological samples and loaded them on high-surface-area electrodes to perform photoelectrochemical WOC.167–169 Such systems have achieved oxygen-evolving photocurrents as high as ∼275 μA cm−2 at +0.5 V vs. NHE in pH 6.5 buffer (+0.88 V vs. RHE), although rapid decay of photocurrents with half-lives of <5 min indicate major stability concerns that remain to be overcome.169
In summary, aromatic macrocycle sensitizer dyes such as porphyrins, subporphyrins, and phthalocyanines have been the most commonly studied organic dyes for water-oxidizing DS-PECs. There are also many additional fundamental studies concerning aromatic macrocycle dyes in DS-PECs en-route to (but not achieving) water oxidation.170–180 While these dyes are inspired by chromophores found in natural photosynthesis and absorb farther into the visible than the more common RuP sensitizer, they still have not extended light absorption beyond ∼650 nm, leaving room for additional improvements.
4.2. Perylene dyes
Like porphyrins and phthalocyanines, perylene diimide (PDI) molecules garnered early attention for OPV and PEC studies due to their unique properties, including high molar extinction coefficients; positive band energies; liquid crystalline behavior; high electron mobility; as well as high thermal, oxidative, and photochemical stability.64 The same properties have made perylene dyes popular materials for water-splitting applications, such as the OTF-PEC systems highlighted above.82,88,89,91,181 In addition, it has recently been demonstrated that suspended colloidal PTCDA or PDI nanostructures in the presence of sacrificial reductant are capable of light-driven water oxidation even without an intentionally added WOCatalyst.102,182,183 Several studies have demonstrated the ability of PDIs to advance the oxidation states of WOCatalyst,181,184–186 and to sensitize metal oxides in DS-PEC architectures,185–188 but successful demonstration of water oxidation had remained elusive.
In 2015 the groups of Prato, Caramori, and Bignozzi published the first example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC system using the cationic perylene derivative [N,N′-bis(2-(trimethylammonium)-ethylene)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide](PF6)2 (TEPDI), co-loaded onto a nanostructured WO3 substrate with citrate-stabilized IrO2 NP WOCatalyst (Fig. 18).153 In addition to WO3, the group also studied the sensitization of nanostructured TiO2 and SnO2 with their cationic PDI. This allowed for the comparison of injection dynamics from the relatively positive LUMO of TEPDI into substrates with different CB energies. TEPDI was able to adsorb on each of these materials, despite its lack of traditional carboxylate or phosphonate anchor groups. The authors hypothesized that the adsorption was caused by “aggregation/hydrophobic interactions”.153 In a DSSC configuration with iodide redox mediator, photocurrent was highest on WO3, followed by SnO2, then TiO2. Consistently, transient spectroscopy experiments showed decreasing rates of injection from photoexcited TEPDI* into the semiconductor CB in the order WO3 > SnO2 > TiO2,153 likely caused by an assumed decreasing thermodynamic driving force in that order.6,121 Furthermore, the WO3 surface is the most acidic (lowest isoelectric point)189 in the series, so the authors hypothesized that its negative surface charge even at low pH may enhance electronic coupling to the cationic TEPDI.153
 Fig. 18  Schematic of the DS-PEC device composed of a nanostructured WO3 film sensitized with a cationic PDI dye, TEPDI, and decorated with IrO2 NP WOCatalyst. “Photoinduced electron injection by PBI loaded on WO3 by exploiting aggregation forces, triggers water oxidation at co-deposited IrO2 nanoparticles”. Reproduced from ref. 50 (copyright 2016 Springer International Publishing Switzerland) with permission from Springer. 
After decoration with IrO2 NP WOCatalyst, optimized WO3/TEPDI:IrO2 anodes were submerged in pH 3, 0.1 M NaClO4 and illuminated with AM1.5G light (∼100 mW cm−2, λ > 435 nm). Steady-state photocurrent reached as high as ∼70 μA cm−2 at +0.92 V vs. RHE. For comparison, WO3/TEPDI anodes without IrO2 under the same conditions reached photocurrent of only ∼16 μA cm−2, and WO3/IrO2 anodes without dye reached photocurrent of ∼8 μA cm−2. Unfortunately, WOC was not confirmed by the detection of O2 products, but instead inferred from the previously demonstrated190 activity of the IrO2 NP catalyst. Action spectra were not a direct match to the TEPDI absorption spectrum, indicating that some light absorption by the yellow WO3 may contribute to photocurrent, and a maximum IPCE of 0.8% was reached. Transient absorption spectroscopy indicated that regeneration of photo-oxidized TEPDI+ by IrO2 occurs on the same timescale as back-electron-transfer recombination, and therefore is likely the kinetic bottleneck of the device.153
A second example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC using a perylene sensitizer was published in 2017 from the group of Wasielewski et al.154 In that study, a perylene monoimide (PMI, Fig. 19) dye was used to sensitize nano-TiO2. Following literature precedent,191,192 the dyed anode was subsequently treated with varying thicknesses of Al2O3 overlayer by atomic layer deposition (ALD). The Al2O3 overlayers were found to enhance the stability of PMI on the TiO2 surface relative to untreated films.154 ALD overlayers have also previously been shown to reduce recombination between conduction band electrons and oxidants at the surface or in solution, due to the passivation of MOx surface states and the creation of a distance-based barrier for electron tunneling.193,194 After ALD treatment, TiO2/PMI/Al2O3 films were decorated with either a dimeric, IrIr, WOCatalyst which binds directly to the MOx surface195 (Fig. 19, right panel) or a monomeric Cp*Ir-type WOCatalyst with a phenylene spacer and strongly-binding silatrane anchor group, Cp*Ir-Sil196 (Fig. 19, left panel).
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of a nano-TiO2 film sensitized with perylene monoimide (PMI). The dyed film was subsequently treated with an Al2O3 overlayer by atomic layer deposition to partially encapsulate the dye, increasing its stability. The TiO2/PMI/Al2O3 films were subsequently decorated with monomeric Cp*Ir-Sil (left panel) or dimeric IrIr (right panel) WOCatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Transient absorption spectroscopy of the dry films suggested that TiO2/PMI can oxidize both IrIr and Cp*Ir-Sil to form the TiO2(−)/PMI/Al2O3/Cat(+) charge-separated state.154 Thicker Al2O3 layers slow the rate of charge transfer between catalyst and dye, but also increase the lifetime of the TiO2(−)/PMI/Al2O3/Cat(+) charge-separated state.154 In aqueous electrolyte and illumination (∼100 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm), photocurrents for TiO2/PMI/Al2O3 anodes without catalyst were enhanced for samples with thicker Al2O3 layers up to 20 deposition cycles, likely due to passivation of recombination-active TiO2 surface states and an increased distance-based barrier for tunneling recombination with any redox-active species in solution.154 The addition of IrIr catalyst always produced lower photocurrents than without catalyst, likely due to relatively fast recombination between IrIr+ and electrons in the TiO2 conduction band. Indeed, increased thicknesses of Al2O3 between TiO2 and IrIr resulted in improved photocurrent as a result of the increased barrier to recombination by electron tunneling.154
In the case of Cp*Ir-Sil, photocurrent was always higher than without catalyst, and the presence and thickness of the Al2O3 layer had minimal effect.154 This likely indicates the effectiveness of the phenyl spacer group to decrease the rate of recombination. In pH 5.8, 0.1 M KNO3 solution, TiO2/PMI/Al2O3/Cp*Ir-Sil anodes reached ∼15 μA cm−2 at +0.4 V vs. NHE (+0.71 V vs. RHE). However, photocurrent decayed by ∼66% over 5 min of repeated scans, despite the Al2O3 encapsulation. Given the demonstrated improved stability of PMI dye with ALD Al2O3 encapsulation, the most likely degradation mechanism would seem to be catalyst instability. Oxygen quantification was done by the generator–collector method, which indicated roughly 20% faradaic efficiency for films with either IrIr or Cp*Ir-Sil catalyst, and surprisingly, even without catalyst (Wasielewski et al. also cautioned that the G–C method could detect degradation products in addition to O2).154 All in all, this study provides a second example where a spacer group between the WOCatalyst and its anchor group (Cp*Ir-Sil) can reduce recombination. It also demonstrates that encapsulation of dye with ALD overlayers is one possible strategy to improve stability of dye molecules in DS-PECs. However, such overlayers may also interfere with charge transfer from oxidized dye to WOCatalyst, so that a balance between overlayer thickness and WOCatalyst spacer length may be required for efficient water-oxidation catalysis.
Also in 2017, a third example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC with a perylene sensitizer was published by Kirner and Finke.121 In this study, the same bis-phosphonate functionalized PMPDI dye previously employed in a water-oxidizing OTF-PEC82 (see Fig. 11 above) was applied in a DS-PEC architecture. Following the example of the Bignozzi group,153PMPDI was studied for the sensitization of nanostructured TiO2, SnO2, and WO3 films. Whereas the Bignozzi group found the best performance for their cationic TEPDI dye on WO3,153 Kirner and Finke found that the anionic phosphonate anchor groups of PMPDI would not bind to the acidic WO3 surface. Instead, PMPDI had a higher surface loading on TiO2 than SnO2, but significantly higher preliminary photocurrent on SnO2, consistent with a higher driving force for charge injection into the more positive conduction band of SnO2. After optimizing the dye-loading procedures for SnO2, the SnO2/PMPDI anodes reached a maximum light-harvesting efficiency (absorptance) of ∼100%,121 compared to just 12% in the previous OTF-PEC architecture.82 Furthermore, maximum absorbed photon-to-current efficiency measurements in the presence of hydroquinone sacrificial reductant reached 13% for the SnO2/PMPDI DS-PEC, compared to just 6% for the previous OTF-PEC architecture.
However and unlike the previous study, where the photoelectrochemical deposition of CoOx WOCatalyst greatly enhanced photocurrent of the OTF-PEC system in pH 7 buffer,82 the photoelectrochemical deposition of CoOx on the SnO2/PMPDI anode with DS-PEC architecture typically decreased steady-state photocurrent by a factor of 2–3, reaching only ∼20 μA cm−2 (+0.82 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi buffer, 45 mW cm−2, 400–710 nm). Open-circuit voltage measurements confirmed that the deposition of CoOx enhanced recombination; CoOx was likely deposited directly on the SnO2 surface, where it can scavenge electrons from the SnO2 CB. Despite this enhanced recombination, G–C measurements indicated that SnO2/PMPDI:CoOx anodes were capable of water oxidation with a faradaic efficiency of 31 ± 7%.121 Significantly, this represents only the second example in the literature of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC composed entirely of earth-abundant elements, including both the sensitizer and the catalyst (the first literature example is discussed below in Section 4.4).
4.3. All organic donor–acceptor (D–A) dyes
Many donor–acceptor (D–A), or “push–pull” type dyes have been employed in DSSC studies.40,135,138 In 2015, the Sun group published the first example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC using this class of sensitizer dye.77 In this work, they employed a D–A dye consisting of a common triphenylamine donor group and a cyanoacrylic acid acceptor/anchor group (D–A, Fig. 20). This dye was co-loaded onto TiO2 with a derivative of the [Ru(pdc)(pic)3] (pdc = 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylate) WOCatalyst structural motif (Fig. 20), which was also developed by the Sun group.197 Hereafter, we will use the nomenclature of Ru–pdc to describe this class of catalyst containing the pdc and pic ligands, either of which may be functionalized with anchor or linking groups. We will refer to the specific catalyst used in this study as Ru–pdc1, which also employed a pdc ligand as a strong anchoring group. Impressively, this paper also demonstrates a rare example of a p/n-DS-PEC tandem cell capable of overall water splitting without an applied bias. The photocathode utilized a different D–A type dye, co-loaded onto NiO with a cobalt complex proton-reduction catalyst (Fig. 20).77
 Fig. 20  Schematic representation of a water-splitting p/n-DS-PEC tandem cell. The photoanode (left) is composed of a D–A sensitizer dye co-loaded onto TiO2 with a Ru–pdc WOCatalyst (Ru–pdc1). The photocathode (right) is composed of a different D–A type sensitizer dye co-loaded onto NiO with a cobalt complex proton-reduction catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Focusing on the anode, it was noted that D–A was loaded onto TiO2afterRu–pdc1, in an attempt to prevent significant aggregation of D–A on the surface.77 When submerged in pH 7, 0.05 M KPi buffer and illuminated with white LED light (100 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm), TiO2/D–A:Ru–pdc1 anodes achieved steady-state photocurrents of ∼300 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) (+0.62 V vs. RHE), which is the highest photocurrent to date for DS-PECs with organic dyes. Importantly, this photocurrent is 3-fold higher and is achievable at a lower applied potential compared to similar photoanodes prepared with the common RuP sensitizer dye and the same WOCatalyst.76 Under the same conditions, controls of TiO2/D–A with no catalyst showed photocurrent of ∼30 μA cm−2 (10-fold lower), and TiO2/Ru–pdc1 with no dye showed photocurrents of only 6 μA cm−2 (50-fold lower). Notably, in the TiO2/D–A:Ru–pdc1 anodes, light absorption by the Ru–pdc1 catalyst is stronger and covers a broader wavelength range than by the D–A dye, yet photocurrent for TiO2/Ru–pdc1 without D–A was not significant.77 Therefore, it is possible that D–A functions as both a sensitizer and an electron-transfer mediator for electron injection from photoexcited Ru–pdc1 catalyst. This could be elucidated by the action spectrum of the TiO2/D–A:Ru–pdc1 anode, although one was not reported.
During extended photolysis at +0.62 V vs. RHE, steady-state photocurrent from TiO2/D–A:Ru–pdc1 anodes decayed by ∼30% to 200 μA cm−2 after 5 min, and by ∼70% to 80 μA cm−2 after 60 min, indicating some degree of instability. Consistent with this, O2 product generated over the 60 min period was detected by GC with a faradaic efficiency of 73%. For the fully-assembled tandem cell depicted in Fig. 19, photocurrent of ∼70 μA cm−2 was achieved in a 2-electrode configuration with no applied bias, and a faradaic efficiency for H2 generation of 55% was measured. This corresponds to an overall solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, ηSTH, of 0.05%. Interestingly, it was found that the photocathode was the kinetic bottleneck of this tandem device, owing to the poor hole-transport properties of the nanostructured NiO film.77
The Sun group published a subsequent DS-PEC system in late 2016 employing a subporphyrin D–A dye,152 which has already been detailed in Section 4.1 above. In early 2016, the Meyer group published their own system155 employing a dye molecule with donor and acceptor units separated by a π-conjugated bridge, a structural motif commonly abbreviated138 as D–π–A. The specific dye employed in the Meyer group study consisted of a triphenylphosphine donor group, π-conjugated thiophene bridge, and a cyano acceptor group with phosphonate anchor, D–π–A. This dye was co-loaded onto the substrate with a Ru–bda type WOCatalyst with phosphonate anchor groups, Ru–bda3 (Fig. 21). An additional strategy employed in this work was to use a nanostructured SnO2/TiO2 core/shell film, wherein a sintered film of SnO2 nanoparticles (∼20 nm diameter) was subsequently treated by atomic layer deposition to form a 3 nm thick TiO2 shell, then dyed with D–π–A.155 As shown in Fig. 22, the core/shell strategy can be viewed as a functional analogue of nature's PSII, in that a cascade of electronic energy levels is designed to thermodynamically drive electrons and holes in different spatial direction in order to decrease the probability of recombination.87
 Fig. 21  Schematic of a DS-PEC composed of D–π–A sensitizer dye co-loaded with a Ru–bda type WOCatalyst (Ru–bda3) on a nanoparticle film of core/shell SnO2/TiO2. The green electrode represents the generator–collector technique used to detect photogenerated O2 in solution. Upper plot: current–time trace for the generator electrode composed of TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 (black line) and core/shell SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 (red line) electrodes with 100 mW cm−2 illumination in pH 7 Pi with +0.88 V vs. RHE. Lower plot: current–time traces at the O2-collector electrode at −0.20 V vs. RHE. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 22  Schematic energy diagram for a DS-PEC employing a core/shell semiconductor substrate. Photo-excitation of the dye is followed by injection into the CB of the TiO2 shell, followed by injection into the CB of the SnO2 core. This enhances spatial separation between the injected electron and the hole on the oxidized dye molecule, reducing the rate of recombination by back electron transfer and thereby allowing more time for regeneration by the WOCatalyst. 
Nanosecond transient-absorption spectroscopy experiments indicated rapid injection (complete within 20 ns) from photoexcited D–π–A* into both TiO2 and SnO2/TiO2 core/shell films.155 By following the decay of the absorption signature of photo-oxidized D–π–A+ (due to back-electron-transfer recombination), it was found that the half-life for the oxidized dye on TiO2 films was 170 ns, whereas on SnO2/TiO2 core/shell films the half-life was 1020 ns, or six-fold longer, and thereby confirming the expected decrease in recombination by employing the core/shell strategy. Photocurrent–time measurements in pH 7, 0.1 M phosphate buffer with 20 mM hydroquinone sacrificial reductant and illumination with white light (100 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm) produced photocurrents up to ∼2500 μA cm−2 for SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A anodes at +0.2 V vs. SCE (+0.86 V vs. RHE) as compared to only ∼100 μA cm−2 in controls for TiO2/D–π–A anodes examined under the same conditions, results which again demonstrate the enhanced charge separation for the core/shell film. The action spectrum for SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A (still with hydroquinone as a sacrificial reductant) were a good match for the dye's absorption spectrum, reaching a maximum IPCE value of ∼21%.155
To explore water-oxidation catalysis, D–π–A dye and Ru–bda3 WOCatalyst were co-loaded onto SnO2/TiO2 films with a ratio of 5:1, respectively. Photolysis experiments with SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 anodes in pH 7 buffer (now in the absence of hydroquinone) produced steady-state photocurrent of ∼100 μA cm−2 after 60 s. For comparison, TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 anodes without the core/shell structure produced no photocurrent under the same conditions, indicating that back-electron-transfer recombination out-competes hole transfer to the WOCatalyst. Curiously, SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A anodes without catalyst also produced comparable photocurrents to those with catalyst.155 The O2 product was detected directly in solution by the generator–collector technique adapted from the Mallouk group.85 Representative current profiles for generator (photolysis) and collector (O2 detection) electrodes are includes in the upper-right portion of Fig. 21. Significant O2 product was not detected for either SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A anodes without catalyst, or TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 anodes without the core/shell structure. Dioxygen product was detected for SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 anodes, but even then the faradaic efficiency was only 8.2%, indicating that the majority of photocurrent did not yield the desired O2 product.155
The oxidative stability of D–π–A was studied by CV on nanoparticle TiO2 films in both acetonitrile and water solutions. In acetonitrile, a reversible oxidative wave was observed even after 50 repeated CV cycles. By contrast, in pH 7 aqueous electrolyte the oxidative wave was irreversible and gradually decayed to practically zero within 50 cycles. This indicates the oxidative instability of D–π–A in aqueous solution, which in turn provides the most likely explanation for the low faradaic efficiency measured under water-oxidation conditions. Importantly, the authors pointed out that photocurrents from SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A anodes in aqueous solution were much more stable over the course of 15 min when in the presence of hydroquinone sacrificial reductant, indicating that even this relatively unstable dye could cycle repeatedly when kinetically protected against oxidative degradation by rapid electron transfer from an excess of the easily oxidized hydroquinone.155 Put more generally, the results imply that even all-organic dyes may be capable of kinetic stability in water-oxidizing DS-PECs if strategies can be devised to promote rapid regeneration of the photo-oxidized dye on a timescale competitive with recombination and degradative oxidation reactions. This highlights the need for efficient hole transfer from light-harvesting materials to WOCatalysts and for highly active (rapid turnover rate) WOCatalysts.
4.4. Polymeric sensitizers
In addition to molecular sensitizers, light-absorbing conjugated organic polymers have also been studied in water-splitting applications. One common example is a material called graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), also known as polyheptazine (structure shown in Fig. 23a). This g-C3N4 material has been studied as a highly stable OSC in photocatalytic (colloidal suspension) H2-production studies.66,67,70 To our knowledge, the first to apply this material to a water-oxidizing DS-PEC was the Beranek group in 2011.81 Photoanodes were prepared by heating nanostructured TiO2 films at 425 °C in the presence of gaseous urea pyrolysis products to form g-C3N4 on the TiO2 surface. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of the TiO2/g-C3N4 composite had a broad light-absorption feature extending out to λ < ∼540 nm, which corresponds to a bandgap smaller than either TiO2 or g-C3N4 alone.81 This suggests a direct optical electron transfer from the HOMO of g-C3N4 to the CB of TiO2 (Fig. 23b, red arrow) due to strong electronic coupling, as opposed to the more common photoinduced electron transfer from the sensitizer's LUMO. Subsequent studies provided TEM data showing that the g-C3N4 layer thickness ranges from 1–3 nm,156 and XRD evidence that the planar g-C3N4 sheets lie flat on the TiO2 surface.157
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of a DS-PEC consisting of nano-TiO2 modified at the surface with g-C3N4 (polyheptazine); (b) energy diagram illustrating visible light absorption by TiO2/g-C3N4 based on direct optical charge-transfer excitation of an electron from the g-C3N4 HOMO into the conduction band of TiO2 (red arrow). Reprinted from ref. 198, copyright 2013, with permission from Elsevier. 
In pH 7, 0.1 M phosphate buffer, TiO2/g-C3N4 electrodes illuminated with visible light (Xe lamp, λ > 420 nm, irradiance not reported) and held at +0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.42 V vs. RHE) reached a photocurrent of ∼35 μA cm−2, which were stable over the course of 10 min. After the anodes were loaded with IrO2 NPs by soaking in a colloidal IrO2 solution overnight, photocurrents were enhanced to ∼120 μA cm−2 and decayed only slightly over the course of 1 h. We suspect that this significant, ∼4-fold current enhancement can be attributed to relatively low recombination between electrons in TiO2 and the IrO2 WOCatalyst, as a result the high surface coverage of TiO2 by g-C3N4 relative to the molecular dyes employed in other systems, and therefore effective spacial separation between TiO2 and IrO2. During 1 h of photolysis by TiO2/g-C3N4/IrO2 anodes, O2 product was confirmed by a commercial O2 sensor, although a faradaic efficiency was not reported. Under the same conditions, TiO2/IrO2 anodes without g-C3N4 showed no photocurrent and no O2 product.81 A subsequent study revealed that TiO2/g-C3N4 anodes with no IrO2 showed significant photocurrent but no O2 product, and slightly lower photocurrent stability during extended photolysis than anodes with IrO2.156 Furthermore, the maximum IPCE for TiO2/g-C3N4/IrO2 anodes in pH 7 buffer was 7 ± 1% at +1.42 V vs. RHE, and the faradaic efficiency was determined to be only 19%, suggesting poor electronic coupling between the organic film and inorganic catalyst.156
Subsequent optimization studies from the Beranek group further improved the performance of their system.157,158,198,199 One study tested the effect of Nb-doping in the TiO2 substrate.198 Therein it was found that 0.1 atomic% was optimal, and Nb–TiO2/g-C3N4 achieved roughly 4-fold higher photocurrents and 30% higher IPCE in pH 7 buffer than un-doped TiO2/g-C3N4, presumably due to increased electron conductivity in TiO2 and reduced recombination.198 Other studies tested alternative WOCatalysts and deposition strategies.157,158,199 Two studies showed that decorating their (un-doped) TiO2/g-C3N4 anodes with an earth-abundant CoOx catalyst by a photoelectrochemical method (rather than loading IrO2 NPs from a colloidal solution) resulted in improved photocurrent and O2 yield, presumably because the photoelectrochemical deposition method allowed for improved adhesion and electrical coupling of the CoOx catalyst.157,158 This TiO2/g-C3N4/CoOx system157,158 constitutes the first example of a water-oxidizing DS-PEC composed entirely of earth-abundant materials, including both sensitizer and catalyst.
Subsequently, it was shown that the IrOx catalyst could also be deposited by the same photoelectrochemical method.199 Comparing the performance of TiO2/g-C3N4/IrO2 anodes prepared from colloidal IrO2 NPs to those prepared by the photoelectrochemical deposition method, both have remarkably similar photocurrent at short times. However, at longer times, films prepared from colloidal IrO2 NPs show a steady decrease in photocurrent and O2 yield, suggesting instability of the IrO2 adhesion. By contrast, films prepared by photoelectrochemical deposition displayed more stable photocurrents and continual O2 production over the course of 1 h. Further optimization experiments demonstrated that the faradaic efficiency for TiO2/g-C3N4/IrO2 anodes was affected by buffer anion,199 showing lowest performance with phosphate buffer (which is known to reduce the activity of IrO2),200,201 and highest performance with sulfate buffer. Finally, it was also found that anode performance was optimized at pH ≤ 6. Higher pH, up to 10, resulted in lower (but stable) photocurrent and constant faradaic efficiency, possibly caused by deprotonation of g-C3N4 and decreased IrO2 activity.199 Finally, pH 12 resulted in high, but unstable photocurrent and loss of faradaic efficiency, likely due to decomposition of g-C3N4.199 In summary, Beranek et al. have demonstrated water-oxidizing DS-PECs based on sensitization by the relatively robust, earth-abundant polymer material g-C3N4, and demonstrated that photoanode performance can be optimized by doping of the MOx semiconductor, by varying the WOCatalyst and catalyst deposition methods, and by varying the electrolyte.
A final system of note was published in 2013 by Xiao et al.202 wherein ZnO nanorods were decorated with poly(pyrrole) (PPy) conducting polymer. Zinc oxide is a common wide-bandgap semiconductor for PECs and has a higher conductivity than TiO2.202 In this study, ZnO nanorods (∼150 × 1500 nm) were electrochemically grown on ITO from pH 7.5 aqueous solution of Zn(NO3)2. The nanorod anode was subsequently chemically etched to make a rough ZnO surface, and PPy was deposited by in situ chemical polymerization of pyrrole with FeCl3 oxidant. SEM images indicated that the ZnO surface was uniformly decorated with PPy nanoparticles of 30 nm diameter. When submerged in pH 7 aqueous buffer (0.5 M Na2SO4) and illuminated with a Xe arc lamp (irradiance not reported), ZnO/PPy reached impressive steady-state photocurrents of ∼680 μA cm−2 at +0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl (+1.4 V vs. RHE), which actually grew slightly over 10 minutes of intermittent illumination. For comparison, bare ZnO anodes reached photocurrents of ∼475 μA cm−2 under the same conditions. In the dark, all anodes showed current ≤10 μA cm−2.202 While such photocurrents are promising, O2 product quantification was not reported, an especially important omission given that ZnO is unstable under such conditions and is known to suffer from photocorrosion20,203,204 (although the PPy coating may help alleviate corrosion).204 Furthermore, O2 production is in question given the fact that a WOCatalyst was not intentionally added, although Fe impurity from the chemical polymerization of PPy202 is certainly possible, if not likely (trace Fe impurity has been shown to greatly enhance the WOC activity of select transition metal oxides).103 Regardless, this interesting ZnO/PPy system warrants further study.
5. Summary and outlook
Herein we have compiled a comprehensive review of literature systems that employ earth-abundant, organic light harvesting materials in photoelectrochemical water-oxidizing anodes. These materials include derivatives of aromatic heterocycles including porphyrin, subporphyrin, and phthalocyanine; perylene derivatives; as well as conducting polymers and fullerenes. Architectures include organic thin-films composed of a single-bandgap organic semiconductor material or heterojunctions between two organic semiconductor materials, as well as dye-sensitized nanostructured semiconductor films. The use of organic materials in such devices takes advantage of their low materials cost, the synthetic tunability of their properties, and low-temperature manufacturing processes.
5.1. OTF-PECs
Progress in water-oxidizing OTF-PECs has largely paralleled the OPV field,64,72,73 showing that planar heterojunctions between two OSC materials can improve performance by enhancing charge separation efficiency relative to the individual layers.88,89 However, film thicknesses in this planar bilayer architecture are limited by the exciton diffusion length, usually on the order of tens of nanometers,64 resulting in poor light-harvesting efficiency. Therefore, bulk-heterojunctions with nanomorphology allow thicker active layers while maintaining short distances between the two phases, and have been successfully employed in water-oxidizing photoanodes.75,91 However, systems are rare in which the bulk-heterojunction electron donor (hole acceptor) material has a HOMO energy sufficiently positive to oxidize water, with only one such system published to date (that shown in Fig. 9).91 As such, further improving the efficiency of OTF-PEC photoanodes will likely require enhanced efforts to develop high-efficiency bulk-heterojunction active layer materials with more positive energy bands, or further studies of multi-junction cell architectures.16,17 Film morphology was also found to have a large effect on performance, especially for photoanodes composed of a single organic-semiconductor material. For example, a film of conducting polymer showed much higher activity when prepared with nanofiber morphology instead of globular morphology.92 We have proposed herein that such a morphology may best be described as an “organic semiconductor–electrolyte bulk heterojunction”, and also merits further study.
One of the great challenges in the OTF-PEC field is to ensure both strong physical and electronic coupling between the organic light harvesting materials and inorganic water-splitting catalysts. The identity and deposition method of the WOCatalyst can also greatly affect performance. Successful strategies to date include the immobilization of catalyst within a Nafion thin-film at the electrolyte interface88 or within a conductive polymer film,90 the use of organometallic catalyst as part of an organic bilayer,89 the use of an interfacial layer such as TiO2 (by atomic layer deposition) between the OSC and catalyst,92 and the incorporation of ionic linking groups such as phosphonate as part of the OSC.82 It has also been hypothesized that the incorporation of ionic groups such as sulfonate or phosphonate throughout the OSC film may enhance electrolyte uptake and provide H+-conduction channels.82,90
Finally, perhaps the most promising developments in the field of OTF-PECs includes the selective use of charge-rectifying interfacial layers. Such layers can decrease recombination between active materials and charge-collecting substrate, enhance coupling with the water-splitting catalyst, and can also enhance the stability of the organic active materials.75 The study of various interfacial layers has been especially pronounced in the field of OTF-PEC bulk-heterojunction photocathodes,107,127–132 and advancements in that field promise to inform similar strategies for use in bulk-heterojunction photoanodes as additional high-potential active materials are developed.
5.2. DS-PECs
A small variety of organic light-harvesting materials have successfully demonstrated light-assisted water oxidation in DS-PEC architectures. These include porphyrins, subporphyrins, perylene dyes, all-organic donor–acceptor dyes, and the organic polymer graphitic carbon nitride (polyheptazine) (Table 3). These dyes have been coupled with a variety of WOCatalysts. Most commonly, molecular metal complexes with Ru or Ir centers are co-anchored to the substrate surface alongside the dye. The top-performing DS-PEC to date that employs an organic dye comes from the Sun group,77 which co-anchored the dye D–A and the Ru–pdc1 WOCatalyst onto TiO2. This strategy of co-anchoring high-activity molecular WOCatalysts is also responsible for the top-performing DS-PECs that employ the RuP sensitizer dye.136,137 Importantly, it has been shown that catalysts with slightly longer linker groups perform better than those with short linker groups.154,164 This strategy may enhance the efficiency with which the catalyst can regenerate surrounding photo-oxidized dye, and/or decrease the rate of recombination between the oxidized catalyst and the CB electrons in the MOx by introducing a distance-based barrier to electron tunneling.
In an alternative strategy, the MOx surface can be loaded with a heterogeneous WOCatalyst such as IrO2 nanoparticles, although this strategy tends to enhance recombination between the catalyst and CB electrons.85 Beranek et al. have demonstrated that DS-PEC performance and lifetime can be enhanced by the photoelectrochemical deposition of heterogeneous WOCatalyst such as IrOx and CoOx, likely because of enhanced coupling between sensitizer and catalyst.157,158,199 Note that the above strategies of co-loading the MOx surface with WOCatalyst, while successful for demonstrating photoelectrochemical water oxidation, can have the added disadvantages of (i) competing with dye for surface loading, thereby reducing the light-harvesting efficiency; and (ii) if catalyst concentration is low relative to dye, the dye layer must be conductive to photogenerated holes in order to allow for regeneration of oxidized dye molecules that are not in direct contact with catalyst. A third catalyst-loading strategy involves the covalent coupling of dye and catalyst to form a molecular dyad,151 which is expected to provide a fast regeneration of the photo-oxidized dye and negate the need for hole conductivity throughout the dye layer. However, cases exist where the dye component may not be sufficiently oxidizing for efficient complete turnover of the catalyst.47,151
We note that nearly all the systems highlighted in Table 3 employ WOCatalyst composed of rare transition metals. A few exceptions are composed entirely of earth-abundant elements, such as the systems by the Beranek group (TiO2/g-C3N4/CoOx)157,158 and the Finke group (SnO2/PMDPI:CoOx),121 wherein CoOx was photoelectrochemically deposited. There is an additional recent example where a CoOx nanoparticle catalyst was co-anchored to nano-TiO2 through long linker groups alongside the common RuP sensitizer dye.205 Furthermore, alternative molecular WOCatalysts exist160 that are composed of earth-abundant transition metals yet still exhibit turnover frequencies ≥0.5 s−1, the approximate rate achievable by the photon flux at 1 sun illumination.47 However, the stability of such catalysts may not be sufficient for long-lived devices,160 and they have yet to be employed in DS-PECs. If lower cost is indeed the main, driving motivation to study organic light-harvesting materials, then more systems should also study the use of earth-abundant WOCatalyst in future studies.
Comparing the DS-PEC systems reviewed in Section 4 to the OTF-PEC systems reviewed in Section 3, the former show lower faradaic efficiencies and lower stability. This suggests that the organic light-harvesting materials in a DS-PEC architecture may be more prone to oxidative decomposition or perhaps desorption. However, the photocurrents achieved by these DS-PECs with organic dyes fall well within the range of those employing Ru-based organometallic dyes (see the performance summary table in a recent review52). With the available data, it is difficult to discern if organic dyes might have fundamental limitations relative to Ru-based organometallic dyes. The highest reported IPCE for a DS-PEC that employs the common RuP sensitizer is 14%,136 and that reported for the ZnPor2/Ru–bda1 molecular dyad (Ru-ZnP, Fig. 15) is 17%.151
Both of these values fall far short of the 80% IPCE measured for the top DSSC.159 The factors that determine the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of a DS-PEC include the light-harvesting efficiency (LHE), the injection efficiency (ϕinj) of photoexcited dye into the MOx CB, and the collection efficiency (ηcol).51 IPCE (λ) = LHE (λ) × ϕinj × ηcol(4) The LHE can be directly measured by the absorptance spectrum of the cell. The ϕinj can be measured by transient absorption spectroscopy experiments. The common RuP sensitizer dye on TiO2 has been well characterized by such methods, with ϕinj ranging from 70% at pH 1 to 50% at pH 5 in aqueous solutions.206 To our knowledge, no such measurements have been made for any of the organic dyes in this review, and under aqueous conditions. Mallouk et al. estimated ϕinj in pH 6.8 buffer by measuring the absorbed photon-to-current efficiency within the first millisecond of illumination, yielding ϕinj ≈ 21% for RuP, and values ranging from 2.4–7.4% for a variety of porphyrin derivatives.150 Could a low ϕinj be a general trend for organic sensitizer dyes in aqueous solutions (perhaps due to dye aggregation causing rapid non-radiative decay, or due to a lower prevalence of long-lived triplet excited states)? Answering this important question will require more thorough kinetic studies of organic dyes.
The much lower IPCEs in DS-PECs relative to DSSCs is most likely caused by a low collection efficiency, ηcol, which is limited by recombination reactions such as back-electron transfer to the photo-oxidized dye before it can be regenerated. In DSSCs, dye is regenerated by fast electron transfer from a redox couple in solution on the microsecond timescale, often with a regeneration efficiency of unity.40 In DS-PECs, this step is limited by the rate of hole transfer to the WOCatalyst. When catalyst is co-anchored onto the substrate surface, and especially when the catalyst:dye ratio is low, this step may be limited by the cross-surface hole mobility within the dye layer. The Mallouk group have shown evidence that at least some porphyrin derivatives have lower cross-surface hole mobility than RuP,150 as estimated by a photoelectrochemical technique.207 Could low cross-surface charge mobility be a general trend for organic sensitizer monolayers? Further studies are needed. Even when the catalyst is directly anchored to the dye, regeneration may be slow. For example, Mallouk et al. found that regeneration was on the order of milliseconds for Ru-based dyes directly bound to IrO2 nanoparticles.208 Clearly, a primary challenge moving forward is to enhance rates of dye regeneration by catalyst oxidation. Promisingly, it has already been shown that hole transfer can occur within ∼500 ps for some covalent chromophore–catalyst dyads.47
The literature also suggests that recombination rates in DS-PECs may be faster than in DSSCs. Nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy studies on nano-SnO2 and TiO2 substrates dyed with RuP in aqueous media have shown that a significant fraction of injected electrons can recombine even on the timescale of tens of nanoseconds,209 although recombination is not complete for hundreds of microseconds to milliseconds.209 This indicates that back-electron transfer is likely competitive with catalyst oxidation in most systems, and is therefore a dominant recombination pathway in DS-PECs. The Mallouk group has recently found evidence for proton intercalation into the nano-TiO2 of DS-PECs, which cause long-lived, electron-trapping surface states.210,211 Such trap states were shown to enhance the recombination rate constant with surface-bound, oxidized sensitizer dye by a factor of 4.211 Protons are constantly generated at the surface of water-oxidizing photoanodes, and are likely driven to intercalate into the MOx in order to compensate the charge of injected electrons. Overall, continued efforts are needed to improve efficiencies of DS-PECs by retarding rates of back-electron transfer, and proton-management at the surface of DS-PECs may prove to be of key importance to decrease recombination. The Al2O3 encapsulation method highlighted above (Fig. 19) was shown to decrease recombination rates with oxidized catalyst,154 and the SnO2/TiO2 core/shell structure (Fig. 22) was shown to decrease the rate of back-electron transfer to oxidized dye by almost an order of magnitude.155 Most likely, a combination of charge-separation strategies (the use of interfacial layers as well as dye and catalyst structural engineering) will be required to achieve highly efficient DS-PECs.
5.3. Stability
The “elephant in the room” for water-oxidation systems that employ organic light-harvesting materials is stability. Practically all systems highlighted in this review exhibit deactivation in the form of gradual photocurrent decay, often over the course of minutes. In general, DS-PECs seem to exhibit faster deactivation and lower faradaic efficiencies than OTF-PEC systems. Improving device stabilities can be accomplished most efficiently by understanding the cause(s) of degradation. In this regard, very little is known. In one instance, the Meyer group probed the degradation of their DS-PEC by performing repeated cyclic voltammetry sweeps (×50) of their dyed photoanode in acetonitrile and in water, finding that the oxidative wave of their D–π–A dye was highly reversible in the former but highly irreversible in the latter, indicating the dye's oxidative instability in the presence of water.155 In another example, Hanson et al. followed the change in the visible absorbance spectrum of a dyed photoanode during extended photolysis, assigning broadband absorbance decay to dye desorption, and changes in the overall shape of the spectrum (with isosbestic points) to chemical degradation of the dye.212 Knowledge of the major deactivation pathways, gained by experiments such as those described above, can inform subsequent strategies to improve stability. For example, if desorption is found to be the major deactivation pathway, then one can study the use of alternative anchor groups, surface treatments, or encapsulation methods to prevent dye desorption.47,154,191,192 If chemical degradation is the problem, then molecular structural changes may be necessary to replace oxidatively unstable units.
A variety of stability tests have been recommended for general photoelectrochemical water splitting,60 which should be applied to this sub-field of PECs based on organic light-harvesting materials. A starting point is to track photocurrent during extended photolysis times. To our knowledge, the longest test of an OTF-PEC lasted only 24 hours.90 Future studies should take systems to their end of lifetime in order to estimate their total turnovers. Subsequently, the electrolysis solution can be analyzed for degradation products, for example ICP-MS may be able to detect metal ions from the corrosion of MOx substrate or catalyst decomposition. Additional analyses of the electrode can be performed both before and after extended electrolysis, including optical and electron microscopy, XRD, XPS, and vibrational spectroscopies.60 It may also be of interest to recover the organic material from the device for analysis by NMR and mass spectrometry to detect oxidation products. Hopefully, such analyses will provide insights on how to improve the stability of future organic-based systems. It is worth noting that even the [Ru(bpy)3]2+-type sensitizers common in DSSCs are oxidatively unstable,213 although dyes in such devices are kinetically stabilized for high total turnovers when a redox couple is present to quickly regenerate the oxidized dye. Likewise, oxidatively unstable organic materials in water-splitting PECs may be kinetically stabilized if efficient coupling to fast water-oxidation catalysts can be achieved. Overall, in-depth studies of the deactivation pathways, degradation products, and the kinetic and thermodynamic stability of organic light-harvesting materials in water-oxidizing photoanodes are important topics for future research.
5.4. Note added in proof
During the review process, one referee pointed us towards recent reports of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) in WOC. MOFs are hybrid materials composed of coordinating organic ligands and metal ions, having highly ordered structure and high surface area. The synthetic tunability of organic ligands and selection of their connecting metal ions make MOFs promising materials for a wide variety of potential applications, including photoelectrochemical water-splitting catalysis. Our literature search revealed only two recent publications that have claimed photoelectrochemical water oxidation using MOFs as the light-harvesting material. These include a MOF thin-film architecture by Gong et al. (DOI: 10.1039/c5sc02679b) and a MOF-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell by Zhang et al. (DOI: 10.1002/advs.201500243).
Gong et al. (DOI: 10.1039/c5sc02679b) drop-cast and dried a mixture of Nafion and the MOF [La(TTCA)(H2O)] (TTCA3− = triphenylene-2,6,10-tricarboxylate) onto ITO. Such thin films in pH 5 buffer demonstrated steady-state photocurrent of 130 μA cm−2, but only with UV illumination and an applied bias of +2.26 V vs. RHE (1.03 V overpotential!). GC analysis of the headspace after 10 h of photolysis revealed a water-oxidation turnover number and turnover frequency of 193/TTCA and 19.3/h TTCA, respectively. While this system demonstrates an impressive photocurrent stability, the MOF contains the rare element La, and no control experiment was done to determine if ITO/Nafion:La(NO3)3 without the TTCA3− ligand could reproduce the catalysis.
Zhang et al. (DOI: 10.1002/advs.201500243) prepared vertically oriented, singe-crystal TiO2 nanowires (100 nm × 1500 nm) on FTO. Such films were subsequently sensitized with Ti(IV)-based MOFs employing different ligand derivatives of 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) with 0, 1, or 2 electron-donating ammine groups to vary the HOMO energy and bandgap, thereby tuning light absorption into the visible. With an added Au nanoparticle (AuNP) catalyst, one TiO2/MOF/AuNP system was able to achieve photocurrent of ∼30 μA cm−2 in pH 6.5 buffer with visible light illumination and held at +0.75 V vs. RHE. However, water oxidation was not confirmed by the direct detection of O2 product. These early studies, while not definitive, encourage continued investigation of MOFs as light-absorbing units for photoelectrochemical water-oxidation catalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Abbreviations

ALDAtomic layer deposition
AM1.5GAir mass 1.5 global standardized solar irradiance13
BBLPoly(benzimidazobenzophananthroline)
CBConduction band
CNTCarbon nanotube
Cp*IrA class of WOCatalysts based on the [Cp*Ir(κ2-ppy)Cl] structural motif160
D–ASensitizer dye composed of electron-donor and acceptor functional groups
D–π–ASensitizer dye composed of electron-donor and acceptor functional groups separated by a π-conjugated bridge
DS-PECDye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cell
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass
g-C3N4Graphitic carbon nitride (polyheptazine) (see Fig. 23)
HERHydrogen-evolving reaction
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
IPCEIncident photon-to-current efficiency
ITOIndium-tin oxide coated glass
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MOxMetal oxide
MWCNTMulti-walled carbon nanotube
NfNafion
NHENormal hydrogen electrode
NPNanoparticle
n-SCn-Type semiconductor
OEROxygen-evolving reaction
OPVOrganic photovoltaic
OSCOrganic semiconductor
OTFOrganic thin-film
PcA phthalocyanine derivative
PDIA perylene diimide derivative
PECPhotoelectrolysis cell
PiInorganic phosphate
PMIA perylene monoimide derivative
p/n-PECTandem photoelectrolysis cell with n-SC photoanode and p-SC photocathode
PorA porphyrin derivative
PPyPoly(pyrrole)
p-SCp-Type semiconductor
PSIIPhotosystem II
PTThPoly(terthiophene)
PVPhotovoltaic
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene)
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
Ru–bdaA class of WOCatalysts based on the [Ru(bda)(pic)2] structural motif160
Ru–pdcA class of WOCatalysts based on the [Ru(pdc)(pic)3] structural motif160
SCSemiconductor
SCESaturated calomel electrode
SCLJSemiconductor–liquid junction
SubPorA subporphyrin derivative
VBValence band
WOCWater-oxidation catalysis
WOCatalystWater-oxidation catalyst

Variables


e
Elementary charge of an electron (C)

E
Electrochemical potential vs. a reference (V)

E
CB
Electrochemical potential of a semiconductor conduction band (V)

E
F
Fermi energy (V)

E
F,n
Quasi-Fermi energy of electrons under illumination (V)

E
F,p
Quasi-Fermi energy of holes under illumination (V)

E
g
Bandgap energy (V)

E
rxn
Electromotive force of a cell reaction (V)

E
VB
Electrochemical potential of a semiconductor valence band (V)

F
Faraday constant (eNA)

J
Current density (μA cm−2)
LHELight-harvesting efficiency (%)

n
Number of electrons transferred in an electrochemical process
ΔGFree energy change (kJ mol−1)

η
col
Collection efficiency of electrons injected into a metal oxide in a DS-PEC architecture (%)

η
STH
Solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency (%)

ϕ
inj
Injection efficiency of photoexcited electrons into a metal oxide conduction band in a DS-PEC architecture (%)

Specific molecules


CoPc
Cobalt(II) phthalocyanine89 (see Fig. 7)

Cp*Ir
A Cp*Ir-type catalyst derivatized with a carboxylic acid anchor group149 (see Fig. 13)

Cp*Ir-Sil
A Cp*Ir-type catalyst with phenylene spacer and silatrane anchor group154 (see Fig. 19)

D–A
An all-organic donor–acceptor sensitizer dye77 (see Fig. 20)

D–π–A
An all-organic donor–π bridge–acceptor sensitizer dye155 (see Fig. 21)

H2Pc
Phthalocyancine88 (see Fig. 5)

IrIr
A dimeric Ir catalyst154 (see Fig. 19)

MnPor
5,10,15,20-Tetra(4-sulfonophenyl)porphyrin90 (see Fig. 8)

PCBM
[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (see Fig. 9 and 10)

PMI
A peryelene-3,4-dicarboximide dye derivate (see Fig. 19)

PMPDI

N,N′-Bis(phosphonomethyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide82 (see Fig. 11)

PTCBI
3,4,9,10-Perylene tetracarboxylic bis(benzimidazole)88,89 (see Fig. 5 and 7)

PTCDA
3,4,9,10-Perylene tetracarboxylic dianhydride91 (see Fig. 9)

Ru–bda1
The Ru–bda type catalyst portion of a molecular dyad151 (see Fig. 15)

Ru–bda2
A Ru–bda type catalyst with an aliphatic anchor linking group152 (see Fig. 16)

Ru–bda3
A Ru–bda type catalyst with phosphonate anchor group155 (see Fig. 21)

RuP
[RuII(bpy)2(4,4′-(PO3H2)2bpy)]2+

Ru–pdc1
A Ru–pdc type catalyst with a pdc anchor group77 (see Fig. 20)

Ru-ZnP
Covalent molecular dyad with a Zn-Por dye and Ru–bda type catalyst151 (see Fig. 15)

SubPor
A subporphyrin dye derivative with push–pull molecular engineering152 (see Fig. 16)

TEPDI

N,N′-Bis(2-(trimethylammonium)-ethylene)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide153 (see Fig. 18)

ZnPc
Zinc(II) phthalocyanine165 (see Fig. 17)

ZnPor1
A Zn-porphyrin sensitizer dye149 (see Fig. 13)

ZnPor2
The Zn-porphyrin dye portion of a molecular dyad151 (see Fig. 15)

Organometallic ligands

bda2,2′-Bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate
bpy2,2′-Bipyridine
pdc2,6-Pyridinedicarboxylate
pic4-Picoline
ppy2-Phenylpyridine

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation, Grant CHE-1057723 (to R. G. F.).
References
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Smalley, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 412–417 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Balzani, L. Moggi, M. F. Manfrin, F. Bolletta and M. Gleria, Science, 1975, 189, 852–856 CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Crabtree and M. S. Dresselhaus, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
Reference Solar Spectral Irradiance: Air Mass 1.5, http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/, accessed January 2017, http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/, accessed May 18, 2016.
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aoki, M. Naruse and T. Abe, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2317–2320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Esiner, H. van Eersel, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2932–2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Esiner, R. E. M. Willems, A. Furlan, W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23936–23945 CAS .
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino, D. Dominé, A. Faes, M. Despeisse, J. Bailat, D. Psaltis, C. Moser and C. Ballif, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
A. J. Bard and M. S. Wrighton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1706–1710 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 82, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 38, 253–278 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
Z. Xing, X. Zong, J. Pan and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2013, 104, 125–146 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 CAS .

          H. F. Coward and G. W. Jones, Limits of Flammability of Gases and Vapors, Bureau of Mines, United States Department of the Interior,  1952 Search PubMed .

          W. A. Badawy, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. R. E. White, B. E. Conway and J. O. Brockris, Springer US, New York, 1st edn,  1997, vol. 30, pp. 187–259 Search PubMed .
J. G. Mavroides, J. A. Kafalas and D. F. Kolesar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 28, 241–243 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Ellis, S. W. Kaiser and M. S. Wrighton, J. Phys. Chem., 1976, 80, 1325–1328 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 Search PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 150–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, M. E. Michel-Beyerle, F. Rebentrost and H. Tributsch, Electrochim. Acta, 1968, 13, 1509–1515 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, Photochem. Photobiol., 1972, 16, 243–260 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsubomura, M. Matsumura, Y. Nomura and T. Amamiya, Nature, 1976, 261, 402–403 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115–164 RSC .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A SciFinder search for the concept “Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells”, including Journal articles, Letters, and Reviews yielded 22,544 results, https://scifinder.cas.org, accessed June 15, 2017.
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Caramori, V. Cristino, L. Meda, R. Argazzi and C. A. Bignozzi, Top. Curr. Chem., 2011, 303, 39–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Young, L. A. Martini, R. L. Milot, R. C. Snoeberger, V. S. Batista, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2503–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Alibabaei, H. Luo, R. L. House, P. G. Hoertz, R. Lopez and T. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4133–4145 CAS .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
D. L. Ashford, M. K. Gish, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13006–13049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, F. Li and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760–775 CAS .
M. K. Brennaman, R. J. Dillon, L. Alibabaei, M. K. Gish, C. J. Dares, D. L. Ashford, R. L. House, G. J. Meyer, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2016, 138, 13085–13102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Caramori, F. Ronconi, R. Argazzi, S. Carli, R. Boaretto, E. Busatto and C. A. Bignozzi, in Applied Photochemistry, ed. G. Bergamini and S. Silvi, Springer International Publishing,  2016, pp. 67–143 Search PubMed .
M. Yamamoto and K. Tanaka, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 1028–1044 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, N. S. McCool and T. E. Mallouk, Nano Today, 2017, 14, 42–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 567–569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aharon-Shalom and A. Heller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2865–2866 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 653–659 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 CAS .

          Z. Chen, H. N. Dinh and E. Miller, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting: Standards, Experimental Methods, and Protocols, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2013 Search PubMed .
P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .
M. Woodhouse, A. Goodrich, R. Margolis, T. L. James, M. Lokanc and R. Eggert, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2013, 3, 833–837 CrossRef .
T. W. Kelley, P. F. Baude, C. Gerlach, D. E. Ender, D. Muyres, M. A. Haase, D. E. Vogel and S. D. Theiss, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4413–4422 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yanagida, A. Kabumoto, K. Mizumoto, C. Pac and K. Yoshino, J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., 1985, 474–475 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Long, L. Yang, W. Chen, W. Dai, X. Fu and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1826–1830 RSC .
R. S. Sprick, J.-X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Wang, B. R. Bunes, Y. Li, C. Wang and L. Zang, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 498, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. Peng and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2365–2402 CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839–3856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Research Cell Record Efficiency Chart, http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed January 27, 2017.
M. P. Gustafson, N. Clark, B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 140, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, F. Li, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, E. Gabrielsson and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25234–25240 RSC .
F. Li, K. Fan, B. Xu, E. Gabrielsson, Q. Daniel, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9153–9159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dotan, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Grätzel and A. Rothschild, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3330–3334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Coridan, A. C. Nielander, S. A. Francis, M. T. McDowell, V. Dix, S. M. Chatman and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2886–2901 CAS .
J. M. Buriak, P. V. Kamat and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11815–11816 CAS .
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, A. Ramakrishnan, O. V. Khavryuchenko, V. D. Khavryuchenko, P. C. Ricci, J. Strunk, T. Cremer, C. Kolbeck and R. Beranek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21511–21519 RSC .
J. T. Kirner, J. J. Stracke, B. A. Gregg and R. G. Finke, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13367–13377,  DOI:10.1021/am405598w .
C. D. Johnson and D. W. Paul, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 105, 322–328 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Zhao, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, L. Blasdel, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 165–176 RSC .
J. R. Swierk, N. S. McCool, T. P. Saunders, G. D. Barber, M. E. Strayer, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17046–17053 CAS .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7076–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. McConnell, G. Li and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Biol., 2010, 17, 434–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Abe, K. Nagai, T. Ogiwara, S. Ogasawara, M. Kaneko, A. Tajiri and T. Norimatsu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 587, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abe, K. Nagai, S. Kabutomori, M. Kaneko, A. Tajiri and T. Norimatsu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2778–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, P. Wagner, L. Tong, G. G. Wallace, D. L. Officer and G. F. Swiegers, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 1943–1946 CrossRef .
G. Liu, C. Chen, H. Ji, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Sci. China Chem., 2012, 55, 1953–1958 CAS .
P. Bornoz, M. S. Prévot, X. Yu, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15338–15341,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.5b05724 .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14872–14875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2338–2356 RSC .
J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, ACS Catal., 2014, 909–933 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Daniel, R. B. Ambre, B. Zhang, B. Philippe, H. Chen, F. Li, K. Fan, S. Ahmadi, H. Rensmo and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1143–1149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 711–738 CrossRef CAS .
A. Huijser, T. J. Savenije, A. Shalav and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 034505 CrossRef .
P. Lubis and M. Saito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 071602 CrossRef .
Y. Naruta, M. Sasayama and T. Sasaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 1839–1841 CrossRef .
J.-X. Li, Z.-J. Li, C. Ye, X.-B. Li, F. Zhan, X.-B. Fan, J. Li, B. Chen, Y. Tao, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 672–676 CAS .
M. S. Burke, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. Zou and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7549–7558 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, A. M. Nardes, B. L. Rupert, R. E. Larsen, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bao, X. Liu, S. Braun and M. Fahlman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301272 CrossRef .
E. Lanzarini, M. R. Antognazza, M. Biso, A. Ansaldo, L. Laudato, P. Bruno, P. Metrangolo, G. Resnati, D. Ricci and G. Lanzani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10944–10949 CAS .
H. Comas Rojas, S. Bellani, F. Fumagalli, G. Tullii, S. Leonardi, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. Grätzel, G. Lanzani, F. D. Fonzo and M. Rosa Antognazza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3710–3723 Search PubMed .
M. O. Reese, A. J. Morfa, M. S. White, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, G. Rumbles and D. S. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 102–112 CAS .
V. I. Madogni, B. Kounouhéwa, A. Akpo, M. Agbomahéna, S. A. Hounkpatin and C. N. Awanou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 640, 201–214 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, F. Liu, A. M. C. Ng, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. Ng and C. Surya, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 281–299 CrossRef .
T. Kawai, K. Tanimura and T. Sakata, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1978, 56, 541–545 CrossRef CAS .
F.-R. Fan and L. R. Faulkner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 4779–4787 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Ayers, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1980, 70, 247–254 RSC .
P. C. Rieke and N. R. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Rieke, C. L. Linkous and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 1351–1357 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Buttner, P. C. Rieke and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1116–1121 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Rieke and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1121–1126 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, O. Kokhan, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas and D. M. Tiede, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11096–11099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Kirner and R. G. Finke, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27625–27637 CAS .
A. Zaban, A. Meier and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7985–7990 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630–2642 RSC .
T. Abe, S. Tobinai, N. Taira, J. Chiba, T. Itoh and K. Nagai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7701–7705 CAS .
T. Abe, J. Chiba, M. Ishidoya and K. Nagai, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7992–7996 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, R.-Q. Sun and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10145–10149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, C. Laberty-Robert, S. Campidelli, R. de Bettignies, V. Artero, S. Palacin and B. Jousselme, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2706–2713 CAS .
A. Guerrero, M. Haro, S. Bellani, M. R. Antognazza, L. Meda, S. Gimenez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3666–3673 CAS .
J. Balapanuru, G. Chiu, C. Su, N. Zhou, Z. Hai, Q. Xu and K. P. Loh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 880–886 CAS .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, R. Cornut, V. Artero and B. Jousselme, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16395–16403 CAS .
M. Haro, C. Solis, G. Molina, L. Otero, J. Bisquert, S. Gimenez and A. Guerrero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6488–6494 CAS .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, S. Campidelli, R. Cornut and B. Jousselme, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4831–4839 CAS .
F. Fumagalli, S. Bellani, M. Schreier, S. Leonardi, H. C. Rojas, A. Ghadirzadeh, G. Tullii, A. Savoini, G. Marra, L. Meda, M. Grätzel, G. Lanzani, M. T. Mayer, M. R. Antognazza and F. D. Fonzo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2178–2187 CAS .
A. Morozan, T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, B. Jousselme and V. Artero, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 355401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Giribabu, R. K. Kanaparthi and V. Velkannan, Chem. Rec., 2012, 12, 306–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Ding, J. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Lu, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4219–4222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Gao, X. Ding, Z. Yu and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2801–2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Mann, M. K. Gannon, T. C. Fitzgibbons, M. R. Detty and D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13057–13061 CAS .
M. Grätzel, CATTECH, 1999, 3, 4–17 Search PubMed .
J. M. Gardner, M. Beyler, M. Karnahl, S. Tschierlei, S. Ott and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19322–19325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Duan, F. Wen, C. Li, M. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 988–990 RSC .
L. Tong, A. Iwase, A. Nattestad, U. Bach, M. Weidelener, G. Götz, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, R. Amal, G. G. Wallace and A. J. Mozer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9472–9475 CAS .
Z. Ji, M. He, Z. Huang, U. Ozkan and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11696–11699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Click, D. R. Beauchamp, Z. Huang, W. Chen and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1174–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kaeffer, J. Massin, C. Lebrun, O. Renault, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and V. Artero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12308–12311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Khusnutdinova, A. M. Beiler, B. L. Wadsworth, S. I. Jacob and G. F. Moore, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 253–259 RSC .
R. J. Kamire, M. B. Majewski, W. L. Hoffeditz, B. T. Phelan, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 541–549 RSC .
G. F. Moore, J. D. Blakemore, R. L. Milot, J. F. Hull, H. Song, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2389–2392 CAS .
J. R. Swierk, D. D. Méndez-Hernández, N. S. McCool, P. Liddell, Y. Terazono, I. Pahk, J. J. Tomlin, N. V. Oster, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 1681–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamamoto, L. Wang, F. Li, T. Fukushima, K. Tanaka, L. Sun and H. Imahori, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1430–1439 RSC .
M. Yamamoto, Y. Nishizawa, P. Chábera, F. Li, T. Pascher, V. Sundström, L. Sun and H. Imahori, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13702–13705 RSC .
F. Ronconi, Z. Syrgiannis, A. Bonasera, M. Prato, R. Argazzi, S. Caramori, V. Cristino and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4630–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Kamire, K. L. Materna, W. L. Hoffeditz, B. T. Phelan, J. M. Thomsen, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, G. W. Brudvig and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3752–3764 CAS .
K.-R. Wee, B. D. Sherman, M. K. Brennaman, M. V. Sheridan, A. Nayak, L. Alibabaei and T. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2969–2975 CAS .
L. Wang, M. Bledowski, A. Ramakrishnan, D. König, A. Ludwig and R. Beranek, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H616–H622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, A. Ramakrishnan, A. Bétard, O. V. Khavryuchenko and R. Beranek, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3018–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, A. Ramakrishnan and R. Beranek, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 411–417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kärkäs, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Åkermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863–12001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730–8731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Ashford, B. D. Sherman, R. A. Binstead, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 4860–4863 CrossRef .
L. Duan, A. Fischer, Y. Xu and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10397–10399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, L. Zhang, X. Ding and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12008–12013 RSC .
Y. Cheng, A. Memar, M. Saunders, J. Pan, C. Liu, J. D. Gale, R. Demichelis, P. K. Shen and S. P. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2473–2483 CAS .
Y. Cheng, C. Xu, L. Jia, J. D. Gale, L. Zhang, C. Liu, P. K. Shen and S. P. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
N. Terasaki, M. Iwai, N. Yamamoto, T. Hiraga, S. Yamada and Y. Inoue, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2553–2557 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mersch, C.-Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Sokol, D. Mersch, V. Hartmann, J. Z. Zhang, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rögner, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, N. Plumeré and E. Reisner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3698–3709 CAS .
G. F. Moore, S. J. Konezny, H. Song, R. L. Milot, J. D. Blakemore, M. L. Lee, V. S. Batista, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4892–4902 CAS .
L. A. Martini, G. F. Moore, R. L. Milot, L. Z. Cai, S. W. Sheehan, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14526–14533 CAS .
R. L. Milot, G. F. Moore, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21662–21670 CAS .
C. F. A. Negre, R. L. Milot, L. A. Martini, W. Ding, R. H. Crabtree, C. A. Schmuttenmaer and V. S. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24462–24470 CAS .
B. J. Brennan, A. C. Durrell, M. Koepf, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12728–12734 RSC .
B. J. Brennan, Y. C. Lam, P. M. Kim, X. Zhang and G. W. Brudvig, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16124–16130 CAS .
P. K. Poddutoori, J. M. Thomsen, R. L. Milot, S. W. Sheehan, C. F. A. Negre, V. K. R. Garapati, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, V. S. Batista, G. W. Brudvig and A. van der Est, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3868–3879 CAS .
A. Antoniuk-Pablant, Y. Terazono, B. J. Brennan, B. D. Sherman, J. D. Megiatto, G. W. Brudvig, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2976–2985 CAS .
A. Nayak, S. Roy, B. D. Sherman, L. Alibabaei, A. M. Lapides, M. K. Brennaman, K.-R. Wee and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3853–3860 CAS .
B. D. Sherman, J. J. Bergkamp, C. L. Brown, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1812–1817 CAS .
J. Jiang, J. R. Swierk, K. L. Materna, S. Hedström, S. H. Lee, R. H. Crabtree, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, V. S. Batista and G. W. Brudvig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28971–28982 CAS .
M. T. Rawls, J. Johnson and B. A. Gregg, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 650, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. Wang, X. Bai, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7284–7290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Shi, D. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu and D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 289–297 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Vagnini, A. L. Smeigh, J. D. Blakemore, S. W. Eaton, N. D. Schley, F. D'Souza, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig, D. T. Co and M. R. Wasielewski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15651–15656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Brennaman, M. R. Norris, M. K. Gish, E. M. Grumstrup, L. Alibabaei, D. L. Ashford, A. M. Lapides, J. M. Papanikolas, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Lindquist, B. T. Phelan, A. Reynal, E. A. Margulies, L. E. Shoer, J. R. Durrant and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2880–2893 CAS .
S. Ferrere, A. Zaban and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Chen, R. M. Williams, J. N. H. Reek and A. M. Brouwer, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 5489–5493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Parks, Chem. Rev., 1965, 65, 177–198 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, C. C. Waraksa, J. T. Lean, B. A. Lewis and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5275–5280 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Son, C. Prasittichai, J. E. Mondloch, L. Luo, J. Wu, D. W. Kim, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11529–11532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hanson, M. D. Losego, B. Kalanyan, D. L. Ashford, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19756–19764 CAS .
C. Prasittichai and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Sheehan, J. M. Thomsen, U. Hintermair, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Materna, B. Rudshteyn, B. J. Brennan, M. H. Kane, A. J. Bloomfield, D. L. Huang, D. Y. Shopov, V. S. Batista, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5371–5377 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, L. Tong, S. Andersson and L. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4659–4668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mei, H. Byford, M. Bledowski, L. Wang, J. Strunk, M. Muhler and R. Beranek, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bledowski, L. Wang, S. Neubert, D. Mitoraj and R. Beranek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18951–18961 CAS .
L.-E. Owe, M. Tsypkin and S. Sunde, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Kushner-Lenhoff, J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 3617–3622 RSC .
Z. Wang, P. Xiao, L. Qiao, X. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Li and F. Yang, Phys. B, 2013, 419, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .

          M. De Zoubov and M. Pourbaix, in Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, Permagon Press Inc., New York,  1966, pp. 406–413 Search PubMed .
K. Wippermann, J. W. Schultze, R. Kessel and J. Penninger, Corros. Sci., 1991, 32, 205–230 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wei, B. Hu, L. Zhou, T. Su and Y. Na, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 345–348 CrossRef .
M. K. Brennaman, A. O. T. Patrocinio, W. Song, J. W. Jurss, J. J. Concepcion, P. G. Hoertz, M. C. Traub, N. Y. Murakami Iha and T. J. Meyer, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 216–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hanson, M. K. Brennaman, A. Ito, H. Luo, W. Song, K. A. Parker, R. Ghosh, M. R. Norris, C. R. K. Glasson, J. J. Concepcion, R. Lopez and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14837–14847 CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Knauf, M. K. Brennaman, L. Alibabaei, M. R. Norris and J. L. Dempsey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25259–25268 CAS .
J. R. Swierk, N. S. McCool, T. P. Saunders, G. D. Barber and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10974–10982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. McCool, J. R. Swierk, C. T. Nemes, T. P. Saunders, C. A. Schmuttenmaer and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16727–16735 CAS .
K. Hanson, M. K. Brennaman, H. Luo, C. R. K. Glasson, J. J. Concepcion, W. Song and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1462–1469 CAS .
P. K. Ghosh, B. S. Brunschwig, M. Chou, C. Creutz and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 4772–4783 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† A draft of this manuscript was submitted by JTK to the Academic Faculty of Colorado State University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Joel T. Kirner	Joel Kirner received his B.S. in Chemistry from the University of Northern Iowa in 2010. He graduated with Honors with Distinction, while also receiving the HM/ICUC Award for Excellence in First Year Undergraduate Chemistry, the ACS Award in Analytical Chemistry, the Outstanding Inorganic Chemistry Student Award, the Outstanding Organic Chemistry Student Award, and the Purple and Old Gold Meritorious Scholarship Award. He subsequently earned his Ph.D. in Materials Chemistry from Colorado State University in May 2017, under the co-direction of Professors R. G. Finke and C. M. Elliott (deceased). His current research interests include dye-sensitized solar cells, water-oxidizing photoelectrolysis cells, and electrochemical energy storage.
Richard G. Finke	Richard Finke is a Professor of Chemistry at Colorado State University. He received his B.A. with Distinction from the University of Colorado, and his Ph.D. in Chemistry from Stanford University in 1976 under Professors James P. Collman and John I. Brauman. He was a NSF postdoctoral fellow in 1977, also at Stanford University, and his awards include A. P. Sloan, Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar, and Guggenheim Fellowships. His current research interests focus on catalysis, kinetics and mechanism, artificial photosynthesis for fuel-forming reactions, water-oxidation catalysis involving polyoxometalates and metal-oxide nanoparticles, and a variety of other topics related to catalysis. These topics include fundamental kinetic and mechanistic studies of nanoparticle formation involving nucleation, growth, and agglomeration, and answering the related question of “who is the true catalyst?” in reactions that could be either homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysis. In the past he has also contributed to bio-inorganic chemistry, especially that involving coenzyme B12, to organo-lanthanide and -actinide chemistry, and to multi-electron-transfer electrochemistry.
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(1)
H2O → ½O2 + 2H+ + 2e−	(2)
H2O → H2 + ½O2	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of various water splitting engineering strategies: (left) a photovoltaic (PV) cell (or multiple cells in series) wired to an electrolyzer; (center) a submerged (integrated) photoelectrolysis cell (PEC) wherein water-splitting reactions occur at the surface of a semiconductor panel in solution; (right) a suspended colloid (photocatalytic) system wherein water-splitting reactions occur at the surface of semiconductor particles throughout solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative band diagrams of various liquid-junction water-splitting systems: (a) a single-bandgap, n-type semiconductor photoanode with metal cathode (n-SC PEC); (b) a dual bandgap (tandem) cell with n-type photoanode and p-type photocathode (p/n tandem PEC); (c) a dye-sensitized metal-oxide photoanode with metal cathode (DS-PEC); (d) a submerged p–n junction photovoltaic photoanode with metal cathode (PV-PEC).	 

 	Fig. 3  “Periodic table of the elements with data for production, price and implied value for the year 2010. The colour coding (green, light-green, orange and red) corresponds to overall production level (medium to high, low, very low and extremely low, respectively). Solid colour is used for elements which are chiefly main economic products of their respective ores while a diagonal gradient in colour is used for elements which are mostly by-products of other elements.” Figure and caption reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic cross-sections of two common device architectures for PECs composed of earth-abundant materials. (a) Organic-thin-film photoelectrolysis cells (OTF-PEC); (b) dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cells (DS-PEC).	 

Ag/AgCl (sat. KCl)	+0.197 V
Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl)	+0.210 V
SCE	+0.241 V
RHE	−(0.0591 V × pH)



PTCBI/H2Pc bilayer	Nf–IrO2	6 μA cm−2 (+1.19 V vs. RHE, pH 10 KOH, ∼70 mW cm−2)	≥90%	0.04% (+1.2)	Abe & Nagai88

PTCBI/CoPc bilayer	
CoPc
	20 μA cm−2 (+1.25 V vs. RHE, pH 11 NaOH, ∼70 mW cm−2)	ND	ND	Abe & Nagai89
PTTh:MnPor	
MnPor
	23 μA (+1.51 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Na2SO4, irradiance not reported)	ND	ND	Chen & Swiegers90

PTCDA/PTCDA:PCBM/PCBM trilayer	Unknown	110 μA cm−2 (+1.16 V vs. RHE, pH 2 KNO3/H2SO4, ∼110 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm)	ND	1.2% (+1.16 V)	Zhao91

PMPDI single layer	CoOx	150 μA cm−2 (+1.56 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi, ∼100 mW cm−2, λ = 315–710 nm)	80 ± 15%	0.12% (none)	Gregg & Finke82
BBL polymer single layer	ALD TiO2/Ni–Co	20 μA cm−2 (+0.90 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Na2SO4/KPi, 100 mW cm−2)	82 ± 16%	1.0% (+1.23 V)	Sivula92

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of PTCBI and H2Pc, and a device schematic for O2 production from an organic bilayer photoanode modified with Nafion-covered IrO2 catalyst. (b) An approximate energy diagram for the ITO/PTCBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 bilayer device. Figures reprinted from ref. 88, copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Oxidative photocurrent produced at an ITO/PTCBI/H2Pc/Nf–IrO2 anode under intermittent illumination with an applied potential of +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in pH 10 KOH. Film thicknesses were 450 nm (PTCBI)/160 nm (H2Pc) coated with 1.2 × 10−5 mol IrO2. Reprinted from ref. 88, copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of PTCBI and CoPc, and a schematic illustration of the ITO/PTCBI/CoPc organic bilayer thin-film photoanode and testing apparatus for photoelectrochemical measurements. Reprinted from ref. 89 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the OTF-PEC photoanode studied in ref. 90. The thin-film was deposited by electrochemical polymerization of poly(terthiophene) (PTTh) in the presence of 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-sulfonophenyl)porphyrin tetrasodium salt (MnPor).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of PTCDA and PCBM. (b) The trilayer film configuration PTCDA/PTCDA:PCBM/PCBM. Also shown are two possible charge separation mechanisms under light illumination: (1) electron transfer from the LUMO of excited PCBM to the LUMO of PTCDA (yellow arrows); (2) hole transfer from the HOMO of excited PTCDA to the HOMO of PCBM (green arrows). Both processes would produce free charge carriers. Reprinted from ref. 91 (copyright 2011, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg) with permission from Springer.	 

 	Fig. 10  Water-splitting photoelectrodes composed of a bulk-heterojunction organic active layer containing PCBM and P3HT (structures shown in red). The photocathode (a) includes a PEDOT:PSS hole-accepting interfacial layer, and the photoanode (b) contains a ZnO electron-accepting layer. Arrows indicate electron and hole pathways. Reprinted from ref. 75, copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the ITO/PMPDI/CoOx OTF-PEC photoanode, where PMPDI is N,N′-bis(phosphonomethyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide. (b) J–V curve with intermittent illumination for ITO/PMPDI/CoOx (red line), ITO/PMPDI (green line), and bare ITO (blue line) in pH 7 KPi buffer, 5 mV s−1 scan rate starting from 0.0 V with 5 s light transients. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of BBL films on FTO prepared by dip-coating (a) and spraying (b), along with optical images of each electrode (c). Panel (d) shows J–V curves for a sprayed film (blue line) and a dip-coated film (red line) in sacrificial electrolyte (0.5 M Na2SO3, pH 7) while under intermittent illumination to the substrate. Scan rate was 10 mV s−1. Reprinted from with permission ref. 92. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 



ZnPor1
	
Cp*Ir
	TiO2	30 μA cm−2 (+0.91 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Na2SO4, 200 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm)	ND	ND	Schmuttenmaer, Crabtree, & Brudvig149
H2Por(s)	IrO2 NPs	TiO2	40 μA cm−2 (+0.70 V vs. RHE, pH 6.8 NaPi, “AM 1.5”, λ > 410 nm)	102 ± 5%	0.036% (+0.70 V)	Mallouk150

ZnPor2
	
Ru–bda1 (covalent dyad)	TiO2	110 μA cm−2 (+0.23 V vs. RHE, pH 7.3 NaPi, 35 mW cm−2, λ > 380 nm)	33%	17 ± 1% (+0.42 V)	Sun & Imahori151

SubPor
	
Ru–bda2
	TiO2	60 μA cm−2 (+0.64 V vs. RHE, pH 7.3 NaF, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm)	64%	6% (+0.64 V)	Sundström, Sun, & Imahori152

TEPDI
	IrO2 NPs	WO3	70 μA cm−2 (+0.92 V vs. RHE, pH 3 NaClO4, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 435 nm)	ND	0.8% (+0.92 V)	Prato, Caramori, & Bignozzi153

PMI
	
Cp*Ir-Sil
	TiO2/Al2O3 core/shell	15 μA cm−2 (+0.71 V vs. RHE, pH 5.8, KNO3, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 420 nm)	20%	ND	Wasielewski154

PMPDI
	CoOx	SnO2	20 μA cm−2 (+0.82 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi, 45 mW cm−2, λ = 400–710 nm)	31 ± 7%	ND	Kirner & Finke121

D–A
	
Ru–pdc1
	TiO2	300 μA cm−2 (+0.61 V vs. RHE, pH 7 KPi, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm)	73%	ND	Sun77

D–π–A
	
Ru–bda3
	SnO2/TiO2 core/shell	100 μA cm−2 (+0.86 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Pi, 100 mW cm−2, λ > 400 nm)	8.2%	ND	Meyer155
g-C3N4	IrO2 NPs	TiO2	120 μA cm−2 (+1.42 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Pi, λ > 420 nm)	19%	7 ± 1% (+1.42 V)	Beranek81,156
g-C3N4	CoOx	TiO2	100 μA cm−2 (+1.23 V vs. RHE, pH 7 Pi, λ = 315–710 nm)	ND	5.4 ± 0.4% (+1.11 V)	Beranek157,158

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the water-oxidizing DS-PEC employing a high-potential Zn-porphyrin (ZnPor1) and Ir organometallic WOCatalyst (Cp*Ir), co-anchored on a sintered TiO2 nanoparticle film. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of the DS-PEC system composed of H2Por-sensitized TiO2 co-loaded with IrO2 nanoparticle WOCatalyst. The scheme displays various electron transfer processes: (i) injection, (ii) recombination, (iii) hole migration, (iv) regeneration of oxidized sensitizer, and (v) electron diffusion to the FTO substrate. Reproduced from ref. 150.	 

 	Fig. 15  (upper) A schematic diagram of the DS-PEC composed of a molecular sensitizer–catalyst dyad (Ru-ZnP) anchored to nano-TiO2. (lower) The current–time responses for TiO2/Ru-ZnP (black), TiO2/ZnP-ref:Ru-ref (blue), TiO2/ZnP-ref (red), and TiO2/Ru-ref (green) electrodes under intermittent white light illumination in pH 7.3 buffer and at +0.23 V vs. RHE. Reproduced from ref. 151-published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the DS-PEC system composed of a “push–pull” subporphyrin sensitizer dye (SubPor) and a Ru–bda type WOCatalyst (Ru–bda2) co-anchored on nano-TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 152-published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Scheme for a PEC composed of a film of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) sensitized with a zinc-phthalocyanine (ZnPc) dye. Electron injection is postulated to occur from the photoexcited dye into the outer carbon nanotube, followed by electron tunneling to the interior of the nanotube providing electron–hole separation. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of the DS-PEC device composed of a nanostructured WO3 film sensitized with a cationic PDI dye, TEPDI, and decorated with IrO2 NP WOCatalyst. “Photoinduced electron injection by PBI loaded on WO3 by exploiting aggregation forces, triggers water oxidation at co-deposited IrO2 nanoparticles”. Reproduced from ref. 50 (copyright 2016 Springer International Publishing Switzerland) with permission from Springer.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of a nano-TiO2 film sensitized with perylene monoimide (PMI). The dyed film was subsequently treated with an Al2O3 overlayer by atomic layer deposition to partially encapsulate the dye, increasing its stability. The TiO2/PMI/Al2O3 films were subsequently decorated with monomeric Cp*Ir-Sil (left panel) or dimeric IrIr (right panel) WOCatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic representation of a water-splitting p/n-DS-PEC tandem cell. The photoanode (left) is composed of a D–A sensitizer dye co-loaded onto TiO2 with a Ru–pdc WOCatalyst (Ru–pdc1). The photocathode (right) is composed of a different D–A type sensitizer dye co-loaded onto NiO with a cobalt complex proton-reduction catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of a DS-PEC composed of D–π–A sensitizer dye co-loaded with a Ru–bda type WOCatalyst (Ru–bda3) on a nanoparticle film of core/shell SnO2/TiO2. The green electrode represents the generator–collector technique used to detect photogenerated O2 in solution. Upper plot: current–time trace for the generator electrode composed of TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 (black line) and core/shell SnO2/TiO2/D–π–A:Ru–bda3 (red line) electrodes with 100 mW cm−2 illumination in pH 7 Pi with +0.88 V vs. RHE. Lower plot: current–time traces at the O2-collector electrode at −0.20 V vs. RHE. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic energy diagram for a DS-PEC employing a core/shell semiconductor substrate. Photo-excitation of the dye is followed by injection into the CB of the TiO2 shell, followed by injection into the CB of the SnO2 core. This enhances spatial separation between the injected electron and the hole on the oxidized dye molecule, reducing the rate of recombination by back electron transfer and thereby allowing more time for regeneration by the WOCatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of a DS-PEC consisting of nano-TiO2 modified at the surface with g-C3N4 (polyheptazine); (b) energy diagram illustrating visible light absorption by TiO2/g-C3N4 based on direct optical charge-transfer excitation of an electron from the g-C3N4 HOMO into the conduction band of TiO2 (red arrow). Reprinted from ref. 198, copyright 2013, with permission from Elsevier.	 
IPCE (λ) = LHE (λ) × ϕinj × ηcol	(4)
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
AM1.5G	Air mass 1.5 global standardized solar irradiance13
BBL	Poly(benzimidazobenzophananthroline)
CB	Conduction band
CNT	Carbon nanotube
Cp*Ir	A class of WOCatalysts based on the [Cp*Ir(κ2-ppy)Cl] structural motif160
D–A	Sensitizer dye composed of electron-donor and acceptor functional groups
D–π–A	Sensitizer dye composed of electron-donor and acceptor functional groups separated by a π-conjugated bridge
DS-PEC	Dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cell
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass
g-C3N4	Graphitic carbon nitride (polyheptazine) (see Fig. 23)
HER	Hydrogen-evolving reaction
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
IPCE	Incident photon-to-current efficiency
ITO	Indium-tin oxide coated glass
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MOx	Metal oxide
MWCNT	Multi-walled carbon nanotube
Nf	Nafion
NHE	Normal hydrogen electrode
NP	Nanoparticle
n-SC	n-Type semiconductor
OER	Oxygen-evolving reaction
OPV	Organic photovoltaic
OSC	Organic semiconductor
OTF	Organic thin-film
Pc	A phthalocyanine derivative
PDI	A perylene diimide derivative
PEC	Photoelectrolysis cell
Pi	Inorganic phosphate
PMI	A perylene monoimide derivative
p/n-PEC	Tandem photoelectrolysis cell with n-SC photoanode and p-SC photocathode
Por	A porphyrin derivative
PPy	Poly(pyrrole)
p-SC	p-Type semiconductor
PSII	Photosystem II
PTTh	Poly(terthiophene)
PV	Photovoltaic
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
Ru–bda	A class of WOCatalysts based on the [Ru(bda)(pic)2] structural motif160
Ru–pdc	A class of WOCatalysts based on the [Ru(pdc)(pic)3] structural motif160
SC	Semiconductor
SCE	Saturated calomel electrode
SCLJ	Semiconductor–liquid junction
SubPor	A subporphyrin derivative
VB	Valence band
WOC	Water-oxidation catalysis
WOCatalyst	Water-oxidation catalyst

e
	Elementary charge of an electron (C)

E
	Electrochemical potential vs. a reference (V)

E
CB
	Electrochemical potential of a semiconductor conduction band (V)

E
F
	Fermi energy (V)

E
F,n
	Quasi-Fermi energy of electrons under illumination (V)

E
F,p
	Quasi-Fermi energy of holes under illumination (V)

E
g
	Bandgap energy (V)

E
rxn
	Electromotive force of a cell reaction (V)

E
VB
	Electrochemical potential of a semiconductor valence band (V)

F
	Faraday constant (eNA)

J
	Current density (μA cm−2)
LHE	Light-harvesting efficiency (%)

n
	Number of electrons transferred in an electrochemical process
ΔG	Free energy change (kJ mol−1)

η
col
	Collection efficiency of electrons injected into a metal oxide in a DS-PEC architecture (%)

η
STH
	Solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency (%)

ϕ
inj
	Injection efficiency of photoexcited electrons into a metal oxide conduction band in a DS-PEC architecture (%)

CoPc
	Cobalt(II) phthalocyanine89 (see Fig. 7)

Cp*Ir
	A Cp*Ir-type catalyst derivatized with a carboxylic acid anchor group149 (see Fig. 13)

Cp*Ir-Sil
	A Cp*Ir-type catalyst with phenylene spacer and silatrane anchor group154 (see Fig. 19)

D–A
	An all-organic donor–acceptor sensitizer dye77 (see Fig. 20)

D–π–A
	An all-organic donor–π bridge–acceptor sensitizer dye155 (see Fig. 21)

H2Pc
	Phthalocyancine88 (see Fig. 5)

IrIr
	A dimeric Ir catalyst154 (see Fig. 19)

MnPor
	5,10,15,20-Tetra(4-sulfonophenyl)porphyrin90 (see Fig. 8)

PCBM
	[6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (see Fig. 9 and 10)

PMI
	A peryelene-3,4-dicarboximide dye derivate (see Fig. 19)

PMPDI
	
N,N′-Bis(phosphonomethyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide82 (see Fig. 11)

PTCBI
	3,4,9,10-Perylene tetracarboxylic bis(benzimidazole)88,89 (see Fig. 5 and 7)

PTCDA
	3,4,9,10-Perylene tetracarboxylic dianhydride91 (see Fig. 9)

Ru–bda1
	The Ru–bda type catalyst portion of a molecular dyad151 (see Fig. 15)

Ru–bda2
	A Ru–bda type catalyst with an aliphatic anchor linking group152 (see Fig. 16)

Ru–bda3
	A Ru–bda type catalyst with phosphonate anchor group155 (see Fig. 21)

RuP
	[RuII(bpy)2(4,4′-(PO3H2)2bpy)]2+

Ru–pdc1
	A Ru–pdc type catalyst with a pdc anchor group77 (see Fig. 20)

Ru-ZnP
	Covalent molecular dyad with a Zn-Por dye and Ru–bda type catalyst151 (see Fig. 15)

SubPor
	A subporphyrin dye derivative with push–pull molecular engineering152 (see Fig. 16)

TEPDI
	
N,N′-Bis(2-(trimethylammonium)-ethylene)-3,4,9,10-perylenediimide153 (see Fig. 18)

ZnPc
	Zinc(II) phthalocyanine165 (see Fig. 17)

ZnPor1
	A Zn-porphyrin sensitizer dye149 (see Fig. 13)

ZnPor2
	The Zn-porphyrin dye portion of a molecular dyad151 (see Fig. 15)
bda	2,2′-Bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate
bpy	2,2′-Bipyridine
pdc	2,6-Pyridinedicarboxylate
pic	4-Picoline
ppy	2-Phenylpyridine
Footnote
† A draft of this manuscript was submitted by JTK to the Academic Faculty of Colorado State University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
