Living cell-based ultrahigh-supercapacitive behaviours   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09818G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09818G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1241-1247Living cell-based ultrahigh-supercapacitive behaviours†

        
          
            Xiaoshuai 
            Wu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Liu‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Chunxian 
            Guo‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuan Zhuan 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuo 
            Zou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Sun
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Chang Ming 
            Li
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Materials Science & Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215009, P. R. China
bSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering & Center for Advanced Bionanosystems, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637457, Singapore
cInstitute for Advanced Cross-field Science and College of Life Science, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, P. R. China
dCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hainan Normal University, Haikou 571158, P. R. China
Received 
      16th November 2021
    , Accepted 6th December 2021First published on 7th December 2021AbstractReported biosupercapacitors are new, but their specific capacitances and power densities are pretty low. Inspired by the sudden blast of unusually high power by humans during emergencies, we propose a new conceptual living-cell-based ultrahigh performance supercapacitor made from bacteria accomplishing a supercapacitance of 1171 F g−1 and energy density of 416 Wh kg−1, which are exceptionally higher than all reported biosupercapacitors by 2 to 3 orders, and even comparable to the energy density of lithium-ion batteries, while retaining a high power of 387 kW kg−1. We propose that 3 double layers in series in a living cell produce a wide potential window of 1.6 V, while millions of individual cell-based micro-supercapacitors in parallel result in ultrahigh supercapacitance. This new living-cell-based supercapacitor sheds fresh scientific light on the fabrication of extremely high energy devices while holding great promise for making highly-biocompatible high-power devices as a future energy source for artificial skin and implantable applications.
Introduction
A bioelectrochemical system (BES) uses enzymes or microorganisms as biocatalysts to harvest electricity by converting biodegradable substrates under mild conditions.1–4 Despite the many intrinsic advantages of BESs, such as renewability, low cost, high theoretical efficiency and the possibility of miniaturization, their low power and energy densities are bottlenecks for practical applications.5–8 Recently, bioinspired energy technology has promoted the development of electrochemical devices in the energy conversion and storage fields.9,10 Huan et al. innovated an artificial photosynthetic system with nonnoble metals and inexpensive material toward converting CO2 to hydrocarbons.11 Rahman et al. explored a chitosan biopolymer laden with NaI salt as a solid polymer electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar cells.12 Supercapacitors have been known to have much higher power density than either batteries or fuel cells, while possessing relatively higher energy density than that of conventional capacitors.13–16 In particular, it has been strongly proposed that biofuel cells can be used for power sources in applications of implantable devices, biomedical wearable apparatus and artificial skin.17–21 However, biofuel cells generally possess relatively low power density. Since capacitors can offer high power density, it is very possible to hybridize a new class of capacitors, biosupercapacitors with biofuel cells, for meeting both energy and power density requirements in practical implantable and other biomedical applications.
Biosupercapacitors made from biological materials such as redox proteins are very newly reported energy devices. In 2012, Malvankar et al. constructed a cytochrome C network-constructed bacterial biofilm to store electrical charges pseudocapacitively with a cytochrome C network bacterial biofilm.22 Then different biosupercapacitors were fabricated from various biological materials, including redox proteins, enzymes23,24 and organelles.25,26 Among these works, Cosnier et al. reported that a double-layer biosupercapacitor made from redox enzymes could be charged/discharged to deliver 0.76 V and 2 mW for 5 days.24 Kizling et al. prepared a biodevice with an anode made from cellulose/polypyrrole with immobilized fructose dehydrogenase, exhibiting double-layer capacitive behaviour for a performance of 0.33 V and 1.6 mW cm−2.27 Villarrubia et al. fabricated an integrated fuel cell/supercapacitor device with a Bucky paper anode immobilized by a methylene green mediator, NAD+/NADH cofactor and glucose dehydrogenase (GDh), producing 0.56 V and 0.87 mW cm−2.28 Very recently, Lv et al. presented a self-charging sweat-based wearable and stretchable biosupercapacitor for an output of 0.6 V and 1.7 mW cm−2.29 Researchers are very keen to welcome a novel class of highly biocompatible new energy conversion/storage devices. In particular, it is hoped that such supercapacitors could hybridize with biofuel cells to simultaneously offer both high energy density and power density for power sources in applications of implantable devices, biomedical wearable apparatus and artificial skin. However, it is noted that all these new biosupercapacitors generally possess low operating voltages of ∼0.3–0.7 V and poor power densities of ∼0.5–2 mW cm−2. Apparently, these devices only possess slightly higher power densities than those (0.1–0.4 mW cm−2) of biofuel cells,30 while they have much lower energy densities than those of the latter. Furthermore, biosupercapacitors have almost the same operating voltages as those of biofuel cells, and also the operational stability (a few hundred cycles with severe deterioration) is not good enough for practical applications. They are specifically much lower than those of electrochemical supercapacitors. Therefore, biosupercapacitors indeed require a great improvement in performance for practical future energy devices in potentially important applications, such as flexible, wearable and implantable power supplies.
Inspired by the sudden blast of unusually high power by humans during emergencies, not only from stories but also from our real lives, we argue that an energy conversion/storage device made from living things may offer exceptional energy and power density for important applications in wearable or/and implantable devices. However, they have not yet been studied. In this work, we provide a demonstration. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa), a kind of Gram-negative bacteria as a living thing, is grown directly on graphene-coated carbon cloth to build a new conceptual symmetric biosupercapacitor. The biosupercapacitor provides superior energy density and exceptionally high power compared to all reported biosupercapacitors, even ranking the best among all carbon-based electrochemical supercapacitors, including both double-layer and pseudo-devices. The mechanism behind this remarkable capacitive performance is investigated to provide deep scientific insights.
Results and discussion
Nano-microstructure and surface characterizations of bacteria
A bacterium cell adhering on an electrode surface is schematically shown in Fig. 1a, which vividly displays its nano-microstructure. The cell is composed of extra- and intra-cellular membranes and is further grown on the electrode surface, thus forming a micro-supercapacitor made from three nano-double-layer capacitors connected in series: an extracellular membrane/electrode surface. Thus, we can reasonably suggest that each living cell forms a micro-supercapacitor comprising three nano-double-layer capacitors connected in series: electrode surface/outside surface of extracellular membrane, inside surface of extracellular membrane/outside surface of intracellular membrane and outside surface of intracellular membrane/inside surface of intracellular membrane. The nano/micro-structure of a single bacterium cell in the biofilm was examined by AFM. The bacterium cells were electrochemically stabilized for stable electrical responses during measurements. The AFM image shows that the cell surface of the freshly cultured P. aeruginosa was relatively smooth and had a roughness of ∼1.7 nm (Fig. 1b), whereas after stabilization, the P. aeruginosa cell had a bumpier surface with a roughness of ∼7.2 nm and holes/channels in sizes over a range of several nanometres to 100 nm appeared (Fig. 1c). Fig. 1d and e further exhibit that these millions of living-cell-based micro-supercapacitors are connected (contact) with each other directly or through pili filaments in a parallel mode.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of charge/discharge processes for a single P. aeruginosa cell. AFM image of the freshly cultured P. aeruginosa cell (b) and P. aeruginosa cell after stabilization (c). (d) SEM image of P. aeruginosa biofilms on a graphene/carbon electrode after electrochemical activation. (e) SEM image shows pili filaments formed between the adjacent bacteria for a bacterial biofilm with a low density. 
Electrochemical behaviours of living-cell-based supercapacitors
CVs of the living-cell-based device show an approximately rectangular shape over a wide potential window from −0.8 to 0.8 V (Fig. S1†), revealing typical electrochemical double-layer capacitive behavior in a broader potential window, ranked the best among all reported biosupercapacitors in aqueous systems. Several pairs of relatively small redox peaks can be observed from the CVs, of which the more negative redox peaks in a range from −0.5 to −0.4 V can be ascribed to the electrochemically active mediators excreted from the bacterial cells in microbial fuel cells, as reported in the literature,30 while the redox peaks over the more positive potential window of −0.2 to 0.6 V are assigned to direct electron transfer reactions at C-type cytochrome protein active centres on the cell membrane.31 Nevertheless, the pseudocapacitance contributed by both mediators and redox proteins can be calculated from the small redox peaks on the CV, which is only 0.9% of the double-layer capacitance (Fig. S2†). This result clearly indicates that the bio-redox contributed pseudocapacitance is insignificant, and therefore the living-cell-based device is indeed a double-layer capacitor.
Results from control experiments for a supercapacitor constructed from carbon cloth without the growth of bacterial cells in Fig. 2a show much smaller double-layer capacitance and no pseudocapacitance, clear evidence that the P. aeruginosa bacterial electrode produces a significantly larger double-layer capacitance than that of the plain carbon cloth electrode. It is known that the potential window of an electrochemical cell without gas evolution in an aqueous electrolyte is theoretically around 1.23 V. The inset in Fig. 2a for the carbon cloth control electrode indicates that the potential window without gas evolution is ∼1.2, a value very close to the theoretical one. In contrast, the living-cell-based biosupercapacitor has a potential window of 1.6 V without gas evolution, much larger than the theoretical cut-off potential window. Very surprisingly, the hydrogen and oxygen evolution potentials for the living cell-device are more negative and more positive than those of the carbon cloth electrode by ∼200 mV, both by the same value, and the operational window is almost three times that of biofuel cells. More interestingly, the living-cell-based supercapacitor can well retain the nearly rectangular CV curve shape as the scan rates increase from 10 to 100 mV s−1 (Fig. 2b), suggesting its high power density. A more detailed mechanism analysis will be presented later.
 Fig. 2  (a) CVs of supercapacitors made up of electrodes of graphene-coated carbon cloth (solid) and P. aeruginosa biofilm grown on graphene-coated carbon cloth (dash dot) under the same conditions; inset is the magnification of CVs of graphene-coated carbon cloth. (b) Specific capacitance as a function of the scan rate; inset is CVs of P. aeruginosa biosupercapacitor at different scan rates. (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the biosupercapacitors at various current densities. (d) Cyclic stability of the biosupercapacitors (current density of 15 A g−1). The inset shows SEM images of bacterial biofilm before and after 1000 charge–discharge cycles. 
To further examine the capacitive behaviours of the new type of biosupercapacitors, galvanostatic charge–discharge experiments were conducted between −0.8 and 0.8 V at four current densities, as shown in Fig. 2c. The charge and discharge curves are well-defined typically capacitive triangle-shaped curves over the whole potential window, for which the double-layer capacitive nature is in good agreement with the CV results shown in Fig. 2a. The specific capacitance (C) of the living-cell-based supercapacitor can be calculated from the charge–discharge curve according to eqn (1):32,33 C = I × Δt/(ΔV × m)(1)where I, Δt, ΔV and m are the applied current, the discharge time, the potential drop during discharge and the mass of electrode material, respectively. With respect to the bacterium biofilm (cell weight), the specific capacitance at a current density of 15 A g−1 is 1171 F g−1 and retains 760 F g−1 when the current density rises to 150 A g−1, clearly demonstrating the superior specific capacitances and good rate capability of the living-cell-based supercapacitor. The specific capacitance and rate capability are the best among all reported carbon-based EDLCs, and very comparable with the best pseudocapacitive devices.34–36 The charge/discharge cycling stability of this novel supercapacitor evaluated at a current density of 15 A g−1 is given in Fig. 2d. The specific capacitance decreases slightly in the first 120 cycles and becomes almost constant thereafter, even after 1000 cycles, proving good long-term stability. The maximum storage specific energy (Emax) can be calculated from eqn (2):32,33 Emax = CV02/2(2)where C is the specific capacitance and V0 is the cycling voltage range (1.6 V). The Emax is 416 Wh kg−1, which is about one order of magnitude higher than those of all state-of-the-art supercapacitors (<20 Wh kg−1), three times higher than that of the reported highest energy density (∼80 Wh kg−1) and even larger than that of lithium-ion batteries (150 Wh kg−1), strongly illustrating the excellent energy storage capacity of the living-cell-based supercapacitor. To verify that the results are repeatable, all the electrochemical experiments were repeated three times, and the results demonstrate that the biosupercapacitor can remain stable in the experiment.
Superior capacitive mechanisms of the living-cell-based biodevice
The mechanism for the superior energy density and power density generated from the living cells was systematically studied. To investigate the electrochemically capacitive behaviours among different bacterial genera, another two kinds of bacteria Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and E. coli were selected to construct biosupercapacitors. CVs for both device show similar capacitive behaviour to that of P. aeruginosa (Fig. S3†), showing that cell-based supercapacitive behaviour could be a universal phenomenon.
In a symmetrical structured device, while discharging the positive electrode has an electron deficiency, while the opposite negative electrode possesses an electron excess. A working principle of the living-cell-based supercapacitor during discharge status is proposed, as schematically shown in Fig. 3, and the equivalent circuit diagrams for individual cell-based micro-supercapacitors and a whole biofilm living-cell-based supercapacitor composed of millions of single cell-based micro-supercapacitors are dramatically illustrated in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. According to Fig. 3a, because a single-cell-based supercapacitor comprises three nano-supercapacitors Cnano1, Cnano2 and Cnano3 connected in series, the operating voltage can be calculated from eqn (3): Vnano = Vnano1 + Vnano2 + Vnano3(3)
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of equivalent circuit for single cell (a) and whole cell based supercapacitor (b). 
This is why the living cell can provide a much higher operating voltage (1.6 V) than that of regular electrochemical supercapacitors (0.8–1.0 V) in an aqueous system. Furthermore, a whole biofilm living-cell-based supercapacitor is composed of millions of single-cell-based micro-supercapacitors connected in parallel, as shown in Fig. 3b. The specific capacitance of the living-cell-based supercapacitor could be calculated according to eqn (4): Ctotal = Cmicro1 + Cmicro2 + Cmicro3 + … + Cmicron(4)
Thus, this novel living-cell-based supercapacitor can offer extraordinarily large specific capacity and high energy density. The higher power density should be ascribed to the porosity and thin thickness of the extra- and intra-membranes with both low electronic resistance and low ionic transport resistance.
Conclusions
In summary, we propose a new conceptual living-cell-based ultrahigh-supercapacitor made from an evolved bacterium with a supercapacitance of 1171 F g−1 and energy density of 416 Wh kg−1, which are exceptionally higher than all reported biosupercapacitors by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude and are even comparable to the energy density of lithium-ion batteries, while retaining a high power density of 387 kW kg−1. The mechanism for the wide potential window of 1.6 V is ascribed to 3 double layers connected in series in a single cell, while millions of individual bacteria cell-based micro-supercapacitors connected in parallel produce ultrahigh supercapacitance. It is worth noting that this innovative living-cell-based supercapacitor has great potential to have an unlimited cycle life if using fluidic nutrition feeding.
This conceptual living-cell-based energy storage device could have great potential to further raise its energy density and power density. We could artificially immobilize highly-reversible redox species on the extra- and intra-cellular membranes to generate highly concentrated redox and realize direct electrochemistry for additional extremely high pseudocapacitance. Alternatively, we can use systems biology or synthetic biology to create super-living cells with highly reversible catalytic centres for high energy and high power density. These can definitely help us to develop fundamental biocatalytic sciences, and more deeply understand the energy storage/conversion processes in human bodies.
Furthermore, this type of living-cell-based energy storage device can be expanded from macrostrains to human cells for implantable and various wearable devices, such as completely biocompatible artificial skin. Some important implantable power sources, such as batteries for cardiac pacemakers and power for medicine robots, can be replaced by delicately designed permanent hybrid biosupercapacitor/biofuel cells made purely from human cells or biological living things. We believe that this novel conceptual biosupercapacitor could also offer great opportunities to explore the new fundamental science of biocatalysis, develop a deep understanding of human metabolism in regard to the electron transfer process and develop new approaches with system biology.
Experimental methods
Bacterial cultivation and electrochemical activation

Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 9027) was cultured anaerobically at 37 °C for 12 h in flasks containing 150 ml of standard glucose medium, which was composed of 10 g of glucose, 5 g of yeast extract, 6.8 g of NaHCO3 and 8.5 g of NaH2PO4 per litre, and then the bacterial culture was directly transferred into the anodic chamber of the MFC to perform discharge across a 1.96 kΩ external resistance for bacterial activation. After discharge for 48 h, the graphene-coated carbon cloth electrodes with bacterial biofilm were collected and used to build biosupercapacitors.
Preparation of graphene/carbon cloth anode
Graphite oxide was synthesized using a solution-based route, as described in previous literature. Graphene oxide (GO) was prepared by dissolving as-prepared graphite oxide in DI water with a concentration of 0.2 mg ml−1, followed by ultrasonication for 30 min. In a two-electrode cell with a Pt sheet as the counter electrode, negatively charged GO was electrophoretically transported to the carbon cloth (E-TEK, B1D, plain, with a geometric area of 1.0 cm2) electrode surface by using a 0.3 mA cm−2 anodic current for 10 min, followed by a 0.6 mA cm−2 cathodic current for 90 s (reducing GO to graphene). The graphene/carbon cloth electrode was air-dried and treated under UV light for 3 h for sterilization.
Biosupercapacitor device setup and electrochemical measurements
Biosupercapacitor devices with a symmetric configuration were constructed with two equal rectangular Perspex frames (5.5 cm (w) × 5.5 cm (l) × 6 cm (h)), separated by a proton exchange membrane (PEM, Nafion 117, Dupont, Wilmington, DE). The P. aeruginosa biofilms grown on the graphene/carbon cloth were utilized as the electrode (Scheme 1). To calculate the device performance, the mass of bacterial cells grown on each electrode was obtained by the weight difference between the dry electrodes before and after bacterial growth. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements were performed with the PGSTAT30 Autolab system (Ecochemie, Utrecht, Netherlands). All the experiments were repeated three times to verify that the results were repeatable.
 Scheme 1  Schematic configuration of the biosupercapacitor device. 
Bacterial cell morphology and structural characterizations
SEM (JSM-6700, JEOL, Japan) was used to investigate the morphology of bacteria grown on graphene-coated carbon cloth electrodes by immersing them in 5% glutaraldehyde for 15 min and sequentially dehydrating them with ethanol (30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 100%). For AFM (SPM 3100, Veeco Instruments Inc., USA) characterization, 100 μL of bacterial suspension were dropped onto the mica surface, and dried at room temperature. The substrate was rinsed with double-ionized water three times to remove the salt and dried using N2 flow. All AFM measurements were carried out in the tapping mode at ambient temperature.
Author contributions
C. M. Li innovated the concept and designed this experiment. X. S. Wu, J. Liu and C. X. Guo were responsible for the experimental concept, design, data analysis and wrote the manuscript. X. S. Wu, J. Liu, C. X. Guo, Z. Z. Shi and Z. Zou prepared materials, performed the electrochemical studies and analyzed data. C. M. Li supervised all aspects of this work and wrote the manuscript. X. S. Wu, J. Liu and C. X. Guo contributed equally to this work. All authors commented on the manuscript and its revisions.
Conflicts of interest
All other authors declare they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Project No. 2021YFA0910400) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21605110, 21972102), Natural Science research Foundation of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (Grant No. 19KJB150038, 21KJB180018), Natural Science Foundation of Suzhou University of Science and Technology (XKQ2018014, XKZ2019011). This work is also funded by Open Foundation of The Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biochip and Medical diagnosis, Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Micro and Nano Heat Fluid Flow Technology and Energy Application, Collaborative Innovation Center of Water Treatment Technology and Material.
References
B. E. Logan, R. Rossi, A. a. Ragab and P. E. Saikaly, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2019, 17, 307–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schroeder and F. Harnisch, Joule, 2017, 1, 244–252 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gupta, M. T. Noori, A. Esteve Nunez and N. Verma, iScience, 2021, 24, 244–252 Search PubMed .
M. M. Gul and K. S. Ahmad, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 142, 111576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Doyle and E. Marsili, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 258, 354–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sevda, T. R. Sreekishnan, N. Pous, S. Puig and D. Pant, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 255, 331–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, L. H.-H. Hsu, P. Kavanagh, F. Barriere, P. N. L. Lens, L. Lapinsonniere, J. H. Lienhard, U. Schroeder, X. Jiang and D. Leech, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 1–13 CrossRef .
C. Santoro, C. Arbizzani, B. Erable and I. Ieropoulos, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 225–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Artero, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, G. Y. Jang, J. K. Kim and J. H. Park, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 62, 11–26 CrossRef .
H. Tran Ngoc, D. A. D. Corte, S. Lamaison, D. Karapinar, L. Lutz, N. Menguy, M. Foldyna, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt, F. Bella, M. Fontecave and V. Mougel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 9735–9740 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Rahman, S. Abu Hanifah, N. N. Mobarak, A. Ahmad, N. A. Ludin, F. Bella and M. S. Su'ait, Polymer, 2021, 230, 124092 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, M. Jiang, W. Wang, S. Liu, W. Huang and Q. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009136 CrossRef CAS .
K. Keum, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Hong, J. G. Son, S.-S. Lee and J. S. Ha, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, K. Jiang, T. Huang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Y.-L. Chen, S.-Y. Gao, F. Wang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101303 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jeerapan, J. R. Sempionatto and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906243 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Shang, Y. Li and J. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 124, 40–52 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, H. Y. Y. Nyein, W. Gao and A. Javey, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Manjakkal, L. Yin, A. Nathan, J. Wang and R. Dahiya, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2100899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, A. S. Campbell, B. E.-F. de Avila and J. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 389–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Malvankar, T. Mester, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 463–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pankratov, Z. Blum, D. B. Suyatin, V. O. Popov and S. Shleev, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 343–346 CrossRef .
C. Agnes, M. Holzinger, A. Le Goff, B. Reuillard, K. Elouarzaki, S. Tingry and S. Cosnier, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1884–1888 RSC .
E. Gonzalez-Arribas, O. Aleksejeva, T. Bobrowski, M. D. Toscano, L. Gorton, W. Schuhmann and S. Shleev, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 74, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pankratova, D. Pankratov, K. Hasan, H.-E. Akerlund, P.-A. Albertsson, D. Leech, S. Shleev and L. Gorton, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602285 CrossRef .
M. Kizling, S. Draminska, K. Stolarczyk, P. Tammela, Z. Wang, L. Nyholm and R. Bilewicz, Bioelectrochemistry, 2015, 106, 34–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. N. Villarrubia, F. Soavi, C. Santoro, C. Arbizzani, A. Serov, S. Rojas-Carbonell, G. Gupta and P. Atanassov, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 459–465 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lv, L. Yin, X. Chen, I. Jeerapan, C. A. Silva, Y. Li, M. Le, Z. Lin, L. Wang, A. Trifonov, S. Xu, S. Cosnier and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2102915 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, Y. Qiao and C. M. Li, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 567–598 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Yu, Y.-Z. Wang, Z. Fang, Y.-T. Shi, Q.-W. Cheng, Y.-X. Chen, W. Shi and Y.-C. Yong, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, P. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Qi, Y. Lei and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, K.-H. Kim, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and E. E. Kwon, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, G. Saeed, L. Zhu, K. N. Hui, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126352 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
A. Gopalakrishnan and S. Badhulika, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 228830 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09818g‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of charge/discharge processes for a single P. aeruginosa cell. AFM image of the freshly cultured P. aeruginosa cell (b) and P. aeruginosa cell after stabilization (c). (d) SEM image of P. aeruginosa biofilms on a graphene/carbon electrode after electrochemical activation. (e) SEM image shows pili filaments formed between the adjacent bacteria for a bacterial biofilm with a low density.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) CVs of supercapacitors made up of electrodes of graphene-coated carbon cloth (solid) and P. aeruginosa biofilm grown on graphene-coated carbon cloth (dash dot) under the same conditions; inset is the magnification of CVs of graphene-coated carbon cloth. (b) Specific capacitance as a function of the scan rate; inset is CVs of P. aeruginosa biosupercapacitor at different scan rates. (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the biosupercapacitors at various current densities. (d) Cyclic stability of the biosupercapacitors (current density of 15 A g−1). The inset shows SEM images of bacterial biofilm before and after 1000 charge–discharge cycles.	 
C = I × Δt/(ΔV × m)	(1)
Emax = CV02/2	(2)
Vnano = Vnano1 + Vnano2 + Vnano3	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of equivalent circuit for single cell (a) and whole cell based supercapacitor (b).	 
Ctotal = Cmicro1 + Cmicro2 + Cmicro3 + … + Cmicron	(4)

 	Scheme 1  Schematic configuration of the biosupercapacitor device.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta09818g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
