Helical polymer self-assembly and chiral nanostructure formation  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0PY01558J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0PY01558J
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 1857-1897Helical polymer self-assembly and chiral nanostructure formation

        
          
            Randall A. 
            Scanga
          
        
       and 

        
          
            James F. 
            Reuther
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA. E-mail: james_reuther@uml.edu
Received 
      10th November 2020
    , Accepted 11th February 2021First published on 16th February 2021AbstractSince the pioneering efforts of Nolte, Okamoto and Green, the field of chiral helical polymers has made significant inroads. Here, we review recent advances made in the design, production and implementation of helical polymer systems. We examine the corresponding chiral nanoobjects derived from their self-assembly and detail their emergent properties as well as their potentials for the construction of new functional devices. We further note parallels and lessons to be learned from natural systems and discuss new directions and opportunities. Principles of homochiral evolution and hierarchical structuring derived from systematic study are presented. With a particular emphasis on methods for the controlled generation of chiral structures of predefined size and morphology, we review recent efforts to apply polymerization induced self-assembly (PISA) and crystallization driven self-assembly (CDSA) to helical polymers. Material properties including circularly polarized luminescence (CPLu), chemosensory detection, chiral discrimination, multi-stimuli responsiveness, chiral plasmonics, and magnetic and magneto-optical behaviours are discussed.
Introduction
Through guided chemical evolution, nature has devised particularly elegant solutions to critically important tasks. DNA, arguably the single most important helical polymer in existence, efficiently encodes information with helically arranged subunits to achieve high density storage. This has led Church et al. to propose the use of DNA as a form of immutable archival storage with information density exceeding that of conventional flash memory by ∼6 orders of magnitude.1 In fact, nature routinely uses helical scaffolds to achieve complex functions, with one such example including light harvesting (LH) systems. For instance, the light-harvesting antenna complex of certain photosynthetic bacteria (i.e. rhodoblastus acidophilus) contains pigments such as carotenoids and bacteriochlorophylls (BChl) surrounded by helical protein subunits. The spectral features of this system have been attributed to efficient singlet–singlet energy transfer between constituent pigments resulting from van der Waals contact of their π-electron systems.2
Helical structures also serve as supports for the extracellular matrix (ECM) and soft tissues; one such material is collagen, a hierarchically structured assembly of superhelical trimers which adopt a pseudo-hexagonal packing arrangement to afford fibrils.3 Helices are also central components of voltage-gated ion channels in transmembrane proteins where they serve as key determinants of ion selectivity and conductance. Similarly, α-helices have routinely served as simplified model systems for investigation of ion conduction processes.4 This has inspired the development of synthetic helical polymer-based ion channels which successfully discriminate anions and cations while simultaneously achieving size selective transport.5 Yet another process found to occur in biological systems is chiral switching, a mechanism which permits dynamic control of structure and function.6 A beautiful demonstration of this can be found in the complex biomineralized spiral structures of certain marine based and terrestrial organisms.7 This led Feringa and coworkers to design an artificial system that achieves helicity switching through the use of a chiral photochromic switch, enabling light-mediated, helix-sense selective polymerization of a dynamically helical polyisocyanate.8 Interestingly, the dynamic behaviour of chiral helical polymers has been exploited to effect switchable enantioselective separations in multistate poly(phenylacetylene) systems as well;9,10 likewise helical supramolecular assemblies have been applied to dual-state switchable enantioselective catalysis.11–13
The process of homochiral evolution is likewise ubiquitous in natural systems (e.g. in communication and replication) and has therefore become a recurrent theme of research in the field of chiral polymer systems. In the most rudimentary sense, homochiral evolution may be viewed as the transference of chirality from monomer to polymer (i.e. intrachain) and from polymer to superstructure (i.e. interchain). In the case of chiral block copolymers (BCP*), Ho and coworkers have elegantly demonstrated that the factors leading to homochiral evolution may be generalized.14,15 A central thrust of this particular line of research has been the creation of new mesochiral phases; one of which, hereafter referred to simply as the helical phase (H*), is a collection of hexagonally arranged helical cylinders (P622 space group).16 Importantly, this phase permits the generation of the corresponding gyroidal phase over a broadened compositional range by taking advantage of the order–order transitions. Noting that bulk periodic nanostructures such as chiral gyroid networks have been proposed candidates for the template directed generation of negative index of refraction metamaterials such as superlenses,17 the prospect of identifying facile methods for their production is particularly intriguing. If realized, such lenses have the potential to reinvigorate if not revolutionize the diffraction limited fields of photolithography and optical microscopy.
Although numerous, the applications and processes noted thus far are not intended to serve as a comprehensive listing, but rather as a glimpse of the potential helical polymer systems present to researchers in the field. Undoubtedly, the ability to recapitulate the same complex functions that nature so elegantly achieves through systems chemistry is and will remain one of the grand challenges of modern-day synthetic methodology. Nonetheless, it logically follows that rationally designed synthetic systems utilizing the same design principles as those already encountered in nature will serve to advance our understanding of the complex interplay between structure and function. In this regard, helical scaffolds serve as privileged templates for the construction of such systems.
New directions and opportunities
Helical polymers represent a unique class of rigid-rod polymers which exhibit exceptionally long persistence lengths, possess useful dynamic behaviors18–21 and engage in particularly interesting self-assembly to yield a diverse array of nanostructures,22–26 including vesicles,27 toroids,28 twisted supramolecular fibers,29 nanoscrews,30 gyroid networks31 and a unique helical phase.32 Herein, we aim to survey the recent literature and advances in the implementation of helical polymers in chiral nanostructure formation. Furthermore, the unique self-assembly of helical polymers has also led to the inference of unique properties, which are also surveyed here (Fig. 1), such as the creation of photonic structures.33 Generally speaking, the helical inversion barrier describes the tendency toward racemization. In a structurally diverse collection of polymers this barrier is sufficiently high to maintain a helical conformation even when in the molecularly dissolved state, an observation attributed to the steric repulsion of bulky pendant groups.34–37 Different mechanisms have been leveraged to apply chiral bias to helical polymer systems including polymerization with the chiral field of liquid crystals, the effects of chiral solvents,38–40 chiral initiators40–42 and even light mediated symmetry breaking. The later effect in addition to the sergeants-and-soldiers principle43,44 and majority rules45 of chiral amplification have been proposed as possible explanations for the emergence of biological homochiralty.46 Many of these methods for helical induction are outlined with recent examples described in detail later in the text.
 Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of a wide variety of nanostructures obtainable through the unique self-assembly of helical polymers; as well as applicable strategies for their creation, intriguing properties and, more broadly, the role of underlying principles in the emergence of natural asymmetry. 
Chiral systems interact distinctly with circularly polarized light (CPL) of a given handedness and offer the capability to exert precise control over electron spin. The latter effect, more formally known as the chiral induced spin selectivity (CISS) effect holds great promise for further development of spintronic applications and is a critically important concept for electron transport processes.47 Furthermore, recent demonstrations have shown well defined chiral polymers to be particularly strong candidates for the production of organic-spintronic devices.48 These unique spin filtering properties also provide pathways to the development of improved dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells for water splitting49,50 Also notable is the first report detailing the tunability of the large magneto-optic activity associated with chiral helical polymers which came in recent years51,52
In the broader sense, supramolecular polymer systems represent a powerful platform for the creation J and H-aggregating systems, assemblies whose unique photophysical properties hold a great deal of promise for construction of optoelectronic devices;53 likewise, assemblies of this sort with a defined helical twist are attracting a great deal of interest as well.54 Though this field has typically been dominated by the supramolecular assembly of small molecules, this review is meant to touch on the impacts of macromolecular ordering of such electroactive groups within the context of helical polymer scaffolds.
The topics covered herein are meant to comprehensively describe the various synthetic, supramolecular and applicatory advancements associated with helical polymer self-assembly made over recent years. Research on novel nanostructure fabrication methods such as polymerization induced self-assembly and crystallization driven self-assembly have now begun to enter the realm of chiral helical materials providing important leaps forward in the scalable and size-controlled synthesis of chiral nanostructures, respectively, unique properties including liquid crystallinity, circularly polarized luminescence, chiral discrimination, chiral switching and stereocomplexation are also discussed in detail, finally, these properties have made possible particular niche applications for assembled chiral nanostructures that include chiral sensing, enantioselective catalysis, chiral separations, biomimetic ion channels, responsive liquid crystal displays and organic photovoltaics, all of which are covered here.
Systems chemistry: from photosynthetic to photovoltaic
The conversion of solar energy by functional supramolecular assemblies of polymers and/or small molecules to other useable forms of energy has tremendous promise. The helix, and by extension helical polymers, provide a viable platform for the creation of such artificial systems. While biological photosynthetic systems are not optimized for overall efficiency in energy conversion55 (i.e. when compared to photovoltaics), their ability to separate charge carriers remains unrivalled amongst known artificial systems where prevention of recombination is highly desirable for the production of efficient organic photovoltaics (OPV)s.56
Early efforts to identify organic materials for electronic application began in the 1950s, in the years that followed zone-refined organic single crystals were presented as the first alternative to traditional semiconductor materials.57 While these materials grant sufficient charge-carrier mobility, processes to obtain them have historically been costly and ultimately intractable. However, in 1994 the helically twisted columnar phase of a discotic liquid crystal comprised of hexahexylthiotriphenylene (HHTT, 1) was subsequently proposed as an alternative.58 Here the ordered stacking arrangement of π-conjugated elements yielded record mobilities of photoinduced charge carriers (0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1); at the time, a feat surpassed only by single crystals. In decades that followed the promise of organic electronics began to be realized through the programmed self-assembly of π-conjugated systems;59 the origins of 1D supramolecular wires can be seen in the early works of Lehn60 and others.61
Helical systems continue to provide unique opportunities to neatly arrange functional units within a given architecture and the resultant Coulomb coupling between these units can permit exciton delocalization. Here, the prerequisite for such coupling will necessarily be ordering, both electronic and structural, as this electronic coupling leads to the creation of delocalized exciton states. This is to say, that electronic excitations are shared amongst these individual elements coherently. Wittmann et al. refers to this as quantum-coherent transport.62 In contrast, electronic and structural disorder lead to exciton localization, and therefore follows that if disorder predominates, long-range transport will not be possible.62 For example, in the case of dye–dye interactions, precise control of molecular organization is of fundamental importance to achieve specific, tailor-made functional properties. Despite this requirement, relatively few reports have detailed the role of precise molecular organization in collective dye–dye interactions of π-conjugated systems when joined by a polymeric backbone. This paucity, as outlined by Würthner and coworkers, can be overcome with designed foldamer-based approaches,63 and similarly with designed helical polymer systems. One can easily imagine that such structuring can prove advantageous. For example, even within comparatively disordered systems, chromophore π–π overlap is known to promote efficient triplet dissociation and migration along polymer backbones that need not be conjugated64 potentially presenting opportunities for the creation of new intramolecular singlet fission (iSF) active layers; insights into the role of crystal structure and its influence in this process can be found elsewhere.65
J-aggregating perylene bisimides (PBIs or PDIs, 2) represent an oft-studied supramolecular system, whilst H aggregating PBIs have received relatively less attention. While the dynamics and photophysical processes at work in these systems are complex, Lim et al. have demonstrated, through a combination of time correlated single photon counting and femtosecond pump–probe measurements, that exciton delocalization occurs within the 1D helically stacked H-aggregates with a exciton diffusion length of ∼10 monomer units.66 While this value is shorter than those determined for J aggregates,67 it nonetheless suggests that structurally modified systems could still prove useful for construction of optoelectronic devices.
From a practical perspective, supramolecular assemblies of small molecules carry the caveat that the desired aggregated structure may only be accessible within a given range of solvents, temperatures and concentrations.68 On the other hand, polymers may be more easily integrated into low-cost device manufacturing workflows and thereby deployed in real world applications; once more demonstrating the potential of suitably designed functional helical polymers. In 2004, Nolte and coworkers provided an early demonstration of the merits of such an approach with their synthesis and characterization of polyisocyanide-derived perylene photonic wires.69 Utilizing a methodology they dub “macromolecular scaffolding strategy”, a helical polyisocyanide backbone provides an ordered arrangement of π-conjugated functional units. Introduction of a flexible spacer between the rigid polymer backbone and electroactive moieties provides conformational freedom, permitting the creation of a functional electronic architecture while the presence of a chiral alanine side chain rigidifies the polymer.70 The polyisocyanide scaffold successfully arranges π-conjugated units with sub-angstrom level precision over length scales on the order of several hundred nanometres while simultaneously maintaining good solution processibility. Furthermore, the system capably generates and transports charges allowing it to be leveraged toward the creation of functional prototype devices including organic field-effect transistors (OFET)s and photovolatics.71
Structure–property relationships were established through the course of these studies, with bay-substituted P-PDI-2 (4) experiencing inhibited π–π interaction due to steric hindrance, resulting in significantly lower device performance. Dabirian et al. explored the relationship between nanoarchitecture and charge transport in bicomponent films comprised of M-PDI (2) and P-PD1-1 (3).72 These studies revealed that the polymer formed interconnections between crystallites in the film yield marked improvement in electrical conductivity; OFET devices fabricated in this fashion showed an improvement in charge carrier mobility of two orders of magnitude.
Similar approaches have been adopted in supramolecular systems as well. Various nanowire assemblies have been constructed which feature oligopeptide sequences appended to electroactive elements. The methodology is robust, consistently yielding well-defined tape-like nanostructures which establish strong electronic coupling amongst their constituent π-conjugated systems.73 The success of this strategy is due in large part to the cooperative nature of amide hydrogen bonding (i.e. of the oligopeptide sequences) and synergistic π–π interaction. In this design, a feature of particular interest is the resultant “infinite” network of NH⋯OC hydrogen bonds whose resonance-enhanced character complements the π–π interaction of the appended chromophore establishing strong electronic interaction.74 Systems bearing widely varying chromophores such as perylene derivatives,75 oligothiophenes76 and oligo(phenylene vinylene)s77 have been demonstrated firmly establishing the utility of the approach.
Recent work from Hafner et al. examining the role of helical nanostructure in the creation of long-lived charge carriers further suggests that helical systems are poised to become useful design elements for (OPV)s.78 Strong intermolecular exciton coupling amongst chromophores contained within H-aggregating stacks of 1 (Fig. 1a) is reported in addition to photoinduced charge generation (i.e. polaron-like) under ambient lighting conditions. Notably, solutions of freely dissolved 1 do not exhibit such behaviour, nor do solutions of 2 which lack peptide groups and are therefore incapable of forming β-sheet-like aggregates such as those observed in self-assembled 1. The presence of point chirality is likewise a prerequisite for the emergence of long-lived charge carriers as evidenced by studies of compound 3, which capably forms H-aggregates but lacks the helical sense of aggregates derived from 1. The self-assembly of 1 is accomplished by means of thermal annealing in 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (TCE), where the π–π interactions of chromophores work in concert with hydrogen bonding through oligopeptide segments to afford twisted supramolecular nanowires with defined helical-sense. The resulting helically ordered supramolecular architecture occurs with an intermolecular spacing of 4.7 Å, which is consistent with the formation of the desired β-sheet-like assembly, while chromophores exhibit an intermolecular separation of 3.8 Å owing to π–π interactions. The assembled fibres displayed uniform morphologies, with lengths on the order of a few microns and a height of approximately 3 nm (dried state) due to rigidity imparted by the core structure (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structure of 1 (where: R = Me, n = 2), 2 (n = 0), and 3 (where: R = H, n = 2). (b) Illustration of the helically twisted supramolecular architecture formed from 1 with internally organized chromophores about the center axis. (c) AFM height image and height profile of nanostructures comprised of 1. (d) Temperature-dependent UV–vis and CD spectra of 1 in 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (TCE): a hypsochromic shift of the chromophore UV–vis absorption is accompanied by an increased bisignate CD signal with negative Cotton effect upon transition from the molecularly dissolved state at 373 K to hydrogen bonded aggregates at room temperature. Adapted from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Variable temperature UV-Vis spectra exhibit a pronounced hypsochromic shift from 422 to 385 nm upon self-assembly, an observation consistent with the formation of H-aggregates. Furthermore, the significant blue shift coupled with the suppression of 0–0 and 0–1 transitions firmly implicates the presence of strongly coupled electronic states. Notably, while achiral model compound 3 similarly forms H-aggregates, it does not exhibit polaron formation. However, upon addition of 50 mol% 1, CD signal intensities indicate that the majority of 3 exists within a helically structured bundle, signifying the presence of a weak sergeants-and-soldiers effect. At this point, the system displays similar charge carrier formation, once again implicating the involvement of helical nanostructures in the emergence of this behaviour. Taken as whole, these results indicate that the presence of strong excitonic coupling alone is not sufficient for photocharge generation and that the helically structured supramolecular architecture is likewise essential for efficient electron transfer amongst functional groups (e.g. amide carbonyl groups).
While helical polymer self-assembly presents distinct advantages for the creation of chemical systems exhibiting unique photochemical and electronic properties, there have been relatively few reports demonstrating improvements in optoelectronic device performance as a result of its influence. To this end, Ouchi et al. have recently demonstrated these effects for supramolecular assemblies of oligothiophenes,79 where a tape-like supramolecular polymer results due to formation of hydrogen bonded assemblies of barbiturated oligo(butylthiophene)s (5). Systematic comparison of the corresponding higher-order helical morphology to a lamellar arrangement derived from a closely related structural analogue (i.e. differing only by alkyl substitution pattern) reveals a marked improvement in optoelectronic performance for the former. In bulk heterojunction OPV devices, the measured power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) illustrate a striking structure–property relationship, with devices fabricated from the helically twisted nanofibers achieving a PCE = 4.5% and those obtained from the lamellar packing providing only PCE = 1.5%.
The emergence of similar synergistic supramolecular interactions for construction of helical polymer systems and related hierarchical suprastructures are becoming increasingly reported. In one such account, Wada et al. detailed what is likely the first known example of one-step, one-dimensional (1D) macromolecular assembly of supramolecular fibers with single-handed helical twist.80 This process is juxtaposed to the preceding example in which premade macromolecular segments were later joined by self-assembly. In much the same fashion as originally reported by Nolte et al., glycine-based isocyanide monomers with variable pendant functionality underwent nickel(II)-catalysed polymerization in CHCl3 to yield helical polymers such as supra-poly(2) (Chart 1, (6); Fig. 3a). However, in this particular instance the as-formed helical macromolecules were found to undergo spontaneous self-assembly to yield an extended 1D supramolecular architecture. This so-called “transit-type merry-go-round mechanism” was the product of serendipitous discovery and is driven by hydrogen bond mediated end-to-end assembly of individual helical macromolecules (Fig. 3d); the typical “merry-go-round” mechanism observed in the nickel(II)-catalysed polymerization of polyisocyanides has been detailed elsewhere.81,82 Interestingly, when the reaction mixture was sampled at different monomer conversions using THF a diluting solvent, the SEC traces shifted to lower molecular weight. Upon addition of more polar solvent mixtures comprised of THF and DMSO (96:4, v/v) the apparent molecular weight was found to markedly decrease, with what was presumed to be complete disassembly occurring within 7 days, yielding a final molecular weight of 2.38 × 104 g mol−1 (DPw = ∼34) (Fig. 3c); indicating the formation and dissociation of supramolecular aggregates. Further examination of this behaviour revealed that the molecular masses of the constituent polymers were unaffected by altered monomer/catalyst ratios. Once more, this observation is attributed to the solvent promoted disassembly of the supramolecular fibers likely due to disruption of hydrogen bonds occurring at the chain-ends of individual macromolecular segments. This supposition is supported by the polarity dependent dissociation kinetics of the supramolecular assemblies themselves, with hydrogen bonding interactions amongst terminal amide groups serving as the likely driving force for non-covalent supramolecular interaction.
 Chart 1  Chemical structures applied to the creation of optoelectronic devices and polyisocyanide derived macromolecular scaffolds; molecular model reproduced with permission from ref. 72 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of glycine-derived polyisocyanide homopolymers (monomers 2–6) by nickel(II) catalysis in CHCl3 at 20 °C (where [M]0/[Ni]0 = 270). (b) Conversion-dependent SEC traces during polymerization of achiral monomer 2. (c) Observation of the disassembly process of supra-poly(2) (at 25 °C) upon 300-fold dilution with THF/DMSO (96:4, v/v) by SEC. (d) Illustration of “transit-type merry-go-round mechanism” leading to self-assembly of 1-D supramolecular structures during homopolymerization. (e) AFM image of supra-poly(2) on HOPG (in H2O at ∼20 °C). (f) gabs (top) spectra of supra-poly(21−r-co-1Lr) (r = 0.0001–0.02) in CHCl3 (at 25 °C), CD (middle), and normalized absorption (bottom). Adapted from ref. 80 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
High resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM) provides height profiles on the order of 2 nm, which agree well with those expected based upon molecular dynamics (MD) simulations where the presence of multiple terminal-end hydrogen bonds is predicted for model dimers in CHCl3. Likewise, the computational model indicates that individual units can be seamlessly joined in an end-to-end fashion, with propagation occurring parallel to the helical chain axis; thereby providing further support for the hypothesized mode of supramolecular assembly. X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies further revealed that the supramolecular chains exist within neatly arranged hexagonal arrays with a lattice constant of a = 3.08 nm. Impressively, chiral induction from an infinitesimal chiral source is achieved, with 13% helix-sense excess obtained with just one chiral sergeant for every 10000 achiral soldier units leading to a measured Kuhn dissymmetry factor of 0.26 × 10−3 at 304 nm (Fig. 3f). This finding implies that a lossless transference of chirality is achieved across 1300 monomeric units which roughly equates to 46 end-to-end assembled macromolecular units.
Helical induction
In the preceding examples, the presence of either an achiral glycine or a chiral alanine serves as a key structural component. This feature imparts increased structural rigidity aiding in the adoption of helical conformations with preferred handedness. This structural unit is also credited for the unique one-step assembly of 1D supramolecular fibres, as reported by Wada et al., where a highly efficient sergeants-and-soldiers chiral amplification occurs through an end-to-end self-assembly process yielding both intramolecular and intermolecular chiral amplification.
To further examine the potential benefits of these structural features, we turn our attention to a recent study performed by Song et al. which employed the helix as a simplified, biomimetic model of enzymatic catalysis. The study revealed the folding dependent rate enhancement for ring-opening polymerizations (ROP) of N-carboxyanhydride (NCA) monomers.83 Here, the controlled spatial arrangement of reactive chain ends conferred by the helix and the corresponding reduction in conformational freedom enabled complementary hydrogen bonding interaction with NCA monomers facilitating the reaction; in this way, the helix catalyses its own formation. Despite the systems’ reduced structural complexity, it successfully mimics the behaviour of enzymes and exhibits Michaelis–Menten type kinetics. Critically, the structure and corresponding mechanistic features of the system result in fast polymerization kinetics. This allows for the controlled ROP of NCA monomers in the presence of water; a condition which would otherwise result in undesired reactions in prototypical systems. Moreover, the low dielectric constant of the dichloromethane (DCM) solvent further facilitates increased hydrogen bonding interactions between the growing polypeptide chains and the NCA monomers. These interactions provide substantial rate enhancement compared to conventional solvent systems such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and therefore, offer reduced chain termination and NCA hydrolysis side reactions. This also necessarily mimics the catalytic binding “cleft” or pocket of an enzyme's active site to a certain extent, and thereby similarly emulates its specificity of interaction.
Cheng and coworkers have also extended these mechanisms to dendritic and bottlebrush based ROP macroinitiators,84,85 where the presence of cooperative macrodipole interactions substantially enhance reaction rate (Scheme 1). In the representative case of NCA polymerization, the enhancement in reaction rate was found to directly correlate with the coil-to-rod transition where the formation of the α-helical secondary structure was monitored through a combination of FTIR and CD spectroscopy. Once more, these features resulted in an improved tolerance toward water and offered enhanced levels of both control and rate of polymerization. Furthermore, NCA polymerization from ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) derived macroinitiators offered further enhancements owing to the presence of collective, cooperative electrostatic interactions amongst growing helices. In yet another related development, Cheng and coworkers recently applied this strategy to the production of polypeptide based unimolecular micelles using dendritic polyamine initiators. Through use of polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer macroinitiators they detail the synthesis of the largest synthetic polypeptides reported to date.84 An intellectual curiosity potentially worthy of further investigation would be examination of the generality of these mechanisms in the synthesis of other helical high polymers.
 Scheme 1  (a) Illustration depicting macrodipole interactions in the cooperative polymerization of α-helices with the positive dipole occurring at the N-terminus. The ordered confinement induced by the brush polymer topology places dipoles in an ordered array leading to an enhanced rate of polymerization. (b) Polymer structure derived from “helically twining polymerization”. (c) Polymer structure utilized for the creation of nanoreactor micelles for HSSP. 
In 2005, Yashima and coworkers presented the first report of synthetic single-handed double helices; a feat accomplished through use of complementary chains bearing a chiral amidine and achiral carboxyl groups joined by salt bridges.86,87 Despite significant advancements in this area, reports of such systems have been relatively few and for the most part are limited to oligomers.88 More recently, noting this scarcity Deng and coworkers endeavoured to expand the palette of double helix fabrication methods.89 Presenting a methodolgy they refer to as “helically twining polymerization”, they demonstrated that dynamic polyacetylenes derived from achiral monomers can subsequently be made to undergo chiral induction in the presence of chiral monomers as molecular chaperones (Scheme 1, (6); Fig. 4, step 2). In turn, this mechanism of chiral induction yields a single-handed helical enantiomer suitably templated for the creation of a complimentary strand (Fig. 4, step 3). Evidence for the successful generation of the desired double helical structure is provided by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) where the double helical organization of the polymer chains can be clearly discerned with diameters measuring on the order of 3.5 Å (Fig. 4a and b).
 Fig. 4  Schematic for the preparation of double helical substituted polyacetylenes (DHSPs). HRTEM images of (a) MM DHSP and (b) PP DHSP; samples prepared by drop-casting of CHCl3 solutions onto ultrathin carbon support films followed by solvent evaporation. Adapted from ref. 89 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chiral micelles derived from helical polyacetylenes featuring cholesteric pendant units act as nanoreactors for helix-sense selective polymerizations (HSSP) of achiral monomers leading to the formation of optically active core–shell nanoarchitectures (Scheme 1, (7)).90 When achiral monomers are incorporated into the micellar core, hydrogen bonds between the chiral micelle and the achiral monomer direct the transfer of chirality through generation of pseudochirality which then in turn propagates during polymerization. This mechanism efficiently transfers chirality from micelle to monomer resulting in the formation of polymer chains of predominately one helical handedness. Suginome and coworkers have also explored the topic of enantioselective catalysis extensively, performing cyclopropanation,91 aldol,92 and Steglich93 reactions with helical poly(quinoxaline-2,3-diyl)s (PQXs); for a representative chemical structure of a PQX refer to (Chart 3).
Homochiral evolution
In the field of chemistry and biochemistry, determining the origins of biological homochirality is of fundamental importance. Gratifyingly, the last decade has witnessed significant progress toward this goal. To this end, circularly polarized light (CPL; not to be confused with circularly polarized luminescence) has been proposed as a possible explanation for the emergence of natural asymmetry. In this way, chiral bias can be applied to various photochemical processes, affording asymmetric transformations with one particularly notable example establishing CPL mediated symmetry breaking in amino acid derivatives.94 Furthermore, recent demonstrations have established the efficacy of CPL induced asymmetric synthesis of small molecules and polymers alike, with examples of photo-mediated chiral induction in azobenzene-appended epoxy polymers,95 4,4′-bipyrdine coordination polymers,96 and polyfluorene polymers.97
Wang et al. recently detailed the enantioselective excitation of left-handed M-helices with left-handed circularly polarized light (L-CPL) permitting transformation of M-twisted diads to coplanar transition states which upon deactivation may be converted to P-helices yielding asymmetric polyfluorenes (Fig. 4a).98 Furthermore, amplification of chirality results due to inter- and intra-chain chirality transfer, where the influence of neighboring diads biases the deactivation pathway resulting in the formation of a complementary, same-handed sequence (Fig. 5b and c). This mechanism of “deactivation chirality amplification” is shown to be operative in films of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diyl) (poly(DOF)), poly(9,9-didodecylfluorene-2,7-diyl) (poly(DDF)) but not in poly(9,9-dihexylfluorene-2,7-diyl) (poly(DHF)) which requires the addition of an exogenous chiral dopant. The as-prepared films are said to be stable when stored at room temperature in the absence of intense light sources, with poly(DOF) films exhibiting CPLu with glum as high as 6 × 10−3. Notably, these values are higher than gCD, an observation attributed to the higher relative anisotropy of the excited state relative to the ground; with conformational changes or alterations in chain alignments potentially occurring in the excited state. Critically, the extent of chiral amplification reported upon irradiation with CPL is noted to be higher than that which could be expected of reversible photo-deracemization, with almost exclusively one single helical enantiomer being obtained. Practically speaking, the desired conformational transformation may be further facilitated by heat to afford longer range chain ordering and thus increased chiral induction.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chiral induction of polyfluorenes via enantiomer-selective photoexcitation with CPL. (b) Chiral amplification upon deactivation through interchain interaction. (c) Chiral amplification upon deactivation by means of intrachain interactions. Adapted from ref. 98 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
He et al. have examined similar effects resulting from application of superchiral light (SCL) obtained by interference of counter-propagating CPL with identical frequency but opposite handedness and differential intensity.99 In this study, the use of SCL enabled the enantioselective synthesis of helical polydiacetylene (PDA) from an achiral DA monomer. The increased optical dissymmetry of SCL relative to CPL led to enhanced chiral amplification during photo-polymerization. Significantly, the PDA films obtained from SCL induced photo-polymerization displayed enhanced chiral sensing relative to those obtained via conventional CPL irradiation. In a subsequent report, He et al. reported a highly enantioselective photo-polymerization of PDA using chiral cysteine modified silver nanoparticles.100 The method permits the fabrication of chiral gradients and further provides an effective means to tailor the circularly polarized luminescence (CPLu) properties of the resultant films. Taken as whole, these advances highlight the possibility of light-mediated asymmetric synthesis of helical polymer architectures.
Helical structures are routinely encountered in biological systems where they act as precisely functional and structural materials. Achieving comparable levels of hierarchical ordering remains a significant challenge in artificial systems. Despite these challenges Vacogne et al. provided the first report of dried state spiral morphologies obtained from the emulsion polymerization of γ-benzyl-L-glutamate (bEL) and γ-benzyl-D-glutamate (bED) NCA monomers.101 Using Raman spectroscopy, analysis of the amide-I band offers insight into the polymer tertiary structures with a secondary peak occurring at 1644–1645 cm−1 indicating the presence of random coil conformations (or related structural defect; Fig. 5a). Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, however, shows strong chiroptical response with bands at 208 and 222 nm confirming the presence of left-handed α-helices, to varying degrees (Fig. 6b). Spiral superstructures of defined chirality were obtained by controlling the chirality of the α-helices themselves, with right-handed helices (rich in bEL residues) giving rise to clockwise spiral morphologies (Fig. 6c and e) and left-handed helices (rich in bED residues) yielding the enantiomorphic, counter-clockwise spiral morphologies (Fig. 6d and f). The hypothesized mode of chiral amplification that led to the observed hierarchical structuring involved the formation of bundled fibrils occurring under confinement within the spherical droplet interface. Interestingly, the morphologies obtained closely resemble the structures of charophyte seeds (a form of green algae).102
 Fig. 6  (a) Raman spectra of polypeptides with amide I bands (black) comprised of varying contributions from the following peaks: a main peak at ∼1652–1655 cm−1 (purple, α-helix) and a smaller peak at ∼1644 cm−1 (green, defect); dashed curve corresponds to the cumulative fit. (b) CD spectra of polypeptides (in HFIP at 0.05 g L−1). Particles obtained from direct emulsification (at 60 °C) of polypeptide-toluene in water of (c) (bEL)159, (d) (bE0.80L aG0.20DL)209, (e) (bED)155, and (f) (bE0.81D aG0.19DL)223; the screw sense of the spirals are either (c, e) clockwise or (d and f) counterclockwise; scale bars = 1 μm. (g) Chemical structures of PLBG and PBDG. Adapted from ref. 101 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Wang et al. recently evaluated the role of chirality in block copolymer self-assembly and microphase separation. Using tethered polymer systems with comparable Flory–Huggins interaction parameter (χ) but differing tendencies toward crystallization, they systematically compared the effects of chirality on the emergence and stabilization of the “helical phase” (H*).15 First presented in 2004,32 the chiral block copolymer (BCP*) polystyrene-block-poly(L-lactide) (PS-b-PLLA) has been studied extensively, laying a solid theoretical and experimental foundation for further fundamental studies. To this end, other BCPs*, such as poly(benzyl methacrylate)-b-poly(D-cyclohexylglycolide) (PBnMA-b-PDCG) and PBnMA-b-poly(L-cyclohexyl glycolide) (PBnMA-b-PLCG), have permitted comparison to the well-characterized PLA-based systems. Substituting a cyclohexyl pendant for the methyl substituent of PLA suppressed the tendency toward competing crystallization and provided a helical phase (H*) with a large window of thermodynamic stability, allowing the helical phase to be facilely accessed upon annealing (Fig. 7). Using the resulting BCPs*, Wang and coworkers were able to assess the individual influence of molecular, intrachain and interchain chirality on the emergence of hierarchical mesodomain structure. This sort of homochiral evolution is commonly encountered in natural systems where the templated formation of hierarchically structured materials is accomplished. Here, the influence of molecular-scale symmetry led to the creation of macroscale chirality and permitted the control of mechanical and optical properties. Implementation of these design principles in the “bottom-up” self-assembly of man-made materials necessitates the detailed understanding of the critical underlying principles guiding the formation of the associated mesodomain structures.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of process of monomer to polymer chirality transfer. The steric bulk of the cyclohexyl ring of poly(L-cyclohexyl glycolide) exerts higher twisting power relative to PLLA leading to the generation of the helical phase (H*) with improved thermodynamic stability (top). Depiction of proposed mechanism of chirality transfer, with molecular level chirality leading to hierarchical (phase) chirality during the self-assembly process of BCPs* (bottom). Adapted from ref. 15 and 106 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and American Chemical Society, respectively. 
Conveniently, nanostructured materials obtained from the self-assembly of PS-b-PLLA and PDLA can also function as sacrificial templates. Owing to the hydrolytic reactivity of the PLA ester group, the PLA block may be selectively degraded to obtain nanoporous PS materials featuring helically structured nanochannels. Introduction of a tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) precursors under acid conditions can then yield PS/SiO2 hybrid nanomaterials via sol–gel reaction. To characterize the morphological features of these assemblies, bulk samples of the PS/SiO2 were microsectioned using an ultramicrotome to obtain thickness of ca. 100 nm. The sectioned samples were then dispersed on copper grids and sputtered with a thin layer of carbon. A series of TEM images were then collected with regular variation in tilt angle (2°) and the resulting tilting series was used to reconstruct a 3D model of the helical nanoarrays (Fig. 8b and c).
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM tomography reconstruction of PS/SiO2 hybrid helical nanostructures obtained using PS-PLLA templated self-assembly and subsequent sol–gel reaction. (b) 3D model of left-handed helical arrays corresponding to the volume depicted in the rectangular area in (a), colors serve to distinguish individual helical microdomains. (c) Left-handed (left) and right-handed (right) chiral nanostructures reconstructed from PS/SiO2 helical nanohybrids prepared using PS-PLLA and PS-PDLA directing templates respectively. (d) Illustrations of the wound-ribbon helix, and (e) two kinds of twisted ribbons. Also shown is the structure of the polymer described (f). Adapted from ref. 104 and 106 with permission from the American Physics Society and American Chemical Society, respectively. 
Ho and coworkers further explored mesochiral phases resulting from the self-assembly behaviour of BCPs* and provided insights into the winding mechanisms of their formation through a combination of tilted chiral lipid bilayer (TCLB)103 and orientational self-consistent field (oSCF) theories.14 Developed by Ou-Yang and coworkers, TCLB theory proposes that the winding mechanism of chiral lipid bilayer assembly can be understood on the basis of calculated free energy associated with surface curvature. In this way, the formation of helical ribbons may be quantitatively described through a combination of surface curvature and molecular tilting using surface and tilt equilibrium equations, respectively. The resulting twisted bilayer assembly can then be viewed as the product of torsions and stresses applied to the curvature elasticity. The theory successfully describes hierarchical superstructure at the tertiary level such as the wound ribbon or twisted ribbons depicted in Fig. 8e and f respectively. Meanwhile, the oSCF theory, as presented by Grason and Russell, describes the thermodynamic preference for handed cholesteric ordering in the bulk on the basis of a mean-field relationship.104,105
Taken as a whole, these theories substantiate the proposed mechanism of chirality transfer with the effects of mutual helical polymer interaction spanning multiple length scales. Helical steric hindrance occurring both at the microphase separated interface and within the intradomain drive the formation of a chiral interface exhibiting a twisted mesodomain comprised of multiple chains. This arrangement is stabilized during formation of the microphase-separated interface due to the immiscibility of the achiral and chiral blocks reinforcing the helical conformation at the chemical junction of the BCP*. These forces generated an ordered molecular assembly of chemical linkages between the disparate microphase separated blocks resulting in the formation of a sharp, clearly delineated chemical interface. The local, helical steric hindrance caused twisting of the interface and cholesteric liquid crystalline-like intradomain, leading to the formation of the helical phase (H*).106
Providing further insights into the twisting mechanism occurring during self-assembly, studies involving a PS-b-PLLA analogue featuring a perylene bisimide junction (Fig. 8f) revealed substantial increases in induced CD signals and accompanying bathochromic shift of the fluorescence emission of the achiral dye-based linker. Critically, this shift of fluorescence emission occurs in solution only when above the critical micelle concentration (CMC); firmly establishing that the twisting mechanism is operative only upon formation of a microphase separated interface through self-assembly. Furthermore, it is anticipated that the controlled structuring of BCPs* may be leveraged toward the fabrication of devices with giant optical activity, beam splitters and negative index of refraction metamaterials,14 making these and other efforts to better understand their self-assembly behaviours critically important tasks.
Liquid crystals
As a representative and general class of helical polymers, polyisocyanates display a range of behaviours existing across a continuum from dynamic to static. Interconvertible conformations of left and right-handed helices may occur along the length of a given chain, undergoing relatively infrequent helical reversals. In the case of materials with low helical inversion barriers, excess helical sense may be obtained by copolymerization of achiral monomers (i.e. soldiers) with small quantities of an optically active monomers (i.e. sergeants). The so-called “sergeants-and-soldiers effect” was first introduced by Green et al. after early investigations of polyisocyanates and provides a routinely cited framework for quantitative description of this cooperativity.43 As noted by Yashima and coworkers, this and other related principles (i.e. “majority rules effect”) of chiral amplification were later extended by Green et al. to the liquid crystal (LC) mesophase. The increased helical sense obtained in the LC mesophase was then attributed to the energetically unfavourable nature of helical reversion events. Ohsawa et al. went on to exploit this LC associated chiral amplification to obtain 2D crystals from poly(phenylacetylene) (PPA) copolymers featuring chiral L-alanine and achiral DL-alanine decyl esters (Chart 2, (8)). Importantly, this development permitted the acquisition of high resolution AFM images and thereby provided the necessary insight to deduce structural features such as helical sense and pitch.107
 Chart 2  (8) Chemical structure of poly(phenylacetylene) (PPA) used to obtain 2D crystals. (9) Chemical structure of poly(oxypropylene)s bearing n-alkylsulfonyl side groups. 
Given the potential of chiral conjugated polymers to control the effects of chirality, their successful incorporation into organic electronic devices is a particularly attractive target. Despite the promise of this approach, however, low degrees of circular polarization are typically obtained which poses an impediment to their practical implementation. This has led Meijer and coworkers to examine chiral amplification phenomena in LC films, where they successfully demonstrated enhancement of the circularly polarizing chiroptical property of a cholesteric mesophase-ordered conjugated donor–acceptor polymer, poly(fluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (c-PFBT) (Fig. 9a). They report LCs facilely prepared upon addition of a commercially available achiral polyethylene monoalcohol (Fig. 9b),108 leading to 5–10× improvements in thin-film chiroptical properties (absorption and emission). They propose that the achiral alcohol functions as a plasticizer, promoting long-range ordering of polymer chains and effective amplification of chiroptical properties in the thin-films.
 Fig. 9  Enhancement of chiroptical properties with an achiral additive. (a) Fluorene copolymer structures studied (b) structure/physical properties of the achiral polyethylene monoalcohol (PEMOH) used as additive. (c) CD spectra of F8*-alt-DPP films embedded prepared with varied wt% PEM-OH; films annealed at 280 °C. (d) gabs at CD max. as a function of wt% PEM-OH based on CD spectra shown in (c), gray bar indicates composition at which maximum enhancement is observed. Morphological evaluation of effects of PEM-OH on F8*-alt-DPP thin-films post-annealing. (e) and (f) POM image of F8*-alt-DPP films without and with 10 wt% of PEM-OH post-annealing, respectively, with crossed polarizers and white circles indicating areas of nematic like texture. (g) and (h) tapping mode AFM height images of F8*-alt-DPP films without and with 10 wt% achiral alcohol (PEM-OH) post-annealing, respectively. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Further permissions related to the material should be directed to the ACS. 
Notably, even at particularly low loading (i.e. 2–6 wt%) a pronounced enhancement in Cotton effect is observed (Fig. 9c). Additionally, 10 wt% PEM-OH formulations exhibited nearly the same enhancement in chiroptical properties as higher loadings and provided macroscopically uniform films, all while maintaining the photophysical properties of the pristine polymers. The effects of added PEM-OH on the mesoscopic features of the blended films are clearly evident upon observation with polarized optical microscopy (POM) with pristine annealed films appearing birefringent but without well-defined texture. Apart from subtle features suggestive of nematic ordering as indicated in Fig. 8e by areas outlined with circles (measuring 3–6 μm), the films appear to possess a semicrystalline structure as indicated by wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS), these observations are consistent with the disordered fibrillar morphology seen by AFM (Fig. 8g). In stark contrast, films prepared using 10 wt% PEM display pronounced birefringence with large nematic domains on the order of 10–20 μm; taken as a whole these findings suggest an enhancement in chiral liquid crystalline ordering.
Kato et al. investigated the LC behavior of helical polysilane rigid-rod polymers and demonstrated that binary mixtures of low and high MW poly[n-decyl-(S)-2-methylbutylsilane] undergo phase separation to form smectic-smectic mesophases (Fig. 10a).109 Although there have been numerous theoretical predictions of such behaviour in rigid-rod like systems,110 successful experimental demonstrations have been relatively few. The phase separation behaviour is attributed to entropic effects; given that the two polymers differ only in MW. The effect is only found to be operative in binary polymer mixtures comprised of low and high MW components with each component possessing a narrowly defined MW distribution (Fig. 10bvs.Fig. 10e). Notably, broader MW distributions failed to produce phase separated smectic phases as evidenced through a combination of small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and AFM (Fig. 10c and d). Smectic layer reflections can be seen in the accompanying SAX profiles, with a layer spacing of 12.56 nm corresponding to the short polymer component and a spacing of 39.04 nm corresponding to the long polymer (Fig. 10g). This observation once again implicates entropy gain as the predominate driving force toward phase segregation; additionally, increased packing entropy may be derived from smectic phase separation. These results suggest the possibility of deliberate LC structuring through precise control of molecular weight distribution and molecular weight ratio.
 Fig. 10  (a) Depiction of smectic–smectic (S–S) demixing process (phase separation) in binary mixtures of PDMS with a narrow distribution of molecular weight (MW) and a large ratio of MW. (b) SEC traces, (c) SAXS profiles, and (d) AFM images of binary mixtures comprised of a long PDMS (L2) with a broad distribution of MW (Mw = 7.42 × 104, Mw/Mn = 3.05) and a short PDMS (L1) with a narrow distribution of MW (Mw = 1.16 × 104, Mw/Mn = 1.11). (e) SEC traces, (f) SAXS profiles, and (g) AFM images of binary mixtures of a long PDMS with a narrow MW distribution (Mw = 6.60 × 104, Mw/Mn = 1.22) and a short PDMS with a broad MW distribution (Mw = 1.22 × 104, Mw/Mn = 1.41). Adapted from ref. 109 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The chiral field
Other recent developments are centred around helical induction within the chiral field of cholesteric liquid crystals (CLCs). These processes can either involve incorporation of an active catalyst or electrochemical polymerization of achiral monomers within the chiral liquid crystal field of a CLC. As seen in the early work of Akagi et al. involving PAs, these LCs may be obtained from nematic liquid crystals in the presence of axially chiral 1,1′-bi-2-naphthol (BINOL) inducers to obtain chiral LCs to which a homogeneous Ziegler–Natta catalyst is added followed by acetylene resulting in the formation of helical polyacetylene (H-PA).111 Such methods have been further developed to achieve thermal reversibility from novel mesogens possessing groups of opposite chirality as well as the thermal dependence derived from the axial chirality of BINOL and the point chirality of an optically active aliphatic chain.112 In this way left-handed, M-helical PAs may be obtained at low temperature (−12 °C) and right-handed, P-helical PA backbones at higher temperatures (28 °C), with the emergence of hierarchal chirality manifesting in the form of nanostructure morphological features including fibrils, fibril bundles, and spirals (Fig. 11). Mechanistically this behaviour may be attributed to induced conformational chirality influenced by π-stacking which further gives rise to hierarchical helicity in the form of such supramolecular nanostructures. Related developments include the use of ionic liquids featuring both LC behaviour and chirality, which have also been employed as templates for electrochemical polymerizations to afford conjugated helical systems. For this, the ionic liquid conveniently serves as both the solvent and supporting electrolyte in the polymerization. Incorporation of positively charged imidazolium units featuring counterbalancing chiral binaphthyl phosphate anions led to the production of liquid-crystalline ionic liquids (LCIL)s. Within the chiral field of these LCILs, electrochemical polymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) dimers and trimers can be performed to yield helical PEDOT films.113
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of acetylene polymerization within a chiral nematic liquid crystal (N*-LC) to yield a helical polyacetylene (H-PA); helical direction of the as formed polymer opposes that of the (N*-LC), with H-PA chains growing parallel to the LC molecules. (b) UV–vis and CD spectra of the H-PA films prepared from N*-LCs at −12 and 28 °C, and illustration of hierarchical helical structure of H-PA; spiral morphology, bundle of fibrils, and twisted polyene chains. (c) Influence of methylene spacer length (m) on temperature dependent of helical pitch and (helical twisting power) HTP in N*-LCs containing (S,S)-D2 analogues [i.e., (S,S)-D2(m = 6), (S,S)-D3(m = 8), (S,S)-D4(m = 10), and (S,S)-D5(m = 12)]. Adapted from ref. 112 with permission from John Wiley and Sons Publishing. 
The electrochemical synthesis of π-conjugated polymers within CLCs was exploited by Otaki et al. to obtain a helical spin polymer (Fig. 12a).114 In addition to displaying optical and electronic activity, the resultant polythiophene displayed paramagnetism. A one-handed helical arrangement of spins is obtained through incorporation of stable radical pendant units allowing for ordering of spins and the emergence of magneto-optical activity (Fig. 12b). Using circular polarized differential interference contrast optical microscopy (C-DIM), a fingerprint-like texture is observed demonstrating transference of the CLC helicity onto the polymer (Fig. 12d), further evidence of chiral transcription was obtained through a combination of CD and UV-Vis spectroscopy. The approach simultaneously permits the production of a polymer with crystal-like molecular arrangement while avoiding the need for bulky pendant mesogens which would otherwise suppress the polymers electronic properties. As noted by Wang et al. while polyradical systems comprised of non-conjugated backbones are fairly well developed, the incorporation of radical species into conductive polymer materials has received relatively less attention.115 Furthermore, recent investigations by Swager and coworkers have highlighted the promise of helical conjugated polymers for creation of new magneto-optical materials which function as Faraday rotators; this new class of helical polymers, poly-3-(alkylsulfone)-thiophenes (P3ASTs) will be detailed later.116
 Fig. 12  (a) Electrochemical polymerization within a CLC medium with transcription of its helical structure; white ellipsoids represent molecules of the CLC matrix, orange ellipsoids monomers and orange sticks the as-obtained polymer. Proposed helical polymer structure, (b) intrahelical structure of the spin polymer, (c) interhelical spin structure as-obtained via LC imprinting are shown. (d) C-DIM image of the as produced spin polymer exhibiting helical texture in the form of stripes; measured distance between these features (stripes) of the optical structure corresponds to the helical half-pitch. Adapted from ref. 114 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The role of tacticity
Kwok et al. have examined the influence of polymer main-chain tacticity in the dipole–dipole induced formation of LCs in the absence of any mesogens.117 The strong dipole–dipole interactions of poly(oxypropylene)s bearing n-alkylsulfonyl side groups (POP-SO2Cn) are credited for the polymers unique LC self-assembly. Through systematic variation of side chain length for the atactic polymer (9), higher order 3D (where n ≥ 3) and smectic A (where n ≥ 6) LC structures may be obtained. Conversely, in the case of isotactic POP-SO2Cn (10), crystallization is favoured due to main chain regularity. In the pursuit of ferroelectric LCs, the design avoids the use of aromatic mesogens as well as hydrogen bonds whose long-range ordering inhibits ferroelectric switching. Additionally, the LC polymer design features short alkyl groups designed to allow the volumetric density of dipoles to increase. Through comparison of atactic and isotactic poly(oxypropylene)s with n-alkylsulfonyl side groups (aPOP-SO2Cn and iPOP-SO2Cn) the effects of main chain tacticity could be assessed. They report that main-chain chirality did not afford the desired ferroelectric LC structure (e.g. chiral smectic C or SmC*) which instead had a stronger tendency toward crystallization than aPOP-SO2Cn (Fig. 13a and b, respectively).
 Fig. 13  Examining the role of main-chain tacticity in mesogen-free LC assembly: (a) phase diagram of aPOP-SO2Cn with n = 1–12. (b) Phase boundary diagrams of iPOP-SO2Cn during cooling and heating processes with a scanning rate of 20 °C. Solid symbols are for heating and open symbols are for cooling. Adapted from ref. 117 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Johnson and coworkers have also examined the role of tacticity in the self-assembly of diblock copoly(triazoles) (DPTs). Utilizing their previously developed iterative exponential growth (IEG) strategy, they demonstrated the expeditious synthesis of a 4 member material library.118 Through systematic variation of stereochemical sequence they successfully elucidate the effects of tacticity on the phase behavior of DPTs through a combination of X-ray scattering and molecular dynamics simulations. These studies revealed that systems featuring isotactic and syndiotactic blocks have a tendency to form phases with more extended phase separated domains than those comprised of a single tacticity.
Stereocomplexation
Helical conformations may also be induced in commodity type polymers such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) through control of their stereoregularity using polymerization mechanisms such as Ru-catalyzed stereospecific living radical polymerization (SLRP).119 Moreover, as previously demonstrated by Kawauchi et al. optically active PMMA polymers are capable of forming cavities on the order of a few nanometres which are useful for encapsulation of fullerenes and other functional molecules.120,121 Specifically, syndiotactic-PMMA (st-PMMA) is found to adopt a helical conformation of preferential handedness based on interactions with chiral alcohols leading to the formation of supramolecular “peapod-like” complexes in the presence of [60]fullerene (C60). Importantly, these supramolecular complexes exhibit optical activity and retain their helicity upon removal of the chiral alcohol. Ren et al. elaborated on this concept to produce composite materials from st-PMMA bottlebrush polymers (derived from tandem SLRP/ROMP) and C60 fullerenes which assembled to form fullerene peapod nanoparticles (FPNs) dispersible in polar organic solvents (Fig. 14). This processability allowed the resulting composite materials to be cast into thin films which served as electrode interlayers for fabrication of organic solar cells (OSC) (Fig. 14).122 Bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells made with modified interface layers comprised of FPN thin-films offered improved device performance relative to conventional systems; with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) approximately 10–30% higher than those produced using ZnO interface layers alone.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis of a bottlebrush polymer featuring syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) (st-PMMA-BB) pedants by ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), and (b) generation of fullerene peapod nanoparticle (FPN) st-PMMA/C60 stereocomplex (SC) by stereocomplexation. Adapted from ref. 122 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Sato et al. recently detailed the incorporation of C60 fullerenes into densely grafted polymer brushes on silica NP surfaces.123 Fullerene encapsulation is demonstrated within the helical cavity of st-PMMA with size-selective recognition events driven by helical polymer hosts undergoing increases in effective diameter to accommodate the C60 and C70 guests. Examination of the as produced inclusion complexes by grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray diffraction (GIWAXD) revealed that polymer brushes adopt a perpendicular orientation with respect to the substrate (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  GIWAXD patterns of st-PMMA brushes with encapsulated (a) C60 and (b) C70 molecules. (c) GIWAXD 1D line profiles of st-PMMA/C60 and st-PMMA/C70 brushes. (d) Schematic of C60 encapsulation at the st-PMMA brush and model of the (e) st-PMMA/C60 and (f) st-PMMA/C70 brush crystal structures. Adapted from ref. 123 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The size selective encapsulation effects of this system provided a ready means for discrimination and separation of C60/C70 mixtures, with a C70 separation efficiency of 99%. In this way, utilization of the cylindrical nanocavity existing within the core of these helical polymers can potentially serve as a general platform for catalytic and separatory applications. In addition, nanospheres have been obtained through stereocomplexation of complimentary helical strands derived from C60 end-capped it/st-PMMA and nanostructured networks of nanospheres from complimentary stereocomplex nanospheres.124
Similarly, stereocomplexation has been explored in polycarbodiimide systems by Novak and coworkers,125 who reported P/M racemization upon thermal annealing which led to the generation of the corresponding stereocomplex from dimeric bundles of complimentary helices (Fig. 16a). Single-handed polymers were obtained via HSSP of achiral monomers with chiral BINOL-Ti(IV) diisopropoxide initiators which on thermal annealing exhibited large changes in specific optical rotation (SOR), reaching plateau values of +283° for P helices and −286° for M helices respectively. The resultant “in situ” generated racemate subsequently forms a precipitate corresponding to the formation of the stereocomplex. This phenomenon was utilized to obtain a variety of morphologies including capsules, spherical particles, fiber-like structures and wrinkled surface patterns.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of stereocomplexation resulting upon thermal annealing. (b) Schemes for different pathways of racemization, (c) formation of spherical aggregates from P-1,2 after thermal annealing, and (d) VCD spectra of P-1 polymers pre/post-thermal annealing. Adapted from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Remarkably, the system was rationally designed to achieve this behaviour, where incorporation of isopropyl groups to phenyl pendants allows the system to exhibit behaviour which parallels that of classical leucine zippers featuring isobutyl groups. These interlocking motifs serve as the effective driving force for sterecomplexation, with interdigitation closely mimicking that of regulatory proteins featuring periodic leucine residues along their α-helical structures (Fig. 17a). The corresponding poly(N-methyl-N′-(2-isopropyl-6-methylphenyl)carbodiimide) polymer has been previously reported, where the presence of bulky isopropylphenyl pendants imposes significant steric effects leading to the creation of static helical polymers.34,42 Noting that the process led to formation of an insoluble precipitate, a block copolymer analogue appended with octadecyl groups P-1,2 was synthesized in order to circumvent solubility issues (Fig. 16c).
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration depicting the formation of stereocomplex, (b) p-XRD profile for annealed (S)-P-1, and (c) SAXS profiles for P-1 polymers. Adapted from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The observed loss of optical activity during annealing allowed the energy associated with the process to be determined, where the coexistence of two helical senses in dynamic equilibrium permits use of the first order rate equation. In this way, once the observed rate constants are obtained, use of the Arrhenius equation provides the activation energy for racemization which for the block copolymer P-1,2 is found to be 20 ± 0.3 kcal mol−1. It can therefore be inferred that the presence of aryl pendant groups at the imine positions along the polymer backbone leads to formation of static helices with a large helical inversion barrier. Vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) enabled determination of absolute configuration; on thermal annealing the bisignate couplet at 1640 cm−1 corresponding to the imine stretching mode was found to attenuate and the emergence of new peaks 1462, 1494, and 1606 cm−1 was similarly noted. The newly formed vibrational mode associated with C–H bending or scissoring appearing at 1462 cm−1 is tentatively assigned to the zippering of adjacent isopropyl groups (Fig. 16d). The powder X-ray diffraction (p-XRD) profile of the poly(N-methyl-N′-(2-isopropyl-6-methylphenyl)carbodiimide) homopolymer P-1 stereocomplex features an intense peak at 12 Å. This first-order peak suggests the presence of intertwined super-helical structures, whereas peaks at 7.12 and 4.47 Å can be associated with the periodic helical twist of the chain conformations. A particularly intriguing feature of the p-XRD profile of annealed samples of P-1, is the newly formed peak appearing at approximately 4 Å (Fig. 17b, indicated with an arrow) which is attributable to the complexation of P/M helices. This observation is consistent with prior reports of dimeric amide foldamers bearing terminal isopropyl groups, where peaks in the range of 3.8–4.50 Å are associated with hydrophobic interactions of the side chains126 further implicating the involvement of isopropyl groups in complexation. Furthermore, these findings are in agreement with those of SAXS (Fig. 17c) where increased peak intensities are noted, further implicating macromolecular reorganization leading to increased order/crystallinity.
Stereocomplexation strategies have likewise proven effective for the generation of plasmonic nanostructures. To this end, Hawker and coworkers reported the stereocomplexation of syndiotactic (st) and isotactic (it) PMMA to form triple helical structures127 for the controlled assembly of plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs).128 Noting the role of DNA mediated assembly methods, the impetus for this particular line of research stems from the desire to prepare nanostructures exhibiting a diverse array of electronic and optical properties in a scalable and versatile fashion. Given the sensitivity of their surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to aggregation, Au NPs were specially chosen as an initial model system for evaluation of triple-helical stereocomplexation directed self-assembly. Accordingly, a general, gram-scale approach was developed, beginning first with helix-sense-selective polymerization of methyl methacrylate with Grignard (t-BuMgBr) and 1,1-diphenyl-n-hexyllithium (hexPh2Li) reagents to afford it- and st-PMMA polymers, respectively (Fig. 18a). Subsequent treatment with ethyl-2-(bromomethyl)acrylate then afforded alkene terminated polymers which in turn underwent thiol-Michael addition to yield the desired macromolecular ligands. Finally, gold–thiol coordination chemistry provided access to complimentary it- and st-PMMA decorated NPs and nanorods (NRs) which when combined spontaneously self-assembled in acetonitrile to yield hybrid nanostructures (Fig. 18b).
 Fig. 18  (a) Nanoparticle assembly by means of PMMA stereocomplexation. (b) TEM image (top) of the morphologies obtained via stereocomplexation of it-PMMA3K–Au NPs + st-PMMA10K–Au nanorods (NRs). (c) UV–vis spectra of 1:1 st-PMMA6K–Au NPs + it-PMMA3K–Au NPs taken at various times after mixing with rapid decay in absorbance demonstrating NP assembly by stereocomplexation. (d) Kinetics of the melting process of stereocomplexed assemblies (at 530 nm). (e) Normalized extinction at 530 nm of stereocomplexed NPs during heating/cooling cycles. Adapted from ref. 128 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Examination of the SPR band by UV-Vis spectroscopy offered insights into the kinetics of aggregation; revealing a broadening of the extinction peak and an accompanying bathochromic shift. These observations are consistent with rapid complexation and decreased inter-NP distances associated with self-assembly (Fig. 18c). Attenuation of the extinction peak was noted as aggregates evolved to form larger assemblies ultimately resulting in precipitation. The utility of the platform is further exemplified by the resultant assemblies’ capability to undergo thermally reversible transformations, where the as-obtained nanostructures could be effectively “melted” to regenerate their constituent nanoparticle building blocks (Fig. 18d and e). Finally, the generality of the approach was successfully demonstrated through generation of composite nanomaterials comprised of Au NPs and quantum dots with a variety of shapes and sizes.
Previously reported polymerization methods developed by Hawker and coworkers yield relatively low dispersity, stereoregular materials (e.g. it-PMMA ĐM < 1.20; meso triad mm >92%,) which can be purified using automated silica-gel chromatography and gradient elution to afford discrete oligomer libraries (ĐMALDI = 1.00–1.01).129 Well-defined stereocomplex materials derived from these OMMAs exhibit distinct melting transitions, in contrast to more disperse materials which provide broadened melt transitions. These methods establish a framework for the scalable production of sterecomplexes with tailor made melting properties and self-sorting behaviours. Closer examination of the self-sorting process accomplished through addition of 2 equivalents of a 50:50 wt% mixture of st-25 and st-40 (Fig. 18b; numbers are associated with DP of discrete oligomers) to it-80 chains (Fig. 19c) revealed the formation of a singular stereocomplex (Fig. 19e) despite the potential for generation of two distinct species (i.e. st-40/it-80 and st-25/it-80, where 25, 40 and 80 denote DP). As depicted in Fig. 19e, stereocomplexation results in the formation of a precipitate which upon dissolution and subsequent GPC analysis permits determination of individual chain components. When stereocomplex derived chain components are compared to residual uncomplexed species within the supernatant, only the st-40/it-80 complex is observed with a 1:2 ratio of st-40 and it-80 chains and solely uncomplexed st-25 chains being found within the supernatant (Fig. 19d).
 Fig. 19  (a) Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms and XRD patterns of it-20, st-20, and the corresponding stereocomplex at it-/st-molar ratio = 1:2. Schematic depicting the selective binding of OMMA to complementary high MW species. Samples and GPC dRI traces of (b) 50:50 wt% mixture of st-25 and st-40, (c) it-80, (d) the supernatant, and (e) the resultant precipitate upon mixing of the initial OMMA solutions (it-/st molar ratio = 1:4). Adapted from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Having noted the tendency of polymers with opposite tacticity or chirality to self-assemble forming stereocomplexes, investigations of their evolution to form stereocomplex-crystals were further examined. In an effort to probe the relationship between sterecomplexation and microphase separation (MS), Ge et al. prepared PS-b-PDLA-b-PLLA (SDL) and PS-b-PLLA-b-PDLA (SLD) triblock copolymers with systematically varied block weight fraction at a fixed total molecular weight.130 They reported that at a PLA weight fraction of ca. 0.3, cylindrical MS structures resulted, and upon reaching PDLA:PLLA compositions approaching unity, the long period L0 of the MS structure is found to decrease indicating the formation of stereocomplexes between stereoisomer PLAs. On modifying the block sequence from SLD to SDL, a similar result is obtained. However, when the length of the PDLA block is increased, a change in equilibrium nanostructure from cylinders to lamellae is observed. Evidence for this change in MS structures can be found in the corresponding SAXS profiles which show peak shifts to higher q values. As depicted in Fig. 20a, the qc is found to increase along with increase of the PDLA block fraction. This effect is found to be more substantial with block copolymers that exhibit a better stereocomplex structure. Notably, due to SC formation, the long periodicity of the lamellar phase varies only slightly with increasing PDLA block fraction. Given the potential of stereocomplexes to improve the mechanical properties of materials as well alter their crystallization behaviour further studies are warranted to better understand the interplay between microphase separation and stereocomplexation.
 Fig. 20  (a) SAXS profiles obtained after quenching from the melt after a long annealing period at 120 °C. (b) Lorentz-corrected SAXS profiles of samples prepared by quenching from the melt and annealing at 180 °C for 6 h under vacuum. (c and d) SEM images of the SDL-2 thin films (∼30 nm) (b) after quenching from the melt at 220 °C and (c) further annealed at 180 °C for 6 h. Adapted from ref. 130 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Nanoprecipitation
Zhang et al. reported a new strategy for helix-sense-selective precipitation polymerization of achiral monomers in the presence of a chiral stimulant (R)/(S)-α-pinene (HSSPP-CS).131 Optically active morphologies including nanoparticles, nanorods and nanofibers are prepared in a single step from achiral monomers using the commercially available catalyst bis(norbornadiene)-rhodium(I) tetrafluoroborate (nbd)Rh+ B−(C6H5)4, the chiral stimulant and an alkanol non-solvent (Fig. 21a). The method allows for production of a variety of nanostructures with the added convenience of being an operationally simple process requiring only variation in the proportion of ternary solvent components to bring about morphological evolution (Fig. 21b).
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of strategy for helix-sense-selective precipitation polymerization induced by a chiral solvent (HSSPP-CS) (a) schematic of strategy for creation of chiral polyacetylene based nanostructures with tunable morphology using ternary solvent systems; (b) proposed mechanism for alteration of chiral nanomaterial morphology (c) plausible mechanism of chiral induction occurring HSSPP-CS. Adapted with from ref. 131 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Citing prior reports of efficient chirality transfer by terpenes (e.g. limonene, pinene) to π-conjugated polymers38,97,132 a similar mechanism was proposed and subsequently tested through a series of control experiments. Control polymerizations performed in CHCl3 in the absence of the chiral stimulant exhibited no discernible CD signal establishing their racemic nature and the role of α-pinene as a chiral chaperone. Interestingly, when dissolved in a chiral solvent mixture consisting of CHCl3/(R)-α-pinene = 4/2 (v/v) the control polymer was found to remain optically inactive. This implicates the involvement of a chiral induction process occurring during polymerization rather than post-polymerization. This observation lends credence to the proposed mode of non-covalent interaction with M1 phenyl pendant groups (Fig. 21c). This conclusion is further supported by polymerization of a monomer bearing only two phenyl pendants M2, wherein the corresponding polymer P2 is obtained with good control (Mw/Mn 1.14) but optical activity is once more notably absent. In similar fashion, chiral induction of the achiral monomers is attributed to non-covalent interaction such as –CH/π, π/π and van der Waals interactions with acetylenic monomers via their phenyl pendant unit.39 The existence of α-pinene within the as-synthesized polymer products is established by FTIR, where the presence of a peak at 2969 cm−1 is said to be diagnostic for the asymmetric stretch of the α-pinene –CH3.
Polymerization induced self-assembly (PISA)
Efforts to create nanostructures of block copolymers are generally hampered by the time-consuming process of post-polymerization self-assembly. Thusly, polymerization induced self-assembly (PISA) has emerged as a robust, scalable procedure to overcome this issue. In general, PISA may be accomplished through chain extension of soluble macroinitiators using established living polymerization methods.133–138 The process yields in situ generated supramolecular assemblies whose morphology is dictated by the length of the poorly soluble core forming block. The process is highly efficient producing the targeted nanostructures at solid contents far exceeding those of traditional solution phase self-assembly. The scope of polymerization methods, applicable monomers and solvent systems is ever expanding, and, accordingly, the method was recently extended to include living coordination polymerizations by O'Reilly and coworkers.
Utilizing the fast, living polymerization of aryl isocyanides by nickel(II) initiators previously presented by Choi and coworkers,139 they demonstrate PISA of helical polymers for the first time. The method allows rapid production of multi-block polyisocyanide copolymers through use of air-stable bisphosphine-chelated nickel(II) complexes and provides efficient living polymerizations of sterically encumbered and electron rich monomers to yield low dispersity (Đ) polymers (Fig. 22a). The nickel-catalysed coordination polymerization-induced self-assembly (NiCCo-PISA) process permits the production of nanoarchitectures spanning a broad morphological range including spheres, worm-like micelles and polymersomes (Fig. 22b).
 Fig. 22  (a) Synthesis of P(PAIC)x-b-P(MAIC)y diblock copolymer nanostructures using NiCCo-PISA (b) P(PAIC)x-b-P(MAIC)y diblock copolymer phase diagram denoting nanostructures obtained via NiCCo-PISA (5 wt% solids) through variation of the DPP(PAIC) and DPP(MAIC), along with dry-state TEM images. Adapted from ref. 140 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Prior attempts by the group to synthesize poly(aryl isocyanide)s bearing L-menthol side chains had led to the discovery that precipitation occurs in DMSO and it was therefore presumed that menthyl-ester aryl isocyanide (MAIC) could serve as a suitable solvophobic block for PISA. After polymerizing a solvophilic block consisting of PEG-ester aryl isocyanide (PAIC) to serve as the macroinitiator/corona, Jimaja et al. assembled chiral cores from the solvophobic P(MAIC) block leading to the generation of targeted morphologies at solid contents of 5 wt%.140 Although, bimodality was observed in GPC traces at higher DP targets this shoulder is not observed for polymerizations conducted in good solvent (e.g. THF). Nonetheless, plots of Mnvs. DP revealed living, controlled behaviour, with a clear linear trend for the selected DMSO solvent system. Furthermore, excess screw-sense is obtained via chiral induction of the core-forming P(MAIC) block as clearly evidenced by CD spectra of the freely dissolved unimeric species in THF (a good solvent for both blocks). The chiral environment presented by the core-forming block was further shown to induce chirality in an achiral guest (i.e. Nile Red).
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) allowed determination of the nanoobject sizes with single populations ranging from 16 to 25 nm depending on the targeted degree of polymerization (DP). TEM permitted determination of the as-produced morphologies with spherical micelles displaying dimensions in relatively good agreement with those determined by DLS and worm-like morphologies being observed as a pure phase at a block copolymer composition of P(PAIC)10-b-P(MAIC)40. As indicated by the corresponding phase diagram (Fig. 22b), mixed morphologies are obtained while transitioning from the low to high DP regime. Notably however, upon arriving at the highest targeted DP, a single population could once more be observed, with a DTEM = 490 nm and a hydrodynamic diameter (Dh) of 630 nm corresponding to the formation of vesicles. The disparity in size can be reconciled on the basis of drying effects associated with the acquisition of TEM images. The vesicular structure was further confirmed by means of static light scattering (SLS) utilizing the Debye method to construct a Zimm plot where the hydrodynamic radius (i.e. Rh, from the Stokes–Einstein equation) and radius of gyration (Rg) offer insight into the internal structure of the spherical particles. Using this relationship, a value of 1 corresponds to a hollow spherical structure and in this manner, the ratio of Rg/Rh was determined to be 1.04, thereby providing solid evidence for the proposed morphology.
Transfer of the as-synthesized particles to water via dialysis gave a stable colloid with an increase in observed particle diameter from 25 to 60 nm. Transfer of chirality to an encapsulated Nile Red (NR) guest was then successfully demonstrated with PISA conducted with 1 wt% dye loading and target block composition of P-(PAIC)20-b-P(MAIC)30. Conformation of successful encapsulation of the lipophilic dye was provided by UV-Vis spectroscopy where solvatochromism resulted in a hypsochromic shift to 635 nm (relative to aqueous NR absorbance at 660 nm). Evaluation of the loading efficiency with differential NR concentrations indicated a maximum internalization of 42% for an overall concentration of 2.3 wt%. Finally, CD provided evidence for chirality transfer from the helical core forming block to the encapsulated achiral NR guest with a signal observed in a region diagnostic for encapsulated NR which was further shown to increase linearly with increased dye loading concentration.
The rhodium catalysed polymerization of poly(phenyl-acetylene)s is also known to proceed rapidly and in high yield to provide dynamically helical polymers with tunable helical inversion barriers (i.e. through pendant group substitution), where the presence of the polyene backbone leads to the adoption of a defined screw-sense. Living dispersion polymerization of (R/S)-4-(1-phenethylbamoyl)phenylacetylene (rmAN/smAN) monomers from poly(phenylacetylene) (PPA) macro-initiators enabled the creation of diverse block copolymer assemblies where variation of the rigid PrmAN core-forming block length led to a morphological transition of vesicles to lamellae, and lamellae to helical ribbons in THF (Fig. 23).141 The living nature of the polymerization in the PISA process was established on the basis of linear first order kinetic plots of monomer conversion and molecular weight indicating that the polymerization proceeds slowly and in the absence of chain-termination/transfer.
 Fig. 23  (a) CD and UV–vis spectra of (a) PrmAN and PsmAN homopolymers and (b) copolymers PPA-b-PrmAN and PPA-b-PsmAN. (c) Raman spectra of PrmAN and PPA-bPrmAN homopolymers. (top right) Synthesis of and PISA of PPAm-b-PrmANn block copolymers. (d) Polymerizations of PPA (0) and PPA80-b-PrmANn: n = 20 (1), 85 (2), 136 (3), 190 (4), 278 (5), and 390 (6); TEM images of the aggregates of PPA80-b-PrmANn: (e) n = 20, (f) n = 85, (g) n = 136, (h) n = 190, (i) n = 278, and (j) n = 390; and (k) schematic illustration depicting morphological evolution of the resultant nanostructures. Adapted from ref. 141 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Increased polymerization times led to the generation of PrmAN polymer products of reduced solubility, necessitating the preparation of alkylated amide derivatives (PrmANBu) for GPC characterization and Mn of the parent polymer was then deduced from the results. The observed decrease in solubility is attributed to the contracted helical conformation of the PrmAN resulting due to intramolecular hydrogen bonding. The conformation of the resultant polymers was determined through a combination of CD, UV-Vis and Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 23a, b, and c, respectively). An intense Cotton band could be observed at 295 nm, a feature assigned to the substituted phenyl rings of PrmAN or PsmAN, while another Cotton effect at 340 nm was attributed to the polyene backbone itself. Both these features indicate the formation of the cis-cisoid helical structure, while cis C–H vibration of the polyene backbone could be observed at 1004 cm−1via Raman spectroscopy, as well as two peaks at 1581 and 1607 cm−1 which are diagnostic for the cis CC bonds (Fig. 23c). The resulting rod–rod block copolymers form ordered packing arrangements with copolymers showing a marked tendency toward the formation of morphologies with low surface curvature such as spherical vesicles (where: n ≤ 136 Fig. 22e–g). However, as the length of the core forming block increases, i.e., PPA80-b-PrmANn (n = 190, 278, and 390), a morphological transition to ribbons is observed (Fig. 23h, i, and j respectively). Coupling dynamic and static LS characterization provided insights into the anisotropy of the assemblies as evidenced by Rg/Rh > 2. This result is rationalized on the basis of decreased conformational entropy and chain mobility rendering the vesicular structure unstable. Consequently, the copolymers showed a preference for the formation of lamellae (50–200 nm) which offered reduced interfacial energy compared to vesicles, and notably evolved into twisted helical ribbons. Upon closer examination using TEM, the handedness of the helical fiber assemblies can be clearly distinguished with left (M) and right (P) helical twists. The coexistence of M and P helices is noted with minority and majority constituents dictated by the point chirality of the monomer. PPA80-b-PrmAN390 displays predominantly left-handed (M) helical assemblies whereas PPA80-b-PsmAN330 displays primarily P-helices. The observed morphological evolution is noted to be similar to that associated with rod–rod block copolypeptides.
Another notable report was provided by Cheng et al. where they detail the development of a polymerization induced chiral self-assembly (PICSA) technique involving a poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) macro-CTA which is chain extended by RAFT with an azobenzene methacrylate monomer to yield PMAA-b-PAzoMA BCPs.142 An assembly process directed by π–π interaction of the pendant azobenzene mesogens occurs on annealing to afford helical smectic layers which is shown to be photochemically reversible on exposure to UV light. The stacking interaction leads to hierarchical structuring of the layered smectic LC assembly resulting in the formation of compound vesicles, vesicles, nanofibers, lamellae, worms and spheres targeted through control of PAzoMA block MW and the volume fraction of water in the binary EtOH:H2O solvent system. Additionally, AFM analysis revealed the presence of M and P twisted superhelical fibers measuring 30 nm wide and 10 nm high.
In yet another notable and early example of chiral nanostructure formation via PISA, RAFT-dispersion polymerization was achieved through the use of a macroCTA based upon poly(Boc-L-alanine methacryloyloxyethyl ester) (PBLAEMA) by De and coworkers.41 They report the preparation of a wide variety of nanostructured morphologies ranging from vesicles, twisted fibers and worm-like micelles. Finally, the aqueous ring-opening polymerization-induced self-assembly (ROPISA) of NCA monomers was recently demonstrated using α-amino-poly(ethylene oxide) macroinitiator. Low dispersity polymers (Đ = 1.08–1.12) were obtained along with needle-like nanostructures could at high concentration (solid contents as high as 13%).143
Crystallization driven self-assembly (CDSA)
Crystallization driven self-assembly permits the fabrication of cylindrical micelles of controlled lengths from seed particles via epitaxial growth. The process also exhibits living behaviour in a manner analogous to living polymerization where nanoobjects grow to predetermined lengths based upon the ratio of free unimers to seed particles. The pioneering works of Manners and Winnik firmly establish methods for controlled epitaxy and the scope of CDSA has subsequently expanded to permit the production of advanced topologies such as block and gradient comicelles.144–146 Also others, such as Choi and coworkers, have developed methods for living-light induced CDSA of ROMP derived block copolymers, driven by cis-to-trans photoisomerization of poly(p-phenylenevinylene) blocks.147 Additionally, Manners and coworkers have presented the preparation of surface-bound (e.g. silicon or graphene oxide substrates) cylindrical micellar assemblies with proposed applications in catalysis and antimicrobial surfaces.148 Finally, in one particularly notable recent example the controlled self-assembly of photocatalytic nanofibers operating within the visible range were demonstrated.149
Within the realm of helical polymers, Wu and coworkers recently adapted the CDSA process to achieve asymmetric self-assembly yielding cylindrical micelles of defined helicity from amphiphilic poly(3-hexylthiophene)-block-poly(phenyl isocyanide) (P3HT-b-PPI) copolymers (Fig. 24).30 The creation of controlled supramolecular assemblies comprised of semiconducting π-conjugated block copolymers is realized with controlled lengths yielding tuneable CPL and white light emission. The resultant nanomaterials have the potential to aid the fabrication of advanced organic photovoltaic (OPV), light-emitting diodes (LED) and OFET devices. This process variant, hereafter referred to simply as crystallization-driven asymmetric self-assembly (CDASA), permitted the production of materials exhibiting CPLu by means of effective chirality transfer from helical PPI blocks to luminescent P3HT blocks. The strength of CPLu is generally evaluated by the magnitude of the glum value, defined as glum = (IL − IR)/IL + IR, where IL + IR denote the intensity of left and right handed components of circularly polarized luminescence, respectively. Cylindrical micelles of controlled lengths were prepared upon annealing in a selective solvent (4/6 (v/v) = toluene/IPA) to afford uniform assemblies (AFM avg. widths = 56 nm) with lengths ranging from 180–615 nm and narrow length distributions (Lw/Ln = 1.01–1.09). The handedness and magnitude of glum was shown to be tunable upon variation of helicity and length of the supramolecular assembly. The precision of the CDASA process makes it an especially attractive means to fabricate uniform, size controlled, single-handed helical nanofibers of semiconductor materials such as P3HT.
 Fig. 24  (Top) Synthetic procedure for production of P3HT-b-PPI copolymers. (Bottom) (a) Schematic depiction of procedure for generation of well-defined cylindrical micelles with helical sense by self-seeding process. AFM height image of cylindrical micelles derived from seed micelles of poly(120-b-2L50) (b), annealing of seeds in selective solvent mixture comprised of toluene/IPA (v/v = 4/6, 0.05 mg mL−1) at 35 °C (c), 43 °C (d), 65 °C (e and f), and 80 °C (g). Histogram plots of measured contour lengths of the as prepared cylindrical micelles post-annealing at 35 °C (h), 65 °C (i), and 80 °C (j) for 1 h. Adapted from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley and Sons Publishing. 
Sensors and stimuli responsive materials
Wei et al. reported the use of nanofibers derived from block copolymers containing helical PPI and conjugated P3HT blocks for the development of chemosensors of high sensitivity and selectivity.150 Transfer etching of poly(4-isocyano-benzoic acid 5-(2-dimethylamino-ethoxy)-2-nitro-benzylester)-b-poly(3-hexylthiophene) (PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT) nanofibrils was shown to provide a robust, tuneable and operationally simple processing procedure for the fabrication of OFETs (Fig. 25b). The as-prepared devices permitted the ultra-trace detection of ammonia at ppb levels with 28.6% relative response to 100 ppb NH3 which, compared to devices derived P3HT homopolymer nanofibrils (7% relative response to 1 ppm NH3), represents greatly improved sensitivity. Generally speaking, the nanofibrils present a high surface-to-volume ratio which allowed for efficient interaction of P3HT with the NH3 analyte thereby providing enhanced sensitivity. Furthermore, the synthesis and device fabrication workflow allows nanofibril length and density to be easily manipulated, thereby providing a ready means to directly control the OFET electronic properties.
 Fig. 25  (a) PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT chemical structure. (b) illustration of procedure for transfer-etching (c–k) AFM images of PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT: (c–e) images of as-casted films prior to transfer-etching process using varying concentrations (c) 0.5 mg mL−1, (d) 0.75 mg mL−1, and (e) 1 mg mL−1 I(in DCM); (f–h) images collected after transfer-etching of the films (c–e), respectively; (i–k) images obtained for the same process procedure using chlorobenzene instead of DCM as solvent and at concentrations (i) 0.5 mg mL−1, (j) 0.75 mg mL−1, and (k) 1 mg mL−1, respectively. Adapted from ref. 150 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In conjugated/insulation block copolymers bearing both a rigid rod and a flexible coil segment, the interplay of these disparate elements is known to result in improved charge carrier properties for regioregular (rr) P3HT.151 This tunability has made P3HT coupled with insulation block copolymers an attractive platform for the creation of variety of organic devices. Furthermore, these materials may be accessed by simple synthetic protocols and exhibit interesting self-assembly behaviours leading to the formation of nanoribbons and nanofibrils as well as hexagonal arrays of cylinders, lamellae, and spheres. Moreover, the wide array of available morphologies presents opportunities for the design and production of analyte selective chemosensory materials. While previous P3HT-BCP systems have sought to improve charge transport through the generation of stratified, lamellar structures. This assembly is less useful for sensory application where it serves to limit interaction of the analyte with the P3HT component.152 In this case, the insulating block consists of a helical PPI materials, of which the pendant group π–π interactions prejudice the system toward formation of a helical conformation.
The improved sensing capability of the resultant superhelical bundles can be attributed to the increased grain boundary density and larger specific surface area presented by the nanofibrillar morphology. Given that the sensory response of P3HT OFETs arises due to interaction of electron-rich ammonia molecules with the electron poor holes of the P3HT conduction band, the increased analyte diffusion imparted by these features leads to an overall improvement in device performance. This is demonstrated by dynamic calculation of the associated reaction rate, wherein PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT nanofibrils exhibit substantially increased rate constants relative to their achiral P3HT-b-PHA counterparts. The stable helical conformation provides rigid-rod behaviour which stems from intramolecular π–π interaction and leads to twisting of the P3HT backbone. Consequently the free exciton bandwidth (W) is 108 meV which is significantly higher than P3HT homopolymer nanofibrils (ca. W = 79 meV); a result attributed to a shortening of the effective conjugated length of the P3HT segment. Notably, the rod–rod (PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT) diblock copolymer has been previously reported to selectively afford either anionic or cationic micelles upon UV irradiation. This responsivity is achieved through the presence of a photolabile nitro-benzyl ester linker whose photocleavage results in the formation of a negatively-charged carboxylate pendants after loss of the positively charged, quaternized amine side-chain.153
The helical structure of the assemblies was investigated using AFM and TEM analysis revealing lateral dimensions on the order of 30–50 nm and overall lengths of several micrometres. The morphologies obtained were shown to rely heavily upon the concentration of the PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT BCP. Samples prepared at concentrations of 0.5 mg mL−1 in dichlorobenzene (DCB) display relatively few nanofibrils, increasing the solution concentration to 0.75 mg mL−1 nanofibrils notably increase in density, finally upon reaching a concentration of 1.0 mg mL−1 spheres joined by nanofibrils are obtained. Importantly these morphologies are shown to be consistent with those produced in the as-casted films, indicating that the transfer etching process does not alter the structure of the nanofibrils.
Similarly polyallenes are capable of forming helical bundles, as previously demonstrated by Wu and coworkers, where ABA triblock copolymers bearing cholesteryl pendants attached to polyallene segments self-assemble into supramolecular bundles of defined handedness.154 The PHA-P3HT-PHA triblock copolymers were readily synthesized through the sequential polymerization of poly(hexadecyloxyallene) (PHA) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). Utilizing a π-allylnickel(II) complex as the catalyst/initiator, three consecutive polymerizations were performed to yield coil–rod–coil block chain topologies in a controlled/living manner.
Uniform spherical particles assembled from PHA40-b-P3HT80 diblock copolymers measured ca. 60 nm in diameter which is justified on the basis of intermolecular π–π interactions coupled with the immiscibility of the blocks themselves (Fig. 26a and b). In stark contrast, the PHA-b-P3HT-b-PHA triblock copolymers were found to provide superhelical nanofibers when casted from THF solution with clear evidence for microphase separation provided by AFM (Fig. 26c); while variations in image contrast of the corresponding TEM images allowed for left and right handed superhelices to be distinguished (Fig. 26d). ECD spectra of the triblock copolymer system in a molecularly dissolved state (i.e. in THF) show only a weak Cotton effect at 244 nm with no discernable Cotton band observed in the region of λ = 440 nm associated with the P3HT segment. On addition of a poor solvent (i.e. MeOH) however, a red-shift of the associated P3HT absorbance to λ = 541 nm is accompanied by the appearance of absorptions at λ = 551 and 605 nm signifying the assembly of helical aggregates engaged in intramolecular π–π interaction. Comparison of the CD spectra obtained for helical assemblies of the triblock copolymers to the PHA homopolymer reveals that the Cotton band of 244 nm is solely attributable to the PHA block while the Cotton effect at 543 nm results specifically due to the helically aggregated P3HT block. These findings indicate that the self-assembly of P3HT segments resulted in the formation of chiral aggregates with supramolecular helicity.
 Fig. 26  (top) Reaction scheme for synthesis of P3HT-PHA triblock copolymers in one pot. (bottom) AFM image of the thin films obtained by casting of solution of poly(140-b-280) in toluene (a) and poly(140-b-280-b-140) (b) casted from THF solution at 25 °C. AFM phase (c) and TEM (d) images of thin films casted from solution of poly(140-b-280-b-140) in toluene (c = 0.2 g L−1). Adapted from ref. 154 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The coil–rod–coil triblock copolymer (4m-b-2n-b-4o) was shown to be pH responsive upon addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to CH2Cl2 resulting in a colour changes from yellow to pink. The response was further shown to be reversible upon addition of triethylamine (TEA) resulting in a once again yellow solution. The pH responsiveness of the system is attributed to the interaction of the P3HT block with the added proton sources. Finally, the thermoresponsivity of the system was demonstrated by heating aqueous solutions of (415-b-220-b-420) to obtain turbidity which was then shown to be reversible upon cooling. The transmittance measured at 800 nm as a function of temperature indicated that the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) is 38 °C at a concentration of 2.0 g L−1. Given that this value occurs close to physiological temperature and that the polymers have been shown to be biocompatible, potential exists for biological applications.
Ion channels
Ion channels are especially attractive candidates for the creation of advanced sensory devices;155 for example, synthetic ion channels enjoy proposed applications in nanopore sensing/single molecule sequencing.156 Having already discussed the role of macrodipole interactions in the self-catalytic construction of α-helices85 we turn our attention to ion channels. Here the alignment of amide bonds generates a macrodipole157 which can alter the pKa values of ionizing groups.158 In other words, the controlled, collective spatial arrangement of individual amide dipoles gives rise to a macrodipole moment which drives ionization of groups existing about the channel lumen; this effect on pKa can be seen in comparative studies of helical and non-helical model compounds.159 Current synthetic methodologies routinely employ foldamer-based approaches (the origins of which can be seen in the early work of Lehn, etc.) for the creation of artificial ion channel structures. Notably, oligopyridinecarboxamides are most frequently utilized with these aromatic, H-bonded foldamers being introduced by Hamilton160 and others such as Lehn.161 These systems provide a functional platform for study of ion selective conduction processes which by extension offer insight into the mechanisms of natural ion channels. For example, a recent report from Lang et al. indicates that enhanced K+ binding affinity arises as a consequence of helical contraction which alters the coordination number.162 What makes this report particularly notable is the rarity of ion channels that can selectively discriminate Na+ and K+.163
Zhang et al. have recently reported helical polymer ion channels featuring positively charged quaternary ammonium groups positioned within their internal helical surface (i.e. lumen).5 The helical polymer was obtained from dihydrazide monomers which underwent condensation reactions resulting in the formation of linear polymers; the linear chain was then converted to its helical conformation upon reaction with dehydrating agents. A synthetic strategy based upon the simple alternating polymerization of monomers permitted the incorporation of charged moieties at regular intervals along the polymer chain leading to the generation of polymers with narrow molecular weight distributions (Mn = 11.9 kDa, Đ = 1.09) (Fig. 27). Compared to unmodified analogues, the quaternized polymer channel is noted to possess a narrower lumen with altered properties; this occurs without disrupting the channel structure which maintains its helical conformation. Anion transport within the channel is shown to be preferential for anions and subject to size-dependent selectivity with Alkali metal ion transport suppressed almost entirely owing to electrostatic repulsion. The transport activity is found to depend on the anion radius such that Cl− > Br− ≈ NO3− ≫ SO42− > ClO4−.
 Fig. 27  (a) Chemical structures of helical polymer channels 1–3. (b) 3D rendering of helical channel 1 as viewed from the top and (c) from the side (yellow spheres denote the positions of quaternary ammonium groups along the interior channel surface. Adapted from ref. 5 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Zeng and coworkers have also presented foldamer-based approaches for the construction of organic nanotubes (ONTs) with angstrom level precision to afford selective transport of water and protons (11).164 The ONTs obtained via a simple, high yielding one-pot polymerization with POCl3 display 2.8 Å cavities and measure 2.8 nm in length. Proton transfer rates comparable to gramicidin A are observed and transport of single file water chains is found to occur approximately 30× faster than other known artificial systems. Other reports from the group demonstrate highly selective ion transport with selectivity values of 12.6 and 16.3 for Na+ and K+ respectively (Fig. 27, (12)).165
Circularly polarized luminescence (CPLu)
CPLu has been the subject of intense research as of late in the field of photonics and optical device fabrication where applications in 3D display, chiral sensing, information storage, quantum computing166 and spintronics167 are anticipated. A diverse array of materials have been applied toward the production of supramolecular and polymer CPLu systems including lanthanide complexes,168 and π-conjugated polymers169 to name a few. Here the strong orbital angular momentum of such assemblies is credited for high values of luminescence dissymmetry factor (glum) where the orbital angular momentum property is said to be a unique feature in organic chiral helical systems.170 Interestingly, the chirality dependent orbital angular momentum may be tuned through application of an external magnetic field resulting in enhancement of the g factor which conversely may be suppressed through inhibition of electron transport in a helical fashion.171
Despite significant strides made both in the production and theoretical understanding of CPLu materials, practical applications remain largely in their infancy requiring further developments to better correlate structure and performance. To this end, Ikai et al. utilized their previously presented one-step method for the production of 1D supramolecular polymers to develop helical assemblies capable of generating CPL from an infinitesimal chiral source (L and D-alanine-based monomers (Chart 3)).172 They further presented chiral evolution from point to supramolecular chirality and full-colour tuneable CPLu from the resultant assemblies. Once more an infinitesimal chiral source (0.01 mol%) is shown to induce substantial chirality in the supramolecular system; derived from predominately achiral glycine monomers. Incorporation of 1 mol% of achiral dyes into the polymer-based blends permitted the production of thin films with tuneable induced CPLu resulting from efficient transfer of chirality from the helical supramolecular polymer providing glum ≥ 1.0 × 10−2.
 Chart 3  Chemical structures recently applied to the development of circularly polarized luminescent materials. 
In summary, although attempts to visualize luminescence emitted from the poly(31−r-co-2Lr)-polymer films with the naked eye were unsuccessful, a built-in solid-state luminescence property could be observed in the corresponding solid-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra. This result is ascribed to intramolecular fluorescence quenching occurring amongst the benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) pendants which presumably arises due to their high density arrangement in supra-poly(3) (Chart 3 (13)). Notably however, an additional CPL was generated through chiral amplification resulting upon mixing of supra-poly(30.99-co-2L0.01) and supra-poly(3) (25/75, w/w). Critically, this result permitted the production of full-colour tuneable CPL with an assortment of achiral dyes.
Similarly, Deng and coworkers developed functional composite films with an on–off switchable property comprised of chiral helical substituted polyacetylenes (HSPAs) PSA and fluorescent monomer DA (Chart 3, (14)).173 Utilizing a “matching rule” they have detailed elsewhere, they further establish the utility of the method for selection of chiral polymers and achiral luminophores (dyes 1, 2, 3, 4). Briefly, the “matching rule” describes an area of overlap occurring between the CD and PL spectra where CPL can be realized (Chart 3, (a)).174 Impressively, they demonstrate that this operationally simple and universal process enables the production of materials with glum as high as +0.323. Additionally, Zhao et al. recently demonstrated the effects of appending chromophores to helical polymer scaffolds to afford CPL active materials from monosubstituted polyacetylenes (15).175
In yet another development credited to Ikai et al., Sonogashira cross-coupling of 2,5-diiodothiophene and achiral/chiral diethynyl monomers successfully afforded optically active D-glucose bound π-conjugated copolymers (16) with chiral amplification arising due to a sergeants-and-soldiers effect. This was confirmed by CD and CPLu measurements with further support being provided by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and insights derived from an earlier report.176 The optically active glucose-linked biphenyl structural motif was inspired by ellagitannins which are naturally occurring saccharides. The foldamer response of the system is seen in both solution and in the solid-state where upon a conformational transition from random-coil to helix results in the emergence of strong CPLu. Finally, in yet another recent report provided by Ikai et al., the synthesis of CPLu active triptycene based polymers is demonstrated via Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling copolymerization it is proposed that these materials may find application in chiral sensing, asymmetric catalysis and/or chiral resolution (17).68 Likewise, circularly polarized luminescent polyquinoxaline-based materials have been prepared with variable side-chain functionality (18).177
Circularly polarized electroluminescence (CPEL)
Early investigations of mesoscale ordering and chirality conducted by Meijer and coworkers began with the synthesis of an enantiomerically pure poly{[2,5-bis[(S)-2-methylbutoxy]-phenylene]vinylene} (BMB-PPV) which exhibited circular polarization of absorption and photoexcited emission in 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution due to formation of chiral aggregates.178 The high degree of stereo- and regioregularity displayed by BMB-PPV promotes aggregation and consequently results in low solubility; this precludes preparation of thin films necessary for OLED fabrication. These observations led to the design and synthesis of an poly{[2,5-bis[(S)-2-methylbutoxy]-1,4-phenylene]vinylene}-co-{[2,5-bis[(3R,3S)-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)oxy]-1,4-phenylene]vinylene} (BMB-PPV-co-BDMO-PPV) capable of generating circularly polarized electroluminescence (CPEL) (Chart 4, (19)).179 The copolymer bears enantiomerically pure (S)-2-methylbutoxy pendant groups which account for its optical activity in π–π* transition and result in circular polarization of luminescence (glum = −1.0 × 10−2) whereas the (±)-(3R,3S)-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)oxy pendants substantially improve solubility.
 Chart 4  Chemical structures utilized for the creation of circularly polarized electroluminescent materials. 
Despite recent efforts to produce OLEDs which yield strong CPEL in polymers180 and in lanthanide complexes,181 low levels of polarization are generally obtained. Meijer and coworkers, investigated multidomain cholesteric liquid crystals (CLCs) consisting of a chiral fluorene–benzothiadiazole donor–acceptor polymers which exhibit broadband CPEL with 40% RH polarization (20). To date, this represents the highest reported polarization without the aid of alignment layers or chiral dopants.182 In contrast to lanthanide based systems which may exploit CPL which originates locally (i.e. from the molecular site of emission) the design utilizes nonlocal effects originating from the CLC ordering. Enantiomerically pure poly(fluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (c-PFBT) was prepared by Suzuki–Miyaura polymerization which was then cast onto ITO substrates to obtain films of varying thickness (100–400 nm). Films were incorporated into a 6 component stack, yielding functional OLED devices after thermal annealing at 240 °C to obtain CLC films.183 AFM studies of films prior to thermal annealing reveal spherical morphology (Fig. 28b) which upon thermal annealing is found to evolve to form an interconnected fiber network (Fig. 28c) where individual fibers display dimensions on the order of 200–300 nm wide. The films are further shown to be birefringent and without preferred orientation upon annealing by POM (Fig. 28e); image analysis suggests domains on the order of 1 μm.
 Fig. 28  (a) Differences in extinction E for LH and RH circularly polarized incident light and unpolarized detection, for films of c-PFBT (thickness ca. 100 nm), pre- and post-annealing (at various temperature, see legend). (b and c) Tapping-mode AFM height images films pre and post-annealing, respectively. (d and e) POM images of films pre- and post-annealing, respectively (viewed with crossed polarizers). Thermal annealing of films was performed at 240 °C for 15 min. Adapted from ref. 182 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Chiral discrimination
Enantiomeric separations in the pharmaceutical industry remain one of the few commercial applications for helical polymers where these materials routinely are implemented as chiral stationary phases, as first popularized by Okamoto and co-workers.184,185 Recent reports have also demonstrated capabilities for chiral discrimination using helical copolymer nanoassemblies in the thin film, solution and bulk with a range of mechanisms and applications. The utilization of helical materials and their corresponding self-assembled chiral nanostructures in enantioselective crystallization to resolve racemic mixtures has been covered in detail in a recent review article by Medina et al. and will not be covered here.186
Deng and co-workers represent significant contributors in the field of chiral discrimination. Recently, his group demonstrated “enantio-differentiating release” of the chiral small molecule therapeutic agent, naproxen, from chiral polymer particles synthesized using precipitation copolymerizations of chiral phenyl acetylene monomers and polylactide functional phenyl acetylene macromonomers.187 Using the enantiomeric forms of PLLA and PDLA macromonomers copolymerized with either (S)- or (R)-chiral monomer (CM, as denoted in their report) resulted in differential release of naproxen depending on the chiral pairing of monomer and macromonomer in chiral particles. The resulting release characteristics provided a relatively modest improvement in chiral resolution of naproxen racemic mixtures showing ∼80% total drug release for P(PLLA2-co-R-CM) and P(PLLA2-co-S-CM) particles with a resulting enantiomeric excess (ee) = ∼15% and ∼10% favouring the (S) and (R) enantiomer, respectively.
Uniquely, discrimination of chiral probing liquids through contact angle analysis when exposed to chiral surfaces represents a relatively rarely observed form of chiral discrimination. This was first demonstrated using chiral small molecule alcohols covalently bound to silica surfaces.188 The chiral matching/mismatching of configurations for probing liquids, e.g. leucinol used in this study, and surface functions led to discrete differences in observed contact angle through formation of diastereomeric pairs during “chiral wetting”. Shundo et al. expanded on this technique using thin films of chiral polymers containing polymethacrylate backbones and surface migrating, chiral functions.189 Again, when examining the chiral probing liquid 1,2-propanediol on the different enantiomer forms of the chiral thin film, distinct contact angles (θ) were observed, e.g. for the (S)-film, θ = 63° for (S)-1,2-propanediol and θ = 41° for (R)-1,2-propanediol. Importantly, the opposite diastereomeric pairing (i.e. using (R)-film) provided analogous results when chirality was matched/mismatched.
One of the most remarkable examples of chiral wetting was reported by Sun and co-workers utilizing smart polymer films for selective, chirality-triggered wettablility switching.190,191 For this, copolymer grafted surfaces with pendant dipeptides were exposed to dilute (c = 1.0 × 10−5 to 0.05 M) aqueous solutions of various enantiomeric forms of monosaccharides showing distinct differences in contact angle via diastereomeric matching. For example, the contact angle of L-lyxose versusD-lyxose solutions at c = 0.05 M are dramatically different when exposed to the smart polymer surfaces with switchable changes from θ = 135° to θ = 36°, respectively, that can be cycled reversibly. The large differences in contact angle are attributed to cooperative hydrogen bonding interactions between certain enantiomers of the solvated sugar molecules and the dipeptide pendant functions on the polymer brushes which induce tertiary structure formation selective for L-saccharides.
Zheng et al. reported a particularly elegant example of chiral discrimination which could be visualized macroscopically through the enantioselective self-association of polyacrylamide gels.192 Three corresponding gels were synthesized containing β-cyclodextrin (βCD-gel), D-, or L-tryptophan (D- or L-Trp-gel) pendant molecules. When small cubes of these gels are suspended in NaCl (aq) solutions, aggregation and adhesion of L-Trp-gels with βCD-gels can be observed with the naked eye triggered by interfacial enantioselective host–guest interactions while D-Trp-gels remain dispersed (Fig. 29). Such chiral recognition is expected to find applications in chiral separation applications.
 Fig. 29  (Left) Chemical structures of the gels. (Right) Visual, macroscopic chiral discrimination of hydrogels functionalized with β-cyclodextrin (βCD-gel), D-, or L-tryptophan (D- or L-Trp-gel) showing selective gel aggregation via supramolecular complexation of L-Trp with β-CD upon agitation in aqueous NaCl solutions. Adapted from ref. 192 with permission from Springer-Nature. 
New polymers and opportunities
Having considered the potential of helical polymer systems in a variety of applications we shift our focus to recent reports detailing the synthesis of new helical polymers and examine their individual use cases. In one such example, Swager and coworkers expected that increased chirality would promote electronic delocalization across the polymer backbone and thereby provide enhanced magnetic field sensitivity.116 Computational studies were performed to help inform their investigations where density functional theory (DFT) was applied to obtain a 1D potential energy surface (PES) as a function of the dihedral angle (torsional angle between thiophene rings) for sulfone and sulfide containing dimers. These calculations indicated that the sulfone appended dimer adopts a larger torsional angle (−46.2° vs. −37.2°) than the analogous sulfide functionalized dimer which was proposed to potentially lead to a tighter helical conformation.
AFM and GI-WAXS permitted examination of polymer morphology and organization in thin films. Both the sulfide and the sulfone appended polythiophenes are found to produce X-ray scattering patterns consistent with the expected interchain spacing of the proposed helical structure; with d100-spacings of 23.5, 25.6 Å and 24.1 Å respectively. Furthermore, AFM imaging revealed nanofibrillar morphologies with an apparent helical dependence and slow diffusion of nonsolvents into dilute solutions yielded micron-scale superhelical bundles as evidenced by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The polymers exhibit strong magneto-optical activity with Verdet constants (104–105 deg T−1 m−1) which surpass those of conventional ferromagnetic crystals obtained from rare earth materials with the added benefit of offering alternative fabrication strategies. These observations are further supported by CD where examination of the π–π* transitions of the sulfide and sulfone polymers reveal aggregation dependent Cotton effects. THF solutions of sulfone appended polythiophenes (Chart 5 (21), SO2-P2) failed to produce Cotton bands prior to addition of a poor solvent (i.e. MeOH), indicating the involvement of ordered helical aggregates in the apparent increase in optical rotary dispersion. Through theoretical calculation and experimentation they conclude that the sign and magnitude of the Verdet constant is closely related to the helical structure of the polymer.
 Chart 5  Recently developed and/or studied helical polymer structures. 
Increasingly work is being performed to better understand the unique magnetic properties of helical systems. For instance, the chiral induced spin selectivity (CISS) effect has emerged as a prominent example of such properties. The CISS effect explains the spin selective conduction properties achieved within chiral polymers, with the effect being well established in DNA193 and peptides/proteins194 Naaman and coworkers have championed these studies, in a recent collaboration with Yashima and coworkers,48 they further explored the concept with a series of well-defined self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of helical poly(phenylacetylene)s which feature D and L-alanine decyl esters (22). The precisely defined lengths and surface bound orientation of these polymers enabled well controlled study of their spin filtering property. Supported by a suite of characterization techniques including magnetic conducting probe AFM (mcp-AFM), 4-probe magnetoresistance (MR, SQUID) and Hall effect devices, they further confirm efficient spin dependent polarization along the polymer backbone. Whereas, on the other hand, past studies of supramolecular nanofibers where shown to achieve spin polarization in excess of 80%.195
These and other recent findings hint to the potential of helical polymer systems in the construction of advanced electronic materials, for instance, in the fabrication of spintronic devices or the development of efficient water splitting systems.196 Similarly, the concept of surface-bound helical polymers was also explored by Lim et al. who reported the efficient synthesis of tethered polyisocyanopeptide (PIAA) brushes.197 Through the use of amino-terminated self-assembled monolayer (SAM) initiators on silicon and gold surfaces, brushes up to 200 nm could be grown via surface initiated polymerization under nickel(II) catalysis (23).
Novak and coworkers recently reported the synthesis of azobenzene appended polycarbodiimides offering molecular switching capability (24).19 This behavior is accessed through the conformational changes achieved via the cis–trans isomerization of the azo-unit due to dynamic photoisomerization. Through a combination of computational and experimental VCD data, they support the occurrence of a spring-like process of helical contraction and expansion along the polymer backbone. This hypothesis is supported by analogous VCD analysis performed on more heavily studied chiroptical switching polycarbodiimides.18,20
Ikai et al. have also recently reported the synthesis of optically active chiral triptycene composed of bis[2-(4-alkoxyphenyl)ethynyl]phenylene units by electrophile induced cyclization, sterics direct the reaction away from the bridgehead carbons resulting in an one-handed helical twist of the polymer backbone (25).198 Comparison of AFM height profiles to helix diameters as derived from molecular dynamic simulation of a 12-mer model of poly-2R shows good agreement providing support for the helical ladder structure.
Zhang et al. reported the chemoenzymatic synthesis of unsaturated chiral polyesters leading to the formation of helical supramolecular structures.199 The unsaturated bond, along with the stereoregularity, solvent polarity and side chain structure were found to be critically important determinants of self-assembly behaviour. With increasing polarity, the nanostructures of the stereoregular unsaturated esters were noted to evolve from spheres to helical fibres, whereas no such assembly was noted for racemic mixtures. Supramolecular bundles of preferential helical twist can clearly be observed in the corresponding SEM images (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Reaction scheme for chemoenzymatic synthesis of helical chiral polyesters and SEM images of (a) (R)-poly-3a, (b) (S)-poly-3a, (c) (R)-poly-3b, (d) (S)-poly-3b, (e) rac-poly-3a, and (f) rac-poly-3b in a mixed solvent of DCM/hexane (1:1) (concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1). Adapted from ref. 199 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Wu and coworkers presented the highly enantioselective living HSSP of diazoacetate monomers bearing optically active methylbenzyl ester substituents with chiral Pd(II) catalysts to obtain polycarbenes (26).200,201 They report an unexpectedly high degree of stereoregularity in the resultant polymer products; an observation revealed by NMR studies. The monomers exhibit a marked difference in polymerization rate, with one enantiomer exhibiting 130× difference from the other despite the chiral centre being far removed from the site of polymerization.202
Kowalewski and coworkers reported the synthesis of helical polyfurans bearing ester side chains where the presence of these electron withdrawing substituents greatly improved photostability (27).203 Helical polymers were obtained by living catalyst transfer polycondensation (CTP) where this substitution pattern resulted in the formation of foldamers. The polymers were found to self-assemble into linear filaments and exhibit dynamic helical behaviour upon addition of MeOH nonsolvent which gave rise to enhancements of CD and concomitant reduction of the absorbance band centred at 445 nm (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  UV–vis absorption (top) and circular dichroism (bottom) spectra of solutions of 11.7 kDa (S)-P3EHEF (0.02 mg mL−1) demonstrating conformational changes upon addition of a CH3OH nonsolvent. Adapted from ref. 203 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Pathways to helical metallopolymers have recently been by Bhattacharjee et al. via bora[1]ferrocenophanes (28).204 Synthesis of the new polymers was accomplished through salt-metathesis where masses on the order of 7 kDa are demonstrated through a combination of GPC and MALDI. The helical nature of the as synthesized polymer was then substantiated by CD, with further support being provided by DFT calculations which indicate that thermodynamically favorable rotamers bias the system toward the formation of single-handed helices. Given the capability of PFS to engage in crystallization-driven self-assembly (CDSA) the report is of interest to those seeking to explore the controlled fabrication of low dimensional nanostructures using novel materials.
We are aware of few reports detailing the use of synthetic polymer systems in the field of chiral plasmonics which makes Cheng et al. recent report particularly interesting.205 Utilizing syndioselective RAFT polymerization of poly(methacrylate hydroxyethyl-3-indole propionate) (PIPEMA) and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA) they successfully produce new chiral nanostructures (29). Owing to the steric hindrance imposed by the polymer side chains a syndiotactic main chain of preferential handedness results, this helical conformation permits the creation of chiral side-by-side (SBS) assemblies of gold nanorods (GNRs) (Fig. 32c). Notably, this chirality transfer is achieved without chiral reagents and results in strong circular dichroism in the visible-NIR range. Further, the CD is shown to be tuneable when the polymer MW is varied. Interestingly, the addition of optical active chiral centres to side chains affords nanorod assemblies of the same chirality.
 Fig. 32  (a) CD spectra of the original GNRs and the PIPEMA192 induced assemblies; at various pH values, numbers in the key correspond to the solution pH value. (b) Selected TEM image of the as assembled nanostructures (obtained at pH 13.4). (c) Top: tilt-angle TEM images of a representative assembly, bottom: 3D models of the corresponding structures; numbers in the label correspond to the title angle. (d) CD spectra of the GNR assemblies as induced PIPEMA with different molecular weights. Adapted from ref. 205 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Finally, we note the production of new photonic paints designed to combat the urban heat island effect by Grubbs and coworkers. In these recent reports, the bulk self-assembly of helical block copolymers lead to the creation of band gap tunable photonic structures upon thermal annealing or simple solvent evaporation. Rigid-rod helical polylactides206 (30) and polyisocyanates33 (31) serve as key structural components with rigidifying effects which strongly inhibit chain entanglements and simultaneously promote successful formation of lamellae. Successful generation of the targeted morphology is noted to occur with polymer molecular weights exceeding 4000 kDa. The selectively tunable period of the resultant photonic structures permits band gap tuning extending into the near-infrared (NIR), once more, after simple evaporation of dichloromethane (DCM). Synthesis of these novel block copolymers is achieved through the Ti(IV) mediated living polymerization of isocyanates using exo-norbornene monomers featuring a half-titanocene complex207 as initiators. This process yields helical macromonomers which subsequently undergo ruthenium mediated ROMP to yield ultra-high MW polymers (∼1500 kDa–7100 kDa) with narrow molecular weight distributions (Đ = 1.08–1.39).
Conclusions and future outlook
Recent progress in the synthesis and self-assembly of chiral, helical polymer systems will inevitably lead to further implementation of these materials in unique future applications. In particular, elegant synthetic methodologies demonstrated by Wu and co-workers have begun to bridge the gap between heavily studied controlled “living” polymerizations (e.g. ATRP,208 RAFT,209 GRIM polymerizations30) and more niche, controlled coordination insertion polymerizations of helical polymers allowing facile synthesis of block copolymers combining polymers with varieties of structures. This continued advancement will undoubtedly lead to more examples of controlled self-assembly of chiral materials with new unique structures/properties, and, more broadly, will further our understanding on the influence of chirality on the origins of life.
The introduction of chirality in semiconductor systems will undoubtedly continue to progress offering new opportunities to develop efficient solar-energy conversion materials. Further, implementation of chiral polymeric materials for structural colour generation through photonic self-assembly of helical brush copolymers has been demonstrated33,206 and is sure to garner further interest as the development of synthetic methodologies continues. Helical polymers, however, have been slow to be implemented in fields of chiral plasmonics which, with the exception of one report,205 is so far dominated by biopolymers (e.g. DNA origami, peptides). Utilization of helical copolymer nanoassemblies as templates for construction of chiral, hybrid inorganic–organic nanostructures are also expected in the near future, especially with recent improvements in size-controlled fabrication of chiral nanostructures. Overall, the field of chiral self-assembly is laden with opportunities with many novel polymer systems and synthetic methodologies being rapidly developed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
G. M. Church, Y. Gao and S. Kosuri, Next-Generation Digital Information Storage in DNA, Science, 2012, 337(6102), 1628–1628 CrossRef CAS .
G. McDermott, S. M. Prince, A. A. Freer, A. M. Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, M. Z. Papiz, R. J. Cogdell and N. W. Isaacs, Crystal structure of an integral membrane light-harvesting complex from photosynthetic bacteria, Nature, 1995, 374(6522), 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, W. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang and N. Sahai, Structure analysis of collagen fibril at atomic-level resolution and its implications for intra-fibrillar transport in bone biomineralization, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(3), 1513–1523 RSC .
J. Lear, Z. Wasserman and W. DeGrado, Synthetic amphiphilic peptide models for protein ion channels, Science, 1988, 240(4856), 1177–1181 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Tian, S. Qi, B. Yang and Z. Dong, Highly Efficient Exclusion of Alkali Metal Ions via Electrostatic Repulsion Inside Positively Charged Channels, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(5), 3627–3632 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, M. S. Pacella, H. Vali, J. J. Gray and M. D. McKee, Chiral switching in biomineral suprastructures induced by homochiral L-amino acid, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(8), eaas9819 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, X. Yi and M. D. McKee, Chiral biomineralized structures and their biomimetic synthesis, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6(10), 1974–1990 RSC .
D. Pijper and B. L. Feringa, Molecular Transmission: Controlling the Twist Sense of a Helical Polymer with a Single Light-Driven Molecular Motor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46(20), 3693–3696 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimomura, T. Ikai, S. Kanoh, E. Yashima and K. Maeda, Switchable enantioseparation based on macromolecular memory of a helical polyacetylene in the solid state, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6(5), 429–434 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hirose, A. Isobe, E. Quiñoá, F. Freire and K. Maeda, Three-State Switchable Chiral Stationary Phase Based on Helicity Control of an Optically Active Poly(phenylacetylene) Derivative by Using Metal Cations in the Solid State, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(21), 8592–8598 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mortezaei, N. R. Catarineu and J. W. Canary, A Redox-Reconfigurable, Ambidextrous Asymmetric Catalyst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(19), 8054–8057 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zimbron, X. Caumes, Y. Li, C. M. Thomas, M. Raynal and L. Bouteiller, Real-Time Control of the Enantioselectivity of a Supramolecular Catalyst Allows Selecting the Configuration of Consecutively Formed Stereogenic Centers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(45), 14016–14019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Caumes, M. Raynal and L. Bouteiller, Modulation of catalyst enantioselectivity through reversible assembly of supramolecular helices, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(15), 2162–2165 RSC .
K.-C. Yang, P.-T. Chiu and R.-M. Ho, Mesochiral phases from the self-assembly of chiral block copolymers, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11(9), 1542–1554 RSC .
H.-F. Wang, K.-C. Yang, W.-C. Hsu, J.-Y. Lee, J.-T. Hsu, G. M. Grason, E. L. Thomas, J.-C. Tsai and R.-M. Ho, Generalizing the effects of chirality on block copolymer assembly, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116(10), 4080–4089 CrossRef CAS .
R.-M. Ho, Y.-W. Chiang, C.-K. Chen, H.-W. Wang, H. Hasegawa, S. Akasaka, E. L. Thomas, C. Burger and B. S. Hsiao, Block Copolymers with a Twist, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(51), 18533–18542 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hur, Y. Francescato, V. Giannini, S. A. Maier, R. G. Hennig and U. Wiesner, Three-Dimensionally Isotropic Negative Refractive Index Materials from Block Copolymer Self-Assembled Chiral Gyroid Networks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(50), 11985–11989 CrossRef CAS .
C. Merten, J. F. Reuther, J. D. DeSousa and B. M. Novak, Identification of the specific, shutter-like conformational reorientation in a chiroptical switching polycarbodiimide by VCD spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(23), 11456–11460 RSC .
D. A. Siriwardane, O. Kulikov, B. L. Batchelor, Z. Liu, J. M. Cue, S. O. Nielsen and B. M. Novak, UV- and, Thermo-Controllable Azobenzene-Decorated Polycarbodiimide Molecular Springs, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(10), 3722–3730 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Reuther and B. M. Novak, Evidence of Entropy-Driven Bistability through 15N NMR Analysis of a Temperature- and Solvent-Induced, Chiroptical Switching Polycarbodiimide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(51), 19292–19303 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Z. Tang, P. D. Boyle and B. M. Novak, Chiroptical Switching Polyguanidine Synthesized by Helix-Sense-Selective Polymerization Using [(R)-3,3′-Dibromo-2,2′-binaphthoxy](di-tert-butoxy)titanium(IV) Catalyst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(7), 2136–2142 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Reuther, D. A. Siriwardane, R. Campos and B. M. Novak, Solvent Tunable Self-Assembly of Amphiphilic Rod–Coil Block Copolymers with Chiral, Helical Polycarbodiimide Segments: Polymeric Nanostructures with Variable Shapes and Sizes, Macromolecules, 2015, 48(19), 6890–6899 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arias, F. Freire, E. Quiñoá and R. Riguera, Nanospheres, Nanotubes, Toroids, and Gels with Controlled Macroscopic Chirality, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(50), 13720–13724 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, B. Xiong, L. Wang, K. Wang, M. Ren, L. Zhang, J. Zhu and Z. Yang, Moebius strips of chiral block copolymers, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 4090 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Kang, H. Huang and J. Deng, Optically Active Janus Particles Constructed by Chiral Helical Polymers through Emulsion Polymerization Combined with Solvent Evaporation-Induced Phase Separation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(5), 6319–6327 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao and J. Deng, Dispersion Polymerization of Substituted Acetylenes in the Presence of Chiral Source for Preparing Monodispersed Chiral Nanoparticles, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39(7), 1700759 CrossRef .
D. M. Vriezema, J. Hoogboom, K. Velonia, K. Takazawa, P. C. M. Christianen, J. C. Maan, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Vesicles and Polymerized Vesicles from Thiophene-Containing Rod–Coil Block Copolymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42(7), 772–776 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, L. Gao, C. Cai, J. Lin, L. Wang and X. Tian, Helical Toroids Self-Assembled from a Binary System of Polypeptide Homopolymer and its Block Copolymer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(34), 14281–14285 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Sakurai, K. Kuroyanagi, R. Nonokawa and E. Yashima, Atomic force microscopy observation of a helical poly(phenylacetylene) bearing aza-18-crown-6 ether pendants induced by amino acids, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42(22), 5838–5844 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, C. Wang, Y.-X. Li, X.-H. Xu, L. Zhou, N. Liu and Z.-Q. Wu, Crystallization-Driven Asymmetric Helical Assembly of Conjugated Block Copolymers and the Aggregation Induced White-light Emission and Circularly Polarized Luminescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(38), 16675–16682 CrossRef CAS .
H.-F. Wang, P.-T. Chiu, C.-Y. Yang, Z.-H. Xie, Y.-C. Hung, J.-Y. Lee, J.-C. Tsai, I. Prasad, H. Jinnai, E. L. Thomas and R.-M. Ho, Networks with controlled chirality via self-assembly of chiral triblock terpolymers, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6(42), eabc3644 CrossRef .
R.-M. Ho, Y.-W. Chiang, C.-C. Tsai, C.-C. Lin, B.-T. Ko and B.-H. Huang, Three-Dimensionally Packed Nanohelical Phase in Chiral Block Copolymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(9), 2704–2705 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Miyake, R. A. Weitekamp, V. A. Piunova and R. H. Grubbs, Synthesis of Isocyanate-Based Brush Block Copolymers and Their Rapid Self-Assembly to Infrared-Reflecting Photonic Crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(34), 14249–14254 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Kennemur and B. M. Novak, Advances in polycarbodiimide chemistry, Polymer, 2011, 52(8), 1693–1710 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okamoto, K. Suzuki, K. Ohta, K. Hatada and H. Yuki, Optically active poly(triphenylmethyl methacrylate) with one-handed helical conformation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101(16), 4763–4765 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. M. Nolte, A. J. M. Van Beijnen and W. Drenth, Chirality in polyisocyanides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1974, 96(18), 5932–5933 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yashima, N. Ousaka, D. Taura, K. Shimomura, T. Ikai and K. Maeda, Supramolecular Helical Systems: Helical Assemblies of Small Molecules, Foldamers, and Polymers with Chiral Amplification and Their Functions, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(22), 13752–13990 CrossRef CAS .
K.-U. Seo, Y.-J. Jin, H. Kim, T. Sakaguchi and G. Kwak, Kinetic Study on Achiral-to-Chiral Transformation of Achiral Poly(diphenylacetylene)s via Thermal Annealing in Chiral Solvent: Molecular Design Guideline for Conformational Change toward Optically Dissymmetric Structures, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(1), 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Zhang, N. Suzuki, M. Fujiki, L. Wang, L. Li, W. Zhang, N. Zhou and X. Zhu, Chiroptical generation and amplification of hyperbranched π-conjugated polymers in aggregation states driven by limonene chirality, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5(3), 784–791 RSC .
J. L. Greenfield, E. W. Evans, D. Di Nuzzo, M. Di Antonio, R. H. Friend and J. R. Nitschke, Unraveling Mechanisms of Chiral Induction in Double-Helical Metallopolymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(32), 10344–10353 CrossRef .
K. Bauri, A. Narayanan, U. Haldar and P. De, Polymerization-induced self-assembly driving chiral nanostructured materials, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6(34), 6152–6162 RSC .
G. Tian, Y. Lu and B. M. Novak, Helix-Sense Selective Polymerization of Carbodiimides: Building Permanently Optically Active Polymers from Achiral Monomers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(13), 4082–4083 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Green, M. P. Reidy, R. D. Johnson, G. Darling, D. J. O'Leary and G. Willson, Macromolecular stereochemistry: the out-of-proportion influence of optically active comonomers on the conformational characteristics of polyisocyanates. The sergeants and soldiers experiment, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111(16), 6452–6454 CrossRef .
M. M. Green, N. C. Peterson, T. Sato, A. Teramoto, R. Cook and S. Lifson, A Helical Polymer with a Cooperative Response to Chiral Information, Science, 1995, 268(5219), 1860–1866 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Green, B. A. Garetz, B. Munoz, H. Chang, S. Hoke and R. G. Cooks, Majority Rules in the Copolymerization of Mirror Image Isomers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117(14), 4181–4182 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Karunakaran, B. J. Cafferty, A. Weigert-Muñoz, G. B. Schuster and N. V. Hud, Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking in the Formation of Supramolecular Polymers: Implications for the Origin of Biological Homochirality, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(5), 1453–1457 CrossRef CAS .
R. Naaman and D. H. Waldeck, Chiral-Induced Spin Selectivity Effect, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3(16), 2178–2187 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mishra, A. K. Mondal, E. Z. B. Smolinsky, R. Naaman, K. Maeda, T. Nishimura, T. Taniguchi, T. Yoshida, K. Takayama and E. Yashima, Spin Filtering Along Chiral Polymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(34), 14671–14676 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mtangi, F. Tassinari, K. Vankayala, A. Vargas Jentzsch, B. Adelizzi, A. R. A. Palmans, C. Fontanesi, E. W. Meijer and R. Naaman, Control of Electrons’ Spin Eliminates Hydrogen Peroxide Formation During Water Splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(7), 2794–2798 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mtangi, V. Kiran, C. Fontanesi and R. Naaman, Role of the Electron Spin Polarization in Water Splitting, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(24), 4916–4922 CrossRef CAS .
C.-K. Lim, M. J. Cho, A. Singh, Q. Li, W. J. Kim, H. S. Jee, K. L. Fillman, S. H. Carpenter, M. L. Neidig, A. Baev, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Manipulating Magneto-Optic Properties of a Chiral Polymer by Doping with Stable Organic Biradicals, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(9), 5451–5455 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Swager, 50th Anniversary Perspective: Conducting/Semiconducting Conjugated Polymers. A Personal Perspective on the Past and the Future, Macromolecules, 2017, 50(13), 4867–4886 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Zhang, Z. Cai, X. Chen, H. Luo, Y. Li, J. Wang and D. Zhang, New Organic Semiconductors with Imide/Amide-Containing Molecular Systems, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(40), 6965–6977 CrossRef CAS .
S. Herbst, B. Soberats, P. Leowanawat, M. Stolte, M. Lehmann and F. Würthner, Self-assembly of multi-stranded perylene dye J-aggregates in columnar liquid-crystalline phases, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 2646 CrossRef .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Comparing Photosynthetic and Photovoltaic Efficiencies and Recognizing the Potential for Improvement, Science, 2011, 332(6031), 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Huber, A. S. Ferreira, R. Thompson, D. Kilbride, N. S. Knutson, L. S. Devi, D. B. Toso, J. R. Challa, Z. H. Zhou, Y. Rubin, B. J. Schwartz and S. H. Tolbert, Long-lived photoinduced polaron formation in conjugated polyelectrolyte-fullerene assemblies, Science, 2015, 348(6241), 1340–1343 CrossRef CAS .
N. Karl and J. Ziegler, Generation and transport of charge carriers in the charge-transfer complex anthracene-pyromellitic-dianhydride, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1975, 32(3), 438–442 CrossRef CAS .
D. Adam, P. Schuhmacher, J. Simmerer, L. Häussling, K. Siemensmeyer, K. H. Etzbachi, H. Ringsdorf and D. Haarer, Fast photoconduction in the highly ordered columnar phase of a discotic liquid crystal, Nature, 1994, 371(6493), 141–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Supramolecular electronics; nanowires from self-assembled π-conjugated systems, Chem. Commun., 2005,(26), 3245–3258 RSC .
C. Fouquey, J.-M. Lehn and A.-M. Levelut, Molecular recognition directed self-assembly of supramolecular liquid crystalline polymers from complementary chiral components, Adv. Mater., 1990, 2(5), 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ducharme and J. D. Wuest, Use of hydrogen bonds to control molecular aggregation. Extensive, self-complementary arrays of donors and acceptors, J. Org. Chem., 1988, 53(24), 5787–5789 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wittmann, F. A. Wenzel, S. Wiesneth, A. T. Haedler, M. Drechsler, K. Kreger, J. Köhler, E. W. Meijer, H.-W. Schmidt and R. Hildner, Enhancing Long-Range Energy Transport in Supramolecular Architectures by Tailoring Coherence Properties, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(18), 8323–8330 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dehm, M. Büchner, J. Seibt, V. Engel and F. Würthner, Foldamer with a spiral perylene bisimide staircase aggregate structure, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2(11), 2094–2100 RSC .
L. M. Yablon, S. N. Sanders, H. Li, K. R. Parenti, E. Kumarasamy, K. J. Fallon, M. J. A. Hore, A. Cacciuto, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Persistent Multiexcitons from Polymers with Pendent Pentacenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(24), 9564–9569 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, J. Lee, M. W. B. Wilson, T. Wu, D. P. McMahon, R. R. Parkhurst, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, A. Rao, K. Johnson, M. Y. Sfeir, M. G. Bawendi, T. M. Swager, R. H. Friend, M. A. Baldo and T. Van Voorhis, A transferable model for singlet-fission kinetics, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6(6), 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lim, P. Kim, M.-C. Yoon, J. Sung, V. Dehm, Z. Chen, F. Würthner and D. Kim, Exciton delocalization and dynamics in helical π-stacks of self-assembled perylene bisimides, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4(1), 388–397 RSC .
H. Marciniak, X.-Q. Li, F. Würthner and S. Lochbrunner, One-Dimensional Exciton Diffusion in Perylene Bisimide Aggregates, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115(5), 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikai, T. Yoshida, S. Awata, Y. Wada, K. Maeda, M. Mizuno and T. M. Swager, Circularly Polarized Luminescent Triptycene-Based Polymers, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7(3), 364–369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hernando, P. A. J. de Witte, E. M. H. P. van Dijk, J. Korterik, R. J. M. Nolte, A. E. Rowan, M. F. García-Parajó and N. F. van Hulst, Investigation of Perylene Photonic Wires by Combined Single-Molecule Fluorescence and Atomic Force Microscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43(31), 4045–4049 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palermo, E. Schwartz, C. E. Finlayson, A. Liscio, M. B. J. Otten, S. Trapani, K. Müllen, D. Beljonne, R. H. Friend, R. J. M. Nolte, A. E. Rowan and P. Samorì, Macromolecular Scaffolding: The Relationship Between Nanoscale Architecture and Function in Multichromophoric Arrays for Organic Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(8), E81–E88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Foster, C. E. Finlayson, P. E. Keivanidis, Y.-S. Huang, I. Hwang, R. H. Friend, M. B. J. Otten, L.-P. Lu, E. Schwartz, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, Improved Performance of Perylene-Based Photovoltaic Cells Using Polyisocyanopeptide Arrays, Macromolecules, 2009, 42(6), 2023–2030 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dabirian, V. Palermo, A. Liscio, E. Schwartz, M. B. J. Otten, C. E. Finlayson, E. Treossi, R. H. Friend, G. Calestani, K. Müllen, R. J. M. Nolte, A. E. Rowan and P. Samorì, The Relationship between Nanoscale Architecture and Charge Transport in Conjugated Nanocrystals Bridged by Multichromophoric Polymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(20), 7055–7063 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Tovar, Supramolecular Construction of Optoelectronic Biomaterials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46(7), 1527–1537 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Hafner, D. Görl, A. Sienkiewicz, S. Balog and H. Frauenrath, Long-Lived Photocharges in Supramolecular Polymers of Low-Band-Gap Chromophores, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26(43), 9506–9517 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Eakins, R. Pandey, J. P. Wojciechowski, H. Y. Zheng, J. E. A. Webb, C. Valéry, P. Thordarson, N. O. V. Plank, J. A. Gerrard and J. M. Hodgkiss, Functional Organic Semiconductors Assembled via Natural Aggregating Peptides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(35), 5640–5649 CrossRef CAS .
K. Besar, H. A. M. Ardoña, J. D. Tovar and H. E. Katz, Demonstration of Hole Transport and Voltage Equilibration in Self-Assembled π-Conjugated Peptide Nanostructures Using Field-Effect Transistor Architectures, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(12), 12401–12409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mba, A. Moretto, L. Armelao, M. Crisma, C. Toniolo and M. Maggini, Synthesis and Self-Assembly of Oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) Peptide Conjugates in Water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 17(7), 2044–2047 CAS .
R. J. Hafner, L. Tian, J. C. Brauer, T. Schmaltz, A. Sienkiewicz, S. Balog, V. Flauraud, J. Brugger and H. Frauenrath, Unusually Long-Lived Photocharges in Helical Organic Semiconductor Nanostructures, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(9), 9116–9125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ouchi, T. Kizaki, M. Yamato, X. Lin, N. Hoshi, F. Silly, T. Kajitani, T. Fukushima, K.-i. Nakayama and S. Yagai, Impact of helical organization on the photovoltaic properties of oligothiophene supramolecular polymers, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9(15), 3638–3643 RSC .
Y. Wada, K.-i. Shinohara, H. Asakawa, S. Matsui, T. Taima and T. Ikai, One-Step Synthesis of One-Dimensional Supramolecular Assemblies Composed of Helical Macromolecular Building Blocks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(35), 13995–14002 CrossRef CAS .
E. Schwartz, M. Koepf, H. J. Kitto, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, Helical poly(isocyanides): past, present and future, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2(1), 33–47 RSC .
J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan, R. J. M. Nolte and N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, Chiral Architectures from Macromolecular Building Blocks, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101(12), 4039–4070 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, H. Fu, R. Baumgartner, L. Zhu, K.-C. Shih, Y. Xia, X. Zheng, L. Yin, C. Chipot, Y. Lin and J. Cheng, Enzyme-mimetic self-catalyzed polymerization of polypeptide helices, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 5470 CrossRef .
S. Lv, H. Kim, Z. Song, L. Feng, Y. Yang, R. Baumgartner, K.-Y. Tseng, S. J. Dillon, C. Leal, L. Yin and J. Cheng, Unimolecular Polypeptide Micelles via Ultrafast Polymerization of N-Carboxyanhydrides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(19), 8570–8574 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baumgartner, H. Fu, Z. Song, Y. Lin and J. Cheng, Cooperative polymerization of α-helices induced by macromolecular architecture, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9(7), 614–622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tanaka, H. Katagiri, Y. Furusho and E. Yashima, A Modular Strategy to Artificial Double Helices, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44(25), 3867–3870 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ikeda, Y. Tanaka, T. Hasegawa, Y. Furusho and E. Yashima, Construction of Double-Stranded Metallosupramolecular Polymers with a Controlled Helicity by Combination of Salt Bridges and Metal Coordination, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(21), 6806–6807 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yashima, K. Maeda and Y. Furusho, Single- and Double-Stranded Helical Polymers: Synthesis, Structures, and Functions, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41(9), 1166–1180 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, S. Hong, J. Liang, Y. Shi and J. Deng, Helically twining polymerization for constructing polymeric double helices, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8(37), 5726–5733 RSC .
B. Zhao, J. Deng and J. Deng, Optically Active Helical Polyacetylene Self-Assembled into Chiral Micelles Used As Nanoreactor for Helix-Sense-Selective Polymerization, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6(1), 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, T. Yamamoto and M. Suginome, Helical Poly(quinoxaline-2,3-diyl)s Bearing 1,2,3-Triazole Pendants: Synthesis by CuAAC and Use as Reusable Abnormal NHC Ligands in Gold Catalysis, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11(1), 424–429 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Qiu, S. Bo, F. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Zhou, H. Niu, H. Dong and T. Satoh, Recyclable helical poly(phenylacetylene)-supported catalyst for asymmetric aldol reaction in aqueous media, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2019, 57(9), 1024–1031 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, R. Murakami and M. Suginome, Single-Handed Helical Poly(quinoxaline-2,3-diyl)s Bearing Achiral 4-Aminopyrid-3-yl Pendants as Highly Enantioselective, Reusable Chiral Nucleophilic Organocatalysts in the Steglich Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(7), 2557–2560 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Noorduin, A. A. C. Bode, M. van der Meijden, H. Meekes, A. F. van Etteger, W. J. P. van Enckevort, P. C. M. Christianen, B. Kaptein, R. M. Kellogg, T. Rasing and E. Vlieg, Complete chiral symmetry breaking of an amino acid derivative directed by circularly polarized light, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1(9), 729–732 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Kim, B.-G. Shin, J.-J. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Photoinduced Supramolecular Chirality in Amorphous Azobenzene Polymer Films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124(14), 3504–3505 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Wu, Z.-W. Cai, Q.-Y. Ye, C.-H. Weng, X.-H. Huang, X.-L. Hu, C.-C. Huang and N.-F. Zhuang, Enantioselective Synthesis of a Chiral Coordination Polymer with Circularly Polarized Visible Laser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(47), 12860–12864 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, N. A. Abdul Rahim, Y. Xia, M. Fujiki, B. Song, Z. Zhang, W. Zhang and X. Zhu, Supramolecular Chirality in Achiral Polyfluorene: Chiral Gelation, Memory of Chirality, and Chiral Sensing Property, Macromolecules, 2016, 49(9), 3214–3221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Harada, L. Q. Phuong, Y. Kanemitsu and T. Nakano, Helix Induction to Polyfluorenes Using Circularly Polarized Light: Chirality Amplification, Phase-Selective Induction, and Anisotropic Emission, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(17), 6865–6877 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, G. Yang, Y. Kuai, S. Shan, L. Yang, J. Hu, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang and G. Zou, Dissymmetry enhancement in enantioselective synthesis of helical polydiacetylene by application of superchiral light, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 5117 CrossRef .
C. He, Z. Feng, S. Shan, M. Wang, X. Chen and G. Zou, Highly enantioselective photo-polymerization enhanced by chiral nanoparticles and in situ photopatterning of chirality, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1188 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Vacogne, C. Wei, K. Tauer and H. Schlaad, Self-Assembly of α-Helical Polypeptides into Microscopic and Enantiomorphic Spirals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(36), 11387–11394 CrossRef CAS .
I. Soulié-Märsche and A. García, Gyrogonites and oospores, complementary viewpoints to improve the study of the charophytes (Charales), Aquat. Bot., 2015, 120, 7–17 CrossRef .
Z.-c. Ou-Yang and J. Liu, Theory of helical structures of tilted chiral lipid bilayers, Phys. Rev. A, 1991, 43(12), 6826–6836 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, T. P. Russell and G. M. Grason, Chirality in Block Copolymer Melts: Mesoscopic Helicity from Intersegment Twist, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110(5), 058301 CrossRef .
G. M. Grason, Chirality Transfer in Block Copolymer Melts: Emerging Concepts, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4(5), 526–532 CrossRef CAS .
R.-M. Ho, M.-C. Li, S.-C. Lin, H.-F. Wang, Y.-D. Lee, H. Hasegawa and E. L. Thomas, Transfer of Chirality from Molecule to Phase in Self-Assembled Chiral Block Copolymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(26), 10974–10986 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohsawa, S.-i. Sakurai, K. Nagai, M. Banno, K. Maeda, J. Kumaki and E. Yashima, Hierarchical Amplification of Macromolecular Helicity of Dynamic Helical Poly(phenylacetylene)s Composed of Chiral and Achiral Phenylacetylenes in Dilute Solution, Liquid Crystal, and Two-Dimensional Crystal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(1), 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kulkarni, S. C. J. Meskers, A. R. A. Palmans and E. W. Meijer, Amplifying Chiroptical Properties of Conjugated Polymer Thin-Film Using an Achiral Additive, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(15), 5883–5890 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kato, K. Sunahara and K. Okoshi, Smectic–Smectic Phase Segregation Occurring in Binary Mixtures of Long and Short Rigid-Rod Helical Polysilanes, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(3), 1134–1139 CrossRef .
S. Varga and E. Velasco, Modeling and Understanding Smectic-Phase Formation in Binary Mixtures of Rodlike Polysilanes: Comparison of Onsager Theory and Experiment, Macromolecules, 2010, 43(8), 3956–3963 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akagi, G. Piao, S. Kaneko, K. Sakamaki, H. Shirakawa and M. Kyotani, Helical Polyacetylene Synthesized with a Chiral Nematic Reaction Field, Science, 1998, 282(5394), 1683–1686 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akagi, T. Yamashita, K. Horie, M. Goh and M. Yamamoto, Chiral Liquid Crystals: Chiral Reaction Field with Thermally Invertible Helical Sense that Controls the Helicities of Conjugated Polymers, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(12), 2070092 CrossRef .
S. Yamakawa, K. Wada, M. Hidaka, T. Hanasaki and K. Akagi, Chiral Liquid-Crystalline Ionic Liquid Systems Useful for Electrochemical Polymerization that Affords Helical Conjugated Polymers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(12), 1806592 CrossRef .
M. Otaki and H. Goto, Helical Spin Polymer with Magneto-Electro-Optical Activity, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(9), 3199–3209 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. Lin, Z. Lin, M. D. Peeks, T. Van Voorhis and T. M. Swager, A Semiconducting Conjugated Radical Polymer: Ambipolar Redox Activity and Faraday Effect, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(34), 10881–10889 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, I. Jeon, Z. Lin, M. D. Peeks, S. Savagatrup, S. E. Kooi, T. Van Voorhis and T. M. Swager, Insights into Magneto-Optics of Helical Conjugated Polymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(20), 6501–6508 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Kwok, B. T. Seymour, R. Li, M. H. Litt, B. Zhao and L. Zhu, Tacticity Effect on Mesogen-Free Liquid Crystalline Self-assembly Induced by Strong Dipole–Dipole Interactions, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(10), 3601–3611 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Golder, Y. Jiang, P. E. Teichen, H. V. T. Nguyen, W. Wang, N. Milos, S. A. Freedman, A. P. Willard and J. A. Johnson, Stereochemical Sequence Dictates Unimolecular Diblock Copolymer Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(5), 1596–1599 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shibata, K. Satoh, M. Kamigaito and Y. Okamoto, Simultaneous control of the stereospecificity and molecular weight in the ruthenium-catalyzed living radical polymerization of methyl and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylates and sequential synthesis of stereoblock polymers, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44(11), 3609–3615 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawauchi, A. Kitaura, J. Kumaki, H. Kusanagi and E. Yashima, Helix-Sense-Controlled Synthesis of Optically Active Poly(methyl methacrylate) Stereocomplexes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(36), 11889–11891 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawauchi, J. Kumaki, A. Kitaura, K. Okoshi, H. Kusanagi, K. Kobayashi, T. Sugai, H. Shinohara and E. Yashima, Encapsulation of Fullerenes in a Helical PMMA Cavity Leading to a Robust Processable Complex with a Macromolecular Helicity Memory, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(3), 515–519 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ren, J. Subbiah, B. Zhang, K. Ishitake, K. Satoh, M. Kamigaito, G. G. Qiao, E. H. H. Wong and W. W. H. Wong, Fullerene peapod nanoparticles as an organic semiconductor–electrode interface layer, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52(16), 3356–3359 RSC .
M. Sato, T. Kato, H. Shimamoto, K. Kamitani, N. Ohta, T. Hirai and A. Takahara, Design of High-Density Helical Polymer Brush on Silica Nanoparticles for the Size Recognition of Fullerene Molecules, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7(2), 148–152 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawauchi, J. Kumaki and E. Yashima, Nanosphere and Nanonetwork Formations of [60]Fullerene-End-Capped Stereoregular Poly(methyl methacrylate)s through Stereocomplex Formation Combined with Self-Assembly of the Fullerenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(32), 10560–10567 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Siriwardane, O. Kulikov, Y. Rokhlenko, S. Perananthan and B. M. Novak, Stereocomplexation of Helical Polycarbodiimides Synthesized from Achiral Monomers Bearing Isopropyl Pendants, Macromolecules, 2017, 50(23), 9162–9172 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Kulikov, C. Incarvito and A. D. Hamilton, Hydrophobic side-chain interactions in a family of dimeric amide foldamers-potential alpha-helix mimetics, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52(29), 3705–3709 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kumaki, T. Kawauchi, K. Okoshi, H. Kusanagi and E. Yashima, Supramolecular Helical Structure of the Stereocomplex Composed of Complementary Isotactic and Syndiotactic Poly(methyl methacrylate)s as Revealed by Atomic Force Microscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46(28), 5348–5351 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abdilla, N. D. Dolinski, P. de Roos, J. M. Ren, E. van der Woude, S. E. Seo, M. S. Zayas, J. Lawrence, J. Read de Alaniz and C. J. Hawker, Polymer Stereocomplexation as a Scalable Platform for Nanoparticle Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(4), 1667–1672 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ren, J. Lawrence, A. S. Knight, A. Abdilla, R. B. Zerdan, A. E. Levi, B. Oschmann, W. R. Gutekunst, S.-H. Lee, Y. Li, A. J. McGrath, C. M. Bates, G. G. Qiao and C. J. Hawker, Controlled Formation and Binding Selectivity of Discrete Oligo(methyl methacrylate) Stereocomplexes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(5), 1945–1951 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ge, F. Zhang, H. Huang and T. He, Interplay between Stereocomplexation and Microphase Separation in PS-b-PLLA-b-PDLA Triblock Copolymers, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(3), 1004–1012 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Deng and K. Pan, Chiral Helical Polymer Nanomaterials with Tunable Morphology: Prepared with Chiral Solvent To Induce Helix-Sense-Selective Precipitation Polymerization, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(21), 8878–8886 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y.-J. Jin, H. Kim, N. Suzuki, M. Fujiki, T. Sakaguchi, S. K. Kim, W.-E. Lee and G. Kwak, Solvent-to-Polymer Chirality Transfer in Intramolecular Stack Structure, Macromolecules, 2012, 45(13), 5379–5386 CrossRef CAS .
F. D'Agosto, J. Rieger and M. Lansalot, RAFT-Mediated Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(22), 8368–8392 CrossRef .
S. Varlas, J. C. Foster and R. K. O'Reilly, Ring-opening metathesis polymerization-induced self-assembly (ROMPISA), Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(62), 9066–9071 RSC .
A. B. Lowe, RAFT alcoholic dispersion polymerization with polymerization-induced self-assembly, Polymer, 2016, 106, 161–181 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhang, C.-Y. Hong and C.-Y. Pan, Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly of Functionalized Block Copolymer Nanoparticles and Their Application in Drug Delivery, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40(2), 1800279 CrossRef .
N. J. W. Penfold, J. Yeow, C. Boyer and S. P. Armes, Emerging Trends in Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8(8), 1029–1054 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C.-Y. Hong and C.-Y. Pan, Polymerization techniques in polymerization-induced self-assembly(PISA), Polym. Chem., 2020, 11(22), 3673–3689 RSC .
J. Lee, S. Shin and T.-L. Choi, Fast Living Polymerization of Challenging Aryl Isocyanides Using an Air-Stable Bisphosphine-Chelated Nickel(II) Initiator, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(19), 7800–7806 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jimaja, S. Varlas, Y. Xie, J. C. Foster, D. Taton, A. P. Dove and R. K. O'Reilly, Nickel-Catalyzed Coordination Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly of Helical Poly(aryl isocyanide)s, ACS Macro Lett., 2020, 9(2), 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. Cai, R. Wang, S. Wang, J. Zhang and X. Wan, Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly of Conjugated Block Copoly(phenylacetylene)s, Macromolecules, 2020, 53(5), 1638–1644 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, T. Miao, L. Yin, Y. Ji, Y. Li, Z. Zhang, W. Zhang and X. Zhu, In Situ Controlled Construction of a Hierarchical Supramolecular Chiral Liquid-Crystalline Polymer Assembly, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(24), 1433–7851 CrossRef .
C. Grazon, P. Salas-Ambrosio, E. Ibarboure, A. Buol, E. Garanger, M. W. Grinstaff, S. Lecommandoux and C. Bonduelle, Aqueous Ring-Opening Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly(ROPISA) of N-Carboxyanhydrides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(2), 622–626 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Finnegan, D. J. Lunn, O. E. C. Gould, Z. M. Hudson, G. R. Whittell, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Gradient Crystallization-Driven Self-Assembly: Cylindrical Micelles with “Patchy” Segmented Coronas via the Coassembly of Linear and Brush Block Copolymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(39), 13835–13844 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, Z. M. Hudson, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Multidimensional hierarchical self-assembly of amphiphilic cylindrical block comicelles, Science, 2015, 347(6228), 1329–1332 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Guerin, H. Wang, Y. Wang, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Cylindrical Block Copolymer Micelles and Co-Micelles of Controlled Length and Architecture, Science, 2007, 317(5838), 644–647 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shin, F. Menk, Y. Kim, J. Lim, K. Char, R. Zentel and T.-L. Choi, Living Light-Induced Crystallization-Driven Self-Assembly for Rapid Preparation of Semiconducting Nanofibers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(19), 6088–6094 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, C. Li, N. Kong, Y. Lu, G. Lin, X. Wang, Y. Yao, I. Manners and H. Qiu, Tailored multifunctional micellar brushes via crystallization-driven growth from a surface, Science, 2019, 366(6469), 1095–1098 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Y. Zhang, L. Du, Y. He, X.-H. Jin, S. Pearce, J.-C. Eloi, R. L. Harniman, D. Alibhai, R. Ye, D. L. Phillips and I. Manners, Tailored self-assembled photocatalytic nanofibres for visible-light-driven hydrogen production, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12(12), 1150–1156 CrossRef .
S. Wei, F. Tian, F. Ge, X. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Yin, Z. Wu and L. Qiu, Helical Nanofibrils of Block Copolymer for High-Performance Ammonia Sensors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(26), 22504–22512 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Haynes, C. Balliet, R. Zhang, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, Self Encapsulated Poly(3-hexylthiophene)-poly(fluorinated alkyl methacrylate) Rod-Coil Block Copolymers with High Field Effect Mobilities on Bare SiO2, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22(5), 1024–1032 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, K. Xiao, J. Chen, N. V. Lavrik, K. Hong, B. G. Sumpter and D. B. Geohegan, High-Performance Field-Effect Transistors Based on Polystyrene-b-Poly(3-hexylthiophene) Diblock Copolymers, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(5), 3559–3567 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y.-G. He, S.-Y. Shi, N. Liu, Y.-Y. Zhu, Y.-S. Ding, J. Yin and Z.-Q. Wu, Fabrication of a multi-charge generable poly(phenyl isocyanide)-block-poly(3-hexylthiophene) rod–rod conjugated copolymer, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6(12), 2348–2355 RSC .
Z.-P. Yu, C.-H. Ma, Q. Wang, N. Liu, J. Yin and Z.-Q. Wu, Polyallene-block-polythiophene-block-polyallene Copolymers: One-Pot Synthesis, Helical Assembly, and Multiresponsiveness, Macromolecules, 2016, 49(4), 1180–1190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Litvinchuk, H. Tanaka, T. Miyatake, D. Pasini, T. Tanaka, G. Bollot, J. Mareda and S. Matile, Synthetic pores with reactive signal amplifiers as artificial tongues, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6(8), 576–580 CrossRef CAS .
M. Langecker, V. Arnaut, T. G. Martin, J. List, S. Renner, M. Mayer, H. Dietz and F. C. Simmel, Synthetic Lipid Membrane Channels Formed by Designed DNA Nanostructures, Science, 2012, 338(6109), 932–936 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Kienker, W. F. DeGrado and J. D. Lear, A helical-dipole model describes the single-channel current rectification of an uncharged peptide ion channel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1994, 91(11), 4859–4863 CrossRef CAS .
D. a. Săli, M. Bycroft and A. R. Fersht, Stabilization of protein structure by interaction of α-helix dipole with a charged side chain, Nature, 1988, 335(6192), 740–743 CrossRef .
H. V. Joshi and M. S. Meier, The Effect of a Peptide Helix Macrodipole on the pKa of an Asp Side Chain Carboxylate, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118(48), 12038–12044 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hamuro, S. J. Geib and A. D. Hamilton, Novel Molecular Scaffolds: Formation of Helical Secondary Structure in a Family of Oligoanthranilamides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33(4), 446–448 CrossRef .
V. Berl, I. Huc, R. G. Khoury, M. J. Krische and J.-M. Lehn, Interconversion of single and double helices formed from synthetic molecular strands, Nature, 2000, 407(6805), 720–723 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lang, X. Deng, F. Yang, B. Yang, W. Wang, S. Qi, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Dong and J. Liu, Highly Selective Artificial Potassium Ion Channels Constructed from Pore-Containing Helical Oligomers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(41), 12668–12671 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Furusho, K. Miwa, R. Asai and E. Yashima, Synthesis and Helical Structure of Spiroborate-Based Double-Stranded Helicate with Oligophenol Strands Bearing Bipyridine Units, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17(50), 13954–13957 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, J. Fan, R. Ye, N. Li, Y. Mu and H. Zeng, Polypyridine-Based Helical Amide Foldamer Channels: Rapid Transport of Water and Protons with High Ion Rejection, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(32), 13328–13334 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, J. Shen, N. Li, A. Roy, R. Ye, C. Ren and H. Zeng, Pyridine/Oxadiazole-Based Helical Foldamer Ion Channels with Exceptionally High K+/Na+ Selectivity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(4), 1440–1444 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wagenknecht, C.-M. Li, A. Reingruber, X.-H. Bao, A. Goebel, Y.-A. Chen, Q. Zhang, K. Chen and J.-W. Pan, Experimental demonstration of a heralded entanglement source, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4(8), 549–552 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Abendroth, N. Nakatsuka, M. Ye, D. Kim, E. E. Fullerton, A. M. Andrews and P. S. Weiss, Analyzing Spin Selectivity in DNA-Mediated Charge Transfer via Fluorescence Microscopy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(7), 7516–7526 CrossRef CAS .
S. Petoud, G. Muller, E. G. Moore, J. Xu, J. Sokolnicki, J. P. Riehl, U. N. Le, S. M. Cohen and K. N. Raymond, Brilliant Sm, Eu, Tb, and Dy Chiral Lanthanide Complexes with Strong Circularly Polarized Luminescence, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(1), 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikai, Y. Wada, S. Awata, C. Yun, K. Maeda, M. Mizuno and T. M. Swager, Chiral triptycene-pyrene π-conjugated chromophores with circularly polarized luminescence, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15(39), 8440–8447 RSC .
F. Song, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Circularly polarized luminescence from AIEgens, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(10), 3284–3301 RSC .
Z. Wang, M. Gao, S. Ren, X. Hao and W. Qin, Magnetic and Electric Control of Circularly Polarized Emission through Tuning Chirality-Generated Orbital Angular Momentum in Organic Helical Polymeric Nanofibers, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(48), 1904857 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikai, M. Okubo and Y. Wada, Helical Assemblies of One-Dimensional Supramolecular Polymers Composed of Helical Macromolecules: Generation of Circularly Polarized Light Using an Infinitesimal Chiral Source, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(6), 3254–3261 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, K. Pan and J. Deng, Combining Chiral Helical Polymer with Achiral Luminophores for Generating Full-Color, On–Off, and Switchable Circularly Polarized Luminescence, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(1), 376–384 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, H. Yu, K. Pan, Z. a. Tan and J. Deng, Multifarious Chiral Nanoarchitectures Serving as Handed-Selective Fluorescence Filters for Generating Full-Color Circularly Polarized Luminescence, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(3), 3208–3218 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, K. Pan and J. Deng, Intense Circularly Polarized Luminescence Contributed by Helical Chirality of Monosubstituted Polyacetylenes, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(18), 7104–7111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikai, S. Awata and K.-i. Shinohara, Synthesis of a helical π-conjugated polymer with a dynamic hydrogen-bonded network in the helical cavity and its circularly polarized luminescence properties, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9(13), 1541–1546 RSC .
T. Nishikawa, Y. Nagata and M. Suginome, Poly(quinoxaline-2,3-diyl) as a Multifunctional Chiral Scaffold for Circularly Polarized Luminescent Materials: Color Tuning, Energy Transfer, and Switching of the CPL Handedness, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6(4), 431–435 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peeters, A. Delmotte, R. A. J. Janssen and E. W. Meijer, Chiroptical properties of poly{2, 5-bis[(S)-2-methylbutoxy]-1, 4-phenylene vinylene}, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9(6), 493–496 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peeters, M. P. T. Christiaans, R. A. J. Janssen, H. F. M. Schoo, H. P. J. M. Dekkers and E. W. Meijer, Circularly Polarized Electroluminescence from a Polymer Light-Emitting Diode, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119(41), 9909–9910 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Lee, J.-W. Song, Y.-J. Lee, C.-J. Yu and J.-H. Kim, Control of Circularly Polarized Electroluminescence in Induced Twist Structure of Conjugate Polymer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(29), 1700907 CrossRef .
F. Zinna, M. Pasini, F. Galeotti, C. Botta, L. Di Bari and U. Giovanella, Design of Lanthanide-Based OLEDs with Remarkable Circularly Polarized Electroluminescence, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(1), 1603719 CrossRef .
D. Di Nuzzo, C. Kulkarni, B. Zhao, E. Smolinsky, F. Tassinari, S. C. J. Meskers, R. Naaman, E. W. Meijer and R. H. Friend, High Circular Polarization of Electroluminescence Achieved via Self-Assembly of a Light-Emitting Chiral Conjugated Polymer into Multidomain Cholesteric Films, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(12), 12713–12722 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abbel, A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Molecular Weight Optimum in the Mesoscopic Order of Chiral Fluorene (Co)polymer Films, Macromolecules, 2008, 41(20), 7497–7504 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okamoto and Y. Kaida, Resolution by high-performance liquid chromatography using polysaccharide carbamates and benzoates as chiral stationary phases, J. Chromatogr. A, 1994, 666(1), 403–419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen and Y. Okamoto, Efficient Separation of Enantiomers Using Stereoregular Chiral Polymers, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(3), 1094–1138 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Medina and Y. Mastai, Chiral Polymers and Polymeric Particles for Enantioselective Crystallization, Isr. J. Chem., 2018, 58(12), 1330–1337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang and J. Deng, Chiral Particles Consisting of Helical Polylactide and Helical Substituted Polyacetylene: Preparation and Synergistic Effects in Enantio-Differentiating Release, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(11), 4003–4011 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rapp and W. A. Ducker, Enantiospecific Wetting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(51), 18051–18053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shundo, K. Hori, T. Ikeda, N. Kimizuka and K. Tanaka, Design of a Dynamic Polymer Interface for Chiral Discrimination, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(28), 10282–10285 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qing and T. Sun, Chirality-Triggered Wettability Switching on a Smart Polymer Surface, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(14), 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qing and T. Sun, Chirality-Driven Wettability Switching and Mass Transfer, Adv. Mater., 2014, 53(4), 930–932 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Kobayashi, T. Sekine, Y. Takashima, A. Hashidzume, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Visible chiral discrimination via macroscopic selective assembly, Commun. Chem., 2018, 1(1), 4 CrossRef .
T. J. Zwang, S. Hürlimann, M. G. Hill and J. K. Barton, Helix-Dependent Spin Filtering through the DNA Duplex, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(48), 15551–15554 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mishra, S. Pirbadian, A. K. Mondal, M. Y. El-Naggar and R. Naaman, Spin-Dependent Electron Transport through Bacterial Cell Surface Multiheme Electron Conduits, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(49), 19198–19202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kulkarni, A. K. Mondal, T. K. Das, G. Grinbom, F. Tassinari, M. F. J. Mabesoone, E. W. Meijer and R. Naaman, Highly Efficient and Tunable Filtering of Electrons’ Spin by Supramolecular Chirality of Nanofiber-Based Materials, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(7), 1904965 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tassinari, K. Banerjee-Ghosh, F. Parenti, V. Kiran, A. Mucci and R. Naaman, Enhanced Hydrogen Production with Chiral Conductive Polymer-Based Electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(29), 15777–15783 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lim, G. Tu, E. Schwartz, J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan, R. J. M. Nolte and W. T. S. Huck, Synthesis and Characterization of Surface-Initiated Helical Polyisocyanopeptide Brushes, Macromolecules, 2008, 41(6), 1945–1951 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikai, T. Yoshida, K.-i. Shinohara, T. Taniguchi, Y. Wada and T. M. Swager, Triptycene-Based Ladder Polymers with One-Handed Helical Geometry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(11), 4696–4703 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Xia, Y. Hu, Q. Zhu, X. Lin and Q. Wu, Enantiocomplementary Chiral Polyhydroxyenoate: Chemoenzymatic Synthesis and Helical Structure Control, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8(9), 1188–1193 CrossRef CAS .
N.-N. Li, X.-L. Li, L. Xu, N. Liu and Z.-Q. Wu, Highly Enantioselective and Helix-Sense-Controlled Synthesis of Stereoregular Helical Polycarbenes Using Chiral Palladium(II) Catalysts, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(19), 7260–7266 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ihara, N. Haida, M. Iio and K. Inoue, Palladium-Mediated Polymerization of Alkyl Diazoacetates To Afford Poly(alkoxycarbonylmethylene)s. First Synthesis of Polymethylenes Bearing Polar Substituents, Macromolecules, 2003, 36(1), 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Chu, X.-H. Xu, S.-M. Kang, N. Liu and Z.-Q. Wu, Fast Living Polymerization and Helix-Sense-Selective Polymerization of Diazoacetates Using Air-Stable Palladium(II) Catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(50), 17773–17781 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Varni, A. Fortney, M. A. Baker, J. C. Worch, Y. Qiu, D. Yaron, S. Bernhard, K. J. T. Noonan and T. Kowalewski, Photostable Helical Polyfurans, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(22), 8858–8867 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bhattacharjee, J. Zhu and J. Müller, Unique Bora[1]ferrocenophanes with Sterically Protected Boron: A Potential Gateway to Helical Polyferrocenes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(46), 16575–16582 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cheng, D. Xu, Z. Lu and K. Liu, Chiral Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles Induced by Polymers Synthesized via Reversible Addition–Fragmentation Chain Transfer Polymerization, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(2), 1479–1489 CAS .
B. R. Sveinbjörnsson, R. A. Weitekamp, G. M. Miyake, Y. Xia, H. A. Atwater and R. H. Grubbs, Rapid self-assembly of brush block copolymers to photonic crystals, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109(36), 14332–14336 CrossRef .
T. E. Patten and B. M. Novak, Living Organotitanium(IV)-Catalyzed Polymerizations of Isocyanates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118(8), 1906–1916 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, H.-J. Lu, Z.-Q. Jiang, Y.-B. Lu, H. Zou, L. Zhou and Z.-Q. Wu, Facile Synthesis of Helical Rod–Coil Block Polymers by the Combination of ATRP and Pd(II)-Initiated Isocyanides Polymerizations, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2019, 220(8), 1800574 CrossRef .
Z.-Q. Jiang, S.-Q. Zhao, Y.-X. Su, N. Liu and Z.-Q. Wu, Combination of RAFT and Pd(II)-initiated isocyanide polymerizations: a versatile method for facile synthesis of helical poly(phenyl isocyanide) block and star copolymers, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(3), 737–745 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of a wide variety of nanostructures obtainable through the unique self-assembly of helical polymers; as well as applicable strategies for their creation, intriguing properties and, more broadly, the role of underlying principles in the emergence of natural asymmetry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Chemical structure of 1 (where: R = Me, n = 2), 2 (n = 0), and 3 (where: R = H, n = 2). (b) Illustration of the helically twisted supramolecular architecture formed from 1 with internally organized chromophores about the center axis. (c) AFM height image and height profile of nanostructures comprised of 1. (d) Temperature-dependent UV–vis and CD spectra of 1 in 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (TCE): a hypsochromic shift of the chromophore UV–vis absorption is accompanied by an increased bisignate CD signal with negative Cotton effect upon transition from the molecularly dissolved state at 373 K to hydrogen bonded aggregates at room temperature. Adapted from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 1  Chemical structures applied to the creation of optoelectronic devices and polyisocyanide derived macromolecular scaffolds; molecular model reproduced with permission from ref. 72 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Synthesis of glycine-derived polyisocyanide homopolymers (monomers 2–6) by nickel(II) catalysis in CHCl3 at 20 °C (where [M]0/[Ni]0 = 270). (b) Conversion-dependent SEC traces during polymerization of achiral monomer 2. (c) Observation of the disassembly process of supra-poly(2) (at 25 °C) upon 300-fold dilution with THF/DMSO (96:4, v/v) by SEC. (d) Illustration of “transit-type merry-go-round mechanism” leading to self-assembly of 1-D supramolecular structures during homopolymerization. (e) AFM image of supra-poly(2) on HOPG (in H2O at ∼20 °C). (f) gabs (top) spectra of supra-poly(21−r-co-1Lr) (r = 0.0001–0.02) in CHCl3 (at 25 °C), CD (middle), and normalized absorption (bottom). Adapted from ref. 80 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 1  (a) Illustration depicting macrodipole interactions in the cooperative polymerization of α-helices with the positive dipole occurring at the N-terminus. The ordered confinement induced by the brush polymer topology places dipoles in an ordered array leading to an enhanced rate of polymerization. (b) Polymer structure derived from “helically twining polymerization”. (c) Polymer structure utilized for the creation of nanoreactor micelles for HSSP.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic for the preparation of double helical substituted polyacetylenes (DHSPs). HRTEM images of (a) MM DHSP and (b) PP DHSP; samples prepared by drop-casting of CHCl3 solutions onto ultrathin carbon support films followed by solvent evaporation. Adapted from ref. 89 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chiral induction of polyfluorenes via enantiomer-selective photoexcitation with CPL. (b) Chiral amplification upon deactivation through interchain interaction. (c) Chiral amplification upon deactivation by means of intrachain interactions. Adapted from ref. 98 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Raman spectra of polypeptides with amide I bands (black) comprised of varying contributions from the following peaks: a main peak at ∼1652–1655 cm−1 (purple, α-helix) and a smaller peak at ∼1644 cm−1 (green, defect); dashed curve corresponds to the cumulative fit. (b) CD spectra of polypeptides (in HFIP at 0.05 g L−1). Particles obtained from direct emulsification (at 60 °C) of polypeptide-toluene in water of (c) (bEL)159, (d) (bE0.80L aG0.20DL)209, (e) (bED)155, and (f) (bE0.81D aG0.19DL)223; the screw sense of the spirals are either (c, e) clockwise or (d and f) counterclockwise; scale bars = 1 μm. (g) Chemical structures of PLBG and PBDG. Adapted from ref. 101 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of process of monomer to polymer chirality transfer. The steric bulk of the cyclohexyl ring of poly(L-cyclohexyl glycolide) exerts higher twisting power relative to PLLA leading to the generation of the helical phase (H*) with improved thermodynamic stability (top). Depiction of proposed mechanism of chirality transfer, with molecular level chirality leading to hierarchical (phase) chirality during the self-assembly process of BCPs* (bottom). Adapted from ref. 15 and 106 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM tomography reconstruction of PS/SiO2 hybrid helical nanostructures obtained using PS-PLLA templated self-assembly and subsequent sol–gel reaction. (b) 3D model of left-handed helical arrays corresponding to the volume depicted in the rectangular area in (a), colors serve to distinguish individual helical microdomains. (c) Left-handed (left) and right-handed (right) chiral nanostructures reconstructed from PS/SiO2 helical nanohybrids prepared using PS-PLLA and PS-PDLA directing templates respectively. (d) Illustrations of the wound-ribbon helix, and (e) two kinds of twisted ribbons. Also shown is the structure of the polymer described (f). Adapted from ref. 104 and 106 with permission from the American Physics Society and American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Chart 2  (8) Chemical structure of poly(phenylacetylene) (PPA) used to obtain 2D crystals. (9) Chemical structure of poly(oxypropylene)s bearing n-alkylsulfonyl side groups.	 

 	Fig. 9  Enhancement of chiroptical properties with an achiral additive. (a) Fluorene copolymer structures studied (b) structure/physical properties of the achiral polyethylene monoalcohol (PEMOH) used as additive. (c) CD spectra of F8*-alt-DPP films embedded prepared with varied wt% PEM-OH; films annealed at 280 °C. (d) gabs at CD max. as a function of wt% PEM-OH based on CD spectra shown in (c), gray bar indicates composition at which maximum enhancement is observed. Morphological evaluation of effects of PEM-OH on F8*-alt-DPP thin-films post-annealing. (e) and (f) POM image of F8*-alt-DPP films without and with 10 wt% of PEM-OH post-annealing, respectively, with crossed polarizers and white circles indicating areas of nematic like texture. (g) and (h) tapping mode AFM height images of F8*-alt-DPP films without and with 10 wt% achiral alcohol (PEM-OH) post-annealing, respectively. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society. Further permissions related to the material should be directed to the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Depiction of smectic–smectic (S–S) demixing process (phase separation) in binary mixtures of PDMS with a narrow distribution of molecular weight (MW) and a large ratio of MW. (b) SEC traces, (c) SAXS profiles, and (d) AFM images of binary mixtures comprised of a long PDMS (L2) with a broad distribution of MW (Mw = 7.42 × 104, Mw/Mn = 3.05) and a short PDMS (L1) with a narrow distribution of MW (Mw = 1.16 × 104, Mw/Mn = 1.11). (e) SEC traces, (f) SAXS profiles, and (g) AFM images of binary mixtures of a long PDMS with a narrow MW distribution (Mw = 6.60 × 104, Mw/Mn = 1.22) and a short PDMS with a broad MW distribution (Mw = 1.22 × 104, Mw/Mn = 1.41). Adapted from ref. 109 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of acetylene polymerization within a chiral nematic liquid crystal (N*-LC) to yield a helical polyacetylene (H-PA); helical direction of the as formed polymer opposes that of the (N*-LC), with H-PA chains growing parallel to the LC molecules. (b) UV–vis and CD spectra of the H-PA films prepared from N*-LCs at −12 and 28 °C, and illustration of hierarchical helical structure of H-PA; spiral morphology, bundle of fibrils, and twisted polyene chains. (c) Influence of methylene spacer length (m) on temperature dependent of helical pitch and (helical twisting power) HTP in N*-LCs containing (S,S)-D2 analogues [i.e., (S,S)-D2(m = 6), (S,S)-D3(m = 8), (S,S)-D4(m = 10), and (S,S)-D5(m = 12)]. Adapted from ref. 112 with permission from John Wiley and Sons Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Electrochemical polymerization within a CLC medium with transcription of its helical structure; white ellipsoids represent molecules of the CLC matrix, orange ellipsoids monomers and orange sticks the as-obtained polymer. Proposed helical polymer structure, (b) intrahelical structure of the spin polymer, (c) interhelical spin structure as-obtained via LC imprinting are shown. (d) C-DIM image of the as produced spin polymer exhibiting helical texture in the form of stripes; measured distance between these features (stripes) of the optical structure corresponds to the helical half-pitch. Adapted from ref. 114 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Examining the role of main-chain tacticity in mesogen-free LC assembly: (a) phase diagram of aPOP-SO2Cn with n = 1–12. (b) Phase boundary diagrams of iPOP-SO2Cn during cooling and heating processes with a scanning rate of 20 °C. Solid symbols are for heating and open symbols are for cooling. Adapted from ref. 117 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis of a bottlebrush polymer featuring syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) (st-PMMA-BB) pedants by ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), and (b) generation of fullerene peapod nanoparticle (FPN) st-PMMA/C60 stereocomplex (SC) by stereocomplexation. Adapted from ref. 122 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  GIWAXD patterns of st-PMMA brushes with encapsulated (a) C60 and (b) C70 molecules. (c) GIWAXD 1D line profiles of st-PMMA/C60 and st-PMMA/C70 brushes. (d) Schematic of C60 encapsulation at the st-PMMA brush and model of the (e) st-PMMA/C60 and (f) st-PMMA/C70 brush crystal structures. Adapted from ref. 123 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of stereocomplexation resulting upon thermal annealing. (b) Schemes for different pathways of racemization, (c) formation of spherical aggregates from P-1,2 after thermal annealing, and (d) VCD spectra of P-1 polymers pre/post-thermal annealing. Adapted from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration depicting the formation of stereocomplex, (b) p-XRD profile for annealed (S)-P-1, and (c) SAXS profiles for P-1 polymers. Adapted from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Nanoparticle assembly by means of PMMA stereocomplexation. (b) TEM image (top) of the morphologies obtained via stereocomplexation of it-PMMA3K–Au NPs + st-PMMA10K–Au nanorods (NRs). (c) UV–vis spectra of 1:1 st-PMMA6K–Au NPs + it-PMMA3K–Au NPs taken at various times after mixing with rapid decay in absorbance demonstrating NP assembly by stereocomplexation. (d) Kinetics of the melting process of stereocomplexed assemblies (at 530 nm). (e) Normalized extinction at 530 nm of stereocomplexed NPs during heating/cooling cycles. Adapted from ref. 128 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms and XRD patterns of it-20, st-20, and the corresponding stereocomplex at it-/st-molar ratio = 1:2. Schematic depicting the selective binding of OMMA to complementary high MW species. Samples and GPC dRI traces of (b) 50:50 wt% mixture of st-25 and st-40, (c) it-80, (d) the supernatant, and (e) the resultant precipitate upon mixing of the initial OMMA solutions (it-/st molar ratio = 1:4). Adapted from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) SAXS profiles obtained after quenching from the melt after a long annealing period at 120 °C. (b) Lorentz-corrected SAXS profiles of samples prepared by quenching from the melt and annealing at 180 °C for 6 h under vacuum. (c and d) SEM images of the SDL-2 thin films (∼30 nm) (b) after quenching from the melt at 220 °C and (c) further annealed at 180 °C for 6 h. Adapted from ref. 130 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of strategy for helix-sense-selective precipitation polymerization induced by a chiral solvent (HSSPP-CS) (a) schematic of strategy for creation of chiral polyacetylene based nanostructures with tunable morphology using ternary solvent systems; (b) proposed mechanism for alteration of chiral nanomaterial morphology (c) plausible mechanism of chiral induction occurring HSSPP-CS. Adapted with from ref. 131 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Synthesis of P(PAIC)x-b-P(MAIC)y diblock copolymer nanostructures using NiCCo-PISA (b) P(PAIC)x-b-P(MAIC)y diblock copolymer phase diagram denoting nanostructures obtained via NiCCo-PISA (5 wt% solids) through variation of the DPP(PAIC) and DPP(MAIC), along with dry-state TEM images. Adapted from ref. 140 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) CD and UV–vis spectra of (a) PrmAN and PsmAN homopolymers and (b) copolymers PPA-b-PrmAN and PPA-b-PsmAN. (c) Raman spectra of PrmAN and PPA-bPrmAN homopolymers. (top right) Synthesis of and PISA of PPAm-b-PrmANn block copolymers. (d) Polymerizations of PPA (0) and PPA80-b-PrmANn: n = 20 (1), 85 (2), 136 (3), 190 (4), 278 (5), and 390 (6); TEM images of the aggregates of PPA80-b-PrmANn: (e) n = 20, (f) n = 85, (g) n = 136, (h) n = 190, (i) n = 278, and (j) n = 390; and (k) schematic illustration depicting morphological evolution of the resultant nanostructures. Adapted from ref. 141 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (Top) Synthetic procedure for production of P3HT-b-PPI copolymers. (Bottom) (a) Schematic depiction of procedure for generation of well-defined cylindrical micelles with helical sense by self-seeding process. AFM height image of cylindrical micelles derived from seed micelles of poly(120-b-2L50) (b), annealing of seeds in selective solvent mixture comprised of toluene/IPA (v/v = 4/6, 0.05 mg mL−1) at 35 °C (c), 43 °C (d), 65 °C (e and f), and 80 °C (g). Histogram plots of measured contour lengths of the as prepared cylindrical micelles post-annealing at 35 °C (h), 65 °C (i), and 80 °C (j) for 1 h. Adapted from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley and Sons Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT chemical structure. (b) illustration of procedure for transfer-etching (c–k) AFM images of PPI(-DMAENBA)-b-P3HT: (c–e) images of as-casted films prior to transfer-etching process using varying concentrations (c) 0.5 mg mL−1, (d) 0.75 mg mL−1, and (e) 1 mg mL−1 I(in DCM); (f–h) images collected after transfer-etching of the films (c–e), respectively; (i–k) images obtained for the same process procedure using chlorobenzene instead of DCM as solvent and at concentrations (i) 0.5 mg mL−1, (j) 0.75 mg mL−1, and (k) 1 mg mL−1, respectively. Adapted from ref. 150 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (top) Reaction scheme for synthesis of P3HT-PHA triblock copolymers in one pot. (bottom) AFM image of the thin films obtained by casting of solution of poly(140-b-280) in toluene (a) and poly(140-b-280-b-140) (b) casted from THF solution at 25 °C. AFM phase (c) and TEM (d) images of thin films casted from solution of poly(140-b-280-b-140) in toluene (c = 0.2 g L−1). Adapted from ref. 154 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Chemical structures of helical polymer channels 1–3. (b) 3D rendering of helical channel 1 as viewed from the top and (c) from the side (yellow spheres denote the positions of quaternary ammonium groups along the interior channel surface. Adapted from ref. 5 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 3  Chemical structures recently applied to the development of circularly polarized luminescent materials.	 

 	Chart 4  Chemical structures utilized for the creation of circularly polarized electroluminescent materials.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Differences in extinction E for LH and RH circularly polarized incident light and unpolarized detection, for films of c-PFBT (thickness ca. 100 nm), pre- and post-annealing (at various temperature, see legend). (b and c) Tapping-mode AFM height images films pre and post-annealing, respectively. (d and e) POM images of films pre- and post-annealing, respectively (viewed with crossed polarizers). Thermal annealing of films was performed at 240 °C for 15 min. Adapted from ref. 182 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (Left) Chemical structures of the gels. (Right) Visual, macroscopic chiral discrimination of hydrogels functionalized with β-cyclodextrin (βCD-gel), D-, or L-tryptophan (D- or L-Trp-gel) showing selective gel aggregation via supramolecular complexation of L-Trp with β-CD upon agitation in aqueous NaCl solutions. Adapted from ref. 192 with permission from Springer-Nature.	 

 	Chart 5  Recently developed and/or studied helical polymer structures.	 

 	Fig. 30  Reaction scheme for chemoenzymatic synthesis of helical chiral polyesters and SEM images of (a) (R)-poly-3a, (b) (S)-poly-3a, (c) (R)-poly-3b, (d) (S)-poly-3b, (e) rac-poly-3a, and (f) rac-poly-3b in a mixed solvent of DCM/hexane (1:1) (concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1). Adapted from ref. 199 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  UV–vis absorption (top) and circular dichroism (bottom) spectra of solutions of 11.7 kDa (S)-P3EHEF (0.02 mg mL−1) demonstrating conformational changes upon addition of a CH3OH nonsolvent. Adapted from ref. 203 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) CD spectra of the original GNRs and the PIPEMA192 induced assemblies; at various pH values, numbers in the key correspond to the solution pH value. (b) Selected TEM image of the as assembled nanostructures (obtained at pH 13.4). (c) Top: tilt-angle TEM images of a representative assembly, bottom: 3D models of the corresponding structures; numbers in the label correspond to the title angle. (d) CD spectra of the GNR assemblies as induced PIPEMA with different molecular weights. Adapted from ref. 205 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
