Light-driven micro- and nanomotors for environmental remediation  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EN00367F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EN00367F
(Tutorial Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1602-1616Light-driven micro- and nanomotors for environmental remediation

        
          
            M. 
            Safdar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Simmchen
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            J. 
            Jänis
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland, FI-80101 Joensuu, Finland. E-mail: janne.janis@uef.fi
bDepartment of Physical Chemistry, Technical University of Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: juliane.simmchen@tu-dresden.de
Received 
      28th April 2017
    , Accepted 18th July 2017First published on 19th July 2017AbstractSynthetic micro- and nanomotors (MNMs) have emerged as a vibrant research field in multidisciplinary nanotechnology with proof-of-concept applications in various disciplines. In this tutorial review, an overview of the latest achievements towards light-driven MNMs is given and their propulsion mechanisms are introduced. The focus of the paper is on the autonomously propelled MNMs that exploit light-induced physical effects or chemical reactions. Light-induced body deformation, as a completely different, nature inspired concept that is found mostly in soft, polymeric MNMs, is also reviewed. In the end, a few applications of photocatalytic and light-driven MNMs for environmental remediation are presented and their potential is critically discussed.Muhammad SafdarMuhammad Safdar is a doctoral researcher at the Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland. He obtained bachelor's degree from Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan – Pakistan, and an international master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Eastern Finland. He also worked at the Laval University, Quebec – Canada, as a research scientist in the Microfluidics and Spectroscopy of Materials group. His scientific interests include microfluidics, synthetic active matter and micro-/nanomotors, catalysis, and thin film materials and deposition.Juliane SimmchenJuliane Simmchen is a Freigeist fellow at the Technical University of Dresden. She obtained her degree in chemistry at this university and then moved for her PhD to Barcelona/Madrid. After a short stay as a Postdoc at the MPI in Stuttgart with Dr. S. Sanchez and Prof. S. Dietrich, she started setting up her own research group in Dresden at the chair of Prof. A. Eychmüller. Her research interests reach from active matter with a focus on photocatalytic propulsion to biohybrids.Janne JänisJanne Jänis is a Professor of Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in organic chemistry from the University of Joensuu in 2005. At present, he is also an Adjunct Professor of Mass Spectrometry at the Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, Finland. His research interests include structural characterization of large biomacromolecules with high-resolution mass spectrometry, thermochemical and enzymatic conversion of biomass side-streams into liquid biofuels or chemicals, and design, fabrication and characterization of novel micro- and nanomotors for environmental and biomedical applications.

Environmental significance
Nano- and micromotors have been suggested for a series of applications, amongst them environmental remediation. It has been shown that the active motion of these microscale devices has the potential to overcome the diffusion limit by active mixing. However, the need for toxic fuels limits the applicability of these devices, but light-driven micromotors offer an exit strategy out of this antagonism. This review shall highlight not only the current developments, but also the potential that micromotors offer for environmental remediation.

1. Introduction
Micro- and nanomotors (MNMs) are small-scale objects engineered from a variety of organic, inorganic or biological materials. A typical task of MNMs is to perform autonomous motion in solution and to carry out different processes (e.g., catalysis or transportation). Over the last decade, MNMs have developed into a vibrant, interdisciplinary field of research and the progress has been previously reported in some excellent review articles.1–5 A theoretical understanding of motion at the microscale and beyond, has been developed extensively and is widely covered in the literature.6–12 The key problems in the field of MNMs are related to the strategies used to provide energy to the particles and to control the directionality of the motion. A common way of providing energy for the propulsion of MNMs is to supply a chemical fuel (e.g. hydrogen peroxide, H2O2) that reacts with the catalytic surface.13–15 The reaction products that are formed (e.g., oxygen gas or electrolytes) may give rise to bubble formation or an electrolyte gradient that provides a necessary thrust to overcome the drag force.16–18 The most common material to prepare catalytic MNMs is platinum (Pt), which is an extremely rare element. Despite its superior catalytic activity, the high cost of Pt has been a source of motivation for researchers to discover alternate, low-cost materials for MNMs such as silver (Ag) or manganese oxide (MnO2).19–21 However, most chemical fuels (e.g. hydrogen peroxide or hydrazine) required by Pt, Ag or MnO2 are toxic for living organisms, which limits their use in various applications. Alternative materials, which utilize pure water as fuel, have also been discovered. For instance, magnesium (Mg) and zinc (Zn) react with water and acids under certain conditions to generate hydrogen gas bubbles.22–27 Nonetheless, the lifetime of these MNMs is very short due to their self-consumption during the chemical reaction. Also, they need to be stored in organic solvents prior to their use and Zn based MNMs require a high concentration of acid for the hydrogen evolution, which inhibits their use in environmental remediation. Enzyme-based MNMs driven by biocompatible fuels (urea, glucose, etc.) are very promising for biomedical applications,28,29 but their use for environmental remediation is difficult.
Due to their self-propulsion capabilities, MNMs are potential candidates for a number of practical applications such as drug delivery, theranostics, and bio-/chemical sensing.30–32 Up to now, most applications have employed catalytic, fuel-driven MNMs, which in most cases require toxic fuels. This drastically limits the potential of most catalytic MNMs, especially for different biomedical applications. A few research groups have achieved important progress with magnetically-driven micromotors and have therefore managed to avoid the use of toxic chemicals.33,34
Light is a renewable and powerful source of energy, which satisfies the energy requirements of most living organisms on Earth. Nature has extensively taken benefit of sunlight through different light harvesting and conversion mechanisms that transform electromagnetic radiation into chemical energy or mechanical processes. The mechanism that most organisms rely on is photosynthesis, occurring at the level of molecular catalysts of the photosystem in plants. Light is an attractive, alternative energy resource to power up MNMs, because it is remotely transmittable and generally harmless to living organisms. The energy content of light is easily variable by employing different wavelengths and intensities.
The 2016 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Jean-Pierre Sauvage, Sir J. Fraser Stoddart and Bernard L. Feringa, who introduced the earliest approaches towards molecular machines. These molecular devices could undergo an actuation in response to external stimuli such as UV light or a pH gradient. Examples of such devices include unidirectional rotary motors and molecular elevators.35,36
Light can be used to attenuate the motion of chemically powered MNMs under certain conditions. As an example, Solovev et al. demonstrated a light-controlled propulsion of Ti/Cr/Pt catalytic microtubes.37 When immersed in H2O2 and benzalkonium chloride, the frequency of bubble formation rapidly decreased upon turning on illumination, which deactivated the micromotors. When the light source was switched off, the motion was restored. White light could turn off the propulsion completely. In contrast, the shorter wavelengths suppressed the generation of microbubbles more rapidly relative to the longer wavelengths. The effect was pronounced when lower concentrations of both chemicals were used. This points to a local decrease in the concentrations of the fuel and of the surfactant due to degradation by light and Pt. This results in an increase in the surface tension of the solution, which inhibits the motion. Such a mechanism offers a powerful wireless modulation of the motion behaviour of chemically propelled MNMs by light. On the other hand, light can expedite catalytic reactions by locally increasing the temperature around the metal cap and the motion can be triggered even under critical fuel concentrations.38 Furthermore, light controlled dynamic self-assembly and disassembly of the fuel-powered micromotors can be realized by decorating the MNMs with light-responsive molecules.39
In this review paper, we present an overview of the progress towards light-driven MNMs in recent years. The MNMs will be categorized based on the mechanisms responsible for their motion. In section 2, we offer the reader a short introduction to the micro- and nanostructures that undergo constricted motion by optical energy that is transferred to the object through external fields.40 This concerns motion present mainly in nematic crystals and optical traps. Such objects might not be classified as autonomously moving MNMs, and thus, only a brief introduction and some selected examples are presented. In section 3, we introduce different classes of autonomous light-driven MNMs, classified by the principle of propulsion. In section 4, we briefly discuss the applications of light driven or chemically fuelled photocatalytic MNMs in the context of environmental remediation.
2. Constricted motion
2.1 Motion in nematic crystals
Since the introduction of liquid crystal displays (LCDs), the anisotropic state of matter between a conventional flowing liquid and a strictly oriented solid crystalline state has become ubiquitous. It has even made an impact on the field of MNMs. The most commonly used liquid crystal (LC) phase is the nematic state; the term originates from the Greek word nema or “thread”, referring to the thread-like topological defects or the disinclination that one can observe in nematic LCs. Those originate from the self-aligned, rod-shaped organic molecules that make up a nematic phase without having a discrete local order, but long-range aligned positions. These positions can be thermally influenced, or by using photoresponsive additives which translate to the position and orientation of the microobjects present in the nematic crystal. This results in an effective motion. Despite the crystallinity, it is important to remark that LCs are free to flow. This leads to exceptional optical and electronic properties. Feringa et al. were the first to show that by using a small quantity of a chiral, photosensitive rotating molecular motor, the resulting nematic phase can be achieved.40 The resulting force was powerful enough to rotate the microscale rods placed in the LC. A rotational motion was further investigated and later improved by the same group.35,41 Kausar et al. achieved a translational motion of polystyrene spheres in a nematic crystal mixed with azobenzene, which served as the photoresponsive molecule.42 The control over the direction was achieved by irradiation with an argon laser, enabling the researchers to change the particle speed by tuning either the laser intensity or the azobenzene concentration. This pioneering work was followed by many more studies.43,44 Recently, Takenake et al. found that the light-induced motion of microobjects in LCs is even possible without the addition of photoactive molecules. This observation is due to the thermal expansion of the LCs in response to light.45
2.2 Motion in optical traps
Early methods that were used for the manipulation of microobjects included the use of optical tweezers and optical waveguides.46 The optical tweezers use a strongly focused light beam to trap micro- or nano-objects. The intensity gradient of the light beam draws small objects towards the focal point and the radiation pressure pushes the particle down the axis. A dominant gradient force results in trapping the object in three dimensions.47 Taking advantage of the fact that the particles in optical traps tend to rotate, Galajda et al. designed spiral microdevices able to rotate efficiently under light irradiation.48 To create a torque, the researchers relied on the helicity of the trapped particle, instead of using a polarized light. After optimization of the shape and an estimation of the drag force, the authors created a system in which the rotor drives two microscale cogwheels as a proof-of-concept application. Such kinds of devices hold a potential to serve as actuators, pumps or valves in microfluidics. To realize this concept, an integrated device was fabricated that included an optical waveguide for transporting the light to drive the motor.49 Later, hydrodynamically coupled two-photon polymerized structures with a chiral geometry, similar to that of a windmill, were created and driven by radiation pressure.50 The hydrodynamic interaction of light with the rotors was sufficient to synchronize the rotational motion of the objects. This synchronization survived even when the frequencies of both oscillators were slightly detuned. The polystyrene Janus particles with an uneven Au coating can undergo a bistable rotation when placed in an optical trap, whereas a Janus particle with a flat circular metal cap cannot stably rotate.51 This is due to the missing bias in the symmetry towards the direction of rotation.
3. Autonomous motion
The term “autonomous MNMs” is broad and covers both fuel-driven and fuel-free MNMs. MNMs driven by light-induced physical effects or photochemical reactions represent a class of autonomous MNMs that only require a light source for their motion. In the following sections, we will discuss several types of light-driven MNMs that utilize distinct mechanisms to undergo autonomous propulsion.
3.1 Motion due to physical interaction of light with matter

3.1.1 Light induced surface effects. 
The interaction of light with matter can trigger various physical effects, for example, changes in the surface properties of light-sensitive materials. Photosensitive molecules, such as azobenzene and spiropyran, can undergo a reversible photo-isomerization which is accompanied by a strong polarity change, depending on the irradiation wavelength.52 The resulting interfacial tension modification can lead to the motion of liquid droplets in solution and to the transport of the unmodified microparticles on solid substrates.42,53 Polymer nanoparticles decorated with azobenzene moieties can undergo motion due to photomechanical energy conversion.54 The trans-cis-trans excitation/relaxation cycles of the azobenzene molecules provide a propulsion force to the nanoparticles in the presence of a photo-intensity gradient, which translates into a directed transport (Fig. 1A). Spiropyran is another light-sensitive photochromic molecule, which photoisomerizes from the nonionic spiropyran (SP) to the zwitterionic merocyanine (MC) form upon UV irradiation; the reverse reaction takes place under visible light. The zwitterionic MC form has a higher affinity for water than its neutral analogue, which decreases the interfacial tension. Under UV irradiation, a gradient distribution of the MC form on the spiropyran-grafted particles can be generated due to a varying degree of photoisomerization across the entire particle surface. Thus, the surface of a particle facing the light source bears a higher concentration of the MC form and a lower interfacial tension in the polar medium, in comparison to the rear side having more SP form. The resulting interfacial tension gradient exerts a net propulsive force towards the light source with the polar side facing forward.55 A light-induced ionization of spiropyran is shown in Fig. 1B.
 Fig. 1  (A) Motion of azobenzene-coated NPs in 10 wt% aqueous solution of poly(vinyl alcohol) under an optical gradient. PVA was added to control the viscosity of the medium. Figure shows trajectories of the moving particles superimposed on the light intensity map. Directed motion of an azo-dye-coated NP under an intensity gradient of illumination is also depicted. White line represents the intensity profile (max, illuminated zone; min, dark region).54 (B) Light-induced ionization of spiropyran groups.55 Reproduced with permission. 
Bechinger and co-workers exposed optically transparent silica spheres of 2.7 μm diameter, capped on one side with a carbon layer, to an inhomogeneous laser field.56 In a binary critical mixture of water and 2,6-lutidine, the laser light absorbed by the capped region caused a local demixing of the solvents above the critical temperature. Thus, a subsequent inhomogeneous concentration gradient around the particles led to self-propulsion due to diffusiophoresis.
In general, MNMs propelled by physical effects have shown to produce efficient propulsion at different wavelengths depending on the properties of the light-sensitive materials.


3.1.2 Motion induced by photo-thermal effect. 
The photothermal effect for self-propulsion, also known as thermophoresis, refers to the generation of a temperature gradient around the Janus particle when it is irradiated with light. The asymmetric distribution of temperature across the particle leads to the circulation of the surrounding liquid and a resulting forward motion of the particle.57,58 Typically, the particles are half-coated with a thin layer of gold to obtain asymmetric structures, having “two faces”. For example, Au/SiO2 Janus microspheres experience self-thermophoresis with the uncoated (cold) side forward under laser irradiation.59 The gold cap absorbs the laser energy, providing a local temperature gradient, which leads to a particle movement at a velocity of 5.3 μm s−1. However, the adsorption of surfactant molecules on the particle surface can modify the surface polarity and reverse the phoretic mobility just as observed for catalytic motors.60 The mesoporous Au/SiO2 Janus nanomotors can also move due to the self-thermophoresis induced by a near-IR (NIR) laser, operating at the wavelength of 808 nm.61 Here, 50 nm silica nanomotors could undergo active motion for up to around 950 body lengths per s. By carefully orienting the light source, the nanomotors could be driven through a microchannel. Fig. 2A shows time-lapse microscopy images of the nanomotors along with a plot of speed vs. irradiation time. Other reports on the thermophoretic propulsion of MNMs, in this case polymeric microcapsules involved poly(styrenesulfonic acid) (PSS) and poly(allylamine hyhrochloride) (PAH) layers with an external thin Au film deposited by sputtering.62,63
 Fig. 2  (A) Time-lapsed microscopy images of the 80 nm Au/SiO2 Janus nanomotors showing on/off motion in response to NIR radiation and plot of the speed-time correspondence.61 (B) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and NIR induced propulsion of Janus nanomotors composed Au stars and bis-pyrene nanoaggregates coated with PEGlated silica shells.65 (C) A uniformly heated gear produces a temperature gradient resulting in smaller surface tension forces over the inner portions of the gear's contour. The temperature profile, at the air–liquid interface, is computed by 3D finite-element simulations and is represented by the colour level. Due to the asymmetric shape of the gear, a non-zero total torque is generated. Rotational displacement of the gear in a time interval of 20 ms at an incident power of 22 mW is also shown.66 (D) Sketch of the focused heating beam illuminating only one gold segment at a time. Trajectory points of a 200 nm PS sphere trapped within a heated, arrayed gold structure (time color-coded, black to yellow) are shown to the right.57 Reproduced with permission. 
A thin film deposition is not the only method to obtain Janus microstructures. Other approaches include Pickering solutions, layer-by-layer self-assembly and microcontact printing. Xuan et al. prepared multi-layered microcapsules composed of chitosan and alginate using silica microspheres as templates.64 Those structures were asymmetrically modified by microcontact printing of gold nanorods (AuNRs) on one hemisphere. Upon irradiation with the NIR laser, the microcapsules underwent a motion, since the AuNRs triggered a local thermophoretic effect by converting the light energy into heat. The Janus-like nanostructures, composed of Au stars and bis-pyrene nanoaggregates coated with PEGlated silica shells, could undergo an active thermophoretic motion when irradiated with the 808 nm NIR-laser.65 The active nanostructures, combining the fluorescent nature of the bis-pyrene nanoaggregates and the photothermal properties of the Au nanostars, possess a great potential for biomedical tumour therapy (Fig. 2B).
A microfabricated, gear-like structure placed on a liquid–air interface can efficiently convert the absorbed light energy into a rotational motion through thermocapillary effects.66 A light-induced thermophoresis could rotate the microgear at a speed of ∼300 rpm under the wide-field illumination with an incoherent light. The microgears with an outer diameter of 8 μm and a thickness of 2.6 μm were fabricated by laser lithography, followed by coating one side with amorphous carbon to enhance the light absorption. As the inner vertices of the microgear were hotter than the outer ones, a local temperature gradient produced a net torque due to the surface tension gradients, leading to a rotational motion (Fig. 2C).
In addition to the self-generated thermophoresis of Janus MNMs, microfabricated plasmonic structures can be utilized as local heat sources to provide temperature gradients to single polymer particles (Fig. 2D).67 Such an approach opens up new possibilities to steer submicron particles through liquid films along predefined pathways by utilizing arrays of plasmonic heat sources.
Besides spherical Janus MNMs, tubular geometries can also be prepared in a rather straightforward way by following a layer-by-layer assembly of polyelectrolyte layers into a porous membrane template. Wu et al. prepared multi-layered tubular motors by assembling negatively charged PSS, positively charged PAH and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) into the inner walls of a porous polycarbonate membrane.68,69 Under NIR irradiation, the tubular structures could move at a speed of 153 μm s−1 with a power of 20 mW μm−2 at 780 nm.


3.1.3 Motion induced by momentum transfer. 
In addition to the light-induced surface effects described in the previous section, a transfer of the angular momentum of photons to micro- and nano-objects holds the potential to cause a rotational or translational motion. In this regard, Higurashi et al. came up with an early demonstration of the rotational motion of an asymmetric SiO2 microdisc due to an optically induced radiation pressure from a symmetrical input intensity profile.70 The beam was focused onto the microdisc, leading to a rotation of 22 rpm at 80 mW of laser power. The rotational speed of the microdisc was tuneable by modulating the input laser power. Another demonstration of the rotational motion of a plasmonic rotor due to the direct angular momentum transfer of the photons was reported by Liu and co-workers (Fig. 3A–C).71 A gold nanostructure of 100 nm in size was sandwiched between the two identical square-shaped silica microdiscs (2.2 × 2.2 μm2), and irradiated with a linearly polarized Gaussian beam. With an applied power of 1 mW at a wavelength of 810 nm, the disc rotated at a frequency of 0.3 Hz, i.e. 18 rpm. The rotational motion of the microdisc system was attributed to the torque generated by the interaction of light with the embedded plasmonic nanostructure. The direction of motion and rotational velocity was tuneable by varying the illumination wavelength to excite different plasmonic modes. Later, Búzás and coworkers proved that the momentum change of the incident photons during reflection from a carefully designed micro-object could provide a sufficient driving force for autonomous translational motion on a flat 2D surface.72 When irradiated with a NIR laser from the top, the reflective surfaces of the wedge-shaped microobjects deflected the light to the side, causing a momentum change that resulted in a directed motion. Translational motion due to the momentum transfer however, requires some crucial structural features of the microobjects, such as an optimal angle between the sides of the wedges (to produce a significant momentum transfer), an elongated geometry to ensure proper orientation, and a suitable aspect ratio for proper placement on a flat surface. A light intensity of 108 Wm−2 generated a speed of about 10 μm s−1 which renders the technique considerably efficient.
 Fig. 3  (A) Illustration of the Au nanostructure sandwiched between two identical silica microdiscs to reduce Brownian motion. (B) SEM image of the silica disc including the Au nanostructure. Inset shows a magnified top view of the Au structure. (C) a. A single motor illuminated by 810 nm laser beam causes the larger silica microdisk to rotate in an anticlockwise direction. b, A 4-in-1 motor sample rotates anticlockwise under excitation at a wavelength of 810 nm. Although they rotate at similar speeds, the 4-in-1 sample needs only half the light power required by the single-motor sample, which indicates that a stronger torque can be achieved by integrating more motor structures into one device. c, A laser beam with a wavelength of 1700 nm induces a clockwise rotation.71 Reproduced with permission. 

3.2 Motion due to light-induced chemical reactions

3.2.1 Motion of Ag/AgCl based MNMs. 
Chemical reactions induced by light rely on the properties of specific materials that undergo changes in response to the energy introduced by radiation. In order to modify the chemical bonds by light, its energy content has to account for the bond energy. Considering the photon energy, visible and infrared wavelengths only account for rotational and vibrational modes, and it becomes obvious why most of the reactions happen under UV light. Many of the earlier light-driven MNMs are based on the light sensitivity of metallic silver and its salts. For instance, Ibele et al. reported that silver chloride (AgCl) microparticles move under UV illumination in deionized water by self-diffusiophoresis.73 The asymmetric decomposition of AgCl particles due to a local structural heterogeneity or a non-uniform exposure produces metallic Ag, and releases Cl− ions into the solution under the UV illumination. As a result, a localized electrolyte gradient around the particle provides a force for translational motion. In addition, the higher diffusion rate of H+ leaves a net electric potential in solution, pointing towards the AgCl particle, which is responsible for the pulling and “schooling” of the passive particles. The metallic silver can be converted back to AgCl by the addition of dilute H2O2. This leads to a pronounced depletion of the Cl− ions near the AgCl particle, which reverses the direction of the diffusiophoretic electric field to a direction away from the particle. As a result of these two countervailing reactions, an oscillatory motion of the particles is observed.74 The motion behaviour of AgCl particles is greatly influenced by the population of particles in the proximity and the timescale of the observation.75Fig. 4A shows a schematic of the electrolyte concentration gradient generated by the AgCl particle under UV light illumination. Single AgCl particles undergo ballistic motion at short time intervals but enhanced diffusion at greater timescale. The coupled active particles exhibit enhanced normal diffusive motion at all timescales, whereas, the “schooled” AgCl particles exhibit a normal diffusion that transforms into a sub-diffusive behaviour at longer timescales. This characteristic motion behaviour dictated by the population density provides valuable insights into the dynamics of these particles in UV light. These effects are triggered by a shift in the chemical equilibrium in response to the external stimulus. An even more pronounced, reversible and collective behaviour of the Ag-based MNMs was observed in the case of Ag3PO4 particles.76 Upon the addition of ammonia (NH3), these particles form exclusion zones, which results in a “schooling” behaviour as NH3 starts to evaporate. When the UV light is applied, the “schooling” behaviour transits into the disassembly of the particle ensembles (Fig. 4B).
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation of the chemical reaction taking place at the AgCl particle surface under light irradiation that generates a concentration gradient of protons and chloride ions, which leads to a diffusiophoretic flow.75 (B) Transition between exclusion and schooling behaviour based on self-diffusiophoresis.76 (C) SEM image of the octopod shaped AgCl micromotors. Optical image shows the trajectories of moving AgCl octopod-like micromotors under UV light.129 (D) Illustration of the propulsion mechanism of Ag–Pt nanorods in I2 fuel. Bottom part shows Ag/AgI conversion and reconversion cycle in light.78 Reproduced with permission. 
Very recently, a motion of individual AgCl particles in the UV light was observed and the dynamics of a single particle was characterized (Fig. 4C).77 The specific dynamics of single particles could be observed due to their special octopod shape, allowing the observation of not only the translational, but also the rotational and rocking motion. This example shows that the specific properties of silver-based MNMs are easily exploitable to convert light energy into chemical energy. In the case of silver-based materials, a high-energy light source, operating at UV range, is necessary to induce these effects. In the environmental remediation, the use of UV light is very common and the MNMs could take benefit of that. The degradation of AgCl releases Ag+ ions, which may be desired for certain antimicrobial actions, but may also contribute to the aquatic toxicity.
Light energy may improve the performance and long-term operation of fuel-driven MNMs by regenerating the fuel molecules. As an example, Wong and Sen recently introduced bimetallic Ag–Pt nanorods, which could move due to self-electrophoresis by decomposing iodine (I2).78 The oxidation of Ag and the reduction of I2 at the Pt segment forms AgI, which can decompose back to Ag and I2 in the presence of light. The propulsion, conversion and reconversion mechanisms of Ag/AgI are illustrated in Fig. 4D. The microrods could move at a speed of 20 μm s−1 in the presence of 113 μM I2, and the speed was doubled upon the exposure to 80 mW of ambient light. The higher concentrations of I2 used may lead to curling of the nanorods due to the non-uniform re-deposition of elemental Ag onto the nanorod surface. These light-harvesting MNMs hold a great promise for applications, which demand low levels of the chemical fuel, such as the creation of microscale pumps within microfluidic setups.


3.2.2 Motion of semiconductor based MNMs. 
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is an efficient photoactive material, with numerous interesting characteristics, such as low cost, chemical stability, high refractive index, biocompatibility, and high photocatalytic activity.79 The three major crystalline forms of TiO2 are rutile, anatase and brookite, each with its own properties and photocatalytic behaviour. A variety of different methods are available for the synthesis of TiO2, including electrodeposition, hydrothermal/solvothermal methods, sputtering, electron beam evaporation, chemical vapour deposition, atomic layer deposition and sol–gel methods.80,81 The properties of TiO2 can be tuned by changing the synthesis parameters and post-fabrication treatment of the structures, for instance, different annealing times and temperatures.82 The potential of TiO2 has been exploited in photocatalysis, biomedical science and energy conversion.83–86 The photocatalytic effect on TiO2 takes place when photons of sufficient energy are absorbed, causing a separation of electrons and holes. A small fraction, which manages to escape from the recombination zone, reaches the surface to react with surrounding chemicals (e.g. water or oxygen) to produce ionic or radical by-products. One of the early demonstrations of the light-driven TiO2 based MNMs used commercially available anatase particles submerged in pure water.87 When subjected to UV irradiation at 365 nm with an intensity of 2.5 W cm−2, the particles underwent a motion with a speed of 10 ± 3 μm s−1. The tendency of positively and negatively charged tracer particles to aggregate around TiO2 was reversible by applying UV irradiation. The locomotion and collective behaviour was a combined effect of the diffusiophoresis, osmophoresis and surface charge interaction among active and tracer particles.
Rolled-up TiO2 microtubes can self-propel with speeds up to ∼60 μm s−1 (1.2 body lengths per s) in a buffered acetic acid-acetate aqueous medium, upon exposure to the UV light (300–400 nm).88 A photocatalytic decomposition of acetic acid and photoreduction of dissolved oxygen into ions and radicals provides a driving force for the diffusiophoretic motion. Notably, a post-fabrication dry annealing process was crucial to observe the motion of the rolled-up microtubes. Rolled-up fabrication of tubular MNMs is a very expensive approach because it requires cleanroom facilities. A more simple and low-cost method also exists for the preparation of TiO2 microtubes.89 Enachi et al. prepared microarrays of TiO2 nanotubes (NTs) by the electrochemical anodization of a Ti foil.90 Their motion behaviour was determined by the crystalline structure involved, such as amorphous, anatase, anatase/rutile mixed phase or mixed phase with a prevalent rutile phase. The microarrays with mixed anatase/rutile phase turned out to be the fastest with speeds of ∼5.39 μm s−1 in the presence of 5% H2O2 and 5% Triton X-100, under 532 nm light. However, in pure water, a speed of ∼1.38 μm s−1 was recorded. Palacci and co-workers studied the collective behaviour of bimaterial colloids (haematite/3-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxysilane and haematite/TiO2) due to the photocatalytic degradation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) under blue or violet light irradiation.91–93 The generation of a chemical gradient around the particle induces an osmotic self-propulsion and a phoretic attraction between them, which can dock and transport passive objects. The collective behaviour involved formation, deformation and reformation of the particle ensembles.
The photocatalytic properties of TiO2 can be considerably enhanced by doping it with Au.94,95 Thus, coating the TiO2 particles with a thin Au layer results in an enhanced propulsion of the MNMs.96 The UV light causes charge separation in the TiO2, and electrons are injected into the Au hemisphere. The accumulation of holes on the TiO2 side causes the oxidation of water and a proton flow towards the Au side to consume the electrons. The flux of protons generates a fluid flow toward the Au hemisphere, resulting in a slip velocity and a displacement of the micromotors with the TiO2 side facing forward, as shown in Fig. 5A. Under a light intensity of 40 × 10−3 W cm−2, the micromotors move with a speed of 25 body lengths per s. The amorphous TiO2 possesses inferior photocatalytic properties compared to the crystalline form. However, the presence of H2O2 in solution may enhance its activity. Thus, the amorphous TiO2 particles coated with an Au layer can effectively trigger the photocatalytic decomposition of H2O2 to exhibit bubble-induced propulsion.97 In a H2O2 solution, the amorphous TiO2 produces peroxide complexes on the surface of the particles. Under UV illumination, the separated electrons transfer to the peroxide complexes, leaving an improved population of the holes behind. This effect enhances the lifetime of the electrons and holes for their participation in the decomposition of H2O2. The formation of O2 (nucleation), growth and expulsion of bubbles in the presence of a surfactant provides a push to move the particle forward. Other types of semiconductor particles may also undergo motion in the UV light by photocatalytically decomposing H2O2.98 Cadmium selenide (CdS) and zinc oxide (ZnO) particles move towards the light source due to the photocorrosion of the exposed surface. A gradient of electrolytes (Zn2+, Cd2+, SO42− and H+) led to a chemophoretic flow with a direction opposite to the light source. In contrast, TiO2 and Ag3PO4 exhibit a motion away from the light source due to the generation of O2 molecules from the exposed surface, which cause an osmotic flow of the surrounding liquid in the direction of the light source (Fig. 5B). For CuO2 particles asymmetrized by an Au layer, the influence of visible light on the photoconductivity was shown to modulate the swimming behaviour.99 The irradiation increased the density of mobile electrons and holes within the CuO2 particles, leading to an enhancement of the bipolar electrochemical peroxide degradation. The effect of the irradiation intensity on the particle velocity was shown to be much stronger than the effect of the peroxide concentration.
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic of catalytic TiO2–Au Janus micromotors powered by UV light in low concentration of H2O2.96 (B) Phototactic motion of semiconductor particles along the light path.98 (C) Schematic of a Janus artificial micromotor. An array of TiO2 nanowires (yellow) is grown on a silicon nanowire (pink). Platinum (black) nanoparticles, which serve as the electrocatalyst, are attached to the surface of the silicon nanowire. On illumination, photoexcited minority carriers drive the photoelectrochemical reaction on the nanotree surface and generate charged products. The electric field generated by unbalanced ions propels the charged Janus nanotree. Below are superimposed images of sequential frames indicating that the pristine and 3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)-ethylamino]- propyltrimethoxysilane-treated Janus nanotrees migrate in a tail-forward direction and exhibit positive phototaxis. The 2-(4-chlorosulfonylphenyl)ethyltrimethoxysilane-treated Janus nanotree migrates in a head-forward direction and exhibits negative phototaxis. The platinum-nanoparticle-decorated Janus nanotree migrates in a head-forward direction and shows positive phototaxis. Scale bars, 10 μm.101 Reproduced with permission. 
Esplandiu et al. created a light-driven pump from a doped Si wafer and a metal structure.100 This structure is able to pump passive particles based on electro-osmosis. Chemical reactions at the metal and silicon surfaces create an electric field that exerts a propelling force on the particles. Dai and co-workers demonstrated a light-driven microswimmer based on a Janus TiO2/Si nanotree structure partly decorated with Pt NPs, which self-aligns with the direction of the light propagation and mimics the phototaxis of natural motile algae.101 By controlling the surface charges via chemical modification, the authors programmed the artificial swimmers to show either positive or negative phototaxis, similar to their natural analogues. Fig. 5C shows the schematic of the photocatalytic action and optical images of the motion behaviour of a nanotree.
Bismuth oxyiodide (BiOI) and tungsten oxide (WO3) are important photocatalytic materials that possess bandgaps smaller than TiO2 (1.7 eV and 2.4–2.8 eV, respectively, vs. 3.2 eV). BiOI can be activated by visible light, whereas, WO3 is active under UV irradiation. Dong et al. produced visible light-driven BiOI/metal based Janus micromotors.102 Upon irradiation by visible light of different wavelengths, such motors undergo self-electrophoretic motion since the electrons created in BiOI migrate to the metal cap and cause a charge imbalance that is compensated by the migration of protons. In a different example it was proven that Au/WO3@C micromotors were propelled exclusively by diffusiophoresis under UV light.103 The WO3 nanoparticles were decorated onto carbon microspheres as a discontinuous layer, which does not allow electron transfer to the Au layer and therefore, no self-created electron gradient can be responsible for the observed motion, only diffusiophoresis.

3.3 Motion due to body deformation
Soft MNMs can undergo motion by body deformation caused by light responsive materials. Uchida et al. introduced crawling of dimethylazobenzene crystals on solid surfaces.104 Simultaneous illumination of the crystal by UV (365 nm) and visible light (465 nm), resulted in a translational motion due to a solid/liquid phase transition and a trans/cis photoisomerization. Alternatively, a photodeformable polymer can directly convert light energy into mechanical actuation, for example, by incorporating photoresponsive chromophores into soft materials. The deformation is, in most cases, a reversible contraction and expansion, or a bending. A careful engineering of the geometrical shapes is therefore required to direct the changes in a way that an oriented motion is achieved. In some of the earliest works, small-scale motors were fabricated from an easy-to-process liquid crystalline material, containing azobenzene moieties. Yamada et al. fabricated a continuous ring with the azobenzene mesogens aligned along the circular direction and exposed it simultaneously to the visible and UV lights from the opposite directions.105 The photoinduced rolling of the ring was analogous to a belt for powering a home-made macroscale motor. Zhu et al. employed a similar photodeformable polymer to create a spoke type motor and envisioned scaling down by techniques such as photolithography.106 A microswimmer with a geometry inspired by a sperm cell was prepared by Huang et al. by casting a similar azobenzene based polymer into a mould to obtain a slender body of approximately 2.6 cm size that was connected to a gripper structure.107 This artificial swimmer has the ability to grab and release a load through the gripper opened and closed by the UV and white light, respectively.
Palagi et al. presented a different strategy by employing a liquid crystalline elastomer with photoisomerizable azobenzene groups.108 The geometries consisted of simple agnostic polymer body shapes. A structured light (patterns) caused intrabody deformations in the form of a travelling wave along the objects, causing a locomotion resembling to the natural microswimmers.
Switching to a different material class and using a low energy infrared light offers a safety advantage since infrared light penetrates body tissue without causing damage to it. Nelson et al. built an untethered, self-folding, soft microrobotic platform, where the photoresponsive gripper consisted of a NIR responsive graphene oxide hydrogel bilayer structure that encapsulates magnetic alginate microbeads.109 The hydrogel gripper structure can be opened by exposure to NIR radiation, causing a local heating around the graphene oxide or, alternatively, by simple heating above 40 °C. Even though the light induced actuation was limited to the opening of the platform, a similar principle, using NIR and a responsive hydrogel, was employed by Mourran et al. shortly after. They designed a light-fueled and light-controlled microswimmer by exploiting the light-induced thermal response, i.e., swelling/unswelling, of thin poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) microgel bodies embedding gold nanorods.110 The irradiation with NIR light yields localized fast temperature increment through photothermal heating, caused by the Au rods. Since the heating is restricted to the inner volume, the bodies undergo bending and torsional motions upon swelling and unswelling. Since swelling and shrinkage are diffusion controlled, they cannot follow the fast temperature changes. This leads to complex motility modes that are sufficiently anisotropic for motion generation. Soft body deformation might be the most elegant solution of the presented approaches, since it comes close to the principle employed by the natural ciliated microswimmers for which the direct photomechanical effects provide the efficient energy conversion. Since the motion comes from the interaction of the body material with light, little or no dependence on the properties, such as ionic strength of the surrounding medium, is to be expected and no waste material is produced during the reaction. Therefore, this approach might revolutionize the environmental applications, especially because scalability of the approach depends on the processability of the polymer. In addition, further downscaling of the devices should be possible.
4. Environmental applications
A rapid increase in the global population paired with a growing industrialization pose a serious threat to the environment due to the release of toxic effluents into the ecosystem. Some examples of these contaminants are non-biodegradable organic dyes, toxic heavy metals, waste chemicals and effluents from personal care products and other formulations. Some of the most commonly adopted techniques for environmental remediation are nanoprecipitation, filtration, adsorption, advanced oxidation processes and chemical or photocatalytic degradation.111 These approaches require external means of agitation to speed up the remediation processes that are limited by diffusive mass transport. Thus, implementation of these methods at remote locations generally turns out to be difficult. One important field where MNMs have an immense potential to contribute to the future progress is in environmental remediation. This is mainly due to the inherent potential to overcome the diffusion limit by employing actively moving matter.
In the following section, we will first introduce a few recent studies employing chemically fuelled MNMs in environmental remediation to prove their feasibility. Then, we will move the discussion to chemically fuelled MNMs that use photochemical reactions to achieve an environmental remediation process. In the last part, we will present a very few examples in which both the propulsion and the remediation process are simultaneously obtained by the light energy.
4.1 Chemically driven MNMs for environmental remediation
Hydrogen peroxide-driven MNMs of different geometries and material compositions have been used to decontaminate water from different classes of chemicals. For example, Soler et al. employed Fe/Pt microtubes to study the Fenton reaction based degradation of organic dyes.112 This study provided evidence that the diffusion limitation can be avoided by using active matter. The peroxide-driven MNMs have also shown promising advancement by dynamically eliminating organic contaminants through selective degradation and adsorption.113–117 The active motility of MNMs facilitates sensing and further removal of the chemical substances such as heavy metals and nerve agents.118–121 A reduced motility of the MNMs in the presence of certain contaminants may be used as a gauge for the determination of contaminant concentration. In addition, the MNMs modified with hydrophobic materials can clean oil spills.122,123 Several other environmental applications of the fuel-driven MNMs have been covered in recent reviews.124,125
4.2 Chemically driven MNMs with photo-induced remediation strategies
The use of UV light for water purification is a widely applied, environmentally friendly approach that can kill several types of bacteria and viruses by disrupting their DNA. However, a simple UV treatment cannot remove other types of photochemically stable pollutants from water such as organic dyestuff or heavy metal contaminants.
In several recent examples, titanium (Ti) based micromotors could photocatalytically degrade chemical and biological pollutants. For example, TiO2/Au/Mg particles were driven by the reaction of the Mg particles with water to produce hydrogen gas bubbles.126 Under UV-irradiation, TiO2 produced oxidative species for the rapid decontamination of nerve agents and biological warfare agents. TiO2/Pt/Pd coaxial nanotubes could degrade rhodamine B with 100% efficiency in 50 and 30 minutes under simulated and natural sunlight, respectively. A superior photocatalytic efficiency of the prepared TiO2/Pt/Pd nanotubes in comparison to the TiO2/Pd or TiO2 nanotubes was attributed to the higher electron–hole pair population and the lower work function (Fig. 6A).127
 Fig. 6  (A) Photocatalytic degradation scheme of TiO2–PtPd coaxial nanotubes under visible light showing the formation of electron–hole pairs and degradation of organic pollutants. Also shown is the visual colour change of three different organic dyes at a concentration of 12 mg L−1 under natural sunlight over time.127 (B) Schematic diagram outlining the solar photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants by the TiO2 microshells containing Au and Pt NPs. Photographs below show a mixture of dyes (a), degradation by control TiO2 (b), after degradation by TiO2 microshells decorated with Au and Pt NPs in the presence of H2O2 (c), and pure water as reference (d). The corresponding absorption spectra are presented to the right side.128 (C) Optical images of the contaminated water samples without and with AgCl octopod-like micromotors (a and b, respectively). The left vial is a reference for colour change comparison. After 3 h of exposure to sunlight, the sample containing AgCl micromotors became completely colourless. Plot on the right demonstrates the use of AgCl micromotors for the inhibition of bacterial growth (E. coli). Inset is the SEM image of E. coli bacteria. Scale bar is 1 μm.129 Reproduced with permission. 
A similar approach was presented by Zhang and coworkers who relied on TiO2-based microshells decorated with AuNPs and PtNPs, as the outer and inner layers, respectively.128 The motion of the microshells was initiated upon the addition of H2O2 fuel. This led to an enhancement of the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants under artificial solar light by over 100 times (Fig. 6B). This is due to the improved mass transfer and increase in the concentration of dissolved oxygen, as compared to the control TiO2 microshells in a diffusion-limited environment. The decoration of TiO2 with AuNPs led to a high electron–hole separation efficiency and to the absorption of the visible light being translated into a strong photocatalytic activity as compared to the bare TiO2 particles.
To eliminate the need for chemical fuels, magnetic fields or ultrasound may also be used to drive the motion. Mushtaq et al. used TiO2/Pt/Pd micromotors fabricated by a template-assisted electrochemical deposition method for photocatalytic water remediation.127 The micromotors underwent motion remotely by acoustic and magnetic manipulation, which makes them a hybrid micromotor system with a switchable propulsion.
4.3 Light-driven MNMs with photon-induced remediation strategies
Light-driven micromotors can eliminate the need for a chemical fuel required for motion, which offers a more practical, clean and cost-efficient solution for their realization. A few proof-of-concept biomedical applications of light-driven MNMs have been recently reported.62,65
Under the UV light, Janus Au/WO3@C micromotors showed improved propulsion in the presence of organic dyes that underwent photocatalytic decomposition to enhance the diffusiophoretic effects.103 Such a fuel-free propulsion, which could take benefit of the contaminant degradation for motion enhancement, is an attractive route for performing dynamic water remediation tasks.
Simmchen et al. recently introduced an example of light-driven AgCl based star-like micromotors for the degradation of different organic dyes and the simultaneous inhibition of the bacterial (E. coli) growth (Fig. 6C).129 The reduction of the Ag+ ions into metallic silver from the AgCl particles takes place upon the UV light irradiation. This leads to the surface modification and the generation of a local electrolyte gradient around the particles, which results in self-diffusiophoretic motion. The photocatalytic activity of AgCl led to the degradation of organic dyes, whereas the silver ions were involved in inhibiting the bacterial growth. Here, the actual increase in efficiency through motility could not be determined since the light was not only responsible for the degradation but also for driving the motion. However, this study proves the potential of light-driven MNMs to clean polluted water without the need for a chemical fuel or surfactant.
Summary and outlook
In this review, we presented an overview of the recent progress in the field of light-driven MNMs with a focus on environmental remediation applications. In general, light can drive the motion of synthetic MNMs through various physical interactions, e.g. by altering the surface properties of the particles, by photothermal effect (self-thermophoresis), or by a direct momentum transfer of the photons. Light energy may also trigger various chemical reactions, which produce gaseous or ionic by-products that eventually lead to the motion of MNMs. Another interesting effect of the interaction of light with photosensitive soft materials is motion due to body deformation. Such a wide range of interactions of light with matter foreshadows possible future strategies for light-driven MNMs that are yet to be explored.
Even though the potential of light-driven MNMs seems enormous, until now, only a few environmental remediation applications of light-driven MNMs have been reported. When critically evaluating these approaches, it is evident that many light-driven MNMs suffer from low speeds as compared to the fuel-driven MNMs, which poses a problem for favourable mixing beyond that of the diffusion-limited process. Thus, continued efforts are required for the speed enhancement of light-driven MNMs. This could be realized, for example, by engineering of the catalytic materials with greatly improved energy conversion efficiency. Moreover, an efficient photocatalytic degradation of pollutants simply in sunlight would make these active systems more attractive for real life applications. Just as in the case of the fuel-driven MNMs, a better control over the directionality of motion as well as the synchronization and communication of a large number of individual particles are among the interesting features that will increase the potential of light-driven MNMs in high tech applications.
Currently, a potential of light-driven MNMs needs to be adapted for the applications in which fuel-driven MNMs are presently utilized, for instance, removal of toxic heavy metals,130 either by functionalization of the MNMs with metal chelating agents or by using graphene oxide coatings. MNMs with hydrophobic surfaces can collect oil spills in water reservoirs, similarly to the fuel-driven analogues.123,131 Like fuel-driven MNMs that can degrade or absorb pesticides and chemical/biochemical substances,121,132,133 light-driven MNMs still remain to be implemented. Other points that need to be addressed are the low production yield of the MNMs, fabricated by employing top-down methods (e.g., vapour-phase coating or electrodeposition), the reusability of the MNMs, and the strategies for their recovery following the remediation task.
Thus, light-driven NMNs hold an enormous potential joined with interesting research questions to lay the fundamentals for technologies of the future and practical applications in many fields, including biomedicine, diagnostics as well as environmental and material sciences.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Prof. A. Eychmüller for careful reading of the manuscript and valuable comments and BSc C. Richard for proofreading. Funding from the Doctoral School of the University of Eastern Finland to MS is gratefully acknowledged. JS acknowledges the Freigeist fellowship from the Volkswagen Foundation.
References
S. Sanchez, L. Soler and J. Katuri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1414–1444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8704–8735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. Lin, T. Si and Q. He, Small, 2016, 3080–3093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, Z. Wu, Y. Wu, M. Xuan and Q. He, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1060–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Wang, Nanomachines: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2015 Search PubMed .
R. R. Bennett and R. Golestanian, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2015, 12, 20141164 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jibuti, L. Qi, C. Misbah, W. Zimmermann, S. Rafai and P. Peyla, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2014, 90, 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Downton and H. Stark, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 204101 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Menzel, A. Saha, C. Hoell and H. Löwen, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 24115 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Elgeti, R. G. Winkler and G. Gompper, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2015, 78, 56601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Volpe, S. Gigan and G. Volpe, Am. J. Phys., 2014, 82, 659–664 CrossRef .
P. Malgaretti, M. N. Popescu and S. Dietrich, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 4007–4023 RSC .
W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11862–11864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sanchez, A. N. Ananth, V. M. Fomin, M. Viehrig and O. G. Schmidt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14860–14863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, T. Y. Chiang, D. Velegol and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10557–10565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Paxton, A. Sen and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 6462–6470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Howse, R. A. L. Jones, A. J. Ryan, T. Gough, R. Vafabakhsh and R. Golestanian, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 48102 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Solovev, Y. F. Mei, E. B. Urena, G. S. Huang and O. G. Schmidt, Small, 2009, 5, 1688–1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safdar, T. Do Minh, N. Kinnunen and J. Janis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32624–32629 CAS .
H. Wang, G. Zhao and M. Pumera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2719–2722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, G. Wu, T. Lan and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7157–7159 RSC .
W. Gao, X. Feng, A. Pei, Y. Gu, J. Li and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4696–4700 RSC .
F. Mou, C. Chen, H. Ma, Y. Yin, Q. Wu and J. Guan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7208–7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Uygun and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 897–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, P. Angsantikul, W. Liu, B. Esteban-Fernandez de Avila, S. Thamphiwatana, M. Xu, E. Sandraz, X. Wang, J. Delezuk, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2156–2161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Thamphiwatana, W. Liu, B. Esteban-Fernandez De Avila, P. Angsantikul, E. Sandraz, J. Wang, T. Xu, F. Soto, V. Ramez, X. Wang, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9536–9542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, R. Dong, S. Thamphiwatana, J. Li, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 9, 117–123 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Schattling, B. Thingholm and B. Städler, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7412–7418 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, A. Jannasch, U. R. Albrecht, K. Hahn, A. Miguel-Lopez, E. Schaffer and S. Sanchez, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7043–7050 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Guix, C. C. Mayorga-martinez and A. Merkoc, Chem. Rec., 2014, 114, 6285–6322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, A. Martín, C. Christianson, W. Gao, S. K. Thamphiwatana, A. Escarpa, Q. He, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13680–13686 RSC .
B. Esteban-Fernández de Ávila, M. A. Lopez-Ramirez, D. F. Báez, A. Jodra, V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann and J. Wang, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 217–221 CrossRef .
F. Qiu and B. J. Nelson, Engineering, 2015, 1, 021–026 CrossRef .
F. Mushtaq, M. Guerrero, M. S. Sakar, M. Hoop, A. M. Lindo, J. Sort, X. Chen, B. J. Nelson, E. Pellicer and S. Pané, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23670–23676 CAS .
J. Vicario, M. Walko, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5127–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Badjic, V. Balzani, A. Credi, S. Silvi and J. F. Stoddart, Science, 2004, 303, 1845–1849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Solovev, E. J. Smith, C. C. B. Bufon, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10875–10878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, T. Si, X. Lin and Q. He, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 511–514 RSC .
Q. Zhang, R. Dong, X. Chang, B. Ren and Z. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24585–24591 CAS .
R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, J. Vicario, N. Katsonis, B. S. Ramon, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 2006, 440, 163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, N. Katsonis, J. Vicario, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14397–14407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kausar, H. Nagano, T. Ogata, T. Nonaka and S. Kurihara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2144–2147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eremin, P. Hirankittiwong, N. Chattham, H. Nádasi, R. Stannarius, J. Limtrakul, O. Haba, K. Yonetake and H. Takezoe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 1716–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, A. Sokolov, O. D. Lavrentovich, I. S. Aranson, J. Vicario, M. Walko, A. Meetsma, B. L. Feringa, E. Uchida, R. Azumi, Y. Norikane, Y. Takenaka, T. Yamamoto, B.-K. Lee, S.-J. Kim, B. Lev, J.-H. Kim, I. Lazo, O. D. Lavrentovich, S.-J. Kim, B. Lev, J.-H. Kim, A. Ferrarini, S. Pieraccini, S. Masiero, G. P. Spada, B. L. Feringa, A. Eremin, P. Hirankittiwong, N. Chattham, H. Nádasi, R. Stannarius, J. Limtrakul, O. Haba, K. Yonetake, H. Takezoe, R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, J. Vicario, N. Katsonis, B. S. Ramon, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer, B. L. Feringa, J. Vicario, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5127–5135 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Takenaka and T. Yamamoto, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 1116–1119 RSC .
J. Glückstad, A. Bañas, T. Aabo and D. Palima, Proc. of SPIE, 2012, 8458, 84581W-1-7 Search PubMed .
D. G. Grier, Nature, 2003, 424, 810–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Galajda and P. Ormos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kelemen, S. Valkai and P. Ormos, Appl. Opt., 2006, 45, 2777–2780 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Di Leonardo, A. Búzás, L. Kelemen, G. Vizsnyiczai, L. Oroszi and P. Ormos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 34104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zong, J. Liu, R. Liu, H. Guo, M. Yang, Z. Li and K. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10844–10851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Kumar and D. C. Neckers, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1915–1925 CrossRef CAS .
A. Diguet, R. M. Guillermic, N. Magome, A. Saint-Jalmes, Y. Chen, K. Yoshikawa and D. Baigl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9281–9284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Abid, M. Frigoli, R. Pansu, J. Szeftel, J. Zyss, C. Larpent and S. Brasselet, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7967–7971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Wu, H. Qin, Z. Zhao and H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3164–3171 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bechinger, C. Lozano, B. Hagen and H. Lo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 1–10 CAS .
A. P. Bregulla and F. Cichos, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 184, 381–391 RSC .
X. Lin, T. Si, Z. Wu and Q. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017 10.1039/c7cp02561k .
H. R. Jiang, N. Yoshinaga and M. Sano, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 1–4 Search PubMed .
A. Brown and W. Poon, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 4016–4027 RSC .
M. Xuan, Z. Wu, J. Shao, L. Dai, T. Si and Q. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6492–6497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, J. Frueh, N. Hu, L. Liu, M. Gai and Q. He, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600206 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, T. Si, J. Shao, Z. Wu and Q. He, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3747–3756 CrossRef .
M. Xuan, J. Shao, X. Lin, L. Dai and Q. He, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 482, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Yang, Y. G. Zhai, G. Bin Qi, Y. X. Lin, Q. Luo, Y. Yang, A. P. Xu, C. Yang, Y. S. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Small, 2016, 12, 5423–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Maggi, F. Saglimbeni, M. Dipalo, F. De Angelis and R. Di Leonardo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Braun and F. Cichos, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11200–11208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, T. Si, W. Gao, X. Lin, J. Wang and Q. He, Small, 2016, 12, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, X. Lin, Y. Wu, T. Si, J. Sun and Q. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6097–6105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Higurashi, H. Ukita, H. Tanaka and O. Ohguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 2209–2210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, T. Zentgraf, Y. Liu, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 570–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Búzás, L. Kelemen, A. Mathesz, L. Oroszi, G. Vizsnyiczai, T. Vicsek and P. Ormos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 41111–41115 CrossRef .
M. Ibele, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3308–3312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Ibele, P. E. Lammert, V. H. Crespi and A. Sen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4845–4851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Duan, M. Ibele, R. Liu and A. Sena, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2012, 35, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Duan, R. Liu and A. Sen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1280–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Simmchen, A. Baeza, A. Miguel-Lopez, M. M. Stanton, M. Vallet-Regi, D. Ruiz-Molina and S. Sánchez, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wong and A. Sen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7172–7179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11849–11851 CAS .
D. Chen and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1356–1374 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yu, G. Q. M. Lu, J. Drennan and I. R. Gentle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2600–2605 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169–189 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Popat, M. Eltgroth, T. J. LaTempa, C. A. Grimes and T. A. Desai, Small, 2007, 3, 1878–1881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan and F. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9406–9418 RSC .
Y. Hong, M. Diaz, U. M. Córdova-Fteueroa and A. Sen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1568–1576 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giudicatti, S. M. Marz, L. I. Soler, A. Madani, M. R. Jorgensen, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5892–5901 RSC .
F. Mou, Y. Li, C. Chen, W. Li, Y. Yin, H. Ma and J. Guan, Small, 2015, 11, 2564–2570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Enachi, M. Guix, V. Postolache, V. Ciobanu, V. M. Fomin, O. G. Schmidt and I. Tiginyanu, Small, 2016, 12, 5497–5505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, S. Kim, G. Yi, D. J. Pine and P. M. Chaikin, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2014, 372, 20130372 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. P. Steinberg, D. J. Pine and P. M. Chaikin, Science, 2013, 339, 936–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. Vatchinsky, P. M. Chaikin and D. J. Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15978–15981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Murdoch, G. I. N. Waterhouse, M. A. Nadeem, J. B. Metson, M. A. Keane, R. F. Howe, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 489–492 CAS .
D. Buso, M. Post, C. Cantalini, P. Mulvaney and A. Martucci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3843–3849 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, Q. Zhang, W. Gao, A. Pei and B. Ren, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 839–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, F. Mou, C. Chen, M. You, Y. Yin, L. Xu and J. Guan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 10697–10703 RSC .
C. Chen, F. Mou, L. Xu, S. Wang, J. Guan, Z. Feng, Q. Wang, L. Kong, W. Li, J. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603374 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhou, Y. C. Li, P. Xu, N. S. McCool, L. Li, W. Wang and T. E. Mallouk, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 75–78 RSC .
M. J. Esplandiu, A. A. Farniya and A. Bachtold, ACS Nano, 2015, 11234–11240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dai, J. Wang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhan, W. Dai, C.-C. Li, S.-P. Feng and J. Tang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1087–1092 CAS .
R. Dong, Y. Hu, Y. Wu, W. Gao, B. Ren, Q. Wang and Y. Cai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1722–1725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, R. Dong, Y. Wu, W. Gao, Z. He and B. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4674–4683 CAS .
E. Uchida, R. Azumi and Y. Norikane, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamada, M. Kondo, J. I. Mamiya, Y. Yu, M. Kinoshita, C. J. Barrett and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4986–4988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Zheng, Z. Liu, H. Liu and Y. Yu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 115, 1167–1172 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Huang, M. S. Sakar, A. J. Petruska, S. Pané and B. J. Nelson, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Palagi, A. G. Mark, S. Y. Reigh, K. Melde, T. Qiu, H. Zeng, C. Parmeggiani, D. Martella, A. Sanchez-Castillo, N. Kapernaum, F. Giesselmann, D. S. Wiersma, E. Lauga and P. Fischer, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 647–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fusco, M. S. Sakar, S. Kennedy, C. Peters, R. Bottani, F. Starsich, A. Mao, G. A. Sotiriou, S. Pané, S. E. Pratsinis, D. Mooney and B. J. Nelson, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 952–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mourran, H. Zhang, R. Vinokur and M. Möller, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604825 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugan and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 CAS .
L. Soler, V. Magdanz, V. M. Fomin, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9611–9620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Wani, M. Safdar, N. Kinnunen and J. Jänis, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1244–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Orozco, L. A. Mercante, R. Pol and A. Merkoçi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3371–3378 CAS .
Z. Lin, Z. Wu, X. Lin and Q. He, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Parmar, D. Vilela, E. Pellicer, D. E. L. Ojos, J. Sort and S. Sánchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4152–4161 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Teo, R. Zboril, I. Medrik and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4789–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jurado-Sánchez, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14088–14091 RSC .
V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, J. Orozco, J. Li, M. Galarnyk, G. Arya and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11190–11193 RSC .
D. Vilela, J. Parmar, Y. Zeng, Y. Zhao and S. Sanchez, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2860–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Singh, A. Martin, K. Kaufmann, S. D. S. De Oliveira and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8162–8169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. Garcia, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Merkoci, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445–4451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Do Minh, M. Safdar and J. Janis, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 8134–8136 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3170–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Soler and S. Sánchez, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7175 RSC .
J. Li, V. V. Singh, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, K. Kaufmann, R. Dong, W. Gao, B. Jurado-sanchez, Y. Fedorak and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11118–11125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mushtaq, A. Asani, M. Hoop, X.-Z. Chen, D. Ahmed, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 6995–7002 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, A. Zhao, F. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5550–5553 RSC .
J. Simmchen, A. Baeza, A. Miguel-Lopez, M. M. Stanton, M. Vallet-Regi, D. Ruiz-Molina and S. Sánchez, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Uygun, B. Jurado-Sánchez, M. Uygun and J. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 559–566 RSC .
M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. Garcia, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Merkoči, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445–4451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, B. Esteban-Fernandez de Avila, M. Uygun and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3360–3363 RSC .
J. Orozco, G. Cheng, D. Vilela, S. Sattayasamitsathit, R. Vazquez-Duhalt, G. Valdés-Ramírez, O. S. Pak, A. Escarpa, C. Kan and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13276–13279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Muhammad Safdar	Muhammad Safdar is a doctoral researcher at the Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland. He obtained bachelor's degree from Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan – Pakistan, and an international master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Eastern Finland. He also worked at the Laval University, Quebec – Canada, as a research scientist in the Microfluidics and Spectroscopy of Materials group. His scientific interests include microfluidics, synthetic active matter and micro-/nanomotors, catalysis, and thin film materials and deposition.
Juliane Simmchen	Juliane Simmchen is a Freigeist fellow at the Technical University of Dresden. She obtained her degree in chemistry at this university and then moved for her PhD to Barcelona/Madrid. After a short stay as a Postdoc at the MPI in Stuttgart with Dr. S. Sanchez and Prof. S. Dietrich, she started setting up her own research group in Dresden at the chair of Prof. A. Eychmüller. Her research interests reach from active matter with a focus on photocatalytic propulsion to biohybrids.
Janne Jänis	Janne Jänis is a Professor of Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in organic chemistry from the University of Joensuu in 2005. At present, he is also an Adjunct Professor of Mass Spectrometry at the Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, Finland. His research interests include structural characterization of large biomacromolecules with high-resolution mass spectrometry, thermochemical and enzymatic conversion of biomass side-streams into liquid biofuels or chemicals, and design, fabrication and characterization of novel micro- and nanomotors for environmental and biomedical applications.

Environmental significance
Nano- and micromotors have been suggested for a series of applications, amongst them environmental remediation. It has been shown that the active motion of these microscale devices has the potential to overcome the diffusion limit by active mixing. However, the need for toxic fuels limits the applicability of these devices, but light-driven micromotors offer an exit strategy out of this antagonism. This review shall highlight not only the current developments, but also the potential that micromotors offer for environmental remediation.


 	Fig. 1  (A) Motion of azobenzene-coated NPs in 10 wt% aqueous solution of poly(vinyl alcohol) under an optical gradient. PVA was added to control the viscosity of the medium. Figure shows trajectories of the moving particles superimposed on the light intensity map. Directed motion of an azo-dye-coated NP under an intensity gradient of illumination is also depicted. White line represents the intensity profile (max, illuminated zone; min, dark region).54 (B) Light-induced ionization of spiropyran groups.55 Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Time-lapsed microscopy images of the 80 nm Au/SiO2 Janus nanomotors showing on/off motion in response to NIR radiation and plot of the speed-time correspondence.61 (B) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and NIR induced propulsion of Janus nanomotors composed Au stars and bis-pyrene nanoaggregates coated with PEGlated silica shells.65 (C) A uniformly heated gear produces a temperature gradient resulting in smaller surface tension forces over the inner portions of the gear's contour. The temperature profile, at the air–liquid interface, is computed by 3D finite-element simulations and is represented by the colour level. Due to the asymmetric shape of the gear, a non-zero total torque is generated. Rotational displacement of the gear in a time interval of 20 ms at an incident power of 22 mW is also shown.66 (D) Sketch of the focused heating beam illuminating only one gold segment at a time. Trajectory points of a 200 nm PS sphere trapped within a heated, arrayed gold structure (time color-coded, black to yellow) are shown to the right.57 Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Illustration of the Au nanostructure sandwiched between two identical silica microdiscs to reduce Brownian motion. (B) SEM image of the silica disc including the Au nanostructure. Inset shows a magnified top view of the Au structure. (C) a. A single motor illuminated by 810 nm laser beam causes the larger silica microdisk to rotate in an anticlockwise direction. b, A 4-in-1 motor sample rotates anticlockwise under excitation at a wavelength of 810 nm. Although they rotate at similar speeds, the 4-in-1 sample needs only half the light power required by the single-motor sample, which indicates that a stronger torque can be achieved by integrating more motor structures into one device. c, A laser beam with a wavelength of 1700 nm induces a clockwise rotation.71 Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation of the chemical reaction taking place at the AgCl particle surface under light irradiation that generates a concentration gradient of protons and chloride ions, which leads to a diffusiophoretic flow.75 (B) Transition between exclusion and schooling behaviour based on self-diffusiophoresis.76 (C) SEM image of the octopod shaped AgCl micromotors. Optical image shows the trajectories of moving AgCl octopod-like micromotors under UV light.129 (D) Illustration of the propulsion mechanism of Ag–Pt nanorods in I2 fuel. Bottom part shows Ag/AgI conversion and reconversion cycle in light.78 Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic of catalytic TiO2–Au Janus micromotors powered by UV light in low concentration of H2O2.96 (B) Phototactic motion of semiconductor particles along the light path.98 (C) Schematic of a Janus artificial micromotor. An array of TiO2 nanowires (yellow) is grown on a silicon nanowire (pink). Platinum (black) nanoparticles, which serve as the electrocatalyst, are attached to the surface of the silicon nanowire. On illumination, photoexcited minority carriers drive the photoelectrochemical reaction on the nanotree surface and generate charged products. The electric field generated by unbalanced ions propels the charged Janus nanotree. Below are superimposed images of sequential frames indicating that the pristine and 3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)-ethylamino]- propyltrimethoxysilane-treated Janus nanotrees migrate in a tail-forward direction and exhibit positive phototaxis. The 2-(4-chlorosulfonylphenyl)ethyltrimethoxysilane-treated Janus nanotree migrates in a head-forward direction and exhibits negative phototaxis. The platinum-nanoparticle-decorated Janus nanotree migrates in a head-forward direction and shows positive phototaxis. Scale bars, 10 μm.101 Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Photocatalytic degradation scheme of TiO2–PtPd coaxial nanotubes under visible light showing the formation of electron–hole pairs and degradation of organic pollutants. Also shown is the visual colour change of three different organic dyes at a concentration of 12 mg L−1 under natural sunlight over time.127 (B) Schematic diagram outlining the solar photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants by the TiO2 microshells containing Au and Pt NPs. Photographs below show a mixture of dyes (a), degradation by control TiO2 (b), after degradation by TiO2 microshells decorated with Au and Pt NPs in the presence of H2O2 (c), and pure water as reference (d). The corresponding absorption spectra are presented to the right side.128 (C) Optical images of the contaminated water samples without and with AgCl octopod-like micromotors (a and b, respectively). The left vial is a reference for colour change comparison. After 3 h of exposure to sunlight, the sample containing AgCl micromotors became completely colourless. Plot on the right demonstrates the use of AgCl micromotors for the inhibition of bacterial growth (E. coli). Inset is the SEM image of E. coli bacteria. Scale bar is 1 μm.129 Reproduced with permission.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
