Exploration and optimisation of poly(2,2′-bithiophene) as a stable photo-electrocatalyst for hydrogen production   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA00291E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA00291E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11358-11366Exploration and optimisation of poly(2,2′-bithiophene) as a stable photo-electrocatalyst for hydrogen production†

        
          
            Chun Hin 
            Ng
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Orawan 
            Winther-Jensen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            C. André 
            Ohlin
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Bjorn 
            Winther-Jensen
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, 3800 Victoria, Australia. E-mail: chun.ng@monash.edu;   Tel: +61 3 9902 0323
bSchool of Chemistry, Monash University, Clayton, 3800 Victoria, Australia
Received 
      14th January 2015
    , Accepted 17th April 2015First published on 20th April 2015AbstractAn organic photo-electrochemical catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) based on the conducting polymer, poly(2,2′-bithiophene) (PBTh), is further explored. Long-term stability testing shows the successful operation of the catalyst over a period of 12 days at neutral pH with corresponding turnover numbers exceeding 6 × 104. Experimental parameters such as substrate type, electrolyte, pH and thickness of the film are explored and their subsequent effects on catalytic behaviour and performance discussed. Significant findings include the four-fold increase in performance by the reduction of thickness to better facilitate charge transfer and the successful photo-catalysis of the HER at pH 11, with an onset that is 0.14 V below E0. Faradaic efficiency was also determined with a maximum recorded efficiency of 80% despite known losses such as crossover reactions and H2 escape from within the system.
Introduction
The potential consequences of anthropogenic climate change have been known for some time, but the dependence of the world economy on fossil fuel based technologies has hindered the transition to renewable based processes. The rate at which the world is diverging from fossil fuels is further influenced by factors such as economics, availability of natural resources and politics, but the absence of a truly breakthrough energy technology has severely limited the attraction and feasibility of moving to a sustainable energy economy.1–4 Commercially available renewable energy platforms such as solar and wind can provide renewable energy but their intermittent nature necessitates the use of a storage medium such as batteries or hydrogen.
Hydrogen has numerous advantages as an energy medium, key of which being that it is completely clean burning, with only H2O as a by-product. Its ability to provide fuel for both electricity generation and transportation – which account for over 45% of our energy consumption5 – is also invaluable. To make hydrogen a viable alternative however, sustainable production methods that are capable of H2 generation at an industrial scale are needed. A promising solution is the use of solar or wind power in combination with water electrolysis. However, cheaper, more robust and energy efficient alternatives than the currently used Pt-based electrode catalysts must first be found. Potential solutions include using biological and bio-mimetic approaches,6,7 improved use of noble metals such as RuO2 or reducing Pt loading,8 as well as the development of new hetero- and homogeneous catalysts;9 unfortunately, a large energy input is still often required. A common technique to reduce electrolysis energy requirements is the development of photo-driven/assisted water splitting catalysts and systems (photolysis),10,11 and is an approach that is harnessed in this body of work.
A key hurdle in the development of a water splitting system is to design one that is conducive to both the cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) – typically acidic – and the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) – typically alkaline. The studies herein continue the development of electrolysis electrodes with a focus directed at the cathodic HER process, which is currently heavily dependent on Pt.12 Promising alternative HER catalysts have harnessed biological enzymes such as hydrogenase,13 synthetic bio-mimics and complexes,14–16 and inorganic particle catalysts such as MoS2;17 often with the incorporation of a photo-active component in an attempt to lower energy requirements.18–20 However, difficulties such as stabilising complex bio-catalyst centres, continued use of acidic or non-aqueous environments, and a requirement for large overpotentials remain key obstacles.
Previous studies have shown the potential of intrinsically conducting polymers (ICPs) in overcoming some of these issues.21,22 While the use of organic ICPs is a break from the more traditional catalytic materials, the photo-active, conductive and stable nature of these materials23 – particularly of the polythiophene family – lends themselves well to catalysis. Such successful uses of ICPs include the oxygen reduction reaction for fuel cell applications,24–26 the reduction of nitrite to ammonia for waste treatment27 and the water oxidation28,29 and proton reduction30 reactions of the electrolysis process.
More recently, our group has reported the ability of poly(2,2′-bithiophene) (PBTh) to photo-electrocatalytically produce H2 from a neutral (pH 7.0) aqueous phosphate buffer solution.31 Although the faradaic efficiency was low, the system demonstrated an onset potential that was significantly lower than that of the theoretical reduction potential (E0) when illuminated. These promising preliminary results have prompted us to further investigate the effect of pH, substrate materials, electrolyte and film characteristics such as thickness on hydrogen evolution using PBTh.
Results and discussion
All PBTh films tested, with the exception of those used for thickness measurements, were prepared in the same manner via a vapour phase polymerisation (VPP) technique using a Fe(III) oxidant solution as described in the Experimental section, see ESI† for further experimental details. This preparation method results in what is referred to below as the standard PBTh film.
Determination of faradaic efficiency and cell optimisation
Ideally, the operation of the PBTh film should yield a 100% faradaic conversion of electrons to hydrogen gas (with a molar ratio of 2:1 e−:H2); however, the initial published findings showed a faradaic efficiency of only 34%.31 Therefore, it is important to determine the origin of this efficiency loss, be it via competing reduction reactions or the escape of produced hydrogen gas or other means. Moreover, it would be beneficial to establish a correlation between observed current and detected hydrogen gas so that we can use the observed current to determine the rate of H2 evolution. To this end, a special cell was designed.
A key goal was to minimise cross-over reactions, whereby oxygen produced at the counter electrode diffuses towards the working electrode to reduce in a competing oxygen reduction reaction and vice versa. These parasitic currents adversely affect the generation and measurement of H2 and is a key contributor to the low initial faradaic efficiency of 34% observed in our initial work.31 To improve upon this, the counter electrode was moved away from the main chamber into a separate tube angled in such a way that the generated O2 gas is directed away from the main cell into a separate head space, Fig. S1.† Earlier designs had also placed the PBTh film within a recessed edge which was found to trap bubbles and affect the detected amount of H2. The cell thus was further modified so that any gases generated from the film were allowed to escape directly into the head space. Lastly, great care was taken to seal the cell from leakage, both from egress of H2 and ingress of O2 from the surrounding air.
A standard glassy carbon supported PBTh film was utilised for the testing. Periodic injections of head space samples into the gas chromatograph were conducted, from 75 to 275 min while the film was held at a potential of −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 1.0 mol L−1 phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) under an illumination of 1.6 suns. The corresponding peak height of H2 was converted to a molar amount via a calibration curve Fig. S2.† In agreement with earlier findings from our group,31 the response of the photo-system to light consists of a rapid initial increase in reduction current (with a speed that is comparable to that of inorganic semiconductors32,33) followed by a more gradual growth in current. This growth is attributed to the gradual swelling of the film and the subsequent exposure of more catalyst centres to the electrolyte, this behaviour can be more clearly observed in Fig. S8.† With the termination of light, the reduction reaction current rapidly returns to zero, see Fig. 1 and 2.
 Fig. 1  Faradaic Efficiency of PBTh on Glassy Carbon. Each point represents the calculated faradaic efficiency from the detected amounts of H2 from each GC injection. Peak efficiency was recorded as 80% at an injection time of 170 min; the overall average efficiency was 72%. The corresponding chromatograms are presented in Fig. S3a.† 
 Fig. 2  (a) Long-term testing of a standard PBTh film on glassy carbon over a period of 12 days at an applied potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, in 1.0 M PB (pH 7.0) under constant illumination of 1.6 suns. (b) Raman spectroscopic analysis of the film after long-term testing over 12 days. No discernible differences can be observed. 
The results from Fig. 1 show an increased faradaic efficiency of up to 80% and demonstrates the effectiveness of our techniques. Nonetheless, leakage of hydrogen remains an issue due the ease by which it is able to diffuse through the remaining polymer parts of the setup (such as O-rings and tubing). Moreover, the detection of trace amounts of O2 and N2, which elute after ca. 3.5 and 6.5 min respectively (Fig. S3b†) indicates the presence of air and thus, the competing oxygen reduction reaction. Finally, dissolved oxygen and hydrogen in the electrolyte remains liable to diffuse between the chambers and cause small amounts of parasitic current despite the steps taken to separate the electrodes.
Nevertheless a faradaic efficiency of up to 80% is still indicative of an efficient electrocatalysis process, especially considering that the attainment of a 100% faradaic efficiency is not trivial.34 This high faradaic efficiency also justifies the use of the recorded electrochemical current on the PBTh electrode as an accurate proxy indicator for produced hydrogen. Thus, in the proceeding results and discussion, current is used as a measure of H2 evolution.
Stability testing
For any catalyst the long-term stability is crucial for the performance and indeed for gaining any commercial interest. We thus probed the long term stability of the PBTh film to determine this important criterion. This was tested via chronoamperometry (CA), where a standard PBTh film was held at −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl at neutral pH 7.0 (0.13 V less than E0) under illumination over a period of 12 days and the current recorded (see Fig. 2a). Occasional top ups of water was necessary due to the need of an open cell setup and the continuous purging with N2 gas; these top up points are marked in Fig. 2a. Inspection of the CA trace shows a gradual decrease in recorded photocurrent over time. This is partly accounted for by a gradual decrease in the light intensity from the halogen light bulb which was recorded between days 4–12 and account for over 70% of the recorded decrease in photocurrent between these days; see Fig. S4 and ESI† for further details. The stability of the PBTh film is also supported by the Raman spectroscopy results which show no discernible differences in the Raman spectrum of the film before and after testing (Fig. 2b) and confirms that the chemical structure of PBTh has not been altered.
Nonetheless, a noticeable decrease in performance can be observed despite corrections for the lamp's output. Probing via SEM and EDX reveals the presence of Cu and Fe which would reduce the number of available catalytic sites and are likely culprits for the gradual drop in photo-current. The magnitude of this deposition and subsequent degradation of the photocurrent was much lessened by the use of a mixed oxide Ti mesh counter electrode when compared to stainless steel and platinum wire counter electrodes but not fully prevented (see Fig. S5–S7†). Migration of dissolved ions from the counter electrode and the surrounding metal casing to the working electrode consequently leads to their deposition onto the PBTh film; although slow, the long duration of these tests compounds this adverse effect. Alternative inert counter electrode and cell materials such as glassy carbon and glass respectively would aid in minimising deposition as would increasing the area of the counter electrode to reduce its oxidation potential. It is worth noting that this occurrence of competitive deposition on the working electrode is a general issue for the field, not specific for the PBTh catalyst.
In light of these findings, it is important to remark that the photocurrent was maintained over a period of 12 days; in comparison, lifetimes for contemporary catalysts for the HER are reported on the timescale of hours.14,35 Moreover, this was achieved under neutral conditions at a potential that is 0.13 V below E0 and the reaction was stopped before the exhaustion of catalytic activity. Given the lack of chemical degradation as determined by Raman spectroscopy, it is highly probable that the long term photo-catalytic activity of PBTh is significantly higher. Maintenance of this catalytic performance is also likely to be further improved upon with the removal of metal ions from the electrochemical system. Assuming that one bithiophene unit is equivalent to one catalytic site (a lower bound estimate), the turnover number (TON) for the complete 12 day period was calculated to be 6.7 × 104, where the density of PBTh film is 1.52 g cm−336 see ESI.† Alternatively, if a more realistic catalytic site comprising of a 13 membered thiophene oligomer is used instead – the span of an average polaron site37 – the TON is 4.4 × 105. It should be noted however, that the true size of the active site is still currently under investigation.
Substrate
Investigations on the substrates were conducted to determine if alternate, low-cost substrates were suitable for pairing with the PBTh films for catalysis. In spite of the chemical inertness, high conductivity and promising preliminary results on glassy carbon, it is an inherently expensive and non-transparent material that may hinder implementation if scaled to industrial capacities. It is thus prudent to investigate alternative substrate options as a precursor to further development. For substrate testing, a standard film of PBTh was polymerised atop the substrate and tested via cyclic voltammetry (CV). An aqueous 1.0 M NaCl (pH 6.0) electrolyte was used for all substrates.
The resulting CVs in Fig. 3 show that despite the capability of PBTh for HER catalysis, the selection of substrates play an important role in the overall system. The work function of the substrate is a key consideration in any photo/electrochemical system; however, the selected materials all possess sufficient energy to regenerate the PBTh HOMO band (5.3 eV38): glassy carbon 4.5 eV,39 silicon 4.8 eV,40 gold 4.8 eV39 and FTO glass 5.0 eV.41 Thus the limitation to successful catalysis is beyond a simple work function requirement. Good adhesion of film, inertness of the substrate and facile electron transport between substrate and PBTh are other key parameters to consider as discussed below; however studies to quantify them are currently beyond the scope of this work.
 Fig. 3  CV showing the performance of PBTh on various substrates; 1 M NaCl pH 5.98, 20 mV s−1. (a) Carbon paper, (b) silicon, (c) glassy carbon for comparison, (d) gold mylar and (e) FTO glass. (f) The evolution of H2 bubbles from the FTO/PBTh film trapped on the top edge of the cell. The oxidation peak present in (c–e), corresponds to the oxidation of adsorbed H2. 
Analysis of Fig. 3 shows the failure of PBTh on carbon paper to be photoactive even though it is a carbon based substrate. It is possible that residual air trapped within the fibres or impurities/degradation of the electrode is leading to a competing reduction reaction. Residual O2 is likely to arise given the hydrophobicity of the carbon paper (which would also adversely affect the performance of the film). However, the limited photo-effect suggests the issue is not O2 related as PBTh has been known to show strong photo-electrocatalytic behaviour towards oxygen reduction.31 Degradation of the carbon paper is more difficult to address and, together with the limited photoactivity, precludes carbon paper as a viable option. The inactivity of silicon conversely is likely due to its limited ability to transfer electrons effectively to the deposited PBTh film. This is supported by the negligible currents, capacitive and faradaic, recorded in both light and dark conditions, and is most likely the result of the presence of the SiO2 layer that reduces good electron conductivity.
On the other hand, we do observe successful catalysis from the gold coated mylar and FTO glass substrates. While not comparable to the currents obtained from glassy carbon, both exhibit substantial photo-electrocatalytic behaviour and the successful activation of the H2O/PBTh/substrate photosystem. The success of gold mylar is unremarkable given its inherently high conductivity and the affinity of sulphur to gold, however, it is not an ideal substitute due to its high cost and relatively low performance. The success of the FTO glass as a substrate for PBTh in the HER is of more commercial interest due to its low-cost, chemical inertness and transparency; characteristics which help allow it to better compensate for its lower catalytic performance as compared to glassy carbon.
It should be noted that for the rest of this work, glassy carbon remained the substrate of choice due to its superior performance. For this seminal work, it is more critical that the maximum potential of the film is recognised and harnessed. Nonetheless, the identification of alternative substrates remains significant.
The effect of electrolyte
A key interest in the operation and performance of the PBTh film is the role that the electrolyte plays in the overall mechanism, in particular whether the use of phosphate buffer (PB) was critical to successful operation of the PBTh photo-electrocatalytic system31 or if it can be replaced with simple salts such as NaCl. To this end, PB and sodium chloride solutions (pH 7.0) were investigated, at 0.1 and 1.0 mol L−1 concentrations.
A potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl was applied to the immersed PBTh film while under illumination and the current recorded after a period of 60 min. The resulting comparison between PB and NaCl at the concentrations of 0.1 and 1.0 mol L−1 is presented in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of the PBTh current density in aqueous PB and NaCl electrolytes at concentrations of 0.1 and 1.0 mol L−1, see Fig. S8† for CA traces. 
The significant photocurrents recorded in the NaCl solution is evidence that a mono- or di-hydrogen-phosphate containing electrolyte is not crucial and that H2O is capable of acting as a source of protons for the HER. This finding is particularly noteworthy as only very few systems are able to photo-electrocatalytically reduce H2O directly to H2 without sacrificial additives such as methanol42 at neutral pH and is a crucial step to the realisation of an effective HER catalyst. The observed doubling in current when increasing the concentration of PB indicates that the introduction of phosphate ions has a positive effect on the amount of available protons for the HER. It is unlikely that the improvement in photocurrent in the PB solutions was due to an increase in ionic strength due to the concentration independence shown by the (0.1 and 1.0 mol L−1) NaCl solutions. Thus this suggests that the performance of the overall system can be improved by the addition of protonating species such as H2PO4− (pKa 7.243). Currently, this has only been demonstrated in relation to PB but it would be of particular interest to see which other species and are able to interact and enhance the PBTh system and further, the extent to which performance can be improved by increasing the concentration of proton donating species. For comparison, the results from using bare glassy carbon substrate are also shown in Fig. 4; the small detected currents (ca. 0.5–1.5 μA cm−2) is attributed to the presence of trace amounts of residual O2.
The effect of pH
The pH dependence of the system was also investigated owing to the important role it plays in understanding the limitations of a particular HER catalyst. Given the ability of PBTh to perform this photo-electrocatalytic function at a neutral pH, it is appealing to review its capabilities at either end of the pH spectrum. PB (0.1 mol L−1) was used as the electrolyte and the pH was varied from 3 to 11.
The onset potential of the film was used to characterise the pH performance and was determined via CV. A slow scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 was utilised to minimise electrical double layer and diffusional effects. The pH of the electrolytes before and after each run was recorded and showed that pH was maintained throughout the experiment (see Table S1†). The resulting voltammograms (Fig. 5a) exhibited reduction onset potentials that moved steadily to more negative potentials with increasing pH, as expected from the stoichiometry of the HER which invokes H+ as a reactant.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of PBTh performance and onset potential for the HER under illumination as pH is varied from 3.1 to 11.0. (a) The CV reduction sweep comparing PBTh catalytic activity at different pH. The theoretical E0 of each pH is indicated by the dotted line. (b) Determination of the onset potential at pH 3.1. The estimated onset potential in dark is also presented. CVs of the remaining pH tests are presented in the ESI, Fig. S9.† (c) Comparison of the pH onset potential, potential has been normalised to E0 of the respective pH where a negative overpotential indicates an onset that is below E0. 
For a more rigorous comparison it is necessary for the onset potentials to be normalised with respect to the E0 at each pH. E0 was determined using the Nernst equation and corrected for the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (0.222 V vs. SHE). With respect to the onset potential, the trace obtained in the dark was subtracted from the trace collected in the light to correct for O2 contamination; this corrected trace was then used to determine the subsequent onset potential (see the solid black trace in Fig. 5b). The onset potential was defined as the point where the corrected reduction current deviates from the baseline by a value of more than 1.0 μA cm−2. The resulting onset potentials vs. E0 is presented in Fig. 5c.
The low onset potential at pH 3.1 is noteworthy because it represents the generation of a photovoltage of ca. 1.0 V, which is obtained by subtracting the estimated Eonset in dark (−1.03 V) and the Eonset in light (−0.05 V), see Fig. 5b. This highlights the generation of high energy photo-electrons by PBTh for hydrogen production. A slight increase in onset potential is also observed as pH increases – from −0.35 V vs. E0 at pH 3.1 to −0.14 V vs. E0 at pH 11.0 (see Fig. 5c) – and represents the increase in activation energy of the HER as the equilibrium shifts from high H+ concentrations at pH 3.0 to high OH− concentrations at pH 11.0. Despite this, PBTh has demonstrated the ability to catalyse the HER at the highly alkaline environment of pH 11.0, which is particularly noteworthy given the implications for overall water splitting process. As stated before, for effective electrolysis both the HER and its conjugate reaction (the OER) must proceed readily. A low pH aids H2 production but this acidic environment drives up the energy required for the OER. Conversely, an alkaline electrolyte aids in the OER but is detrimental to the energetics of the HER in most catalytic systems. Thus, the discovery that PBTh remains an effective photo-electrocatalyst at pH 11 with an onset potential that is 0.14 V below E0 is a key finding in the progress towards a viable commercial water splitting device.
Interaction between light and PBTh
The effect of the PBTh film thickness on the HER performance was investigated. As the catalysis process is dependent on light to generate an active excited state, the more light absorbed the more potential catalytic events. Equally, good conductivity of holes is a prerequisite for the effective charge separation/regeneration of the film. Therefore, the PBTh photo-electrocatalytic system requires an ideal balance of light absorption vs. charge transport from the active site to the supporting electrode; in the case of the poorly conducting PBTh, this balance becomes even more important. To investigate this, the thickness of the PBTh film is varied and the resulting performance is compared against the measured absorbance of PBTh on a glass slide. Four different thicknesses were prepared – 0.11, 0.21, 0.44 and 1.24 μm – where the standard film is represented by the thickness of 0.44 μm, the thickness of each film was measured via profilometry.

Fig. 6 highlights the importance of the balance between conductivity and light absorbance. The thicker films at 0.44 and 1.24 μm has a dramatically increased absorbance – to the point where the saturation of UV-Vis detector was reached for the 1.24 μm film; however, the higher resistance through the thicker films considerably reduces the ability for efficient charge separation. As a result, a large portion of the generated excitons recombine as they are unable to move and separate, thus causing a decline in the overall photo-electrocatalytic ability. Conversely, by having a thin film, there is facile mobility of the charges from substrate to the catalytic site at the PBTh-water interface but the absorbance of the film suffers. As a result, fewer excitons are generated and the number of possible catalytic events decreases. An optimum balance between these two factors is achieved by the film at a thickness of 0.21 μm and is evident by the recorded current and detected hydrogen which represents a threefold increase in performance when compared to the 0.44 μm film (standard film).
 Fig. 6  Comparison of PBTh as thickness is varied. Three parameters are presented, the UV-Vis absorbance, the detected H2 peak (in μV) at 120 min and the current sustained at the end of 120 min under illumination and an applied potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The UV-Vis absorbance was measured on PBTh on glass slide (Fig. S10†). See Fig. S11 and S12† for the corresponding CA trace and gas chromatogram respectively. 
By utilising the limitations discovered in these investigations, it is also possible to infer several details with respect to the catalytic mechanism of the system. The dependence on thickness – and hence, resistance with regard to hole conduction and possible recombination – suggests that the kinetic driving force of the system operates via the conduction of the photo-generated holes away from the catalytic site, thus achieving charge separation. Had charge separation occurred via the fast injection of the photo-electron into H+, thickness should have had little effect on the measured photocurrent; save for a slight voltage drop from internal resistance. Due to the hydrophobic nature of PBTh in its reduced form44 we assume that the active catalytic area of the film remains confined to the interfacial layers and is independent of the thickness of the PBTh film. Direct empirical evidence would be required to support these arguments though it is encouraging to note that the deductions made thus far are able to account much of the current observations.
The wavelength dependency was also probed to determine if the excitation photon energy and subsequent photo-electrochemical response corresponded well to the absorbance spectrum of PBTh. This is similar in purpose as the commonly reported incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement used for solar-cells and highlights PBTh's photo-response for a given wavelength. For our purposes, the dependency of PBTh's catalytic response (reported in μA mW−1 cm−2) is compared against the wavelength of the incident photons to illustrate their relationship; no IPCE in its conventional sense is calculated due to the need for an applied potential.
A PBTh film on glassy carbon with a relatively high reduction potential of −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl was chosen to yield a better photo response. A high intensity Xe lamp was used for the photo-dependency measurements to allow for a wider spectral window. The reported results in Fig. 7 show a strong match up to the absorbance of PBTh though there is a slight blue shift in the response. This is not surprising considering that the energetics of the two-electron catalysis reaction will be more demanding than a conventional singlet excitation process. Importantly, the results show that it is the π → π* transition in the visible spectrum (between 400 to 550 nm) that is responsible for the photo-electrochemical catalysis of the HER.
 Fig. 7  The wavelength of PBTh's catalytic performance with respect to the incident photon wavelength with an applied potential of −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl; the raw current response is shown in Fig. S13.† The UV-Vis absorption spectrum of PBTh is also shown for comparison. 
Conclusion
The investigation into various system parameters have resulted in a substantial increase in performance on the PBTh film with respect to the HER. Importantly, it has revealed the significant potential of PBTh as a commercially viable catalyst for the HER and exhibits key characteristics such as high faradaic efficiency and long term stability. Furthermore, PBTh's high pH performance and low onset potential provides an ideal condition for the water oxidation reaction and presents a very compelling material for the water splitting system.
The use of a conducting polymer as a photo-electrochemical catalyst brings further novelty in its implications for future catalyst designs, not solely for HER. The ease in which polymers can be polymerised, blended, patterned and manipulated brings about a flexibility not often observed with traditional catalyst materials. As a result there remains significant scope with which the PBTh system can be modified and investigated. Future studies into combinations of various polymerisation parameters e.g. humidity, polymerisation time and polymerisation temperature and/or into engineering aspect of the substrate morphology and cell design will thus further aid in determining the true potential of the PBTh system.
Experimental
The standard PBTh film was polymerised using a 40 w/v% Fe(III) p-toluenesulfonate in butanol as the oxidant solution. Approximately 0.5 mL of this solution was spin-coated onto a glassy carbon substrate (polished to a mirror finish) at 1500 rpm for 30 s. The deposited sample was then placed in a pre-heated VPP chamber with 2,2′-bithiophene monomer (from Sigma Aldrich) and left to heat and polymerise in the oven at a temperature of 70 °C for 1 h. The sample was then taken out and washed and left to soak overnight in ethanol. After soaking the sample was rinsed once more and left to dry in air. Unless otherwise stated, the counter and reference electrodes used was stainless steel wire and Ag/AgCl respectively. An initial CV scan was performed for all samples prior to testing to confirm photo-electrocatalytic behaviour. Illumination was provided by a Leica KL 2500 LCD lamp with an equivalent power of 1.6 suns.
Efficiency
A standard PBTh film was used for testing efficiency but a modified metal cell was utilised for better sealing and separation of the counter electrode (Ti mesh45), see Fig. S1.† An initial CV was performed to check photo-electrocatalysis. Main investigations proceeded via a CA measurement. Regular gas chromatography (GC) injections into the gas chromatograph (SRI 310C, TCD, MS-5A column, Ar carrier) was performed and the resulting hydrogen peak at 1.96 min recorded. Conversion to a hydrogen:Ar ratio was done using the calibration curve as shown in Fig. S2† and the rate of hydrogen production was calculated (Ar flow rate 2 mL min−1) for conversion to faradaic efficiency.
Stability testing
A standard film was used for long-term tests and was continually purged with N2 to remove O2, a titanium mesh was used as the counter electrode. The CA test was left to run over a period of 12 days with sporadic top ups with distilled H2O to replace evaporated and consumed H2O.
Substrates
Each substrate was sonicated in a 50:50 mixture of ethanol and H2O for 1 h and rinsed in acetone prior to polymerisation. Polymerisation was conducted as per before save glassy carbon was replaced with the appropriate substrate. Testing proceeded after an initial purge using Ar gas and consisted of a CV run at 20 mV s−1.
Electrolyte
The NaCl and PB solutions used in the electrolyte testing was made up using NaCl and NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 salts from Merck respectively. The pH of each electrolyte solution was tested prior to the studies using a Mettler Toledo pH meter; the NaCl solutions were adjusted to approach pH 7.0 using small amounts of 0.1 mol L−1 HCl and NaOH. Testing was conducted on the same PBTh film but a new area was utilised for each electrolyte. N2 was bubbled through the cell for 20 min prior to commencement, followed by the main CA test.
pH
The 0.1 mol L−1 PB pH solutions were made up using varying ratios of NaH2PO4 and Na2HPO4 and dissolved in water. At pH 9, the solution was almost entirely Na2HPO4 and for pH 11, ca. 4 mL of 0.1 mol L−1 NaOH was added to increase alkalinity. A standard PBTh film was used for testing with each pH run performed on a different area; this helps to minimise variations due to differences between films. The cell was purged with Ar prior to the main pH testing; CV at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. The pH before and after each run was recorded and is presented in Table S1.†
Interaction between light and PBTh

Thickness. 
For the preparation of the thin PBTh films the oxidant solution (40% Fe(III) PTS in butanol) was diluted with butanol to a concentration of 20 w/v% and 10 w/v% Fe(III) PTS for the 0.21 μm and 0.11 μm film respectively. Polymerisation then occurred via the standard technique. The 0.44 μm film was prepared in the same manner as the standard film. The 1.24 μm film was prepared using two depositions of the oxidant solution; after an initial first polymerisation of the standard film (but before the wash step), another layer of the oxidant solution was deposited via spin coater and the VPP process repeated. The resulting double layer of PBTh was then washed as per usual in ethanol to produce the thick 1.24 μm film. Polymerisation of each thickness was conducted on both glassy carbon substrates and glass slides.
CV and CA measurements on the glassy carbon PBTh films were run under Ar (0.15 mL min−1) to assess the performance of the film. CA measurements were conducted by applying a potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl over a period of 120 min under illumination. GC measurements were conducted concurrent to CA and the resulting H2 peak height at 120 min is shown in Fig. S12.† UV-Vis spectroscopy of the PBTh films polymerised on glass slides were conducted on a Jasco V670 Spectrophotometer to determine the absorbance.


Wavelength dependency. 
A thin film of 0.21 μm was prepared as described in the thickness measurements, on glassy carbon. An initial CV was conducted followed by a CA run held at −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl reference electrode, Ti mesh and 1 mol L−1 PB at pH 7 were used as the counter electrode and electrolyte respectively. The light source was provided by a high intensity Xe lamp (Rofin Polilight PL6) and the wavelengths selected using the respective bandpass filter (Newport 10BPF10-XXX series). The PBTh film was placed under illumination for a period of 10 min and the average current recorded as the catalytic response; a 5 min dark interval separated each wavelength measurement. Intensity was determined using a Si solar cell and converted with the approximation that 1 sun is equivalent to 100 mW cm−2. Ar was used to purge the cell throughout the experiment at a rate of 10 mL min−1.

Acknowledgements
Bjorn Winther-Jensen and C. André Ohlin thank the Australian Research Council (ARC) for a joint Discovery Project grant (DP130100483). C. André Ohlin thanks the ARC for a Discovery Project grant and Queen Elisabeth II fellowship (DP110105530). The authors also acknowledge use of facilities within the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy.
References
J. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bowker, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2235–2246 RSC .
R. Kleijn and E. van der Voet, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 2784–2795 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Abbasi and S. A. Abbasi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3034–3040 CrossRef PubMed .
The International Energy Agency, Key World Energy Statistics, Paris, 2014.
P. D. Tran, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 727–747 CAS .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, Y. S. Chaudhary and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7470–7490 CAS .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Joya and H. J. M. de Groot, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8787–8799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Esiner, H. van Eersel, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 2932–2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Tran and J. Barber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13772–13784 RSC .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Karunadasa, E. Montalvo, Y. Sun, M. Majda, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Science, 2012, 335, 698–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Na, M. Gorlov and L. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6458–6467 RSC .
A. Magnuson, M. Anderlund, O. Johansson, P. Lindblad, R. Lomoth, T. Polivka, S. Ott, K. Stensjö, S. Styring, V. Sundström and L. Hammarström, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1899–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, J. Sun, J. R. Long, P. Yang and C. J. Chang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 118–124 RSC .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma and J. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963–1968 CAS .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lanzarini, M. R. Antognazza, M. Biso, A. Ansaldo, L. Laudato, P. Bruno, P. Metrangolo, G. Resnati, D. Ricci and G. Lanzani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10944–10949 CAS .
M. P. Gustafson, N. Clark, B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 140, 309–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8475–8491 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kolodziejczyk, O. Winther-Jensen, D. R. MacFarlane and B. Winther-Jensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10821–10826 RSC .
R. Kerr, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, M. Forsyth and B. Winther-Jensen, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, F29–F31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Winther-Jensen, O. Winther-Jensen, M. Forsyth and D. R. Macfarlane, Science, 2008, 321, 671–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Winther-Jensen and B. Winther-Jensen, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 43, 98–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Winther-Jensen, B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 307–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Gustafson, K. Matsumoto, D. R. MacFarlane and B. Winther-Jensen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 122, 166–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Winther-Jensen, K. Fraser, C. Ong, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1727–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Ng, O. Winther-Jensen, B. Kolodziejczyk, C. A. Ohlin and B. Winther-Jensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 18230–18234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9167–9175 RSC .
W. Teng, X. Li, Q. Zhao and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9060–9068 CAS .
O. Winther-Jensen, K. Chatjaroenporn, B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8185–8189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hotta, T. Hosaka and W. Shimotsuma, Synth. Met., 1983, 6, 69–71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aguirre, P. Gast, S. Orlinskii, I. Akimoto, E. J. J. Groenen, H. El Mkami, E. Goovaerts and S. Van Doorslaer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 7129–7138 RSC .
B. Kolodziejczyk, D. Mayevsky and B. Winther-Jensen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4568–4573 RSC .
S. S. Moganty, R. E. Baltus and D. Roy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 483, 90–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Allen and G. W. Gobeli, Phys. Rev., 1962, 127, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Helander, M. T. Greiner, Z. B. Wang, W. M. Tang and Z. H. Lu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2011, 29, 011019 Search PubMed .
D. Merki and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878–3888 CAS .

          P. Y. Bruice, Organic Chemistry, Pearson Eduction Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, 5th edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
G. Kossmehl and M. Niemitz, Synth. Met., 1991, 43, 1065–1071 CrossRef .
M. Hilder, O. Winther-Jensen, B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14034–14040 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta00291eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Faradaic Efficiency of PBTh on Glassy Carbon. Each point represents the calculated faradaic efficiency from the detected amounts of H2 from each GC injection. Peak efficiency was recorded as 80% at an injection time of 170 min; the overall average efficiency was 72%. The corresponding chromatograms are presented in Fig. S3a.†	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Long-term testing of a standard PBTh film on glassy carbon over a period of 12 days at an applied potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, in 1.0 M PB (pH 7.0) under constant illumination of 1.6 suns. (b) Raman spectroscopic analysis of the film after long-term testing over 12 days. No discernible differences can be observed.	 

 	Fig. 3  CV showing the performance of PBTh on various substrates; 1 M NaCl pH 5.98, 20 mV s−1. (a) Carbon paper, (b) silicon, (c) glassy carbon for comparison, (d) gold mylar and (e) FTO glass. (f) The evolution of H2 bubbles from the FTO/PBTh film trapped on the top edge of the cell. The oxidation peak present in (c–e), corresponds to the oxidation of adsorbed H2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of the PBTh current density in aqueous PB and NaCl electrolytes at concentrations of 0.1 and 1.0 mol L−1, see Fig. S8† for CA traces.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of PBTh performance and onset potential for the HER under illumination as pH is varied from 3.1 to 11.0. (a) The CV reduction sweep comparing PBTh catalytic activity at different pH. The theoretical E0 of each pH is indicated by the dotted line. (b) Determination of the onset potential at pH 3.1. The estimated onset potential in dark is also presented. CVs of the remaining pH tests are presented in the ESI, Fig. S9.† (c) Comparison of the pH onset potential, potential has been normalised to E0 of the respective pH where a negative overpotential indicates an onset that is below E0.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of PBTh as thickness is varied. Three parameters are presented, the UV-Vis absorbance, the detected H2 peak (in μV) at 120 min and the current sustained at the end of 120 min under illumination and an applied potential of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The UV-Vis absorbance was measured on PBTh on glass slide (Fig. S10†). See Fig. S11 and S12† for the corresponding CA trace and gas chromatogram respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  The wavelength of PBTh's catalytic performance with respect to the incident photon wavelength with an applied potential of −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl; the raw current response is shown in Fig. S13.† The UV-Vis absorption spectrum of PBTh is also shown for comparison.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta00291e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
