Metal nanoparticle–semiconductor nanowire hybrid nanostructures for plasmon-enhanced optoelectronics and sensing  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TC01820J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TC01820J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11785-11800Metal nanoparticle–semiconductor nanowire hybrid nanostructures for plasmon-enhanced optoelectronics and sensing

        
          
            Andrea 
            Pescaglini
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Daniela 
            Iacopino
          
          
        
      *
      Tyndall National Institute-UCC, Dyke Parade, Cork, Ireland. E-mail: andrea.pescaglini@tyndall.ie
Received 
      18th June 2015
    , Accepted 20th September 2015First published on 19th October 2015AbstractPlasmonic metal nanoparticles have recently attracted increasing interest due to their nanosized dimensions, tunable optical properties in the visible and near-infrared regions of the spectrum and easy manufacturing. Although the optical properties of these sub-wavelength objects arising from plasmonic resonances have been extensively investigated in both isolated and assembled structures, their rational integration in 1D semiconductor-based devices for generation of engineered properties is a novel and vastly unexplored field. In particular, development of metal nanoparticle–1D semiconductor hybrid nanostructures has been hampered by a number of challenges including limited control of component assembly processes and modest theoretical and experimental understanding of fundamental physical phenomena occurring in such hybrids. In this feature article, we describe recent progress in fabrication methods and review the relevant plasmonic properties of metal nanoparticles that can be exploited to manipulate, enhance and optimize the performance of semiconductor nanowire-based devices. Finally, we explore the enhanced properties of hybrid metal nanoparticle–semiconductor nanowire structures and describe their application in optoelectronics and sensing.
Andrea Pescaglini
Andrea Pescaglini received his BSc and MSc degrees in Physics from the University of Pisa in 2007 and 2010 respectively. In 2010 he was awarded a Marie Curie Early Stage Researcher and he obtained his PhD degree from the Chemistry Department of University College Cork in 2014. He then joined the Epitaxy and Physics of Nanostructures group as a postdoctoral fellow in Tyndall National Institute (Cork, Ireland). His current research interest covers fabrication and studies of optical and electrical properties of semiconductor nanowires-based devices, nanoplasmonics and development of nanostructured devices for light-emitting diodes.
Daniela Iacopino
Daniela Iacopino received her BSc degree in Chemistry from Universita' di Pavia (Italy) in 1995. She received her PhD in Chemistry in 2000 Universita' di Modena (Italy) after a research period in the Chemistry Dept. of University of Birmingham (UK). In 2000, she was awarded a Marie Curie postdoctoral fellowship at University College Dublin, where she developed strategies for the self-assembly of DNA based electronic devices. Daniela joined the Nanotechnology Group at Tyndall in 2002 as a staff researcher. Her current research interests are synthesis and self-assembly of metal and polymer semiconductor one-dimensional structures for sensing and photonic applications. Other active areas include single particle darkfield spectroscopy for technological and environmental sensing applications and fabrication of hybrid photonic plasmonic devices. In a further application, metal nanoparticles and particle assemblies are also used for enhanced Raman spectroscopies applied to works of art. Daniela is co-author of over 50 scientific papers, one book chapter and one patent.
1 Introduction
In the last decades, we have assisted to a progressive miniaturization of electrical components, driven by the semiconductor industry, towards the fabrication of more compact, low-power consumption and faster portable electronic devices. From a technological point of view, the miniaturization process needs to be supported by progress in CMOS-compatible fabrication techniques, in order to reach higher resolutions (∼15 nm for state-of-the-art transistors). In addition, a deeper understanding of the electronic properties of semiconductor materials and low-dimensional systems with a size-regime approaching the border line between classical and quantum mechanics is also an essential requirement towards further miniaturization.
The nano-size evolution in the semiconductor electronic field, described by the well-known Moore's law, is actually able to realize truly nanoscale elements fully capable of computing, transmitting and storing data. As discussed, further improvement in performance is linked with the ability to increase the density of the operational units, achievable by reducing the size of transistors, as well as the speed at which data are computed and transmitted. Regarding the former aspect, the present technology is still capable of further improvement in terms of resolution and device densities, although accessing the quantum regime paradigm will require completely novel technologies and architectures for computing data, as assessed by the emerging research field of quantum information and computation.1 On the other hand, processor performances in semiconductor technology show limitations. Heat generation and signal delay issues associated with electronic interconnection limit the speed rate to a range of ∼10 GHz.2 Consequently, further improvement directed to exceed such a range will require the development of a radically new chip-scale technology able to operate beyond the limits imposed by semiconductor technology and to reach optical frequencies that, to date, are only achievable in dielectric photonics (Fig. 1).3 Unfortunately, photonic circuitry cannot be easily scaled below the diffraction limit of light (about ∼λ/2 that is one to two orders of magnitude larger than the electronic counterparts), therefore the large mismatch between electronic and photonic components has up to now hampered the on-chip integration and miniaturization.
 Fig. 1  Characteristic domains in terms of the operating speed and device sizes for semiconductors (electronics), dielectrics (photonics) and metals (plasmonics). Adapted with permission.2 Copyright 2010, AAAS. 
The new flourishing field of technology called plasmonics, has recently emerged as a potential route towards miniaturization of optical components beyond the limit of traditional optics.4,5 This capability is made possible by exploiting coherent electron excitation in the electronic gas of metal nanostructures and their ability to manipulate, propagate and enhance light in nanoscale volumes.6 When metallic atoms form a crystal structure, valence electrons are shared in orbitals delocalized on the entire crystal and acquire a quasi-free nature.7 The application of Maxwell's equations at the metal–dielectric interface results in propagating wave-like solutions, also called surface plasmon polariton (SPP). The distinctive characteristic of surface plasmons compared to photons is that they have a much smaller wavelength at a given frequency.8 Therefore, using SPP enables the fabrication of nanoscale optical integrated circuits in which light can be guided, split, filtered, focused and also amplified in plasmonic nanodevices smaller than the optical wavelength.9,10 For metallic nanostructures significantly smaller than the free-space wavelength, geometrical boundary conditions determine the frequency at which the electron oscillation is driven resonantly (in this context called localized surface plasmon) producing a very strong charge displacement and high field intensity in close proximity to the nanostructures (typically within 15 nm).11 From this fundamental mechanism, the unique optical properties and an extraordinary ability to concentrate light into sub-wavelength volumes and mediate, enhance the interaction between the propagating radiation and nanoscale objects can be derived.6,12
On the other hand, in semiconductor technology the attempt to further reduce the size of active components has focused increasing attention on fabrication routes and fundamental properties of 1D semiconductor nanowires. Growth techniques, based on the vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism, have allowed fabrication of a broad range of inorganic nanowire compositions such as Si, Ge, ZnO, CdS, GaN, GaAs, InP, InAs and also traditional less accessible compositions like InGaN,13–16 as well as axial and radial heterostructured nanowires accommodating large lattice mismatches with an unprecedented level of flexibility in material engineering.17
Recently, integration of metal nanoparticles into semiconductor nanowires has been shown as a viable route for the expansion and enhancement of nanowire functionalities.18–20 In fact, hybrid architectures combine the strength of both fields: plasmonic active nanoparticles can be integrated to enhance, expand and tune the light interaction with the semiconductor component; at the same time, homogeneous or heterostructured semiconductor 1D materials can be realized to offer the optimum optical and/or electrical properties required in operational devices. Overall, the degree of freedom in the design and optimization afforded in a single hybrid nanostructure that opens up an exciting and novel field of research still vastly unexplored.
In this review article, we first present the techniques explored to fabricate hybrid metal nanoparticle–semiconductor nanowire (HbNW) nanostructures. In Section 3, we discuss some of the most remarkable properties of nanowire-based optoelectronic and sensing devices achievable by exploring the 1D nature and the composition versatility of nanowires combined with the plasmonic features of metal nanoparticles. Great emphasis will be placed on the plasmonic-related processes and properties of metal nanoparticles that can be manipulated and exploited to add additional or improved capabilities to semiconductor nanowires. In particular, two different plasmonic-related processes will be discussed: the electric field enhancement in close proximity to the metal surface, responsible for enhancing the light–matter interaction (such as light absorption, SERS and non-linear optical processes) and the generation of energetic electron–hole pairs that plays a crucial role in all processes involving photon–electron conversion (such as photodetection, solar cells and catalysis). Finally in Section 4 relevant applications of HbNWs in photodetection, photovoltaics and molecular sensing will be presented.
2 Fabrication methods: from single components to hybrid 1D nanostructures
A well known approach to load metal nanoparticles on the surface of nanowires is sputtering deposition (see Fig. 2a).21–23 This technique forms nanoparticles with size below ∼10 nm and is very attractive due to its simplicity, reliability and relatively low-cost. Particle density can be moderately adjusted by changing the process conditions (sputtering current and the distance to the target substrate) and the deposition time.24 The absence of any stabilizing chemical agents during deposition ensures an extremely clean process with the metal surface in direct contact with the semiconductor. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is also a viable method for decorating semiconductor nanowires with noble metal nanoparticles.25 Although this technique is often used for the conformal growth of thin films with atomic control of the thickness and composition, aggregation instead of uniform coating can be obtained for an appropriate precursor–substrate combination where the homogeneous chemical adsorption of precursors at the substrate surface is inhibited.26 This is the case of noble metal ALD on oxide surfaces, where at an early stage the nucleation in localized spots results in nanoparticle formation.27,28 A major drawback of sputtering and ALD is that only quasi-spherical shapes can be achieved and increasing deposition times lead to uncontrolled aggregation and eventually to the formation of continuous films.
 Fig. 2  Hybrid metal nanostructures decorated semiconductor nanowires obtained by (a) the sputtering technique,48 (b and c) e-beam lithography,30 (d and e) galvanic displacement,33 (f) droplet deposition,37 (g) mask-selective droplet deposition,40 and (h and i) chemical functionalization.47 Adapted with permission from (a) Copyright 2015, RSC; (b and c) Copyright 2014, ACS; (d and e) Copyright 2012, ACS; (f) Copyright 2011, ACS; (g) Copyright 2014, ACS; (h and i) Copyright 2011, RSC. 
For nanowires with large enough diameters, top-down fabrication (e-beam lithography) becomes a possible technique to fabricate geometry-customizable metal nanostructures directly on the nanowires29 or in their proximity30 within the resolution of the lithographic process (see Fig. 2b and c). However, top-down fabrication of metal nanostructures is not exempt from limitations. The resolution of the lithography process (∼20 nm) prevents investigation of the metal nanostructure behavior in the quantum regime (sub-10 nm sized structures)31 and enhancing phenomena in arrays with an inter-particle distance below 10 nm (strongly-coupled regime), interesting for catalysis, quantum optics and sensing.32 Other drawbacks include the polycrystallinity of the nanostructures, the presence of an additional layer required to ensure the adhesion to the substrate (usually titanium or chromium) and prohibitive costs that prevent any integration into commercial devices.
Bottom-up synthetic approaches constitute valid alternatives as they address most of the limitations of top-down techniques. Among them, galvanic displacement was used to decorate Si nanowires with Au and Pt nanoparticles of different morphologies.33,34 In this process, the nanowires provided electrons for reduction of metal ions in solution and at the same time served as templates for the particle formation. Typical nanostructures resulting from the process are shown in Fig. 2d and e. Different particle shapes were synthesized (spherical, triangular, rod-like) with diameter 20–100 nm attached to the nanowire body with less than 1 nm distance from the nanowire surface. Site-specific growth of Ag nanoparticles located at the ends of ZnO nanorods was demonstrated by photodeposition.35 In this approach, optically excited electrons in the semiconductor conduction band reduced metal ions in solution leading to metal atom deposition and self-organization into a spherical shape. The crystal planes with a reduced lattice mismatch between ZnO and Ag located at the ends of the nanorods determined the most favorable sites for particle nucleation. A similar mechanism was also proposed to explain the formation of Ag nanorods and spheres during vapor–solid growth of ZnO nanowires on a silicon substrate covered by Ag nanoparticles.36
An alternative method is drop-casting of chemically synthesized colloidal nanoparticles directly on the nanowires.37,38 In this approach, a host substrate with nanowires deposited on the surface is covered by a droplet of the colloidal solution and after solvent evaporation a random deposition of nanoparticles homogeneously distributed on the substrate is obtained. Fig. 2f shows the result of this process on a Si nanowire deposited on a Si/SiO2 substrate contacted with two Al electrodes. Despite the simplicity of the process, its effectiveness was limited, as demonstrated by the small number of particles decorating the nanowire and the relative random location. Moreover, the coffee-stain effects during solvent evaporation induced preferential nanoparticle accumulation at the border of the droplet, greatly reducing the density of particles deposited on the remaining substrate surface.39 Also the capillary effects during solvent evaporation drove particle deposition at the nanowire–substrate contact points, preventing efficient coverage of the actual nanowire surface (particularly in nanowires with diameter much larger than the particle diameter).
Some of these limitations were addressed by the mask-selective droplet deposition method, recently developed in our group.40 In this method, nanowires were deposited on a host substrate and a layer of photoresist was used as an effective mask to selectively expose the nanowire top surface to air. Following the droplet deposition of colloidal nanoparticles the photoresist was removed, leaving only nanoparticles attached on the exposed surface of the nanowires. A representative image of Au nanorod-decorated ZnO nanowire hybrid nanostructures is shown in Fig. 2g, depicting high yield deposition of Au nanorods preferentially deposited on the nanowire surface. The main advantage of droplet deposition methods relies on the ability to decouple the nanoparticle formation from the deposition step. The nanoparticle size and shape can be finely tuned by synthetic methods prior deposition41–46 and nanowires can be homogeneously decorated with nanostructures having a specific geometry.
Finally, we also mention that attachment of Au colloidal nanorods onto ZnO nanowires was also demonstrated by chemical functionalization with poly(2-vinyl pyridine) (Fig. 2h and i).47 This is a very promising approach because it allows an effective coverage of the nanowire surface for both isolated nanowires and vertical arrays, although this chemical functionalization process may not be readily extended to other materials different from ZnO.
Overall, simultaneous control of the particle shape, size and location on the semiconductor nanowire component remains a key challenge and constitutes the major bottleneck for the realization of plasmonic hybrid devices by the design.
3 Properties of hybrid nanostructures: semiconductor nanowires and metal nanoparticles
3.1 Semiconductor nanowires for photonic and sensing applications
The 1D nature of semiconductor nanowires together with the dislocation-free structure and the ability to accommodate a large lattice mismatch are associated with a number of properties interesting for nanoelectronic and photonic applications.49,50
For instance, in photodetection, semiconductor nanowires have showed great potential due to (i) the prolonged lifetime of photogenerated carriers mediated by the in-built radial potential promoted by surface states and (ii) the reduced carrier transit time due to the high mobility achievable in high-quality single-crystal materials combined with the micrometer or nanometer inter-electrode distance. In 2001, Lieber's group presented one of the first examples of a single InP nanowire photodetector exhibiting highly polarized photoluminescence and polarized-sensitive photoconductivity with a responsivity of 3000 A W−1.51 Following this pioneristic work many other materials were explored such as GaN, Si, Ge, Se, CdS, ZnO among others.52 For insatnce, Soci et al. realized a single-crystal ZnO nanowire UV photodetector with a photoconductive gain of up to 108 (Fig. 3a).53
 Fig. 3  (a) Photoconductive gain versus photon absorption rate in ZnO nanowire photodetectors irradiated at a light wavelength of 390 nm. The inset shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the device.53 (b) Measured spectra of the absorption efficiency Qabs under unpolarized light taken from individual Ge nanowires with radii of 10 nm (black), 25 nm (blue) and 110 nm (red). The inset depicts a schematic illustration of the device.54 (c) A schematic of a single core–shell Si nanowire solar cell and the SEM image of the nanowire cross section.57 (d) The SEM image of a vertical InP nanowire array solar cell with superimposed p–i–n doping levels.59 (e) The microphotoluminescence spectrum of a single CdS:Sn nanowire nanolaser at 4 K optically pumped at 325 nm showing near band edge emission (485–491 nm) and the donor–acceptor pair transition and the LO phonon replica (510–540 nm).63 (f) A schematic of a electrically pumped ZnO nanowire array laser device and the electroluminescence spectrum of the device operating at 70 mA with the related side-view optical microscope image.64 Adapted with permission from (a) Copyright 2007, ACS; (b) Copyright 2010, ACS; (c) Copyright 2007, NPG; (d) Copyright 2013, AAAS; (e) Copyright 2013, ACS; (f) Copyright 2011, NPG. 
Moreover, the careful design of the nanowire geometry was found to be capable to boost device performances. Brongersma et al. showed that light absorption in nanowires can be engineered by exploiting internal leaky mode resonances in optimized geometries (Fig. 3b). The authors demonstrated a 25-fold enhancement in the absorption and wavelength selectivity in Ge nanowires due to structural engineering.54 This approach was applied to other semiconductor nanowires and allowed to boost the optical absorption beyond the intrinsic properties of the material.55
The nanowire properties explored for photodetection are equally relevant for designing nanowire-based solar cells. To this aim both radial and axial heterostructured nanowires have been proposed.56 For instance, Tian et al. realized a single p-type/intrinsic/n-type (p–i–n) coaxial silicon nanowire solar cell.57 In this geometry the electron–hole pairs generated under radiation in the intrinsic part were readily collected at the p-type core and n-type shell thanks to a carrier collection distance smaller than the minority carrier diffusion length (Fig. 3c). This efficient carrier collection scheme allowed to reach an overall apparent efficiency of 3.4%. Using a similar radial structure, a higher efficiency of up to 4.5% was demonstrated in GaAs nanowires under comparable illumination conditions (1.5 AM).58 Substantial improvement in light absorption was obtained in vertical arrays of axial p–i–n InP nanowires with optimized diameter size and length of the top n-segment, demonstrating a record efficiency of 13.8%, comparable to planar InP cells (Fig. 3d).59 Despite the variety of alternative materials60,61 and geometries explored,52,56 the limited efficiency observed in semiconductor nanowire solar cells and photodetectors was mostly attributed to the limited light absorption caused by the sub-wavelength dimensions.62
The 1D geometry, high refractive indices, high crystal quality and adjustable diameters and length dimensions make nanowires natural optical gaining media for nanolasers and LEDs. Fabry–Perot waveguide modes tunable with the nanowire length65 were observed in a number of optically pumped binary semiconductors (see Fig. 3e) such as ZnO,66 CdS,63,67 and GaN68 with quantum efficiencies up to 60%.69 In addition, the rational design of heterostructured nanowires containing multi-quantum-wells,70,71 self-assembled quantum dots,72,73 and band-graded materials74–77 acting as gaining media inside the nanowire optical cavity have been explored for wavelength-tunable nanolasers and proposed as building blocks for light-emitting devices. Also, electrically injected nanolasers based on single nanowires78,79 and arrays64,80 have been successfully demonstrated opening up attractive perspectives for intra-chip optical interconnection applications (see Fig. 3f).81
Finally, we mention that the large surface-to-volume ratio in nanowires offers obvious advantages for molecular and gas sensing. In fact, following the same principle of field-effect transistors where a voltage applied to a channel gate results in modulation of the channel conductivity, molecules adsorbed on a nanowire surface change the surface band bending and consequently the nanowire electrical transport properties (see Fig. 4a). Therefore, nanowires represent a very promising tool for sensitive detection of target molecules via electrical readout. To this aim different geometries, mechanisms and materials were explored. ZnO nanowires were largely used for gas sensing due to the low fabrication cost and high sensitivity to gases such as O2,82,83 NO2,84 ethanol,85 H2S,86 and NH3.87 In addition, sensing properties of ZnO were enhanced via a higher working temperature,85 piezotronic effect,88,89 polymer functionalization90,91 and defect concentration.92 An interesting scheme to enhance the sensitivity of up to 5 orders consisted of the introduction of a non-symmetrical Schottky contact between the metal and nanowires.93,94 In this scheme, the device contained an Ohmic contact and a Schottky barrier contact where the barrier height, and consequently the current passing through the device under reverse bias conditions, resulted being extremely sensitive to the interaction with the surrounding medium (i.e. adsorbed biomolecules, gases and light irradiation), as showed in Fig. 4b and c. Following the same principle, interdigitated nanowire architectures were explored to increase the gas sensitivity by exploiting the Schottky-to-Schottky double barrier at the interface between two nanowires.95 Nanowire field-effect transistors were also shown to be capable of detecting molecules with concentrations in the pM range that was further lowered to ∼1.5 fM using the device in the subthreshold regime.96 Air-bridge contacted vertical arrays of InAs nanowires displayed increased sensitivity due to the exposition of the entire nanowire surface to the analyte (see Fig. 4d and e).97 This approach together with the electron accumulation layer at the InAs surface, resulted in sensitivity to NO2 at parts-per-billion level. An alternative mechanism exploited the sharp metal–insulator phase transition of VO2 at which the nanowire conductivity increased several orders of magnitude, leading to successful detection of chemically inert and reactive gases.98 Despite demonstration of ultra-low detection limits achievable with nanowire-based sensors, the major challenge in this field remains selectivity. In fact the high sensitivity due to the large surface-to-volume ratio can result in the impossibility of distinguishing individual contributions in real environments where more than one type of molecule interacts with the nanowire. This brief snapshot on the main photonic and sensing capabilities of semiconductor nanowires demonstrates the large potential of 1D nanostructures for technology development. However, nanowires are not exempt from limitations. In Section 4, we will show how integration of metal nanoparticles with semiconductor nanowires can solve some of these limitations providing better performance in these application fields.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the working principle of (a) the field-effect sensing mechanism and (b) the Schottky-gated device. (c) The energy-band diagram of the metal–ZnO Shottcky contact.93 (d) An illustration of an InAs vertical nanowire array sensor and (e) the response (percentage of the current variation) of an array of 200 nanowires to varying concentrations of NO2 in N2. The inset shows the time response to 9 ppm.97 Adapted with permission from (a–c) Copyright 2010, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; (d and e) Copyright 2010, ACS. 
3.2 Plamonic properties of metal nanoparticles: theory and design
The plasmonic properties of metal nanoparticles simply arise from the negative sign of the dielectric function at visible frequencies. This behavior gives rise to plasmonic resonant oscillations that generate an intense dipole-like electromagnetic field rapidly decaying outside the metal and for excitation of electron–hole pairs via non-radiative plasmon decay. The energy at which these processes occur can be easily tuned by modification of the shape, size and local environment of the metal nanoparticles to modify the metal response by increasing the absorption already in the visible range of the spectrum.

3.2.1 Plasmonic-enhanced electromagnetic field. 
When the electron gas is confined in volumes V ≪ λ3 the plasma experiences a nearly space-independent external field (quasi-static approximation) and modes arise naturally from the solution of Laplace equation ∇2Φ = 0 with Φ being the electrical potential. Due to their non-propagating nature, these modes are known as localized surface plasmons. The oscillating electronic system leads to resonances that amplify the field both inside and in the near-field zone outside the metal nanostructure. Another interesting consequence of the confinement to nanoscale volumes is the possibility to excite directly the surface plasmons without phase-matching techniques that are instead required for volume plasmons and SPPs.
For the highly-symmetric geometry of an homogeneous sphere in a non-absorbing medium with the dielectric function εm the spatial electric field distribution can be easily calculated analytically. The polarizability experiences a resonance enhancement in correspondence to the minimum of |ε(ω) + 2εm|, corresponding to99 Re[ε(ω)] = −2εm(1)that is called the Fröhlich condition and the associated mode is the dipole surface plasmon. In a free electron plasma, eqn (1) is verified at the frequency ωlsp defined by (2)where n is the number density of electrons, ε0 the permittivity of the free space, me the electron effective mass and ωp2 = ne2/ε0me is the plasma frequency of the free electron gas. This relation shows that the localized surface plasmon frequency is always smaller than the plasma frequency and, most importantly, it is affected by the dielectric constant εm of the surrounding medium. The latter property in particular is of great interest for sensing applications since the presence of a target molecule in the medium or its binding event on a receptor can change εm and therefore be detected via monitoring ωlsp (see also Section 4.2).
The total electric field associated with the oscillating electronic gas in the near-field zone shows a fast spatial decay ∼r−3 in proximity of the metal surface. Such a strong damping limits the volume where a molecule can be located in order to experience the plasmonic-mediated enhancement of the optical properties. On the other hand, at a large distance from the metal nanostructure the dipole radiation is well approximated by a spherical wave, with the typical ∼r−1 decay.100
In the case of a metal nanostructure with a more general ellipsoidal geometry, with semiaxes a1 ≤ a2 ≤ a3, Gans formulation101 of the analytical solution for the Laplace equation leads to multiple plasmonic resonances at frequencies Re[3εm + 3Li(ε(ω) − εm)] = 0(3)where Li is the depolarizing factor for the axes i = x, y, z.102 Using the dielectric function for an ideal free electron gas we arrive at the expression of the localized surface plasmon resonance frequencies (4) Within the class of ellipsoids, spheroids with a1 = a2 < a3 are particularly interesting because they represent a reasonable approximation to the real geometry of chemically prepared rod-shaped metal nanoparticles. For these non-spherical nanoparticles the polarizability exhibits two spectrally separated plasmon resonances, corresponding to the oscillation of the electron plasma along the long (∥) and short (⊥) axes, therefore since L∥ < L⊥ < 1, we have the following relation between the two frequencies ω∥lsp < ω⊥lsp. Finally, we observe that the analytical solution of the Maxwell's equations can be obtained only in these simple geometries. Solving the equations for a generic non-spherical particle requires numerical methods such as discrete dipole approximation,103,104 boundary element methods105,106 and finite difference time domain methods.107


3.2.2 Plasmonic-mediated hot electron generation. 
The local re-radiation of the incident electromagnetic field discussed in the previous section has been extensively investigated for mediating the light interaction with single emitters and for taking advantage from the the double effect of enhancing the incident radiation and the light scattered off from the object.108 In this process, the radiative decay of the excited plasmon by re-emission of a photon (related to the scattering cross section) needs to be more effective than the non-radiative decay (related to the absorption cross section) where the incident photon energy is lost in non-radiative transition and eventually converted into heat.109
Recently, the non-radiative decay process has attracted considerable interest motivated by the possibility to generate energetic electron–hole pairs, called hot carriers, that are of great interest in photocatalytic processes and conversion of light into electric current for photodetection and photovoltaic applications.110,111 From this perspective, small nanoparticles (diameters below 20 nm) where the absorption cross section is much larger than both scattering and geometrical cross sections, represent ideal systems for the efficient photon to hot-carrier conversion. After the typical lifetime of plasmon excitation (∼10 fs), hot electron–hole pairs are created giving rise to a non-equilibrium distribution of electrons (holes) with energy above (below) the Fermi energy.112
Experimental investigations showed that the timescale of the hot carrier generation has lifetimes in the range 0.05–1 ps, depending on the material composition.113,114 The lifetime and particle size play a crucial role in determining the number of carriers generated with high energies (Fig. 5a and b). In large nanoparticles the density of states increases towards the continuum, providing an increasing number of available states at low energies (around the Fermi level). On the other hand, the reduction of the carrier lifetime defines the time-range where a non-equilibrium distribution of hot carriers exists before thermalization via electron–electron and electron–phonon interactions.113
 Fig. 5  Distribution of hot electrons (red lines) and hot holes (blue lines) generated per unit of time and volume as a function of their energy with respect to the Fermi level. The plots compare four different hot carrier lifetimes τ ranging from 0.05 to 1 ps and nanoparticle diameters of (a) 15 nm, and (b) 25 nm.113 In the particle with diameter 15 nm the carrier distribution was found to be extending across the all interval of energies. A decrease in the lifetime results in a narrower distribution near the Fermi energy with a larger number of excited particles. A similar trend was also observed by increasing the diameter to 25 nm. (c) The simulated enhancement factor in metal nanoparticles with different shapes showing that the ellipsoidal geometry is the most advantageous.112 (d) A schematic representation of the hot electron generation and injection process at a metal–semiconductor interface. Adapted with permission from (a and b) Copyright 2014, ACS; (c) Copyright 2010, Elsevier. 
The particle shape also affects the generation process. The energy distribution δN of hot carriers was found to be proportional to the field enhancement factor κ inside the particle as follows115 (5)
Since κ(ω) follows the behavior of the polarizability, eqn (5) shows that the maximum density of hot carriers is obtained in correspondence to the plasmonic resonance where the absorption cross section reaches the maximum. Moreover, because κ is shape-dependent the hot carrier generation results are also affected. Fig. 5c compares field enhancement factors for a metal slab, a sphere, a cube and an ellipsoid, showing that among these geometries an ellipsoid is expected to be more efficient in creating hot electron–hole pairs.
While metal nanoparticles can be used as active elements to convert incident radiation into electron–holes with energy up to the plasmon quanta ℏωp, an interface with another object, for instance a semiconductor, is required to extract the hot carriers from the metal before they relax down to the ground state (see Fig. 5d). Carrier injection however, introduces an additional limitation to the overall process efficiency. Typical Schottky barrier heights (Φb) at the metal–semiconductor interface are in the range 0.5–1 eV, therefore electrons with energy below Φb have an exponentially decreasing probability to be injected. In surface plasmon polaritons, launched at a metal/semiconductor interface, the conservation of the momentum allows to increase each carrier energy by ∼ℏqvf, giving rise to a large number of carriers having a sharp distribution near the Fermi energy.112 However, for the SPP wavelength in the visible range (500–700 nm) ℏqvf is of the order of ∼10 meV, much below Φb. On the other hand, in metal nanostructures, since the momentum is not conserved due to the scattering with the surface, the energy conservation allows excitation of single carriers up to the maximum available energy ℏωp, that in the visible range is 1.5–2 eV, above Φb. This simple argument shows the importance of size reduction and corroborates the use of metal nanoparticles for hot-carrier generation. However, energy larger than the interface barrier is not the only requirement for the carrier injection. At an ideal flat interface, the conservation of the momentum parallel to the interface P⊥ imposes that only carriers having (6)are allowed to cross the border. Consequently, in a perfect metal–semiconductor junction, the electron injection rate can be well approximated using the Fowler equation116 Iph = I0·(ℏω − Φb)2(7)where ℏω is the energy of the incident radiation and Φb the barrier height at the interface. Finally, once the hot carriers are in the semiconductor, they need to be efficiently collected via an external applied circuit therefore the semiconductor materials with high mobility and a device architecture with short collection paths play a crucial role in increaseingthe overall process efficiency.
In conclusion, metal nanoparticles with large absorption cross sections represent a quasi-ideal system to convert electromagnetic radiation into electric current. A number of parameters such as the particle shape, size, and carrier lifetime affect the hot carrier generation efficiency and optimized injection and carrier collection schemes need to be designed to exploit this process in real devices. In this contest, HbNW-based architectures afford a number of advantages compared to traditional 2D planar geometries that will be discussed in Section 4.

4 Hybrid nanostructures: applications
4.1 Optoelectronic applications
The optical and electronic properties of individual semiconductor nanowires and metal nanoparticles discussed in Section 3 naturally make optoelectronic one of the most exciting fields of applications for HbNW nanostructures. In fact hybrid architectures afford the promise to combine expanded capabilities, higher performances and miniaturization of optoelectronic devices thus increasing device efficiency, speed and reducing power consumption.
In particular, the fields of photodetection and photovoltaics could largely benefit from the enhanced properties of HbNWs. In traditional 2D semiconductor devices, the minimum lateral size and thicknesses of the active region are determined by the diffraction-limited spot size of light and the characteristic absorption depth of the material. These constrains limit the device miniaturization to the size range of microns. Also, strong carrier recombination in an active region with dimensions much larger than the carrier mean free path penalizes device performances.62 Semiconductor nanowires address some of these limitations by means of nanoscale dimensions and faster carrier collection due to shorter transit paths. However, reduced dimensions below the characteristic absorption depth prevent efficient light trapping thus limiting the overall efficiency.117 Integration of metallic nanostructures to enhance light absorption by the intensified local electric field, represents a viable pathway to improve the performance of both photodetectors and solar cell nanowire-based devices. For instance, near-field coupling between plasmonic nanostructures in proximity of a GaAs nanowire was used to redirect the electromagnetic radiation into the semiconductor and enhance the intensity up to 20 times for the determined wavelength and polarization, allowing to tailor the nonlinear optical response of a single nanowire.30 Enhancement of the second harmonic generation by ∼1700 times was reported by Grinblat et al. for a ZnO nanowire placed in the electric field hot-spot generated by a gold pentamer oligomer.118 The coupling between leaky mode resonances (LMR) in nanowires and localized surface plasmons has been also investigated. In a bare semiconductor nanowire, LMRs represent the electromagnetic modes supported by the dielectric cavity where the absorption is resonantly enhanced.55 The leaky nature of these modes facilitated their interaction with the surface plasmons of metal nanostructures on the nanowire surface. The resulting coupling allowed to suppress, enhance and shift the absorption resonances, expanding largely the level of control of tunability and modulation of the optical properties.29,119
Different proof-of-concept hybrid nanowire photodectectors have been designed based on the enhanced light absorption in hybrid nanostructures.120 For example, Tang et al. exploited a dipole antenna to concentrate near-infrared radiation (∼1.3 μm) in metal–semiconductor–metal Ge photodetectors with the sub-wavelength volume of the order of 10−4λ3, demonstrating a plasmonic enhancement factor of 20 in the detected photocurrent.121 Hyun et al. used scanning photocurrent microscopy to resolve a local photocurrent enhancement by 20% along a Si nanowire decorated with Au nanoparticles under transverse polarization (Fig. 6a).37 Reducing the gap separation between the metal particles and Si nanowire down to the sub-nanometer range via galvanic displacement afforded a larger coupling with the plasmonic resonances, resulting in an enhanced photocurrent by a factor of 2 compared to the bare nanowires. In addition, 5 time larger sensitivity and wavelength-dependent response were achieved by embedding Au nanoparticles inside the Si nanowire.33,122 Even larger boost in performance was found in an Au-cluster-decorated InAs nanowire near-infrared photodetectors with a 3-fold enhancement in the responsivity compared to bare nanowire;123 ZnO nanowires covered with Au nanoparticles also displayed an impressive 3 orders of magnitude enhanced on/off current ratio and ∼30 times faster recovery time compared to their bare counterparts.124 Lu et al. investigated the UV photoresponse of ZnO nanorod arrays decorated with Al nanoparticles.125 The lower ohmic losses of Al compared to other metals in the UV range naturally makes it a more suitable plasmonic material for hybrid UV photodetectors. The overall effect of the Al particles on the ZnO surface was a 12 time enhancement of the responsivity and a 6-fold increase of the on/off ratio. The results of the plasmonic activity of Al nanoparticles were also observed in the enhancement of the near-band edge emission and in a faster photoluminescence decay that was attributed to an effective coupling between the surface plasmons in metal particles and excitons in ZnO nanorods.126 Metal particles on the nanowire surface can also induce oscillation of the photocurrent intensity as a function of the nanowire diameter due to the coupling of the surface plasmon with the allowed electromagnetic modes of the nanowire.127 Luo et al. demonstrated a considerabe improvement in the photodetection performance of CdSe nanoribbons decorated with Au hollow nanoparticles compared to bare CdSe nanoribbons and nanoribbons decorated with solid nanoparticles.128 Furthermore, improved performance related to plasmonic enhanced light absorption was also observed in other hybrid systems including Au-decorated CdSe nanowires and CdTe nanowires,129,130 Au decorated ZnO/ZnCdSeTe core–shell nanowires,131 Ag decorated ZnO nanorod array LEDs,132 and Si nanowire arrays coated with Au nanoparticle decorated graphene films.133
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a HbNW photodetector and FDTD simulation of the field enhancement at the metal nanoparticle-nanowire interface (top). Enhancement of the ratio between photocurrent intensity under transversal and longitudinal polarization (bottom).37 (b) The SEM image of the Au nanorod-decorated ZnO nanowire and schematic of the external applied circuit (top). The false colors highlight the different device components: ZnO nanowire (blue), Au nanorods (red), Ti/Al contacts (green). Comparison between the photocurrent spectra under a light wavelength longer than 650 nm of a hybrid device and a bare ZnO nanowire (bottom).40 (c) The SEM image of a single silicon nanowire solar cell decorated with an Ag octahedron and (bottom) the changes in photocurrent with respect to the non decorated nanowire.149 Adapted with permission from (a) Copyright 2010, ACS; (b) Copyright 2014, ACS; (c) Copyright 2011, ACS. 
Knight et al. explored for the first time the alternative mechanism of hot-electron generation via plasmon decay for photodetection.134 The proposed device, composed by an array of Au nanoantennas fabricated on an n-type Si substrate, showed a wavelength-resonant and polarization-sensitive photocurrent, demonstrating a spectral response at energies below the semiconductor bandgap with a quantum efficiency of ∼0.01%.134 Recently, our group demonstrated this concept in Au nanorod–ZnO nanowire hybrid devices for near-infrared photodetection (Fig. 6b).40 In the presented architecture, Au-nanorod-localized surface plasmons were used as active elements for generating and injecting hot electrons into the wide band gap ZnO nanowire, functioning as a passive component for charge collection. The hot electron generation and injection processes resulted in a large enhancement of the detected photocurrent at wavelengths where the ZnO nanowire was negligibly responsive on a time scale more than one order of magnitude faster than the typical ZnO photoresponse. In addition, the quantum efficiency measured at the nanorod longitudinal plasmonic resonance (650 nm) was calculated to be approximately 3%, more than 30 times larger than values reported for hot-carrier based photodetectors with planar geometries,135 thus demonstrating the advantage of using 1D hybrid architectures.
Other examples of enhanced capabilities in semiconductor devices integrated with plasmonic nanostructures can be found to be applied to the solar cell technology. However, despite the fact that heterostructured nanowires represent a promising class of materials for solar cell devices,56–58,136–138 and their effectiveness in enhancing solar energy conversion via hybridization with metal nanoparticles has been extensively demonstrated in thin-film solar cells,139–145 the investigation of HbNW nanostructures for photovoltaics has been still scarcely pursued.
Nevertheless, some remarkable examples in the literature have shown that hybrid nanostructures have the potential to substantially improve different solar energy conversion systems. For instance, in Si nanowire/organic hybrid solar cells the introduction of Ag nanoparticles on the nanowire surface resulted in ∼30% increase in conversion efficiency and almost a 50% increase in the external quantum efficiency in the wavelength range 400–600 nm due to the nanoparticle-mediated absorption enhancement within the active polymer.146 Decoration of ZnO nanowire arrays with Au nanoparticles in dye-sensitized solar cells allowed to expoite the advantages of the plasmonic-enhaced absorption and hot-carrier generation of metal nanoparticles with the reduced charge recombination due to the Schottky barrier at the Au–ZnO interface.147 Kawawaki et al. improved the absorption of PbS QD/ZnO nanowire solar cells in the near-infrared range by including Ag nanocubes with an overall enhancement of the power conversion efficiency from 4.5% to 6%.148 Within the solid-state p–n energy conversion scheme, core–shell silicon nanowire solar cells decorated with single silver nanocrystals showed wavelength-dependent enhancement of the short-circuit current (i.e. absorption) arising from both the near-field and far-field coupling with dipolar and quadrupolar nanocrystal resonances (Fig. 6c).149 In solar to chemical energy conversion, plasmonic nanostructures deposited on semconductor nanowire arrays have been also shown to enhance water splitting in the UV and visible regions of the spectrum via expanding and improving the absorption range of the bare nanowire arrays.150,151
Finally, we mention that the lasing properties of nanowires discussed in Section 3.1 are also affected by the presence of metal nanoparticles. Zhang et al. were the first to investigate the interaction between the plasmonic resonance of a spherical Ag nanoparticle and the Fabry–Perot modes in an optically pumped CdS nanowire. The wavelength and the relative intensity of resonance modes in the nanowire cavity were modulated by adjusting the particle position along the nanowire resulting in an enhancement of the cavity Q-factor of 56%.152
4.2 Sensing applications
Another mechanism that can be explored and implemented in hybrid structures is surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). Raman scattering signals of a single or few molecules adsorbed at or in proximity of metal nanostructures have been observed due to the plasmonic-mediated signal enhancement of many orders of magnitude.153 This approach, that expands the capability of traditional Raman spectroscopy, has become a widely explored technique to study molecular structures and to detect ultra-low concentrations of molecules in sensing devices.154–156 In order to exploit and integrate these capabilities in real sensing devices, optimized fabrication techniques for SERS templates are required to maximize the sensitivity and avoid non-uniform distribution of nanoparticles that would result in poor reproducibility. Vertical arrays or spaghetti-like ensembles of nanowires decorated with metal nanoparticles represent ideal candidates to achieve these requirements. The larger available surface provided by the nanowires compared to a flat surface allows an increase of the nanoparticle density, i.e. field-enhanced hot spots, loaded on the substrate, thus resulting in a dramatic enhancement of the Raman signals by 6–7 orders of magnitude and low detection limits down to few hundreds ppms (Fig. 7a and b).47,48,157,158 Moreover, the decoration techniques are capable of realizing an homogeneous distribution of nanoparticles over the entire substrate resulting in an excellent reproducibility of the results.159–161
 Fig. 7  HbNW for SERS applications. (a) The SEM image of the Au nanoparticle-coated MnO2 nanowires and (b) Raman scattering of methylene blue on MnO2 nanowires covered by different amount of Au nanoparticles.48 (c) The SEM image of a Si nanowire decorated with different Au nanostructures and Raman spectra recorded at different positions along the nanowire with (d) parallel and (e) perpendicular polarization with respect to the nanowire long axis.33 Adapted with permission from (a and b) Copyright 2015, RSC; (c–e) Copyright 2012, ACS. 
In addition, SERS activity of metal nanostructures attached on the nanowire surface can also be exploited to enhance the Raman scattering of the nanowires. For instance, metal nanoparticle decorated Si nanowires with sub-nanometer particle-nanowire gap separation led to an enhancement of the Raman signal of up to a factor of 28, recorded where two nanoparticles were found on either side of the nanowires (Fig. 7c–e).33,162 This approach provided an elegant way to perform the in situ resonance and non-resonance Raman spectroscopy investigation of homogeneous and heterostructured nanowires as well as characterization of nanowire surface optical phonon modes.163
The sensitivity of the plasmonic resonance frequencies to the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium (see Section 3.2.1) offers an alternative method of molecular recognition. The appearance of a target analyte in solution or its binding on a pre-functionalized nanoparticle metal surface modifies the medium permittivity and can be revealed via monitoring the frequency shift of the plasmonic resonances. This principle, previously demonstrated in 2D and 3D nanoparticle assemblies164–167 and other plasmonic structures,168–171 was recently demonstrated by Convertino et al. in silica nanowire forests decorated with Au and Ag nanoparticles where the light trapping effect in the nanowire ensemble resulted in a refractive index sensitivity among the highest reported in the literature.172
In the detection schemes previously described, metal nanoparticles played the role of active elements while nanowires had mainly the function of passive templates. However, it should be mentioned that alternative detection strategies can be explored in HbNW-based sensors. Many proof-of-concept devices have been demonstrated to be able to detect ultra-low concentrations of molecules either in gas phase or in solution using the properties of the metal–semiconductor interface. As discussed in Section 3.1, the advantages of using semiconductor nanowires for sensing rely on the high surface to volume ratio, providing high sensitivity, and the gating effect of absorbed molecules on the channel conductivity, that allows a direct electrical readout of their concentrations.173 Based on these properties, many authors demonstrated enhanced capabilities of HbNWs compared to pristine nanowires due to the combined gating and catalytic action carried out by the metal particles on the nanowire surface. In fact, for large enough densities of metal nanoparticles on the nanowire surface the Schottky barrier at the metal–semiconductor interface strongly affects the nanowire conductivity, conferring enhanced sensitivity to the surrounding medium.174–176 In addition, metal nanoparticles own well-known catalytic properties (also affected by the plasmonic-mediated hot-carrier generation process)177–181 that allow a larger adsorption of molecules on the nanowire surface as well as a faster absorption/desorption process, thus enhancing the overall detection response of the hybrid nanostructures versus the bare nanowire.23,175,182–188
The expanded capabilities of HbNWs are not limited to the enhanced detection sensitivity. Recently, schemes to improve the selectivity of the device response have also been proposed. Zou et al. showed the successful use of a metal nanoparticle decorated nanowire hybrid field-effect transistor as a highly selective gas sensor. In this prototype, the engineered electronic properties of an In2O3 nanowire obtained by Mg-doping, assisted by the catalytic properties of various metal particles, resulted in high sensitivity and selectivity in detecting CO, O2, H2 and C2H5OH.189 Another important advantage offered by hybrid nanostructures is that metal nanoparticle surfaces can be easily functionalized in order to reach a selective response to target molecules in solutions. Pachauri et al. showed the feasibility of this approach demonstrating an ion-sensitive metal–semiconductor field-effect transistor for chemical sensing.190
Overall, sensing represents one of the most promising and explored applications of HbNW nanostructures. The possibility of exploiting and optimizing the entire capabilities, ranging from the plasmonic and catalytic properties of metal nanoparticles to the electrical transport in nanowires, represents an attractive prospective for developing the next generation of miniaturized sensors.
5 Conclusions and outlook
This brief snapshot on some of the most remarkable achievements obtained in the field of metal nanoparticle–semiconductor nanowire hybrid devices supports the high expectations and promises to solve key weaknesses of the present technology in many fields. However, despite their great potential, HbNW nanostructures are not exempt from limitations and challenges to be addressed originating from both plasmonic and semiconductor nanowire components.
In plasmon-related processes, the main limitation arises from the ohmic losses due to intraband and interband electronic transitions, described by a non-vanishing imaginary part of the permittivity ε′′ in metals. Although the ideal case of ε′′ = 0 is not possible, every metal has an optimum optical region where the imaginary part reaches the minimum. For instance, Au shows minimum losses at wavelengths in the range 600–800 nm.191 At present, Au and Ag are the most used metals in plasmonic devices, as they also have the lowest ohmic losses. However, the high cost, especially of Au, has encouraged research of alternative low-cost materials,192 such as copper,193,194 aluminum195 and alkali metals.196 Alternative strategies in materials engineering include growth of metallic compounds to obtain materials with reduced carrier concentrations and consequently lower ohmic losses197 and highly doped semiconductors with a metal-like behavior.191 However, investigation of these alternative materials in hybrid nanostructures is still lacking in the literature.
On the semiconductor nanowire side, although the vapor–liquid–solid growth conducted via different methods such as chemical vapor deposition, metal–organic chemical vapor deposition, molecular beam epitaxy, metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy and pulsed laser ablation methods,81,198,199 allows an outstanding control of the chemical composition, the synthesis of high-crystal quality materials requires expensive equipment. The associated scaling up of the growth process is also an issue that needs to be addressed in terms of cost and technological capabilities. In addition, manipulation of these nanostructures and assembly in precise configurations represent an important limitation to the realization of integrated circuits based on nanowire elements, even though different approaches ranging from self-assembly methods to nanopatterning200–203 have opened up viable routes for industrial-oriented applications.204
Overall, fabrication of metal nanostructures by the design on the nanowire surface, or in its proximity, actually represents the main limiting factor that hampers the fundamental investigation of these fascinating hybrid materials and remains one of the major bottlenecks for mass production of plasmonic hybrid devices. In fact, exploration of the properties of hybrid architectures is still at its infancy and more research needs to be done to explore new material combinations, geometry and device capabilities. From the industrialization point of view, even though the resolution of silicon manufacturing processes is actually capable of fabricating structures with nanometer dimensions of the order of ∼10 nm, realization of metal nanostructures requires alternative processes.192 From this perspective, the use of highly doped semiconductors would facilitate the integration of plasmonic nanostructures in the present semiconductor-device technology by exploitation of CMOS-compatible strategies. On the other hand, chemical synthesis of metal nanostructures205 offers a low-cost, high yield throughput that could potentially match the requirements imposed by industrial manufacturing but suffers from limited control of the nanowire decoration process and still requires further improvements for the fabrication of devices on a large scale.
Nevertheless, the field of plasmonic-enhanced hybrid devices can be appointed as one of the most promising fields of research with potential large impact on future technological developments. The promising results obtained so far are strongly driving increasing scientific efforts in further development, optimization and integration of plasmonic devices with present electronic components, towards a new chip-scale technology taking advantage from the strengths of both plasmonic and electronic components.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Commission under FP7 ITN project “Nanowiring” (265073) and by FP7 NMP project “Hysens” (263091).
References
T. D. Ladd, F. Jelezko, R. Laflamme, Y. Nakamura, C. Monroe and J. L. O'Brien, Nature, 2010, 464, 45–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2010, 328, 440–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zia, J. A. Schuller, A. Chandran and M. L. Brongersma, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 83–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Lindquist, P. Nagpal, K. M. McPeak, D. J. Norris and S.-H. Oh, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 036501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Schuller, E. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. Jun, J. White and M. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Silvestroni, Fondamenti di chimica, Editoriale Veschi,  1989 Search PubMed .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Mater. Today, 2005, 8, 56 CrossRef .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Maier, M. L. Brongersma, P. G. Kik, S. Meltzer, A. A. G. Requicha and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cang, A. Labno, C. Lu, X. Yin, M. Liu, C. Gladden, Y. Liu and X. Zhang, Nature, 2011, 469, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, M. Tang, M. Hentschel, H. Giessen and A. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mølhave, B. A. Wacaser, D. H. Petersen, J. B. Wagner, L. Samuelson and P. Bøggild, Small, 2008, 4, 1741–1746 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Barrelet, Y. Wu, D. C. Bell and C. M. Lieber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11498–11499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Radovanovic, C. J. Barrelet, S. Gradecak, F. Qian and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1407–1411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Johansson, L. S. Karlsson, C. P. T. Svensson, T. Mårtensson, B. A. Wacaser, K. Deppert, L. Samuelson and W. Seifert, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 574–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ertekin, P. A. Greaney, D. C. Chrzan and T. D. Sands, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114325 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cheng, E. Sie, B. Liu, C. Huan, T. Sum, H. Sun and H. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 071107 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Hyun and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2731–2734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, D. Li, H. Hu, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Wong, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Hu and Z. Shen, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4416–4422 CAS .
S. Dhara and P. Giri, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 124317 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Fang, J. Sha, Z. L. Wang, Y. T. Wan, W. W. Xia and Y. W. Wang, Behind the change of the photoluminescence property of metal-coated ZnO nanowire arrays, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 033103 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kolmakov, D. Klenov, Y. Lilach, S. Stemmer and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 667–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hatakeyama, T. Morita, S. Takahashi, K. Onishi and K. Nishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3279–3285 CAS .
N. P. Dasgupta, C. Liu, S. Andrews, F. B. Prinz and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12932–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Christensen, H. Feng, J. L. Libera, N. Guo, J. T. Miller, P. C. Stair and J. W. Elam, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3047–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Dasgupta, H. J. Jung, O. Trejo, M. T. McDowell, A. Hryciw, M. Brongersma, R. Sinclair and F. B. Prinz, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 934–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. King, A. Wittstock, J. Biener, S. O. Kucheyev, Y. M. Wang, T. F. Baumann, S. K. Giri, A. V. Hamza, M. Baeumer and S. F. Bent, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2405–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Colombo, P. Krogstrup, J. Nygård, M. L. Brongersma and A. F. i. Morral, New J. Phys., 2011, 13, 123026 CrossRef .
A. Casadei, E. F. Pecora, J. Trevino, C. Forestiere, D. Ruffer, E. Russo-Averchi, F. Matteini, G. Tutuncuoglu, M. Heiss, A. F. i. Morral and L. Dal Negro, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2271–2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Scholl, A. L. Koh and J. A. Dionne, Nature, 2012, 483, 421–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W.-S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3913–3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, D. Li, H. Hu, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Wong, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Hu, Z. Shen and Q. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4416–4422 CAS .
K.-Q. Peng, X. Wang, X.-L. Wu and S.-T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3704–3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4774–4777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shen and D. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21088–21093 CAS .
J. K. Hyun and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2731–2734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, N. K. Grady, R. Bardhan, F. Hao, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2346–2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pescaglini, A. Martn, D. Cammi, G. Juska, C. Ronning, E. Pelucchi and D. Iacopino, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6202–6209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ashkarran and A. Bayat, Int. Nano Lett., 2013, 3, 50 CrossRef .
E. C. Le Ru, J. Grand, I. Sow, W. R. Somerville, P. G. Etchegoin, M. Treguer-Delapierre, G. Charron, N. Félidj, G. Lévi and J. Aubard, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5013–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Novo, A. M. Funston, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzan and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 112, 3–7 Search PubMed .
X. Xia and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6038–6042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kattumenu, C. H. Lee, L. Tian, M. E. McConney and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15218–15223 RSC .
T. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Jin, X. Wang and J. Zhou, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 7606–7612 RSC .
J.-P. Colinge, C.-W. Lee, A. Afzalian, N. D. Akhavan, R. Yan, I. Ferain, P. Razavi, B. O'Neill, A. Blake and M. White, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 225–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Zimmler, D. Stichtenoth, C. Ronning, W. Yi, V. Narayanamurti, T. Voss and F. Capasso, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1695–1699 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, M. S. Gudiksen, X. Duan, Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1455–1457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, X.-Y. Bao, H. Kim, Y. Lo and D. Wang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 1430–1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. Aplin, J. Park, X. Bao, Y.-H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, J.-S. Park, P. Fan, B. Clemens and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, J. S. White, J.-S. Park, J. A. Schuller, B. M. Clemens and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Garnett, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 269–295 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Colombo, M. Heiß, M. Gratzel and A. F. Morral, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 173108 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wallentin, N. Anttu, D. Asoli, M. Huffman, I. Aberg, M. H. Magnusson, G. Siefer, P. Fuss-Kailuweit, F. Dimroth, B. Witzigmann, H. Q. Xu, L. Samuelson, K. Deppert and M. T. Borgstrom, Science, 2013, 339, 1057–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, Phys. E, 2002, 14, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Roder, M. Wille, S. Geburt, J. Rensberg, M. Zhang, J. G. Lu, F. Capasso, R. Buschlinger, U. Peschel and C. Ronning, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3602–3606 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, G. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Lin, L. Chernyak, J. Zhao, J. Kong, L. Li, J. Ren and J. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Johnson, H. Yan, P. Yang and R. J. Saykally, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8816–8828 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Zimmler, F. Capasso, S. Müller and C. Ronning, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2010, 25, 024001 CrossRef .
A. Pan, R. Liu, Q. Yang, Y. Zhu, G. Yang, B. Zou and K. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24268–24272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Johnson, H.-J. Choi, K. P. Knutsen, R. D. Schaller, P. Yang and R. J. Saykally, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 106–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, R. E. Russo and S. S. Mao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 043106 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Qian, Y. Li, S. Gradečak, H.-G. Park, Y. Dong, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 701–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Li, C.-Y. Wen and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2287–2291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deshpande, T. Frost, L. Yan, S. Jahangir, A. Hazari, X. Liu, J. Mirecki-Millunchick, Z. Mi and P. Bhattacharya, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1647–1653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Heiss, Y. Fontana, A. Gustafsson, G. Wüst, C. Magen, D. ORegan, J. Luo, B. Ketterer, S. Conesa-Boj and A. Kuhlmann, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 439–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Erhard, A. T. M. G. Sarwar, F. Yang, D. W. McComb, R. C. Myers and A. W. Holleitner, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 332–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Xu, P. Wang, X. Zhuang, A. Pan and L. Tong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5085–5089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pan, W. Zhou, E. S. P. Leong, R. Liu, A. H. Chin, B. Zou and C. Z. Ning, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 784–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, D. Wang, C. Meng, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, L. Dai, X. Liu, T. Hasan, X. Liu and Q. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3153–3159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bao, M. A. Zimmler, F. Capasso, X. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1719–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qian, Y. Li, S. Gradecak, D. Wang, C. J. Barrelet and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yan, D. Gargas and P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Mahmoodi, B. Raissi, E. Marzbanrad, N. Shojayi, A. Aghaei and C. Zamani, Procedia Chem., 2009, 1, 947–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohseni Kiasari and P. Servati, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 1–3 Search PubMed .
M.-W. Ahn, K.-S. Park, J.-H. Heo, D.-W. Kim, K. Choi and J.-G. Park, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138, 168–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wan, Q. H. Li, Y. J. Chen, T. H. Wang, X. L. He, J. P. Li and C. L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3654–3656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, H. B. Lu, J. C. Li, C. Liu, D. J. Fu and Y. L. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 173110 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Law and J. Thong, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 205502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 494–499 CAS .
Y. Han, C. Gao, H. Zhu, S. Chen, Q. Jiang, T. Li, M. Willander, X. Cao and N. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 405–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. He, 
            et al.
          , Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Lao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 262107 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. Ahn, K. S. Park, J. H. Heo, J. G. Park, D. W. Kim, K. J. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. H. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 263103 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. Zhou, P.-H. Yeh, Z. Li, T.-Y. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3327–3332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-H. Yeh, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4975–4978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Choi, I.-S. Hwang, J.-G. Park, K. J. Choi, J.-H. Park and J.-H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095508 CrossRef PubMed .
X. P. A. Gao, G. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 547–552 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Offermans, M. Crego-Calama and S. H. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2412–2415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Strelcov, Y. Lilach and A. Kolmakov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2322–2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Maier, Plasmonics: fundamentals and applications, Springer Verlag,  2007 Search PubMed .

          J. D. Jackson and J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics, Wiley, New York,  1962, vol. 3 Search PubMed .
R. Gans, Ann. Phys., 1912, 342, 881–900 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles (Wiley science paperback series), Wiley-VCH,  1998 Search PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, K. Park and M. Srinivasarao, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 65, 1–38 CrossRef PubMed .
F. J. Garcia de Abajo and A. Howie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 115418 CrossRef .
G. W. Bryant, F. J. Garcia de Abajo and J. Aizpurua, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Yee, 
            et al.
          , IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 1966, 14, 302–307 CrossRef .
E. C. Le Ru and P. G. Etchegoin, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 631–640 CrossRef .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–38 CrossRef .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang, H. V. Demir and Y. K. Gun'ko, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 85–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manjavacas, J. G. Liu, V. Kulkarni and P. Nordlander, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7630–7638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8410–8426 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and A. O. Govorov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7606–7614 CAS .
R. H. Fowler, Phys. Rev., 1931, 38, 45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, H. Li, H. Zhang and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 203109 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Grinblat, M. Rahmani, E. Corts, M. Caldarola, D. Comedi, S. A. Maier and A. V. Bragas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6660–6665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Li, D. Song, H. Liu, B. Jiang, F. Bai and L. Chu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 756–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Berini, Laser Photonics Rev., 2014, 8, 197–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, S. E. Kocabas, S. Latif, A. K. Okyay, D.-S. Ly-Gagnon, K. C. Saraswat and D. A. Miller, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 226–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Hu, H.-L. Chen, C.-H. Shen, L.-S. Hong, B.-R. Huang, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 102–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, W. Hu, N. Guo, Z. Lu, X. Zou, L. Liao, S. Shi, P. Chen, Z. Fan and J. C. Ho, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3628–3635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, M. Sakurai, M. Liao and M. Aono, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19835–19839 CAS .
J. Lu, C. Xu, J. Dai, J. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Lin and P. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3396–3403 RSC .
J. Lu, J. Li, C. Xu, Y. Li, J. Dai, Y. Wang, Y. Lin and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18301–18305 CAS .
J. P. Sundararajan, P. Bakharev, I. Niraula, B. A. Fouetio Kengne, Q. MacPherson, M. Sargent, B. Hare and D. N. McIlroy, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5181–5185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-B. Luo, W.-J. Xie, Y.-F. Zou, Y.-Q. Yu, F.-X. Liang, Z.-J. Huang and K.-Y. Zhou, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 12979–12988 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Chakraborty, F. Greullet, C. George, D. Baranov, E. Di Fabrizio and R. Krahne, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5334–5340 RSC .
L.-B. Luo, X.-L. Huang, M.-Z. Wang, C. Xie, C.-Y. Wu, J.-G. Hu, L. Wang and J.-A. Huang, Small, 2014, 10, 2645–2652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, Y. Bao, F. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Cheng, Z. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Fang and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 123904 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Z. Liu, H. Y. Xu, C. L. Wang, L. X. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Y. Sun, J. G. Ma, X. T. Zhang, J. N. Wang and Y. C. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8634–8639 RSC .
L.-B. Luo, L.-H. Zeng, C. Xie, Y.-Q. Yu, F.-X. Liang, C.-Y. Wu, L. Wang and J.-G. Hu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3914 Search PubMed .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, Y. Wang, A. S. Urban, A. Sobhani, B. Y. Zheng, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1687–1692 CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
P. Krogstrup, H. I. Jørgensen, M. Heiss, O. Demichel, J. V. Holm, M. Aagesen, J. Nygard and A. F. i. Morral, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Kempa, B. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. Hu, X. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456–3460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hagglund, M. Zach, G. Petersson and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053110 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Derkacs, S. Lim, P. Matheu, W. Mar and E. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 093103 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Reineck, G. P. Lee, D. Brick, M. Karg, P. Mulvaney and U. Bach, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4750–4755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Derkacs, W. Chen, P. Matheu, S. Lim, P. Yu and E. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 091107 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hagglund, M. Zach and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Wei, X. Li and W. C. Choy, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6236 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, S. Qu, X. Zhang, F. Tan and Z. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Chen, Y. B. Tang, C. P. Liu, Y. H. Leung, G. D. Yuan, L. M. Chen, Y. Q. Wang, I. Bello, J. A. Zapien, W. J. Zhang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13433–13437 CAS .
T. Kawawaki, H. Wang, T. Kubo, K. Saito, J. Nakazaki, H. Segawa and T. Tatsuma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4165–4172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brittman, H. Gao, E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5189–5195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Pu, G. Wang, K.-D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y.-K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C.-M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y.-J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K.-Q. Peng, Y. Hu, F.-Q. Zhang, B. Hu, L. Li, M. Wang, X.-M. Meng and S.-T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 18–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, X.-Y. Shan, X. Feng, C.-X. Wang, Q.-Q. Wang, J.-F. Jia and Q.-K. Xue, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4270–4274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Halas and M. Moskovits, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 607–611 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sharma, M. Fernanda Cardinal, S. L. Kleinman, N. G. Greeneltch, R. R. Frontiera, M. G. Blaber, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, H. Wang, G. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Feng, W. S. Teo, T. Wu and H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3087–3094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Aroca, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5355–5363 RSC .
J.-A. Huang, Y.-Q. Zhao, X.-J. Zhang, L.-F. He, T.-L. Wong, Y.-S. Chui, W.-J. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5039–5045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, T. Mårtensson, K. A. Dick, K. Deppert, H. Xu, L. Samuelson and H. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 275712 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Lu, K. Ai, G. Zhang and X. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2348–2355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, J. Gao, P. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Sun and S.-T. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3296–3301 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, W. Cai, Y. Lin and B. Chen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8925–8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, H. Hu, M. I. B. Utama, L. M. Wong, K. Ghosh, R. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Shen and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3940–3947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pescaglini, E. Secco, A. Martin, D. Cammi, C. Ronning, A. Cantarero, N. Garro and D. Iacopino, Non-resonant Raman Spectroscopy of Individual ZnO Nanowires via Au Nanorod Surface Plasmons, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015 Search PubMed  , submitted.
K. Sugawa, H. Tahara, A. Yamashita, J. Otsuki, T. Sagara, T. Harumoto and S. Yanagida, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1895–1904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, K. Bonroy, D. Nelis, F. Frederix, J. DHaen, G. Maes and G. Borghs, Colloids Surf., A, 2008, 321, 313–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, X.-Q. Dinh, X. Yu and F. Luan, Plasmonics, 2011, 6, 491–506 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, G. Chen and D.-H. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5147–5153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kabashin, P. Evans, S. Pastkovsky, W. Hendren, G. Wurtz, R. Atkinson, R. Pollard, V. Podolskiy and A. Zayats, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 867–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Kou, Z. Yang, W. Ni and J. Wang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5233–5237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, J. Zhou, T. Liu, Y. Tao, R. Jiang, M. Liu, G. Xiao, J. Zhu, Z.-K. Zhou and X. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2381 Search PubMed .
A. G. Brolo, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 709–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Convertino, M. Cuscun, F. Martelli, M. G. Manera and R. Rella, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 685–690 CAS .
P. Feng, F. Shao, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, Sensors, 2014, 14, 17406–17429 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Xu, P. Xu, Y. Zhu, X. Chen and W. Yu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 285501 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, L. Li, Z. Du, H. Yu, Y. Xiang, Y. Li, Y. Cai and T. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 035501 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-H. Ahn, J. Yun, Y.-K. Choi and I. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 013508 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Weidemaier, H. L. Tavernier and M. D. Fayer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9352–9361 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, L. Wei, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Pan and J. Chen, Plasmonics, 2013, 8, 1193–1202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, T. Peng, X. Hu, Y. Nie, X. Zhou, J. Qu and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 132, 857–862 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wu, X. Hu, J. Fan, E. Liu, T. Sun, L. Kang, W. Hou, C. Zhu and H. Liu, Plasmonics, 2013, 8, 501–508 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Shimizu, R. A. Pala, J. D. Fabbri, M. L. Brongersma and N. A. Melosh, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2797–2803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Joshi, Q. Hu, F. Alvi, N. Joshi and A. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16199–16202 CAS .
W. Lim, J. Wright, B. Gila, J. L. Johnson, A. Ural, T. Anderson, F. Ren and S. Pearton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 072109 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Dobrokhotov, D. McIlroy, M. G. Norton, A. Abuzir, W. Yeh, I. Stevenson, R. Pouy, J. Bochenek, M. Cartwright and L. Wang, 
            et al.
          , J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 104302 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Dobrokhotov, D. McIlroy, M. G. Norton, R. Abdelrahaman, A. Safir and C. Berven, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 135504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, C. Y. Jin, J.-H. Ahn, S. Jeon and I. Park, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6851–6856 RSC .
W. Dong, H. Huang, Y. Zhu, X. Li, X. Wang, C. Li, B. Chen, G. Wang and Z. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 425602 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Singh, R. K. Gupta and P. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2246–2252 CAS .
X. Zou, J. Wang, X. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, X. Xiao, J. C. Ho, J. Li, C. Jiang, Y. Fang, W. Liu and L. Liao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3287–3292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pachauri, K. Kern and K. Balasubramanian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 023501 CrossRef PubMed .
G. V. Naik, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3264–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Nathan, N. Prashant, M. M. Kevin, J. N. David and O. Sang-Hyun, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 036501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kim, S. H. Ehrman and T. A. Germer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1278–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, J. Henzie, M. H. Lee and T. W. Odom, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 20146–20151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ray, M. H. Chowdhury and J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 6480–6487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Arnold and M. G. Blaber, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 3835–3847 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Blaber, M. D. Arnold and M. J. Ford, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 143201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Plissard, D. R. Slapak, M. A. Verheijen, M. Hocevar, G. W. Immink, I. van Weperen, S. Nadj-Perge, S. M. Frolov, L. P. Kouwenhoven and E. P. Bakkers, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1794–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Chen, W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Semiconductor Nanowires: From Next-Generation Electronics to Sustainable Energy, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2015, pp. 1–53 Search PubMed .
D. Whang, S. Jin and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 951–954 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lieber and Z. L. Wang, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javey, S. Nam, R. S. Friedman, H. Yan and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 773–777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Whang, S. Jin, Y. Wu and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1255–1259 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, P. Werner and M. Zacharias, Small, 2006, 2, 700–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Perez-Juste, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzan and P. Mulvaney, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1870–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Andrea Pescaglini
	Andrea Pescaglini received his BSc and MSc degrees in Physics from the University of Pisa in 2007 and 2010 respectively. In 2010 he was awarded a Marie Curie Early Stage Researcher and he obtained his PhD degree from the Chemistry Department of University College Cork in 2014. He then joined the Epitaxy and Physics of Nanostructures group as a postdoctoral fellow in Tyndall National Institute (Cork, Ireland). His current research interest covers fabrication and studies of optical and electrical properties of semiconductor nanowires-based devices, nanoplasmonics and development of nanostructured devices for light-emitting diodes.

Daniela Iacopino
	Daniela Iacopino received her BSc degree in Chemistry from Universita' di Pavia (Italy) in 1995. She received her PhD in Chemistry in 2000 Universita' di Modena (Italy) after a research period in the Chemistry Dept. of University of Birmingham (UK). In 2000, she was awarded a Marie Curie postdoctoral fellowship at University College Dublin, where she developed strategies for the self-assembly of DNA based electronic devices. Daniela joined the Nanotechnology Group at Tyndall in 2002 as a staff researcher. Her current research interests are synthesis and self-assembly of metal and polymer semiconductor one-dimensional structures for sensing and photonic applications. Other active areas include single particle darkfield spectroscopy for technological and environmental sensing applications and fabrication of hybrid photonic plasmonic devices. In a further application, metal nanoparticles and particle assemblies are also used for enhanced Raman spectroscopies applied to works of art. Daniela is co-author of over 50 scientific papers, one book chapter and one patent.

 	Fig. 1  Characteristic domains in terms of the operating speed and device sizes for semiconductors (electronics), dielectrics (photonics) and metals (plasmonics). Adapted with permission.2 Copyright 2010, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Hybrid metal nanostructures decorated semiconductor nanowires obtained by (a) the sputtering technique,48 (b and c) e-beam lithography,30 (d and e) galvanic displacement,33 (f) droplet deposition,37 (g) mask-selective droplet deposition,40 and (h and i) chemical functionalization.47 Adapted with permission from (a) Copyright 2015, RSC; (b and c) Copyright 2014, ACS; (d and e) Copyright 2012, ACS; (f) Copyright 2011, ACS; (g) Copyright 2014, ACS; (h and i) Copyright 2011, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photoconductive gain versus photon absorption rate in ZnO nanowire photodetectors irradiated at a light wavelength of 390 nm. The inset shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the device.53 (b) Measured spectra of the absorption efficiency Qabs under unpolarized light taken from individual Ge nanowires with radii of 10 nm (black), 25 nm (blue) and 110 nm (red). The inset depicts a schematic illustration of the device.54 (c) A schematic of a single core–shell Si nanowire solar cell and the SEM image of the nanowire cross section.57 (d) The SEM image of a vertical InP nanowire array solar cell with superimposed p–i–n doping levels.59 (e) The microphotoluminescence spectrum of a single CdS:Sn nanowire nanolaser at 4 K optically pumped at 325 nm showing near band edge emission (485–491 nm) and the donor–acceptor pair transition and the LO phonon replica (510–540 nm).63 (f) A schematic of a electrically pumped ZnO nanowire array laser device and the electroluminescence spectrum of the device operating at 70 mA with the related side-view optical microscope image.64 Adapted with permission from (a) Copyright 2007, ACS; (b) Copyright 2010, ACS; (c) Copyright 2007, NPG; (d) Copyright 2013, AAAS; (e) Copyright 2013, ACS; (f) Copyright 2011, NPG.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the working principle of (a) the field-effect sensing mechanism and (b) the Schottky-gated device. (c) The energy-band diagram of the metal–ZnO Shottcky contact.93 (d) An illustration of an InAs vertical nanowire array sensor and (e) the response (percentage of the current variation) of an array of 200 nanowires to varying concentrations of NO2 in N2. The inset shows the time response to 9 ppm.97 Adapted with permission from (a–c) Copyright 2010, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; (d and e) Copyright 2010, ACS.	 
Re[ε(ω)] = −2εm	(1)
	(2)
Re[3εm + 3Li(ε(ω) − εm)] = 0	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  Distribution of hot electrons (red lines) and hot holes (blue lines) generated per unit of time and volume as a function of their energy with respect to the Fermi level. The plots compare four different hot carrier lifetimes τ ranging from 0.05 to 1 ps and nanoparticle diameters of (a) 15 nm, and (b) 25 nm.113 In the particle with diameter 15 nm the carrier distribution was found to be extending across the all interval of energies. A decrease in the lifetime results in a narrower distribution near the Fermi energy with a larger number of excited particles. A similar trend was also observed by increasing the diameter to 25 nm. (c) The simulated enhancement factor in metal nanoparticles with different shapes showing that the ellipsoidal geometry is the most advantageous.112 (d) A schematic representation of the hot electron generation and injection process at a metal–semiconductor interface. Adapted with permission from (a and b) Copyright 2014, ACS; (c) Copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 
	(5)
	(6)
Iph = I0·(ℏω − Φb)2	(7)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a HbNW photodetector and FDTD simulation of the field enhancement at the metal nanoparticle-nanowire interface (top). Enhancement of the ratio between photocurrent intensity under transversal and longitudinal polarization (bottom).37 (b) The SEM image of the Au nanorod-decorated ZnO nanowire and schematic of the external applied circuit (top). The false colors highlight the different device components: ZnO nanowire (blue), Au nanorods (red), Ti/Al contacts (green). Comparison between the photocurrent spectra under a light wavelength longer than 650 nm of a hybrid device and a bare ZnO nanowire (bottom).40 (c) The SEM image of a single silicon nanowire solar cell decorated with an Ag octahedron and (bottom) the changes in photocurrent with respect to the non decorated nanowire.149 Adapted with permission from (a) Copyright 2010, ACS; (b) Copyright 2014, ACS; (c) Copyright 2011, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 7  HbNW for SERS applications. (a) The SEM image of the Au nanoparticle-coated MnO2 nanowires and (b) Raman scattering of methylene blue on MnO2 nanowires covered by different amount of Au nanoparticles.48 (c) The SEM image of a Si nanowire decorated with different Au nanostructures and Raman spectra recorded at different positions along the nanowire with (d) parallel and (e) perpendicular polarization with respect to the nanowire long axis.33 Adapted with permission from (a and b) Copyright 2015, RSC; (c–e) Copyright 2012, ACS.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
