Fluorescent indicators based on BODIPY  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15132K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15132K
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1130-1172Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsFluorescent indicators based on BODIPY

        
          
            Noël 
            Boens
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Volker 
            Leen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wim 
            Dehaen
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200f – bus 02404, 3001 Heverlee (Leuven), Belgium. E-mail: Noel.Boens@chem.kuleuven.be; Wim.Dehaen@chem.kuleuven.be;  Fax: +32-16-327990;   Tel: +32-16-327497  Tel: +32-16-327439
Received 
      17th May 2011
    First published on 28th July 2011AbstractThis critical review covers the advances made using the 4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY) scaffold as a fluorophore in the design, synthesis and application of fluorescent indicators for pH, metal ions, anions, biomolecules, reactive oxygen species, reactive nitrogen species, redox potential, chemical reactions and various physical phenomena. The sections of the review describing the criteria for rational design of fluorescent indicators and the mathematical expressions for analyzing spectrophotometric and fluorometric titrations are applicable to all fluorescent probes (206 references).
1. Introduction
Fluorescence spectroscopy, fluorescence imaging and fluorescence indicators are nowadays indispensable tools in various fields of modern science and medicine, including clinical diagnostics, biotechnology, molecular biology and biochemistry, materials science, and analytical and environmental chemistry. The classic indicator is a molecule capable of transforming chemical information, such as the presence or concentration of a specific analyte, into an analytically useful signal. In this review, we shall use the words indicator, detector, sensor, chemosensor and probe indiscriminately, with the sole purpose of bringing more variation in the text. A typical fluorescent indicator combines an analyte recognition site (also called chelator, chelating group, coordination site, binding site, receptor or ligand) with a fluorescent reporter moiety (fluorophore) which translates the binding between the analyte and the recognition site into a fluorescence output signal. Fluorescent sensors that can detect, quantify and/or image specific molecules or ions have become essential, sensitive tools in science, medicine and technology and have contributed considerably to the understanding of chemical and biological systems. The design, development, spectroscopic/photophysical characterization and application of novel fluorescent indicators continue to be topics of a vibrant, highly multidisciplinary research area.
Especially for sensing and visualization of analytes inside living cells, fluorescence microscopy offers considerable advantages over other measurement methods, such as microelectrodes, NMR, atomic absorption spectroscopy and spectrophotometry. Besides the high sensitivity and specificity, fluorescence techniques applied to intracellular measurements have a great spatial and temporal sampling capability, they tend to be operationally simple, and they are generally minimally disruptive to cells. Fluorescence is an experimentally versatile spectroscopy: the fluorescence signals may be monitored as (excitation and emission) spectra, intensities, intensity ratios, lifetimes, and even as anisotropy. Because light can travel through and egress from biological environments, it is possible via microscopic imaging to simultaneously visualize concentrations in all regions of a living cell. The use of several probes which are responsive to different ions allows the simultaneous monitoring/visualization of these ions.
Among the numerous classes of highly fluorescent dyes, the set based on 4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene1,2 (better known as BODIPY,3 difluoroboron dipyrromethene, Fig. 1) shows perhaps the highest potential and has spectacularly risen in popularity. Although the first member of this set was reported as early as 1968 by Treibs and Kreuzer,4 the possible uses of BODIPY-based dyes for biological labeling, for electroluminescent devices, as tunable laser dyes, as potential candidates for solid-state solar concentrators, as fluorescent switches, and fluorophores in sensors and labels were fully recognized only since the mid 1990s. As a result, since then the number of research papers and patents has increased spectacularly as more researchers enter the field. The many excellent features of BODIPY can explain its ever-growing success. The robustness against light and chemicals, the relatively high molar absorption coefficients ε(λ) and fluorescence quantum yields Φ, negligible triplet-state formation, narrow emission bandwidths with high peak intensities, good solubility, resistance towards self-aggregation in solution, excitation/emission wavelengths in the visible spectral region (≥500 nm), and fluorescence lifetimes τ in the nanosecond range all contribute to the appeal of these interesting compounds. Moreover, their spectroscopic and photophysical properties can be fine-tuned by attachment of ancillary residues at the appropriate positions of the difluoroboron dipyrromethene core. The wide versatility of synthetic pathways to the BODIPY class of fluorophores allows the creation of a perfect fit between the structure of the dye and its desired spectroscopic and photophysical characteristics.
 Fig. 1  (left panel) Representation of the BODIPY framework with the numbering scheme shown. The 8-position is often specified by meso. The 3,5-positions are sometimes referred to by α, while β is used to denote the 2,6-positions. All the positions of the BODIPY core are possible sites for functionalization. (right panel) A selection of dipolar, delocalized structures of BODIPY with the formal charges indicated. 
Some earlier review articles cover the synthesis, spectroscopic properties and various applications of BODIPY compounds.1,2,5 This critical review, however, is entirely dedicated to the advances made using the 4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene scaffold as a fluorophore in the design, synthesis and application of fluorescent indicators in order to try to highlight the wide diversity and applicability of BODIPY derivatives. It gives an overview of the state-of-the-art of the chemistry involved in the synthesis of reported BODIPY sensors and of their relevant spectroscopic/photophysical properties, including fluorescence quantum yields Φ, wavelength of the absorption maximum λabs, wavelength of the fluorescence emission maximum λem, ground-state dissociation constants Kd of the formed complexes with the analytes, etc. The purpose of the present review is to provide a comprehensive account of developments in the area of probes with BODIPY as a fluorophore, covering the period since the beginning in 1997 till the end of 2010.
Theoretically, a sensor must respond to its analyte reversibly. Nevertheless, in many cases, reversibility has not been demonstrated, but can be expected based on the principles of coordination chemistry. A substantial number of indicators described here react irreversibly with the analyte and are therefore more appropriately designated as dosimeters. These irreversible sensors are also included in this review. BODIPY-derived fluorescent labels, tags and markers are not discussed, however. Readers interested in commercial BODIPY-based probes should consult the Life Technologies (formerly Invitrogen) web site.6
We begin this review with a short overview of the most important developments in the synthesis and functionalization of the BODIPY core. In Section 3, we describe the criteria to be considered in the rational design of functional fluorescent probes. Section 4 describes briefly the three most widely utilized photophysical mechanisms operative in fluorescent sensors. Section 5 focuses on the determination of the dissociation constant Kd of the analyte–probe complex. Spectrophotometric and fluorometric titrations, direct as well as ratiometric will be discussed. The probes reported in the literature since 1997 are described in Section 6. This section, which comprises the bulk of the review, is subdivided according to the analyte of interest (cation, anion, biomolecule, reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, other phenomena). We close this review with our view on which future developments might shape progress in the domain of BODIPY-based probes.
2. Synthesis
Starting from commercially available pyrrole-based starting materials, it is relatively easy to produce a multitude of boron dipyrromethene dyes, often in high yield and multi-gram quantity. Interestingly, their spectroscopic/photophysical properties can be ‘fine-tuned’ by introducing different electron releasing/withdrawing groups onto the BODIPY framework.
2.1. Synthesis of the BODIPY core
Synthetic approaches to the difluoroboron dipyrromethene core are largely based on chemistry well known from porphyrin research, leading to the parent BODIPY chromophore.7
The acid-catalyzed condensation of aldehydes 2 with pyrrole 1 affords dipyrromethanes 3 (Scheme 1). For unsubstituted pyrrole, this reaction is normally carried out in pyrrole as a solvent to prevent polymerization, although modifications allow the use of fewer equivalents of pyrrole.8 On the other hand, for 2-substituted pyrroles, multiple condensations are not a competing side reaction, and an excess of pyrrole is not needed. Dipyrromethanes 3 are rather unstable compounds, and because they are sensitive to light, air and acid, best used immediately after preparation. Oxidation of dipyrromethane 3 yields a dipyrromethene or dipyrrin 4. This oxidation can be carried out with DDQ (2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-p-benzoquinone) or p-chloranil (2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-p-benzoquinone), the latter providing milder reaction conditions. Moreover, there are only a few examples where the aldehyde is not an aromatic one, because oxidation tends to fail in other cases. Subjecting the dipyrrin to base and boron trifluoride etherate affords the borondifluoride complex 5 in high yield.
 Scheme 1  Condensation of pyrrole with an aromatic aldehyde, yielding dipyrromethane 3 that is subsequently oxidized and complexed to BODIPY dye 5. 
The chemical robustness of BODIPY dyes also allows many post-synthetic modifications on the meso-aryl substituent, such as oxidation, reduction and nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr), without significant decomposition of the dye.
A second route to BODIPY uses the condensation of pyrrole 1 with an acylium equivalent 6 (Scheme 2). The intermediate acylpyrrole 7 is usually not isolated, because it can react under acidic conditions with an excess of pyrrole to form a dipyrrinium salt 8. The acylium equivalent can be an acid chloride,9,10 an acid anhydride11 or an orthoester.12 A particular advantage of this approach lies in the synthesis of asymmetric dipyrrins, because the isolated acylpyrrole 7 can be combined with a second pyrrole moiety 1b in an acidic condensation. Again, application of an excess of base and boron trifluoride etherate yields the BODIPY dye 9.
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of BODIPY dyes through the acylation of pyrrole followed by condensation and complexation. 
A third route, described by Wu and Burgess, is an interesting alternative to the condensation of an acylated pyrrole.13 Their serendipitous discovery that the second pyrrole equivalent is not always needed, and phosphorus oxychloride is capable of condensing pyrrole-2-carbaldehyde 10 with itself, deserves a closer look (Scheme 3). In the proposed mechanism, phosphorus oxychloride substitutes the aldehyde oxygen, resulting in a chlorinated azafulvene 11, which is attacked by a second pyrrole aldehyde 12. Subsequent nucleophilic attack by chloride, followed by decomposition of the unstable intermediate, yields dipyrrinium 15. The dipyrromethene can undergo complexation in a standard fashion to symmetric BODIPY 16. The products, arising from a one-pot procedure and requiring little purification, are generally obtained in exceptionally high yields. Similar mechanisms may account for scrambling that can occur in the preparation of asymmetric systems via the condensation of an acylpyrrole.
 Scheme 3  One-pot condensation–decarbonylation of pyrrole-2-carbaldehydes to yield dipyrrins and BODIPY dyes. 
Likewise, the condensation of nitrosopyrroles leads to aza-dipyrrins, which in turn are complexed with borontrifluoride etherate to the corresponding aza-BODIPY dyes. One-pot synthetic routes towards such deep blue aza-dipyrrins were established as early as 1943,14–16 but the complexation to the aza-BODIPY 21 was not reported until 1994.17 The one-pot sequence comprises condensation of the nitromethane adducts of chalcones 17 at elevated temperatures with a nitrogen source to form pyrroles 18, which are partially nitrosated to 19 in the reaction mixture (Scheme 4). A cross-condensation of these two pyrrole moieties then results in the formation of aza-dipyrrin 20. In more recent studies, optimized reaction conditions to the aza-dipyrrins were discovered, while also establishing a modular, asymmetric approach which includes isolation of the nitrosopyrrole.18,19
 Scheme 4  Reaction of nitrosylated pyrrole to form an aza-dipyrrin 20 and aza-BODIPY 21. 
Unfortunately, these aza-BODIPY dyes can only be prepared from heavily substituted pyrroles, such as 2,4-diarylpyrroles or ring annelated pyrroles.20,21 Several groups have put considerable effort in the synthesis of the alkyl analogues and less densely substituted structures, but without any success. Recent synthetic evidence confirms the instability of alkylated pyrroles and nitrosopyrroles under the previously established reaction conditions.22
Especially interesting about aza-BODIPY dyes is that the meso-nitrogen induces a large red shift of the absorption and fluorescence emission maxima, leading to dyes that fluoresce in the near-infrared (NIR) spectral range with moderate to good fluorescence quantum yields Φ. However, recent work by Rurack and coworkers shows that it is not always possible to generalize this design, because a 1,7-constrained aza-BODIPY dye failed to show bathochromically shifted spectra in comparison with its standard BODIPY counterpart.23
2.2. Functionalization of the BODIPY scaffold
The increasing interest in difluoroboron dipyrromethene dyes has led to a closer examination of the chemistry of the BODIPY core itself, and an array of functionalization methods are now available. As most of this synthetic methodology has been described in recent reviews, and lies outside the scope of this review, only a few reactions that are highly relevant to the synthesis of fluorescent indicators will be briefly described.
Like other electron-deficient heteroaromatic systems,24 the 3,5-methyl groups on e.g. BODIPY dye 22 are relatively acidic. This acidity allows the fluorophores to be condensed with aromatic aldehydes to form CC double bonds in a Knoevenagel-type reaction (Scheme 5).25,26 These reactions normally take place under basic conditions or in buffer, and removal of water from the mixture can be achieved by using a Dean–Stark apparatus or molecular sieves. Although the ease of these reactions has led to widespread use, yields are often low or not reported in the literature. Also, several electron-poor aldehydes have been found unreactive under these conditions.27 The use of electron-donating substituents on the aromatic aldehyde (see e.g.23) shifts the absorbance and fluorescence spectra of the resulting BODIPY dyes to the red.28,29 For example, p-dimethylaminostyryl substituted BODIPYs emit in the red (24)30 to NIR (25)26 spectral range.
 Scheme 5  Condensation of 3,5-dimethyl-BODIPY dyes with aromatic aldehydes can result in both mono- and distyrylated fluorophores. 
The electron deficiency at the 3,5-positions renders halogen substituents at these positions highly reactive towards nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) and palladium-catalyzed cross coupling. Originally introduced by Dehaen and Boens, 3,5-dichlorinated BODIPY dyes (as 26) are prone to substitution with carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, selenium, tellurium nucleophiles (Scheme 6).31–34
 Scheme 6  Nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) and oxidative nucleophilic substitution of hydrogen (ONSH) at the 3,5-positions of BODIPY. 
As for carbon and oxygen centered nucleophiles, the effects on the spectral properties of the parent dye are limited,35,36 but nitrogen, sulfur, selenium and tellurium centered substituents induce large bathochromic shifts of the absorption and emission maxima.34,37,38 Replacement of the meso-aryl with a trifluoromethyl moiety reduces the nonradiative decay through rotation, and thus leads to fluorophores with higher quantum yields.39 Also, monohalogenated dyes have been prepared and were shown to exhibit similar reactivity, thus bypassing the necessity of a second substitution in order to avoid a remaining reactive chlorine substituent.40
Placing new substituents at the 3,5-positions has a large effect on the spectroscopic and photophysical properties, what makes this strategy especially interesting for the design of novel fluorescent sensors and labels. In a recent development that is complementary to the chemistry of the 3- and 3,5-chlorinated structures, direct oxidative nucleophilic substitution of the 3- and 3,5-hydrogens allows the preparation of substituted BODIPYs 27 in a single step from 3,5-unsubstituted dyes 28 (Scheme 6).41 For carbon centered nucleophiles, the products for double substitution can also be obtained.
The halogenated dyes 26 and 29 can also be reacted in various transition metal catalyzed cross-coupling reactions (Scheme 7).42 As well as further fine-tuning of the maxima of absorption and fluorescence emission bands, such new substituents have a beneficial effect on the quantum yields of fluorescence. Suzuki and Stille arylations 30a, Heck reactions 30b, Sonogashira alkynations 30c and, most recently, copper-catalyzed Ullman etherification 30d can be used to introduce new functionality in mostly good yields.43Again, mono- and disubstituted systems are accessible.
 Scheme 7  Functionalization of 3-halogenated BODIPY dyes through transition metal catalysis. The R′ group is depicted for the various reaction types. 
Apart from their use in fluorescent sensors, such transition metal catalyzed reactions on 3,5-halogenated BODIPY derivatives have recently been used in the synthesis of novel fluorescent materials.44,45
3. Design criteria of fluorescent indicators
Fluorescent indicators for real-time sensing and fluorescence imaging are indispensable tools in life science and materials science.46–48 Fluorescence sensing and imaging of analytes is critically dependent on the availability of the appropriate probes. The rest of this section discusses the criteria to be considered in the design of fluorescent probes, a research area of continually increasing importance.
For the rational design of useful fluorescent probes, the list of parameters that need to be optimized collectively and simultaneously is extensive. (i) First and foremost is the ability of the probe to elicit a highly selective fluorescence response to the analyte of interest without reaction with other competing analytes (i.e., the preferred complex formation with the analyte of interest when other analytes are present). (ii) An obvious criterion is robustness of the indicator against chemicals and light. (iii) The fluorescence should be as bright as possible, requiring large ε(λ) values at the excitation wavelength λ and high fluorescence quantum yields Φ, i.e., a high dye brightness ε(λ) × Φ.49 (iv) The ground-state dissociation constant (Kd) of the analyte–probe complex with 1∶1 stoichiometry must be well-matched with the analyte concentration [X] one intends to monitor. Indeed, the fluorescence intensity originating from 1∶1 analyte–probe complex formation is dependent upon the analyte concentration in the range from approximately 0.1Kd to 10Kd and is effectively invariant outside of this analyte concentration window. If the analyte concentration is too low ([X] ≪ 0.1Kd), no fluorescence change is measured because no significant binding takes place. If the analyte concentration is too high ([X] ≫ 10Kd), the sensor is saturated and cannot give any information about [X]. (v) If temporal resolution of changing analyte concentration is required, the reversible association–dissociation of a chelator and an analyte should be fast, so that real-time monitoring and visualization of changes in analyte concentration are possible. (vi) Fluorescence signaling by turn-on (i.e., fluorescence enhancement) or shifts in excitation and/or emission wavelength is favored over turn-off response (i.e., fluorescence quenching) with concomitant lower signal-to-noise ratios. For quantitative measurements, fluorescent indicators that respond to analyte binding by spectral shifts in the excitation and/or emission spectrum are superior. Ratiometric measurements at two excitation and/or emission wavelengths and the knowledge of Kd of the complex allow the determination of the unknown analyte concentration [X].50 (vii) Indicators that absorb and emit light in the visible or NIR (650–900 nm) spectral range offer numerous advantages over UV light-excitable indicators [(a) availability of low-cost lasers as efficient excitation sources; (b) emission (observation) wavelengths compatible with affordable detectors; (c) no need for expensive quartz optical components; (d) less light scatter].
Some of the above properties are particularly important for fluorescent indicators functional inside live cells. (i) Selectivity for a specific analyte over other cellular analytes remains the key criterion by which the usefulness of fluorescent indicators is ultimately judged. (ii) A bright fluorescent probe allows utilizing lower dye concentrations and, therefore, reduces phototoxicity to live cells. (iii) Ratiometric measurements are especially helpful for intracellular measurements because they cancel out most effects that are not related to changes in analyte concentration [X] (such as unequal dye loading, uneven cell thickness, altered excitation intensities, photobleaching, varied emission collection efficiencies and dye leakage). However, for certain applications, fluorescence turn-on indicators can be advantageous.51 (iv) Long-wavelength (more specifically NIR: 650–900 nm) excitation and emission profiles minimize sample photodamage and cellular autofluorescence from endogenous chromophores. In the NIR range, biological samples have low fluorescence background, producing a high signal-to-noise ratio. Moreover, dramatically reduced Rayleigh and Raman scattering of NIR light allows this radiation to penetrate deeply into biological cells and tissues. For all these reasons, NIR fluorescent sensors have great potential for in vivo imaging applications.
Biological constraints require water solubility, membrane permeability and minimal toxicity to living samples. Ionic groups are preferable to ensure water solubility and to keep the probe within the cytosol (i.e., intracellular retention). Minimally disruptive loading of indicators into cells requires cell membrane permeable dyes which are transformed inside the cell into their corresponding charged forms. This approach commonly involves import of membrane permeable dyes with attached esters into the cell where ubiquitous esterases liberate the charged and more hydrophilic form of these compounds. Since protons can sometimes compete with the analyte of interest, the pH dependence of any indicator developed for biological systems needs to be determined to assess the performance of the sensor within the pH range expected in the biological system studied. Finally, small molecular size probes are generally preferable over bulky ones because they penetrate the cells faster.
Although no fluorescent indicators are yet known that perfectly satisfy all these criteria at once, partial fulfillment is useful.
Owing to its beneficial properties, BODIPY is an excellent choice as a fluorescent building block for novel indicators. Good stability against chemicals and light, small molecular size, bright fluorescence due to high ε(λ) and Φ, and fluorescence excitation and emission spectra in the visible region are all intrinsic to the BODIPY fluorophore. Moreover, one can attach practically any chelator at almost any position of the BODIPY core so that the spectroscopic and analyte binding properties can be custom-made.
4. Photophysical mechanisms
Many photophysical processes (quenching via collision, photoinduced electron transfer, exciplex formation, photoinduced proton transfer, energy transfer, …) may be responsible for the fluorescence changes (excitation and emission spectra, quantum yield Φ, lifetime τ, anisotropy r) upon binding of the analyte by the indicator. The most widely utilized mechanisms in the design of indicators will be discussed briefly in this section. For a detailed treatment of these mechanisms, the reader is referred to textbooks in ref. 48 and 52.
4.1. Photoinduced electron transfer (PET)
Photoinduced electron transfer (PET) is often the cause of fluorescence quenching, when the PET process is followed by a nonluminescent process returning to the ground state. The Marcus theory53 gives a quantitative description of the rate constant of electron transfer in solution if the interaction between the donor and acceptor in the encounter pair is weak. The PET process may be elucidated pictorially in terms of simple molecular orbital (MO) theory, which has become a powerful tool to discuss the fluorescence ‘on–off’ switching of fluorescent probes.
Fluorescent probes based on PET are often built as fluorophore–spacer–chelator constructs, in which the fluorophore and chelator are separated by a (short) aliphatic spacer, which electronically disconnects the π-electron systems of the fluorophore and the chelator. In many BODIPY-based probes, appending the chelator at the meso-position of the BODIPY fluorophore decouples the two subunits because of the almost perpendicular arrangement of the fluorophore and the chelator.
The reductive PET process according to eqn (1) is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. 1A* + D → A˙− + D˙+(1)where 1A* (A = electron acceptor) denotes the singlet-excited fluorophore and D (D = electron donor) stands for the electron-rich chelator (e.g., ionophore for ion-sensitive probes). In reductive PET, the fluorophore is reduced whereas the chelator is oxidized. When the fluorophore serves as the electron acceptor, the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) of the fluorophore should be lower than the HOMO of the chelator so that an electron can be transferred to the fluorophore and fill its singly occupied HOMO (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Reductive PET for fluorescent indicator (A = electron acceptor, D = electron donor). The drawing at the bottom depicts an analyte-free fluorescent indicator in which the chelator is electron-rich (e.g., amine electron donor). In that case the apo sensor will be in the fluorescence “off” state due to reductive PET. Complex formation will switch off PET and restore fluorescence, i.e., the fluorescence ‘on’ state (this situation is depicted in Fig. 3). 
 Fig. 3  Reductive and oxidative PETs are impossible and deactivation of the singlet-excited fluorophore via fluorescence becomes possible. 
Reductive PET is used frequently in the design of BODIPY-based indicators. In these sensors, the chelator is the electron donor (e.g., the amine group) and the BODIPY fluorophore acts as the electron acceptor. Photo-excitation promotes an electron from the HOMO of the BODIPY fluorophore to its LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital). Subsequently, an electron on the HOMO of the electron-rich chelator transfers to the HOMO of the BODIPY fluorophore. Since PET opens a nonluminescent deactivation channel to the excited fluorophore, fluorescence quenching will occur and the probe will be nonfluorescent or weakly fluorescent (i.e., the sensor is in the fluorescence ‘off’ state). Generally, reductive PET occurs in the analyte-free form of the sensor when the chelator serves as an electron donor. Coordination of the analyte to the chelator lowers the HOMO of the chelator so that electron transfer to the attached fluorophore is slowed down (or even switched off) and fluorescence is turned on (illustrated in Fig. 3). The ‘on’ state displays fluorescence properties intrinsic to the BODIPY fluorophore.
Oxidative PET according to eqn (2) is schematically illustrated in Fig. 4. 1D* + A → D˙+ + A˙−(2)where 1D* denotes the singlet-excited fluorophore and A stands for the electron-poor chelator. If the energy levels are such that the singlet excited state (LUMO) of BODIPY can donate electrons to the chelator's LUMO, then oxidative PET (i.e., the fluorophore is oxidized while the chelator is reduced) occurs. When the fluorophore serves as the electron donor, the LUMO of the fluorophore should be higher than the LUMO of the chelator, which allows electron transfer from the LUMO of the fluorophore to that of the chelator.
 Fig. 4  Oxidative PET for fluorescent indicator (A = electron acceptor, D = electron donor). The drawing at the bottom depicts an analyte-bound fluorescent indicator in which the chelator is electron-poor. In that case the apo sensor will be in the fluorescence ‘on’ state (this situation is depicted in Fig. 3). Complex formation will turn on PET and quench the fluorescence, i.e., the fluorescence ‘off’ state. 
A few fluorescent indicators shown in this review, which are based on oxidative PET, are in the fluorescence ‘on’ state when in the ion-free (apo) form.54–56 This situation corresponds to that depicted in Fig. 3. Coordination of the ion with the ionophore makes the ionophore electron poor and lowers the LUMO of the ionophore, so that PET from the excited BODIPY fluorophore to the ionophore becomes possible (Fig. 4), leading to fluorescence quenching. The ion:indicator complex corresponds to the fluorescence ‘off’ state. The situation in which a BODIPY-based dosimeter or tag is in the ‘off’ (quenched) state (PET is operative) before reaction with thiol and fluorescence is turned on upon reaction also occurs (see ref. 57–60).
4.2. Photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer (ICT)
When the fluorophore possesses an electron-donating (e.g. amino, methoxy) group conjugated to an electron-withdrawing group, it undergoes intramolecular charge transfer from the donor to the acceptor upon photo-excitation and hence, the increase in dipole moment can be considerable. The excited state reached upon photo-excitation [Franck–Condon state or locally excited (LE) state] is not in thermodynamic equilibrium with the surrounding (polar) solvent molecules. A relaxed intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) state of minimal free energy is reached when the solvent cage is in thermodynamic equilibrium with the fluorophore. This solvent relaxation is responsible for the red shift of the fluorescence spectra with increasing solvent polarity. The rate of charge recombination in the ICT state is slowed down if the donor and the acceptor are spatially separated so that conjugation is minimized. Typically, the absorption spectra of probes with an ICT state are rather narrow, while the fluorescence emission spectra are very dependent on solvent polarity. The fluorescence quantum yields Φ are low in polar solvents but not in apolar ones. It is expected that a cation, or a proton, closely interacting with the electron-rich donor will reduce the electron-donating capacity of this group and thus change the efficiency of ICT and consequently modulate Φ, τ and the absorption and fluorescence spectra. Conversely, a cation (or a proton) interacting with the electron acceptor enhances the electron-withdrawing character of this group. Therefore, changes in Φ and τ, and spectral shifts are expected.
The most prominent distinction between PET and ICT sensors lies in the different fluorescence response upon analyte recognition. PET probes display fluorescence enhancement or quenching without pronounced spectral shifts, so that the terms ‘off–on’ and ‘on–off’ fluorescent sensors are often used. The absence of shift of the spectra rules out ratiometric measurements at two wavelengths (see Sections 5.3 and 5.5). In contrast, indicators based on ICT show clear fluorescence band shifts upon analyte binding, making ratiometric measurements possible.
4.3. Resonance energy transfer (RET)
Two fluorophores may be joined in the same molecule. One of these, the donor, may collect radiation at the excitation wavelength and transfer this energy to the second fluorescent moiety, the acceptor, which emits it at a longer wavelength. This nonradiative transfer of excitation energy (D* + A → D + A*) requires some interaction between donor and acceptor entities. It can occur if the emission spectrum of the donor overlaps the absorption spectrum of the acceptor, so that several vibronic transitions in the donor have nearly the same energy as the corresponding transitions in the acceptor. Such transitions are coupled: they are said to be in resonance and this type of nonradiative energy transfer is designated as resonance energy transfer (RET). Molecules in which RET is operative are typically used to artificially enhance the Stokes shift. RET can occur via different interaction mechanisms. If the mechanism of energy transfer is large-distance through space, the interactions between the donor and the acceptor consist of Coulombic dipole–dipole interactions. Förster derived the rate constant of such long-range, through-space dipole–dipole singlet–singlet energy transfer (1D* + 1A → 1D + 1A*) and could show that it depends on several factors:61 (i) spectral overlap of the donor emission spectrum with the acceptor absorption spectrum; (ii) distance rDA between the donor and acceptor; (iii) orientational factor κ2; (iv) fluorescence quantum yield of the donor in the absence of RET; (v) refractive index of the medium. One important parameter is the critical distance or Förster radius R0 which is defined as the distance at which the rate of RET and the decay of the singlet-excited donor (in the absence of RET) are equal. R0 is generally in the range between 1.5 and 6.0 nm. Förster-type RET causes the fluorescence quantum yield of the donor to decrease while the acceptor fluorescence is enhanced. Time-resolved fluorescence of the donor and acceptor provides direct information on the transfer rate constant. A structure with donor–acceptor (through-space) energy transfer might be called an (through-space) energy transfer cassette or dyad.
5. Determination of Kd
5.1. The model
The most common model utilized for the determination of the ground-state dissociation constant Kd of the formed complex PXn between probe P and analyte X is given by eqn (3). (3)Kd is given by eqn (4): Kd = [P][X]n/[PXn](4)where [] represent equilibrium molar concentrations. Strictly speaking, Kd should be defined in terms of activities, but, in practice, concentrations are almost always used. Kd defined in eqn (4) should be considered as an “apparent” constant, because it depends not only on temperature but also on ionic strength and the medium. Some of the references cited in this review quote values for the stability constant Ks (also referred to as equilibrium constant, association constant, formation constant or binding constant) of the complex PXn instead of the dissociation constant Kd. There is a simple, reciprocal relationship between Ks and Kd: Kd = 1/Ks and, hence, log Kd = −log Ks. For consistency, in this review, we have converted all the reported Ks values to Kd values. At least for 1∶1 (analyte∶probe) complexes, the Kd value estimated from the analysis of the fluorometric and/or spectrophotometric titrations should be somewhere in the range of the experimentally employed analyte concentrations [X]. A Kd value outside this [X] range should set off an alarm. The Kd value determines the range of analyte concentrations that can be probed by the sensor. The three simplest complex stoichiometries are 1∶1 (PX), 2∶1 (PX2) and 1∶2 (P2X). Although equilibrium (association, binding, dissociation, …) constants must be considered theoretically as dimensionless numbers, we will follow the common practice of expressing Kd for P∶X complexes in mole per dm3 (M); for 2∶1 (analyte∶indicator) complexes PX2, Kd will be given in M2; for 1∶2 (analyte∶indicator) complexes P2X, Kd will be in M0.5.
For the determination of the ground-state dissociation constant Kd of the complex PXnvia fluorometric titrations, the model becomes more elaborate because excited-state processes have to be taken into account (Scheme 8).
 Scheme 8  Photophysical model used for the determination of Kd of the complex PXnvia fluorometric titration. 
In this model, it is assumed that only the apo (free) probe P and the bound probe PXn absorb light at the excitation wavelength (hence not the analyte X nor the intermediate complexes).
In Scheme 8, hν denotes photo-excitation. The stars in P* and  indicate that the respective free and bound probes are in the singlet-excited state.  represents the rate constant of binding (association) of nX by the excited-state probe P*, while  stands for the rate constant of dissociation of the excited-state complex . The kinetics of deactivation of P* and  are expressed by the rate constants kP and kPXn, respectively, which contain contributions of fluorescence and radiationless deactivation. n represents the number of analyte species bound per probe molecule (i.e., stoichiometry of binding).
5.2. Determination of Kdvia direct fluorometric titration
The correct expression of the steady-state fluorescence signal F as a function of analyte concentration [X] has been derived by Kowalczyk et al. for the simplest case of a 1∶1 complex between fluorescent probe P and analyte X.62 The plot of F as a function of [X] (direct plot) or F against −log [X] (semilogarithmic plot) is quite complicated, unless some simplifications are introduced. The simplified expression of F as a function of [X] has been extended for the case of a n∶1 complex between an analyte and an indicator [eqn (5)].63 The ground-state dissociation constant Kd of the complex PXn can be determined by direct fluorometric titration as a function of [X] using the fluorescence excitation or emission spectra. Nonlinear fitting of eqn (5) to the steady-state fluorescence data F recorded as a function of [X] yields values of Kd, Fmin, Fmax, and n. (5)In eqn (5), F stands for the fluorescence signal at [X], while Fmin and Fmax denote the fluorescence signals at minimal [X] (i.e., in the absence of analyte X; apo form of the indicator; mathematically, ) and maximal [X] (i.e., in the presence of an excess of X; bound or saturated form of the indicator; mathematically, ), respectively. In eqn (5), F is the dependent variable, [X] is the independent variable, and Fmin, Fmax, n and Kd are adjustable parameters in the nonlinear fitting. Evidently, it is always possible to keep one or more parameters constant during the fitting. Note that [X] is the concentration of the free analyte, which may be different from the analytical (total) analyte concentration. For determining the stoichiometry of binding n, there is an additional way via the method of continuous variations, often called Job's plot.64 One drawback of this method is that the sharpness of the maximum in the Job's plot depends on the magnitude of Kd: the smaller the Kd, the more accurate the maximum can be located and, hence, the more accurate the value of n will be.
The simplified eqn (5) assumes that (i) P and PXn are excited with constant incident spectral radiant power; (ii) the absorbance of the sample is small (<0.1) and (iii) rate of binding of X to the probe in the excited state can be neglected (i.e., ). The latter condition can be checked by the invariance of the fluorescence decay times within the range of used [X].65
A graphical display of eqn (5) together with the experimental F-data against [X] or F against −log [X] is a powerful tool for detecting deviations and for judging the quality-of-fit. Ideally, one should use simultaneous (also referred to as global) nonlinear analysis of the fluorescence F-data surface collected at multiple excitation and emission wavelengths (preferably the whole spectrum) as a function of [X] to estimate the global parameters n and Kd, and the local Fmin and Fmax parameters for each {excitation wavelength–emission wavelength} pair. Such global analysis provides parameter estimates with improved accuracy and precision compared to single curve analysis, in which F-data at a single pair of {excitation wavelength–emission wavelength} are analyzed in function of [X]. Moreover, global analysis is superior in discriminating among competing models. Unfortunately, global analysis of fluorometric titrations is not yet common.

Eqn (5) is often linearized. The objection to those linearizations is the transformation effect on the variables. Hence, proper weighting must be used in the linear least-squares regression to provide reliable parameter estimates. The difficulty of obtaining the correct weights for incorporation in the transformed linear equations complicates the regression analysis considerably and is a good reason for using the simpler nonlinear regression. The reader should consult ref. 66 for details. This reference gives a wealth of information on binding constants, statistical treatment of data, complex formation studied via UV–vis spectrophotometry, etc., but has an extremely limited discussion on fluorometric methods.
When eqn (5) is rewritten in the form of a log–log plot, it is known as the Hill plot [eqn (6)].66 (6)The plot of the left side of eqn (6) against log [X] is linear with slope = n and intersects the abscissa at the value corresponding to log Kd. Linear least-squares regression according to eqn (6) requires values of Fmin and Fmax.
There are also nonlogarithmic, linear plotting forms of eqn (5). Eqn (5) can be transformed into the linear Benesi–Hildebrand equation [eqn (7)].66,67 (7)The plot of the left side of eqn (7) against 1/[X]n shows a linear relationship and Kd is given by the ratio of slope/intercept. This plot—sometimes referred to as the double-reciprocal plot—preserves the separation of independent (i.e., [X]) and dependent (i.e., F) variables. Linear least-squares regression analysis according to eqn (7) needs values of Fmin and n.
Another linearization of eqn (5) is sometimes called the Scott equation [eqn (8)]:66 (8)The plot of the left side of eqn (8) against [X]n shows a linear relationship and Kd is given by the ratio of intercept/slope. Linear least-squares regression according to eqn (8) necessitates values of Fmin and n.
5.3. Determination of Kdvia ratiometric fluorometric titration
If spectral shifts are observed in the excitation and/or emission spectra upon binding of the analyte X by the sensor, then ratiometric fluorometric titrations as a function of [X]—using ratios of the fluorescence excitation or emission spectral data—can be used to determine Kd and n of the analyte–probe complex. Ratiometric fluorometric measurements were introduced by R. Y. Tsien and coworkers.50 Nonlinear fitting of eqn (9)68 to the steady-state fluorescence ratios R recorded as a function of [X] yields values of Kdξ, Rmin, Rmax, and n. (9)In the excitation ratiometric method, one measures R = F(λem, λ1ex)/F(λem, λ2ex) at a common emission wavelength, λem, and two different excitation wavelengths, λ1ex and λ2ex. Rmin is the ratio of the fluorescence intensities at two distinct excitation wavelengths and one emission wavelength of the apo (or free) form of the indicator (minimum [X]; mathematically ), Rmax represents the ratio of the fluorescence intensities of the bound form of the indicator (saturating [X]; mathematically ), R denotes the ratio of the fluorescence intensities corresponding to intermediate [X] and ξ = Fmin(λem, λ2ex)/Fmax(λem, λ1ex). Choosing the wavelength of the pseudo-isoemissive point as λ2ex simplifies the analysis. Then ξ = 1 and the expression for R [eqn (9)] reduces to that of F [eqn (5)].
Fitting eqn (9) to excitation ratiometric values R as a function of [X] yields values for Kdξ(λem, λ2ex), Rmin, Rmax, and n. Because ξ(λem, λ2ex)—the ratio of the fluorescence signal of the apo form of the indicator over that of the bound form at the given wavelengths—is experimentally accessible, a value for Kd can be recovered from ratiometric excitation fluorescence data.
In the emission ratiometric method, one determines R = F(λ1em, λex)/F(λ2em, λex) at the given wavelengths as a function of [X]. In this case, ξ is defined as ξ = Fmin(λ2em, λex)/Fmax(λ2em, λex). ξ = 1 when λ2ex is chosen as the wavelength corresponding to the pseudo-isoemissive point and, in that case, the expression for R [eqn (9)] simplifies to that of F [eqn (5)].
Fitting eqn (9) to the emission ratiometric fluorescence data R as a function of [X] yields values for Kdξ(λ2em, λex), Rmin, Rmax, and n. Because ξ(λ2em, λex) can be determined from the fluorescence signals of the apo and bound forms of the indicator at the given wavelengths, a value for Kd can be obtained.
As for F [eqn (5)], linear transformations of eqn (9) are also possible. However, the recommended parameter estimation method is via global nonlinear fitting.
5.4. Determination of Kdvia direct spectrophotometric titration
The ground-state dissociation constant Kd of the complex PXn can also be determined by direct spectrophotometric titration as a function of [X], using the UV-vis absorption spectra [eqn (10)]. Nonlinear fitting of eqn (10) to the absorbance data A recorded as a function of [X] yields values of Kd, Amin, Amax, and n. (10)In eqn (10), A denotes the absorbance at [X], whereas Amin and Amax stand for the absorbances at minimal and maximal [X], respectively. Hence Amin and Amax correspond to the absorbances of a free (minimal [X]) and a bound (saturating [X]) indicator, respectively.
Analogous linear plotting forms can be derived for eqn (10) as for F [eqn (5)]. However, global nonlinear least-squares fitting of the whole UV-vis absorption spectrum as a function of [X] is the preferred method for the accurate estimation of the global parameters Kd and n.
5.5. Determination of Kdvia ratiometric spectrophotometric titration
If (large) spectral shifts are observed in the absorption spectra upon binding of the analyte X, the ratiometric method can be used to estimate Kd.69 In eqn (9), R = A(λ1abs)/A(λ2abs) is the ratio of the absorbances A at the two given wavelengths. Nonlinear fitting of eqn (9) to the ratiometric absorbance data R recorded as a function of [X] yields values of Kdξ, the ratios Rmin and Rmax, and n. Rmin is the ratio of the absorbances at the indicated wavelengths for the apo (or free) form of the indicator (minimum [X]), Rmax represents the analogous ratio for the bound form of the indicator (maximum [X]), R denotes the ratio corresponding to intermediate [X] and ξ = Amin(λ2abs)/Amax(λ2abs). Since ξ—the ratio of the absorbances at λ2abs—is experimentally accessible, a value for Kd can be extracted from ratiometric absorption data. Note that ξ = 1 if the wavelength corresponding to the isosbestic point is taken as λ2abs. In that case, the expression of R [eqn (9)] reduces formally to that of A [eqn (10)].
As for the previous cases, linear transformations are possible. However, the recommended parameter estimation method is via global nonlinear fitting.
6. Indicators
6.1. Indicators for cations

6.1.1. pH. 
Intracellular pH (pHi) plays numerous crucial roles in living cells and hence a lot of effort has gone into the design and construction of probes for sensing and imaging pH inside live cells.70 The most valuable probes are perhaps those responsive to near-neutral, cytosolic pH (6.8–7.4), although sensors which are sensitive to more acidic (e.g. probes 33) or more basic environments are also useful.
Up to now, despite the valuable properties of BODIPY, no functional, BODIPY-derived probe for cytosolic pH has been built. However, a series of fluorescent BODIPY-based chemical sensors for protons in organic, aqueous, and mixed aqueous–organic media has been reported. Actually, the high potential for BODIPY dyes as building blocks in fluorescent indicators was first demonstrated in pH indicators, and has been followed by numerous examples of molecular sensors that incorporate BODIPY.
Dissociation constants for pH indicators will be expressed as pKa = −log Kd. For quantitative pH measurements, it is crucial to match the indicator's pKa to the pH of the system of interest. pH sensors with 1∶1 binding stoichiometry have a usable pH response in the range from approximately pKa − 1 to pKa + 1.
Many pH indicators contain a p-(N,N-dialkyl)aniline subunit as a pH sensitive group. The neutral form of 31 is nonfluorescent, attributed to reductive PET from the meso p-N,N-dimethylaminophenyl group to BODIPY.71,72 Protonation prevents PET so that the protonated form displays strong emission. The twisting of the meso-aryl substituent out of the plane of the boradiazaindacene chromophore leads to nonconjugated π-systems and contributes to the efficiency of the ‘off–on’ switching.
Compound 32 with 3,5-distyryl substituents has red-shifted absorption and fluorescence emission maxima in comparison to 31.25 In apolar solvents the strong fluorescence emission of 32 occurs from the BODIPY locally excited (LE) state. As the solvent polarity increases, photo-excitation of 32 leads to population of a nonemissive ICT state, causing a drastic quenching of the characteristic BODIPY LE fluorescence (Φ decreases from 0.92 in hexane to 4 × 10−4 in MeCN). In polar solvents stabilization of the ICT state opens up a deactivation path for the LE state that occurs totally nonradiatively. Protonation of 32 completely suppresses the quenching ICT process and leads to strong fluorescence enhancement.
A series of fluorescent pH probes 33a–d were recently reported for imaging acidic endosomes in cancer cells.51 Compounds 33 are almost nonfluorescent in the nonprotonated form (Φ < 0.002) attributed to reductive PET quenching by the meso-anilino substituent and they become highly fluorescent (Φ 0.55–0.60) when the aniline nitrogen is protonated. A new, highly selective strategy for in vivo tumor visualization was developed in which the pH-triggerable (i.e., fluorescence switch-on) fluorescent probes 33 were conjugated to a cancer-targeting monoclonal antibody (trastuzumab). Confocal spectroscopy revealed that the probe–antibody conjugates are not fluorescent outside tumor cells at neutral pH. After internalization by endocytosis, the probe–antibody conjugates accumulate in late (after 4 h) endosomes or lysosomes (pH 5–6) where the acidic pH makes them highly fluorescent (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  pH-responsive BODIPY dyes with a 8-amino phenyl substituent. 
Compound 24 is the first example of an unsymmetrically substituted BODIPY sensor with the pH sensitive p-N,N-dimethylaminostyryl group conjugated via the 3-position.30 In contrast to compounds 31–33, there is direct electronic conjugation in 24 between the N,N-dimethylaniline and BODIPY subunits by the introduction of an ethenyl linker at the 3-position. In polar solvents, photo-excitation of 24 leads to population of a highly polar ICT state, which is deactivated by an increase of the rate of internal conversion as the energy gap between the excited and the ground state decreases (Φ decreases from 0.97 in hexane to 0.13 in MeCN). Protonation of the dimethylanilino group of 24 switches off any ICT interaction and this leads to the typical BODIPY-like narrow, structured and solvent-polarity independent absorption and emission bands. It is not surprising that related compound 34 with a p-iodophenyl substituent at the meso-position shows similar spectroscopic and photophysical behavior.73
Also pH sensor 35 is very similar to 24 but now there is a p-anisyl group at the meso-position.29 Its fluorescence properties (λem, Φ and lifetimes τ) were found to be strongly solvent dependent, indicative of the ICT nature of the emitting state. In MeCN solution, protonation of the tertiary amine function of 35 switches off ICT and this gives a large fluorescence enhancement in conjunction with hypsochromic shifts of the absorption and emission maxima, in analogy to what was found for 34.
Compounds 2526 and 3673 are 3,5-distyryl-boradiazaindacene dyes which differ only in the p-substituent (H in 25versus I in 36) on the meso-phenyl group. Upon protonation in chloroform solution, the absorption and emission spectra of 25 display a blue shift while those of comparable dye 3726 show a red shift. The difference was attributed to the ICT electron donor (in 25) and acceptor (in 37) properties of the 3,5-substituents on the BODIPY core. Upon protonation, compound 36 shows hypsochromically shifted absorption and emission bands as found for dye 25. Simultaneously, Φ of 36 increases from 0.18 to 0.68. Analysis of the spectrophotometric and fluorometric titrations in terms of two successive protonation steps gave pKa values of 3.0 and 5.1–5.2. Probe 36 was covalently anchored to inert, porous polyacrylate beads to form a solid-state colorimetric and fluorescent sensor for analysis of HCl in a gas stream and aqueous solution (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Indicators with protonatable groups at the 3- and 3,5-positions. 
Although phenol itself has a pKa value of 10.0,74–76 electron-withdrawing substituents can lower the pKa so that the near-neutral pH range can be sensed. BODIPY analogues 38a–b use meso-phenol–phenolate couples as pH-sensitive subunits and show fluorescence ‘off–on’ switching upon deprotonation–protonation.77 Derivatives 38a–b are twisted and conjugatively uncoupled, which is corroborated by the pKa value of 10.4 in a MeOH∶H2O mixture (1∶1), close to pKa of phenol itself. The absence of emission of the phenolate forms can be attributed to reductive PET from phenolate to the BODIPY core.
BODIPY appended calix[4]arene 39 with four phenolic groups has a pKa value of 6.5 and, hence, can signal near-neutral pH changes.78 This indicator is based on PET mediated fluorescence: reductive PET renders it virtually nonfluorescent at high pH while protonation blocks PET and restores the typical BODIPY fluorescence.  
BODIPY dyes with phenolic (40–41) or naphtholic (42) subunits on the 8-position and with substituents having different electron driving forces on positions 3 and 5 have pKa values between 7.5 and 9.3.31,79 Compounds 40–42 have very similar BODIPY-based spectra, with λabs and λem which are hardly dependent on the solvent. In aqueous solution, the absorption maxima λabs of these dyes undergo small blue shifts (up to 5 nm) upon increasing the pH, while the corresponding emission is quenched without spectral shifts. λabs at the lowest (left) and highest (right) pH are given in Fig. 7 (compounds 40–42).
 Fig. 7  pH indicators based on hydroxyaryl BODIPY derivatives. 
Ester 43a has high quantum yields (0.93–1.0) in organic solvents and displays single exponential fluorescence decay kinetics with lifetimes τ in the 3.5–4.2 ns range.69 The absorption maxima λabs are in the 564–576 nm range while the emission maxima λem lie between 577 and 595 nm. Compound 43b is a water-soluble pH sensor with a pKa of 7.6 and Φ of 0.75 in its phenolic form. The phenolate form of 43b is non-emissive.


6.1.2. Metal ions. 
Many metal ions play very diverse and crucial roles in several biological processes, while others are associated with toxicity and disease.80 These functions have sparked the interest in the accurate measurement of such metal ions, and progress in this field has been thoroughly reviewed in recent years.
In the past decade, fluorescent probes for Zn2+ have attracted a great deal of attention and many probes have been proposed based on numerous fluorophores. Di(2-picolyl)amine is the most widely used ionophore for Zn2+. Sensors for the detection and imaging of Zn2+, especially in biological systems, have been extensively reviewed.81–85 A recent review describes the tools and tactics for the optical detection of Hg2+.86 Another recent review paper deals with the chemistry and biology of zinc, iron and copper in neurobiology.87
The ratiometric BODIPY-linked azacrown ether sensor 44 with high selectivity for potassium over other alkali ions in MeCN is the first example of a probe synthesized using SNAr of 3,5-dichloroBODIPY (Fig. 8).32 A large conformational change of the sensor upon K+ binding (Kd of the 1∶1 complex K+–44 equals 0.5 mM) was invoked to explain the blue shifts in absorption and emission. Later research88 confirmed these findings and showed that some alkaline-earth metal ions (Ca2+) and HTM ions (Pb2+, Hg2+) also produced comparable spectral hypsochromic shifts and increases of Φ.
 Fig. 8  Sensors with a selective response to K+. 
Sensor 45 with a 1,3-alternate calix[4]bisazacrown-5 linked to two BODIPYs at the meso-position shows a high sensitivity and selectivity for K+ ions over other alkali and alkaline-earth metal ions (Na+, Cs+, Ca2+, Ba2+) in acetonitrile, ethanol, and ethanol–water mixtures.89 In medium to high polarity solvents, an efficient ICT process occurs in the excited state leading to a dual emission and a strong fluorescence quenching. Upon K+ coordination, this ICT process is hindered and a large fluorescence enhancement is observed. The inhibition of the ICT process is more efficient when two K+ ions are coordinated. The global Kd values of the 2∶1 (metal∶indicator) K+–45 complexes are dependent on the solvent and they were found to be 0.9 × 10−6 M2, 5.5 × 10−6 M2 and 3.2 × 10−4 M2 in MeCN, EtOH, and EtOH∶H2O 3∶1 (v/v), respectively.
Reaction of 46 with aminodextran gave a water-soluble, dextran-conjugated, triazacryptand-based, BODIPY-derived K+ sensor. This compound shows a strong fluorescence emission increase upon K+ binding, without observable spectral shift.90 The dextran-conjugated indicator was used as an extracellular K+ sensor to detect cellular K+ efflux. A ratiometric, dual-color fluorescent dextran conjugate was synthesized by coupling dextran to green fluorescent, K+-sensitive BODIPY derivative 46 and tetramethylrhodamine, a reference chromophore with K+-insensitive red fluorescence.91 The dextran backbone confers high water solubility and membrane impermeability. Upon K+ binding, fluorescence quenching via reductive PET from the triazacryptand to BODIPY is hindered, resulting in increased BODIPY fluorescence of this conjugate. It was used to measure noninvasively [K+] in the airway surface liquid (ASL) and to establish the major determinants of ASL [K+] regulation.
Sodium-selective indicator 47 with an oligo-ethyleneglycol bridge between the m-positions of the 3- and 5-phenyl rings of BODIPY is based on conformational restriction triggered by cation recognition at this bridge.92 Of the alkali metal ions (Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+), binding of Na+ leads to the largest bathochromic shift of the absorption maximum, while no clear shift was found for the emission maximum. Determination of the Kd values of the 1∶1 complexes of 47 with Na+ and K+ indicates that the selectivity of 47 for Na+ (Kd 0.64 mM) over K+ (Kd 3.6 mM) is low. Φ for the ion-free and Na+ bound forms of 47 are the same (0.68), implying that PET is not operative (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  BODIPY chemosensors for alkali metal ions. 
BODIPY derivative 48 with an aza-15-benzocrown-5 chelator is a Na+-sensitive indicator.93 The selectivity for Na+ over K+ is less than 2. The fluorescence emission intensity increased ca. 7-fold upon Na+ binding and ca. 3-fold upon K+ binding.
Chemosensors 49 represent 15-benzocrown-5 ether appended BODIPY analogues with different electron acceptor strengths.94 In the polar solvents acetonitrile and methanol, apo 49a is virtually nonfluorescent due to reductive PET from the weak benzocrown electron donor to BODIPY. Upon binding of Na+ and K+ to the benzocrown ether, the electron donor properties of the latter are further reduced, thus suppressing PET and leading to large cation-induced fluorescence increases without spectral shifts. Fluorometric titrations yielded Kd values of 3 mM and 1 mM for the 1∶1 Na+–49a and K+–49a complexes, respectively. The higher Kd value for the Na+ complex is unexpected, because 15-crown-5 is supposed to provide a tighter fit for Na+ than for K+. In compound 49b, excited-state deactivation occurs mainly by fluorescence from the initially formed LE state of BODIPY and conversion to an ICT state does not occur. No red-shifted (broad and unstructured) emission from an energetically lower lying ICT in acetonitrile, methanol, or any other polar solvents could be detected. Binding of Na+ or K+ to 49b was only accompanied by a small increase of Φ. Kd for the 1∶1 Na+–49b complex was found to be 3 mM (Fig. 10). 
 Fig. 10  Fluorescent chemosensors for Na+ and K+. 
In solvents more polar than hexane, BODIPY sensor 50 having a 13-phenyl-1,4,7,10-tetraoxa-13-azacyclopentadecane chelator shows dual emission from the LE and ICT state, both fluorescence quantum yields being low.95,96 In acetonitrile solution, only emission from the LE state of 50 was observed (Φ 0.0002). Crowned compound 50 forms 1∶1 complexes with various alkali (Li+, Na+) and alkaline-earth (Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+) metal ions, the latter being the stronger (Kd measured for the cation complexes of 50 are in the order Na+ > Li+ > Mg2+ > Ba2+ > Sr2+ > Ca2+). Coordination of the cation to the nitrogen of the aza crown leads to cation-dependent enhancement of the LE fluorescence quantum yield and cation-independent slight (2–3 nm) red shifts of λabs and λem. The stability of the 1∶1 complex between Na+ and 50 is solvent dependent: Kd of Na+–50 equals 6 mM in acetonitrile and 23 mM in methanol.
The same aza-15-crown-5 chelator as in 50 was attached via a styryl linker to the 3-position of the BODIPY core to produce compound 51.97 Apo 51 in acetonitrile solution has a low fluorescence quantum yield which was attributed to the ICT character of the excited state. Also this sensor was not selective because it forms 1∶1 complexes with several alkali (Li+, Na+), alkaline-earth (Mg2+, Ca2+, Ba2+) and transition (Zn2+) metal ions and protons, producing large blue shifts and significant cation-induced fluorescence amplifications. The stability of the metal-ion complexes with 51 decreases in the order Ba2+ > Li+ > Na+ ≈ Zn2+ > Ca2+ > Mg2+ (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Sensors with aza-15-crown-5 chelator at different locations. 
Two ‘off–on’ indicators with meso-APTRA substituents as low-affinity chelators for calcium but with different groups (methyl in 52aversus p-anisyl in 52b) at the 3,5-positions have very similar dissociation constants Kd of the 1∶1 52–Ca2+ complexes and quantum yields Φ.98 The absorption and fluorescence emission spectra of 52b are red-shifted by 65 and 100 nm, respectively, compared to those of 52a. Reductive PET from APTRA to BODIPY is shut down upon Ca2+ complex formation so that a large fluorescence enhancement is observed without any spectral shifts (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  BODIPY dyes with APTRA chelator at the meso-position. 
Sensor 53 was synthesized by appending BODIPY entities on a calix[4]arene-crown-5 ether.99 In pure MeOH and in aqueous MeOH solution (up to 5% water), this indicator exhibits pronounced, selective fluorescence quenching in the presence of Ca2+. Other physiologically important ions (Na+, K+, Mg2+) did not quench the fluorescence.
BODIPY appended calix[4]arene diethyl ester 54 shows Ca2+ selectivity over other metal ions.54 Upon Ca2+ binding, fluorescence quenching of 54 occurs, which was attributed to oxidative PET from the BODIPY donor to the electron-deficient Ca2+-bound carbonyl groups of the esters. A value of 19 nM was determined for Kd of the 1∶1 Ca2+–54 complex (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Calixarenes with pending BODIPY fluorophores as Ca2+ sensors. 
BAPTA is very selective for Ca2+ over Mg2+ and was used as a high affinity Ca2+ chelator in the construction of a series of long-wavelength sensors 55.100 Attachment of the BAPTA moiety to the BODIPY scaffold via a 3-propanamide side chain results in strong fluorescence quenching due to reductive PET. This PET process is switched off upon addition of aqueous Ca2+, resulting in significant fluorescence enhancements without spectral shifts. Measured Kd values for the Ca2+–55 complexes are around 200 nM (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  BAPTA–BODIPY dyad for Ca2+ sensing. 
In chemosensor 56, the high-affinity Ca2+ chelator BAPTA is connected to the BODIPY chromophore at the meso-position.101 Upon Ca2+ binding, a ca. 250-fold fluorescence intensity increase was observed, without noteworthy spectral shifts. Derivative 57 with an O6-benzylguanine residue can be covalently and selectively coupled to SNAP-tag fusion proteins in living cells to produce conjugate 58, in which X represents a protein with defined localization. [SNAP-tag is a 20 kDa mutant of the human DNA repair protein O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase that reacts specifically and rapidly with benzylguanine and benzylchloropyrimidine derivatives, leading to covalent labeling of the SNAP-tag with a probe such as 57. SNAP-tag can be localized in living cells through its fusion with targeted proteins and hence allows the precise localization of the conjugate 58.] The indicator in 58 retains its high affinity for Ca2+ after conjugation to proteins, displaying a 180-fold fluorescence intensity amplification upon Ca2+ binding with 2 nm red shifts. Measured Kd values for the 1∶1 complexes of Ca2+ with 56, 57 and 58 in MOPS buffer (pH 7.2) were 300 nM, 210 nM and 200 nM, respectively. The high sensitivity of probe 57 in addition to the possibility of coupling it to specific proteins makes it a powerful tool for measuring/visualizing changes of Ca2+ levels with high spatiotemporal resolution in live cells (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Functionalized BAPTA-based chemosensors. 
BODIPY linked aza-18-crown-6 ether indicators 59a and 59b are enantiopure derivatives of achiral dye 44, having methyl and isobutyl groups on their stereogenic centers, respectively.88 The Φ values of apo 59 were very low (0.005). Addition of metal ions, in particular Ca2+, Pb2+, Mg2+, Zn2+ and Hg2+ ions, produces fluorescence enhancements and blue shifts of λabs and λem of 59. The most stable complexes were formed with Ca2+ and Pb2+ and indicated 1∶2 (metal∶indicator) stoichiometries.
BODIPY bearing benzocrown ethers of various cavity sizes (15-crown-5, 18-crown-6 and 21-crown-7) at the meso-position (60) have been employed as multi-cation sensors.102 Compound 60a with 15-benzocrown-5 is similar to sensors 49 described in ref. 94. The selectivity afforded by the various crown ether sizes was investigated in a systematic way. In methanol solution, all sensors 60 are virtually nonfluorescent in their ion-free forms (Φ 0.004). Addition of metal ions does not induce any observable spectral changes but leads to fluorescence enhancement for ions that coordinate to the crown ether. For 60a with the smallest cavity, only coordination to Na+ (Kd 1.2 × 10−5 M) was found. Greater Kd values were determined for the analogous 1∶1 Na+–49a and Na+–49b complexes in methanol, namely 3 × 10−3 M. Indicator 60b with a larger cavity than 60a showed the maximum fluorescence enhancement upon K+ binding. The stability of the 1∶1 metal ion complexes with 60b decreased in the order K+ > Ba2+ > Rb+. For 60c with the largest cavity, the most stable complex was formed with Cs+ (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Crown-ether containing derivatives as metal ion indicators. 
The two azacrown ether appended BODIPY analogues 61 are practically nonfluorescent in their ion-free forms.103 Coordination of the alkali metal ions Li+, Na+, and K+ with 61a produces small red shifts of λabs and λem and large Φ increases (0.082 with Li+, 0.073 with Na+, 0.003 with K+). Larger spectral red shifts were observed upon addition of Ca2+ and Mg2+, while Φ also increased (to 0.017 with Ca2+ and 0.108 with Mg2+). Kd of the 1∶1 Li+–61a and 1∶1 Mg2+–61a complexes were 3.2 × 10−4 M and 2.3 × 10−3 M, respectively. In contrast to 61a, compound 61b with the aza-18-crown-6 chelator shows a good selectivity toward K+ with an estimated Kd of 1.5 × 10−4 M for the complex. Both probes are also pH sensitive, but no pKa values were given.
Compound 62 has a selective fluorescence turn-on response to Ni2+ compared to other biologically relevant metal ions in water (Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Zn2+).104 Addition of 50 equiv. of Ni2+ switches off PET and triggers a ca. 25-fold fluorescence turn-on with no shifts of λabs and λem compared to the apo probe. Confocal microscopy showed that 62 can respond to changes in Ni2+ levels within live cells (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Metal ion sensing dyes 61 and 62. 
Two BODIPY fluorophores and a noncyclic azatetrathia (NS4) chelator were combined in sensor 63.105 The absorption spectrum of apo 63 shows two distinct maxima at 528 and 624 nm, corresponding to unmodified BODIPY (green) and extended conjugation BODIPY (red), respectively. Ag+ binding only affects the long wavelength absorption peak (hypsochromic shift and intensity changes). Upon excitation of apo 63 at 480 nm, RET occurs, which leads to weak residual emission from the green emitting dye (λem ≈ 550 nm, Φ 4.1 × 10−3) and strong emission from the red emitting dye (λem 680 nm, Φ 0.49). Binding of Ag+ causes blue-shifted emission spectra, whereas all the other metal ions tested (Pb2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Hg2+, Co2+, …) cause insignificant spectral changes. Kd of the Ag+–63 complex was determined to be 6 μM.
Compound 64 is a BODIPY-derived, water-soluble, membrane-permeable, fluorescence turn-on sensor with the same azatetrathia (NS4) receptor as in 63, but at the meso-position, exhibiting high selectivity and sensitivity for Cu+.106 Also probe 65 has the same Cu+ chelating subunit but now at the 3-position of BODIPY.107 Sensor 64 displays weak fluorescence in its apo form due to reductive PET from the azatetrathia chelator. Upon Cu+ complexation (Kd 3.6 pM), PET is turned off and the fluorescence is enhanced ca. 10-fold, with a small blue shift of λem. Addition of Cu+ to 65 induces small blue shifts of λabs (550 nm) and λem (570 nm) to 548 nm and 556 nm, respectively, with a concomitant 20-fold fluorescence increase. The emission band of 65 at 505 nm remains unchanged, rendering the probe useful for ratiometric applications. Compounds 64 and 65 both form 1∶1 complexes with Cu+ and feature excellent selectivity for Cu+ over various biologically relevant metal ions, including Cu2+. Both indicators are membrane-permeable and respond to changes in the levels of labile intracellular Cu+ (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Azatetrathia chelators in detectors for Ag+ (63) and Cu+ (64, 65). 
Compound 66 is a membrane-permeable, water-soluble, Cu2+-selective sensor with N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amine coordination sites at the 3,5-positions of BODIPY.108 In the presence of 400 μM Cu2+, the fluorescence emission of 66 was completely quenched, while under identical conditions, other biologically relevant metal ions, such as Na+, K+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Cd2+, Co2+, Zn2+, Hg2+ and Pb2+, produced only slight changes of the fluorescence emission of 66. A 2∶1 Cu2+–66 complex (Kd 9.7 × 10−8 M2) was formed, indicating that each Cu2+ ion binds to one N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amine subunit. Indicator 66 can monitor intracellular Cu2+ (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Cu2+-selective sensor 66 has ligands at the 3,5-positions. 
In MeCN, compound 67a is a selective ‘off–on’ fluorescent indicator for Pb2+.109 Dye 67a is nonfluorescent due to reductive PET, but displays a large fluorescence enhancement with Pb2+ and to a lesser degree with Cu2+ and Zn2+. Compound 67a forms 1∶1 complexes with Pb2+ and Cu2+ and exhibits a more than 15-times higher selectivity for Pb2+ over Cu2+. Conversely, compound 67b is a fluorescent dosimeter which shows a highly selective fluorescence increase in acetonitrile only with Cu2+.
Compound 68 having a 16-phenyl-1,4,7,10,13-pentaoxa-16-azacyclooctadecane chelator at the meso-position of BODIPY is a turn-on fluorescent indicator for Pb2+.110 Compared to the open-chain receptor in analogue 67, sensor 68 has a macrocyclic chelating moiety. The apo form of probe 68 is essentially nonfluorescent (Φ ≈ 0), whereas the Pb2+–68 complex is highly fluorescent (Φ 0.74). Of the competing metal ions screened, only Sr2+, Ba2+ and Hg2+ could illicit a spectral response from the sensor (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Pb2+ probes. 
A conformationally restricted and sterically hindered BODIPY core has been used to construct a selective Cu2+ detector based on 8-hydroxyquinoline (69).111 8-Hydroxyquinoline is an important ionophore used for sensing Hg2+ and Cu2+.112 Significant fluorescence quenching of 69 in the presence of Cu2+ and Hg2+ was observed, with markedly higher selectivity for Cu2+ than Hg2+.
Derivative 70 containing a meso thiacalix[4](N-phenylazacrown-5)ether with strong chelation-induced emission enhancement in the presence of Cu2+, Fe3+ and Hg2+ was described by Bitter and coworkers.113 Apo 70 is nearly nonfluorescent (Φ 0.0016), but upon addition of Cu2+, Fe3+ and Hg2+ large fluorescence increases were observed. Ag+ reduces the sensitivity of Cu2+ sensing in a competitive process. The stability of the 1∶1 metal ion complexes with 70 decreases in the order Cu2+ ≈ Hg2+ > Fe3+ (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  BODIPY chemosensors for Cu2+. 
Compound 71 is a colorimetric and NIR fluorescent turn-on BODIPY-based probe with di(2-picolyl)amine as a chelator with high selectivity for Cu2+.114 Upon binding of Cu2+, the main absorption band at 526 nm decreases in intensity and shifts to 536 nm, while a new band at 621 nm appears, resulting in a naked eye color change. Excitation at 620 nm in the presence of Cu2+ produces a strong fluorescence band with λabs at 651 nm.
Gold nanoparticles functionalized with 72 were developed for imaging Cu2+ in living cells.115 Addition of increasing Cu2+ concentrations to the functionalized nanoparticles in 20 mM HEPES buffer (with 10% MeCN) at pH 7.4 gave a blue shift of the absorption band and quenching of the fluorescence without a spectral shift. The nanoparticles exhibited a high selectivity for Cu2+ over other competing metal ions. The dissociation constant Kd for the 1∶1 complex of Cu2+ coordinated to 72 attached to the gold nanoparticles was found to be 1.6 × 10−5 M. The BODIPY-functionalized gold nanoparticles could respond to changes in intracellular [Cu2+] within live cells. Apo 72 in MeCN has λabs and λem of 594 nm and 691 nm (Φ 0.3), respectively, comparable to the values found for 72 tethered to gold nanoparticles. Upon addition of Cu2+, λabs of 72 shifted to 502 nm, while the emission at 691 nm was gradually quenched (Φ < 10−5) (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Fluorescent probes for Cu2+. 
For the detection and removal of Pb2+ in both water and human blood, fluorescent sensor 73 was covalently anchored onto the surface of nickel nanoparticles coated with silica shells (Fig. 23).116 The magnetic nanoparticles functionalized with apo 73 are virtually nonfluorescent (Φ < 0.003) presumably by reductive PET. Addition of Pb2+ to these nanoparticles results in formation of a 1∶1 Pb2+–73 complex (Kd 9.5 μM) with associated fluorescence amplification (Φ 0.019). Similar observations were made for sensor 73 in MeCN solution, but the fluorescence quantum yields are much higher (Φ 0.067 for apo 73 and 0.189 for the Pb2+-saturated form). The stability of the 1∶1 Pb2+-complex with 73 immobilized on the nanoparticle is ca. 12-fold higher than that for analogous 67a (derived from the Kd values)109 because of the preorganization of 73 on the surface of the nanoparticle and the CO⋯Pb2+ coordination possibility. Compound 73 immobilized on nanoparticles (Fig. 23) in aqueous solution and sensor 73 in acetonitrile solution display large fluorescence increases only with Pb2+ among the metal ions tested. Compound 67a also exhibits large fluorescence amplification with Pb2+ whereas small increases with Zn2+ and Cu2+ were found.109 This difference suggests that the carbonyl groups in 73 play an important role in the selectivity for Pb2+ over other competing metal ions. The magnetic nanoparticles functionalized with the fluorescent indicator 73 were able to remove successfully Pb2+ from water and human blood.
 Fig. 23  BODIPY–73-functionalized, magnetic nanoparticles with a Ni core and silica shell for the detection and removal of Pb2+ from water and human blood. 
Nanoparticles with a Fe3O4 core and silica shell were functionalized with BODIPY-based fluorescent sensor 74 as a selective turn-on fluoro-chromogenic probe for detecting Pb2+ in living cells (Fig. 24).117 The nanoparticles are virtually nonfluorescent (Φ < 0.0005) in their apo state. Addition of Pb2+ to these nanoparticles results in a large fluorescence enhancement (Φ 0.054). The blue-shifted and broad fluorescence emission spectra (full width at half height of the maximum of the emission band > 5 × 103 cm−1) of the BODIPY-functionalized nanoparticles in HEPES buffer as a function of [Pb2+] and of dye 74 in acetonitrile with emission maxima at 460 nm and 456 nm, respectively, are not BODIPY-like. Indeed, fluorescent indicators 24,3034,7335,2951,9783,11884,11987,12092,121 and 109,122 with a p-N,N-dialkylaminostyryl group at the 3-position of the BODIPY core all have λabs and λem in the red to NIR spectral region. Detailed spectroscopic solvent-dependent studies of BODIPY dyes having styryl substituents at the 3-position confirm this.37,123
 Fig. 24  Pb2+-sensitive dye 74 was attached to Fe3O4 nanoparticles. 
Dye 75 with an o-aminophenol chelator at the meso-position of BODIPY is sensitive to Hg2+ and Cu2+ (Fig. 25).124 Apo 75 has a low quantum yield (Φ < 0.002) which increases in the presence of Hg2+ (Φ 0.01). A 1∶2 complex was put forward in which two molecules of 75 bind a single Hg2+ ion (Kd 2 × 10−15 M0.5). The bathochromically shifted absorption and fluorescence emission bands observed in the presence of Cu2+ were attributed to J-aggregate formation of Cu2+–752.
 Fig. 25  
o-Aminophenol substituted BODIPY for the detection of Hg2+ and Cu2+. 
Four isomeric 3,4,4,8-tetrathienyl-substituted BODIPY derivatives 76 have been investigated as Cu2+ and Hg2+ sensors.125 All the apo isomers 76 have λabs in the 531–563 nm range, while λem values are between 562 and 593 nm. The fluorescence quantum yields are extremely low for all unbound isomers. Derivatives 76a and 76b form stable 1∶2 complexes with Cu2+ in which two indicator molecules coordinate to one Cu2+ ion, while 1∶1 binding was found for 76c and 76d. Conversely, 76c and 76d give 1∶2 (Hg2+∶indicator) complexes, whereas 1∶1 (Hg2+∶indicator) complexes were formed with 76a and 76b.

meso-Thienyl substituted BODIPY isomers 77 have been shown to coordinate to Cu2+ and Hg2+.126 1∶1 complex formation with Cu2+ in acetonitrile solution resulted in smooth absorbance decreases, while for Hg2+ a 1∶2 metal-to-indicator binding was found (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  Thiophene-containing dyes and their response to metal ions. 
Water-soluble, ratiometric, distyryl BODIPY sensor 78 for Zn2+ ions was described by Akkaya et al.127 The Zn2+ chelator in 78 is the same and, moreover, at the same 3-position of BODIPY as in the Cd2+ selective sensor 83 reported by Peng and coworkers (Fig. 27).118 The different solution composition used in the complexation studies might be responsible for the different selectivity. Based on the ICT mechanism, the NIR absorption and emission maxima of 78 undergo blue shifts upon Zn2+ complexation with a simultaneous increase of fluorescence emission intensity (no Φ data available). The largest emission intensity increases were found in the presence of Zn2+, although Hg2+ and Cd2+ also showed some response. A Kd value of 20 μM was found for the 1∶1 Zn2+–78 complex, much less than that of the Zn2+–80 complex (Kd 1 nM).128
 Fig. 27  Water-soluble dye with selective response to Zn2+. 
Fluorescence enhancement upon Zn2+ chelation of 79 has been attributed to shutting down of reductive PET.129Φ for apo 79 amounts to 0.003 and increases to 0.058 upon Zn2+ binding. The maxima of the excitation and emission spectra are almost unchanged by Zn2+. A Job's plot analysis revealed a 1∶1 Zn2+–79 complex, but no Kd was reported.
Di(2-picolyl)amine was attached at the meso-position of BODIPY via a CH2 linker to construct detector 80 for the selective visualization of Zn2+ in living cells (Fig. 28).128 The suppression of reductive PET was assumed responsible for a ca. 11-fold increase of Φ in going from the apo to the zinc-bound form of 80. Cd2+ also induces a large fluorescence enhancement and interferes with the selectivity. Cations such as Na+, K+, Ca2+ and Mg2+, which exist at high concentrations under physiological conditions, have no influence on fluorescence enhancement. Formation of a Zn2+–80 complex with 1∶1 stoichiometry and high affinity (Kd 1 nM) was obtained from direct fluorometric titration. Compound 80 is pH insensitive in a wide pH range (pH 4–10), is cell-permeable and can visualize intracellular Zn2+ changes.
 Fig. 28  Zn2+ probes with dipicolylamine chelator attached at the meso-position. 
Terpyridine-functionalized BODIPY 81 forms 1∶1 and 1∶2 (metal∶indicator) complexes with various divalent metal cations M2+. The most stable complexes are those with Zn2+ (Kd values for the 1∶1 and 1∶2 complexes are 6.3 × 10−9 M and 5 × 10−15 M0.5, respectively).130 The 1∶1 and 1∶2 complexes with Mg2+ and Ca2+ are two orders less stable than the corresponding Zn2+ complexes. Ion-free 81 has high fluorescence quantum yields (e.g., Φ 0.87 in dichloromethane) and its absorption and emission maxima are virtually solvent independent (λabs ≈ 530 nm, λem ≈ 550 nm).
The intense green BODIPY fluorescence of 82 (Φ 0.39) is quenched by oxidative PET from the excited-state fluorophore to the bipyridyl moiety coordinated to metal cations (Fig. 29).55 Zn2+ formed the most stable 1∶1 complex with 82 (Kd 9 × 10−8 M) and was the most effective fluorescence quencher. The complexes with Cd2+ (Kd 5 × 10−5 M) and Hg2+ (Kd 6 × 10−4 M) are definitely less stable.
 Fig. 29  Pyridine containing chelators for metal ions. 
Compound 83 is the first ratiometric, fluorescent sensor for imaging Cd2+ in living cells based on the ICT mechanism.118 Although Cd2+ and Zn2+ have very similar properties, BODIPY derivative 83 was described as the first fluorescent sensor which can distinguish Cd2+ from Zn2+. Coordination of Cd2+ with 83 produces blue shifts in the absorption and fluorescence emission spectra with a simultaneous increase of Φ from 0.12 to 0.59. Direct and ratiometric fluorometric measurements are possible and yielded Kd values of 48 μM and 70 μM, respectively, for the 1∶1 Cd2+–83 complex. Excellent selectivity for Cd2+ over other metal ions was observed, including Zn2+. Sensor 83 can be used to image intracellular Cd2+ in living cells in direct and ratiometric mode.
Chemosensor 84 is a water-soluble, ‘off–on’ PET-based probe featuring the same tetraamide chelator as in Hg2+-sensor 96c.119 However, in 84 the tetraamide chelator is connected to the 3-position of the BODIPY platform via a vinyl bridge. Apo 84 has an absorption peak at 578 nm and is weakly fluorescent (Φ 0.003). Upon Cd2+ addition, the absorption peak at 578 nm decreases and a new peak at 562 nm appears, while Φ increases ca. 100-fold without change in emission wavelength. A Job's plot indicated that two Cd2+ ions coordinate to one molecule 84. Kd values for the 1∶1 and 2∶1 Cd2+–84 complexes were determined to be 1.4 × 10−4 M and 7.7 × 10−6 M2, respectively. Almost no fluorescence intensity changes were observed with Zn2+, so that sensor 84 can distinguish Cd2+ from Zn2+. Living cell experiments showed the potential for Cd2+ imaging (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Fluorescent probes with selectivity for Cd2+. 
BODIPY-based 85 with a 13-phenyl-1,4,7,10-tetrathia-13-azacyclopentadecane chelating subunit linked at the meso-position shows strong enhancement of Φ selectively with Hg2+ (5900-fold), Ag+ (2200-fold) and Cu2+ (2500-fold).131 Excitation of apo 85 at the BODIPY absorption band leads to a LE state which undergoes a fast ICT process. The LE emission band is insensitive to solvent polarity, while the maximum of the ICT band shifts to lower energy with increasing solvent polarity. Binding of Hg2+, Ag+ and Cu2+ inhibits the ICT process and is accompanied by a large increase in LE fluorescence. Sensor 85 forms 1∶1 complexes with Hg2+ (Kd < 1.8 μM) and Ag+ (Kd 16 μM) in acetonitrile. Initial studies in mixed MeCN∶H2O 1∶3 (v/v) indicate that 85 also gives fluorescence turn-on in water, although with lower increases of Φ (223-fold for Hg2+, 92-fold for Ag+, only 2-fold for Cu2+).
8-Hydroxyquinoline was used as an ion signaling unit in the construction of the Hg2+-selective chromo- and fluoro-ionophore 86.112 The fluorescence emission of this compound is scarcely affected by the presence of HTM ions such as Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+ and Cd2+, but is quenched by more than 98% with 5 equiv. of Hg2+ ions, while the color of the solution changes from light amber to red. Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions also showed some quenching effects on 86. A 1∶1 complex with Hg2+ is formed (Kd 13 μM) in which the BODIPY core of 86 adopts a nearly orthogonal conformation with the 8-hydroxyquinoline moiety due to the presence of methyl groups at the 1,7-positions of the BODIPY core. This arrangement secures the binding site of 8-hydroxyquinoline for the accommodation of metal ions (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  Chemosensors responsive to multiple metal ions. 
Emission-ratiometric sensor 87 contains a BODIPY dyad and a Hg2+-sensitive azadioxadithia-15-crown-5 chelator.120 Binding of Hg2+ causes a blue shift in the absorption spectrum of the longer wavelength dye (i.e., red BODIPY moiety with a crown chelator, the energy acceptor) and hence increases the overlap between the emission spectrum of the energy donor (i.e., blue BODIPY core with alkyl substituents) and the absorption spectrum of the energy acceptor. This results in more efficient Förster type RET48,52,61 in the Hg2+–87 complex and higher fluorescence emission of the complex, hence increasing the signal ratio of apo and bound forms of 87. Kd of the 1∶1 Hg2+–87 complex was determined to be 4.5 × 10−7 M in THF.
Two chelating azadioxadithia (NO2S2) macrocycles were placed on the 3,8-positions of the BODIPY platform to construct indicator 88 for the colorimetric and fluorescent ratiometric detection of Hg2+.121 The ion-free form of 88 displays broad absorption (λabs 606 nm) and emission (λem 668 nm) bands and is virtually nonfluorescent (Φ 0.04). Addition of Hg2+ caused the disappearance of the band at 606 nm and the simultaneous appearance of a new, sharper, blue-shifted band at 564 nm. These concomitant absorption changes are clearly visible, turning the solution color from purple to red-pink. Addition of Mg2+, Fe3+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Mn2+, Pb2+, Ag+ and Al3+ results in negligible absorbance or fluorescence changes. Upon addition of Hg2+, the fluorescence intensity increases ca. 7-fold in conjunction with a hypsochromic shift in the emission spectra to 578 nm, allowing ratiometric fluorescent detection of Hg2+. The dissociation constants Kd for the Hg2+ complexes with the two macrocycle chelators in 88 were determined using reference compounds. Kd values of 23 μM and 34 μM were determined for the 1∶1 Hg2+ complexes with the binding site decoupled from the BODIPY chromophore (on 8-position) and the one conjugated to the BODIPY system (on 3-position), respectively. Both PET and ICT were invoked to rationalize the colorimetric and fluorescence responses of 88 to Hg2+. Coordination of Hg2+ to the 8-appended macrocycle reduces the PET process and this is the main reason for the fluorescence emission enhancement. Coordination of Hg2+ to the 3-appended macrocycle suppresses the ICT process and this is assumed to be responsible for the blue shifts in the absorption and emission spectra.
NIR emitting dye 89132 resembles the ratiometric Hg2+-selective sensor 88 described by Li and colleagues.121 In 89, the two chelating azadioxadithia (NO2S2) macrocycles are attached to the 3,5-positions of BODIPY via styryl linkers. Addition of Hg2+ to 89 causes the disappearance of the absorption band at 720 nm and the simultaneous appearance of a new hypsochromic band at 630 nm. In metal-ion-free 89, the ICT process from the crown subunits to BODIPY leads to very weak fluorescence (λem ≈ 750 nm). Upon binding of Hg2+, a ∼90 nm blue shift is observed in the emission spectra. Compound 89 can be used as a colorimetric and fluorometric Hg2+ sensor. A 2∶1 stoichiometry for the Hg2+–89 complex was found with a Kd of 1.8 × 10−6 M2, indicating that each azadioxadithia crown-15 macrocycle binds one Hg2+ ion.
In indicator 90, two BODIPY fluorophores are combined with one macrocyclic azadioxadithia (NO2S2) chelator for selective Hg2+ sensing.133 This molecular arrangement with an excitation energy donor (blue BODIPY in 90, Fig. 32), energy acceptor (red BODIPY) and cation selective chelator exhibits red to NIR emission. For apo 90 in THF, two absorption bands are observed with λabs at 500 nm (blue BODIPY) and 690 nm (red distyryl BODIPY) and two associated emission bands with λem at 518 nm and 725 nm. In the presence of Hg2+, the shorter wavelengths λabs and λem are not shifted. However, the longer wavelength absorption band shifts hypsochromically to 650 nm and concomitantly, the longer wavelength emission peak shifts to ∼665 nm and increases its intensity. The decrease in the emission intensity of the shorter wavelength emitting BODIPY upon binding of Hg2+ is indicative of the increased RET efficiency because of the larger spectral overlap between the donor emission spectrum (blue fluorophore) and the acceptor absorption spectrum (red chromophore). The Kd value of the 1∶1 Hg2+–90 complex was 3 μM.
 Fig. 32  Chemosensors with azadioxadithia-15-crown-5 as a chelator for Hg2+. 
Compound 91 with an azaBODIPY chromophore and 1,7-bis(2-pyridyl) substituents is a NIR fluorescent probe for Hg2+ (Fig. 33).134 Coordination with Hg2+ induces bathochromic shifts in both the absorption and fluorescence emission maxima, allowing ratiometric measurements. The Kd value of the 1∶1 Hg2+–91 complex was determined to be 5.4 × 10−6 M.
 Fig. 33  An azaBODIPY-based indicator for Hg2+. 
Sensor 92 with an open-chain azadioxadithia (NO2S2) chelator is a highly selective fluorescent sensor for Hg2+ in an aqueous environment.135 Apo 92 has a low Φ (0.008), indicative of efficient reductive PET from the NO2S2 chelator to BODIPY. Addition of Hg2+ inhibits PET and simultaneously produces a large increase in fluorescence (Φ 0.58). Fluorometric titration revealed a 1∶1 stoichiometry for the Hg2+–92 complex with a Kd of 4 × 10−5 M. The bright fluorescence of the Hg2+–92 complex is controlled by some anions (Cl−, Br−, CO2−3, SCN− and CH3CO−2). This has been attributed to the significant coordinating ability of these anions to Hg2+. The presence of the aniline function also creates a pH indicator with a low pKa of 1.97.
Probe 93 exhibits a large, selective fluorescence enhancement towards Hg2+ over other metal ions, except Ag+, Pb2+ and Cu2+.136 In contrast to analogous 92, reported by the same research group, the fluorescence response of 93 was unaffected by the presence of anions existing in the environment (NO−3, AcO−, Cl−, ClO−4, SO2−4 and H2PO−4). Probe 93 formed a 1∶1 complex with Hg2+ with a Kd of 5 μM (Fig. 34).
 Fig. 34  Open-chain chelators for the sensing of Hg2+. 
Derivative 94 containing a tridentate diazaoxa (N2O) chelator was synthesized as a fluorescent turn-on sensor with high selectivity for Hg2+ over other cations in an aqueous environment.137 The very weak fluorescence of apo 94 was attributed to reductive PET. Upon Hg2+ chelation, the fluorescence increases ca. 27-fold with a virtually unchanged λem position (∼509 nm). A global Kd value of 6.3 × 10−19 M2 was determined for the 2∶1 Hg2+–94 complex. Derivative 94 can be used for intracellular monitoring/imaging of Hg2+.
A highly selective fluorescence turn-on response in the presence of Hg2+ over other metal ions (Li+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, Pb2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Ag+, Mn2+) was found for probe 95 (Fig. 35).138 Theoretical calculations of the energy levels indicated that reductive PET from the aniline subunit to excited-state BODIPY is responsible for the low Φ (0.003) of apo 95. In metal complexes, the frontier MO energy levels change to a great extent. For the Hg2+–95 complex, both reductive and oxidative PETs are prohibited, and therefore, strong fluorescence BODIPY emission (Φ 0.13) was observed without pronounced spectral shifts.
 Fig. 35  Turn-on sensors for Hg2+. 
Three fluorescent PET sensors 96 were designed by Wang and Qian to provide an insight into what constitutes a chelator for Hg2+. Molecules 96a, 96b and 96c were synthesized by incorporating two, three and four amide arms into the aniline, o-hydroxyaniline and o-phenylenediamine subunits, respectively, attached at the meso-position of the BODIPY platform (Fig. 36).139 Compounds 96 have similar absorption spectra in the absence or presence of Hg2+ (λabs 523 nm). Before addition of Hg2+, they are weakly fluorescent due to reductive PET. Addition of Hg2+ to 96b and 96c efficiently blocks the PET quenching pathway. The fluorescence quantum yield increases without noticeable shifts of λem. A Job's plot indicated that sensor 96b chelates Hg2+ with a 1∶1 stoichiometry (Kd 20 μM). Sensor 96c can accommodate two Hg2+ ions to form a 2∶1 Hg2+–96c complex with a bridging H2O molecule where each Hg2+ ion is coordinated by three nitrogen atoms of one diamide arm. Kd values for the 1∶1 and 2∶1 Hg2+–96c complexes were determined to be 9.1 × 10−7 M and 4.2 × 10−7 M2, respectively. In sharp contrast, compound 96a does not exhibit any measurable fluorescence intensity change in the presence of Hg2+; obviously 96a does not form a complex with Hg2+.
 Fig. 36  Comparison of amide-containing BODIPY dyes for Hg2+ sensing. 
A fluorescent, ratiometric probe based on a BODIPY–rhodamine RET system was used for detecting Hg2+ in ethanol:water solution and in live cells.140 Leuco-rhodamine derivative 97a was chosen as a Hg2+ detector. A Hg2+ induced ring-opening reaction generates the long-wavelength rhodamine (in 97b) which can act as an energy acceptor (Scheme 9). BODIPY was chosen as the energy donor because its fluorescence emission spectrum overlaps well with the absorption spectrum of the energy acceptor rhodamine. The UV-vis spectrum of 97a showed only the absorption profile of the donor BODIPY and excitation of 97a at 488 nm resulted in the emission profile of BODIPY (λem 514 nm, Φ 0.35). Addition of Hg2+ promotes the formation of ring-opened compound 97b and a highly efficient RET process is turned on. Excitation of BODIPY at 488 nm now results in the emission of rhodamine with a λem of 589 nm (Φ 0.20). Measurement of the fluorescence intensity ratio (F589nm/F514nm) allows the detection of Hg2+.
 Scheme 9  Hg2+ ions induce heterocycle formation and concomitant RET process allows sensing. 
Dithia-18-benzocrown-6 appended BODIPY 98 displays Hg2+ and Ag+ selective fluorescence enhancement.141 The 1∶1 complex with Hg2+ has a Kd of 6.3 μM.
The size-restricted 7-aza-1-oxa-4,10-dithiacyclododecane macrocycle was attached to the meso-position of BODIPY via a phenyl linker to produce probe 99 for the selective detection of Fe3+ in various media.142 In the polar organic solvents acetonitrile and methanol, 99 exhibits amplified fluorescence (>500 fold) upon Fe3+ binding without pronounced spectral shifts (Fig. 37). Kd values of the 1∶1 Fe3+–99 complexes in MeCN and MeOH were determined to be <3.2 × 10−6 M and 1.6 × 10−5 M, respectively. In neat as well as buffered aqueous solution, Fe3+ binding leads to an increase of the typical BODIPY LE fluorescence (around 510 nm) and a concomitant decrease of the ICT fluorescence (around 630 nm). The formed 1∶1 Fe3+–99 complexes in aqueous solution are less stable than those in MeCN and MeOH. Kd values of 6.3 × 10−5 M, 10−4 M, and 7.9 × 10−5 M in H2O, 0.01 M MOPS, and 0.01 M Tris buffer, respectively, were measured.
 Fig. 37  Sensing of metal ions with sulfur-containing crown ether BODIPY-based dyes. 
The meso-catechol subunit in 100a is oxidized to the corresponding o-quinone in 100b by excess FeCl3, CuCl2, [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2, DDQ, or ceric ammonium nitrate [CAN: Ce(NH4)2(NO3)6] in methanol (Fig. 38).143 Compound 100a is virtually nonfluorescent in methanol due to reductive PET from catechol to BODIPY. Upon oxidation to 100b, significant fluorescence enhancement is observed because PET from the o-quinone group to BODIPY becomes energetically unfavorable. ROS such as H2O2, ˙OH, 1O2, , −OCl did not drastically change the fluorescence properties of 100a.
 Fig. 38  Fe3+ mediated o-quinone formation in a catechol-substituted BODIPY. 
Distyryl BODIPY derivative 101 was reported as a fluorescent probe for the detection of Cr3+ (Fig. 39).144 Ion-free 101 is practically nonfluorescent (Φ 0.003). Binding of Cr3+ produces a color change from green to blue and an impressive fluorescence increase (Φ 0.69) without shift of Φem. 1∶2 (metal∶indicator) and 2∶2 complexes between Cr3+ and 101 were postulated via sequential coordination. Job's plot analysis could not provide a clear stoichiometry, however.
 Fig. 39  Sensor with turn-on response to Cr3+. 

6.2. Indicators for anions

6.2.1. Fluoride (F−). 
Although anions play decisive roles in a multitude of essential biological processes, the design of selective fluorescent indicators for anions has received much less attention than that for fluoroionophores for cations.
The most popular, reported BODIPY-derived anion sensors/dosimeters are those for fluoride. An unidentified, irreversible reaction of compound 2430 with tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF) in acetone solution led to disappearance of the main S1 ← S0 absorption band at 599 nm and the emission peak at 686 nm, while the peak intensities at 452 and 482 nm increased.145
The cationic adduct of 4-dimethylaminopyridine with BODIPY 102a reacts with TBAF to yield the strongly fluorescent, neutral BODIPY derivative 102b.146 To boost the fluorescence increase upon F− addition, the reaction was done in the presence of iodide ions. The addition of tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) to 102a in CHCl3 results in a drastic fluorescence quenching, supposedly by the high sensitivity of the cationic adduct to the external heavy atom effect imparted by I−. When subsequently TBAF was added, the fluorescence increased spectacularly, due to formation of 102b and the lower sensitivity of this neutral compound to the external spin–orbit coupling effect of I−.
Compound 103 has been proposed as a colorimetric and fluorometric probe for selective fluoride detection (Fig. 40).147 Apo 103 was found to be moderately fluorescent in acetonitrile solution (Φ 0.353). In the presence of fluoride ions, the main absorption band of 103 with λabs at 599 nm disappeared and a new red-shifted band appeared at 718 nm. At high F− concentrations, the fluorescence of 103 was completely quenched. These changes have been explained by the authors as driven by a 1∶1 hydrogen bonding interaction between the indolic NH proton and F−. However, one cannot exclude complete deprotonation of the indolic NH proton by the rather basic fluoride at high F− concentrations. A very efficient ICT in the excited state from the indole anion to BODIPY will then completely turn-off the fluorescence. The anions Cl−, Br−, I−, ClO−4, HSO−4, NO−3, … are not basic enough to deprotonate the indolic NH.
 Fig. 40  Fluorescent indicators responsive to fluoride. 
Analogues 104a and 105a with trimethylsilylethynyl substituents at the 3,5- (for 104a) and 8-positions (for 105a) were deprotected with TBAF in dichloromethane solution.148 In these irreversible reactions, the electron-rich trimethylsilylethynyl group was converted into the electron-deficient ethynyl function. The absorption and emission maxima of deprotected compound 104b shifted 20 nm hypsochromically with respect to those of 104a. As expected, no changes of λabs and λem were detected between the meso-substituted compounds 105a and 105b. Although the authors described compound 104a as a specific dosimeter for fluoride ions, other anions are capable of inducing cleavage of the SiMe3 group.149 Conversely, anions such as Cl−, Br−, I−, ClO−4 and HPO2−4 are known not to cleave the SiMe3 protective group from ethynes. However, a similar response might be observed in the presence of hydroxide and alkoxide anions. Moreover, some transition metal salts, such as Ag(I) and Cu(I), have been shown to deprotect terminal alkynes, and spectroscopic effects may thus be observed in the presence of these metal ions.150
A similar desilylation reaction of two silyl ethers 106a–b was reported by Akkaya et al. (Fig. 41).151 The location of the emerging phenolate group on BODIPY is critical. Removal of the triisopropylsilyl protective group from 106b by fluoride ions triggers reductive PET and leads to a drastic decrease of fluorescence intensity and a small blue shift (10 nm) of λabs. In contrast, upon exposure to fluoride ions, the absorption peak of 106a at 560 nm gradually decreases and a new peak at 682 nm emerges. Deprotection of 106a generates strong ICT and leads to the formation of the nonemissive phenolate. Although these deprotection reactions were claimed to be highly selective for fluoride, other anions can also cleave silyl ethers. Conversely, Cl−, Br−, I−, AcO−, CN−, H2PO−4, HSO−4 and NO−3 are not known to deprotect silyl ethers under mild conditions. Again, alkylsilyl based protecting groups can be removed under a range of conditions,149 and because triisopropylsilyl ethers are efficiently cleaved by mild acid, some caution is advised regarding the pH sensitivity of such probes.
 Fig. 41  Fluorescent dosimeters for fluoride based on desilylation reactions. 


6.2.2. Cyanide (CN−). 
Reaction of compound 107 with tetrabutylammonium cyanide resulted in a color change from pink to blue (33 nm bathochromic shift of λabs) and a fluorescence turn-off (Φ 0.01) was attributed to cyanohydrin formation.152 The reaction is reversible and compound 107 can be restored on the addition of trifluoroacetic acid.
Di(2-picolyl)amine containing dye 108 forms a virtually nonfluorescent complex with Cu2+. Decomplexation of Cu2+ ions from this Cu2+–108 complex (in THF) by CN− ions (in H2O) gave tetracyanocuprate ions and restored apo 108 and its concomitant fluorescence (Fig. 42).153
 Fig. 42  Cyanide indicators. 


6.2.3. Hydrogenphosphate (HPO2−4) and other anions (F−, OAc−, …). 
The fluorescence emission intensity of the 1∶1 Zn2+–82 complex55 was found to be highly sensitive to anion (HPO2−4, F−, Cl−, Br−, and OAc−) coordination to zinc.154 In the 1∶1 Zn2+–82 complex, oxidative PET from the excited-state BODIPY moiety to the Zn2+ chelated bipyridyl group was assumed to be responsible for fluorescence quenching. Chelation of the anions to the metal center partially neutralizes the charge on the metal center and this turns off the oxidative PET process and restores the full emission intensity of the BODIPY fluorophore. Kd values of the anion complexes with the 1∶1 Zn2+–82 complex were similar and ranged from 2.1 × 10−4 M (for OAc−) to 4.0 × 10−4 M (for Br−).
BODIPY derivative 109 with a dipicolylaminylethylamine group was reported forming a 1∶1 complex with Zn2+ (Fig. 43).122 Addition of anions (F−, HPO2−4, OAc−) to this 1∶1 Zn2+–109 complex produces large changes in the absorption and emission spectra. Analysis of the electrostatic binding of these anions to the metal center yielded comparable Kd values [(2.2–2.4) × 10−5 M].
 Fig. 43  The 1∶1 Zn2+ complex with 109 is sensitive to several anions. 

6.3. Indicators for biomolecules

6.3.1. Saxitoxin. 
Compound 110—with the aza-18-crown-6 ether chelator and the azaBODIPY chromophore—has been used as a visible sensor for the marine toxin saxitoxin, the most toxic component of paralytic shellfish poisons.155 This sensor is based on the concept of reductive PET. In the absence of saxitoxin, PET from the azacrown ether to the azaBODIPY quenches the fluorescence. Upon complexation of saxitoxin, PET is switched off and fluorescence is turned on. At ∼1∶1 saxitoxin–110 stoichiometry, the fluorescence enhancement was over 100%. Kd of the 1∶1 saxitoxin–110 complex was determined to be 1.6 μM, while an analogous compound with a larger crown ether (aza-27-crown-9 instead of aza-18-crown-6 in 110) bound the toxin less strongly (Kd 71 μM) and gave insignificant fluorescence enhancement (Fig. 44).
 Fig. 44  Fluorescent probe for saxitoxin. 


6.3.2. Peptides and proteins. 
Three BODIPY-based probes with stilbene or diphenylacetylene moieties connected via a polyethylene glycol linker of different lengths to the phenylethynyl group at the meso-position were synthesized for targeting β-amyloid plaques.156 However, no experimental evidence was presented that these fluorescent probes bind to β-amyloid plaques.
Triazole containing BODIPY dyes 111 can distinguish between secondary structure conformations of soluble oligomers of amyloid Aβ(1–42) peptide.157 The fluorescence emission spectra of 111 showed different intensity enhancements in the presence of unordered and ordered, β-sheet-rich Aβ(1–42) soluble oligomers.
BODIPY-derived 112 has been developed as a dual nuclear and fluorescent imaging probe targeting β-amyloid (Aβ) aggregates in the brain.158In vitro experiments showed that this fluorescent dye has a high affinity for synthetic Aβ(1–42) aggregates and could serve as a probe for detecting Aβ plaques in mouse brain sections. However, additional structural changes are needed to improve its ability to cross the blood–brain barrier.
Fluorescent probe 113 incorporates BODIPY and two Zn2+–di(2-picolyl)amine complexes for the selective detection and visualization of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins, materials representative of many neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease.159 Compound 113 forms 1∶1 complexes with several tau peptide fragments containing phosphorylated amino acid residues at (i, i + 4) positions, with Kd values in the μM range. The selective detection of NFTs is based on the coordination of 113 with the multiple phosphate groups of the hyperphosphorylated tau proteins. Probe 113 clearly discriminates between NFTs and the plaques assembled from β-amyloid peptide.
Granisetron appended BODIPY derivative 114 was found to bind with high affinity to human serotonin receptors.160 The BODIPY fluorophore was attached at the N1-position of indazole because it was the most tolerant regarding substitution.
By means of a fluorescence image-based screening against three cell lines, probe 115 was found to selectively stain AlphaTC1 cells, which secrete glucagon.161 The selectivity of 115 toward glucagon was further confirmed in vitro. Apo 115 is weakly fluorescent (Φ 0.012) but becomes markedly more fluorescent in the presence of 200 μM glucagon (Φ 0.151). λabs and λem of 115 are hardly influenced by the presence of glucagon (Fig. 45).
 Fig. 45  Protein-sensitive BODIPY-based probes. 


6.3.3. Monosaccharides. 
Boronic acid is an important functional group in the design of receptors and sensors for carbohydrates.162 The boronic acid-based carbohydrate sensing field is very extensive with a large number of active laboratories. BODIPY functionalized with a phenylboronic acid 116 displayed spectral changes in the absorption and emission spectra in the presence of sugars (D-fructose, D-glucose, D-galactose).163 The affinity of 116 for the sugars decreased in the order D-fructose > D-galactose > D-glucose (Fig. 46).
 Fig. 46  Indicator for D-fructose, D-glucose and D-galactose. 


6.3.4. Thiol (Cys). 
Compound 117a is a fluorescent turn-on dosimeter for the optical sensing and imaging of thiols.58 The fluorescence of dye 117a is quenched by oxidative PET from the excited BODIPY fluorophore to the electron-poor 2,4-dinitrobenzenesulfonate moiety. Highly fluorescent phenolic compound 117b is formed by the thiol-specific SNAr reaction. The potential of the probe was demonstrated by imaging of thiols in live cells. Based on the same SNAr reaction with thiols, very comparable fluorescent turn-on dosimeters have been reported by Lu and coworkers59 (compound 118a) and Shao et al.60 (compound 119a). Fluorescence of 118a and 119a is also quenched by oxidative PET from the excited BODIPY subunit to the electron-poor 2,4-dinitrobenzenesulfonate moiety. After SNAr reaction with thiol, derivatives 118b and 119b are formed, producing a large fluorescence enhancement. The applicability of probe 118 was demonstrated by the determination of μM levels of non-protein cysteine in human serum. Sensor 119 was used for fluorescent imaging of cellular thiols (Scheme 10).
 Scheme 10  Fluorescent dosimeters for thiols. 

6.4. Indicators for reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS)
The type of ROS and RNS is diverse including species like superoxide radical anion (), peroxynitrite (ONOO−), nitrite (NO−2), nitric oxide (NO), peroxyl radical (ROO˙), hydroperoxyl radical (HOO˙), hydroxyl radical (HO˙), and alkoxyl radical (RO˙). Also included in the definition are molecules such as hypochlorous acid (HOCl), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), nitroxyl (HNO), and electronically excited species like singlet oxygen (1O2).
Since most of the BODIPY-derived probes for ROS/RNS react irreversibly with the ROS/RNS, their structure is destroyed in the reaction. Hence, these indicators should be labeled as dosimeters.

6.4.1. ONOO− (peroxynitrite). 
Peroxynitrite (ONOO−) is a reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). Reaction between nonfluorescent 120a with peroxynitrite produces fluorescent dye 120b.164 Compound 120a is nonfluorescent due to reductive PET from the phenol subunit to BODIPY. The HOMO of the quinoid structure in 120b is lower in energy than the HOMO of BODIPY so that the PET process is switched off and fluorescence is turned on. Compound 120a is highly selective for peroxynitrite: of the other ROS and RNS, only ˙OH could generate a (weaker) fluorescence response. Probe 120a was also used for visualizing peroxynitrite in murine macrophage cells treated with various stimulants.
The fluorescence intensity of 121 was dramatically enhanced upon addition of peroxynitrite (ONOO−), a potent nitrating agent. Other ROS (˙OH, −OCl, 1O2, NO, , H2O2) gave little fluorescence augmentation (Fig. 47).165 Formation of a nitrated product and resultant suppression of the PET process are responsible for the fluorescence intensity increase (see also Section 6.5.2). Compound 121 is applicable for fluorescence imaging of ONOO− in living cells.
 Fig. 47  Fluorescent dosimeters for peroxynitrite. 


6.4.2. 
             (superoxide radical anion). 
The luminescence of imidazo[1,2-a]pyrazin-3(7H)-one compounds 122a has been reviewed recently.166 In chemiluminescent probes based on 122a, a fluorophore is one of the R substituents. Reaction of 122a with ROS generates 122b in the excited state (indicated by *), which returns to the ground state via nonradiative pathways and emission of light.
In compound 123, the imidazopyrazinone moiety is connected through a direct bond at the 2-position of the fluorophore BODIPY.167 Dye 123 emits yellow-green luminescence under neutral pH conditions after oxidation by . λem of 123 in the presence of ROS was located at longer wavelengths (λem 545 nm) than the fluorescence emission of BODIPY, suggesting that the emitting species is the fully conjugated 123 with its oxidized imidazopyrazine subunit (see structure 122b), rather than the BODIPY moiety alone. This is an indication against RET from the excited-state, oxidized imidazopyrazine to BODIPY. Compound 123 provided the highest luminescence response towards  among the various ROS tested. BODIPY derivative 123 was also used for the detection of ROS generated from stimulated cells.
In lipophilic indicator 124, the imidazopyrazinone subunit is connected to the meso-position of BODIPY via a p-phenylene linker.168 The -induced chemiluminescence of 124 has λem at 542 nm (Fig. 48).
 Fig. 48  Fluorescent dosimeters for . 


6.4.3. HOCl (hypochlorous acid). 
Fluorescent probe 125a has been developed for the selective detection of HOCl on the basis of a specific reaction with p-methoxyphenol yielding p-benzoquinone-substituted 125b.169 Compound 125a is almost nonfluorescent (Φ < 0.01) due to reductive PET (the HOMO energy of the p-methoxyphenol moiety is higher than that of the BODIPY subunit). After oxidation of the p-methoxyphenol subunit of 125a, the HOMO energy of the p-benzoquinone moiety in 125b is lower that that of the BODIPY core and therefore the PET process is prohibited, so that 125b is fluorescent. Formation of HOCl has been successfully detected in an abiotic as well as in an enzymatic system and in live macrophage cells upon stimulation (Fig. 49).
 Fig. 49  Fluorescent dosimeter for HOCl. 


6.4.4. ROO˙ (peroxyl radical). 
BODIPY–α-tocopherol adduct 126 is a lipophilic fluorescent probe for the detection of peroxyl radicals in model membrane systems and their imaging in the lipid membranes of live cells (Fig. 50).170,171 Reductive PET from the chromanol moiety to the singlet-excited BODIPY renders 126 nonemissive. Upon peroxyl radical scavenging, oxidation of the chromanol moiety switches off PET, leading to a significant fluorescence enhancement, which is independent of the solution pH and membrane composition.
 Fig. 50  Fluorescent dosimeter for ROO˙. 


6.4.5. HNO (nitroxyl). 
BODIPY derivative 127 forms a 1∶1 Cu2+ complex (Kd 3 × 10−6 M) involving the di(2-picolyl)amine chelator and the triazole bridge. This Cu2+ complex can be used for the direct detection of HNO in aqueous solution.56 The fluorescence of 127 (Φ 0.12) is strongly quenched upon formation of the Cu2+–127 complex (Φ 0.01), supposedly by oxidative PET from excited BODIPY to the bound Cu2+ ion. In the presence of HNO, reduction of the Cu2+–127 complex generates NO(g) and Cu+–127, with concomitant restoration of BODIPY fluorescence. Other RNS and ROS (NO, NO−2, NO−3, ONOO−, H2O2, and OCl−) failed to induce significant fluorescence amplification of the Cu2+–127 complex, making this system potentially valuable for studying the individual roles of NO and HNO in biology (Fig. 51).
 Fig. 51  Fluorescent dosimeter for nitroxyl. 


6.4.6. NO2− (nitrite). 
Probe 128 is a BODIPY dye with a meso p-aminophenyl substituent for the determination of nitrite.172 Reaction of nitrite with 128 in acidic solution yields a diazonium salt, which is converted in basic solution to a diazoate, a stable and highly fluorescent compound. Compound 128 has been used to monitor trace nitrite in drinking water and in fresh vegetable without extraction (Fig. 52).
 Fig. 52  Fluorescent dosimeter for NO2−. 


6.4.7. NO (nitric oxide). 
Free radical nitric oxide (NO) is an essential molecule for cellular signal transduction. NO plays a crucial role in signal transduction pathways in the cardiovascular173 and nervous systems174 and is a vital component of the cytostatic/cytotoxic function of the immune system.175–177 The literature on fluorescent indicators for NO has been reviewed recently.178 Nearly all the probes for detection of NO are aromatic vicinal diamines. The changes in fluorescence of these organic molecules require reactions with intermediate RNS and not with NO itself. Therefore, their fluorescence response does not necessarily reflect real-time NO production. A 1∶1 Cu2+ complex of a fluorescein derivative (Φ 0.077) allows for the direct detection of NO by the irreversible reduction of the complex to Cu+ with release of the bright nitrosylated fluorophore (Φ 0.58). This derivative showed selectivity for NO over other ROS and RNS.179
All reported BODIPY-derived probes for the detection of NO employ the o-phenylenediamine scaffold on the meso-position which is converted to the corresponding benzotriazole group upon reaction with NO in the presence of O2 or with NaNO2 and HCl.
Compound 129a is the first example of a BODIPY-based probe for NO.180,181 The benzotriazole-forming reactions of 129a and 131 with NaNO2 + HCl have been used also for the detection of nitrite.182,183 Additional probes for NO have been reported by Nagano and coworkers (129b–e, 132)181,184 and H.-S. Zhang et al. (133, 134).20,185 The spectral properties and fluorescence quantum yields of 129a and 130a reported by Nagano et al.181 are completely divergent from those of Zhang and coworkers.180 Conversion of the diamino dyes 129 to the corresponding benzotriazole derivatives 130 caused little change of λabs and λem but greatly increased Φ, a typical feature of probes based on the reductive PET mechanism (Fig. 53).181 A similar increase in Φ values was found when 132 (Φ 0.012) was converted to its corresponding benzotriazole derivative (Φ 0.496). The high selectivity of these o-phenylenediamine-derived probes for NO under aerated conditions has contributed to their success, because the fluorescent benzotriazole product is not formed by reaction with the ROS superoxide (), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or peroxynitrite (ONOO−).
 Fig. 53  Fluorescent dosimeters for NO. 


6.4.8. H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide). 
In an endeavor to develop reusable redox-responsive fluorescent indicators, the reversible quinone–hydroquinone couple was used. Compound 135a contains the hydroquinone group which can be oxidized to the quinone moiety in 135b (Fig. 54).186 The process to convert the quinone back to the hydroquinone is fully reversible. The quinone group is an excellent electron acceptor. Hence, fluorescence of 135b (quinone) is efficiently quenched by oxidative PET from the BODIPY fluorophore to the quinone group (‘off’ state), but not in 135a (hydroquinone; ‘on’ state). This is the opposite effect of how probes 125 and 136 operate. Fluorescence from 135a in water containing 5% (v/v) Triton-X fades as hydrogen peroxide converts the hydroquinone to quinone (135b). Unlike the irreversible ROS detectors (i.e., dosimeters) the system can be re-set, because addition of sodium ascorbate reduces the quinone back to the hydroquinone form. Cycling of the reversible system between ‘on’ and ‘off’ can be repeated many times with no obvious drop in performance. The indicator system 135 can be catalogued also as a redox-responsive system (6.5.1).
 Fig. 54  Fluorescent indicator for H2O2. 

6.5. Indicators for other phenomena
All the fluorescent indicators discussed in Sections 6.1–6.4 transform chemical information (e.g., the presence of an analyte) into a spectroscopically useful signal. These indicators are adequately described by the usual definition given in the Introduction. However, the probes in Section 6.5 warrant a more general definition, because they are responsive to sometimes purely physical phenomena. A fluorescent probe can then be defined generally as a compound capable of converting any chemical and/or physical information of the probe's environment into a functional fluorescence output signal.

6.5.1. Redox potential. 
In fluorescent redox potential sensors 136, flavin was connected to BODIPY via an L-proline linker.187 The fluorescence of 136a was considerably quenched when the flavin subunit was in the reduced form (Φ 0.05, ‘off’ state) compared to the oxidized form (Φ 0.31) (‘on’ state, as shown in Fig. 55), presumably by reductive PET from reduced flavin to BODIPY. This is precisely the opposite effect of how indicator 135 operates. Compounds 136 were shown to reversibly respond to the thiol–disulfide equilibria associated with intracellular thiols such as glutathione and thioredoxin, which play a critical role in regulating structures and functions of proteins. Hela cells stained with 136a could be cycled through a readily observable fluorescence change by the successive additions of Na2S2O4 (leading to ‘off’ state) and H2O2 (producing ‘on’ state).
 Fig. 55  Fluorescent sensor for redox potential. 


6.5.2. Nitration. 
Nitration of the aromatic meso-substituent in 137a lowers the HOMO energy level significantly, so that reductive PET to BODIPY is switched off and compound 137b becomes highly fluorescent (Fig. 56).188 Conversely, the nitrile functional groups on BODIPY lower the LUMO energy level of BODIPY due to their electron-withdrawing effect, so that oxidative PET from excited BODIPY to the meso-nitroaromatic group in 137b is suppressed. As a result, the nitro group induces fluorescence, whereas the common idea is that this group is a fluorescence quencher. The transformation of 137a into 137b and the ensuing fluorescence enhancement demonstrate that by judiciously controlling the MO energy levels of BODIPY and meso-substituent vis-à-vis each other the reductive and oxidative PET processes can be switched ‘on’ or ‘off’.
 Fig. 56  Fluorescent dye responsive to nitration. 


6.5.3. Hydrolysis of esters. 
Hydrolysis of the esters at the 2,6-positions of 138a to the corresponding carboxylates 138b leads to 15–20 nm bathochromic shifts of the excitation and emission maxima in 138b attributed to a mitigation of the electron-withdrawing capacity of esters (in 138a) compared to carboxylates (in 138b) (Fig. 57).189 The spectral changes can be used to detect esterase activity in living cells.
 Fig. 57  Fluorescent dye sensitive to hydrolysis of its ester functions. 


6.5.4. Biocatalytic Diels–Alder reactions. 
Dyads 139a–b are water-soluble fluorescent sensors for investigating RNA-catalyzed Diels–Alder reactions.190 These probes consist of anthracene and sulfonated BODIPY fluorophores linked at the meso-position by conjugated phenylethynyl bridges. Anthracene in 139a–b efficiently quenches BODIPY fluorescence, supposedly by reductive PET. The differences in Φ of 139a (0.006) and 139b (0.014) correlate well with the degree of conjugation between anthracene and the phenylethynyl bridge. Upon destruction of the anthracene group of 139b by the Diels–Alder reaction, the fluorescence emission intensity of 139c increases 20-fold (Φ 0.30) (Fig. 58). Binding in the hydrophobic catalytic pocket of a Diels–Alderase RNA increases significantly the fluorescence anisotropy of 139a–c compared to aqueous Diels–Alderase (DAse) buffer or aqueous solution. Using fluorescent probes 139a–b, RNA-catalyzed Diels–Alder reactions were monitored under single- and multiple-turnover conditions, down to the single-molecule level.
 Fig. 58  Anthracene–BODIPY dyads 139a–b as sensors for biocatalytic Diels–Alder reactions and the product 139c of the Diels–Alder reaction between 139b and N-pentylmaleimide as dienophile. 


6.5.5. Viscosity. 
Viscosity is one of the important, physical parameters determining the diffusion rate of species in condensed media, including biological systems. While methods for measuring the macroscopic viscosity are well developed, methodologies based on fluorescence for investigating the “local” viscosity on the microscopic level (e.g., within a cell membrane or within the cytosol of a cell) are rather new. The inherent drawbacks of conventional methods for measuring viscosity hamper real-time viscosity measurements. Conversely, fluorescence-based techniques such as fluorescence anisotropy191 and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching192,193 provide viscosity data with high spatial and temporal resolution. Very recent and promising developments employ fluorescent molecular rotors based on BODIPY (Fig. 59) that operate on the principle of hindered intramolecular rotation. Lindsey, Holten and coworkers194 showed that the fluorescence quantum yield Φ and fluorescence lifetime τ of the S1 excited state for 8-phenylBODIPY or 8-(4-tert-butylphenyl)BODIPY were significantly smaller than those for the sterically hindered analogues having an o-tolyl or mesityl group at the 8-position. It was proposed that free rotation of the 8-aryl group enhances nonradiative deactivation of the S1 excited state. As a result, restriction of rotation of the 8-aryl substituent would reduce the nonradiative decay of S1 and lead to higher Φ and τ values.
 Fig. 59  Fluorescent molecular rotors for measurement of local viscosity. 
BODIPY derivative 140195 having a p-substituted phenyl group at the meso-position was used to image local microviscosity in live cells via fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM).196,197 The increase of the fluorometric parameters Φ and τ and the rotational relaxation time θ of 140 with increasing solvent viscosity in methanol–glycerol mixtures is consistent with the hindered rotation of the meso-phenyl group in the medium of high viscosity. Confocal time-resolved fluorescence images of incubated cells containing 140 indicated a narrow distribution of τ (1.4–1.8 ns), corresponding to an intracellular viscosity of ca. 140 cP. The average value of θ in cells was 1.1 ns, corresponding to a microviscosity of ca. 80 cP, in fair agreement with that obtained from FLIM.
A molecular rotor having two BODIPY fluorophores linked via a flexible chain (compound 141) was proposed by Benniston, Harriman et al.198 to measure the viscosity of the surrounding medium. It was shown that Φ and τ of 141 increase with increasing solvent viscosity in a homologous series of unbranched alkanols. The rate constant of nonradiative deactivation of S1 decreases with increasing viscosity, while the rate constant of fluorescence remains reasonably constant. A key point in the mechanism by which the probe responds to changes in local viscosity is the structural distortion of the dipyrromethene framework that accompanies rotation of the meso-phenyl ring.
Ferrocene–BODIPY dyad 142 is a molecular rotor displaying significant enhancement of Φ as the solvent viscosity increases.199 The viscosity-dependent properties of 142 were investigated in THF–ethylene glycol mixtures of varying viscosity. Φ increased dramatically as the fraction of ethylene glycol increased. In low viscosity H2O–THF mixtures, the fluorescence intensity of 142 varied linearly with the water fraction up to 60% H2O. Since rotation of the meso-phenyl ring in 142 is restricted by the 1,7-dimethyl substituents of BODIPY, the critical factor for the nonradiative decay of 142 should be the rotation of the ferrocene subunit around the axis of the ethynyl group.

7. Conclusion and perspectives
In this critical review, we have given an overview of the developments for the period 1997–2010 in the area of fluorescent indicators built on the BODIPY scaffold. Although many such fluorescent probes have been described in the literature, only a relatively small number of them have found applications in environmental and biological milieus. We hope this review has emphasized the importance of rational design for developing ‘ideal’ probes for the many analytes that need to be detected, monitored and/or visualized. Since BODIPY already offers an outstanding fluorophore platform, the design work should focus primarily on constructing suitable chelators for specific analytes.
The versatility of the BODIPY scaffold is due to its synthetic adaptability. Recent progress in BODIPY chemistry makes it possible to build dyes by postfunctionalization of the BODIPY core rather than by starting from appropriately substituted pyrroles. By connecting suitable binding sites to the BODIPY nucleus at any position of the fluorophore, a wide range of fluorescent detectors can be realized. The photophysical mechanism of operation of the sensor can be switched depending on the position of the coordination site. In other words, each location of attachment can elicit different properties for the same receptor. The near-orthogonal geometries of BODIPY core and aromatic residues attached to the meso-position can minimize electronic communication between these subunits. Conversely, substituents at the pyrrole positions allow coplanar geometries that maximize electronic coupling. Organic moieties at the boron center have minimal effect on their spectroscopic properties, but they expand the variety of derivatives that can be made. For instance, efficient RET from a high-energy absorbing chromophore (e.g., pyrene) at boron to the low-energy boradiazaindacene emitter can provide large virtual Stokes shift200,201 and can be applied in suitably engineered sensors. Functional groups suitable for increasing the solubility in aqueous medium or for labeling biomolecules can be introduced at the boron center with minimal disturbance of the excellent spectroscopic properties of the BODIPY core. Attractive asymmetric dyes can be designed combining a chelator at one pyrrole site and a chromophore that moves the spectra to the red or NIR region at another pyrrole position.
There is still much scope to improve the chelators to satisfy the design criteria described in Section 3.1, such as high selectivity, fast reversible chelation, water solubility, fluorescence bio-imaging capacity, a feasible synthetic route, etc. Hence, improving the design of the coordination site is the key issue in order to create truly functional probes for environmental and biological applications.202 Although very selective receptor groups are known for some analytes—e.g. BAPTA with high affinity for Ca2+, APTRA as a chelator for Mg2+, with low affinity for Ca2+, …—considerable advances, such as reported in K+ biosensing,203 have to be made. Multidisciplinary collaboration between organic synthetic chemists, spectroscopists, physiologists, biochemists, materials scientists, … might facilitate this process. These novel probes will significantly expand the knowledge of the role of many analytes in environmental and biological systems.
There is a huge unfulfilled need for sensitive and selective sensors for detection and visualization of physiologically important anions in an aqueous environment. The number of indicators for anions is limited when compared to the abundance of probes for (metal) cations. Perhaps the most urgently needed receptors are those for chloride, because of their role in chloride channels and carriers. Most of the commercially available chloride probes are 6-methoxyquinolinium or acridinium derivatives that work on the principle of fluorescence quenching.3 The loading of these indicators is done via long-term incubation requiring large dye excess or by hypotonic permeabilization. The limited selectivity, rapid leakage and low brightness of these indicators together with the need for UV-excitation for the 6-methoxyquinolinium analogues are unfavorable characteristics. In addition, the design and synthesis of sensitive, selective and user-friendly indicators for other physiologically relevant anions, such as phosphate and hydrogen carbonate (HCO−3) ions, also present a great challenge. The field of anion recognition requires further progress to achieve Nature's efficiency in strong and selective anion binding.
Biological applications require water-soluble and membrane-permeable probes which are well retained within the cytosol. These seemingly conflicting conditions have been fulfilled elegantly by R. Y. Tsien and coworkers,50 who proposed membrane permeable dyes with attached esters which diffuse into cells where they are hydrolyzed by esterases to afford the charged form of these compounds. Good retention inside cells demands the creation of several negative charges and this implies several ester functionalities on the BODIPY core. The effect of the attachment of esters on the properties of BODIPY will have to be investigated. Finally, it is evident that NIR probes are favored for biological measurements. The design strategy for constructing NIR BODIPY derivatives with high brightness mainly aims at extending the conjugation length and introducing conformationally constrained (i.e., rigid and fused) rings.28,200,204–206
8. Glossary of abbreviations

APTRA
o-aminophenol-N,N,O-triacetic acid
BAPTA1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid
BODIPYdifluoroboron dipyrromethene or 4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene
DAse bufferaqueous Diels–Alderase buffer (300 mM NaCl, 30 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.4, 80 mM MgCl2, 10% EtOH)
DDQ2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-p-benzoquinone
DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide
EtOHethanol
FLIMfluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy
HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid
HOMOhighest occupied molecular orbital
HTMheavy and transition metal
ICTintramolecular charge transfer

K
d
ground-state dissociation constant

K
s
ground-state stability constant (Ks = 1/Kd)
LE statelocally excited state, Franck–Condon state
LUMOlowest unoccupied molecular orbital
Mmole per dm3
MeCNacetonitrile
MeOHmethanol
MOmolecular orbital
MOPS3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid
NIRnear-infrared
NOnitric oxide
PETphotoinduced electron transfer
PIPESpiperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid)
RETresonance energy transfer
RNAribonucleic acid
RNSreactive nitrogen species
ROSreactive oxygen species
SNArnucleophilic aromatic substitution
TBAFtetrabutylammonium fluoride (Bu4NF)
TBAItetrabutylammonium iodide (Bu4NI)
THFtetrahydrofuran
Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

ε(λ)molar absorption coefficient at excitation wavelength λ

Φ
fluorescence quantum yield

λ
abs
wavelength of maximal absorbance

λ
em
wavelength of maximal fluorescence emission spectral radiant power

λ
ex
wavelength of maximal fluorescence excitation spectral radiant power

τ
fluorescence lifetime (decay time)

Acknowledgements
The ‘Instituut voor de aanmoediging van innovatie door Wetenschap en Technologie in Vlaanderen’ (IWT) is acknowledged for a fellowship to VL.
References
A. Loudet and K. Burgess, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4891–4932 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel and A. Harriman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1184–1201 CrossRef CAS .

          R. P. Haugland, The Handbook. A Guide to Fluorescent Probes and Labeling Technologies, Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, 10th edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. Treibs and F.-H. Kreuzer, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1968, 718, 208–223 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Benniston and G. Copley, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 4124–4131 RSC .
Life Technologies (formerly Invitrogen). Web site: http://probes.invitrogen.com.
T. E. Wood and A. Thompson, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1831–1861 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rohand, E. Dolusic, T. H. Ngo, W. Maes and W. Dehaen, ARKIVOC, 2007, 10, 307–324 Search PubMed  , and references cited therein.
M. Shah, K. Thangaraj, M.-L. Soong, L. T. Wolford, J. H. Boyer, I. R. Politzer and T. G. Pavlopoulos, Heteroat. Chem., 1990, 1, 389–399 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Boyer, A. M. Haag, G. Sathyamoorthi, M.-L. Soong, K. Thangaraj and T. G. Pavlopoulos, Heteroat. Chem., 1993, 4, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, E. Mintzer and R. Bittman, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 1718–1721 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Yakubovskyi, M. P. Shandura and Y. P. Kovtun, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2009, 3237–3243 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu and K. Burgess, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4933–4935 RSC .
M. Rogers, J. Chem. Soc., 1943, 590–596 RSC .
W. Davies and M. Rogers, J. Chem. Soc., 1944, 126–131 RSC .
E. Knott, J. Chem. Soc., 1947, 1196–1201 RSC .
T. H. Allik, R. E. Hermes, G. Sathyamoorthi and J. H. Boyer, Proc. SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 1994, 2115, 240–248 CAS .
J. Killoran, L. Allen, J. F. Gallagher, W. M. Gallagher and D. F. O'Shea, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1862–1863 RSC .
A. Gorman, J. Killoran, C. O'Shea, T. Kenna, W. M. Gallagher and D. F. O'Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10619–10631 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and H.-S. Zhang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2005, 61, 1045–1049 CrossRef .
W. Zhao and E. M. Carreira, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7254–7263 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liras, J. Bañuelos Prieto, M. Pintado-Sierra, F. López Arbeloa, I. García-Moreno, Á. Costela, L. Infantes, R. Sastre and F. Amat-Guerri, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 4183–4186 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Wang, A. B. Descalzo, Z. Shen, X.-Z. You and K. Rurack, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 2887–2903 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Shimizu, N. Watanabe, T. Kataoka, T. Shoji, N. Abe, S. Morishita and H. Ichimura, Pyridine and Pyridine Derivatives, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, Wiley-VCH,  2000 Search PubMed .
K. Rurack, M. Kollmannsberger and J. Daub, New J. Chem., 2001, 25, 289–292 RSC .
E. Deniz, G. C. Isbasar, Ö. A. Bozdemir, L. T. Yildirim, A. Siemiarczuk and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 3401–3403 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dost, S. Atilgan and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 8484–8488 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Yu, A. B. Descalzo, Z. Shen, H. Röhr, Q. Liu, Y.-W. Wang, M. Spieles, Y.-Z. Li, K. Rurack and X.-Z. You, Chem.–Asian J., 2006, 1, 176–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baruah, W. Qin, C. Flors, J. Hofkens, R. A. L. Vallée, D. Beljonne, M. Van der Auweraer, W. M. De Borggraeve and N. Boens, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 5998–6009 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rurack, M. Kollmannsberger and J. Daub, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 385–387 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baruah, W. Qin, N. Basarić, W. M. De Borggraeve and N. Boens, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 4152–4157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baruah, W. Qin, R. A. L. Vallée, D. Beljonne, T. Rohand, W. Dehaen and N. Boens, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 4377–4380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rohand, M. Baruah, W. Qin, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Chem. Commun., 2006, 266–268 RSC .
E. Fron, E. Coutiño-Gonzalez, L. Pandey, M. Sliwa, M. Van der Auweraer, F. C. De Schryver, J. Thomas, Z. Dong, V. Leen, M. Smet, W. Dehaen and T. Vosch, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1490–1496 RSC .
W. Qin, T. Rohand, M. Baruah, A. Stefan, M. Van der Auweraer, W. Dehaen and N. Boens, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 420, 562–568 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rohand, J. Lycoops, S. Smout, E. Braeken, M. Sliwa, M. Van der Auweraer, W. Dehaen, W. M. De Borggraeve and N. Boens, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 1061–1066 CAS .
W. Qin, T. Rohand, W. Dehaen, J. N. Clifford, K. Driessen, D. Beljonne, B. Van Averbeke, M. Van der Auweraer and N. Boens, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 8588–8597 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qin, V. Leen, W. Dehaen, J. Cui, C. Xu, X. Tang, W. Liu, T. Rohand, D. Beljonne, B. Van Averbeke, J. Clifford, K. Driesen, K. Binnemans, M. Van der Auweraer and N. Boens, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11731–11740 CAS .
L. Li, B. Nguyen and K. Burgess, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2008, 18, 3112–3116 CrossRef CAS .
V. Leen, E. Braeken, K. Luckermans, C. Jackers, M. Van der Auweraer, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4515–4517 RSC .
V. Leen, V. Zaragozí Gonzalvo, W. M. De Borggraeve, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4908–4910 RSC .
T. Rohand, W. Qin, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 4658–4663 CrossRef CAS .
V. Leen, T. Leemans, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011 DOI:10.1002/ejoc.201100324  , in press.
J. C. Forgie, P. J. Skabara, I. Stibor, F. Vilela and Z. Vobecka, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1784–1786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, V. Leen, C. Jackers, M. Van der Auweraer, M. Smet, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Dyes Pigm., 2011, 88, 372–377 CrossRef CAS .

Chemosensors of Ion and Molecule Recognition, ed. J.-P. Desvergne and A. W. Czarnik, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  1997 Search PubMed .
A. P. de Silva, H. Q. N. Gunaratne, T. Gunnlaugsson, A. J. M. Huxley, C. P. McCoy, J. T. Rademacher and T. E. Rice, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1515–1566 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Valeur, Molecular Fluorescence. Principles and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. E. Braslavsky, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 293–465 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grynkiewicz, M. Poenie and R. Y. Tsien, J. Biol. Chem., 1985, 260, 3440–3450 CAS .
Y. Urano, D. Asanuma, Y. Hama, Y. Koyama, T. Barrett, M. Kamiya, T. Nagano, T. Watanabe, A. Hasegawa, P. L. Choyke and H. Kobayashi, Nat. Med. (N. Y.), 2009, 15, 104–409 CAS .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer, New York, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
R. A. Marcus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 1111–1121 CrossRef .
H. J. Kim and J. S. Kim, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 7051–7055 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tufan and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 2857–2859 CrossRef .
J. Rosenthal and S. J. Lippard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5536–5537 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsumoto, Y. Urano, T. Shoda, H. Kojima and T. Nagano, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 3375–3377 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Qian, Q. He, B. Yang, J. Li and Y. Hu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2010, 8, 3627–3620 CAS .
J. Lu, C. Sun, W. Chen, H. Ma, W. Shi and X. Li, Talanta, 2011, 83, 1050–1056 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, H. Guo, S. Ji and J. Zhao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3012–3017 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 1948, 437, 55–75 CrossRef .
A. Kowalczyk, N. Boens, V. Van den Bergh and F. C. De Schryver, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 8585–8590 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cielen, A. Tahri, K. Ver Heyen, G. J. Hoornaert, F. C. De Schryver and N. Boens, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1998, 1573–1580 RSC .
P. Job, Ann. Chim., 1928, 9, 113–134 CAS .
A. Kowalczyk, N. Boens, K. Meuwis and M. Ameloot, Anal. Biochem., 1997, 245, 28–37 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Connors, Binding Constants. The Measurement of Molecular Complex Stability, J. Wiley & Sons, New York,  1987 Search PubMed .
H. A. Benesi and J. H. Hildebrand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1949, 71, 2703–2707 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cielen, A. Stobiecka, A. Tahri, G. J. Hoornaert, F. C. De Schryver, J. Gallay, M. Vincent and N. Boens, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2002, 1197–1206 RSC .
W. Qin, M. Baruah, W. M. De Borggraeve and N. Boens, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 183, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han and K. Burgess, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2709–2728 CrossRef CAS .
T. Werner, C. Huber, S. Heinl, M. Kollmannsberger, J. Daub and O. S. Wolfbeis, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1997, 359, 150–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kollmannsberger, T. Gareis, S. Heinl, J. Breu and J. Daub, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1333–1335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ziessel, G. Ulrich, A. Harriman, M. A. H. Alimary, B. Stewart and P. Retailleau, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1359–1369 CrossRef CAS .

          D. D. Perin, Dissociation Constants of Organic Bases in Aqueous Solutions, Butterworth, London,  1972 Search PubMed .

          E. P. Serjeant and B. Dempsey, Ionisation Constants of Organic Acids in Aqueous Solution, Pergamon Press, New York,  1979 Search PubMed .

          N. Isaacs, Physical Organic Chemistry, Longman Scientific & Technical, Harlow, England, 2nd edn,  1995 Search PubMed .
T. Gareis, C. Huber, O. S. Wolbeis and J. Daub, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1717–1718 RSC .
C. N. Baki and E. U. Akkaya, J. Org. Chem., 2001, 66, 1512–1513 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qin, M. Baruah, A. Stefan, M. Van der Auweraer and N. Boens, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 2343–2351 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Sayre, G. Perry and M. A. Smith, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 1999, 3, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang and Z. Guo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 205–229 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kikuchi, K. Komatsu and T. Nagano, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2004, 8, 182–191 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Lim, H. C. Freake and C. Brückner, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 38–49 CrossRef .
P. Carol, S. Sreejith and A. Ajayaghosh, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 338–348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, J. Yoon and D. R. Spring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1996–2006 RSC .
E. M. Nolan and S. J. Lippard, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3443–3480 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Que, D. W. Domaille and C. J. Chang, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1517–1549 CrossRef CAS .
I. Móczár, O. Huszthy, Z. Maidics, M. Kádár and K. Tóth, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 8250–8258 CrossRef .
J.-P. Malval, I. Leary and B. Valeur, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 1089–1094 RSC .
W. Namkung, P. Padmawar, A. D. Mills and A. S. Verkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7794–7795 CrossRef CAS .
W. Namkung, Y. Song, A. D. Mills, P. Padmawar, W. E. Finkbeiner and A. S. Verkman, J. Biol. Chem., 2009, 284, 15916–15926 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamada, Y. Nomura, D. Citterio, N. Iwasawa and K. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6956–6957 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Martin, A. Rothe and K. R. Gee, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2005, 15, 1851–1855 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kollmansberger, K. Rurack, U. Resch-Genger, W. Rettig and J. Daub, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 329, 363–369 CrossRef .
K. Rurack, M. Sczepan, M. Spieles, U. Resch-Genger and W. Rettig, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 320, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kollmannsberger, K. Rurack, U. Resch-Ginger and J. Daub, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 10211–10220 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qin, M. Baruah, M. Sliwa, M. Van der Auweraer, W. M. De Borggraeve, D. Beljonne, B. Van Averbeke and N. Boens, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6104–6114 CrossRef CAS .
N. Basarić, M. Baruah, W. Qin, B. Metten, M. Smet, W. Dehaen and N. Boens, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2005, 3, 2755–2761 Search PubMed .
N. R. Cha, S. Y. Moon and S.-K. Chang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 8265–8268 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Gee, A. Rukavishnikov and A. Rothe, Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screening, 2003, 6, 363–366 CAS .
M. Kamiya and K. Johnsson, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 6472–6479 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Blakemore, R. Chitta and F. D'Souza, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 1977–1982 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kálai and K. Hideg, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 10352–10360 CrossRef .
S. C. Dodani, Q. He and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18020–18021 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun and E. U. Akkaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10464–10465 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, E. W. Miller, A. Pralle, E. Y. Isacoff and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10–11 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Domaille, L. Zeng and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1194–1195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, J. Li, S. Zhang, C. Wei, E. Hao and M. G. H. Vicente, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1888–1893 RSC .
X. Qi, E. J. Jun, L. Xu, S.-J. Kim, J. S. J. Hong, Y. J. Yoon and J. Yoon, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 2881–2884 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Mbatia, D. P. Kennedy, C. E. Camire, C. D. Incarvito and S. C. Burdette, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 5069–5078 CAS .
Y. Mei, P. A. Bentley and W. Wang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 2447–2449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Moon, N. R. Cha, Y. H. Kim and S.-K. Chang, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 181–183 CrossRef CAS .
V. Csokai, M. Kádar, D. L. H. Mai, O. Varga, K. Tóth, M. Kubinyi, A. Grün and I. Bitter, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 1058–1063 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, V. Leen, S. Van Snick, N. Boens and W. Dehaen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6329–6331 RSC .
H. Y. Lee, H. Son, J. L. Lim, J. Oh, D. Kang, W. S. Han and J. H. Jung, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2022–2027 RSC .
H. Y. Lee, D. R. Bae, J. C. Park, H. Song, W. S. Han and J. H. Jung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1239–1243 CrossRef CAS .
H. Son, H. Y. Lee, J. L. Lim, D. Kang, W. S. Han, S. S. Lee and J. H. Jung, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11549–11553 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, J. Du, J. Fan, J. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Zhao, S. Sun and T. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1500–1501 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, W. Zhu, X. Qian and L. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16160–16161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun and E. U. Akkaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14474–14475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, Y. Li, J. Li, C. Li, X. Liu, J. Lv, J. Xu, H. Liu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 2313–2316 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun, E. Deniz and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 5359–5361 CrossRef CAS .
A. Filarowski, M. Kluba, K. Cieślik-Boczula, A. Koll, A. Kochel, L. Pandey, W. M. De Borggraeve, M. Van der Auweraer, J. Catalán and N. Boens, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 996–1008 CAS .
H. Lu, Z. Xue, J. Mack, Z. Shen, X. You and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3565–3567 RSC .
S. H. Choi, K. Pang, K. Kim and D. G. Churchill, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10564–10577 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, K. Kim, J. Jeon, B. Meka, D. Bucella, K. Pang, S. Khatua, J. Lee and D. G. Churchill, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11071–11083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Atilgan, T. Ozdemir and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Peng, B. Guo, J. Fan, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, A. Cui and Y. Gao, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2005, 3, 1387–1392 CAS .
H. Koutaka, J.-i. Kosuge, N. Fukasaku, T. Hirano, K. Kikuchi, Y. Urano, H. Kojima and T. Nagano, Chem. Pharm. Bull., 2004, 52, 700–703 CrossRef CAS .
C. Goze, G. Ulrich, L. Charbonnière, M. Cesario, T. Prangé and R. Ziessel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 3748–3755 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rurack, M. Kollmannsberger, U. Resch-Genger and J. Daub, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 968–969 CrossRef CAS .
S. Atilgan, I. Kutuk and T. Ozdemir, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 892–894 CrossRef CAS .
S. Atilgan, T. Ozdemir and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 4792–4795 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun, M. D. Yilmaz and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 607–609 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, J. Fan, X. Peng, H. Li, J. Wang and S. Sun, J. Fluoresc., 2008, 18, 919–924 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, K. Guo, X. Peng, J. Du, J. Wang, S. Sun and H. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142, 191–196 CrossRef .
H. Lu, L. Xiong, H. Liu, M. Yu, Z. Shen, F. Li and X. You, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 2554–2558 CAS .
H. Lu, S. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Shen, C. Liu and X. You, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 14081–14086 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and X. Qian, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 3721–3724 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Xiao and X. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8025–8029 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, S. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, E.-H. Lee, K.-W. Kim and J. S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2008, 29, 1831–1834 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bricks, A. Kovalchuk, C. Trieflinger, M. Nofz, M. Büschel, A. I. Tolmachev, J. Daub and K. Rurack, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13522–13529 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Kennedy, C. M. Kormos and S. C. Burdette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8578–8586 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 2545–2549 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 4947–4949 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hudnall and F. Gabbaï, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4596–4597 RSC .
Y. Shiraishi, H. Maehara, T. Sugii, D. Wang and T. Hirai, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 4293–4296 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Rao, S. M. Mobin and M. Ravikanth, Tetrahedron, 2010, 66, 1728–1734 CrossRef CAS .

          P. G. M. Wuts and T. W. Greene, Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis, Wiley Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, 4th edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Orsini, A. Vitérisi, A. Bodlenner, J.-M. Weibel and P. Pale, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 2259–2262 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Bozdemir, F. Sozmen, O. Buyukcakir, R. Guliyev, Y. Cakmak and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1400–1403 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ekmekci, M. D. Yilmaz and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 461–464 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guliyev, O. Buyukcakir, F. Sozmen and O. A. Bozdemir, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 5139–5141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun, B. T. Baytekin and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 5649–5651 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Gawley, H. Mao, M. M. Haque, J. B. Thorne and J. S. Pharr, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 2187–2191 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Parhi, M.-P. Kung, K. Ploessl and H. F. Kung, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 3395–3399 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Smith, A. Alonso, C. M. Brown and S. V. Dzyuba, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2010, 391, 1455–1458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ono, M. Ishikawa, H. Kimura, S. Hayashi, K. Matsumura, H. Watanabe, Y. Shimizu, Y. Cheng, M. Cui, H. Kawashima and H. Saji, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2010, 20, 3885–3888 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ojida, T. Sakamoto, M.-a. Inoue, S.-h. Fujishima, G. Lippens and I. Hamachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6543–6548 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. V. Vernekar, H. Y. Hallaq, G. Clarkson, A. J. Thompson, L. Silvestri, S. C. R. Lummis and M. Lochner, J. Med. Chem., 2010, 53, 2324–2328 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, N.-y. Kang, Y. K. Kim, A. Samanta, S. Feng, H. K. Kom, M. Vendrell, J. H. Park and Y.-T. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10077–10082 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Yang, Y. Cheng, S. Jin and B. Wang, in Artificial Receptors for Chemical Sensors, ed. V. Mirsky and A. Yatsimirsky, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2011 and references therein Search PubMed .
N. DiCesare and J. R. Lakowicz, Tetrahedron Lett., 2001, 42, 9105–9108 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-N. Sun, H.-L. Wang, F.-Q. Liu, Y. Chen, P. K. H. Tam and D. Yang, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 1887–18890 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ueno, Y. Urano, H. Kojima and T. Nagano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10640–10641 CrossRef CAS .
K. Teranishi, Bioorg. Chem., 2007, 35, 82–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sekiya, K. Umezawa, A. Sato, D. Citterio and K. Suzuki, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3047–3049 RSC .
R. Saito, A. Ohno and E. Ito, Tetrahedron, 2010, 66, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-N. Sun, F.-Q. Liu, Y. Chen, P. K. H. Tam and D. Yang, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 2171–2174 CrossRef CAS .
P. Oleynik, Y. Ishihara and G. Cosa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1842–1843 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khatchadourian, K. Krumova, S. Boridy, A. T. Ngo, D. Maysinger and G. Cosa, Biochemistry, 2009, 48, 5658–5668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Wang, X. Zhang and H.-S. Zhang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2004, 60, 987–993 CrossRef .
R. M. J. Palmer, A. G. Ferrige and S. Moncada, Nature, 1987, 327, 524–526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Garthwaite, S. L. Charles and R. Chess-Williams, Nature, 1988, 336, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Marletta, P. S. Yoon, R. Iyengar, C. D. Leaf and J. S. Wishnok, Biochemistry, 1988, 27, 8706–8711 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Stuehr, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 1997, 37, 339–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Marletta, A. R. Hurshman and K. M. Rusche, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 1998, 2, 656–663 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Miller and C. J. Chang, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2007, 11, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lim, D. Xu and S. J. Lippard, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2006, 2, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Wang, J.-S. Li and H.-S. Zhang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 481, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gabe, Y. Urano, K. Kikuchi, H. Kojima and T. Nagano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3357–3357 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Li, H. Wang, X. Zhang and H.-S. Zhang, Talanta, 2003, 61, 797–802 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Huang, H. Wang, Y.-H. Guo, R.-L. Fan and H.-S. Zhang, Talanta, 2006, 69, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gabe, T. Ueno, Y. Urano, H. Kojima and T. Nagano, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386, 621–656 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, R. Chi, J. Zou and H.-S. Zhang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2004, 60, 3129–3134 CrossRef .
A. C. Benniston, G. Copley, K. J. Elliott, R. W. Harrington and W. Clegg, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2008, 2705–2713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, Y. Tomiyama, A. Morita, M. Ikekita and S. Aoki, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 853–856 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ueno, Y. Urano, H. Kojima and T. Nagano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10640–10641 CrossRef CAS .
T. Komatsu, Y. Urano, Y. Fujikawa, T. Kobayashi, H. Kojima, T. Terai, K. Hanaoka and T. Nagano, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7015–7017 RSC .
A. Nierth, A. Yu. Kobitski, G. U. Nienhaus and A. Jäschke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2646–2654 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Jameson and J. A. Ross, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2685–2708 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Sprague and J. G. McNally, Trends Cell Biol., 2005, 15, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kang, C. A. Day, K. Drake, A. K. Kenworthy and E. DiBenedetto, Biophys. J., 2009, 97, 1501–1511 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Kee, C. Kirmaier, L. Yu, P. Thamyongkit, W. J. Youngblood, M. E. Calder, L. Ramos, B. C. Noll, D. F. Bocian, W. R. Scheidt, R. R. Birge, J. S. Lindsey and D. Holten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20433–20443 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kuimova, G. Yahioglu, J. A. Levitt and K. Suhling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6672–6673 CrossRef CAS .

          P. J. Verveer and Q. S. Hanley, Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, FRET and FLIM Techniques, ed. T. W. J. Gadella, Elsevier,  2009, vol. 33, pp. 59–94 Search PubMed .

          H. C. Gerritsen, A. V. Agronskaia, A. N. Bader and A. Esposito, Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, FRET and FLIM Techniques, ed. T. W. J. Gadella, Elsevier,  2009, vol. 33, pp. 95–132 Search PubMed .
M. A. H. Alamiry, A. C. Benniston, G. Copley, K. J. Elliott, A. Harriman, B. Stewart and Y.-G. Zhi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4024–4032 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, Y. Li, Y. Zhu, X. Jing, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 9929–9935 RSC .
G. Ulrich, S. Goeb, A. De Nicola, P. Retailleau and R. Ziessel, Synlett, 2007, 1517–1520 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ziessel, G. Ulrich and A. Harriman, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 496–501 RSC .

Artificial Receptors for Chemical Sensors, ed. V. Mirsky and A. Yatsimirsky, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. D. Carpenter and A. S. Verkman, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1160–1163 CrossRef CAS .
K. Umezawa, Y. Nakamura, H. Makino, D. Citterio and K. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1550–1551 CrossRef CAS .
K. Umezawa, A. Matsui, Y. Nakamura, D. Citterio and K. Suzuki, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1096–1106 CrossRef CAS .
O. Buyukcakir, O. A. Bozdemir, S. Kolemen, S. Erbas and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 4644–4647 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (left panel) Representation of the BODIPY framework with the numbering scheme shown. The 8-position is often specified by meso. The 3,5-positions are sometimes referred to by α, while β is used to denote the 2,6-positions. All the positions of the BODIPY core are possible sites for functionalization. (right panel) A selection of dipolar, delocalized structures of BODIPY with the formal charges indicated.	 

 	Scheme 1  Condensation of pyrrole with an aromatic aldehyde, yielding dipyrromethane 3 that is subsequently oxidized and complexed to BODIPY dye 5.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of BODIPY dyes through the acylation of pyrrole followed by condensation and complexation.	 

 	Scheme 3  One-pot condensation–decarbonylation of pyrrole-2-carbaldehydes to yield dipyrrins and BODIPY dyes.	 

 	Scheme 4  Reaction of nitrosylated pyrrole to form an aza-dipyrrin 20 and aza-BODIPY 21.	 

 	Scheme 5  Condensation of 3,5-dimethyl-BODIPY dyes with aromatic aldehydes can result in both mono- and distyrylated fluorophores.	 

 	Scheme 6  Nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) and oxidative nucleophilic substitution of hydrogen (ONSH) at the 3,5-positions of BODIPY.	 

 	Scheme 7  Functionalization of 3-halogenated BODIPY dyes through transition metal catalysis. The R′ group is depicted for the various reaction types.	 
1A* + D → A˙− + D˙+	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Reductive PET for fluorescent indicator (A = electron acceptor, D = electron donor). The drawing at the bottom depicts an analyte-free fluorescent indicator in which the chelator is electron-rich (e.g., amine electron donor). In that case the apo sensor will be in the fluorescence “off” state due to reductive PET. Complex formation will switch off PET and restore fluorescence, i.e., the fluorescence ‘on’ state (this situation is depicted in Fig. 3).	 

 	Fig. 3  Reductive and oxidative PETs are impossible and deactivation of the singlet-excited fluorophore via fluorescence becomes possible.	 
1D* + A → D˙+ + A˙−	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Oxidative PET for fluorescent indicator (A = electron acceptor, D = electron donor). The drawing at the bottom depicts an analyte-bound fluorescent indicator in which the chelator is electron-poor. In that case the apo sensor will be in the fluorescence ‘on’ state (this situation is depicted in Fig. 3). Complex formation will turn on PET and quench the fluorescence, i.e., the fluorescence ‘off’ state.	 
	(3)
Kd = [P][X]n/[PXn]	(4)

 	Scheme 8  Photophysical model used for the determination of Kd of the complex PXnvia fluorometric titration.	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 5  pH-responsive BODIPY dyes with a 8-amino phenyl substituent.	 

 	Fig. 6  Indicators with protonatable groups at the 3- and 3,5-positions.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  pH indicators based on hydroxyaryl BODIPY derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 8  Sensors with a selective response to K+.	 

 	Fig. 9  BODIPY chemosensors for alkali metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 10  Fluorescent chemosensors for Na+ and K+.	 

 	Fig. 11  Sensors with aza-15-crown-5 chelator at different locations.	 

 	Fig. 12  BODIPY dyes with APTRA chelator at the meso-position.	 

 	Fig. 13  Calixarenes with pending BODIPY fluorophores as Ca2+ sensors.	 

 	Fig. 14  BAPTA–BODIPY dyad for Ca2+ sensing.	 

 	Fig. 15  Functionalized BAPTA-based chemosensors.	 

 	Fig. 16  Crown-ether containing derivatives as metal ion indicators.	 

 	Fig. 17  Metal ion sensing dyes 61 and 62.	 

 	Fig. 18  Azatetrathia chelators in detectors for Ag+ (63) and Cu+ (64, 65).	 

 	Fig. 19  Cu2+-selective sensor 66 has ligands at the 3,5-positions.	 

 	Fig. 20  Pb2+ probes.	 

 	Fig. 21  BODIPY chemosensors for Cu2+.	 

 	Fig. 22  Fluorescent probes for Cu2+.	 

 	Fig. 23  BODIPY–73-functionalized, magnetic nanoparticles with a Ni core and silica shell for the detection and removal of Pb2+ from water and human blood.	 

 	Fig. 24  Pb2+-sensitive dye 74 was attached to Fe3O4 nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 25  
o-Aminophenol substituted BODIPY for the detection of Hg2+ and Cu2+.	 

 	Fig. 26  Thiophene-containing dyes and their response to metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 27  Water-soluble dye with selective response to Zn2+.	 

 	Fig. 28  Zn2+ probes with dipicolylamine chelator attached at the meso-position.	 

 	Fig. 29  Pyridine containing chelators for metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 30  Fluorescent probes with selectivity for Cd2+.	 

 	Fig. 31  Chemosensors responsive to multiple metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 32  Chemosensors with azadioxadithia-15-crown-5 as a chelator for Hg2+.	 

 	Fig. 33  An azaBODIPY-based indicator for Hg2+.	 

 	Fig. 34  Open-chain chelators for the sensing of Hg2+.	 

 	Fig. 35  Turn-on sensors for Hg2+.	 

 	Fig. 36  Comparison of amide-containing BODIPY dyes for Hg2+ sensing.	 

 	Scheme 9  Hg2+ ions induce heterocycle formation and concomitant RET process allows sensing.	 

 	Fig. 37  Sensing of metal ions with sulfur-containing crown ether BODIPY-based dyes.	 

 	Fig. 38  Fe3+ mediated o-quinone formation in a catechol-substituted BODIPY.	 

 	Fig. 39  Sensor with turn-on response to Cr3+.	 

 	Fig. 40  Fluorescent indicators responsive to fluoride.	 

 	Fig. 41  Fluorescent dosimeters for fluoride based on desilylation reactions.	 

 	Fig. 42  Cyanide indicators.	 

 	Fig. 43  The 1∶1 Zn2+ complex with 109 is sensitive to several anions.	 

 	Fig. 44  Fluorescent probe for saxitoxin.	 

 	Fig. 45  Protein-sensitive BODIPY-based probes.	 

 	Fig. 46  Indicator for D-fructose, D-glucose and D-galactose.	 

 	Scheme 10  Fluorescent dosimeters for thiols.	 

 	Fig. 47  Fluorescent dosimeters for peroxynitrite.	 

 	Fig. 48  Fluorescent dosimeters for .	 

 	Fig. 49  Fluorescent dosimeter for HOCl.	 

 	Fig. 50  Fluorescent dosimeter for ROO˙.	 

 	Fig. 51  Fluorescent dosimeter for nitroxyl.	 

 	Fig. 52  Fluorescent dosimeter for NO2−.	 

 	Fig. 53  Fluorescent dosimeters for NO.	 

 	Fig. 54  Fluorescent indicator for H2O2.	 

 	Fig. 55  Fluorescent sensor for redox potential.	 

 	Fig. 56  Fluorescent dye responsive to nitration.	 

 	Fig. 57  Fluorescent dye sensitive to hydrolysis of its ester functions.	 

 	Fig. 58  Anthracene–BODIPY dyads 139a–b as sensors for biocatalytic Diels–Alder reactions and the product 139c of the Diels–Alder reaction between 139b and N-pentylmaleimide as dienophile.	 

 	Fig. 59  Fluorescent molecular rotors for measurement of local viscosity.	 
APTRA	
o-aminophenol-N,N,O-triacetic acid
BAPTA	1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid
BODIPY	difluoroboron dipyrromethene or 4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene
DAse buffer	aqueous Diels–Alderase buffer (300 mM NaCl, 30 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.4, 80 mM MgCl2, 10% EtOH)
DDQ	2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-p-benzoquinone
DMSO	dimethyl sulfoxide
EtOH	ethanol
FLIM	fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy
HEPES	4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid
HOMO	highest occupied molecular orbital
HTM	heavy and transition metal
ICT	intramolecular charge transfer

K
d
	ground-state dissociation constant

K
s
	ground-state stability constant (Ks = 1/Kd)
LE state	locally excited state, Franck–Condon state
LUMO	lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
M	mole per dm3
MeCN	acetonitrile
MeOH	methanol
MO	molecular orbital
MOPS	3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid
NIR	near-infrared
NO	nitric oxide
PET	photoinduced electron transfer
PIPES	piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid)
RET	resonance energy transfer
RNA	ribonucleic acid
RNS	reactive nitrogen species
ROS	reactive oxygen species
SNAr	nucleophilic aromatic substitution
TBAF	tetrabutylammonium fluoride (Bu4NF)
TBAI	tetrabutylammonium iodide (Bu4NI)
THF	tetrahydrofuran
Tris	tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

ε(λ)	molar absorption coefficient at excitation wavelength λ

Φ
	fluorescence quantum yield

λ
abs
	wavelength of maximal absorbance

λ
em
	wavelength of maximal fluorescence emission spectral radiant power

λ
ex
	wavelength of maximal fluorescence excitation spectral radiant power

τ
	fluorescence lifetime (decay time)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
