A paradigm of storage batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE02356A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE02356A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3203-3224A paradigm of storage batteries

        
          
            Xiulei 
            Ji
          
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-4003, USA. E-mail: david.ji@oregonstate.edu
Received 
      24th July 2019
    , Accepted 9th September 2019First published on 9th September 2019AbstractResearch on batteries is at the crossroads. The research goal of Li-ion batteries is laser-focused, which is to push the performance limits of electrodes and electrolytes for an ever-higher energy density. However, the primary evaluation metric of storage batteries is the levelized energy cost, and there may exist several routes to reach a cost target. Therefore, it becomes urgent for researchers to have a roadmap for this new paradigm of storage batteries. In this article, I describe five dimensions of storage battery research from a chemical reaction point of view, where electrode materials and ion charge carriers represent the reactants, electrolytes provide the medium for the reaction, battery operation principles describe the configurations of the reactors, and electrode–ion chemical bonding reveals the nature of the reaction. The permutations of these five dimensions create 10 unique research planes, and the research activities on Li-ion batteries have been in one such plane: electrode materials × electrolytes. For Li-ion batteries, the electrode–ion interactions are largely taken as purely ionic; in contrast, the electrode–ion interplays may be to a large extent of donor–acceptor covalency when charge carriers are no longer small metal cations. Covalent-ionic bonding in batteries may represent the nexus to engender a constellation of new solutions in energy storage. Design of storage batteries entails a panoramic view with these five dimensions holistically considered. A deeper understanding of the chemical reaction nature of batteries will be advantage that unifies rather than compartmentalizes a paradigm of storage battery research.
Xiulei Ji
Prof. Xiulei Ji graduated from Jilin University with a BSc degree in chemistry in 2003. He obtained his PhD degree from the University of Waterloo in 2009. He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of California, Santa Barbara from 2010 to 2012. Dr. Ji is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University. His research interests are design principles of electrochemical energy storage, and materials chemistry in batteries and pseudocapacitors.

Broader context
Societal energy income should ideally come from cost-effective ‘farming’ of renewable sources, e.g., solar, wind, tidal, and geothermal. Energy storage facilities are the “banks” of energy, where the currency is electricity. From energy banks, customers, e.g., electric vehicles, can “cash out” energy anytime and anywhere, and into these banks, people can invest their energy surplus or saving through the smart internet of things. However, we have yet to reach this sustainable energy economy that demands ubiquitous and localized storage solutions. Storage batteries represent the most promising solution to fill the gap in storage needs for the future. Such battery facilities may be installed at the gigawatt scale that the world has never seen. Storage batteries must be competitive in their levelized energy cost compared to the utility electricity price, and these batteries must be safe without facing liability costs. As of now, the battery field may have entered a new research paradigm that entails more holistic considerations. This article enlists five dimensions of factors, namely electrode materials, ion charge carriers, electrolytes, electrode–ion interactions, and battery operation principles. I introduce empirical trends that exemplify the relevance of these considerations. These seemingly intricate considerations are different aspects of chemical reactions taking place in a compartmentalized reactor.

Introduction
Renewable energies such as solar and wind cannot be transported or stored directly; thus, such powers need to be converted to electricity first, a universal ‘currency’ of energy. However, to date, electricity, as a primary industry commodity, has no shelf life, and is not widely stored for future usage. In the existing grid infrastructure, the generation and consumption of electricity must be simultaneous,1 where the grid is incongruous with the intermittency and, sometimes, the unpredictability of the power generated from renewable sources.2 This incompatibility creates an enormous problem when a large percentage of electricity coming from renewable sources finds no users behind the meters, which could cause catastrophic failure of an aging grid.3 Grid interruptions cost the economy of the United States $150 billion annually, which is still rising.4 The solution to this challenge is to secure the grid with storage capacity, which puts away the electricity surplus by peak shaving and later fills the gap when the demand outpaces the concurrent power generation. Nowadays, electricity saving at the societal level has become an absolute necessity, and the storage facilities will serve as the ‘banks’ of electricity.
Energy storage for electricity is usually done indirectly, where electricity is converted to other forms of energy reversibly, including potential energy by pumped hydropower storage (PHS)5 and compressed air,6 kinetic energy by flywheels,7 thermal energy by molten salts,8 and chemical energy by secondary batteries9 or by chemicals, e.g., H2 production.10 On the other hand, electricity can be stored directly by superconducting magnetic energy storage as infinitely flowing electric current11 or by capacitors as electrostatic energy.12 Currently, over 94% of the global storage capacity is realized by PHS,13 which inconveniently depends on specific geographical features to generate a good hydraulic head between water reservoirs, up and down. Among storage solutions, batteries are the most attractive because they are modular and adaptable for homes, communities, and the grid.14
Batteries, in particular Li-ion batteries (LIBs), are ubiquitous in portable electronics, power tools, and recently for electrified transportation, e.g., e-bikes and electric vehicles (EVs).15 Yet the consensus is that the current LIB technology is unfit for storage purposes mainly due to cost and safety issues. Electrochemical capacitors and other commercialized batteries, including lead-acid and nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH), despite approaching their technological maturity and demonstrating their relevance for niche markets, have yet to address the massive demand of energy storage. The battery community has the mission to invent alternative battery technologies specifically for storage purposes.
Based on different applications, batteries can be classified into power batteries and storage batteries. As for power batteries for transport uses, the goal of future development is crystal clear, which is to circumvent the anxieties of EVs, which include limited driving ranges, long charge times, insufficient battery longevity, and safety risks. The market relevance of power batteries is mostly defined by the driving range of EVs, where the current goal is set to 300 miles for the North America market, whereas the driving-range requirements may be less demanding in Asia and Europe. As a caveat, the extension of the driving range should not be at the expense of safety, where, however, there may exist a trade-off for nickel-rich cathode materials.16–18 In the near future, it is unlikely that any battery technologies may advance to the level of displacing lithium-based batteries as the market-dominating power batteries.
On the other hand, the paths toward market-winning storage batteries are distinct from those of power batteries. In the radar chart of Fig. 1, the two solid curves sketch the required deliverables of power batteries and storage batteries compared to the ideal scenarios. As a most conspicuous difference, the evaluation metrics for storage batteries are relaxed for energy density and often for power density and fast rechargeability, all of which are, nevertheless, indispensable for good power batteries. Note that for certain applications, e.g., for storing electricity from wind farms, storage batteries may be required to function at a rate of, for example, 2C, i.e., charge or discharge completed within 30 min. Instead, the top priority of storage batteries is the cost—the levelized energy cost (LEC).19 In contrast to power batteries, research on storage batteries is unchained from pursuing ever-higher energy density, and thus the era when one battery type fits all has reached its end. Therefore, there will emerge an expansive paradigm of storage batteries.
 Fig. 1  Radar chart showing the required performance in comparison with the ideal cases, where red is for power batteries and blue is for storage batteries; the dashed light-blue line of the octagon marks the ideal scenarios. 
Cost considerations
Levelized energy cost
LEC is the cost of every kW h delivered by a storage facility as the output during the entire lifetime of the facility. Here, I take electricity arbitrage, potentially by homeowners for revenue generation, as an example to illustrate LEC via the following equation: (1)where Ccc is the capital cost, including installation fees, Cm is maintenance and operation cost, Ce is the total expense of electricity purchasing, n is the total number of cycles during a device's lifetime, E is the maximum energy that a battery can store, EE is the energy efficiency, i.e., the round-trip efficiency of a charge/discharge cycle, and DoD is the average depth of discharge in each cycle. To break even, the electricity price by which homeowners sell to the grid, e.g., as the peak-hour price of electricity, cannot be lower than the LEC. Note that the estimated inflation rate should be included, which is missing in this equation.
In order to attain the minimal LEC, the numerator and the denominator terms in eqn (1) should be minimized and maximized, respectively. First, it is pivotal to note that the capital cost, Ccc, can be highly volatile, which has been evident for the market of lithium, nickel, and cobalt compounds.20 In storage batteries, earth-abundant elements and common commodity materials21 should be used,22 and rare elements and expensive materials need to be avoided in the design of battery chemistries. Moreover, economy of scale should be applicable to storage battery chemistries, where the battery manufacturing costs, including the environmental impacts, are sustainably low. Note that for most batteries, the maintenance and operation cost, Cm, may be nearly nil at a small scale, e.g., a home module, whereas this cost may be more applicable to flow batteries, which rely on pumps, where the replacement of these pumps every 5 to 7 years23 may demand professional service, resulting in greater Cm. For minimal Ce, ideally, battery modules would be connected by the internet of things, which will smartly store low-price electricity from solar or wind that is generated during ‘inconvenient’ hours when the demand is very low. In eqn (1), a bonus factor that is not considered is the value reclaimed by recycling decommissioned batteries.24,25 Recycling of lead-containing compounds is how lead-acid batteries stay competitive to date.
Indeed, boosted electrochemical performance of the same battery chemistry will lower the LEC, where the approach is to maximize the product of n, E, EE, and DoD—the total delivered energy, ET, of the device over the lifetime. Note that in the literature, batteries are typically evaluated in deep cycles with 100% DoD. However, cycling in intermediate DoD ranges, e.g., from 40% to 80%, may significantly enhance the longevity of batteries.26 For metal batteries, the ET of the device may be maximized if the most suitable range of DoD is identified for the metal anodes.
According to a report of Sandia National Laboratories, the markets for grid storage applications are really diverse, where there are five categories, i.e., electric supply, ancillary services, utility customers, grid system support, and renewables integration.27 The above illustration is by no means comprehensive because the rate of return, i.e., profit, can be very sensitive to different applications.28
Before LEC can be quantitatively determined for a battery technology, the storage battery chemistries and their constituent materials have to be evaluated by conventional metrics, gravimetric and volumetric ones, particularly at the stage of basic research. Gravimetric metrics, such as specific capacity, rate capability, and specific energy/power, are widely employed to evaluate the performance of battery electrodes in fundamental research. Volumetric metrics may be seen as unimportant for storage purposes; however, volumetric properties directly determine the amount of inactive materials used, such as electrolyte, separator, and packaging. For example, when the energy density is halved, the cost for all these inactive materials doubles.
Furthermore, storage batteries are only relevant if they can be scaled up, which means that the battery chemistries and the electrode materials must be conducive for materials and device engineering. Battery chemistries may behave very differently when batteries adopt practically relevant conditions, particularly low electrolyte/electrode mass ratios and high loadings of active mass, such as Li–S batteries.29,30
Liability cost and electrolytes
The most significant cost risk that is not covered in eqn (1) is the potential liability, often unaffordable to a manufacturer. The liability concern comes from the sheer scale of storage battery installation in the future, e.g., for loading levelling. In order to best serve societal needs, battery storage will eventually need to deliver power at the gigawatt (GW) scale safely, where the scale is on a par with the power that one PHS facility or a nuclear power plant delivers. By simple estimation, if the power density of a battery is 200 W kg−1, and the density of this battery is 2.0 kg L−1, to deliver power at 1 GW, the volume of batteries will be 2500 m3, when not accounting for the space needed for operation, e.g., service and venting. Furthermore, the coming 5G era demands safe UPS solutions for data centers and server farms more than ever, where currently gel (sealed) lead-acid batteries are the widely trusted safe option.
Now, let us regard a battery not as an electronic device but as a reactor that holds a wet synthetic reaction. Usually, to design a wet synthetic reaction, a chemist should do due diligence to select a reaction medium, i.e., a solvent, where such a medium defines the chemical environments for the reaction as well as affecting the yield, the reaction rate, and the safety of the reaction. In batteries, it is the electrolyte that serves as the reaction medium via the electrode–electrolyte interfaces, sometimes through a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI),31,32 and, most importantly, the battery safety directly relates to this electrolyte.33,34 Regarding the safety of batteries, the pivotal question is which type(s) of electrolytes storage batteries should employ. Currently, there are four primary types of electrolytes: (1) aprotic organic electrolytes, (2) ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes, (3) solid-state electrolytes, and (4) aqueous electrolytes. The first three types of electrolytes afford wider electrochemical windows than aqueous electrolytes, where they allow the operation of highly reducing anode materials, e.g., lithiated carbonaceous anodes in LIBs and lithium metal in Li–S and Li–O2 batteries. Organic electrolytes are used in the current LIBs, and the LIB community is considering IL electrolytes35 and solid-state electrolytes.36
Among these electrolytes, it seems that conventional carbonate-based organic electrolytes are not aligned with the high safety requirements for large-scale storage. Although the safety of LIBs that use such electrolytes has been managed at the scale of EVs by battery management systems, it is unlikely that such electrolytes could meet the demand of energy storage at the GW scale.37 The risk will be extreme if a GW facility adopts flammable batteries that are vulnerable to natural disasters and accidental thermal runaway of cells. Unfortunately, to date, due to the lack of suitable alternative storage batteries, LIBs have been installed for commercial storage purposes, and frequent reports of accidents at these facilities have caused a serious public safety concern.
However, it is essential to note that not all organic solvents are flammable, e.g., if fire retardants are employed as electrolyte solvents.38,39 Recent studies reported that high salt concentrations in such fire-extinguishing solvents allow good performance of the carbonaceous anode in different batteries.40,41 However, like IL electrolytes, non-flammability of electrolytes may not necessarily equal “non-exploding” as it is the thermal stability of the electrolytes and the flammability of the released gas molecules that are most relevant to the explosion risk.42,43 This same concern applies to an emerging class of electrolytes, deep eutectic solvents, which have shown utility mainly in flow batteries.44,45 It is the limited thermal stability of the hydrogen bond donors of such electrolytes that raises concerns.46
Recently, efforts have been directed to solid-state electrolytes to solve challenges of lithium metal batteries, including safety.47–49 Without solubility in solid-state electrolytes, polysulfide shuttling in Li–S batteries is certainly prevented; however, Li-dendrite formation and the resulting short-circuit were still observed with solid-state electrolytes.50 Furthermore, it was reported that solid-state electrolytes, particularly oxides, and molten lithium could react violently at relatively high temperatures, which negates the promise of safety benefits of this type of electrolytes.51 As another challenge, the electrodes’ volumetric change may cause contact failures between solid-state electrolytes and electrodes, where this issue is more severe for large batteries but less so for miniaturized batteries.52 Ultimately, let alone the safety considerations, the prospect of IL and solid-state electrolytes is not promising for usage in storage batteries, considering the high cost of these electrolytes. To date, most work on solid-state electrolytes has been on Li-based batteries. Yet solid-state electrolytes may be an interesting research topic for aqueous metal batteries, e.g., Zn–metal batteries, given that cost-effective electrolytes are identified.53
It is widely believed that aqueous batteries are the most relevant for storage purposes with consideration predominantly on the advantage of their safety, where the “decomposed” aqueous electrolytes, mainly water vapor, are not flammable or liable to explode. Furthermore, it is very likely that aqueous batteries, albeit of a modest energy density, can exhibit the most competitive LEC.
Let us look at the commercial aqueous batteries first. Valve-regulated lead-acid batteries (VRLA), originally invented in 1934,54 are strong competitors in the storage market as, currently, most data centers employ VRLA as UPS batteries.55,56 It is unclear why Ni–MH batteries have not been widely employed for energy storage. Note that Ni–MH cells were commercialized nearly simultaneously with LIBs; nevertheless, the latter has received relentless effort for optimization, but the attention that Ni–MH batteries have secured has not been great, at least from academia. On the other hand, there exist some inherent challenges of Ni–MH batteries, e.g., the use of rare earth elements,57 the relatively fast self-discharge, and safety concerns based on the fact that the anode of Ni–MH batteries is simply a hydrogen-storage material.58
For future aqueous batteries to be competitive, their LEC needs to be lower than those of lead-acid and Ni–MH batteries. Recently, effort has been devoted to aqueous LIBs.59–61 In particular, the operation window of aqueous electrolytes has been widened using highly concentrated aqueous electrolytes, i.e., water-in-salt electrolyte (WiSE).62,63 However, it remains a question whether the LEC of aqueous LIBs will be competitive. For the sake of lowering the LEC, it is necessary to move beyond lithium, which will be discussed in a later section on ion charge carriers.
Nevertheless, aqueous batteries are not always ideal when examining their potential safety faults. The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on the sides of cathode and anode, respectively, must be suppressed because the accumulation of H2 and O2 may possibly cause cell damage, although explosion is rare for aqueous batteries.64 HER or OER also causes poor Coulombic efficiency (CE) and fast self-discharge. Aqueous electrolytes if acidic or basic can be corrosive to electrodes and current collectors as well, where the piecemeal dissolution of electrode active mass as a function of time causes capacity fading.65
Five dimensions of storage battery chemistries
Batteries are reactors that decouple redox reactions, where the reactants do not get to meet each other directly, and the ‘transactions’ of charge and mass transfers between the reactants are completed via the transport through two charge conduction media: the external circuit passing electrons and the internal electrolyte migrating ions, i.e., mass. When looking at such redox reactions holistically, electrodes alone cannot represent the reactants or products, which also entail the ion charge carriers and sometimes the solvent molecules of electrolytes.
As shown in Fig. 2, five dimensions conceptually constitute a paradigm for the design of storage battery chemistries: electrode materials, electrolytes, ion charge carriers, electrode–ion chemical bonding,66 and operation principles. Any two dimensions define a unique plane of research, where there are 10 such planes. In retrospect, the development of LIBs has been on the plane set by two dimensions: electrode materials and electrolytes; Li+ is the default choice of the ion charge carrier, the electrode–ion interactions are taken as purely ionic, and the battery is in a cation rocking-chair configuration.67,68 In this article, I will not detail the discussion about electrolytes and electrodes, and the interested readers are referred to prior review articles for in-depth information on these two dimensions of different battery technologies (examples are ref. 69–71). Herein, I will underscore the other three dimensions that touch on the nature of chemical reactions in batteries, where the reactants and reaction medium coexist symbiotically. Mainly, this article puts a conspicuous focus on the chemical bonding between the ion charge carriers and the electrode hosts. Of note, the four basic battery operation principles are proposed here for the first time, which is aimed to streamline the future design of battery device configurations. I will focus the discussion on anion storage electrode materials. For the last section, I will share my perspectives on some critical issues of aqueous metal batteries.
 Fig. 2  Five dimensions to consider when constructing a new paradigm of storage battery chemistries. The permutations of the five dimensions can generate 10 research planes, where three of them are shown as examples. The knowledge of LIBs is built in the plane defined by electrode materials × electrolytes. 
The primary objective of this article is to elicit the attention of the community on balanced and holistic considerations toward future storage batteries. The many dimensions of considerations certainly sketch an intricate space, which explains the difficulty of inventing a practically relevant storage battery technology,72 but suggests vast opportunities for new battery chemistries to be explored. This article attempts to sort out this complexity in a conceptual framework, which foreshadows a roadmap to the future paradigm of storage batteries.
Ionic charge carriers
LIBs unfolded via electrode materials
The history of LIB research is rich in research philosophy and methodologies. There has been over four decades of strenuous work on LIBs, where the most effort has been focused on the design and optimization of electrode materials and electrolytes with the Li ion taken as the default ion charge carrier. A suite of discoveries have brought this technology to the current stage, including the following: Harris studied electrodeposition in a variety of solvents that would be employed in electrolytes of LIBs;73 Whittingham discovered the topotactic intercalation of Li ions in layered LixTiS2;74,75 Goodenough and coworkers reported that Li ions could be reversibly removed from LixCoO2;76 Yazami and Touzain tested electrochemical lithium intercalation in graphite.77 The later game-changers for LIBs were mainly electrode materials, i.e., spinel LiMn2O4,78 olivine LiFePO4,79,80 nickel-rich oxides,81–83 Li-rich metal oxides,84,85 and silicon anodes.86,87
LIBs have been evolving to attain a higher energy density for EV applications, where the technical approaches have been to widen the potential difference between anode and cathode and to increase the capacity of both electrodes. For higher cathode potential, compounds such as LiNi0.5Mn1.5O288 and LiCoPO489 have been scrutinized. To increase cathode capacity, one strategy is to extract Li ions more completely from LiMO2 compounds,90 and another approach is to activate the anionic redox reactivity of oxygen atoms in Li2MO3.85,91,92 In fact, the ultimate anionic redox cathode may be Li2S,93,94 Li2O2,95 and even LiI,96 where during battery charge, it is anions of these salts as redox centers that get oxidized into sulfur solid, O2 gas, and I2 solid, respectively.
A plethora of materials have been explored to increase anode capacity, most of them being conversion-reaction ones, including metal oxides,97,98 metal sulfides,99,100 alloying electrodes,101–103 and organic solids.104–106 However, the choice for commercial LIB anodes has ‘stubbornly’ remained as carbon-based materials, among which graphite,77 soft carbon,107 and hard carbon108 have all been investigated. Recently, the Li metal anode (LMA) has been celebrating a ‘renaissance’ despite its early commercial failure in the late 1980s.109 Yet the daunting challenge is to reach a CE of 99.95% so that 60% of LMA remains active after 1000 cycles. Indeed, the use of LMA is probably the only viable path to reach an energy density of 500 W h kg−1 for secondary batteries.110
In hindsight, the development of LIBs has been a gradation of electrode materials that are sequenced by the diminishing prospect of achieving high electrochemical performance. This list includes new members of ‘mainstream’ electrodes, from ionic and electronic dual conductors, e.g., LiCoO2, to electronic insulators, e.g., LiFePO4, from 2D ion-diffusion electrodes, e.g., LiTiS2, to non-2D diffusion materials, e.g., LiMn2O4, from topotactic intercalation electrodes, e.g., transition metal sulfides and oxides, to conversion/alloying-reaction electrodes, e.g., silicon and sulfur, and to plating electrodes, i.e., LMA.110
The progress made on LIBs has significantly extended the depth of understanding and the landscape of electrode materials and electrolytes, in particular, the structure–performance correlations. The community has learned many correlations that serve as design principles of new electrode materials later, i.e., inductive effect,111 nanoconfinement effect,112–114 shortening diffusion pathways,115,116 widening ion diffusion channels,117,118 electrode coating,119 doping,120 defects,121 redox mediators,122 solvent-in-salt electrolytes,123,124 to name a few. Advanced ex situ and in situ characterization tools125–128 as well as computation studies129–131 have also significantly advanced the development of LIBs. All knowledge accumulated from the research on LIBs has provided the source of inspiration and a toolbox for the ongoing studies of storage batteries.
The diffusion of attention on the periodic table

Metal ion charge carriers. 
During the past decade, research on storage battery chemistries has evolved rapidly along the third dimension of considerations—ion charge carriers—additional to the electrode materials and electrolytes. Interestingly, it has been a stochastic “walk” of the battery community stepping on different elements as ion charge carriers, as shown in Fig. 3. With Li+ as the starting point, attention has gone to Na+132,133 and recently to K+134,135 along the alkali metal group due to their earth abundancy. Note that Na+ was seriously considered as a charge carrier nearly simultaneously with Li+ in the 1980s.136,137 Phenomenal progress has been made in promoting the electrochemical properties, e.g., capacity,138,139 rate capability,140,141 and cycling life,142 for Na-ion batteries (NIBs)143 and K-ion batteries (KIBs).144 Often, electrode materials known from prior studies of LIBs have been employed as model materials; however, the community has been frequently surprised by the different performance revealed on the same electrode materials for charge carriers other than Li ions.145,146 Ca2+ was touched on as well for ion-transfer batteries;147 however, reversible Ca plating has yet to be demonstrated.148 Most recently, we reported that Cu2+ can be employed as a charge carrier for an aqueous sulfur electrode, where Cu2+ itself is redox active in forming Cu2S.149 Exploiting the redox reactivity of charge carriers may represent a promising direction for the design of storage batteries.
 Fig. 3  A map of ion charge carriers covered in battery research, where they are arranged resembling where they are in the periodic table, where small fonts indicate low earth abundancy. 
For metal batteries, charge carriers are selected often because their corresponding metals are employed as anodes, where interest has been hovering on Mg,150,151 Al,152,153 and Zn,154–156 besides the alkali metal batteries.157 Recently, Fe metal-based batteries originally invented by Edison158,159 have started to attract attention again with alkaline Fe–O2 batteries,160 and a battery with an insertion cathode of a Prussian blue analog in our recent study, for example.161
It is critical to note that the usage of divalent charge carriers does not lead to a doubled capacity of electrodes. The capacity of an electrode is determined by the number of charges transferred, which relates to the changes of oxidation states of the redox centers within the electrodes, e.g., the center elements or the redox-active ligands. This is reflected by the fact that the same electrodes often exhibit even lower capacity values when hosting multivalent ions than monovalent ions. The high charge density of multivalent ions induces strong electrostatic interactions with the hosts, thus being electrostatically “sticky”, which causes irreversible structural changes of electrodes.162,163
Furthermore, the utility of metal batteries is ultimately evaluated by cycle life and energy density, which are dictated by the reversibility, i.e., CE, of the metal anodes. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements suggest a reversible behavior of Mg plating/stripping with a CE near unity.164,165 It was reported that the CE of Al plating is 95% from a molten NaAlCl4 electrolyte at a current density below 1 mA cm−2.166 However, more accurate CE values of Mg anode and Al anode from chronopotentiometry, i.e., galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) tests, have yet to be reported. Recently, the measurement of the average CE of Li plating/stripping has caught attention, which employs the following equation:167,168 (2)where the anode mass corresponding to Qc is repeatedly stripped/plated for n cycles from/onto the initially plated metal anode of QT on the current collector that is typically several times Qc, and Qs represents the remaining metal anode on the current collector that can be measured in the last complete stripping after n cycles. We employed this method to calculate the average CE of Fe anode plating/plating as 90.7% in an aqueous electrolyte of 0.5 M FeSO4.161
From the long history of LIBs, it seems that the bottleneck of development of various metal batteries is the dearth of cathodically stable electrolytes. The LIB field is fortunate to have identified alkyl carbonates for carbonaceous anodes, particularly ethylene carbonate, which could decompose to “seal” the “lithium reservoirs” of graphitic anodes, thus kinetically prohibiting rapid parasitic reactions. However, for all metal batteries, the metal anodes are exposed squarely to the electrolytes, where to find electrolytes that facilitate reversible plating/stripping is a top priority of metal batteries. Some exciting progress has been made with new electrolytes.169,170


Nonmetal ion charge carriers. 
To date, most battery chemistries have used metal-ion charge carriers, and non-metal cations have received little attention. Recently, renewed efforts have been devoted to hydrogen-containing cations, including H+ and NH4+. The usage of protons as charge carriers should be dated back to 1859 when Planté invented lead-acid batteries. The discharge of lead-acid batteries, indeed, uses protons to convert PbO2 to PbSO4 in a “conversion” reaction. In Ni–MH batteries and in graphite hydrogen-insertion electrodes, where alkaline electrolytes are employed, it should be stressed that it is not protons but hydride ions (H−) that serve as charge carriers in the hydride anodes.171,172 On the other hand, interestingly, as for the NiOOH cathode of Ni–MH batteries, it does take in protons to form Ni(OH)2 during battery discharge.173,174
The proton is the lightest and smallest ion charge carrier one can possibly find for batteries, where its measured radius is ∼0.89 fm or ∼2.1 fm, using muon or e− spectroscopy, respectively.175 It is often expected that hosting protons in electrodes would cause negligible strain of the electrodes, where the longevity of proton batteries would be superior to that of existing batteries. Plus, the rate capability of proton batteries that transport tiny protons should be superlative. Indeed, protons facilitate the operation of some aqueous pseudocapacitors. In 1971, Trasatti and Buzzanca reported the pseudocapacitive behavior of RuO2 in an acidic electrolyte.176 The reaction mechanism has been described as RuO2 + δH+ + δe− ↔ RuO2−δ(OH)δ. In 1976, Schöllhorn and Besenhard investigated proton insertion to form H0.5MnO3.177 Recently, similar electrochemical proton incorporation has been reported for other metal oxides, including TiO2,178 MnO2,179 WO3,180 and MoO3,181 and MXenes.182
The high-rate proton-storage behavior was later attributed to the crystal water molecules in electrodes. In 1995, Zheng et al. observed that hydrous RuO2 exhibits enhanced pseudocapacitive properties compared to its non-hydrous counterpart.183 As another example, it is well known that WO3 hydrate shows faster electrochromic performance than its non-hydrous version.184 Unfortunately, these electrode materials are not suitable platforms to demonstrate the power of the Grotthuss mechanism due to a lack of the percolating hydrogen-bonding network inside the electrodes.
In aqueous electrolytes, protons combine with water molecules, forming hydronium; therefore, hydronium has been considered as a battery charge carrier, e.g., for organic molecular solid electrodes.185 H3O+ as a charge carrier is of a medium ionic size, 100 ± 10 pm, which is very close to that of Na+, 102 pm, with a coordination number (CN) of six.186 However, it is often a question as to whether proton or hydronium serves as the charge carrier within electrodes. To address this question, my group employed an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) to quantify the mass changes of an electrode material of WO3·0.89H2O in an acidic electrolyte.187 As Fig. 4 shows, during the initial cathodic process, the electrode surrenders mass at the rate of 18 g mol−1 of e−, which indicates water molecules are squeezed out of the electrode's structure. At a deep DOD, there is mass gain at a rate of 18 g mol−1 of e−, where at this time, hydroniums are inserted back. Interestingly, lattice water molecules may transport in the opposite or the same direction compared to protons as charge carriers, and thus lattice water molecules in electrodes are not bystanders in electrochemical processes using an aqueous electrolyte. However, in nonaqueous electrolytes, ‘free’ protons may serve as charge carriers. Sjödin and coworkers reported an all-organic proton battery, where poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-based electrodes operate on quinone/hydroquinone redox reactions.188
 Fig. 4  CV curves of the WO3·0.89H2O electrode at a scan rate of 3 mV s−1 (top) and the in situ EQCM results of WO3·0.89H2O (bottom). Blue: cathodic scan; red: anodic scan.187 Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Topotactic insertion of NH4+ into a solid electrode, i.e., TaS2, was reported by Whittingham in 1974.189 Recently, Huggins, Cui, and coworkers studied the reversible storage of NH4+ in Prussian blue analogs.190 Gogotsi and coworkers reported the electrochemical properties of a MXene electrode with NH4+ as the charge carrier.191 We first reported a full cell design of an NH4-ion battery.192 We studied the remarkable fit of NH4+ as a charge carrier for Prussian blue analog electrodes in terms of long cycle life.193 Indeed, NH4+ with an ionic radius of 1.48 Å (CN = 6), larger than those of K+, Na+, and Li+, matches the voids of Prussian blue analogs better, and the inserted NH4+ is not hydrated. Furthermore, NH4+ is a molecular ion, which may form covalent-ionic bonding with its electrode hosts. This will be highlighted in a later section on electrode–ion chemical bonding.
Anions are no newcomers in terms of their function of compensating for charge neutrality in electrochemical reactions. For Li–S batteries that cannot retain polysulfide ions in the cathode, the polysulfide ions, Sx2− (3 < x < 8), essentially serve as the redox-active charge carriers.194 Br− and I− ions are widely employed in flow batteries195 and redox-mediated supercapacitors,196 respectively. Most recently, “atomic plating” of both Br and Cl inside the galleries of graphite from LiBr and LiCl mixed with graphite as solid has been realized in the environment of WiSE.197 I will expand the discussion related to anion hosting in the section on battery operation principles.
From consideration of Li ions and all these different ion charge carriers, the community may have gained the impression that it is not the electrode materials alone that decide the electrochemical properties of electrodes but the coupling of electrodes and the charge carriers that collectively shape the electrochemical behavior of the electrode systems.

Electrode–ion chemical bonding
Varying strengths of chemical bonding
Based on examples of different battery systems, the fourth dimension of storage battery design has surfaced: the chemical bonding between the electrode materials and the ion charge carriers. On the one hand, the formation or breaking of electrode–ion chemical bonding drives the changes of Gibbs free energy of a battery system and the associated cell voltage. On the other hand, such chemical bonding may profoundly affect the kinetic behaviors of electrodes as well.198
As for thermodynamics, let us look at carbon anodes first. In electrochemical cells, Li or K ions can be reversibly inserted into graphite anodes to form binary Li– or K–graphite intercalation compounds (GICs),199,200 whereas binary Na–GICs do not even exist. Yet by switching the electrode from graphite to hard carbon201 or soft carbon,202 a good capacity above 200 mA h g−1 can be readily obtained for Na-ion storage. What is different between graphite and these nongraphitic carbons? We conducted neutron total scattering and associated pair distribution function203 studies of hard carbon and soft carbon, where the results suggested that there exist a great number of defects in these nongraphitic carbons.204,205 Greaney and coworkers computed the binding energies between Na atoms and representative defect sites, which theoretically suggest that the defect sites bind Na atoms more strongly than basal graphene sites, thus being favorable to contribute capacity for Na storage.206 Such defective sites may include point defects, e.g., monovacancy, divacancy, and Stone–Wales defects; edges, i.e., zigzag and armchair sites; even graphene sites with curvatures. Greaney and coworkers reported the following equation to calculate the formation energy of Na–C binary compounds:207 (3)where N is the number of carbon atoms in the system, x is the number of sodium atoms incorporated, ENax+CN denotes the energy of the Na–C system, ECN is the energy of the carbon structure, and ENaBCC refers to the cohesive energy for each Na atom on Na metal surface. A positive ΔH from eqn (3) would suggest sodium plating on the carbon surface instead of Na insertion into carbon; conversely, if ΔH is negative, Na can be inserted into the carbon electrode. In eqn (3), the entropy changes and the overpotentials are not considered. It is evident that weak Na–C interactions with a small ENax+CN would preclude the formation of Na–C compounds. Goddard III and coworkers compared the calculated binding energies of different alkali metals with graphene and found that the binding energy is the weakest for Na, akin to that of Mg.208
Another example is a cathode material of LIBs, spinel LixMn2O4. During the electrochemical extraction of Li ions from Li2Mn2O4, the potential of the M(IV)/M(III) couple would abruptly rise by over 1 V when Li2−xMn2O4 (1 > x > 0) transitions to LiMn2O4 and Li1−xMn2O4 (1 > x > 0), as shown in Fig. 5.209 Interestingly, at this transition the remaining Li ions in LiMn2O4 would move from the roomy octahedral sites to the cramped tetrahedral sites. The higher operation potential certainly relates to enhanced ionic bonding due to the much closer Li–O proximity in the tetrahedral sites. Cairns and coworkers suggested the existence of partial Li–O–Mn covalency based on their 7Li NMR measurements, which provides an alternative perspective to understand the high operation potential.210
 Fig. 5  The voltage curve for Li+ insertion and extraction of LixMn2O4.209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Pearson's hard and soft acids and bases (HSAB) theory211 could shed light on the empirical trends observed for molecular battery electrodes, gaseous or solid. One example of the gaseous electrodes is the O2 electrode in K–O2 batteries, firstly reported by Wu and coworkers,212 where the discharge product is potassium superoxide, KO2, unlike the peroxide discharge products of Na2O2 and Li2O2 in Na–O2213 and Li–O2 batteries,214,215 respectively. This may be explained by the HSAB theory, where the “softer” K+ prefers to bind “soft” O2− to form K–O2, whereas the harder Li+ or Na+ favors interaction with the harder peroxide O22−, resulting in the formation of Li2O2 or Na2O2. Interestingly, by forming the metal superoxide, the polarization of the GCD profiles of K–O2 cells is very small (Fig. 6a), much less than that of Na–O2 and Li–O2 batteries. Wu and coworkers further reported that the overpotential for the reversible formation of a superoxide with a bulky alkyl ammonium cation, tetrabutylammonium (TBA+), TBA–O2, is even smaller than that of K–O2, where TBA+ happens to be softer than K+ (Fig. 6b). The trend begs the question of whether the decreased overpotential correlates to the increased softness of the cations and the increased covalency between the binding constituents of the resulting compounds, which may elicit further studies.
 Fig. 6  (a) GCD potential profiles of the first discharge–charge cycle of a K–O2 battery in an electrolyte of 0.5 M KPF6 in 1,2-dimethoxyethane. The K metal electrode was replaced by a fresh one after the first discharge process. (b) CV curves for oxygen reduction and oxidation on a glassy carbon electrode in oxygen-saturated acetonitrile containing 0.1 M TBAPF6, LiClO4, or KPF6 (three-electrode cell setup). Current density for the LiClO4 electrolyte is enlarged three times for clarity. A good reversibility of the O2/O2− couple can be observed with tetrabutylammonium cation (TBA+) due to its large size and thus low charge density.212 Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The impacts of the HSAB theory on molecular electrodes were recently exemplified in our studies by the solid sulfur electrode that operates with Cu2+ as the charge carrier in an aqueous electrolyte.149Fig. 7 shows the GCD profiles of sulfur electrodes using Cu2+, Pb2+, Mn2+, and Li+ as charge carriers. The Cu–S electrode system exhibits the highest potential, greater than that of Li2S by 1.3 V. The strong binding between soft Lewis acids of Cu2+/Cu+ and soft Lewis base of S2− avails the formation of CuS and Cu2S as the intermediate and the final discharge products, respectively. The Cu–S system demonstrates a record-high capacity of 3044 mA h g−1 or 609 mA h g−1 based on the mass of sulfur or Cu2S, respectively, where Cu2+ serves as the redox center as well. Intriguingly, the extent of polarization for the Cu–S electrode, i.e., at 0.05 V, is only ∼10% that of the Li–S electrodes. A similar question here is whether the smaller extent of polarization relates to the higher covalency between Cu2+/Cu+ and S2− than that between Li+ and S2−.
 Fig. 7  The GCD profiles of sulfur electrodes with Cu2+, Pb2+, Mn2+, and Li+ as charge carriers.149 Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2019 Wiley. 
As a further example of the HSAB theory, the soft–soft acid–base interaction also promotes the reversibility of a redox-mediated electrochemical capacitor, where its cathode operation is based on the oxidation of Br− to Br3−. However, Br3− diffuses to the anode side, thus causing rapid self-discharge. Stucky and coworkers addressed this challenge by precipitating Br3− inside the nanopores of an activated carbon electrode by using a soft cation of TBA+ as a complexing agent.216 The resulting TBABr3 infiltrated in the activated carbon seems insoluble in the aqueous electrolyte, which solves the self-discharge problem, and an ion-exchange-membrane separator is not necessary.
Covalent-ionic pseudocapacitance
Kinetics of chemical reactions is an intricate subject. By recognizing the chemical reaction nature of Faradaic processes in batteries, it appears that to understand pseudocapacitance may entail a picture larger than just the electrodes or solely the ion charge carriers. Thus, it may be efficacious to look for the correlations between the electrode–ion interactions and the rate behavior of batteries or pseudocapacitors. Unfortunately, the understanding along this line is rudimentary, which, however, shows marked opportunities to design fast Faradaic processes for future energy storage.
First, let us briefly summarize the evolving models of pseudocapacitance that have been built upon the properties of electrodes. Pseudocapacitance was originally defined for surface/near-surface storage of ion charges, where these charges, unlike those in electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs), migrate across the electrical double layer and continue to move through the near-surface regions of the Faradaic electrodes.217–219 From early observations of pseudocapacitance, the ratio of the change of charge acceptance/loss, Δq, and the change of the electrode potential, ΔV, is largely constant, where Δq/ΔV coincides with the definition of the capacitance of EDLCs. Therefore, in the early literature of pseudocapacitance, the rectangular shape of CV curves or the linear sloping GCD profiles were considered the prominent features of pseudocapacitance,220 and even to date, linear GCD profiles are often deemed to represent pseudocapacitive performance.
Later, the definition of pseudocapacitance evolved to reflect the diffusion-related behavior that is either “capacitive” (also known as non-diffusion controlled or activation controlled) or diffusion controlled. A well-known equation of i = avb can be used to describe the extent by which the Faradaic reaction is diffusion controlled, where i is the current of CV tests, a is a coefficient, v is the potential scan rate of the CV tests, and the exponent b is 0.5 or 1.0 if the reaction is completely diffusion controlled or fully capacitive, respectively.221,222
If pseudocapacitance were an exclusively surface phenomenon, the capacitance would be a function of the specific surface area of the electrode materials. Over a decade ago, Dunn and coworkers began to report pseudocapacitive behavior of metal oxide electrodes with relatively low surface areas.222,223 The majority of the stored ions in these electrodes must be well beneath the surface of the electrode particles, and these materials exhibit high b values close to 1.0, a strong characteristic of non-diffusion-controlled behavior. Through a series of seminal reports, Dunn and coworkers formulated a new model of pseudocapacitance that encompasses intercalation pseudocapacitance, where pseudocapacitance no longer has to be a surface phenomenon.224,225
Until recently, the correlations of pseudocapacitance have been attributed to the properties of electrode materials, where limited attention had been paid to the identities of ion charge carriers because Li ion was often taken as the default charge carrier like in LIB studies. Our recent study attempted to change this situation.226 We compared the NH4+- and K+-hosting behaviors of a bilayered V2O5 electrode. The storage mechanisms in the V2O5 structure are via intercalation considering the relatively low specific surface area of V2O5, i.e., 37 m2 g−1, and the fact that the lattice of V2O5 uniformly shrinks or expands upon ion insertion or deinsertion, respectively. Despite using the same electrode, the same concentration of the electrolyte, and the same anion of the salt, there exist interesting disparities between hosting NH4+ and K+. Firstly, V2O5 electrode exhibits a much larger capacity of NH4+ storage, 100 mA h g−1, than that of K+, 60 mA h g−1. Secondly, the hosting of NH4+ gives rise to much faster rate performance than that of K+. For NH4+, the pairs of cathodic peaks and anodic peaks are nearly vertically aligned with small overpotentials (Fig. 8a), where this scenario was defined by Conway as “kinetic reversibility”, which occurs when the potential scan rate, v, is slower than the reaction rate constant, k0.12,227 In stark contrast, the peaks of redox pairs for K+ storage, particularly the rightmost pair, are well separated with wide gaps and overpotentials (Fig. 8c), a characteristic of kinetic irreversibility. Note that there are two known scenarios for kinetic reversibility: (1) chemisorption of redox species on electrodes227 and (2) extremely thin-film electrodes.228 Additionally, the b value of i = avb for NH4+ storage is unity for different peaks, whereas it is about 0.8 for K+ (Fig. 8b and d).
 Fig. 8  (a and c) CV curves from 1 to 8 mV s−1 for NH4+ and K+ storage, respectively. (b and d) The b values from the logarithm of the cathodic peak current vs. the logarithm of scan rate.219 Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
The model of intercalation pseudocapacitance could not explain well the different kinetic behaviors between K+ and NH4+ as charge carriers. We tentatively attribute such difference to their different types of electrode–ion chemical bonding. Ex situ Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic results reveal that the bonding between the inserted NH4+ and V2O5 causes a split of V–O vibration peaks, attributed to some covalency, together with no splitting for K+ (Fig. 9a and b). Density functional theory (DFT) calculations suggest a charge transfer (CT) of 0.17 e− from V2O5 to every inserted NH4+. The charge density isosurfaces of NH4–V2O5 depict delocalized charge distribution in sharp contrast to the localized ionic picture of the K+ case (Fig. 9c and d). I posit that the difference relates to the fact that NH4+ as a molecular ion with σ* orbitals is a better electron acceptor than K+ in forming a donor–acceptor bond or covalent-ionic bonding.229,230 The interaction between NH4+ and bilayered V2O5 can be essentially viewed as chemisorption taking place inside the lattice of the electrode. I dub this type of pseudocapacitance as chemisorption-involved insertion pseudocapacitance, or covalent-ionic pseudocapacitance, or CI pseudocapacitance.
 Fig. 9  (a) The first GCD profiles of VO300 in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. (b) Ex situ FTIR spectra at selected SOC. The bottom spectrum was collected after potassiation to −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (c and d) Plots of charge density difference resulting from the host/guest interaction. From the reduced V2O5 electrode in panel (c), a small amount of charge is transferred from V (the yellow lobes on the vanadium) through the OV bond, accumulating charges in a H⋯OV bond (blue cloud). Panel (d) shows the lack of CT for the insertion of potassium atoms (purple). The charge density isosurfaces are ±0.005 e Å−3 with blue surfaces for bounding electron-accumulated regions and yellow surfaces for regions of electron depletion.226 Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Furthermore, the transport of molecular ions inside electrodes may be very different from that of metal ions, where metal ions would slide or hop inside the lattices of electrodes for transporting, whereas NH4+ may swing or rotate to transport as in a “monkey-bar-walking” fashion, oriented by the formation of the hydrogen bond between individual hydrogen atoms of NH4+ with oxo-oxygens of the V2O5 lattice.
Molecular ions as charge carriers represent a fascinating underexplored area, where studies of them will provide new understandings for battery design and they will serve as powerful reactors to prepare new compounds that cannot be fabricated otherwise. Our recent study on the reversible insertion of methyl viologen (MV2+) into a molecular solid of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride demonstrates the impacts of nuances from the electrode–ion chemical bonding on electrode structures and fast electrochemical reactions.231 This study serves as an example to solicit systems of supramolecular chemistry232 for energy storage, and also highlights an electrochemical approach to prepare new supramolecular structures.
Grotthuss pseudocapacitance
In 1806, von Grotthuss posited that electrical conduction in water is via “succession of decomposition and recombination of the elements of water”, where water is “decomposed and recomposed at once”.233,234 Recent theoretical studies further revealed that proton conduction is a structural diffusion event through the breaking and forming, in concert, of the O–H covalent bond and H+⋯OH2 hydrogen bond via H5O2+, the Zundel ion.235–237 Namely, when a proton approaches one end of a water chain, with the domino-falling-like bond vibrations taking place instantaneously, the other end of the water chain kicks out a proton to complete the proton conduction.
However, it is critical to note that the prerequisite of the Grotthuss mechanism is the ion–molecule chemical bonding that is much stronger than van der Waals forces, and the conventional ion–dipole interactions, where such ion–molecule bonding may include hydrogen bond (HB),238e.g., H+⋯OH2, Li-bond,239 and bonds with σ holes, e.g., halogen bond (XB).240–242 Compared to H-bond, Li-bond is more ionic with a smaller extent of CT.243,244
The Grotthuss conduction differs from vehicle-like transport, i.e., molecular diffusion, where with the vehicular fashion an ion “escorted” by a solvation shell moves by pushing through other solvent molecules, thus engaging significant energy barriers. Understandably, the diffusion-free Grotthuss conduction is faster than vehicular conduction, which explains the higher conductivity of HCl solution than that of NaCl with the same solute concentration.
In order to employ Grotthuss proton conduction in battery electrodes, it is critical to have water ‘canals’ built inside the electrode structures so as to generate a percolating H-bonding network. Unfortunately, most prior studies fall short of facilitating this percolating hydrogen bonding network. Recently, our collaborative research reported an example of Grotthuss proton storage in a defective and hydrated Prussian blue analog—Turnbull's blue, Cu[Fe(CN)6]0.63·□0.37·3.4H2O (CuFe–TBA)—as the electrode.245 Structural characterization and DFT calculations collectively suggest the percolation of a hydrogen-bonding network inside the electrode structure (Fig. 10a). Interestingly the CuFe–TBA electrode also exhibits fast kinetic reversibility, revealed by its CV curves displaying vertically aligned redox peaks (Fig. 10b). Furthermore, with an active mass loading of 1.5 mg cm−2, upon increasing the current rate from 1C to 1000C, the GCD profiles are nearly identical without obvious overpotentials (Fig. 10c). These results unequivocally demonstrate the power of Grotthuss conduction in promoting the rate capability of Faradaic reactions. Grotthuss proton storage is a unique Faradaic process, where it is distinct from the intercalation pseudocapacitance or the surface EDLC. Here, I tentatively name it as Grotthuss pseudocapacitance.
 Fig. 10  (a) DFT calculations of the water orientations in a 3 × 1 × 1 super cell of CuFe–TBA. (b) CV curve of the CuFe–TBA electrode for (de)insertion of proton. (c) GCD profiles of CuFe–TBA at 1, 20, 200, 500 and 1000C rate (1C = 65 mA g−1).245 Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
Conjecture of the correlation between covalent-ionic bonding and pseudocapacitance
From the above examples of capacitive NH4+ storage and proton Grotthuss pseudocapacitance plus the electrode systems of TBA–O2, K–O2, and Cu–S, I posit that covalent-ionic bonding between charge-compensating ion and electrode is one root cause of capacitive or non-diffusion-controlled kinetic behavior of Faradaic electrodes, i.e., pseudocapacitance. Such covalent-ionic bonding of the Lewis donor–acceptor characteristic may take place on the surface of electrode materials, known as chemisorption, or in the lattice of a crystalline or amorphous material. However, the boundaries of bonding strengths for this correlation to be valid are unclear. For example, if completely covalent bonding were formed between the electrode structure and the inserted ion, the rate capability must be poor as the ions could not move at all. Thus, it is postulated that there exists an extent of covalency or a value of CT that corresponds to the maximum kinetic behavior, and this CT value may vary depending on the unique properties of electrodes and ions.
Additional opportunities related to chemical bonding in batteries
Note that electrode–ion interactions should include the interplays between the lattice solvent, e.g., lattice water, in the electrode structure and the inserted ions, where such interactions are often described as shielding of ions.155,246 Besides the electrode–ion interplays, the inserted ions may interact among themselves. It is expected that the inserted ions would only repulse each other. However, when there is CT from the electrode to ions, the inserted ions may form covalent or metallic bonds between themselves.247 In the recent work by Wang and coworkers, the ratio of intercalants over carbon atoms in C3.5[Br0.5Cl0.5], a Stage-I GIC, is unprecedented. This coincides with the near-neutral oxidation states of Br−0.05 and Cl−0.25 due to the near-unity CT, and the deduced conclusion that these ions not only exert little repulsion between each other within the graphite host but form covalent bonds to form molecules or even polymers.197 Besides the electrode–ion interactions and ion–ion interactions, the interplays between the lattice water molecules themselves can be instrumental. Grotthuss proton conduction in the water-rich Turnbull's blue electrode is an exceptional example, which shows the values of the percolating hydrogen bonding network inside the electrode to high rate capability.245
One important implication of CT for ion charge carriers is that the inserted ions themselves serve as redox centers, thus being an extra site for electronic charge storage. The higher NH4+ storage capacity than K+ in the bilayered V2O5 electrode seems aligned with this implication. The Cu–S electrode system highlighted earlier also showcases the benefits of such redox-active ion charge carriers.149
Four basic operation principles of batteries
One basic rule of Faradaic electrochemical reactions, spontaneous or not, is that the products of electrochemical reactions are charge neutral. The exception is on the surface of electrode particles, where the charges are responsible for the energy difference between the chemical potential, μ, and electrochemical potential, , of the electrode surface. The charge-neutrality rule requires both anode and cathode of a battery staying neutral over cycling upon losing or gaining electrons in redox reactions. Therefore, when electrons migrate from anode to cathode or vice versa, the concomitant ion migration in the electrolyte must compensate for the charge neutrality of electrodes no matter whether cations or anions or both are employed as charge carriers.
Let me use a discharge process to illustrate the construction of the four battery operation principles that are derived from the charge-neutrality rule. As for the anode that surrenders electrons, there are two scenarios to stay neutral: (A) the anode ejects cations of the same quantity of charge into the electrolyte and (B) the anode incorporates electrolyte-born anions. Regarding the cathode that gains electrons, similarly, the two routes are: (a) the cathode harvests electrolyte-originated cations and (b) the cathode expels anions into the electrolyte.
The permutations of A, B coupling with a, b lead to four basic battery operation principles, as shown by the linking double-headed arrows in Fig. 11. The (A, a) batteries, e.g., LIBs, NIBs, and KIBs, are cation rocking-chair batteries (RCB) or, with more pictorial precision, “pendulum” batteries, where during cycling, cation charge carriers commute between the anode and cathode (Fig. 12a).248 More precisely, during discharge of a cation RCB, anode releases cations into the anode side of the electrolyte, and cathode takes in cations from the cathode side of the electrolyte simultaneously. To be more inclusive, when metals are employed as the anode, I consider such metal batteries as cation RCBs, e.g., Li batteries,249 Na batteries,250 Mg batteries,251 Zn batteries,154,252 and Fe batteries.161 Nevertheless, the ionic charge carrier in an RCB is not necessarily a cation, where the commuting ion can be an anion in a (B, b) RCB. Studies of (B, b) anion RCBs can be dated to the 1970s,253 and this area recently has garnered renewed interest (Fig. 12b).254,255 Note that during operation of any RCBs, cation- or anion-based, the salt concentration in the electrolyte stays constant; therefore, in these batteries, the usage of electrolytes can be minimized and the separator can be made ultra-thin.
 Fig. 11  Schematic showing how four fundamental principles of battery operation are constructed. A pairs with a to form a cation RCB; B couples with b to build an anion RCB; A pairs with b, which leads to a DIB; B couples with a to be an RDIB. 
 Fig. 12  Schematics of four types of battery configurations. (a) Cation RCB, (b) Anion RCB, (c) DIB, and (d) RDIB.256 
When A, B and a, b are cross-linked, as depicted in Fig. 11, the (A, b) and (B, a) batteries employ both cations and anions as charge carriers during operation. The (A, b) battery is known as a dual-ion battery (DIB), where its charge process “feeds” the anode and the cathode with cations and anions, respectively (Fig. 12c).257 Note that EDLCs operate in exactly the same fashion as a DIB. In the (B, a) batteries, the assignments of charge carriers for the electrodes are the opposite—anions for the anode and cations for the cathode—which were, thus, named as reverse dual-ion batteries (RDIBs) in our recent report (Fig. 12d).256 The migration paths of cations and anions in DIBs and RDIBs resemble a playing accordion, where during operation, the anions and cations are either simultaneously dumped into the electrolyte or concurrently taken up by the electrodes. Of note, when DIBs (and RDIBs) operate, the electrolyte is initially the sole source of ionic charge carriers, thus making the electrolyte a part of the battery's active mass.258 Therefore, the electrolyte with a sufficient number of ions is indispensable for the operation of these batteries, and “capacity” of the electrolyte is linearly proportional to its salt concentration, which substantially affects the cell energy density. Remarkably, three of four battery types—anion RCB, DIB, and RDIB—involve anion storage, by (de)insertion, in one or both electrodes to reach charge neutrality.
Although the battery community had favored metal ions as charge carriers as the norm, the first reported ion-insertion electrode was an acceptor-type GIC by Rüdorff and Hoffmann in 1938, where they studied the electrochemical intercalation of HSO4− anions into graphite in an “ion transfer cell”.259 Since then, acceptor-type GICs have remained at the center of anion intercalation chemistry.260 In 1989, a patent was issued on the first DIB or dual-graphite battery, where redox-amphoteric graphite serves as both cathode and anode.261 This invention may have been inspired by the reports on the reversible formation of donor-type Li–GICs, a newcomer after anion–GICs.262 It is worth noting that the conducting polymer community has studied electrochemical doping of anions in polymer matrices since the 1980s, and the electrolytes used were typically aqueous ones.263,264
The challenge of acceptor-type GICs as anion-hosting cathodes is that their formation takes place at highly oxidizing potentials, i.e., 4.5 to 5.5 V vs. Li+/Li, where most solvents in aprotic electrolytes would be oxidized. As one approach, the community worked on new electrolytes to address this challenge. Trulove and coworkers employed IL electrolytes to improve the reversibility of the graphite cathode.265 More recent studies could reversibly cycle graphite cathode using IL electrolytes.266–268 Ethyl methyl sulfone and an electrolyte with a fluorinated solvent can also survive above 5.0 V vs. Li+/Li.269,270 Tang and coworkers used a higher concentration of nonaqueous electrolytes, which shows stable cycling of graphite in a graphite–Al DIB.271,272
The usage of electrolytes of high salt concentrations and IL electrolytes lowers the anion-insertion potential in graphite compared to dilute electrolytes.273 To explain this phenomenon, the logic to formulate the eqn (3) is used to generate the following eqn (4), where the entropy changes and overpotentials are, again, not considered: (4)where graphite is employed as the cathode and the plating/stripping of Li is the anode in a carbon‖Li half-cell of DIBs, ΔH is the enthalpy change of the half-cell, ECN is the cathode energy before anion insertion occurs, where there are N carbon atoms in the system, E(xA−+CN) is the energy of the anion-inserted cathode, where x is the number of anion incorporated, ELiBCC is the change of cohesive energy of Li metal for adding one lithium atom on the surface, and ΔHdesolv.A− and ΔHdesolv.Li+ represent the desolvation energies of anions and Li ions, respectively. For the graphite cathode, the high operation potential is due to the fact that ΔH is too negative, where ΔH ≈ −n·F·emf, where n is the number of charges transferred, F is the Faraday constant, and emf is the electromotive force, i.e., the thermodynamic cell voltage. In order to render ΔH less negative, one can carry out the following: decreasing the absolute difference of (E(xA−+CN) − ECN), and/or increasing the absolute values of desolvation energies, ΔHdesolv.A− and/or ΔHdesolv.Li+. For a higher concentration of salt in the solvent or in ILs, the desovlation energies of both cations and anions may be increased due to the increased population of cation–anion pairs more strongly bonded than the ion–solvent species. This argument should be applicable to the WiSE as well.
Another approach to stabilize the graphite cathode is to grow an artificial SEI on the graphite surface, where Wu and coworkers formed such an SEI by discharging graphite at low potentials in an organic carbonate electrolyte.274
The attention on anion-hosting cathodes has shifted to non-graphitic materials. Upon compromising the long-range order of graphite, it was reported that soft carbon, e.g., MCMB, could deliver a good capacity, whereas the capacity of amorphous carbon, i.e., hard carbon, is low, most likely due to its structure being too tortuous for molecular ions to migrate through.275 More recently, it has been found that molecular solids and metal–organic frameworks could reversibly store anions.276–279 Their capacities are not necessarily higher than that of graphite; however, their operation potentials are much lower than that of graphite, within the stable range of aprotic electrolytes.
Interestingly when the operation potential of anion storage is sufficiently low, anion-storage electrodes become relevant for use as battery anodes to pair with cation-deficient cathode materials, thus forming an RDIB. We reported the first RDIB with ferrocene encapsulated in activated carbon as a low-potential anode.249 The use of an anion-hosting anode is a hallmark for battery design because such a device configuration has the luxury of allowing selection of a cathode from a great number of cation-deficient cathode materials reported for LIBs during the past four decades. Nevertheless, in prior studies, cation-deficient cathode materials had to be coupled with metallic anode materials, e.g., Li, Na, K, and Mg, in nonaqueous electrolytes or Zn in aqueous electrolytes. These cells are ‘half-cells’ if the metal anode is not of finite mass compared to the cathode.
Over past decades, the choice of electrodes for anion storage had been bound to carbon-containing materials that are expected to be more structurally flexible, e.g., graphite, soft carbon, polymers, and organic molecular solids. However, we recently discovered that a compact inorganic metal oxide, i.e., Mn3O4, could reversibly host anions of NO3− and SO42− from their aqueous electrolytes and deliver a good capacity value and stable cycling.280 Anion insertion transforms the crystalline structure of Mn3O4 to be partially amorphous; however, this phase change appears to be harmless for reversibility. It is the author's opinion that oxidative anion storage is a common phenomenon of electrochemical reactions, where many yet-to-be-explored materials may exhibit reversible properties, high capacity, and long cycle life.
In the DIB field, most studies have employed nonaqueous electrolytes. Nonaqueous electrolytes allow the usage of a broad spectrum of energetic anode materials; whereas, aqueous electrolytes require anodes to operate without significant HER. However, compared to nonaqueous electrolytes, aqueous electrolytes exhibit higher solubility toward many salts, and the concentration can be sufficiently high for the aqueous electrolytes to become WiSE. An ultra-high concentration of electrolytes has profound impacts on the performance of DIBs because the chemical environment of such electrolytes is very different for water molecules and salt ions compared to that in dilute aqueous electrolytes and nonaqueous electrolytes.
One example is that the concentrations of electrolytes could dramatically shift the cation or anion insertion potentials in the electrode materials. In 2015, Wang and coworkers reported a WiSE, where a near-saturation salt concentration increases the cation-insertion potential.62 Recently, my group reported that higher electrolyte concentrations lower the anion-incorporation potential of electrodes.256 In fact, these up or down potential shifts depend on the activity coefficients of cations and anions in the Nernst equation with calculations shown below:
Electrode (ox) + Cationn+ + ne− → Electrode (red) (5)Electrode (ox) + ne− → Electrode (red) + Anionn− (6)where E°, R, T, n, F, ccation, γcation, canion, and γanion are the standard potential, gas constant (8.3145 J K−1 mol−1), absolute temperature (298 K), number of electrons transferred, Faraday constant (96 485.3 J V−1 mol−1), cation concentration, cation activity coefficient, anion concentration, and anion activity coefficient, respectively. The shifts of the operation potentials of either cation or anion insertion relate to the activity coefficients that are orders of magnitude higher in WiSE than in dilute electrolytes.256
In advancing the performance of DIBs, the capacity and operation potential of the anode are critical for the energy density of DIBs. To this end, anode materials other than graphite have been investigated, including alloying electrodes such as Al,281 Sn,282 and LMA.283,284 The DIB setup sets free the choice of anode materials, where anodes investigated for NIBs and KIBs are all relevant as suitable anode materials for DIBs beyond lithium.285–287
Opportunities in the anion-insertion redox battery chemistry
Anion storage represents remarkable opportunities in designing new battery chemistries. Nevertheless, I consider the ‘plating’ of small halide atoms such as fluoride and chloride as the Holy Grail of this research area. Electrochemical conversion by reduction or oxidation from ions to their neutral elemental phases is plating, which is best known for metals but rarely reported for nonmetals. The best electrode is ‘no electrode’ with zero mass and volume taken, which is simply a current collector for plating. The electrode-free approach was exemplified by the anode-free lithium batteries.288 The recent breakthrough of insertion of Br−0.05 and Cl−0.25 into the galleries of graphite, by Wang and coworkers, showcased the power of ‘plating’ of nonmetals in achieving a high energy density of batteries.197 Of note, such ‘plating’ is at the atomic scale, where nearly neutral atoms of Br−0.05 and Cl−0.25 are fastened under the protection of stacking graphene sheets as the extended current collector. However, it would be challenging to plate bulk Cl and Br phases in their molecular forms, which are gaseous and liquid, respectively. My group recently plated a solid iodine electrode from a WiSE that contained superhalides of [ZnIx(H2O)4−x]2−x.289
Next to ‘plating’, it would be insertion chemistries of light anions in high-capacity electrode hosts that are more interesting for the sake of a greater energy density. To this end, one may want to consider the concentrations of electrolytes as well, where the mass of anions should be considered either when calculating the specific capacity of the cathode or when estimating the energy density of the full cells. For DIBs (and RDIBs), it seems that highly concentrated electrolytes, aprotic or aqueous, are more attractive due to their higher specific ‘capacity’ values. Furthermore, if saturated electrolytes are employed, it is pivotal to understand that during charge of DIBs or discharge of RDIBs, WiSE may no longer stay as WiSE due to the matriculation of ions when forming the ion-inserted electrodes. To maintain the high concentrations of electrolytes, we proposed that a certain mass of electrolyte salt(s) can be pre-mixed with either of the electrodes before operation of batteries.256 Upon the usage of electrolyte-originated ions, the solid salt helps maintain the high concentrations of the electrolytes via dissolution.
In summary, the four basic battery operation principles particularly the anion-hosting mechanisms in electrodes provide a panoramic view on the design of battery chemistries at the full reaction scale.
Perspectives on aqueous metal batteries
As discussed above, considering both factors of cost and safety, it appears to be most realistic that future GW battery storage facilities deploy aqueous batteries. Among aqueous storage batteries, metal batteries are the most attractive due to the usage of high-capacity metal anodes. There are primarily two types of metal batteries: the first is the cation RCB that uses a cation-deficient insertion cathode; the second is the DIB that employs an anion-insertion or anion-plating cathode. For all metal batteries, the challenge of capacity fading for the cathode may not be a showstopper, which can be tackled with novel electrolytes; however, it is the performance of the metal anodes that eventually determines the future of a metal battery. Close attention should be paid to the long-standing challenges of metal anodes: HER and irregular plating morphology, e.g., dendrites.
The storage battery community could learn much from the recent progress in promoting the CE and addressing the dendrite formation of LMA.290 For example, in Zn batteries, the parasitic reaction on the surface of zinc metal anode (ZMA) arises from the reactions with water, i.e., HER. To mitigate HER, one can decrease the concentration of water near the surface of ZMA, which renders water less reactive cathodically, or one can raise the ZMA oxidation potential, which makes ZMA less reactive anodically, where a Zn-based WiSE, e.g., 30 m ZnCl2, which we first reported for Zn batteries, could accomplish both tasks to a large extent.291 Furthermore, based on Sand's law, a higher concentration of salts in the electrolytes delays Sand's extinction, thus inhibiting the formation of tip-grown morphologies, often described as dendrites.290 Another parameter that should be monitored is the pH value of aqueous electrolytes, where an acidic environment accelerates HER on the surface of ZMA. All these considerations are applicable to other aqueous metal batteries, including Fe batteries. Three dimensional architectures of current collectors may play a role in stabilizing the performance of metal anodes, which certainly helps mitigate the dendrite problem.292
Aqueous electrolytes are rarely spectators in aqueous batteries as for affecting the performance of electrodes. HER of electrolytes not only lowers the CE of metal anodes, leads to fast self-discharge and capacity fading and dries up the electrolytes, but causes safety concerns. To evaluate the CE of metal anodes’ plating/stripping processes in aqueous electrolytes, it is pivotal to cover a wide range of current rates or current densities (in units of mA g−1 or mA cm−2, respectively). A high current rate/density can mask the negative impacts of HER and suggest overestimated CE values of the metal anodes because the kinetics of HER are largely consistent regardless of the adopted current rate/density of plating and stripping. High current rate/density can reveal the reversibility of the metal anode that does not consider the reactivity of the electrolytes. However, to investigate the metal anode for its practicality in a battery, one must consider the reactions between the metal anodes and the electrolytes.
Note that a long cycle life of electrodes implies their stable performance at the cell scale, where aqueous electrolytes’ stability in contact with the electrodes should be considered. The suggestion here is to differentiate the usage of the terms ‘cyclability’ and ‘cycle life’, where the former is about electrodes’ reversibility alone, which can be revealed at high rates, and the latter is about the ensemble of the electrode and the electrolyte, where the cycle life should ideally be marked with the number of days taken for the cycling measurements.
Another challenge associated with aqueous metal batteries pertains to the corrosiveness of the electrolytes to cathode materials as well as to current collectors. If the cathode slowly dissolves in the aqueous electrolytes, the cycle life of such electrodes is a function of time. In addition, high-potential cathodes may cause OER of water. However, at a high current rate/density, cathode materials that dissolve or cause OER may still deliver a large number of cycles with minimal capacity fading, where the duration of such cycling tests may not be long. To reveal the true cycle life of cathodes in aqueous metal batteries, again, it is crucial to note how many days are used for cycling.
To inhibit the reactivity of water, i.e., HER and OER, inorganic SEI from the decomposition of electrolyte salts may be instrumental, where the aim is to achieve similar kinetic stability in aqueous systems to that seen on carbon anodes of LIBs. Alternatively, it is highly promising to tune the strength of O–H bonds of water by constructing conducive chemical environments to stabilize water molecules. Both approaches may have tremendous impacts on the future of aqueous batteries.
The choice of current collectors in aqueous batteries is not trivial, where few current collector materials are very stable in aqueous electrolytes.293 Al affords greater overpotentials of HER for Li-ion-based electrolytes; however, caution should be taken when using Al as the negative current collector because Al can reduce some charge carriers, e.g., Zn2+ and Fe2+. Titanium is more inert on the anode side; however, it is relatively expensive. An excessive mass of metal anode itself can be employed as the anode current collector. Graphite paper or cloth seems to be a suitable current collector for both anode and cathode, albeit the anion insertion into graphite should be considered on the cathode side.
To date, most studies of aqueous batteries have been done in coin cells. Coin cells exert a large pressure, and the used active mass of electrodes in coin cells is typically small. Such conditions are suitable to test electrodes’ performance, but often reveal little about the electrolyte's reactivity toward electrodes. The author expects that future studies will report more pouch cell results when the focus is about new electrolytes for metal anodes. Note that pouch cells may swell when gas evolves in the cells. Such information will be vital for the community to evaluate new battery chemistries.
Lastly, a rarely discussed concern of Zn batteries relates to the rarity of zinc, where Zn is only four times more abundant than Li in the Earth's crust. According to the International Energy Agency, the world needs 266 GW of energy storage by 2030 to combat global warming. Bloomberg New Energy Finance estimates that global energy storage will hit 942 GW by 2040. If we estimate the power density of Zn batteries as 200 W kg−1 and assume that all 942 GW of storage is undertaken by Zn batteries, which is unlikely, there will be a need for 4.71 million metric tons of Zn batteries. If we estimate half of the battery mass comes from Zn metal or Zn ions, we will need 2.36 million metric tons of Zn. The good news is that in 2018 alone, the global production of zinc was over 13 million metric tons, and, in addition, Zn used in batteries can be recycled. In this situation, the consumption of Zn for Zn batteries would constitute 1.8% of the total global Zn production by 2040 if we assume that the annual global Zn production is maintained at 13 million metric tons for the next 20 years. Therefore, it is most likely that the global installation of Zn batteries will not face a shortage of the Zn supply despite its relative rarity.
Conclusions and perspectives
In this new paradigm of storage batteries, to invent market-winning storage batteries, a roadmap that encompasses considerations toward minimizing the LEC will be highly valuable to the community. Practically relevant innovations in the storage battery field should present progress aligned with lowering the cost and/or enhancing the electrochemical performance for a lowered LEC. The energy-density-oriented research philosophy that has served well for LIBs no longer can effectively guide the progress in storage batteries. The development of storage batteries may require a holistic view on the chemical reaction nature of batteries, where one is allowed to consider most aspects of a chemical reaction: the reactants and the reaction medium. From an overview, five dimensions of battery chemistries: electrodes, ion charge carriers, electrode–ion chemical bonding, electrolytes, and basic operation principles should be considered in designing a new battery chemistry.
This article has emphasized some empirical trends of electrochemical properties of battery electrodes as a function of the chemical bonding between the electrodes and the inserted ions. In the author's opinion, the ion–electrode chemical bonding will serve as one powerful vehicle for discovering new battery chemistries and better understanding of existing ones. For the pursuit of marketing-winning battery chemistries, the boundaries set for specific ion battery types should be removed. Instead, the field may find suitable storage battery chemistries faster by elucidating the implications in thermodynamics and kinetics of electrochemical processes associated with the interplays between the electrodes and the ion charge carriers.
It is expected that the community will move beyond focusing on the materials alone and will address the nature of Faradaic processes in batteries from a holistic perspective of chemical reactions. Chemical reactions take place by providing amenable chemical environments for reactants, where such reactants in batteries are electrode structures, ions, and sometimes electrolyte solvent molecules. To define the chemical environments, one should select the reaction medium, which is the electrolyte in batteries. Inspired by the recent breakthroughs made with new electrolytes of WiSE, the battery field will continue to make more discoveries that relate to innovations of electrolytes. Another observation is that the focus of the battery field has gradually extended beyond the regimes of solid-state chemistry/physics. It moves to interdisciplinary areas, where attention focuses on the design of electrolytes and the interfaces with the electrodes. Future foci may be the reactivity of all reactants in the new chemical environments defined by the electrolytes. For example, the reactivity of water becomes tunable within WiSE. To this end, the effort is much required to curtail the reactivity of the solvent of electrolytes. In aqueous electrolytes, to address HER and OER represents a more urgent task than to offer a new electrode structure if that is indifferent to the extent of HER and OER. The reactivity of electrolytes directly pertains to the reversibility of batteries, i.e., the cycle life, and the rate of self-discharge—the properties that determine whether a battery is commercially relevant.
Batteries are nothing but reactors of chemical reactions. One should not only design the chemical reactions but also choose the reactor configurations that best reveal the energy and power of the chemical reactions. The four basic battery operation principles are the types of reactors to enable different battery chemistries. The field will witness a looming revolution on the diversity of battery configurations. Despite the novelties and new ideas to be explored, the community needs a universal guideline of battery performance evaluation, which is indispensable toward finding a suite of practically relevant battery chemistries. Basic research may not need to deliver commercialization-related milestones. Claims, such as energy density, power density, and cycle life, however, need to be aligned with lowering the LEC.
The GW batteries will need novel designs of battery devices, which may be larger than those of non-aqueous batteries. To date, there have been many different battery designs, including coin cells, cylindrical cells, pouch cells, and micro/thin-film batteries, and printable batteries.294,295 The industry of aqueous storage batteries can solicit the expertise from lead-acid batteries.
In summary, the research on storage batteries will witness a paradigm shift from approaches of materials science to considerations of chemical science.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
X. J. is grateful to U.S. National Science Foundation Award No. 1551693 for financial support. X. J. thanks Mr. Woochul Shin for his assistance in formatting the references and obtaining permissions to reproduce figures previously published in journals.
Notes and references
G. Crabtree, Nature, 2015, 526, S92–S92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS .

Energy Storage, ed. G. M. Crawley, World Scientific, Singapore,  2017 Search PubMed .
35x25: A Vision for Energy Storage, Energy Storage Association, 2017.
E. Barbour, I. A. G. Wilson, J. Radcliffe, Y. Ding and Y. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 61, 421–432 CrossRef .
H. Lund and G. Salgi, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 1172–1179 CrossRef .
B. Bolund, H. Bernhoff and M. Leijon, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 235–258 CrossRef .
U. Herrmann, B. Kelly and H. Price, Energy, 2004, 29, 883–893 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aneke and M. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 179, 350–377 CrossRef .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Buckles and W. V. Hassenzahl, IEEE Power Eng. Rev., 2000, 20, 16–20 Search PubMed .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
The world's water battery: pumped hydropower storage and the clean energy transition, International Hydropower Association.
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1042–1044 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bianchini, M. Roca-Ayats, P. Hartmann, T. Brezesinski and J. Janek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10434–10458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharifi-Asl, J. Lu, K. Amine and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900551 CrossRef .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
GEVO 2018, https://www.iea.org/gevo2018/.
N. Nitta and G. Yushin, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 317–336 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. H. Chakrabarti, S. A. Hajimolana, F. S. Mjalli and M. Saleem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R55–R79 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bernardes, D. C. R. Espinosa and J. A. S. Tenório, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, G. Chen and Z. Chen, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 851–862 RSC .
D. E. Turney, J. W. Gallaway, G. G. Yadav, R. Ramirez, M. Nyce, S. Banerjee, Y. K. Chen-Wiegart, J. Wang, M. J. D’Ambrose, S. Kolhekar, J. Huang and X. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4819–4832 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Eyer and G. P. Corey, Energy storage for the electricity grid: benefits and market potential assessment guide: a study for the DOE Energy Storage Systems Program, Sandia Report, 2010.
D. M. Davies, M. G. Verde, O. Mnyshenko, Y. R. Chen, R. Rajeev, Y. S. Meng and G. Elliott, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 42–50 CrossRef .
J. Lochala, D. Liu, B. Wu, C. Robinson and J. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24407–24421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, W. A. Henderson, H. Pan, B. R. Perdue, R. Cao, J. Z. Hu, C. Wan, K. S. Han, K. T. Mueller, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Shao and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 17, 3061–3067 CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, D. Oh, Y. Lin, Z. Zhuo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, F. Wang, A. Kushima, Z. Wang, H.-C. Kim, Y. Qi, W. Yang, F. Pan, J. Li, K. Xu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18670–18680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. La Mantia, M. Pasta, H. D. Deshazer, B. E. Logan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1810–1813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ashtiani, ECS Trans., 2008, 11, 1–11 CAS .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, H. Sun, L. Fu, F. Ye, Y. Zhang, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705702 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Williard, W. He, C. Hendricks and M. Pecht, Energies, 2013, 6, 4682–4695 CrossRef .
X. Wang, E. Yasukawa and S. Kasuya, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1066–A1071 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. Zhang, J. L. Allen and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1079–A1082 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, E. Watanabe, K. Takada, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, V. Murugesan, K. S. Han, X. Jiang, Y. Cao, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang, J.-G. Zhang, M. L. Sushko and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 674–681 CrossRef CAS .
A. Basile, M. Hilder, F. Makhlooghiazad, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, D. R. MacFarlane, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703491 CrossRef .
M. Ue, H. Tokuda, T. Kawai, M. Yanagidate and Y. Otake, ECS Trans., 2009, 16, 173–181 CAS .
K. Takechi, Y. Kato and Y. Hase, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2501–2506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Ding, X. Guo and G. Yu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2875–2883 CrossRef CAS .
N. Delgado-Mellado, M. Larriba, P. Navarro, V. Rigual, M. Ayuso, J. García and F. Rodríguez, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 260, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Cheng, C.-Z. Zhao, Y.-X. Yao, H. Liu and Q. Zhang, Chem, 2019, 5, 74–96 CAS .
R. Murugan, V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7778–7781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, Y. Gong, K. K. Fu, X. He, G. T. Hitz, J. Dai, A. Pearse, B. Liu, H. Wang, G. Rubloff, Y. Mo, V. Thangadurai, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 572–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ishiguro, Y. Nakata, M. Matsui, I. Uechi, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Imanishi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1690–A1693 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chung and B. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8611–8619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, S. Tang, Y. Cheng, K. Wang, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y.-C. Cao, F. Wei and L. Mai, Joule, 2018, 2, 1991–2015 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Zhang, X. Song, H. Zarrin, X. Tian, J. Qiao, L. Rasen, K. Li and Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 663–670 RSC .
P. T. Moseley, J. Power Sources, 2000, 88, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
I. González, A. Ramiro, M. Calderón, A. J. Calderón and J. F. González, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 11090–11103 CrossRef .

          S. McCluer, Battery Technology for Data Centers and Network Rooms: Lead-Acid Battery Options. APC Schneider Electric White paper # 30.
Y. Li, D. Han, S. Han, X. Zhu, L. Hu, Z. Zhang and Y. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Pan, M. Gao and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4743–4755 RSC .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115–1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Luo, W.-J. Cui, P. He and Y.-Y. Xia, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 760–765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Yi and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 830–840 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. Chen, T. Qing, X. Fan, W. Sun, A. von Cresce, M. S. Ding, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, M. A. Schroeder, N. Eidson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2017, 1, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Pavlov, in Lead-Acid Batteries: Science and Technology, ed. D. Pavlov, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2nd edn,  2017, pp. 593–620 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, H. Jiang, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, Q. Guo, W. Wang, S. Han, L. Wang and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902653 CrossRef .

          L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of Molecules and Crystals: An Introduction to Modern Structural Chemistry, Cornell University Press,  1960 Search PubMed .
M. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. D. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7854–7863 RSC .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. Zu and H. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2614–2624 RSC .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. S. Harris, Electrochemical Studies in Cyclic Esters, MSc thesis, University of California, Berkeley,  1958 .
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pereira, G. G. Amatucci, M. S. Whittingham and R. Hamlen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yazami and Ph. Touzain, J. Power Sources, 1983, 9, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 461–472 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, Electrochem. Soc. Meeting Abstracts, 1996, 96(1), 73 Search PubMed .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Sun, S.-T. Myung, B.-C. Park, J. Prakash, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Lee, H. Cha, M. Yoon, M. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702028 CrossRef .
N. Yabuuchi and T. Ohzuku, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 171–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, S.-H. Kang, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek and S. A. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3112–3125 RSC .
J. Hong, W. E. Gent, P. Xiao, K. Lim, D.-H. Seo, J. Wu, P. M. Csernica, C. J. Takacs, D. Nordlund, C.-J. Sun, K. H. Stone, D. Passarello, W. Yang, D. Prendergast, G. Ceder, M. F. Toney and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, D. Yu, Y. Jun Mo and N. Pei, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 181–191 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhong, A. Bonakdarpour, M. Zhang, Y. Gao and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
K. Amine, H. Yasuda and M. Yamachi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 178–179 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Ouyang, X. Yu, M. Ge, X. Huang, E. Hu, C. Ma, S. Li, R. Xiao, W. Yang, Y. Chu, Y. Liu, H. Yu, X.-Q. Yang, X. Huang, L. Chen and H. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
E. McCalla, A. M. Abakumov, M. Saubanère, D. Foix, E. J. Berg, G. Rousse, M.-L. Doublet, D. Gonbeau, P. Novák, G. V. Tendeloo, R. Dominko and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2015, 350, 1516–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Johnson, N. Li, C. Lefief, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6095–6106 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Danuta and U. Juliusz, US Pat., 3043896A,  1962 Search PubMed .
H. Yamin and E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 1983, 9, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Oh, R. Black, E. Pomerantseva, J.-H. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Phipps, T. G. Hayes, P. M. Skarstad and D. F. Untereker, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 1073–1077 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem., 1984, 55, 280–286 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miki, D. Nakazato, H. Ikuta, T. Uchida and M. Wakihara, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 508–510 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 7, 209–231 RSC .
M. N. Obrovac, L. Christensen, D. B. Le and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A849–A855 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Mosby and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10656–10661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, C. Chang, L. Yuan, T. Sun and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1616–1621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 348–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, X. Hou, L. Miao, L. Li, R. Shi, L. Liu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7020–7024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fong, U. von Sacken and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2009–2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. Liu and J. S. Xue, Science, 1995, 270, 590–593 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakajima, Mainichi Dly. News, 1989, 1 CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu, A. Manthiram, Y. S. Meng, V. R. Subramanian, M. F. Toney, V. V. Viswanathan, M. S. Whittingham, J. Xiao, W. Xu, J. Yang, X.-Q. Yang and J.-G. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Paclhi, K. S. Nanjunclaswamy, C. Masquelier, S. Okada and J. B. Gooclenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1609–1613 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, R. E. Usiskin, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Science, 2017, 358, eaao2808 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, S.-C. Yin and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A170–A172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Z. Chen, Z. Ma, F. Pan, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1031–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Shon, H. S. Lee, G. O. Park, J. Yoon, E. Park, G. S. Park, S. S. Kong, M. Jin, J.-M. Choi, H. Chang, S. Doo, J. M. Kim, W.-S. Yoon, C. Pak, H. Kim and G. D. Stucky, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Han, J. Yang, J. Su, X. Xu, S. Li, L. Xu, R. Fang, H. Jiang, X. Zou, B. Song, L. Mai and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 15, 2180–2185 CAS .
H. J. Lee, J. Shin and J. W. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705851 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Meng, X.-Q. Yang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3589–3615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Herle, B. Ellis, N. Coombs and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Islam, D. J. Driscoll, C. A. J. Fisher and P. R. Slater, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5085–5092 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, O. Fontaine and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 489–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Angell, C. Liu and E. Sanchez, Nature, 1993, 362, 137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, M. Li, Y. Hu, J. Lu, A. Lushington, R. Li, T. Wu, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700341 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Li, A. Pei, K. Yan, Y. Sun, C.-L. Wu, L.-M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Science, 2017, 358, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Levi, G. Salitra, N. Levy, D. Aurbach and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 872–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, L. Zhong, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan, W. Xu, L. Q. Zhang, S. X. Mao, N. S. Hudak, X. H. Liu, A. Subramanian, H. Fan, L. Qi, A. Kushima and J. Li, Science, 2010, 330, 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Newman, K. E. Thomas, H. Hafezi and D. R. Wheeler, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
M. Doyle, T. F. Fuller and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1526–1533 CrossRef CAS .
A. Urban, D.-H. Seo and G. Ceder, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 16002 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, J. Power Sources, 2004, 126, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eftekhari, Z. Jian and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4404–4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Delmas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703137 CrossRef .
C. Delmas, J.-J. Braconnier, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3–4, 165–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, Z. Xu, B. Zahiri, X. Tan, E. M. Lotfabad, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11004–11015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, Q. Wang, Y. Lu, B. Li, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1125–1129 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Jian, X. Wang, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, C. Bommier and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2610–2613 RSC .
D. S. Charles, M. Feygenson, K. Page, J. Neuefeind, W. Xu and X. Teng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Lu, C. Zhao, L. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Shen, J. Zhao, X. Yu, H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, S. Komaba, M. Forsyth, C. Johnson and T. Rojo, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900184 CrossRef .
X. Wu, D. P. Leonard and X. Ji, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5031–5042 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ge and M. Fouletier, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 28–30, 1172–1175 CrossRef .
L. Xue, H. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Xin, K. Park, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9608–9612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Lipson, B. Pan, S. H. Lapidus, C. Liao, J. T. Vaughey and B. J. Ingram, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8442–8447 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, R. Skaletsky and Y. Gofer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 3536–3545 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, A. Markir, L. Ma, Y. Xu, H. Jiang, D. P. Leonard, W. Shin, T. Wu, J. Lu and X. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12640–12645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Licht and D. Peramunage, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, L4–L6 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D.-Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16119 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Tikekar, S. Choudhury, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16114 CrossRef CAS .

          S. U. Falk and A. J. Salkind, Alkaline Storage Batteries, John Wiley, New York,  1969 Search PubMed .
A. K. Manohar, S. Malkhandi, B. Yang, C. Yang, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1209–A1214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and A. Manthiram, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1050–1055 CrossRef .
X. Wu, A. Markir, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, W. Shin and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900911 CrossRef .
R. Attias, M. Salama, B. Hirsch, Y. Goffer and D. Aurbach, Joule, 2019, 3, 27–52 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, Y. Yuan, C. Bommier, X. Wang, L. Ma, D. P. Leonard, M. M. Lerner, R. G. Carter, T. Wu, P. A. Greaney, J. Lu and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13031–13037 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Mizrahi, N. Amir, E. Pollak, O. Chusid, V. Marks, H. Gottlieb, L. Larush, E. Zinigrad and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A103–A109 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, H. Gizbar, A. Schechter, O. Chusid, H. E. Gottlieb, Y. Gofer and I. Goldberg, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A115–A121 CrossRef CAS .
X.-G. Sun, Z. Zhang, H. Y. Guan, C. A. Bridges, Y. Fang, Y.-S. Hu, G. M. Veith and S. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6589–6596 RSC .
B. D. Adams, J. Zheng, X. Ren, W. Xu and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702097 CrossRef .
G.-T. Kim, G. B. Appetecchi, M. Montanino, F. Alessandrini and S. Passerini, ECS Trans., 2010, 25, 127–138 CAS .
I. Shterenberg, M. Salama, H. D. Yoo, Y. Gofer, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A7118–A7128 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. See, K. W. Chapman, L. Zhu, K. M. Wiaderek, O. J. Borkiewicz, C. J. Barile, P. J. Chupas and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 328–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 310–316 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Verbraeken, C. Cheung, E. Suard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 95–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mao, P. De Vidts, R. E. White and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 54–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pohl, A. Antognini, F. Nez, F. D. Amaro, F. Biraben, J. M. R. Cardoso, D. S. Covita, A. Dax, S. Dhawan, L. M. P. Fernandes, A. Giesen, T. Graf, T. W. Hänsch, P. Indelicato, L. Julien, C.-Y. Kao, P. Knowles, E.-O. Le Bigot, Y.-W. Liu, J. A. M. Lopes, L. Ludhova, C. M. B. Monteiro, F. Mulhauser, T. Nebel, P. Rabinowitz, J. M. F. dos Santos, L. A. Schaller, K. Schuhmann, C. Schwob, D. Taqqu, J. F. C. A. Veloso and F. Kottmann, Nature, 2010, 466, 213–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Trasatti and G. Buzzanca, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 29, A1–A5 CrossRef .
R. Schöllhorn, R. Kuhlmann and J. O. Besenhard, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 83–90 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, G. K. Mor, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11312–11316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Pang, M. A. Anderson and T. W. Chapman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Mitchell, W. C. Lo, A. Genc, J. LeBeau and V. Augustyn, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3928–3937 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Xie, K. Tang, C. Wang and C. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11569–11573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Yan, Z. Xiao, C. Liu, Y. Zhang and X. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 205–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, L. Gao, B. Liang, X. Wang, G. Chen, Z. Liu, J. Chao, D. Chen and G. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19904–19910 RSC .
X. Wang, C. Bommier, Z. Jian, Z. Li, R. S. Chandrabose, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, P. A. Greaney and X. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2909–2913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, J. J. Hong, X. Wu, T. W. Surta, Y. Qi, S. Dong, Z. Li, D. P. Leonard, J. J. Holoubek, J. C. Wong, J. J. Razink, X. Zhang and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11556–11559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Emanuelsson, M. Sterby, M. Strømme and M. Sjödin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4828–4834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1974, 328–329 RSC .
C. D. Wessells, M. T. McDowell, S. V. Peddada, M. Pasta, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1688–1694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Qi, J. J. Hong, Z. Li, A. S. Hernandez and X. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13026–13030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Xu, H. Jiang, Z. Wei, J. J. Hong, A. S. Hernandez, F. Du and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3077–3083 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Stuart, US Pat., 4828942,  1989 Search PubMed .
C. Ponce de León, A. Frías-Ferrer, J. González-García, D. A. Szánto and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716–732 CrossRef .
B. Wang, J. A. Maciá-Agulló, D. G. Prendiville, X. Zheng, D. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. W. Boettcher, X. Ji and G. D. Stucky, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1090–A1093 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. Chen, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, X. Lü, C.-J. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu, T. Qing, Y. Wang, O. Borodin, Y. Ren, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nature, 2019, 569, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. B. Armand, in Materials for Advanced Batteries, ed. D. W. Murphy, J. Broadhead and B. C. H. Steele, Springer US, Boston,  1980, pp. 145–161 Search PubMed .
D. Guerard and A. Herold, Carbon, 1975, 13, 337–345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, W. Luo and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11566–11569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, Y. Ma, S. J. Visco and L. C. D. Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, L169–L170 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. L. Billinge and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Commun., 2004, 749–760 RSC .
C. Bommier, T. W. Surta, M. Dolgos and X. Ji, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5888–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jian, C. Bommier, L. Luo, Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Wang, P. A. Greaney and X. Ji, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2314–2320 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Bommier, Z. S. Chong, Z. Jian, T. W. Surta, X. Wang, Z. Xing, J. C. Neuefeind, W. F. Stickle, M. Dolgos, P. A. Greaney and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602894 CrossRef .
C. Bommier, X. Ji and P. A. Greaney, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 658–677 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 3735–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Tucker, L. Kroeck, J. A. Reimer and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1409–A1413 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Pearson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 3533–3539 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2923–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hartmann, C. L. Bender, M. Vračar, A. K. Dürr, A. Garsuch, J. Janek and P. Adelhelm, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 228–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogasawara, A. Débart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801–815 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoo, B. Evanko, X. Wang, M. Romelczyk, A. Taylor, X. Ji, S. W. Boettcher and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9985–9993 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Springer US, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Lv, Y. Tao and Q.-H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1390–1403 RSC .
H. Y. Lee and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 144, 220–223 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lindström, S. Södergren, A. Solbrand, H. Rensmo, J. Hjelm, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7717–7722 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14925–14931 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P.-L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. D. Abruña, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, W. Shin, H. Jiang, X. Wu, Z. Li, J. Holoubek, W. F. Stickle, B. Key, C. Liu, J. Lu, P. Alex Greaney, X. Zhang and X. Ji, Chem, 2019, 5, 1537–1551 CAS .
H. Angerstein-Kozlowska, J. Klinger and B. E. Conway, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 75, 45–60 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, Wiley, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
B. D. Pelatt, J. F. Wager and D. A. Keszler, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 274, 337–351 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Reed, L. A. Curtiss and F. Weinhold, Chem. Rev., 1988, 88, 899–926 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, W. Shin, H. Jiang, X. Wu, W. F. Stickle, G. Chen, J. Lu, P. A. Greaney, F. Du and X. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3227 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1988, 27, 89–112 CrossRef .
C. J. T. Grotthuss, Ann. Chim., 1806, LVIII, 54–74 Search PubMed .
B. Jaselskis and C. E. Moore, Bull. Hist. Chem., 2007, 32, 10 Search PubMed .
M. Thämer, L. D. Marco, K. Ramasesha, A. Mandal and A. Tokmakoff, Science, 2015, 350, 78–82 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Marx, M. E. Tuckerman, J. Hutter and M. Parrinello, Nature, 1999, 397, 601–604 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Wolke, J. A. Fournier, L. C. Dzugan, M. R. Fagiani, T. T. Odbadrakh, H. Knorke, K. D. Jordan, A. B. McCoy, K. R. Asmis and M. A. Johnson, Science, 2016, 354, 1131–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Minch, J. Chem. Educ., 1999, 76, 759 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Shigorin, Spectrochim. Acta, 1959, 14, 198–212 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guthrie, J. Chem. Soc., 1863, 16, 239–244 RSC .
O. Hassel and J. Hvoslef, Acta Chem. Scand., 1954, 8, 873 CrossRef CAS .
A.-C. C. Carlsson, J. Gräfenstein, A. Budnjo, J. L. Laurila, J. Bergquist, A. Karim, R. Kleinmaier, U. Brath and M. Erdélyi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5706–5715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Sannigrahi, T. Kar, B. G. Niyogi, P. Hobza and P. v. R. Schleyer, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 1061–1076 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Z. Hou, W.-T. Xu, X. Chen, H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8178–8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, J. J. Hong, W. Shin, L. Ma, T. Liu, X. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Qi, T. W. Surta, W. Huang, J. Neuefeind, T. Wu, P. A. Greaney, J. Lu and X. Ji, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
P. Novák and J. Desilvestro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 140–144 CrossRef .
K. Sato, M. Noguchi, A. Demachi, N. Oki and M. Endo, Science, 1994, 264, 556–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lazzari and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 773–774 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Sun, Y. Sun and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 449–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Levi, Y. Gofer and D. Aurbach, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 860–868 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, W. Huang, Z. Luo, L. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Li, L. Li, J. Hu, H. Ma and J. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao1761 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kennedy and J. C. Hunter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Reddy and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17059–17062 RSC .
X. Zhao, Z. Zhao-Karger, D. Wang and M. Fichtner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13621–13624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, A. Markir, J. Lu and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6338–6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Q. Liu, C. Jiang, B. Ji, X. Ji, Y. Tang and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019 DOI:10.1002/anie.201814294 .
J. R. Dahn and J. A. Seel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 899–901 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rüdorff and U. Hofmann, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1938, 238, 1–50 CrossRef .
M. Armand and P. Touzain, Mater. Sci. Eng., 1977, 31, 319–329 CrossRef CAS .

          F. P. McCullough, C. A. Levine and R. V. Snelgrove, US Pat., 4830938A,  1989 Search PubMed .
W. Rüdorff and E. Schulze, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1954, 277, 156–171 CrossRef .
W.-S. Huang, B. D. Humphrey and A. G. MacDiarmid, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1986, 82, 2385–2400 RSC .
P. Novák, K. Müller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207–282 CrossRef .
R. T. Carlin, H. C. D. Long, J. Fuller and P. C. Trulove, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L73–L76 CrossRef CAS .
T. Placke, O. Fromm, S. F. Lux, P. Bieker, S. Rothermel, H.-W. Meyer, S. Passerini and M. Winter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1755–A1765 CrossRef CAS .
T. Placke, A. Heckmann, R. Schmuch, P. Meister, K. Beltrop and M. Winter, Joule, 2018, 2, 2528–2550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, N. Chen, R. He, Z. Wang, S. Dai and X. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1751–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Seel and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 892–898 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Read, A. V. Cresce, M. H. Ervin and K. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 617–620 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Tang, F. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502588 CrossRef .
X. Tong, F. Zhang, B. Ji, M. Sheng and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9979–9985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez and X. Ji, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1762–1770 CrossRef .
W.-H. Li, Q.-L. Ning, X.-T. Xi, B.-H. Hou, J.-Z. Guo, Y. Yang, B. Chen and X.-L. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804766 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ishihara, M. Koga, H. Matsumoto and M. Yoshio, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A74–A76 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, Z. Jian, P. K. Waldenmaier, J. W. Palmisano, R. S. Chandrabose, X. Wang, M. M. Lerner, R. G. Carter and X. Ji, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 719–723 CrossRef .
I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, C. Bommier, D. D. Fuller, D. P. Leonard, A. G. Williams and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43311–43315 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Aubrey and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13594–13602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dühnen, R. Nölle, J. Wrogemann, M. Winter and T. Placke, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A5474–A5482 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, Z. Wei, L. Ma, Y. Yuan, J. J. Hong, X. Wu, D. P. Leonard, J. Holoubek, J. J. Razink, W. F. Stickle, F. Du, T. Wu, J. Lu and X. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5286–5291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Tang, F. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502588 CrossRef .
M. Sheng, F. Zhang, B. Ji, X. Tong and Y. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601963 CrossRef .
X.-T. Xi, W.-H. Li, B.-H. Hou, Y. Yang, Z.-Y. Gu and X.-L. Wu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
X.-T. Xi, X. Feng, X.-J. Nie, B.-H. Hou, W.-H. Li, X. Yang, A.-B. Yang, W.-D. Sun and X.-L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 8406–8409 RSC .
L. Fan, Q. Liu, S. Chen, K. Lin, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Small, 2017, 13, 1701011 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Fan, Q. Liu, S. Chen, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602778 CrossRef .
S. Dong, Z. Li, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, H. Jiang, J. Lu, X. Zhang and X. Ji, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 233–239 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weber, M. Genovese, A. J. Louli, S. Hames, C. Martin, I. G. Hill and J. R. Dahn, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 683–689 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Hong, L. Zhu, C. Chen, L. Tang, H. Jiang, B. Jin, T. C. Gallagher, Q. Guo, C. Fang and X. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019 DOI:10.1002/anie.201909324 .
S. Li, M. Jiang, Y. Xie, H. Xu, J. Jia and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706375 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J.-X. Jiang, C. Fang and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097–14099 RSC .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, I. R. Pala, M. Machler, M. F. Burz, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, Science, 2017, 356, 415–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, K. Usui, K. Sodeyama, S. Ko, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Wang, M. Yu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7426–7451 RSC .
M. Yu and X. Feng, Joule, 2019, 3, 338–360 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Xiulei Ji
	Prof. Xiulei Ji graduated from Jilin University with a BSc degree in chemistry in 2003. He obtained his PhD degree from the University of Waterloo in 2009. He was an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of California, Santa Barbara from 2010 to 2012. Dr. Ji is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University. His research interests are design principles of electrochemical energy storage, and materials chemistry in batteries and pseudocapacitors.

Broader context
Societal energy income should ideally come from cost-effective ‘farming’ of renewable sources, e.g., solar, wind, tidal, and geothermal. Energy storage facilities are the “banks” of energy, where the currency is electricity. From energy banks, customers, e.g., electric vehicles, can “cash out” energy anytime and anywhere, and into these banks, people can invest their energy surplus or saving through the smart internet of things. However, we have yet to reach this sustainable energy economy that demands ubiquitous and localized storage solutions. Storage batteries represent the most promising solution to fill the gap in storage needs for the future. Such battery facilities may be installed at the gigawatt scale that the world has never seen. Storage batteries must be competitive in their levelized energy cost compared to the utility electricity price, and these batteries must be safe without facing liability costs. As of now, the battery field may have entered a new research paradigm that entails more holistic considerations. This article enlists five dimensions of factors, namely electrode materials, ion charge carriers, electrolytes, electrode–ion interactions, and battery operation principles. I introduce empirical trends that exemplify the relevance of these considerations. These seemingly intricate considerations are different aspects of chemical reactions taking place in a compartmentalized reactor.


 	Fig. 1  Radar chart showing the required performance in comparison with the ideal cases, where red is for power batteries and blue is for storage batteries; the dashed light-blue line of the octagon marks the ideal scenarios.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Five dimensions to consider when constructing a new paradigm of storage battery chemistries. The permutations of the five dimensions can generate 10 research planes, where three of them are shown as examples. The knowledge of LIBs is built in the plane defined by electrode materials × electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 3  A map of ion charge carriers covered in battery research, where they are arranged resembling where they are in the periodic table, where small fonts indicate low earth abundancy.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  CV curves of the WO3·0.89H2O electrode at a scan rate of 3 mV s−1 (top) and the in situ EQCM results of WO3·0.89H2O (bottom). Blue: cathodic scan; red: anodic scan.187 Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  The voltage curve for Li+ insertion and extraction of LixMn2O4.209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) GCD potential profiles of the first discharge–charge cycle of a K–O2 battery in an electrolyte of 0.5 M KPF6 in 1,2-dimethoxyethane. The K metal electrode was replaced by a fresh one after the first discharge process. (b) CV curves for oxygen reduction and oxidation on a glassy carbon electrode in oxygen-saturated acetonitrile containing 0.1 M TBAPF6, LiClO4, or KPF6 (three-electrode cell setup). Current density for the LiClO4 electrolyte is enlarged three times for clarity. A good reversibility of the O2/O2− couple can be observed with tetrabutylammonium cation (TBA+) due to its large size and thus low charge density.212 Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  The GCD profiles of sulfur electrodes with Cu2+, Pb2+, Mn2+, and Li+ as charge carriers.149 Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2019 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and c) CV curves from 1 to 8 mV s−1 for NH4+ and K+ storage, respectively. (b and d) The b values from the logarithm of the cathodic peak current vs. the logarithm of scan rate.219 Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The first GCD profiles of VO300 in (NH4)2SO4 electrolyte. (b) Ex situ FTIR spectra at selected SOC. The bottom spectrum was collected after potassiation to −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (c and d) Plots of charge density difference resulting from the host/guest interaction. From the reduced V2O5 electrode in panel (c), a small amount of charge is transferred from V (the yellow lobes on the vanadium) through the OV bond, accumulating charges in a H⋯OV bond (blue cloud). Panel (d) shows the lack of CT for the insertion of potassium atoms (purple). The charge density isosurfaces are ±0.005 e Å−3 with blue surfaces for bounding electron-accumulated regions and yellow surfaces for regions of electron depletion.226 Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) DFT calculations of the water orientations in a 3 × 1 × 1 super cell of CuFe–TBA. (b) CV curve of the CuFe–TBA electrode for (de)insertion of proton. (c) GCD profiles of CuFe–TBA at 1, 20, 200, 500 and 1000C rate (1C = 65 mA g−1).245 Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic showing how four fundamental principles of battery operation are constructed. A pairs with a to form a cation RCB; B couples with b to build an anion RCB; A pairs with b, which leads to a DIB; B couples with a to be an RDIB.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematics of four types of battery configurations. (a) Cation RCB, (b) Anion RCB, (c) DIB, and (d) RDIB.256	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
