Throwing light on platinized carbon nanostructured composites for hydrogen generation  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE02444C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02444C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4087-4094Throwing light on platinized carbon nanostructured composites for hydrogen generation

        
          
            Priti A. 
            Mangrulkar
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Abhay V. 
            Kotkondawar
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sumanta 
            Mukherjee
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Meenal V. 
            Joshi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nitin 
            Labhsetwar
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            D. D. 
            Sarma
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Sadhana S. 
            Rayalu
          
        
      *ab
aCSIR-Network of Institutes for Solar Energy (CSIR-NISE), India
bEnvironmental Materials Division, CSIR-NEERI, Nehru Marg, Nagpur-440020, India. E-mail: s_rayalu@neeri.res.in
cSolid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012, India. E-mail: sarma@sscu.iisc.ernet.in
Received 
      1st August 2014
    , Accepted 22nd September 2014First published on 22nd September 2014AbstractIn the present study, we have synthesised carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) through a relatively simple process using a hydrocarbon precursor. These synthesised CNPs in the form of elongated spherules and/or agglomerates of 30–55 nm were further used as a support to anchor platinum nanoparticles. The broad light absorption (300–700 nm) and a facile charge transfer property of CNPs in addition to the plasmonic property of Pt make these platinized carbon nanostructures (CNPs/Pt) a promising candidate in photocatalytic water splitting. The photocatalytic activity was evaluated using ethanol as the sacrificial donor. The photocatalyst has shown remarkable activity for hydrogen production under UV-visible light while retaining its stability for nearly 70 h. The broadband absorption of CNPs, along with the Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) effect of PtNPs singly and in composites has pronounced influence on the photocatalytic activity, which has not been explored earlier. The steady rate of hydrogen was observed to be 20 μmol h−1 with an exceptional cumulative hydrogen yield of 32.16 mmol h−1 g−1 observed for CNPs/Pt, which is significantly higher than that reported for carbon-based systems.

Broader context
Solar energy can be the answer to the questions raised on fulfilling the world's energy demands, subject to its efficient utilization. The solar energy conversion to hydrogen mediated through photocatalytic splitting of water appears to be an ambitious yet positive step in this pursuit. Decades of extensive research in this regard has enriched the database on the various materials explored so far. The focus has now shifted towards carbon-based nanomaterials, which are well known for their excellent light absorption and charge transfer properties. The carbon nanostructures, either singly or in combination with other semiconducting materials are expected to enhance hydrogen generation by virtue of their photothermal effect. They also facilitate the effective dispersion of metal nanoparticles. This research article is an attempt to exploit the synergistic effect of both carbon and platinum in their nano form by exploiting their photothermal and plasmonic properties, respectively.

Introduction
Harvesting solar energy for its effective conversion into a chemical fuel carrier like hydrogen continues to intrigue researchers worldwide. From the viewpoint of efficient solar energy conversion, the pre-requisite being visible light activity, high quantum efficiency and long term stability of the photocatalyst. In this context, the recent research scenario is driven towards the quest for new and advanced materials, and it is largely centered on nano-structured materials. This is essentially because the particle size of the materials when scaled down, can lead to exciting changes in their properties, consequently making way for their application in various fields. Amongst several nanostructured materials that are being reported for various applications, carbon based nanomaterials have created their niche.
The different allotropes of carbon namely – graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes, and fullerenes have found use in many applications such as catalyst supports,1,2 adsorbents,3,4 batteries,5 transistors,6 diodes,7 sensors,8,9etc. The sp2-hybridized state of elemental carbon possesses structural variations that can range from being amorphous to being highly crystalline. After the discovery of C60 molecules and other fullerenes10 followed by carbon nano tubes by Iijima in 1991,11 this field has generated interest and has witnessed considerable growth. Belonging to this rich family of carbonaceous materials, the carbon nanoparticle (CNP) is an important member.
There are several routes, both physical as well as chemical, by which these CNPs may be synthesized. Physical routes include laser ablation of graphite or high radiation based creation of point defects in diamonds. On the other hand, chemical routes include processes like carbonization of carbohydrates, thermal decomposition of small molecules, pyrolysis of polymers, etc.
These carbon nanoparticles are usually formed as a result of incomplete combustion of either liquid or gaseous hydrocarbons. They are non-fluorescent, hydrophobic particles with sizes ranging typically from 20–800 nm. On further purification and functionalization, these particles may become hydrophilic and also exhibit fluorescence.12 Although, the fluorescent CNPs have been widely exploited for bioimaging and sensing applications, the non-fluorescent particles have been poorly explored.
The literature investigating the role of carbon-based nanostructures in the field of photocatalysis is available. In most of these reports, carbon nanostructures have been used in conjunction with a semiconductor like TiO2, CdS, Fe2O3. In these photocatalytic systems, their role in the photocatalytic reaction has been observed to be varied ranging from being a sensitizer, a support or even a co-catalyst.13–19 Recently, Akimoto et al. have demonstrated the generation of hydrogen by charcoal powder by laser irradiation.20 They concluded that the carbon powder acted as a sacrificial agent in the photoreaction. Irrespective of the role of carbon nanostructures in a photocatalytic reaction, they are known to enhance it significantly which may be because of several reasons. (1) They suppress the electron–hole recombination reaction and aid in the efficient shuttling of electrons. (2) They can act as sensitizers by harvesting light and even lead to an extension of the absorption maxima by forming chemical bonds when present with semiconductors. (3) Owing to their hydrophobicity, they can help in uniform adsorption of organic substrates (or organic donors) thereby facilitating the reaction. (4) As a support, they can help in efficient dispersion of semiconductors as well as metal nanoparticles. (5) The most striking feature of carbon nanostructures is their ability to absorb electromagnetic radiation particularly in the infrared region. This absorption of light leads to the generation of a significant amount of heat in addition to the induction of phonon resonances.21 Carbon nanostructures can thus either singly or in combination with other semiconducting materials are expected to enhance hydrogen generation by virtue of their photothermal effect.
All the aforementioned factors in addition to the relatively inexpensive nature of carbon nanomaterials make them attractive candidates in photocatalysis. Recently, a report stated that in contrast to the graphitic phase, carbon nanostructures exhibit metallic or semiconducting properties, which make them useful in the field of catalysis as they aid in the charge transfer process.22 Exploring along these lines, in our present investigation, we have synthesized non-fluorescent carbon nanostructures through the combustion of a hydrocarbon precursor (vegetable oil). The synthesis procedure is relatively simple and green. Furthermore, these carbon nanostructures were loaded with platinum nanoparticles via a photodeposition method. The photodeposition route ensures high deposition of the noble metal and also eliminates the calcination step. The resulting platinized carbon nanostructured composite was evaluated in photocatalytic water splitting reaction, using ethanol as the sacrificial donor.
Experimental
Materials and method
The hydrocarbon (soybean oil) used as a precursor was purchased from the local market and was used without further purification. Chloro platinic acid (H2PtCl6·6H2O) and ethanol were procured from E-Merck, India Ltd.
Synthesis of CNPs
CNPs were synthesized by bringing about the combustion of the hydrocarbon precursor (soybean oil). In a typical procedure, the precursor for CNPs was taken in a container and a cotton wick was completely immersed in it. When the cotton wick soaked with the oil was burned, the hydrocarbons made up of hydrogen and carbon combine with oxygen to form water and carbon dioxide. The hydrogen burns more quickly than the carbon and so there is an area of the wick, which is carbon rich. A brass plate was kept close to the wick and the soot particles typically of 30–55 nm sizes were collected on the brass plate.
Photodeposition of Pt on CNPs
A platinized carbon composite was formed by photodeposition of platinum nanoparticles onto CNPs. This takes place simultaneously during the course of the photocatalytic reaction in the presence of ethanol and water. The PtCl4− ions get reduced to Pt, which was substantiated by XPS analysis.
Characterization
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were performed on a VSW spectrometer at a pressure of <1 × 10−9 torr with an Al Kα X-ray source (photon energy 1486.6 eV) at a pass energy of 20 eV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements were performed on a Technai T-20 operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Photocatalysts in a powdered form were dispersed in ethanol and sonicated in an ultrasound bath for 15 min. A few drops of this suspension were then cast on a carbon coated Cu grid. The samples were dried under vacuum overnight before analysis. The amount of Pt loaded onto the CNPs was estimated using an ICP-MS (Perkin Elmer NexIon 300) operating at an RF power of 1550 W and with plasma and carrier gas flow rates of 15.0 L min−1 and 1.2 L min−1, respectively. Calibration was performed through standard solutions with the calibration coefficient of 0.9998. Samples were analysed after a suitable dilution with deionized water (Milli Q 18.0 Ω). CHNS analysis was carried out on a Variol EL III CHNS.
Photocatalytic hydrogen production

Offline evaluations. 
The photocatalytic activity was evaluated for hydrogen production through offline evaluations. A stock solution of 0.1 mg mL−1 of CNPs was prepared by dispersing 1 mg of synthesized CNPs in 10 mL of ethanol and further sonicating it for 20 min. Aliquots from this solution were then taken depending upon the amount of catalyst desired in a photocatalytic reaction. In a typical experiment, a known amount of the photocatalyst was taken in a 20 mL borosilicate vial containing 10 mL of water. Ethanol was added as a sacrificial donor. A known amount of Pt precursor solution was added to it. The vial was properly sealed and evacuated. The reaction mixture was then illuminated using two tungsten filament lamps of 200 W each for 2 h. The evolved gas was analysed on a gas chromatograph through manual injections. Hydrogen evolved was estimated through a standard calibration curve.


Online evaluations. 
The photocatalytic experiments were carried out in a borosilicate glass reactor (750 mL) with an inner irradiation reaction cell under ambient temperature (25 °C). A 400 W high-pressure mercury lamp was used as an illumination source. The IR fraction of the illumination source was filtered as a result of the cold water circulating through the illumination well. In a typical photocatalytic experiment for hydrogen production, 6 mL stock solution of the carbon nanoparticles (0.1 mg mL−1) were dispersed in an aqueous solution (300 mL) containing ethanol (5%) as the sacrificial donor. A known amount of Pt was added to it. The photoreactor was completely covered by aluminium foil to avoid losses due to light scattering. Prior to the exposure to the light, the reaction mixture was thoroughly evacuated by purging nitrogen, ensuring the complete removal of oxygen. After regular intervals (2 h), the amount of hydrogen generated was evaluated through an automatic gas sampling valve of a gas chromatograph equipped with a TCD and 5A molecular sieve column.

Results and discussion
Characterization
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to characterize chemical compositions of the as-synthesized and Pt loaded CNPs. XPS spectra collected for C 1s and N 1s from CNPs are shown in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b, respectively. We decompose these spectra to characterize different constituents present in the sample. Decomposition of the C 1s spectra obtained from CNPs shows the presence of four different components. The C-1 component spectrum with a binding energy (BE) of 284.7 eV is associated with aliphatic and aromatic C, i.e. C with no N or O species in the surroundings, present in the CNP sample.23–25 The components C-2 and C-3 with BEs of 286.3 eV and 287.6 eV are associated with C–O25 (and CN23) and CO25 kinds of species present at the surface of the CNPs. The higher BE component C-4 at a BE of 290.4 eV can be assigned either to the presence of O–CO23 or aromatic CC π bonds (π–π* transition).26 The obtained intensity ratio between these four component spectra is (C-1:C-2:C-3:C-4 = 1:0.2:0.12:0.21). The C 1s spectra obtained from the Pt loaded CNP/Pt sample shown in Fig. 1c also comprises of these four species with a relative intensity ratio of 1:0.33:0.16:0.12 between the components C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4. The N 1s spectrum obtained from the CNP sample is weak and broad. In order to keep the analysis meaningful, we have decomposed the N 1s spectra with a minimum number of component spectrum. The spectral decomposition shows the presence of two components having BEs of 400.9 eV and 402.6 eV. The lower BE component was assigned to the presence of CN bonds27,28 whereas the higher BE component might be coming from NO27 or protonated –NH227 kinds of species. The estimated number density ratio between N and C in the CNP sample is around 2.4%. Pt 4f XPS spectra collected from the Pt loaded CNPs/Pt sample are shown in Fig. 1d. The decomposition of the Pt 4f spectra shows the presence of three types of Pt species. The higher intensity components having spin–orbit split BEs of 71.4 eV and 74.8 eV suggest the predominant presence of metallic Pt(0) states.25,26 The other two higher BE components (Pt-2 and Pt-3) are associated with the presence of Pt(II)O and Pt(IV)O2 species in the sample.25,26 The number ratio between loaded Pt with respect to C is 1.2%, obtained from the analysis of the area under the corresponding photoemission signal. The morphology of the photocatalyst was observed through Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The TEM micrographs of CNPs (Fig. 2) show the presence of clusters of aggregated carbon nanoparticles. It also shows that fusion and interconnection of primary particles take place, giving rise to agglomerates. The carbon nanoparticles are in the form of elongated spherules. Fig. 2 shows TEM micrographs of CNPs/Pt. It can be clearly seen that the Pt particles are homogeneously dispersed on the external surface of the CNP owing to their photodeposition.
 Fig. 1  (a) C 1s and (b) N 1s X-ray photoelectron spectra obtained from the as-synthesized CNP sample. (c and d) Show the XPS spectra obtained for C 1s and Pt 4f from the CNPs/Pt sample. In all the figures black open circles represent the experimental spectra. Various component spectra obtained from the decomposition of the experimental spectra are shown as magenta, green and blue and wine dotted lines. The red solid lines are the overall fit whereas orange lines show the residues of such fits. 
 Fig. 2  Transmitted electron micrographs of the as-synthesized CNPs and Pt loaded CNP/Pt sample. 
Elemental analysis of the CNPs revealed that they mainly contain elemental carbon C = 91.95%, H = 0.053%, N = 0.045% and S = 0%.
The UV-DRS spectrum of CNPs/Pt reveals a broadband absorption from 300–700 nm (Fig. 3). The broadband absorption observed in addition to the absorption of CNP in the UV region at about 340 nm makes it a promising material capable of exploiting the solar radiation from the UV-NIR region.
 Fig. 3  UV-DRS spectra of CNPs/Pt. 
Photodeposition of Pt
Photodeposition of PtNPs on CNPs is a pivotal step in the formation of platinized carbon nanostructured composites (CNPs/Pt). It therefore, becomes imperative to monitor the deposition of these PtNPs as a function of time. To study this aspect, experiments were carried out wherein, a known amount of CNPs was taken in water and to them Pt and ethanol were added. These were then irradiated with light for different time intervals. Table 1 summarises the photodeposition of Pt as a function of time.
Table 1 Photodeposition of PtNPs on CNPs as a function of time




S. No.
Time (min)
%Deposition of Pt




1.
15
95.1


2.
30
98.9


3.
45
99.1


4.
60
99.4


5.
120
99.9




It is evident that nearly 99% of PtCl4− ions get photoreduced in the form of PtNPs within 45 minutes of its exposure to light. The formation of platinum nanoparticles in the presence of ethanol and water takes place through a series of steps as reported earlier by Harada et al.29 Initially, reduction of PtCl6− ions to PtCl4−, which is relatively a fast process, takes place under photoirradiation.PtCl62− + RCH2OH + hν → PtCl63− + RCH2O + H+PtCl63− → PtCl52− + Cl−PtCl52− + ˙RCH2O → PtCl42− + RCHO + HClPtCl52− → PtCl62− + PtCl42−
Further reduction of PtCl42− to Pt in a zerovalent state is relatively a slow process, achieved in two steps. In the first step, Cl dissociates from PtCl42−, followed by the reduction of Pt2+ to Pt0.
Optimization of reaction parameters
There are several parameters that can influence the photocatalytic hydrogen yield like the photocatalytic dose, illumination intensity, irradiation time, presence and type of sacrificial donor, etc. and therefore it is of utmost importance to study the effect of these parameters and optimize them for achieving the maximum hydrogen yield. The effect of these parameters was studied through offline evaluations mentioned earlier and is discussed in detail below.
Photocatalytic dose
The amount of photocatalyst used in a photocatalytic reaction is one of the important parameters as it directly influences the hydrogen yield. The amount of CNPs was varied in the range of 0.01–0.06 mg per 10 mL (Fig. 4) of water keeping all the other experimental conditions constant. The highest hydrogen yield of 7525 mmol h−1 g−1 (a hydrogen evolution rate of 150.5 μmol h−1) of the photocatalyst was observed at a photocatalytic dose of 0.02 mg per 10 mL of water. At a lower photocatalytic dose, the hydrogen yield could be lower due to a less number of active sites, whereas with an increase in the photocatalytic dose, there is a decrease in the optical path length. This reduction in the effective intensity of photons leads to a decrease in photogenerated electrons and holes, consequently leading to a decreased activity at higher doses.
 Fig. 4  Effect of a photocatalytic dose on hydrogen generation by CNPs/Pt (time: 2 h, illumination: 200 W × 2 tungsten lamps, and water–ethanol – 20:1. 
Illumination intensity
In a photocatalytic reaction, the amount of irradiated photon catalyses the reaction and hence the photocatalytic activity strongly depends on it. The illumination intensity was varied, by varying the wattages of tungsten filament lamps (100 W, 200 W and 400 W). It was observed that with the increase in illumination intensity the hydrogen yield increased (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Effect of illumination intensity on hydrogen generation by CNPs/Pt (photocatalytic dose = 0.02 mg per 10 mL, time: 2 h, and water–ethanol – 20:1). 
The significant increase in the hydrogen evolution rate may be attributed to several factors. External illumination with 400 W leads to heating of the system, which facilitates hydrogen generation. A temperature of 80 °C has been observed. This enhanced rate cannot be related only to induced reaction steps, but can also be rationalized in terms of the following considerations:
(1) With an increase in the temperature, the solubility of oxygen decreases.
(2) More facile desorption of intermediate species adsorbed on the surface.
(3) Acceleration of “Dark” catalytic reaction on the surface of the catalyst.
The last factor can contribute significantly through the reaction between photogenerated oxygen adsorbed on the surface of CNP with a sacrificial donor employed like ethanol and other intermediates. The increased temperature probably leads to higher reaction rates between the photogenerated oxygen (holes, super oxides, and intermediate oxidants) and the sacrificial donor with the consequent increase in the photoinduced hydrogen production.
Sacrificial donor
Water splitting is an uphill reaction and not thermodynamically favourable. Moreover, the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes further affect the photocatalytic efficiency. Sacrificial donors are generally added which act as hole scavengers thereby preventing the recombination reaction and consequently, increasing the photocatalytic activity. The effect of the sacrificial donor was studied by varying the sacrificial donors. The highest hydrogen yield was obtained where ethanol was used as the sacrificial donor followed by mono ethanolamine and methanol as shown in Fig. 6. In the case of alcohol–water mixtures, it is reported that the interaction of valence band holes with alcohol and water lead to the formation of H+ leading to an increased hydrogen yield as per the following reactions:302h+ + H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 or H+ + OH2h+ + C2H5OH → 2H+ + CH3CHO
 Fig. 6  Effect of varying the sacrificial donors (photocatalytic dose = 0.02 mg per 10 mL, time: 2 h, illumination: 200 W × 2 tungsten lamps, and water–ethanol – 20:1). 
As a result of these interactions, the intermediates (acetaldehyde) that are consequently formed may further lead to the formation of protons, which are finally reduced to hydrogen at the reduction site of the metal.
Comparison of CNPs, PtNPs and CNPs/Pt
To illustrate the role of each of the components of the synthesized photocatalyst and to understand the underlying mechanism, we compared the photocatalytic activity of each of the involved components individually as well as in combination with each other. An identical set of experiments was carried out using only CNPs, only PtNPs, an admixture of PtNPs and CNPs and platinized carbon nanostructured composites. The results are as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of CNPs, PtNPs and CNPs/Pt. 
The enhanced activity of the platinized carbon nanostructured composite is attributed to the Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) effect of the platinum nanoparticles photodeposited on the surface of CNPs. There are three independent energy transfer processes that govern the SPR effect, thereby increasing the concentration of charge carriers. These are SPR mediated charge transfer from the metal to the semiconductor, near field electromagnetic radiation and scattering mechanism.31 It is known that if the involved components, in this case, the metal nanostructures (PtNPs) and the semiconductors (CNPs) are in close proximity with each other, then all the three mechanisms play a role in enhancing the photocatalytic activity. However, if some distance separates them, then only the near field electromagnetic and scattering mechanism may be the reason behind the improved activity. Also, with an increasing distance from the surface, the effect may significantly decrease. The above results are a clear indication of these facts.
In the case of a PtNP + CNP admixture, where first the PtNPs were formed and then mixed with CNPs, both the nanoparticles are not in close contact with each other. However, in the case of CNPs/Pt, the PtNPs get photodeposited onto the CNPs and hence are in close proximity. This facilitates effective charge transfer between them and also helps in the concentration of these charge carriers through scattering and near field electromagnetic radiation mechanisms. As far as the significantly lower activity of individual components are concerned (CNPs & PtNPs), several studies have already proven that the composites exhibit higher photoactivity as compared to their pure counterparts.
Photocatalytic activity
The photocatalytic activity of the platinized carbon nanostructured composite was evaluated for hydrogen production under UV-Vis irradiation (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  An experimental setup for online photocatalytic evaluations. 
A steady hydrogen evolution rate of 20 μmol h−1 was observed as the reaction progressed for 24 h. Fig. 9 shows the time dependency of hydrogen evolution observed. It is evident that there is a steady increase in the hydrogen evolution with time and no apparent decline was observed up to 24 h. The total amount of hydrogen that was produced after 24 h was 0.44 mmol (9.856 mL). The stability of the catalysts was also monitored in a separate experiment and the photocatalyst showed stability up to 70 h, which is quite significant in terms of solar hydrogen production.
 Fig. 9  Hydrogen evolution by CNPs/Pt as a function of time. 
Photothermal activity vs. photocatalytic activity
A marked difference was observed in the hydrogen evolution rate in the case of offline and online evaluations. There are a number of factors that may contribute to this. Apart from the difference in the reactor configuration and reaction volume, the obvious difference lies in the source of illumination and temperature. While in the case of vials, the illumination source is a tungsten filament lamp, which constitutes 85% of IR radiation, 15–20% of visible radiation and 1% of UV radiation; the high-pressure mercury lamp has 45% visible radiation. There is also a difference in the reaction temperature between the two cases. In the case of vials, the temperature is in the range of 70–80 °C, while in the case of an inner radiation cell; the temperature is maintained close to ambient (25 °C). However, it needs to be borne in mind that despite the temperature remaining close to ambient, the photocatalytic activity is reasonably good (20 μmol h−1). This maybe attributed to the SPR effect of PtNPs and carbon nanostructures which facilitates localized heating, presumably compensating well for the temperature maintained at 25 °C. It is possible, that since carbon is known to be a good absorber, it absorbs IR radiation significantly which may lead to a rise in temperature in the case of vials. In addition to this, the localized heating aids in enhancing the hydrogen evolution rate by virtue of the thermal effect as discussed earlier under the effect of illumination intensity. To substantiate the effect of localized heating, a simple experiment of evaporation of water by CNP, CNPs/Pt and PtNPs under solar light was carried out, wherein CNPs/Pt showed the highest evaporation of water illustrating the influence of localized heating as reported by others as well for different nanoparticles.32 Efforts were undertaken to replicate the system under photothermal conditions similar to that observed in the case of borosilicate vials (offline evaluations), however, the present system showed a hydrogen evolution rate which was significantly lower which was ascribed to the volatilization of the sacrificial donor (ethanol). It is also envisaged to design reactors wherein the increase in the temperature can be monitored independent of the pre-set temperature of 20 °C presently required in the system due to the use of a mercury vapour lamp.
Plausible mechanism
Pt, which is deposited on the surface of CNPs during the course of a photocatalytic reaction enhances the photocatalytic activity by acting as a co-catalyst as well as due to the SPR effect exhibited by it.
Typical steps taking place during the reaction are as follows:
(1) On illumination of CNPs with a light source, there is a charge separation leading to the formation of photogenerated electrons and holes. The electron migrates to the conduction band leaving the hole in the valence band.
(2) As the Fermi energy levels of Pt are more negative than the conduction band potential of CNPs, transition of conduction band electrons from CNPs to Pt takes place.
(3) Pt, which was added along with the catalyst, is photodeposited on the surface of CNPs by the electrons present in the conduction band of CNP.
(4) Ethanol added as the sacrificial donor helps in suppressing the recombination reaction by quenching the holes.
(5) The protons on the surface of Pt are finally reduced to hydrogen. Pt is involved in different energy transfer mechanisms, which significantly enhances the photocatalytic activity.
Efforts are being made to illustrate the SPR effect of Pt in enhancing the photocatalytic activity of CNPs. The possible rationalization could be as follows: Pt acts as a sensitizer and absorbs the light in the UV-Vis range. However, due to the energetically unfavourable condition, the electrons generated are not transferred leading to localized heating. This may lead to increased charge formation with a consequent increase in the photocatalytic activity. Also, two other energy transfer mechanisms which probably play some role are as follows: (i) interaction of CNPs with the strong electric fields generated by the Pt due to SPR. Due to these intense electric fields, the number of photogenerated electrons and holes increases and (ii) scattering of photons by plasmonic Pt helps in increasing the effective photon path length, in turn increasing the number of photogenerated electrons and holes These two effects probably increase the hydrogen evolution rate.
Conclusions
In summary, platinized carbon nanostructured composites were successfully prepared by the combustion of a hydrocarbon precursor followed by photodeposition of platinum nanoparticles on carbon nanostructures. The CNP matrix helps in efficient dispersion of platinum nanoparticles and this proximity of PtNPs with CNPs aids in enhancing the photocatalytic activity through the SPR effect. Temperature has a pronounced effect on the photoactivity of platinized carbon nanostructured composites. A steady hydrogen rate of 20 μmol h−1, aqueous stability as well as the inexpensive nature of carbon make this photocatalyst promising.
Acknowledgements
The authors would sincerely like to acknowledge CSIR-Network Project (NWP-56) for financial assistance. The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr S. R. Wate, Director, CSIR-NEERI for his encouragement and guidance during the course of this work. The authors would also like to thank Dr Manaswita Nag for providing assistance during TEM analysis at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.
Notes and references
H. Yoon, S. Ko and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1468 RSC .
F. Rodríguez-reinoso, Carbon, 1998, 36(3), 159 CrossRef .
H. Wang, A. Keller and F. Li, J. Environ. Eng., 2010, 135(10), 1075 CrossRef .
X. Rex, C. Chena, M. Nagatsu and X. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 395 CrossRef .
B. Gao, C. Bower, J. Lorentzen, L. Fleming, A. Kleinhammes, X. Tang, L. M. cNeil, Y. Wu and O. Zhou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327, 69 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Zhou, J. Kong and H. J. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 3 Search PubMed .
D. Vairavapandian, P. Vichchulada and M. Lay, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 626, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sinha, J. Ma and J. T. W. Yeow, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6(3), 573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kroto, J. Heath, S. O'Brien, R. Curl and R. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., 2007, 46, 6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dai, T. Peng, D. Ke and B. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 125603 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Zhao, S. Kang, P. Yao, X. Li and J. Mu, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 239–242, 1686 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antoinietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chai, T. Peng, P. Zeng and X. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1179 RSC .
A. Ye, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 969 CAS .
A. Suryavanshi, P. Dhanasekaran, D. Mhamane, S. Kelkar, S. Patil, N. Gupta and S. Ogale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(12), 9584 CrossRef .
I. Akimoto, K. Maeda and N. Ozaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18281 CAS .
E. Graham, C. Macneill and N. Levi-Polyachenko, Nano LIFE, 2000, 35, 3523 Search PubMed .
P. Kamat, The Electrochemical Society Interface, 2006, 15(1), 45 CAS .
S. C. Ray, A. Saha, N. R. Jana and R. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18546 CAS .
D. Solomon, J. Lehmann, J. Wang, J. Kinyangi, K. Heymann, Y. Lu, S. Wirick and C. Jacobsen, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 438, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Shukla, A. Hamnett, A. Roy, S. R. Barman, D. D. Sarma, V. Alderucci, L. Pino and N. Giordano, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 352, 337 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. AricÒ, V. Antonucci, N. Giordano, A. K. Shukla, M. K. Ravikumar, A. Roy, S. R. Barman and D. D. Sarma, J. Power Sources, 1995, 50, 295 CrossRef .
A. P. Dementjev, A. de Graaf, M. C. M. van de Sanden, K. I. Maslakov, A. V. Naumkin and A. A. Serov, Dimond Relat. Mater., 2000, 9, 1904 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rossi, B. Andre, A. van Veen, P. E. Mijnarends, H. Schut, F. Labohm, H. Dunlop, M. P. Delplancke and K. Hubbard, J. Mater. Res., 1994, 9, 2440 CrossRef CAS .
M. Harada and H. Einaga, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Patsoura, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, A. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(1), 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar energy can be the answer to the questions raised on fulfilling the world's energy demands, subject to its efficient utilization. The solar energy conversion to hydrogen mediated through photocatalytic splitting of water appears to be an ambitious yet positive step in this pursuit. Decades of extensive research in this regard has enriched the database on the various materials explored so far. The focus has now shifted towards carbon-based nanomaterials, which are well known for their excellent light absorption and charge transfer properties. The carbon nanostructures, either singly or in combination with other semiconducting materials are expected to enhance hydrogen generation by virtue of their photothermal effect. They also facilitate the effective dispersion of metal nanoparticles. This research article is an attempt to exploit the synergistic effect of both carbon and platinum in their nano form by exploiting their photothermal and plasmonic properties, respectively.


 	Fig. 1  (a) C 1s and (b) N 1s X-ray photoelectron spectra obtained from the as-synthesized CNP sample. (c and d) Show the XPS spectra obtained for C 1s and Pt 4f from the CNPs/Pt sample. In all the figures black open circles represent the experimental spectra. Various component spectra obtained from the decomposition of the experimental spectra are shown as magenta, green and blue and wine dotted lines. The red solid lines are the overall fit whereas orange lines show the residues of such fits.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transmitted electron micrographs of the as-synthesized CNPs and Pt loaded CNP/Pt sample.	 

 	Fig. 3  UV-DRS spectra of CNPs/Pt.	 

1.	15	95.1
2.	30	98.9
3.	45	99.1
4.	60	99.4
5.	120	99.9
PtCl62− + RCH2OH + hν → PtCl63− + RCH2O + H+
PtCl63− → PtCl52− + Cl−
PtCl52− + ˙RCH2O → PtCl42− + RCHO + HCl
PtCl52− → PtCl62− + PtCl42−

 	Fig. 4  Effect of a photocatalytic dose on hydrogen generation by CNPs/Pt (time: 2 h, illumination: 200 W × 2 tungsten lamps, and water–ethanol – 20:1.	 

 	Fig. 5  Effect of illumination intensity on hydrogen generation by CNPs/Pt (photocatalytic dose = 0.02 mg per 10 mL, time: 2 h, and water–ethanol – 20:1).	 
2h+ + H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 or H+ + OH
2h+ + C2H5OH → 2H+ + CH3CHO

 	Fig. 6  Effect of varying the sacrificial donors (photocatalytic dose = 0.02 mg per 10 mL, time: 2 h, illumination: 200 W × 2 tungsten lamps, and water–ethanol – 20:1).	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of CNPs, PtNPs and CNPs/Pt.	 

 	Fig. 8  An experimental setup for online photocatalytic evaluations.	 

 	Fig. 9  Hydrogen evolution by CNPs/Pt as a function of time.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
