Oxidative sorption of arsenite from water by iron: a mechanistic perspective   - Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EW00522K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EW00522K
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2022, 8, 2466-2490Oxidative sorption of arsenite from water by iron: a mechanistic perspective†

        
          
            Puthiya Veetil 
            Nidheesh
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Govindaraj 
            Divyapriya
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Elizabeth B. 
            Cerkez
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ashitha 
            Gopinath
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tuhin 
            Banerji
          
        
      de and 

        
          
            Daniel R. 
            Strongin
          
        
      c
aEnvironmental Impact and Sustainability Division, CSIR National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India. E-mail: pv_nidheesh@neeri.res.in
bInstitute of Robotics and Intelligent System (IRIS), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, CH-8092, Switzerland
cDepartment of Chemistry, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA
dR.D. Aga Research Technology and Innovation Centre, Thermax Limited, Pune 411019, India
eMumbai Zonal Centre, CSIR National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Worli, Mumbai 400018, India
Received 
      8th July 2022
    , Accepted 24th August 2022First published on 12th September 2022AbstractSustenance of life without potable water is unquestionable among all communities inhabiting the earth. Reports of the past few decades showcase the alarming contamination levels of arsenic in groundwater arising from both natural and anthropogenic sources, where the complete removal is still a topic of debate. Arsenite (As(III)) is considered a more potent form of arsenic as it predominantly exists as a neutral species in natural water (pH of 6–9) making the removal process challenging. However, under the same pH conditions, the oxidized form, arsenate (As(V)), exists as a negatively charged species, allowing removal via adsorption, precipitation, or coagulation processes. This fundamental property of arsenic necessitates the conversion of arsenite to arsenate by various oxidation techniques to enhance removal from contaminated waters. To this end, iron and iron-related compounds have gained immense attention as oxidizing agents in the water treatment industry due to their natural abundance and reactivity with arsenic. This review is devoted to the discussion of the mechanisms pertaining to various iron and iron-based compounds during the oxidative adsorption of arsenite. Moreover, the review provides insight into the different technologies that can utilize iron and iron-based minerals for the elimination of arsenic from water.

Water impact
Arsenite (As(III)) is considered a more potent form of arsenic as it predominantly exists as a neutral species in natural water (pH of 6–9) making the removal process challenging. This fundamental property of arsenic necessitates the conversion of arsenite to arsenate by various oxidation techniques to enhance removal from contaminated waters. To this end, iron and iron-related compounds have gained immense attention as oxidizing agents in the water treatment industry due to their natural abundance and reactivity with arsenic.

1. Introduction
Life on this planet is unsustainable if fresh water sources are depleted unexpectedly or gradually, thus preserving this precious resource is essential for a sustainable future. Out of the different freshwater sources, groundwater is the primarily preferred source by both urban and rural populations for drinking and agricultural use.1 Globally, groundwater extraction has increased over the years, arising from four major groundwater issues including deterioration of groundwater quality, depletion of water, trans-boundary water conflicts, and the water–energy nexus.2 The deterioration of groundwater quality is of particular concern over the implications of groundwater contamination due to the heavy dependency on groundwater by different communities of the world. Considering this, it is essential to know the major contributors of groundwater contamination across the globe.
The extent of a contaminant's effect on groundwater quality is largely linked to the potency of the contaminant as a function of concentration, i.e. “the dose makes the poison”.3 In this regard, arsenic is one of the major contaminants of concern, as chronic exposure to even minute levels of arsenic (<10 μgL−1) causes lasting health issues.4,5 Thus, the increasing levels of arsenic in groundwater has become a public menace due to its carcinogenic nature6 and has affected more than 200 million people7 all over the world, necessitating recurrent monitoring and remediation practices. Across the globe, many populations are affected by arsenic contamination, as shown in Fig. S1,† where the top three countries by population, China, India, and the Unites States, all have issues with arsenic in groundwater. For example, Bangladesh has received worldwide attention for widespread arsenic contamination of groundwater. Hence, it is necessary to analyze all aspects pertaining to arsenic contamination and how far research efforts have progressed in tackling this issue. A summary of review articles related to arsenic removal technologies as discussed by various researchers is presented in Table S1.†
In the last few decades, one technique for arsenic removal that has gained prominence is oxidative sorption on iron and iron-related materials.8–10 Iron is ubiquitous in nature, being the fourth most abundant element on earth,11 thus iron is readily available at a low cost. Further, iron exerts relatively low toxicity.12,13 A remarkable property of iron, leading to its versatility, is the various oxidation states, in particular the Fe(II) to Fe(III) redox couple with a reduction potential of 0.77 V. Depending on the environmental conditions, 16 different forms of iron oxides, hydroxides, and oxyhydroxides are formed with the most common being hematite, magnetite, and ferrihydrite, due to the reactivity of iron with oxygen. Moreover, iron forms complexes with carbonates and sulfates in the environment resulting in the formation of a variety of iron compounds.14,15 Further, high-valent iron species, tetravalent and above, are effective in catalyzing radicals and two electron transfer reactions.12 Iron species in the pentavalent (+5) and hexavalent (+6) oxidation states are known to be strong oxidizing agents, particularly of organic pollutants to non-toxic products, due to the instability of these oxidation states.16 For example, the redox potential of Fe(VI) varies in between 2.2 (V/SHE) (in acidic) and 0.7 (V/SHE) (in alkaline).17 However, the partial free-radical character of Fe(V) made its reactivity 3 times higher than that of Fe(VI).16 Thus, due to its abundance, low toxicity, and reactivity, we review the essential features of iron and iron related compounds that make them an excellent choice for the oxidative removal of arsenic from water.
Initially, a brief overview on the properties, contamination, and toxicity of arsenic is provided. Subsequently, the challenges faced during arsenic removal are explored. Finally, the effects of pH on arsenic removal are discussed in detail. Above all, this review delivers an understanding of the oxidative sorption mechanism and applicability of iron in different advanced treatment technologies. We note that this review does not consider conventional methods, design of water treatment plants, and feasibility studies adopted for arsenic removal.
2. Challenges in arsenite removal
Arsenic cannot be degraded; rather it must be separated from the water medium to the solid phase.6 The removal of arsenic, as mentioned above, is dependent on the species present, where arsenite is the predominant form in anoxic environments i.e. groundwater, whereas arsenate is more common in oxic environments. As groundwater conditions are generally characterized by pH values between 3 and 8, arsenite is neutral, existing as H3AsO3.18,19 For this reason, the primary method for arsenite and arsenate removal from water, coagulation, is more effective for arsenate removal rather than arsenite, as the former has a higher affinity towards the main coagulants employed, namely alum, lime, and ferric salts.6,19 Similarly, various natural and low cost adsorbents including metals, metal oxides, and bimetallic components have been tested for their efficacy to eliminate arsenite and arsenate,20 where the removal of arsenite is incomplete due to the neutral charge of the species and thus the low affinity towards adsorbents.21 Hence the challenge facing arsenic remediation strategies is to overcome the low affinity of arsenite for various coagulants and absorbents, where the primary approach is employing a pre-treatment stage to transform arsenite to arsenate.
Numerous oxidizing agents including hypochlorite, ozone, hydrogen peroxide, permanganate, iron and manganese dioxides have been reported in the literature for the conversion of arsenite to arsenate.19 Amongst them, iron is a promising candidate as it is an environmentally friendly, abundant material which can be used for both oxidation and simultaneous adsorption. Further, both arsenite and arsenate have some affinity towards iron hydroxides and oxyhydroxides.22 Various iron and iron-based compounds and the applicability to the oxidative sorption of arsenite are described in the subsequent sections.
3. Effect of solution pH on oxidative sorption of arsenite
3.1. Effect of solution pH on arsenic speciation
One of the primary controlling factors in the removal of arsenic from waters is solution pH, which significantly influences the adsorption of arsenic on iron based compounds since ionization of both the adsorbent and adsorbate is influenced by pH.23,24 Thus, electrostatic considerations dominate interactions, where oppositely charged species will favor adsorption and like charged species will hinder the process. Further, the processes of corrosion, dissolution, precipitation, etc. will affect the conditions favoring or hindering adsorption.
As mentioned previously, both arsenite and arsenate species exhibit weak-acid properties. Arsenous acid (H3AsO3) has three acid dissociation constant values (pKa1 9.22, pKa2 12.13, and pKa3 13.4). At pH < 9.22, thus arsenite primarily exists in the neutral H3AsO3 form. In pH values ranging from 9.22 to 12.13, arsenite exists in the form of the negatively charged H2AsO3− species.24,25 Likewise, arsenic acid (H3AsO4) has three acid dissociation constant values (pKa1 2.20, pKa2 6.97, and pKa3 11.53).24,25 In the pH range of 2.2 to 6.97, arsenate exists in the predominant form of negatively charged H2AsO4− species.
3.2. Effect of solution pH on arsenite oxidation
Solution pH also has a significant effect on iron speciation. In the water medium, both ferrous and ferric ions undergo hydrolysis reactions and form hexa-aqua complexes. At pH below 10, the ferrous ion is predominant in its ionic form, while it is predominant in Fe(OH)+ at pH < 11, Fe(OH)2 at pH < 11.5 and Fe(OH)3− at pH > 1.5. Similar to this, ferric ions are predominant as Fe3+ at pH < 3, Fe(OH)2+ at pH in between 3 and 4, Fe(OH)2+ at pH in between 4 and 6, Fe(OH)3 at pH in between 6 and 9.5 and Fe(OH)4− at pH > 9.5.26 Thus, Fenton oxidation of As(III) is favourable at pH near 3, where both ferrous and ferric ions are in their ionic form. However, the present review describes iron minerals in more detail and their performance is different from the soluble iron species.
At neutral pH, rapid oxidation of As(III) to As(V) occurs on magnetite under aerobic conditions through Fe2+-catalyzed Fenton-like reactions.27 Similarly, structural Fe(II) hydroxide (SFH) removed both As(III) and As(V) under aeration and was less pH-dependent compared to the absence of oxygen.28 Mineral transformation of SFH into Fe(II/III) or FeOOH enhances the oxidative–sorption and precipitation of arsenic species. In the pH range of 7–9, conversion of As(III) to As(V) is mainly attributed to the Fe(VI) species resulting from mineral transformation due to the Fenton reaction.28 The highest adsorption of As(III) with the least dissolved As(V) could be attained at neutral pH along with the mixed solution of As(III) and arsenian pyrite ((Fe,As)S2 and Fe(As,S)2).29
Ferrihydrite can oxidize Mn(II) into the high valence Mn(VI) that improves the oxidative sorption of As(III).30 Oxidation of Mn(II) by ferrihydrite is found to be minimal in the pH range of 5–7, whereas it reached the maximum at the pH of 9 along with the formation of buserite (δ-MnO2) that could result in the highest oxidation of As(III).30 With ferrihydrite, sorption of As(V) and As(III) is high in the pH range of 3–5 and 8–10, respectively.31
Fe(VI) exists in different forms depending on the solution pH. Relatively stable and predominant forms of Fe(VI) under neutral and alkaline conditions are HFeO4− and FeO42− respectively.32 In the ferrate system, oxidation of As(III) occurs rapidly under alkaline conditions for the As(III)/Fe(VI) ratio of 3:2.33,34
3.3. Effect of solution pH on arsenic sorption
Regarding the adsorbate, the surface of the iron-based compound is affected by pH due to the point of zero charge (pHpzc), a measure of the surface acidity. When the pH of the solution equals the pHpzc, the solution is neutrally charged, characterized by an equal amount of protonated and deprotonated surface groups. Above the PZC, the surface becomes negatively charged, as deprotonation is favored, and thus adsorption of positively charged species is enhanced. Below the PZC, the surface becomes positively charged, as protonation is favored, enhancing the adsorption of negatively charged species.
Thus, for any oxidative sorption scenario, one needs to consider how the pH will affect the pairing of the adsorbate and adsorbent. For example, nano zero valent iron (nZVI) favors the adsorption of As(V) between pH 2.20 and 7.7, as As(V) will exist primarily as H2AsO4− and the surface of the adsorbent will be positively charged, as the pHpzc of the pristine nZVI is 7.7.23 Meanwhile, owing to the negative surface charge of ZVI, a decrease in the removal of arsenate is caused by electrostatic repulsion.23,25 Removal of As(III) on resin supported nZVI follows the order as given: pH 5.0 > pH 7.0 > pH 9.0 > pH 3.0.35 Similarly, the pHpzc values of ZVI and pristine nZVI are about 7.4 and 7.7, respectively.23 The decline in the adsorptive removal of As(III) observed at pH below 4.0 and above 10.0 is due to the electrostatic repulsion occurring between the oppositely charged adsorbate and adsorbent. Higher removals of As(III) on ZVI are observed at pH ranging between 4.0 and 10.0 because of the presumable adsorption of neutrally charged arsenite below pH 9.22.36
The corrosion of ZVI is also greatly influenced by the pH of the solution. Due to the strong influence of pH on the redox reactions, the corrosion of nZVI is greatly accelerated at acidic pH. At the same time, the surface passivation of iron oxide substantially occurs under alkaline conditions. Adsorptive removal of arsenite and arsenate is high on the surface of corrosion products enveloping the ZVI surface. Further, acidic and aerobic conditions favour the formation of lepidocrocite on nZVI, whereas alkaline conditions favour the formation of magnetite/maghemite.23 Under acidic and anaerobic conditions, reduction of As(III) into As(0) could occur due to the reaction with ZVI along with 90% removal; under non-acidic conditions, 40–60% removal was observed with no change in the oxidation state of As(III).37 Reduction of As(V) to As(III) is reported for the commercial ZVI only when the adsorption of As(V) occurs for pH < 7.0.38 The reduction of water molecules on the surface of ZVI results in the formation of local alkalinity which is typically more than pH 9.0. Hence the auto-oxidation of As(III) can also happen near the vicinity of the ZVI surface when the pH value is higher than the pKa value of 9.2.39
Wu et al.23 reported the dual influence mechanism of pH on nZVI towards the removal of As(V). As(V) removal mechanisms between ZVI and nZVI are observed to be different at higher pH conditions. An increase in the solution pH significantly impacted the corrosion of nZVI, while it did not change the phase of ZVI. At the pH of 4.0, 7.0 and 10.0, the surface charge of ZVI and nZVI is found to be strongly positive, slightly positive and negative, respectively. At the pH of 4.0, removal of As(V) occurs on both nZVI and ZVI surfaces through strong electrostatic attraction. However, removal of As(V) happens to be different at pH 10.0. ZVI exhibited a decrease in the removal of As(V) due to electrostatic repulsion. In contrast, nZVI still showed better removal of As(V) owing to the existence of favourable corrosion products that enhanced the coordinating ability towards As(V). Corrosion products of nZVI could favour the adsorption of As(V) irrespective of pH. Moreover, the pHpzc of nZVI is found to be different after the corrosion, since the pHpzc of iron (hydr)oxides exists in the range of 7.0 to 9.0.23Fig. 1 represents the difference in the mechanistic removal of As(V) by ZVI and nZVI at acidic and alkaline pH.
 Fig. 1  Effect of pH on the adsorptive removal mechanism of As(V) by ZVI and nZVI. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
Favorable sorption of As(V) onto hydrous ferric oxide (HFO) and goethite (α-FeOOH) is observed at pH lower than 5–6, whereas the higher affinity of As(III) is found at pH 6–9 for HFO and lower dependency on pH is noticed with goethite for the broad pH range. Magnetite exhibited the increasing As(III) sorption trend with the increase in the pH up to 10.40 The electrostatic interaction-based sorptive mechanism of arsenic species could be easily understandable based on the pHPZC values of HFO (pHPZC = 8.1), goethite (pHPZC = 6.9) and magnetite (pHPZC = 6.4).24 The pH at which As(III) and As(V) (cross over pH) are equally sorbed varies based on the Fe to As ratio, mineral composition and the surface area.40 The cross over pH with HFO is found at the pH of 6.5 and 8.5 for the total As the concentration of 50–100 μM and 10 μM, respectively. Similarly, the cross over pH of goethite is observed at the pH of 6.0 and 7.0 with a total As of 100 μM and 50 μM respectively.40 With iron(II,III) hydroxycarbonate green rust (CGR), As(III) showed high removal at the pH of 7.5 which was 2–8 times higher than the As(V) removal. Due to the negative surface charge at the pH > 10, low sorption of more negatively charged As(V) occurs, whereas high sorption of less negatively/neutrally charged As(III) happens.41
Sorption of As(III) on Fe3O4/CaO2 increases with increasing pH from 3–6; however it gradually decreased with the further rise in pH from 7–12.42 The pHpzc of the adsorbent can be raised in the binary metal oxide system with the appropriate ratio of metal oxides. The pHpzc values of Al–Fe binary metal oxides are found to be 7.6, 8.2, and 8.7 for the Al–Fe ratio of 0:1, 1:4, and 1:1, respectively. The maximum removal of As(V) occurs in the pH range of 3–7, whereas As(III) sorption is high in the pH range of 7–9.31
Fe–Al bimetallic particles containing a molar ratio of nFe:nAl2O3 = 1:0.2 exhibited higher removal of As(III) at the alkaline pH of 11 through the sequential adsorption, oxidation and co-precipitation reactions.43 At pH < 4.0, removal of As(V) on sulfated mesoporous Fe–Al bimetallic particles is attributed to (i) the electrostatic attraction between the negatively charged H2AsO4− species and protonated OH groups of the adsorbent ((Al(OH)3 and Fe(OH)O)) and (ii) the hydrogen bonding between neutral H3AsO4 species and unprotonated OH groups of the adsorbent.44 At pH > 4.0, sulfate groups are released into the solution resulting in the development of a positively charged adsorbent. Further H2AsO4− species replaced the sulfate groups through the electrostatic attraction mechanism along with the competitive interaction towards OH− groups.44 The stability of Fe–Al bimetallic particles is found be high in the pH range of 5.0–9.0 signifying the negligible leaching of both Fe and Al species under neutral and weak acidic and alkaline conditions.45 In the pH range of 4–8, Fe–Cu bimetallic particles exhibited better removal of As(V) since the pHpzc of Fe–Cu particles is between 8 and 9.46 The solution pH was increased because of the release of OH− groups.47
Solution pH-dependent sorption of arsenic on the Fe(VI) decay product is reported to be similar to other iron oxide systems.48 Higher sorption of As(V) occurs in the pH range of 6–8 is because the pHpzc of the Fe(VI) decay product 2-line ferrihydrite is 8.1.49 Complete sorption of arsenic species was observed at near-neutral pH at the Fe:As ratio of 2:1 through the incorporation of arsenic into nanocrystalline iron(III) oxide which resulted from the decay of Fe(VI).50 Fe(VI)/Fe(III) salts showed greater dependency on pH in removing arsenite, whereas Fe(VI)/Al(III) salts showed lesser dependence on the pH of the solution. The difference between the pHpzc values of Fe hydroxides (7.0–8.5) and Fe–Al hydroxides (8.7–9.1 for Fe:Al = 1:1) significantly influences the affinity of arsenic species since Fe–Al hydroxides possess a higher positive charge than the Fe hydroxides.22
4. Oxidative sorption by iron
Two primary mechanisms exist for the interaction of arsenic with iron-based removal strategies, (1) solution–oxidation/adsorption and (2) adsorption/surface-oxidation. In the first mechanism, arsenite is oxidized by a homogenous reaction and the produced arsenate is adsorbed on a surface. The second mechanism is characterized by a surface adsorption event first followed by oxidation, thus describing a primarily heterogenous strategy. The following section will review various iron-based materials where one or both mechanisms are operative. Arsenite removal by various iron particles is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Arsenite removal efficiencies of various iron particles




Si. No.
Oxidant/adsorbent
Source of As
Initial As(III) concentration (mg L−1)
As(III) oxidation/adsorption (%)
Remarks




1.
ZVI51
Lab-synthesized
1
>70% oxidation within 10 min for pH 3, 7 and 9
• Able to remove arsenic completely within 24 h


2.
Fe/Cu (ref. 52)
Lab-synthesized
0.1–1
Maximum As(III) sorption capacity was found to be 19.68 mg g−1
• Acidic condition favors As sorption


• Sorption follows pseudo second order kinetics


• Bicarbonate, phosphate and sulphate don't have any effect on arsenic sorption


3.
Fe/Al (ref. 43)
Lab-synthesized
20
>75% removal at pH ranging from 3 to 11
• Alkaline condition favors removal


• Surface adsorption, oxidation and co-precipitation are the As(III) removal mechanisms


4.
Fe/Cu (ref. 47)
Spiked in groundwater
1
Complete removal
• Precipitation and coprecipitation are the As(III) removal mechanisms


• As removal efficiency of bi-metallic particle is twice that of ZVI


5.
Mn–Fe binary oxide53
Lab-synthesized
2
Almost complete removal for the pH ranging from 3 to 7.5
• Adsorption capacity of 50 mg g−1


• Mn in the binary material accelerates the As(III) oxidation


• Fe forms surface OH groups, which effectively sorbed As(V)


6.
Iron–copper–manganese trimetal oxide54
Lab-synthesized
10
—
• Adsorption capacity of 131 mg g−1 at pH 7


• As removal is by oxidation followed by sorption


• Lower pH is favored


7.
Aluminum substituted nickel ferrite55
Lab-synthesized
100
—
• Adsorption capacity of 1114 mg g−1


• Adsorbent is able to reduce arsenic concentration below 10 ppb even from its initial concentration of 500 ppb


8.
Fe3O4/CaO2 composite42
Lab-synthesized
0.5
32.3% oxidation of arsenite
• Adsorption capacity of 56.35 mg g−1 at pH 6


98% adsorption
• Arsenite oxidation within 15 min


9.
Ferrihydrite + Mn(II)30
Lab-synthesized
75
Almost complete oxidation and sorption of arsenite
• As(V) was adsorbed on ferrihydrite


• As(III) oxidation increased with Mn(II) concentration as well as solution pH


10.
Manganese oxide coupled with Fe(III) trimesic56
Lab-synthesized
5
—
• As(III) removal is by oxidation followed by adsorption


• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 76.34 mg g−1


11.
Mesoporous Fe/Al bimetallic particles45
Lab-synthesized
10
>99% removal of As(III) with the addition of 3 or 4 g L−1 Fe/Al
• As(III) removal increased with increase of the Fe/Al mass ratio


• Acidic and neutral conditions are favorable for As(III) removal


• Surface adsorption, oxidation and intraparticle reduction are the As(III) removal mechanisms


• Significant difference in the morphology of Fe/Al bimetallic particles after reacting with As(III) and agglomeration of Fe/Al bimetallic particles were observed


12.
Cu(II)–Fe(III) oxide doped anion exchangers57
Lab-synthesized
150
—
• At high pH and in the presence of interfering ions, anion exchanger can enhance As(III) removal


• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 94.4 mg g−1


13.
Amorphous Fe/Mn bimetal58
Lab-synthesized
5–50
—
• As(III) removal was enhanced by homogeneously distributed active centers and low-coordinated adsorption sites provided by the amorphous phase of the bimetal


• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 161.6 mg g−1


• Neutral pH favors optimal adsorption


14.
Bioceramic buttressed Mn doped iron oxide59
Lab-synthesized
0.1–0.4
98% As(III) removal in 210 min at pH 6.5
• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 12 mg g−1


15.
Yttrium doped iron oxide60
Lab-synthesized
20
60% adsorption of As(III) is achieved in initial 30 minutes
• Maximum As(III) sorption capacity was found to be 84.22 mg-As per g at pH 7.0


• Uptake of As(III) increases as the pH of solution is increased from 3 to 8 and after that slight reduction is observed


16.
Fe2O3 nanocrystals on sepiolite nanofibers (MI/SEPs)61
Real groundwater
0.1–50
Removal efficiency of 96.4% with an arsenic concentration of 456.5 mg L−1
• Adsorption capacity of As(III) of 50.35 mg g−1 for As(III)on MI/SEPs


• MI/SEPs can reduce the As concentration from 140 to 0.5 μg L−1


• The maximum adsorption capacity of 50.35 mg g−1 was observed for As(III)


17.
Structural Fe(II)hydroxides28
Lab-synthesized
30
60% removal efficiency at pH 7.0 under anoxic condition
• As(III) was adsorbed by Fe(II/III) and Fe(III)oxides


• It was oxidized to As(V) on the surface after 2 hours


18.
Nanoparticles of iron oxide from cold rolling mill (CRM)62
Lab-synthesized
0.5
60–80% removal of arsenic
• The monolayer adsorption capacity for CRM fines Fe2O3 is 1.94 × 103 μg g−1


• CRM is rhombohedral phase α-Fe2O3. It is ferromagnetic and its adsorption capacity is high at acidic pH




4.1. Zero valent iron
Zero valent iron (ZVI) is a promising material for water treatment as it has several advantages including high contaminant removal efficiency at low ZVI dosage, a wide range of contaminant treatment applications, and control over the release of toxic intermediates.63,64 Corrosion of ZVI results in the formation of an oxide layer over the surface of ZVI, where under anoxic conditions the dissolution of iron from ZVI is anodic, producing hydrogen gas, while under oxic conditions the process is cathodic, caused by the reduction of oxygen.65 The possible reactions of the ZVI–water system are given in eqn (1)–(8).66 The thickness and the type of iron oxide present in the oxide layer depend primarily on the oxygen availability, where the oxide layer may be of a single-phase like goethite, wüstite, maghemite, magnetite, and hematite, or in multi-phase combinations.67,68 For example, when ZVI was exposed to dissolved oxygen saturated water, rapid loss of iron from ZVI was observed within a day in addition to the formation of magnetite and maghemite.69 The metallic iron core acts as an electron donor as well as reducing agent, while the oxide layer serves as an adsorbent via surface complexation reactions and electrostatic attractions, and as a medium to inhibit or facilitate transfer of electrons from the ZVI core.64,70 Even though several articles are published on the application of ZVI in water and wastewater treatment,71–75 the pollutant removal mechanism by ZVI is highly complex.66,76 Fe0 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2(1) Fe0 + O2 + 2H2O → 2Fe2+ + 4OH−(2) Fe2+ + 2H2O → Fe(OH)2 + 2H+(3) 6Fe2+ + O2 + 6H2O → 2Fe3O4 + 12H+(4) 4Fe2+ + O2 + 10H2O → 4Fe(OH)3 + 8H+(5) 4Fe2+ + O2 + 6H2O → 4FeOOH + 8H+(6) Fe0 + O2 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2O2(7) Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe3+ + OH˙ + OH−(8)
Oxidative sorption of arsenite by ZVI can occur via both of the primary mechanisms. In the solution–oxidation/adsorption mechanism, the main oxidants responsible for the oxidation of arsenite are hydrogen peroxide (eqn (7)) and hydroxyl radicals generated via Fenton reactions (eqn (8)). ZVI corrosion is mainly attributed to water not to arsenic species.77 Recently, formation of ferryl ions during ZVI corrosion and its importance in arsenite oxidation was demonstrated (eqn (9)).78 Under acidic conditions, 85–95% of the total arsenic concentration in bulk solution was in the form of arsenate, indicative of the oxidation of arsenite in solution rather than on the ZVI surface, as adsorption of the arsenate product would be expected.78 At the same time, oxidation of arsenite was slower under near neutral pH conditions, showing the necessity for acidic pH to generate hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals during ZVI corrosion. Despite the decreased rate of arsenite oxidation at pH 8, 70% of arsenite was oxidized. Interestingly, using scavenging reactions the authors found that the oxidation was not driven by hydroxyl radicals. Thus, ferryl ions are believed to be the main oxidants responsible for arsenite oxidation at circumneutral pH,79,80 also potentially an active oxidant in a wide pH range.78 Arsenate formed by arsenite oxidation in bulk solution undergoes sorption over newly formed iron (oxyhydr)oxides over ZVI particles78–80 and fixed via an inner-sphere surface complexation reaction.81 Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe4+ + H2O(9)
Sorption of arsenite is favored by the corroded products as goethite, lepidocrocite, and maghemite adsorb greater than 97% of arsenite within a day, while detectable arsenite sorption over hematite and magnetite occurred only after 2 days.39 Even though both goethite and lepidocrocite are able to sorb arsenite rapidly, oxidation of arsenite was not observed.39 The arsenite moiety was observed from radial structure function data of As–O shells via extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). Similar to this, Fe3O4 and Fe2O3 were able to adsorb 11 and 13% respectively of arsenite, even though complete arsenite sorption occurred.82 Meanwhile, maghemite and hematite are able to adsorb and oxidize arsenite from water.39 Arsenite oxidation is also favored by water oxidation as well as hydroxide ion release during ZVI corrosion.39 Ferric–arsenate complexation over magnetite or maghemite is the final arsenic removal mechanism.77 Thus, generation of complexation sites is one of the rate limiting steps in arsenic removal by ZVI, as these sites are not present initially but are generated continuously by ZVI corrosion and subsequent aging of Fe(OH)2.77
Adsorption, oxidation, and reduction of arsenite over ZVI were observed to occur simultaneously,82,83 indicating the complex nature of arsenite interactions with ZVI. Compared to reduction, oxidation of arsenite is less sensitive to its initial concentration.83 Reduction reactions of arsenite under acidic anoxic and acidic oxic conditions are given in eqn (10) and (11), respectively.37 The concentrations of arsenite, arsenate, and metallic arsenic in the ZVI surface were found to be 51, 14, and 35%, respectively.83 Reduction of arsenite to As(0) by ZVI is effective under low pH and limited aeration conditions,37 where the reaction is thermodynamically favorable.77 This reaction occurs in two stages under anoxic conditions,84 in which the first step is the breaking of an As–O bond over the oxide layer. In the second stage, reduction arsenite, diffusion of metallic arsenic through the oxide layer and formation of the Fe–As thin intermetallic layer (which is the facile step) are the main steps. This mechanism was proved with the help of X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES).84 At the same time, formation of metallic arsenic is not observed in the case of chitosan fiber-supported ZVI nanoparticles.85 H3AsO3 + 1.5Fe0 + 3H+ → As0 + 1.5Fe2+ + 3H2O(10) H3AsO3 + 7.2Fe0 + 4.05O2 → As0 + 2.4Fe3O4 + 1.5H2O(11)
Thus, arsenic speciation and the mechanism of arsenite removal in the adsorption/surface-oxidation mechanism are shown in Fig. S2.82† Formation of metallic arsenic was not observed in the cases of iron oxides treated with arsenite solution, indicating that ZVI is necessary for arsenite reduction. Arsenate was enriched at the surface of ZVI and arsenite was fairly distributed over the oxide layer to a depth of 4 nm, while metallic arsenic was observed only at the core region. At the same time, significant38 and insignificant77 reduction of adsorbed arsenate over ZVI has also been observed. Reduction of arsenite can be decreased by using appropriate supports, like a bifunctional resin35 which is able to sorb arsenate effectively.
Overall reactions occurring in the solution–oxidation/adsorption mechanism as well as adsorption/surface-oxidation mechanism for arsenic removal are shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Arsenite oxidative sorption mechanisms of ZVI. 
Finally, weak magnetic fields have been observed to have a positive effect on arsenite oxidative removal over ZVI86,87 and are attributed to enhanced corrosion. Premagnetization of ZVI shifted the corrosion products from magnetite and maghemite to lepidocrocite (Fig. 3a) and increased the arsenite oxidation rate (Fig. 3b).87 A study by Sun et al.88 reported the importance of a weak magnetic field and anion identity in arsenite removal by ZVI (Fig. 3c), where the enhancement order was SO42− > Cl− > NO3− ≈ ClO4−. This combination enhanced the conversion of arsenite to arsenate as well as adsorption and co-precipitation. The magnetic field gradient force (FΔB) is the primary enhancer, rather than Lorentz force, for the amplifying effect of the magnetic field. Due to the magnetic field, ferrous ions move towards the portions having stronger magnetic fields and enhance the corrosion, resulting in a localized iron oxide distribution over the ZVI surface. This ferrous ion movement results in accumulation of positive charges the near poles of the magnetic field and addition of anions leads to electroneutrality. The absence of anions inhibits the movement of ferrous ions in the solution, thus motivating the authors to also study how the identity of the ion could enhance the effect further.
 Fig. 3  (a) Fractions of ZVI corrosion products with (Mag-ZVI) and without (Pri-ZVI) magnetization, (b) fractions of arsenite and arsenate over ZVI; reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015, and (c) effect of anions and magnetite on ZVI corrosion, reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
In a recent study,89 sulfide modified nano-ZVI supported on attapulgite exhibited higher adsorption activity than pristine nano-ZVI and attapulgite supported nano-ZVI. The removal of arsenite by the former involved various processes including 1) the formation of FeS by the reaction of Fe2+ generated by ZVI corrosion with S2− and subsequent formation of the As2S3 precipitate by reacting with arsenite, 2) co-precipitation with Fe2+ and Fe3+ generated from ZVI corrosion and 3) surface complexation with iron oxides during which partial oxidation of arsenite to arsenate occurred on the interface of sulfide modified nano-ZVI.
4.2. Bimetallic particles
Combination of two metals is an effective way to remove arsenite by oxidative sorption, as zero valent metal ions are able to generate reactive oxygen species in aerated water and can generate adsorption sites.90,91 Fe/Al, a ferromagnetic mesoporous material with pore sizes ranging from 4.9 to 6.8 nm and oxygen content ranging from 13.36 to 25.64 wt%, is an effective bimetal for arsenite removal.45 Based on the characterization of the bimetal before and after arsenite removal, the authors proposed both adsorption/surface-oxidation and solution–oxidation/adsorption mechanisms, similar to ZVI (Fig. 4). Both arsenite and arsenate were sorbed over oxides of Fe and Al. Some sorbed arsenic species underwent further reduction reactions forming metallic arsenic bound to metallic iron. The adsorption of As primarily occurs at iron sites, making Fe–O–As bonds replace hydrogen in Fe–O–H. After the sorption of arsenic, agglomeration of bimetallic particles occurs along with a coverage of the flocculant material (most likely in the form of hydroxides). Arsenite removal by Fe/Al also occurs by surface adsorption, oxidation and co-precipitation.43
 Fig. 4  Arsenite removal mechanism by bimetallic particles. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier Ltd., copyright 2016. 
The adsorption mechanism of arsenate over Fe/Al also depends on solution pH (ref. 92) and is enhanced by sulfate modification.44 Exchange of sulfate ions with H2AsO4− is the main sorption mechanism at pH higher than 4, while sorption of H2AsO4− by protonated hydroxyl groups of Fe and Al and hydrogen bonding of H3AsO4 with unprotonated hydroxyl groups are the arsenate removal mechanisms at pH less than 4.44
In the second system, Fe/Cu particles are effective as metallic copper is easily oxidizable and able to adsorb analytes at high rates due to the presence of cuprite and tenorite at the surface.93 The initial reduction of arsenate is mainly by reactions with metallic copper.93 Iron corrosion is also accelerated by the presence of Cu as the redox potential of Cu (0.34 V) is higher than that of Fe (−0.44 V).47 The arsenite and arsenate sorption capacity of Fe/Cu was 19.68 and 21.32 mg g−1, respectively52 and increased to 90.1 and 126.58 mg g−1, respectively after stabilization with starch.46 Similarly, Zhang et al.94 reported oxidative removal of arsenite over Fe/Mn bimetal–organic frameworks (Fig. 5). Adsorption/surface-oxidation was the proposed removal mechanism, where oxidation of arsenite was mainly by Mn species and subsequent adsorption occurred at oxides of iron.94 The homogeneous distribution of the adsorption/oxidation sites and low-coordinated active centers were the main reasons behind the higher arsenite sorption capacity (161.6 mg g−1) and oxidization ability of the bimetallic particles.94
 Fig. 5  Adsorption/surface-oxidation removal mechanism of arsenite by Fe/Mn bimetal–organic frameworks. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
4.3. Iron (oxyhydr)oxides
Due to the high affinity to arsenic species, iron oxides and hydroxides have attracted great attention for arsenic remediation. As already noted above, the corrosion products of ZVI are iron oxides and hydroxides are the primary adsorption sites for arsenic. These compounds in their natural forms have strong adsorption affinities for arsenic and can have large specific surface areas.95 Depending on the specific mineral, the adsorption capacity of iron oxides for arsenic can be as high as 100 mg g−1, where the high affinity is attributed to the formation of surface complexes between iron hydroxides and arsenic species.96–98 Thus, iron oxides are ideal materials for selective adsorption of arsenic from water.
Iron oxides are naturally occurring compounds formed predominantly from weathering of magmatic rocks. In both aquatic and terrestrial environments, the redistribution process may occur by erosion or reductive dissolution in the form of Fe(II) and then oxidative re-precipitation.99 Iron oxides generally consist of closely packed arrays of anions (usually hexagonal or cubic) in which interstices are partially filled with divalent or trivalent iron, predominantly in octahedral, but in some cases tetrahedral coordination.99 The most prevalent iron oxides present in Earth's crust are ferric based.
Iron oxides have been used in many different forms for arsenic removal. It has been reported for arsenic removal either in the form of iron oxide suspensions,95 packed beds of iron oxides,100 conventional chemical coagulation101 or electrocoagulation using iron electrodes.102,103 The most commonly reported iron oxides for arsenic removal are hematite and magnetite. Hematite (Fe2O3), also named specularite or oligisite, is widely distributed in rocks of all ages and forms the most abundant and important iron ore.104 Further, hematite is extremely stable and often the end member of transformations from other iron oxides.99 Magnetite (Fe3O4) is another abundant and widespread type of iron oxide mineral, composed of a mixed valency of Fe(II) and Fe(III). It is most often found under reducing conditions relative to hematite,99 due to inclusion of ferrous iron, but is often pseudomorphously altered to hematite or goethite under oxidizing conditions.105
Among iron oxide materials employed for arsenic adsorption, natural or synthesized powders are commonly used, in addition to doped iron oxides. The adsorption capacity of the particles depends largely on the physical and chemical characteristics of the materials involved, including particle size. While natural iron oxides generally have large particle sizes, synthetics are commonly of nanometer sizes, and thus have greater surface areas, though nanometer dimensioned particles can also be found naturally in freshly precipitated systems.106 Generally, the modification of iron oxides is focused on achieving larger surface areas for the generation of more active sorption sites.107 Several nanoscale adsorbents have been developed and tested for arsenic removal, such as magnetic-maghemite nanoparticles, Fe2O3 nanoparticles, and nanoscale zero-valent iron.36,108–110 Due to these various modifications and novel iron oxide-based adsorbents, researchers have reported a wide range of adsorption capacities and kinetics111–113 and there is much discrepancy in the literature. Reports of adsorbed arsenic forming a very stable mixture and even a mineral in some cases have been documented,114 whereas others have reported reduction of As(V) to As(III) after adsorption which may lead to weaker As–Fe bonding and increased possibility of release of As(III) post adsorption of As(V).38
Various researchers have demonstrated that iron oxyhydroxides like ferrihydrite, goethite, lepidocrocite, schwertmannite, and amorphous iron oxyhydroxides are able to remove As(III) and As(V) as well as methylated arsenic species from water.111,112,115,116 The exact composition of ferrihydrite and most of these iron oxyhydroxides is also not clear, being variously reported as FeO(OH), Fe5O6(OH)3·3H2O, 5Fe2O3·9H2O, or Fe2O3·2FeO(OH)·6H2O. Ferrihydrite, a product of iron-fixing bacteria or of the natural hydrolysis of iron salts in solution, is metastable and a precursor of goethite, feroxhyte, hematite, and other iron minerals.105 Goethite (alpha-FeOOH) is an iron oxide mineral exhibiting needle-shaped crystals with grooves and edges. It is one of the most thermodynamically stable iron oxyhydroxides at ambient temperature.99 Due to its thermodynamic stability, goethite is by far the most common iron oxide in soils.
Studies have shown that in the adsorption process, arsenate oxyanions can exchange with hydroxyl groups from iron hydroxides and form inner-sphere monodentate or bidentate surface complexes, represented as Fe–O–AsO(OH)–O–Fe.117–123 Comparative studies showed that the impregnation of iron oxides with activated carbon increased the adsorption capacity by more than ten times. In situ generated ferrihydrite by electrocoagulation has been reported to have the maximum adsorption affinity for arsenate and arsenite due to its high surface area.124 The mechanism by which arsenic species adsorb on iron oxyhydroxide minerals in water is mainly attributed to chemical adsorption through forming binuclear bridging complexes Fe–O–AsO(OH)–O–Fe on the minerals, as well as electrostatic attraction and surface complexation between the species and iron hydroxides on the minerals.117–123,125
The effect of natural organic matter on the performance of ferrihydrite has been reported recently.126 The authors found that the presence of humic acid hinders the arsenite oxidation efficiency of ferrihydrite. Pure ferrihydrite is able to oxidize ∼40% of the adsorbed As(III), while only ∼29% As(III) oxidation occurred on the ferrihydrite–humic acid coprecipitate.
4.4. Bi- and tri-metal oxides
The selectivity of iron oxides towards the removal of arsenic species depends on ligand exchange with surface –OH groups, resulting in the formation of monodentate and bidentate surface complexes.20,127 Though iron oxide based adsorbents are efficient at removing As(V) species, removal of As(III) species is generally inefficient.128,129 Thus, oxidation of As(III) to As(V) prior to adsorption on the iron oxide is required to effectively remove arsenic from aqueous environments.128 Thus, these systems operate by an adsorption/surface oxidation mechanism, but then are followed by a desorption and reabsorption step.
Binary metal oxides have been developed via combinations of different metal oxides that could exhibit synergistic effects of excellent oxidation potential as well as greater adsorption capacity.127,130 Some of the binary metal oxides researchers have developed to significantly improve the oxidative sorption of As(III) species include Fe–Mn,53,128,129 Fe–Cu,127,131 Fe–Co,132 Fe–Cr,133 Fe–Ti,134 Fe–Ce,135,136 Fe–Zr (ref. 137), etc. The adsorption capacity of many of these binary metal oxides is found to be comparatively high to that of the single systems due to the increased number of adsorption sites, facilitating the chelating reactions with surface –OH groups.20,127
Among the binary metal oxides, Fe–Mn oxide systems have been the most widely studied for the removal of arsenic species, where As(III) removal follows coupled oxidation and adsorption.128 Due to the high oxidation potential of manganese oxide (MnO2), pre-oxidation of As(III) to As(V) occurs, followed by adsorption of the oxidized species onto the iron oxide surface.138 The removal mechanism of As(III) by Fe–Mn binary metal oxide is summarized in the following equations (eqn (12)–(14)).128 As(III)(aq) + (−SFe–Mn) → As(III)–SFe–Mn(12) As(III)–SFe–MnMnO2 + 2H+ → As(V)(aq) + Mn2+ + H2O(13) As(V)(aq) + As(III)–SFe–Mn → As(V)–SFe–Mn + As(III)(aq)(14)Initially, aqueous phase As(III)(aq) adsorbs onto a surface site of the Fe–Mn metal oxide (–SFe–Mn). The adsorbed As(III) species (As(III)–SFe–Mn) is oxidized by MnO2 (either structural Mn(III) or Mn(IV)), producing As(V), which can remain adsorbed or desorb followed by readsorption at a new site on the iron oxide (As(V)–SFe–Mn). Thus, MnO2 in the Fe–Mn binary metal oxide system not only acts as the oxidizing agent to convert As(III) to As(V) but can also provide additional active sites for adsorption of As(V) through the formation of Mn2+ species while increasing the positive surface charge.138 Moreover, oxidation of As(III) by MnO2 occurs via a two-step mechanism which involves the initial conversion of Mn(IV) to the intermediate Mn(III) product (MnOOH*) and its further reduction into Mn(II) occurs as given in eqn (15) and (16).128 2MnO2 + H3AsO3 → 2MnOOH* + H3AsO4(15) 2MnOOH* + H3AsO3 + 4H+ → 2Mn2+ + H3AsO4 + 3H2O(16)
The molar ratio of Mn and Fe in Fe–Mn binary metal oxides influences the oxidative sorption removal of As(III) species.139 The highest removal of As(III) and As(V) was observed at a Mn/Fe molar ratio of 1:3 and 1:6, respectively. Binary oxides with a Mn/Fe ratio of 1:3 exhibited nearly complete removal of As(III) at pH < 5.5, where the removal decreased with increasing pH in the range of pH > 6.0. Fe–Mn binary oxides produced at the Mn/Fe ratio of 1:3 and lower exhibited structural similarity to 2-line ferrihydrite; meanwhile oxides produced with ratios higher than 1:3 exhibited structural similarity to δ-MnO2. Further, Fe–Mn binary metal oxides synthesized under alkaline conditions with H2O2, resulting in a Mn/Fe molar ratio of 0.71, exhibited nearly 100% removal of both As(III) and As(V) species at pH < 7.5, where the removal decreased with increasing pH in the range of pH > 8.0.53
Though nano-sized metal oxides exhibit higher oxidative–sorption behavior due to larger surface areas, separation of these particles after treatment is a time consuming, tedious process.140,141 To maintain the large surface areas but aide post-treatment, magnetic nanoparticles possessing superparamagnetic properties have been developed. Magnetite contains both Fe2+ and Fe3+ species at octahedral sites and doping of Mn could yield enhanced magnetic properties within a bimetallic oxide. Specifically, the inclusion of Mn(II) would result in greater magnetic susceptibility than the pure magnetite owing to the existence of partially filled orbitals, namely five unpaired electrons. Further, the octahedral or tetrahedral sites of magnetite can be occupied by Mn2+/Mn3+ species, displacing Fe2+/Fe3+ without inducing large changes in particle size.142 Thus, magnetic Fe–Mn binary metal oxides could be easily recovered from the treated water using an external magnetic field. Ouma and Ofomaja141 studied the influence of varying the ratio of Fe2+:Fe3+ and level of Mn doping in the MnxFe(3−x)O4 adsorbent to remove As(III) through central composite design of the response surface methodology. Removal of As(III) was positively influenced by the interaction between Fe3+ and Mn, negatively impacted by the Fe2+ and Fe3+ species, and insignificant for the interaction between Fe3+ and Mn.141 Further, increasing the doping level of Mn in magnetite could improve the oxidation of As(III) species and also increase the adsorption sites for the removal of resulting As(V) species. Finally, shell and core structured magnetic metal oxides containing maghemite and Fe–Mn binary metal oxide, respectively, with a particle size of 20–50 nm resulted in effortless separation from the solution through the saturation magnetization of 23.2 emu g−1.140
While promising, the oxidative–sorption properties of binary oxide particles may be limited due to the excessive aggregation that could potentially affect large scale applications.130,135 One way to inhibit the agglomeration of Fe–Mn binary oxide particles is employing high surface area graphene sheets as a supporting template. Hence more active sites are available for the oxidation and adsorption of arsenic species. Further, the high electrical conductivity of graphene enhances the electron transfer between the Fe–Mn binary oxide and arsenic species, which could promote the favorable redox reaction.130Fig. 6 represents the oxidative sorption of As(III) species on the reduced graphene oxide (rGO) supported Fe–Mn binary metal oxide system.
 Fig. 6  Oxidative sorption of As(III) species on rGO/Fe–Mn metal oxide. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
Other supporting materials have been used to improve the adsorption capacity, mechanical stability, and reusability of binary oxide systems including multiwalled carbon nanotubes,135 chitosan,143 alginate,144 konjac glucomannan based aerogels,145–147 diatomite,129 bioceramics,148 and polyvinyl alcohol.149 Ye et al.145 proposed the oxidation–adsorption mechanism for the removal of As(III) species onto the konjac glucomannan based composite aerogel. Adsorption of As(III) onto the surface of Fe–Mn oxides immobilized on konjac glucomannan based aerogel was facilitated by iron oxides, followed by oxidation of the adsorbed species to As(V) by manganese oxide. Once produced, As(V) could be readily adsorbed onto the iron oxide. Both As(III) and As(V) species bind to the aerogel surface through the formation of inner sphere complexes (either monodentate mononuclear or bidentate binuclear) via exchange of –OH and –OH2 groups of iron oxide.146 A positive feature of these systems is that the binary metal oxides immobilized on the supporting materials could be reused for multiple treatments with a NaOH/NaCl/NaClO solution.145–147
Cupric oxide (CuO) is considered a promising metal oxide adsorbent to remove both As(III) and As(V) anionic species in a wider pH range due to a high pHPZC (9.4).127 To avoid the aggregation and improve the separation, CuO is doped with magnetite, copper ferrites, and other supporting materials.93,150 The selectivity and oxidation property of the metal oxide adsorbent can be enhanced when it is modified with anion exchangers.151 The synergistic effects of cupric oxide, iron oxide, and anion exchanger on the removal of arsenic species with enhanced affinity in a wider pH range were reported by Jacukowicz-Sobala et al.127 The hybrid anion exchangers containing Cu(II)–Fe(III) binary oxide decreased the concentrations of As(III) and As(V) species from 500 μg L−1 to below 10.0 μg L−1 in the simulated ground water containing other interfering ions.127 The content of Cu in the Fe–Cu binary metal oxide could influence the structural morphology and adsorption capacity. Fe–Cu metal oxide with low Cu content (Fe0.9Cu0.1) exhibited a non-uniform core–shell structure, whereas high Cu content metal oxide (Fe0.5Cu0.5) displayed a Janus-like structure. Fe0.9Cu0.1 metal oxide exhibited higher removal of As(V) due to the enhanced electron transfer between Cu, Fe and As species.93 Likewise, Fe–Al adsorbents also exhibited better removal of As species due to the increased adsorption site (hydroxyl groups) compared with the single metal oxide.44 Fe–Al binary mixed (hydr) oxides are prepared as Fe on alumina using FeCl3·6H2O and Fe2(SO4)3.44 Fe–Al binary metal oxide synthesized using Fe2(SO4)3 (10 wt%) as a ferric additive exhibited higher removal of As(V) owing to the strong interactions with the sulfate groups and alumina.44 At pH > 4.0, release of sulfate groups from the adsorbent develops a net positive surface charge on the adsorbent. Meanwhile, negatively charged As(V) species adsorbed onto the surface of adsorbent through electrostatic interaction.
Trimetal oxides have also been reported as promising materials to enhance the oxidation–sorption based removal of As(III) through synergistic effects. In an Fe–Ni–Mn metal oxide system, the manganese oxidized As(III) and the primary adsorption ability towards As was attributed to the iron oxide but nickel oxide enhanced the arsenic adsorption capacity of the material by elevating the point of zero charge (pHPZC) of the material.152 At an atomic ratio of Fe:Ni:Mn of 3:2:1, an amorphous adsorbent (30–60 nm) was obtained with a surface area of 195.78 m2 g−1 and a pHPZC of 10.20, similar to the pHPZC (10.8) of pristine nickel oxide. At environmental pH values between 6.5 and 8.5, the surface charge of trimetal oxide would be positive, and As(III) species would exist as H3AsO3, based on the pKa values of arsenite (9.22 and 12.30). Removal of arsenite on the Fe–Ni–Mn trimetal oxide was suggested to be due to ion exchange or electrostatic attractions of equal charge.152 Further, FTIR and TGA analysis of arsenite adsorbing Fe–Ni–Mn trimetal oxide revealed the formation of inner-sphere complexes through the hydroxyl substitution by arsenite ions. Addition of low crystalline nickel oxide to the Fe–Ni–Mn adsorbent increases the active surface sites thus enhancing the adsorption capacity.
In an Fe–Cu–Mn trimetal oxide, manganese oxide was presumed to be the primary oxidizing agent of As(III), whereas copper oxide and iron oxide exhibited affinity towards the adsorption of As(V).54 A higher sorption capacity of As(III) was reported (131 mg g−1) at pH 7.0, which outperforms most reported studies. The study reveals a possible oxidative sorption mechanism of As(III) species on Fe–Cu–Mn trimetal oxide, as represented in Fig. 7, where (i) As(III) present in the bulk liquid diffuses towards the solid–liquid interface where ligand exchange occurs between the adsorbent and the As(III) species, (ii) the MnO2 component of the trimetal oxide oxidizes As(III) to As(V) followed by detachment of As(V) and the concomitant formation of Mn(II) species, and finally (iii) the dissolved As(V) species further replaces the –OH groups of trimetal oxides and is adsorbed on copper or iron oxides, (Mn(II) species could also be sorbed onto the surface).
 Fig. 7  Mechanism of oxidative sorption removal of As(III) species on Fe–Cu–Mn trimetal oxide. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2020. 
In another trimetal oxide, Ni–Al–Fe trimetal, aluminum oxide contributed additional surface hydroxyl groups which could enhance the adsorption of As species.55 The pHPZC of the Ni–Al–Fe trimetal oxide was found to be 6.73 at a pH of 7.0, where the surface would be neutral to slightly negative, the adsorption capacities of As(III) and As(V) were 114 and 103 mg g−1, respectively. Aluminum substituted cobalt ferrite (Co0.9Al0.2Fe1.7O4), represented as Co–Al–Fe trimetal oxide with a pHpzc of 6.8, showed higher removal of As(III) at pH 2.0 and 12.0, while it exhibited better adsorption of As(V) at pH 5.0 and 7.0.153 The maximum adsorption capacity of 130 and 76 mg g−1 was observed for As(III) and As(V) species, respectively under neutral pH conditions. Al substitution of Co–Al–Fe influences the surface reactions through ligand exchange, while Co and Fe based transitional metal centres initiate the redox reactions. Notably, formation of more stable zero valent arsenic species (As(0)) was observed due to the occurrence of simultaneous redox reactions.
4.5. Other iron-based minerals
Although it is reported that iron oxides have high arsenic affinities, if the iron hydroxides are applied alone, the disadvantages of iron oxides for arsenic removal include slow adsorption kinetics, narrow applicable pH ranges, and difficulties in disposal after adsorption. Also, because of small particle sizes, iron oxide nanoparticles cannot be used in continuous flow systems. To overcome these difficulties, novel materials have been developed by combining iron oxides with other traditional adsorbents. In the modification process, the traditional adsorbents serve as a supporting matrix while iron oxides selectively remove arsenic from the system.20,113,154,155 The most frequently used method is the modification of activated carbon by impregnating iron oxides on the surfaces.
4.6. Structural Fe(II) hydroxides
ZVI has proved effective for the oxidative-sorption of arsenite, however, a prerequisite for the adsorption step is the formation of structural Fe(II) hydroxides on the ZVI surface.150 Structural Fe(II) species are generated via Fe2+ precipitation over the iron mineral surface or by incorporation of Fe2+ in iron minerals.28 All the structural Fe(II) species are highly reactive.28 Oxidized layers on the surface of ZVI control both the electron and Fe(II) transfer from the underlying structural Fe(II) hydroxides to the liquid medium. Passivation behavior is the limiting step for the conversion of Fe0 to Fe(II) in most conditions. This issue can be addressed by the supplementation of chemical oxidants. In other way, structural Fe(II) hydroxides can be prepared by alkali treatment of ferrous sulfate.28 Structural Fe(II) hydroxides exhibit different arsenite oxidative sorption mechanisms in the presence and absence of oxygen.28,150 The presence of oxygen greatly enhanced the removal of As(III), while anoxic conditions significantly decreased its removal. Based on experimental studies, it was found that Fe(IV) formed in the system is the main oxidant for arsenite oxidation in structural Fe(II) hydroxide aerated systems (Fig. 8).28 At the same time, the pollutant removal mechanism varied with pH. At pH 7, oxidation in solution followed by adsorption at the iron surface is the arsenite removal mechanism, while adsorption followed by oxidation is the contaminant removal mechanism at pH 9. In the absence of oxygen, arsenite oxidative sorption over structural Fe(II) hydroxides decreased significantly and oxidants like Cu(II), Cr(VI) and NO2− are necessary for mineral transformation of structural Fe(II) hydroxides and oxidation of arsenite.150
 Fig. 8  Oxidative sorption mechanism of arsenite in aerated structural Fe(II) hydroxide systems. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2016. 
4.7. Ferrate
Iron species with higher oxidation states like Fe(IV), Fe(V) and Fe(VI) are collectively referred to as ferrates,156 where among these Fe(VI) has received much attention due to its high redox potential in a wide range of pH (+2.2 V under acidic conditions and +0.7 V under basic conditions).157 The higher oxidation potential of ferrate has been used for water and wastewater treatment and is well described by several researchers.156–158 Rapid oxidation of arsenite occurs in water by ferrate as given in eqn (17)34 and has been confirmed by Fan et al.33,159 due to the large thermodynamic driving force. Even though the oxidation potential of ferrate is higher in acidic medium, increased rates of arsenite oxidation were reported in basic rather than acidic medium, due to competitive redox reactions of ferrate with water under acidic conditions.33 2HFeO4− + 3H3AsO3 → 2Fe3+ + 3HAsO42−(17)
Multiple mechanisms of reactions occur in the Fe(VI) system during the oxidation of the pollutant as represented in Fig. 9. Formation of Fe(V) and Fe(IV) can occur through (i) one electron and two electron reaction pathways and (ii) reactions with radical species produced via the Fenton reaction.160 Further, the resulting Fe(V) and Fe(IV) species can also react with the pollutant. Oxygen-atom transfer reactions during the oxidation of arsenite (AsO33−) to arsenate (AsO43−) suggest the transfer of 4 e− equivalents per Fe(VI). Self-decomposition reactions of ferrates (Fe(IV), Fe(V) and Fe(VI)) could also happen in multiple steps as represented in Fig. 9.160 During the self-decomposition of ferrates, a notable amount of reactive oxygen species such as O2˙− and H2O2 is produced in the presence of oxygen molecules that could also induce further oxidation reactions.
 Fig. 9  Possible reaction mechanisms of ferrate while oxidizing the contaminant X. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Oxidative sorption by ferrates proceeds via solution oxidation followed by adsorption. As As(III) is oxidized to As(V), the ferrates are reduced to lower valent iron ions, namely Fe(III) or Fe(II). As a result of formation of these iron species, precipitation of iron oxides and hydroxides can occur, thus generated adsorption sites. Recent studies have demonstrated that ferrate is enough for the complete removal of arsenic from water,48,50 due to the precipitation of amorphous ferrihydrite from potassium ferrate, having an arsenic sorption capacity of 162.02 mg g−1 at pH 6.5.48 At the same time, Prucek and co-workers50 observed the formation of nanoparticles possessing a γ-Fe2O3 core coated with a γ-FeOOH shell after the treatment of arsenic contaminated water with ferrate at pH 6.6, where the nanoparticle was responsible for the complete removal of arsenic from water. To enhance the adsorption capacity however, addition of suitable adsorbents to ferrate is needed to remediate contaminated waters. Ferrate oxidation followed by iron22,34 or aluminum coagulation22 has been proposed and superior performance by aluminum at pH 6.5 was observed, able to reduce arsenic concentrations from 500 to 1.4 μg L−1.22 Ferrate oxidation of 500 ppm arsenite followed by sorption over ash of Unio (Lamellidens marginalis) shells reduced arsenic levels in water below 10 ppb within 40 min.161 Introduction of biochar along with ferrate facilitates simultaneous oxidation and removal of arsenic by adsorption and co-precipitation. The functional groups present on the biochar are known to enhance the oxidative capacity. Initially, arsenite is oxidized to arsenate by ferrate and biochar. Subsequent to this, adsorption of arsenate onto biochar and ferric (hydr)oxides formed by the reduction of ferrate leads to the formation of Fe–As biochar floc which further enhances the adsorption and co-precipitation of arsenate. Additionally, the presence of biochar aided in faster settling of the floc when compared to the ferrate system alone.162
5. Arsenite treatment methods based on oxidative sorption mechanisms
Oxidative sorption based advanced treatment methods are beneficial to conventional methodologies due to their efficient performance, acceptability, scalability, and economical factor. These oxidative sorption methodologies include the iron-based chemical, electrochemical and photochemical approaches, where the oxidation of arsenite is initiated via the reactive oxygen species and/or direct electron transfer reactions followed by subsequent sorption of arsenate by the resulting iron oxides and oxyhydroxides as described in this section.
5.1. Fenton process
The ZVI/O2 process is found as an effective method for the oxidation of arsenite as discussed in the above section where Fenton reactions are responsible for the oxidation of arsenite. Based on the investigation on Fenton reactions, Hug and Leupin80 proposed the arsenite oxidation and subsequent removal mechanism as shown in Fig. 10. The use of a heterogeneous catalyst over soluble ferrous ion salt in the Fenton process provides a significant advantage as the catalyst is reusable and effective over a wide pH range.163 Based on this, Lu and co-workers164 used three metal layered double hydroxide Cu–Zn–Fe-LDH as a heterogeneous Fenton catalyst for the oxidative removal of arsenite. The catalyst was found effective for the simultaneous removal of arsenic as well as acetaminophen. Solutions containing 5 mg L−1 of arsenite and 15 mg L−1 of acetaminophen were treated with 0.5 g L−1 catalyst and 50 mmol L−1 hydrogen peroxide at pH 7 which resulted in complete removal of acetaminophen and reduction of arsenite to <10 μg L−1.
 Fig. 10  Proposed arsenite removal mechanism by the Fenton process (INT and INT-OH are intermediates) reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2003. 
In addition to ZVI applications, oxidative sorption by binary metal oxides could be further enhanced with external dosages of H2O2.165 Enhanced removal of As(III) with magnetic Fe–Mn binary metal oxides plus H2O2 can be attributed to ˙OH radicals generated through Fenton like reactions, catalyzed by surface Fe(II) and Mn(II) species, as well as the dissolved species (eqn (8)). Further regeneration of Mn(II) species occurs based on the reaction given in eqn (18). About 69.16% removal of As(III) was attributed to surface bound ˙OHads radicals catalyzed by the surface bound Fe and Mn species and about 30.39% removal was attributed to ˙OH in the bulk solution, catalyzed by dissolved Fe and Mn species (eqn (19) and (20)). The freshly generated As(V) was removed through subsequent adsorption onto the oxide surfaces. (18) (19) (20)
A single step Fenton like process mediated by the Fe(III)/calcium peroxide (CaO2) system exhibited simultaneous arsenite oxidation and removal of arsenite with 100% and 95.8% efficiency.166 Although the generation of singlet oxygen from Ca(II) at a fast rate helped in arsenite oxidation, the major contributor in the oxidation process was the hydroxyl radical. The nascent colloids formed from Ca and Fe provided active sites for arsenite removal. The process begins by arsenite uptake by Ca–Fe colloids and their subsequent oxidation by the oxidants. The main advantage of this process is that it can be operated over a wide range of pH from 3 to 9. Moreover, the system facilitated arsenite oxidation at a rate greater than that of the Fe(III)/hydrogen peroxide system.
5.2. Electrochemical methods
Electrochemical processes are efficient in controlling redox reactions and also influence the speciation of iron.167 Further, reactive oxygen species such as H2O2 and ˙OH radicals could be electrogenerated in the electrochemical system to effectively oxidize arsenite to arsenate.168,169 The electro-Fenton process involves the in situ production of Fenton's reagents (Fe2+ and/or H2O2) with the addition of external power supply to produce ˙OH radicals.170 Without an external power source, bio-electro-Fenton processes occur at the cathode chamber of the microbial fuel cell (MFC) and electrons are produced through the anaerobic degradation of organic compounds in the anode chamber, which are transported back to the cathode chamber via external connection.168,169 The microbial driven reduction reactions, such as the two electron-based oxygen reduction, produce H2O2 and iron oxide reduction produces Fe2+ species (eqn (21) and (22)). The iron oxide (γ-FeOOH) coated carbon cathode could act as the source of Fe2+ species and the externally purged oxygen/air could act as the source of H2O2.169 The quantity of iron oxide on the cathode controls the arsenic removal because (i) produced Fe2+ species by electrochemical reduction catalyzes the generation of radicals through the reaction with electrogenerated H2O2 that could oxidize arsenite into arsenate and (ii) the resulting arsenate can be further adsorbed onto the surface of the iron oxide. O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2(21) Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+(22)
An overall electron transfer mechanism that occurs in the bio-electro-Fenton system during the removal of arsenic species in the MFC coupled process is given as follows (Fig. 11):169 (1) anaerobic oxidation of lactate by Shewanella putrefaciens SP200 strain in the anodic chamber of the MFC to produce electrons and protons, (2) electrons are utilized to produce H2O2 at the cathode chamber via the two electron oxygen reduction reaction, (3) iron oxide (γ-FeOOH) on the cathode is electrochemically reduced into Fe(II)ads species, (4) Fe(II)ads species are further dissolved into the liquid medium Fe2+, (5) Fe(II)–Fe(III) reactive intermediates oxidize the As(III) species, and (6) oxidation of As(III) occurs in the reaction with (a) H2O2 and (b) Fenton reaction.
 Fig. 11  (A) Overall electron transfer reactions in a bio-electro-Fenton process coupled with an MFC during the removal of arsenic species; (B) reaction mechanisms involved in the bio-electro-Fenton process at the cathode chamber. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2014. 
The corrosion rate of ZVI controls the removal of arsenic since the generation of radical species to oxidize arsenite via the Fe2+ catalyzed Fenton reaction and the formation of hydrous ferric oxides to adsorb arsenate depends on the corrosion products.168 In the MFC-ZVI hybrid process, the corrosion rate of ZVI is improved through the low voltage electricity produced in the MFC.168 In the MFC-ZVI hybrid electrochemical cell, the cathode of the single-chamber MFC was connected to the iron anode where the corrosion reactions occur, and the anode of the MFC was connected to the carbon cathode where the electrogeneration of H2O2 occurs (Fig. S3†). Radical species produced through the Fenton reaction further oxidize the arsenite and hydrous ferric oxides formed as a result of a series of oxyhydrolysis reactions could remove the arsenic species through adsorption and coprecipitation. Further electrosorption of arsenate also could happen near the vicinity of the iron electrode. Removal of arsenic observed in the MFC-ZVI hybrid process was observed to be higher than the ZVI process alone due to the enhanced corrosion of iron.168 Due to the enhancement in the electron/charge transfer of electrochemical processes, the resulting favorable faradic reactions could improve the adsorption of arsenic species.167 The birnessite content of Fe-Mn oxide on the anode enhances the conversion of Mn(II/III) to Mn(IV) with the externally applied potential (1.2 V) owing to the rise in positive surface charge.167 Further, arsenic species migrate towards the anode and adsorb onto the surface of Fe–Mn oxide. When As(III) species adsorb onto the Fe–Mn oxide, they are oxidized into As(V) species through the electrically converted Mn(IV) and released into the solution. The anticipated electrochemical redox reactions occur on the Fe–Mn anode as illustrated in Fig. S4.†
Carbon-based cathode materials could effectively produce H2O2 through a two-electron oxygen reduction reaction. Stainless steel which is an iron alloy was used as a sacrificial anode to produce Fe2+, and graphene-coated stainless steel was used as the cathode to produce H2O2 in the electrochemical system.172 Hydroxyl radicals produced via the Fenton reaction could oxidize As(III) into As(V) resulting in the production of Fe(III)-As(V) precipitates. Electrochemically converted arsenic species could also be effectively removed from the water through water-soluble polymers coupled with ultrafiltration membranes. Under cyclic voltammetry analysis, polymers also showed good response during the oxidation of As(III).173 A three-dimensional monolith electrode developed from Fe/Fe3C nanoparticles and N,O co-doped carbon nanotubes fixed on carbonized wood facilitated both arsenite oxidation and adsorption.171 The arsenite oxidation to arsenate was mediated by heterogeneous electro Fenton reactions that occurred on the cathode and the generated arsenate was immobilized on the anode by the electrosorption process (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of arsenite oxidation on the cathode and deposition on the anode using Fe/Fe3C@CNTs electrodes reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2021. 
5.3. Aerated iron electrocoagulation
The aerated electrocoagulation process is an emerging topic in the field of electrochemical treatment of waters and wastewaters. Enhancement in performance of the electrocoagulation process by aeration has been observed in recent studies of the treatment of industrial wastewaters174 and dairy wastewater.175 Recently, aerated iron electrocoagulation has been shown to be particularly effective for the oxidation of arsenite and its complete removal from water.10,176,177 Even though oxygen is generated in the conventional electrocoagulation process by water oxidation at the anode (eqn 23), it may well be ineffective for the oxidation of arsenite under field conditions.178 H2O ⇌ 0.5O2 + 2H+ + 2e−(23)
Oxidation of arsenite in the aerated electrocoagulation process occurs either by ferryl ions or by oxides/oxyhydroxides formed during electrolysis. Ferrous ions generated by sacrificial iron anode may be converted to ferric ions along with the generation of hydrogen peroxide as shown in eqn (24) and (25).177,179 There may be a chance for generating hydroxyl radicals in the system via Fenton reactions. Ferryl ions may also generate in the electrolytic system (a) by the reactions between ferrous ions and oxygen as explained in the case of zero valent iron and (b) by the reactions occurring as in an aerated structural Fe(II) hydroxide system.28 Fe2+ + O2 → O2˙− + Fe3+(24) Fe2+ + O2˙− + 2H+ → Fe3+ + H2O2(25)
Formation of oxides and oxyhydroxides during iron electrocoagulation in the presence and absence of oxygen is shown in Fig. 13.176 In the presence of oxygen, lepidocrocite will be formed within seconds, while magnetite or green rust will be formed in the absence of oxygen and in the presence or absence of sulfate and carbonate as shown in the figure. Green rust also will be converted to lepidocrocite in the presence of oxygen. This conversion takes a few minutes and final aging of lepidocrocite (formed as either a primary or secondary product) will result in formation of either goethite or aged lepidocrocite. At neutral pH conditions, green rust formed will be converted to magnetite as an aging product and at pH 10 and in the absence of phosphate, green rust will be converted to magnetite as a secondary product. Surface layer formation at the anode, which mainly consists of magnetite, is also challenging for long term EC experiments in the field.178 Lepidocrocite is the main product in aerated iron electrocoagulation and is responsible for the oxidation of arsenite. Kobya and co-workers180 identified the presence of hematite, maghemite, magnetite, goethite, and lepidocrocite in the sludge generated after iron electrocoagulation.
 Fig. 13  Iron oxide/oxyhydroxide formation pathway in iron electrocoagulation. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Complete removal of arsenite by aerated electrocoagulation was reported recently by bench scale studies.10,181 Speciation analysis and assessment of total arsenic reveals the oxidation of arsenite and subsequent removal of arsenate as shown in Fig. S5.† Arsenite concentration decreases with electrolysis and at the same time, arsenate concentration increases at the initial stages of electrolysis and then decreases. This indicates the effective oxidation of arsenite in the electrolytic system and subsequent removal of arsenate by adsorption onto the iron oxides formed. Fe–O–As bonding observed by FTIR confirmed the sorption of arsenate. Sorption of arsenate is enhanced by external addition of bivalent cations182 as it can form Fe(III)–As(V)–Ca bonds, and facilitates arsenic decontamination under field conditions.183,10 The co-precipitation of arsenate and iron was also confirmed via XRD analysis of the minerals observed and it showed that both FeAsO4 and angelellite were formed. Recently, aerated iron electrocoagulation operated in continuous mode for the treatment of simulated groundwater containing arsenite was reported by Syam Babu et al.184 In their study, 12 cycles of 6 h duration each at two different flow rates of 5 L h−1 and 10 L h−1 were evaluated. Complete removal of arsenite was observed in the first 4 cycles when 10 L h−1 was adopted. However, the efficiency was reduced after the 4th cycle due to electrode passivation. The authors attempted to overcome the electrode passivation by changing the polarity after each cycle where they could reduce the passivation to some extent.
5.4. Photoinduced oxidation
The oxidation of arsenite (As(III)) on the surface of Fe(III) (oxyhydr)oxides in the absence of molecular oxygen does not occur and there are conflicting reports on whether the heterogeneous reaction occurs in the presence of dissolved O2.185,186 While some observations for this reaction occurring have been reported, it is generally agreed that it is not operative at short time scales and is not facile on iron (oxyhydr)oxide surfaces. Prior research, however, has shown that the oxidation of arsenite to arsenate does occur homogeneously187 and heterogeneously188,189 (on small band semiconductor iron oxyhydroxide) in the presence of light. In the homogeneous circumstance, the key photochemical requirement is that As (III) is excited by 254 nm radiation, a wavelength which is not readily available for remediation strategies that typically rely on longer wavelengths (e.g., solar). In the heterogeneous circumstance, the excitation of iron (oxyhydr)oxides, which have bandgaps in the visible range, with longer wavelengths, results in the oxidation of As(III) and the formation of As(V). The As(V) product, depending on experimental conditions, can exist as an adsorbed and/or solution phase species.
For the heterogeneous photo-oxidation case, As(III) oxidation in the presence of iron oxides/hydroxides is dependent on the redox state and phase of the iron-bearing mineral in the system, in addition to the pH and chemical composition of the aqueous phase. In many studies, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are invoked as key contributors to the oxidation process, but while ROS do play an important role in any system containing iron and oxygen, studies have demonstrated that the fundamental initiating reactions directly involve electron transfer (ET) from the As(III) moiety to the Fe species in the Fe(III) bearing (oxyhydr)oxide substrate. Furthermore, the mechanistic detail of the ET reactions is not consistent across the different iron oxyhydroxide phases, due, for example, to differences in Fe redox potentials. The low solubility of iron oxyhydroxides in oxygenated waters, even at low pH, results in Fe(II) or Fe(III) existing at low concentrations in aqueous environments. As either concentration or pH increases, precipitation of the first nascent colloidal species occurs followed by formation of more crystalline (oxyhydr)oxides and finally formation of oxide solids.190,191 Whether amorphous or crystalline, each of these different iron-oxo phases interacts with As(III) similarly, forming inner sphere complexes at the interface.192 While surface complexation may be similar, the photooxidation of As(III) can proceed via two distinct mechanisms depending on the phase and redox state of the iron compound.
The first mechanism associated with the photo-oxidation of As(III) involves its complexation with aqueous Fe(III)-oxo species or a nascent colloid. In these circumstances, excitation of the complex by light generates an excited state, inducing ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) where there is ET from As(III) to Fe(III). Direct evidence of As(III)/Fe(III) complexation was identified with nascent colloidal ferric hydroxide (CFH),193 where at constant Fe(III) concentration an absorbance at 285 nm was found to increase with increasing As(III) concentration, and following the Benesi–Hildebrand method, the equilibrium constant of complex formation was derived. With low concentrations of the fresh Fe(III) colloid, oxic and anoxic reactions resulted in an Fe(II):As(V) concentration ratio of 1.5:1 and 2:1, respectively. The deviation of the oxic reaction from the 2:1 Fe(II):As(V) ratio can be attributed to the facile oxidation of the Fe(II) product by dissolved molecular oxygen. Furthermore, under oxic conditions the presence of ROS scavengers did not decrease the generation of As(V) over the course of the reaction. In a second study, Pozdnyakov and coworkers showed that at low concentrations, the formation of ROS directly from photolysis was the primary oxidant of As(III) but as concentrations increased a photoactive Fe–As complex was responsible for the oxidation.194 These results demonstrate that LMCT is operative as the dominate mechanism for arsenite oxidation when Fe(III) is present as an oxo or, at most, a poly-oxo species.
The same study also analysed amorphous ferric hydroxides (AFH), where the CFH was allowed to age, finding a decrease in the amount of As(III) oxidation under the same conditions.193 The experimentally observed decrease in the oxidation efficiency is likely attributable to the decrease in Fe–As bonds, where in the precipitated phase a fraction of Fe will be in the interior of the particle; a fraction which will only grow as the particle increases in size. Furthermore, while the precipitated phase has not been structurally analysed, it might be expected that this material is ferrihydrite (Fh), a nano-dimensioned metastable ferric (oxyhydr)oxide which is a small band gap semiconductor. Semiconductors are characterized as materials where the band gap (Eg) – the energy difference between the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) – is separated by less than 3 eV.195 Exposure to photon energies (i.e., hν) greater than Eg can promote an electron from the VB to the CB leaving an oxidative hole behind (hvb+). Work by Bhandari et al.188 demonstrated that suspensions containing both Fh and As(III) resulted in the formation of adsorbed As(V) on the mineral surface and solution phase Fe(II) when exposed to light. Both this study using Fh and that previously discussed invoking LMCT yield a concentration ratio, Fe(II):As(V), of ∼2:1, suggesting direct ET from As(III) to Fe(III). However, the reactions with Fh were completed in glass containers, which block wavelengths below ∼300 nm, thus when exposed to simulated solar radiation the suspension was never exposed to the wavelength of light necessary for the direct LMCT identified by Xu et al.193 Hence, the more plausible mechanism is due to the semiconducting properties of Fh, where the initiation of the reaction can be attributed to formation of a hvb+ and the subsequent oxidation of As(III). As As(III) is oxidized on Fh, excited electrons present in the CB reduce structural Fe(III) generating Fe(II) which can partition into solution. Further studies using Fh showed that the concentration ratio, Fe(II):As(V), was the same under oxic and anoxic conditions, both generating a 2:1 ratio of Fe(II):As(V).188 This is particularly important as the LMCT circumstance purposed in the nascent case necessitates O2 and hence, generation of ROS to form the transient As(IV) species.193 For the Fh circumstance, however, the Fe(III)–As(III) species does not necessarily form a long lived Fe(II)–As(IV) species, as the Fe(II) generated is on the surface of a bulk lattice. Here the electron can be conducted away from the reduced Fe atom through the bulk and eventually reduce a different Fe(III) site (spatially removed from the initial reduction site), which can then be released as Fe(II) into solution.196,197 Thus the second electron removal, where As(IV) is oxidized to As(V), is likely facile as the species is already bound to a reformed Fe(III) site. This result also helps to explain why a majority of the As(V) generated in reactions with Fh remains bound to the surface, because the formation of Fe(II)–As(IV) does not necessitate desorption into solution, as the electron is conducted away from the active site, and Fe(II) is released elsewhere from the iron oxyhydroxide lattice. The reader is directed to a recent review by Huang et al.198 which discusses Fe(II) reactivity in the environment, particularly on environmentally relevant iron oxides, hydroxides, and oxyhydroxide surfaces.
In contrast to Fh, when goethite (Gt – α-FeOOH), also a small band gap semiconductor, was used in the photooxidation of As(III), the ratio of Fe(II):As(V) deviated from 2:1.189 The initiation of the reaction on Gt was attributed to the oxidation of As(III) by hvb+, similar to Fh. Perhaps, it is interesting that the overall oxidative capacity of the minerals varies and Fh and Gt do not behave similarly in the photo-oxidation of As(III) at a pH of 5.5. Prior research has suggested that the competition between the rate of Fe(II) release during the oxidation of As(III) and the heterogeneous oxidation of photo-generated surface Fe(II) with dissolved oxygen is a key consideration in explaining the photochemistry involving As(III) and iron oxyhydroxides.189 For Fh it is has been argued, for example, that the release of Fe(II) from the lattice is rapid at a pH of 5.5 (a pH lower than its point of zero charge) so that the subsequent oxidation of Fe(II) primarily occurs homogeneously in solution. In the case of Gt, however, at a pH of 5.5 the heterogeneous oxidation of surface Fe(II) by dissolved oxygen is rapid, resulting in the reduction of dioxygen and ultimately to the generation of solution phase ROS which can then homogeneously oxidize aqueous As(III). This may be attributed to the fact that at pH 5.5, goethite is closer to the point of zero charge of ∼6.4, thus Fe(II) desorption is a slower process relative to surface oxidation by O2. Hence, in the Gt circumstance the As(V) product is generated both on the oxyhydroxide surface and in solution (in contrast to Fh). The presence of two pathways/mechanisms would (1) decrease the amount of Fe(II) released into solution, (2) increase the quantity of As(V) in solution, and (3) increase the rate of As(III) oxidation, which is what is hypothesized to occur upon the exposure of Gt and As(III) to light.
The contribution of ROS, primarily ˙OH, in the oxidation of As(III) in the presence of Gt during UVA irradiation was confirmed recently by Wang et al.199 using hole and ROS scavengers. Specifically, this research investigated As(III) in the presence of solution phase oxalate and Gt at pH 3 and 7 (notably above and below the pH 5.5 condition described above). At the lower pH, the photo-oxidation of As(III) largely proceeded through photo-Fenton chemistry resulting from the reaction between aqueous Fe(II) and H2O2. In particular, the research indicated that the resulting ˙OH played a large role in oxidizing As(III) to adsorbed As(V). This result is relatively consistent with the Bhandari et al.189 study that showed that at a pH of 5.5, a large fraction of As(III) was oxidized in solution rather than on the goethite surface. It is noted however that Fe(II) in the Wang et al. study is suggested to be formed from the Fe(III)-oxalate complex whereas in the Bhandari work, Fe(II) is proposed to result from the photoreduction of Fe(III) in the Gt lattice followed by its release into solution. The research by Wang et al.199 goes on to show that the As(III) oxidation at pH 7 in the presence of goethite (and oxalate) is largely a semiconductor driven process where As(III) is oxidized by the photogenerated hole in the iron oxyhydroxide. This mechanism is similar to what was previously observed for Bhandari et al.188 at pH 5.5 for Fh where the primary As(III) oxidation mechanism was due to the photogenerated hole in Fh.
Despite differences in overall reactivity and propagating mechanisms, a band gap excitation can be invoked for the initiation of As(III) oxidation for Fh and Gt, while the CFH are dependent on formation of an excited As(III)–Fe(III) complex which results in LMCT. Overall, a combination of LMCT of aqueous species and excitation of the band gap can be employed when analysing the photoinduced oxidation of As(III) in the presence of ferric species. However, one of the notable benefits of the iron (oxyhydr)oxide systems in regard to remediation strategies is the presence of surfaces that can strongly bind the As(V) product, making removal of the As(V) more practical.
5.5. Peroxicoagulation
The peroxicoagulation process is a modified version of the electro-Fenton process in which hydrogen peroxide is generated from the cathode via two electron reduction of oxygen (eqn (21)), the ferrous ion is generated from the anode (via scarification of iron or stainless steel) and the hydroxyl radical is generated via the Fenton reaction.170,200,201 One of the issues of peroxicoagulation is to control the increase in solution pH with electrolysis time which is due to the hydrogen evolution reaction as occurs in the electrocoagulation process.202–204 Thus, peroxicoagulation is a combination of the electro-Fenton process and electrocoagulation process, in which electro-Fenton predominates under acidic conditions, while electrocoagulation predominates under neutral and alkaline conditions.205,206 However, external aeration during the peroxicoagulation process is an advantage for the oxidation of arsenite even under alkaline and neutral conditions, as aerated iron electrocoagulation is found effective for the oxidative sorption of arsenite from water.10,207
The peroxicoagulation process is found effective for the oxidation of arsenite and sorption of arsenate in a wide pH range.9,181,208 It is also found that ferryl ions and hydroxyl radicals are the main oxidants responsible for arsenite oxidation.9,181,208 This process is able to reduce arsenic concentration from 1464 μg L−1 to 4 μg L−1 within 30 s of electrolysis.181 Compared with other electrochemical advanced oxidation processes, the peroxicoagulation process has shown superior performance as the process is able to remove arsenic completely from water medium, while both electro-Fenton and anodic oxidation are able to oxidize arsenite fully and not able to remove the arsenate formed.208
6. Management of arsenic and iron bearing sludge
Though iron based arsenic removal processes are efficient in decreasing arsenic concentrations below the WHO recommended limit, improper disposal of the arsenic bearing sludge can become fresh sources of contamination depending on the environmental conditions (like pH and redox potential) of the disposal or storage facility.209,210 Arsenic removal water treatment plants could potentially generate about 5–7 kg of arsenic bearing sludge per cubic meters of water211 and direct disposal of the arsenic-iron sludge into landfills could increase the risk of soil and groundwater contamination.210 Thus, the sustainable management of arsenic bearing iron sludge is vital for the continuous practice of the suggested treatment options. Solidification/stabilization of arsenic–iron sludge along with concrete, cement and lime mortar, polymers, and fly ash is proven to decrease arsenic leachability.209,212–217 Control mechanisms preventing arsenic leaching in the cement and lime-based solidification/stabilization process are attributed to the formation of calcite and non-soluble precipitates such as calcium arsenite, calcium hydrogen arsenate hydrates, calcium hydrogen arsenates, etc. that cap the pore of the matrix.217 Diffusion coefficient values were found to be in the range of 10−10 to 10−12 cm2 s−1 suggesting that cement and lime alone are sufficient to prevent the leaching of arsenic, where the best result could be obtained with a mixed cement and lime matrix.217
The characteristics of arsenic bearing iron sludge resulting from the electrochemical arsenic remediation (ECAR) technology can be compared with concrete materials as a basis for identifying potential incorporation of ECAR into solidification mixtures.216 The grain size of ECAR is similar to the already used filler material signifying its potential utilization in concrete. The specific gravity of ECAR sludge is estimated to be 2.65–2.7, which is higher than that of silt and sand due to the higher iron content. Further, the optimum moisture content value estimated for ECAR sludge is higher than those of other already used materials, suggesting the consideration of higher water demand during the design of the concrete mix for the cement–water ratio. Arsenic bearing iron sludge obtained from ECAR exhibits higher void ratio and porosity than the sand and contain medium plasticity index of 7–17 usually used.216 Despite these differences, Fe and As K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy analysis of concrete stabilized arsenic-iron sludge reveals the presence of As–Ca coordination and a decrease in As–Fe coordination.209 Further, X-ray diffraction analysis confirms the presence of calcite that could minimize the leaching of arsenic by decreasing the pore size and the potential decrease in mobility is attributed to the formation of poorly soluble calcium arsenates. It was recommended that about 25% of the arsenic-iron sludge produced from the electrochemical remediation process could be added safely to concrete mixtures based on toxicity characteristic leachate procedure tests.209
Iron arsenic sludge obtained post treatment of arsenic contaminated solution by electrocoagulation can be successfully used as a binding material in concrete instead of cement.184 Estimation of how much percentage of iron arsenic sludge that must be mixed in the concrete to obtain high compressive strength, is an important factor affecting the stability of the concrete mix. By varying the percentage of iron arsenic sludge in the concrete from 0.5% to 3%, it was observed that 1% provided highest compressive strength of 22.5 MPa which was well above the acceptable residential concrete limit. The TCLP tests of the concrete mix provided evidence of negligible arsenic leaching which is an indication of the concrete mix being a safe method for the management of iron arsenic sludge.184 Sun et al.218 stabilized arsenic by incorporating it into the crystal lattice in natural minerals. Arsenic containing lime ferrate sludge was mixed with ZVI and treated under hydrothermal conditions for 12 h at 150 °C. Arsenate ions were released from the sludge whereas Ca2+ from gypsum under hydrothermal conditions. AsO43− and supersaturated Ca2+ reacted in a closed environment leading to the crystal growth of Johnbaumite, a mineral.
The critical parameters to produce good quality arsenic-iron sludge incorporating brick are sludge fraction and firing temperature.219 The optimum proportion of arsenic-iron sludge incorporation to produce the desired bonding of clay and sludge brick is found to be 6%, which is the maximum safe limit, and its corresponding compressive strength is 15.1 MPa. Higher leaching of both arsenic and iron is observed under acidic and alkaline conditions from the sludge-brick, suggesting that the brick should not be exposed to extreme pH conditions. At pH 3.0, leaching of arsenic exceeded the standard limit of 0.05 mg L−1. At neutral pH, leaching of arsenic for 3 and 6% of sludge fraction never exceeded the limit; however, higher sludge fractions such as 9 and 12% exceeded the standard limit in 72 and 24 h of leachability tests, respectively.220 The optimum firing temperature to obtain high compressive strength with less surface fracture was found to be ∼1000 °C for the heating time of 6 h. Properties such as plastic index and dry shrinkage were decreased with increasing sludge fraction in the sludge–clay matrix. Increased firing temperature and decreased sludge fraction resulted in lower water absorption.220
Recently, arsenic bearing iron sludge has been reportedly used for the formation of colored glasses.221,222 Since glass has high chemical and thermal stability, incorporation of arsenic bearing iron in glass provides safer, reusable disposal options with low arsenic leachability. In general, glass manufacturing processes do not require iron but glasses that are produced for specific applications like amber glass, heat-absorbing glasses, and container glasses require iron.221 During the glass manufacturing process, Fe2O3 acts as the coloring agent, since Fe has loosely bound 3d electrons, that depending on the speciation of iron (Fe2+ and Fe3+) different colors are imparted to glass. Arsenate sorbed α-Fe2O3 nanoparticle sludge was used to produce amber colored soda lime silicate glass that has broader applications in container bottles and building glasses.221,222 Furthermore, As(V) acts as a refining agent that facilitates the homogenization of molten glass by avoiding bubble development.221,222
Bioconversion of inorganic arsenic to organic is considered to be one of the most sustainable ways to handle arsenic bearing sludge in rural environments.210,223 Biotransformation of inorganic As by microbes could result in the formation of volatile and nonvolatile organic arsenic species through oxidation, reduction, and methylation processes. Cow dung is the excellent platform for the occurrence of various biochemical reactions through different microbial consortiums.223,224 Mixing of cow dung with arsenic bearing sludge promotes the conversion of toxic inorganic arsenic species to a less toxic organic arsenic species, like gaseous phase methylarsines.223 Biotransformation of inorganic As species occurs in the first few days of incubation with cow dung and it is efficient when fresh cow dung was introduced. Biotransformation of As was observed to increase with higher cow dung dosage. The presence of arsenic reducing bacteria in cow dung is responsible for the conversion of As(V) to As(III). Removal of inorganic As was found to be similar for open cap and closed cap environments to establish aerobic and anaerobic conditions respectively.223
7. Conclusions and future prospects
Inorganic arsenic contamination of groundwater is a prevalent issue in many parts of the world, which is difficult to be solved for many decades due to its geogenic nature and groundwater being the major source for human consumption. Despite the advanced studies on new materials and methodologies, arsenic removal by iron-based materials is constantly gaining major interest due to its large availability, low cost and non-toxic nature. Participation of iron species such as Fe(0), Fe(II) and Fe(III) in the oxidation of arsenite to arsenate and its removal mechanisms are detailed under different pH conditions as well as at various treatment systems. Mechanisms of oxidative sorption of iron-related materials such as zero-valent iron, iron (oxyhydr)oxides, structural Fe(II) hydroxides, ferrate, bimetallic particles, and bi and tri-metal oxides in removing arsenite and arsenate species are summarized as follows,
(i) Oxidative sorption of arsenite by ZVI can occur via both of the primary mechanisms i.e. (1) solution-oxidation/adsorption and (2) adsorption/surface-oxidation. Adsorptive removal of arsenite and arsenate is high on the surface of corrosion products enveloping the ZVI surface; however, arsenate removal was predominant. The corrosion of nZVI is greatly accelerated at acidic pH, while the surface passivation of iron oxide predominantly occurs under alkaline conditions. Further, acidic and aerobic conditions favoured lepidocrocite formation, whereas alkaline conditions favoured the formation of magnetite/maghemite.
(ii) The mechanism by which arsenate oxyanions adsorb on iron oxyhydroxide minerals in exchange with hydroxyl groups is mainly attributed to chemical adsorption through forming inner-sphere monodentate or bidentate surface complexes as Fe–O–AsO(OH)–O–Fe, as well as electrostatic attraction and surface complexation between the species and iron hydroxides on the minerals.
(iii) Arsenite removal by the bimetallic particles and bi/tri-metal oxides involves the synergistic effects of excellent oxidation potential and greater adsorption capacity. Bimetallic particles also involve complicated reaction mechanisms where the oxidation of arsenite to arsenate occurs by reactive oxygen species on the surface, while the reduction of arsenate to arsenite occurs in the intraparticle.
(iv) The role of redox reactivity of various Fe(II) species is substantial in removing arsenite through the oxidative sorption mechanism across multiple treatment systems, including the ZVI based Fenton reaction, electrochemical treatment systems such as electro-Fenton and bio-electro-Fenton, aerated iron electrocoagulation, photoinduced oxidation and peroxicoagulation.
Due to their fine particle sizes, iron-based nanoparticles cannot be used in continuous flow systems. To enable their easy separation, novel materials have been developed by combining iron oxides with other traditional adsorbents. However, the strong bonding between the iron-based material and the supporting matrices is of question. Further studies need to be performed to identify the supporting material that could have long term binding with the iron-based materials.
Apart from the benefits of arsenic removal by iron-based treatment systems, it also generates a massive volume of arsenic bearing sludge. The sustainable management of arsenic bearing iron sludge is crucial for the prolonged practice of the discussed treatment methodologies. Solidification/stabilization of arsenic-iron sludge, concrete, cement and lime mortar, polymers, and fly ash is proven to decrease arsenic leachability. On the other hand, bioconversion of inorganic arsenic to organic arsenic is considered to be one of the most sustainable ways to handle arsenic bearing sludge in rural environments. Since the microbial conversion of arsenic and iron is possible, it is important to store the sludge under the controlled environment that restrict the microbial activity. The possibilities of chemical and microbial changes that can occur during the sludge disposal activity increase the risk of arsenic leaching into the ground. Thus, more research needs to be focused on finding innovative and sustainable ways to manage the arsenic bearing iron sludge.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors acknowledge the Federal Commission for Scholarships for Foreign Students, the Swiss Government for the funding of the scholarship (Ref. No: 2021.0481).
References
S. K. Singh and E. A. Stern, Environment, 2017, 59, 24–28 Search PubMed .

          S. Elsawah and J. H. A. Guillaume, Incorporating human aspects into groundwater research and policy making: A soft and critical systems thinking approach,  2016 Search PubMed.
P. Hunter, EMBO Rep., 2008, 9, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gilbert-diamond, Z. Li, A. E. Perry, S. K. Spencer and A. J. Gandolfi, Environ. Health Perspect., 2013, 1154–1160 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Monrad, A. K. Ersbøll, M. Sørensen, R. Baastrup, B. Hansen, A. Gammelmark, A. Tjønneland, K. Overvad and O. Raaschou-Nielsen, Environ. Res., 2017, 154, 318–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nidheesh and T. S. A. Singh, Chemosphere, 2017, 181, 418–432 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Uppal, Q. Zheng and X. C. Le, Curr Opin Environ Sci Health, 2019, 7, 126–135 CrossRef .
J. Xu, W. Ding, F. Wu, G. Mailhot, D. Zhou and K. Hanna, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Si, G. Li and F. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2017, 4, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
D. Syam Babu, P. V. Nidheesh and M. Suresh Kumar, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2021, 56, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Frey and G. H. Reed, ACS Chem. Biol., 2012, 7, 1477–1481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, L. Chen and R. Zboril, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4(1), 18–34 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Stephan Enthaler and K. Junge, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3317–3321 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ilbert and V. Bonnefoy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2013, 1827, 161–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. M. Bigham, R. W. Fitzpatrick and D. G. Schulze, Soil Mineral. with Environ. Appl.,  2002, vol. 7, pp. 323–366 Search PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, F. Kazama, H. Jiangyong and A. K. Ray, J. Water Health, 2005, 3, 45–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Toxic/Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng., 2010, 45, 645–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Baig, T. Sheng, Y. Hu, J. Xu and X. Xu, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2015, 43, 13–26 CAS .
D. Mohanty, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2017, 228, 381 CrossRef .

          S. Lata and S. R. Samadder, Removal of arsenic from water using nano adsorbents and challenges: A review, Elsevier Ltd,  2016, vol. 166 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Wang, G. Zhang, Q. Wu and D. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1518–1526 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, V. K. Sharma and O. S. Mbuya, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 169, 339–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, J. Tu, W. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Chu, G. Lu, Z. Lin and Z. Dang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1544–1552 RSC .
L. Hao, M. Liu, N. Wang and G. Li, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 39545–39560 RSC .
C. Su and R. W. Puls, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2008, 193, 65–78 CrossRef CAS .

          L. D. Benefield, J. F. Judkins and B. L. Weand, Process chemistry for water and wastewater treatment, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,  1982 Search PubMed .
G. Ona-Nguema, G. Morin, Y. Wang, A. L. Foster, F. Juillot, G. Calas and G. E. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 5416–5422 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Guan, Z. Tian, X. Guan and D. Wu, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 506, 703–710 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qiu, T. Gao, J. Hong, Y. Luo, L. Liu, W. Tan and F. Liu, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2018, 228, 205–219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lan, H. Ying, X. Wang, F. Liu, W. Tan, Q. Huang, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Water Res., 2018, 128, 92–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Masue, R. H. Loeppert and T. A. Kramer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 837–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ghernaout and M. W. Naceur, Desalin. Water Treat., 2011, 30, 319–332 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Fan, N. Li, C. Chuang, Y. Shi, R. Brown, J. Vanleeuwen, K. Banerjee, J. Qu and H. Chen, Arsen. Soil Groundw. Environ. - Biogeochem. Interact. Heal. Eff. Remediat.,  2007, vol. 9, pp. 623–639 Search PubMed .
Y. Lee, I. H. Um and J. Yoon, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 5750–5756 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Du, S. Zhang, B. Pan, L. Lv, W. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Water Res., 2013, 47, 6064–6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Kanel, B. Manning, L. Charlet and H. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1291–1298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Klas and D. W. Kirk, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 252–253, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sun, K. A. Osseo-Asare, Y. Chen and B. A. Dempsey, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 196, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Manning, M. L. Hunt, C. Amrhein and J. A. Yarmoff, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 5455–5461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dixit and J. Hering, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 4182–4189 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Su and R. T. Wilkin, in Advances in Arsenic Research ACS Symposium Series, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  2005, pp. 25–40 Search PubMed .
X. Song, P. Chen, X. Luo, Y. Zhang and J. Liu, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103427 CrossRef CAS .
C. Meng, Q. Mao, L. Luo, J. Zhang, J. Wei, Y. Yang, M. Tan, Q. Peng, L. Tang and Y. Zhou, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 191, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, L. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Shan, X. Li, W. Zhu and Y. Luo, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 711–718 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, F. Fu, D. D. Dionysiou and B. Tang, Water Res., 2016, 96, 22–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Babaee, C. N. Mulligan and M. S. Rahaman, Environ. Earth Sci., 2017, 76, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nakseedee, V. Tanboonchuy, P. Khemthong, N. Grisdanurak and C.-H. Liao, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2017, 36, 1449–1457 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lan, Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Kang and L. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 292, 389–397 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, Z. Ding, Z. Zhao and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 350, 453–462 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prucek, J. Tuček, J. Kolařík, J. Filip, Z. Marušák, V. K. Sharma and R. Zbořil, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 3283–3292 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rana, N. Kumari, M. Tyagi and S. Jagadevan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 347, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Babaee, C. N. Mulligan and M. S. Rahaman, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2018, 93, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Gyoten, A. Sonoda, Q. Feng and M. Xue, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 1490–1497 RSC .
G. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Wang and H. Li, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 309, 112993 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Penke, G. Anantharaman, J. Ramkumar and K. K. Kar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55608–55617 RSC .
J. Phanthasri, P. Khamdahsag, P. Jutaporn, K. Sorachoti, K. Wantala and V. Tanboonchuy, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jacukowicz-sobala, D. Oci, P. Mazur and E. Stanis, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 394, 122527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Yang, L. Zhang, W. Zhu, J. Sun, G. Li, T. Li and J. Wang,  2019, pp. 2845–2854.
N. Dhiman, F. Fatima, P. N. Saxsena, S. Roy, P. K. Rout and S. Patnaik, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 32866–32876 RSC .
Y. Yu, L. Yu, K. Shih and J. P. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 521, 252–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tian, X. Tian, L. Ma, C. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang and L. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 25236–25243 RSC .
B. Prasad, C. Ghosh, A. Chakraborty, N. Bandyopadhyay and R. K. Ray, Desalination, 2011, 274, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mukherjee, R. Kumar, A. Sinha, Y. Lama and A. K. Saha, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 46, 443–466 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mu, F. Jia, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 27–45 RSC .
C. Noubactep, Environ. Technol., 2008, 29, 909–920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guan, Y. Sun, H. Qin, J. Li, I. M. C. Lo, D. He and H. Dong, Water Res., 2015, 75, 224–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Flury, J. Frommer, U. Eggenberger, U. Mäder, M. Nachtegaal and R. Kretzschmar, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 6786–6792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Noubactep, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2013, 41, 702–710 CAS .
B. C. Reinsch, B. Forsberg, R. L. Penn, C. S. Kim and G. V. Lowry, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 3455–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely and W. Zhang, J. Contam. Hydrol., 2010, 118, 96–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu and J. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 671, 388–403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Raman and S. Kanmani, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 177, 341–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Crane and T. B. Scott, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 112–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tosco, M. Petrangeli Papini, C. Cruz Viggi and R. Sethi, J. Cleaner Prod., 2014, 77, 10–21 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fu, D. D. Dionysiou and H. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 267, 194–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Noubactep, Water Res., 2015, 85, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Farrell, J. P. Wang, P. O'Day and M. Conklin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 2026–2032 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Pang, J. Jiang and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Katsoyiannis, T. Ruettimann and S. J. Hug, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 7424–7430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Hug and O. Leupin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 2734–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Kanel, J.-M. Grenèche and H. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 2045–2050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, M. A. V. V. Ramos, B. E. Koel and W. X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6995–6997 RSC .
M. A. V. V. Ramos, W. Yan, X. Q. Li, B. E. Koel, W. X. Zhang, Y. Weile, X. Q. Li, B. E. Koel and W. X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14591–14594 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, R. Vasic, A. I. Frenkel and B. E. Koel, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 7018–7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Horzum, M. M. Demir, M. Nairat and T. Shahwan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7828–7837 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. Guan, J. Wang, X. Meng, C. Xu and G. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 6850–6858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Shi, B. Ma, P. Zhang, X. Jiang, Z. Xiao and X. Guan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 10581–10588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Hu, T. Huang, J. Li, H. Qin and X. Guan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 3742–3750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, H. Liu, E. Anang, C. Li and X. Fan, Water Sci. Technol., 2021, 83, 2886–2900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nidheesh, J. Khatri, T. S. Anantha Singh, R. Gandhimathi and S. T. Ramesh, Chemosphere, 2018, 200, 621–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Scaria, P. V. V. Nidheesh and M. S. Kumar, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 259, 110011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kumar, N. Talreja, D. Deva, N. Sankararamakrishnan, A. Sharma and N. Verma, Desalination, 2011, 282, 27–38 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sepúlveda, M. A. Rubio, S. E. Baltazar, J. Rojas-Nunez, J. L. Sánchez Llamazares, A. G. Garcia and N. Arancibia-Miranda, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 524, 177–187 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Yang, L. Zhang, W. Zhu, J. Sun, G. Li, T. Li and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2845–2854 RSC .
S. Dixit and J. G. Hering, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37(18), 4182–4189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. A. J. Appelo and W. W. J. M. de Vet, in Arsenic Ground Water,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. L. Farquhar, J. M. Charnock, F. R. Livens and D. J. Vaughan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(8), 1757–1762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Sherman and S. R. Randall, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(22), 4223–4230 CrossRef CAS .

          R. M. Cornell and U. Schwertmann, The iron oxides: structure, properties, reactions, occurrences and uses, 2nd edn,  2003 Search PubMed .
H. Zeng, M. Arashiro and D. E. Giammar, Water Res., 2008, 42, 4629–4636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, S. Bang and G. P. Korfiatis, Water Res., 2000, 34, 1255–1261 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, T. J. Pepping, T. Banerji, S. Chaudhari and D. E. Giammar, Water Res., 2011, 45, 384–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Banerji and S. Chaudhari, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3990–4000 CrossRef CAS .

          J. D. Dana, Manual of mineralogy, ed. C. Klein and C. S. Hurlbut Jr, Wiley, New York, 21st edn,  1993, p. 681 Search PubMed .
R. V. Gaines, H. C. W. Skinner, E. E. Foord, B. Mason and A. Rosenzweig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 2693 Search PubMed .
S. I. Siddiqui, M. Naushad and S. A. Chaudhry, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2019, 126, 60–97 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, A. Sarswat, C. U. Pittman, T. Mlsna and D. Mohan, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 2575–2593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Chowdhury and E. K. Yanful, J. Environ. Manage., 2010, 91, 2238e2247 Search PubMed .
S. R. Chowdhury, E. K. Yanful and A. R. Pratt, Environ. Earth Sci., 2011, 64, 411–423 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, S. Tong, M. Ge, J. Zuo, C. Cao and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 959–965 RSC .
S. I. Siddiqui and S. A. Chaudhry, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2017, 111, 592–626 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Gallegos-Garcia, K. Ramírez-Muñiz and S. Song, Arsenic removal from water by adsorption using iron oxide minerals as adsorbents: A review,  2012, vol. 33 Search PubMed .
D. Mohan and C. U. Pittman, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 142, 1–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Otgon, G. Zhang, K. Zhang and C. Yang, Hydrometallurgy, 2019, 186, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Lafferty and R. H. Loeppert, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(7), 2120–2127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, A. Van Geen, R. Louis, N. Nikolaidis and R. Bailey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(19), 7662–7666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goldberg, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2002, 66, 413 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goldberg and C. T. Johnston, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 234, 204–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Manning, S. E. Fendorf and S. Goldberg, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32(16), 2383–2388 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. B. Myneni, S. J. Traina, G. A. Waychunas and T. J. Logan, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1998, 62(21–22), 3499–3514 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. B. Myneni, S. J. Traina, G. A. Waychunas and T. J. Logan, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1998, 62(19–20), 3285–3300 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun and H. E. Doner, Soil Sci., 1996, 161(12), 865–872 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Xu, X. Wang and G. P. Demopoulos, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2007, 71, 1643–1654 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Van Genuchten, J. Peña, S. E. Amrose and A. J. Gadgil, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 285–304 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, P. Singh, E. Paling and S. Delides, Miner. Eng., 2004, 17, 517–524 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xue, Y. Ran, Y. Tan, C. L. Peacock and H. Du, Chemosphere, 2019, 224, 103–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jacukowicz-Sobala, D. Ociński, P. Mazur, E. Stanisławska and E. Kociołek-Balawejder, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 394, 122527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Zhang, J. H. Qu, H. J. Liu, R. P. Liu and G. T. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chang, J. Qu, H. Liu, R. Liu and X. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 338, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Lou, Y. Liu, R. Fu, S. A. Baig and X. Xu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 67951–67961 RSC .
H. Feng, L. Tang, J. Tang, G. Zeng, H. Dong, Y. Deng, L. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Ren and Y. Zhou, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1595–1607 RSC .
S. Zhang, H. Niu, Y. Cai, X. Zhao and Y. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 158, 599–607 CrossRef CAS .
T. Basu and U. C. Ghosh, Desalination, 2011, 266, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gupta and U. C. Ghosh, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 161, 884–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Y. Qiu and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11355–11367 RSC .
P. K. Mishra, P. Gahlyan, R. Kumar and P. K. Rai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10668–10678 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, G. Zhang and J. Paul Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 358, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ociński, I. Jacukowicz-Sobala, P. Mazur, J. Raczyk and E. Kociołek-Balawejder, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 294, 210–221 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Qu and W. Jefferson, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 366, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shan and M. Tong, Water Res., 2013, 47, 3411–3421 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ouma and A. Ofomaja, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 2812–2822 RSC .
L. Yang, L. Ma, J. Xin, A. Li, C. Sun, R. Wei, B. W. Ren, Z. Chen, H. Lin and J. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3038–3047 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, G. Zhang and H. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 193, 243–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ociński, I. Jacukowicz-Sobala and E. Kociołek-Balawejder, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23, 24527–24539 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ye, W. Jin, Q. Huang, Y. Hu, B. R. Shah, S. Liu, Y. Li and B. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41877–41886 RSC .
S. Ye, W. Jin, Q. Huang, Y. Hu, B. R. Shah, Y. Li and B. Li, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 87, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, W. Jin, Q. Huang, Y. Hu, Y. Li, J. Li and B. Li, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 94, 527–534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dhiman, M. Markandeya, F. Fatima, P. N. Saxsena, S. Roy, P. K. Rout and S. Patnaik, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 32866–32876 RSC .
G. Zhang, J. Luo, L. Wang and X. Zhang, Environ. Technol., 2019, 0, 1–39 Search PubMed .
B. Shao, Y. Chen, D. Wu, C. Dai and Y. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 311, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jacukowicz-Sobala, D. Ociński, P. Mazur, E. Stanisławska and E. Kociołek-Balawejder, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 370, 117–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Nasir, P. S. Goh and A. F. Ismail, Chemosphere, 2018, 200, 504–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Penke, G. Anantharaman, J. Ramkumar and K. K. Kar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11587–11598 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Adeleye, J. R. Conway, K. Garner, Y. Huang, Y. Su and A. A. Keller, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 286, 640–662 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mehta, S. Mazumdar and S. K. Singh, J. Water Process. Eng., 2015, 7, 244–265 CrossRef .
P. K. Rai, J. Lee, S. K. Kailasa, E. E. Kwon, Y. F. Tsang, Y. S. Ok and K. H. Kim, Environ. Res., 2018, 160, 420–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, L. Chen and R. Zboril, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 18–34 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Sharma, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 1051–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fan, R. C. Brown and C. P. Huang, Int.
J. Environ. Pollut., 2002, 18, 91–96 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Sharma, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 182–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Tandon, S. B. Singh and R. C. Shukla, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 17038–17046 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Wang, Y.-L. Liu, S.-Q. Tian, J.-J. Yang, L. Wang and J. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 126128 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Nidheesh, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40552–40577 RSC .
H. Lu, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. Qiu, L. Zhu and S. Küppers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25343–25352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, J. Lu, Y. Zhang, G. Cheng, S. Guo, P. Wei, Y. an Ming, Y. Wang and R. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123578 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Z. Chen, P. Wu and J. P. Chen, Water Res., 2021, 201, 117312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qiao, X. Yang, L. Liu, Y. Luo, W. Tan, C. Liu, Z. Dang and G. Qiu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 390, 122165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xue, Z. Z. Shen, B. Zhao and H. Z. Zhao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 261, 621–627 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Wang, C. P. Liu, Y. Yuan and F. bai Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 275, 200–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nidheesh, M. Zhou and M. A. Oturan, Chemosphere, 2018, 197, 210–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Li, H. Li, M. Ye, X. Zhang, C. Gong, H. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Zhang and C. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128925 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Lu and J. Zhang, Environ. Pollut., 2019, 254, 112958 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bernabe, J. Sa, P. Santander and L. Basa, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 151–159 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, P. V. Nidheesh and M. S. Kumar, Chemosphere, 2018, 205, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Akansha, P. V. Nidheesh, A. Gopinath, K. V. Anupama and M. Suresh Kumar, Chemosphere, 2020, 253, 126652 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Dubrawski, C. M. Van Genuchten, C. Delaire, S. E. Amrose, A. J. Gadgil and M. Mohseni, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 2171–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, C. M. van Genuchten, S. E. A. Addy, J. Yao, N. Gao and A. J. Gadgil, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 12038–12045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. van Genuchten, S. R. S. Bandaru, E. Surorova, S. E. Amrose, A. J. Gadgil and J. Peña, Chemosphere, 2016, 153, 270–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Gadgil, S. Amrose, S. Bandaru, C. Delaire, A. Torkelson and C. van Genuchten, in Water Reclamation and Sustainability, ed. S. Ahuja, Elsevier, Boston,  2014, pp. 115–154 Search PubMed .
M. Kobya, U. Gebologlu, F. Ulu, S. Oncel and E. Demirbas, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5060–5070 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. S. Bandaru, C. M. van Genuchten, A. Kumar, S. Glade, D. Hernandez, M. Nahata and A. Gadgil, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 6094–6103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Van Genuchten, A. J. Gadgil and J. Peña, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 11828–11836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Hu, S. L. Lo and W. H. Kuan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 126, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
D. Syam Babu, K. Vijay, P. V. Nidheesh and M. Suresh Kumar, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2021, 47, 101476 Search PubMed .
S. J. Hug, L. Canonica, M. Wegelin, D. Gechter and U. von Gunten, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 2114–2121 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Y. Jia, L. Xu and S. Zhao, Water Res., 2011, 45, 6496–6504 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, D. Monllor-Satoca, D. Kim, J. Yeo and W. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 9381–9387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bhandari, R. J. Reeder and D. R. Strongin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 2783–2789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bhandari, R. J. Reeder and D. R. Strongin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 8044–8051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. De Yoreo, P. U. P. A. Gilbert, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, R. L. Penn, S. Whitelam, D. Joester, H. Zhang, J. D. Rimer, A. Navrotsky, J. F. Banfield, A. F. Wallace, F. M. Michel, F. C. Meldrum, H. Cölfen and P. M. Dove, Science, 2015, 349, aaa6760 CrossRef PubMed .
V. M. Yuwono, N. D. Burrows, J. A. Soltis and R. L. Penn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2163–2165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ona-Nguema, G. Morin, F. Juillot, G. Calas and G. E. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 9147–9155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Li, F. Wu and Y. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 272–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. Pozdnyakov, W. Ding, J. Xu, L. Chen, F. Wu, V. P. Grivin and V. F. Plyusnin, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 431–439 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 543–556 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Frierdich, M. Helgeson, C. Liu, C. Wang, K. M. Rosso and M. M. Scherer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 8479–8486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Yanina and K. M. Rosso, Science, 2008, 320, 218–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, A. Jones, T. D. Waite, Y. Chen, X. Huang, K. M. Rosso, A. Kappler, M. Mansor, P. G. Tratnyek and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 8161–8233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, M. Xiao and F. Wu, Environ.
Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 31–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nidheesh, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2018, 16, 1283–1292 CrossRef CAS .
E. Brillas, I. Sirés and M. A. Oturan, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6570–6631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nidheesh and R. Gandhimathi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27946–27954 RSC .
P. V. Nidheesh and R. Gandhimathi, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2014, 21, 8585–8594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jayashree, S. T. Ramesh, A. Lavanya, R. Gandhimathi and P. V. Nidheesh, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2019, 21, 2033–2045 CrossRef CAS .
D. Venu, R. Gandhimathi, P. V. Nidheesh and S. T. Ramesh, J. Hazard., Toxic Radioact. Waste, 2016, 20, 4–7 Search PubMed .
D. Venu, R. Gandhimathi, P. V. Nidheesh and S. T. Ramesh, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 129, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Van Genuchten, S. E. A. Addy, J. Peña and A. J. Gadgil, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 986–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Nidheesh, D. Syam Babu, B. Dasgupta, P. Behara, B. Ramasamy and M. Suresh Kumar, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 2418–2423 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, C. M. van Genuchten, I. Mookherjee, A. Debsarkar and A. Dutta, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 233, 141–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Clancy, K. F. Hayes and L. Raskin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 10799–10812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mandal, S. R. Debbarma, A. Saha and B. Ruj, Procedia Environ. Sci., 2016, 35, 943–949 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sri Bala Kameswari, A. G. Bhole and R. Paramasivam, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2001, 18, 167–176 CrossRef .
P. González-Contreras, J. Weijma and C. J. N. Buisman, Water Res., 2012, 46, 5883–5892 CrossRef .

          X.-B. Min, L.-Y. Chai, Y.-J. Liang and Y. Ke, Arsenic Pollution Control Technologies for Arsenic-Bearing Solid Wastes, Springer, Singapore,  2019 Search PubMed .
T. S. Singh and K. K. Pant, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 131, 29–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. Mookherjee, A. Roy, A. Dutta and A. Debsarkar, in Waste Management and Resource Efficiency, Springer, Singapore,  2019, pp. 625–637 Search PubMed .
S. Kundu and A. K. Gupta, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 153, 434–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, J. Li, X. Sun, J. Zheng, Z. Wu, W. Liu, D. Zhao and Z. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129683 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Hassan, K. Fukushi, K. Turikuzzaman and S. M. Moniruzzaman, Waste Manage., 2014, 34, 1072–1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. A. Rouf and M. D. Hossain, in Fate of Arsenic in the Environment, Proceedings of the BUET-UNU International Symposium, Dhaka, Bangladesh,  2003 Search PubMed .
D. Mukherjee, S. Ghosh, S. Majumdar and K. Annapurna, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 639–650 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Mukherjee, S. Ghosh, S. Majumdar and K. Annapurna, Arsenic (V) Remediation Using Adsorption-Induced Ultrafiltration Process and Management of Toxic Sludge in Glass Formation, Springer, Singapore,  2019 Search PubMed .
M. A. Rahman, M. A. Jalil and M. A. Ali, J. Hydrol., 2014, 518, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Eriksen-Hamel and B. K. N. Zinia, in Technologies for Arsenic Removal from Drinking Water,  2001, pp. 207–213 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ew00522kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Water impact
Arsenite (As(III)) is considered a more potent form of arsenic as it predominantly exists as a neutral species in natural water (pH of 6–9) making the removal process challenging. This fundamental property of arsenic necessitates the conversion of arsenite to arsenate by various oxidation techniques to enhance removal from contaminated waters. To this end, iron and iron-related compounds have gained immense attention as oxidizing agents in the water treatment industry due to their natural abundance and reactivity with arsenic.


 	Fig. 1  Effect of pH on the adsorptive removal mechanism of As(V) by ZVI and nZVI. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

1.	ZVI51	Lab-synthesized	1	>70% oxidation within 10 min for pH 3, 7 and 9	• Able to remove arsenic completely within 24 h
2.	Fe/Cu (ref. 52)	Lab-synthesized	0.1–1	Maximum As(III) sorption capacity was found to be 19.68 mg g−1	• Acidic condition favors As sorption
• Sorption follows pseudo second order kinetics
• Bicarbonate, phosphate and sulphate don't have any effect on arsenic sorption
3.	Fe/Al (ref. 43)	Lab-synthesized	20	>75% removal at pH ranging from 3 to 11	• Alkaline condition favors removal
• Surface adsorption, oxidation and co-precipitation are the As(III) removal mechanisms
4.	Fe/Cu (ref. 47)	Spiked in groundwater	1	Complete removal	• Precipitation and coprecipitation are the As(III) removal mechanisms
• As removal efficiency of bi-metallic particle is twice that of ZVI
5.	Mn–Fe binary oxide53	Lab-synthesized	2	Almost complete removal for the pH ranging from 3 to 7.5	• Adsorption capacity of 50 mg g−1
• Mn in the binary material accelerates the As(III) oxidation
• Fe forms surface OH groups, which effectively sorbed As(V)
6.	Iron–copper–manganese trimetal oxide54	Lab-synthesized	10	—	• Adsorption capacity of 131 mg g−1 at pH 7
• As removal is by oxidation followed by sorption
• Lower pH is favored
7.	Aluminum substituted nickel ferrite55	Lab-synthesized	100	—	• Adsorption capacity of 1114 mg g−1
• Adsorbent is able to reduce arsenic concentration below 10 ppb even from its initial concentration of 500 ppb
8.	Fe3O4/CaO2 composite42	Lab-synthesized	0.5	32.3% oxidation of arsenite	• Adsorption capacity of 56.35 mg g−1 at pH 6
98% adsorption	• Arsenite oxidation within 15 min
9.	Ferrihydrite + Mn(II)30	Lab-synthesized	75	Almost complete oxidation and sorption of arsenite	• As(V) was adsorbed on ferrihydrite
• As(III) oxidation increased with Mn(II) concentration as well as solution pH
10.	Manganese oxide coupled with Fe(III) trimesic56	Lab-synthesized	5	—	• As(III) removal is by oxidation followed by adsorption
• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 76.34 mg g−1
11.	Mesoporous Fe/Al bimetallic particles45	Lab-synthesized	10	>99% removal of As(III) with the addition of 3 or 4 g L−1 Fe/Al	• As(III) removal increased with increase of the Fe/Al mass ratio
• Acidic and neutral conditions are favorable for As(III) removal
• Surface adsorption, oxidation and intraparticle reduction are the As(III) removal mechanisms
• Significant difference in the morphology of Fe/Al bimetallic particles after reacting with As(III) and agglomeration of Fe/Al bimetallic particles were observed
12.	Cu(II)–Fe(III) oxide doped anion exchangers57	Lab-synthesized	150	—	• At high pH and in the presence of interfering ions, anion exchanger can enhance As(III) removal
• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 94.4 mg g−1
13.	Amorphous Fe/Mn bimetal58	Lab-synthesized	5–50	—	• As(III) removal was enhanced by homogeneously distributed active centers and low-coordinated adsorption sites provided by the amorphous phase of the bimetal
• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 161.6 mg g−1
• Neutral pH favors optimal adsorption
14.	Bioceramic buttressed Mn doped iron oxide59	Lab-synthesized	0.1–0.4	98% As(III) removal in 210 min at pH 6.5	• Maximum As(III) adsorption capacity was found to be 12 mg g−1
15.	Yttrium doped iron oxide60	Lab-synthesized	20	60% adsorption of As(III) is achieved in initial 30 minutes	• Maximum As(III) sorption capacity was found to be 84.22 mg-As per g at pH 7.0
• Uptake of As(III) increases as the pH of solution is increased from 3 to 8 and after that slight reduction is observed
16.	Fe2O3 nanocrystals on sepiolite nanofibers (MI/SEPs)61	Real groundwater	0.1–50	Removal efficiency of 96.4% with an arsenic concentration of 456.5 mg L−1	• Adsorption capacity of As(III) of 50.35 mg g−1 for As(III)on MI/SEPs
• MI/SEPs can reduce the As concentration from 140 to 0.5 μg L−1
• The maximum adsorption capacity of 50.35 mg g−1 was observed for As(III)
17.	Structural Fe(II)hydroxides28	Lab-synthesized	30	60% removal efficiency at pH 7.0 under anoxic condition	• As(III) was adsorbed by Fe(II/III) and Fe(III)oxides
• It was oxidized to As(V) on the surface after 2 hours
18.	Nanoparticles of iron oxide from cold rolling mill (CRM)62	Lab-synthesized	0.5	60–80% removal of arsenic	• The monolayer adsorption capacity for CRM fines Fe2O3 is 1.94 × 103 μg g−1
• CRM is rhombohedral phase α-Fe2O3. It is ferromagnetic and its adsorption capacity is high at acidic pH
Fe0 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2	(1)
Fe0 + O2 + 2H2O → 2Fe2+ + 4OH−	(2)
Fe2+ + 2H2O → Fe(OH)2 + 2H+	(3)
6Fe2+ + O2 + 6H2O → 2Fe3O4 + 12H+	(4)
4Fe2+ + O2 + 10H2O → 4Fe(OH)3 + 8H+	(5)
4Fe2+ + O2 + 6H2O → 4FeOOH + 8H+	(6)
Fe0 + O2 + 2H+ → Fe2+ + H2O2	(7)
Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe3+ + OH˙ + OH−	(8)
Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe4+ + H2O	(9)
H3AsO3 + 1.5Fe0 + 3H+ → As0 + 1.5Fe2+ + 3H2O	(10)
H3AsO3 + 7.2Fe0 + 4.05O2 → As0 + 2.4Fe3O4 + 1.5H2O	(11)

 	Fig. 2  Arsenite oxidative sorption mechanisms of ZVI.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fractions of ZVI corrosion products with (Mag-ZVI) and without (Pri-ZVI) magnetization, (b) fractions of arsenite and arsenate over ZVI; reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015, and (c) effect of anions and magnetite on ZVI corrosion, reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 4  Arsenite removal mechanism by bimetallic particles. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier Ltd., copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  Adsorption/surface-oxidation removal mechanism of arsenite by Fe/Mn bimetal–organic frameworks. Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 
As(III)(aq) + (−SFe–Mn) → As(III)–SFe–Mn	(12)
As(III)–SFe–MnMnO2 + 2H+ → As(V)(aq) + Mn2+ + H2O	(13)
As(V)(aq) + As(III)–SFe–Mn → As(V)–SFe–Mn + As(III)(aq)	(14)
2MnO2 + H3AsO3 → 2MnOOH* + H3AsO4	(15)
2MnOOH* + H3AsO3 + 4H+ → 2Mn2+ + H3AsO4 + 3H2O	(16)

 	Fig. 6  Oxidative sorption of As(III) species on rGO/Fe–Mn metal oxide. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 7  Mechanism of oxidative sorption removal of As(III) species on Fe–Cu–Mn trimetal oxide. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 8  Oxidative sorption mechanism of arsenite in aerated structural Fe(II) hydroxide systems. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2016.	 
2HFeO4− + 3H3AsO3 → 2Fe3+ + 3HAsO42−	(17)

 	Fig. 9  Possible reaction mechanisms of ferrate while oxidizing the contaminant X. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  Proposed arsenite removal mechanism by the Fenton process (INT and INT-OH are intermediates) reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2003.	 
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2	(21)
Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+	(22)

 	Fig. 11  (A) Overall electron transfer reactions in a bio-electro-Fenton process coupled with an MFC during the removal of arsenic species; (B) reaction mechanisms involved in the bio-electro-Fenton process at the cathode chamber. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of arsenite oxidation on the cathode and deposition on the anode using Fe/Fe3C@CNTs electrodes reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2021.	 
H2O ⇌ 0.5O2 + 2H+ + 2e−	(23)
Fe2+ + O2 → O2˙− + Fe3+	(24)
Fe2+ + O2˙− + 2H+ → Fe3+ + H2O2	(25)

 	Fig. 13  Iron oxide/oxyhydroxide formation pathway in iron electrocoagulation. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ew00522k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
