Recent advances in polyaniline-based micro-supercapacitors  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2MH01345B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2MH01345B
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2023, 10, 670-697Recent advances in polyaniline-based micro-supercapacitors

        
          
            Xiang 
            Chu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Weiqing 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Hong 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: ehongli@ntu.edu.sg
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Technologies of Materials (Ministry of Education), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, P. R. China. E-mail: wqyang@swjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      28th October 2022
    , Accepted 16th December 2022First published on 16th December 2022AbstractThe rapid development of the Internet of Things (IoTs) and proliferation of wearable electronics have significantly stimulated the pursuit of distributed power supply systems that are small and light. Accordingly, micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) have recently attracted tremendous research interest due to their high power density, good energy density, long cycling life, and rapid charge/discharge rate delivered in a limited volume and area. As an emerging class of electrochemical energy storage devices, MSCs using polyaniline (PANI) electrodes are envisaged to bridge the gap between carbonaceous MSCs and micro-batteries, leading to a high power density together with improved energy density. However, despite the intensive development of PANI-based MSCs in the past few decades, a comprehensive review focusing on the chemical properties and synthesis of PANI, working mechanisms, design principles, and electrochemical performances of MSCs is lacking. Thus, herein, we summarize the recent advances in PANI-based MSCs using a wide range of electrode materials. Firstly, the fundamentals of MSCs are outlined including their working principle, device design, fabrication technology, and performance metrics. Then, the working principle and synthesis methods of PANI are discussed. Afterward, MSCs based on various PANI materials including pure PANI, PANI hydrogel, and PANI composites are discussed in detail. Lastly, concluding remarks and perspectives on their future development are presented. This review can present new ideas and give rise to new opportunities for the design of high-performance miniaturized PANI-based MSCs that underpin the sustainable prosperity of the approaching IoTs era.
Xiang Chu
Xiang Chu received his BE Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Southwest Jiaotong University in 2016, China. Then, he became a PhD student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University in 2018, under the supervision of Prof. Weiqing Yang. Currently, he is a visiting PhD student at the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, under the supervision of Prof. Hong Li. His research interests include advanced electrochemical energy storage materials and devices.
Weiqing Yang
Dr Weiqing Yang is currently a Full Professor at the Southwest Jiaotong University. He received his MS in Physics (2007) and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering (2011) from Sichuan University. He was a Post-Doctorate Research Fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology from 2013 to 2014, under the supervision of Prof. Zhong Lin Wang. He has published more than 200 papers. Currently, his main research interests include energy harvesting and storage devices.
Hong Li
Dr Hong Li is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering in Nanyang Technological University (NTU) Singapore. He obtained his PhD in NTU in 2008. Prior to joining NTU in 2016 as an NAP fellow, he worked as a Postdoc at Stanford University USA (Department of Mechanical Engineering and SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis). His research interests include catalyst engineering and device development for energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage devices play an indispensable role in modern society given that they drive billions of distributed consumable electronic products, beyond the boundaries of conventional central power supply system.1,2 Supercapacitors, featuring high power density and long cycling life, are prototypical electrochemical energy storage devices that bridge the gap between rechargeable batteries and electrolytic capacitors.3–5 The first supercapacitor was described in Becker's patent licensed in 1957, in which porous carbon electrodes and ammonium chloride electrolyte were employed to assemble an individual cell.6 However, supercapacitors only attracted interest in both academia and industry in the late 20th century due to their promise in hybrid electric vehicles.7–9 The rapid development of integrated circuits and wearable electronics in recent years demands energy storage devices that are small and light. However, conventional supercapacitors with a sandwich configuration and large volume are proven to be cumbersome when integrated with other on-chip electronic components, which hinders their widespread applications.10–13 Micro-supercapacitors (MSCs), a type of miniaturized supercapacitor device featuring a size in the range of centimeters to millimeters, or even sub-millimeters, can be directly integrated on-chip as reliable micro-power sources. MSCs can also be widely utilized in implantable devices, wearable electronics, self-powered system, and Internet of Things (IoTs) systems (Fig. 1), which have recently become a research hotspot due to their high power density and good energy density delivered in a limited footprint area and volume.14–20
 Fig. 1  Holistic diagram illustrating various implementations of both conventional supercapacitors (SCs) and MSCs. Image of power grid: reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. Image of rail transit: reproduced with permission from ref. 15 Copyright 2021, Wiley. Image of an airplane: reproduced with permission from ref. 16 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Image of implantable devices: reproduced with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Image of wearable electronics: reproduced with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. Image of self-powered system: reproduced with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2015, Springer & Tsinghua University Press. Image of IoTs system: reproduced with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022, Wiley. 
According to history, people learned to store charges as early as 1745 by assembling a Leyden jar (the first man-made device to store charges), although the nature of the charges was not clearly revealed.21 Subsequently, more than 200 years after the invention of the Leyden jar, MSCs appeared (Fig. 2). The first MSC was inspired by the concept of micro-batteries with a laminated thin-film structure, in which a solid-state lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON) electrolyte layer was sandwiched between two RuO2 electrodes.22,23 However, these MSCs suffered from a low specific capacitance and power density due to the limited ionic conductivity and polarizability of LiPON. In 2003, two years after the RuO2-based MSC was reported, MSCs with interdigitated micro-electrodes using conducting polymers were proposed.24 Recently, a wide variety of materials including carbonaceous materials,25–27 transition metal oxides,28,29 transition metal carbides/nitrides/carbonitrides,30–32 conducting polymers,33,34 and coordination polymers35,36 has been successfully exploited for the fabrication of MSCs. Correspondingly, the specific capacitance, energy density, and power density of MSCs have also been boosted through the proper design of electrode nanostructures and device configurations.12,37,38
 Fig. 2  Brief timeline of the development history of MSCs. Image of conducting polymer MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 24 Copyright 2003, Elsevier. Image of PANI MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2011, Wiley. Image of printed PANI MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
Electrode materials are one of the critical factors that determine the electrochemical performance of MSCs. Among the multifarious electrode materials for MSCs, polyaniline (PANI) stands out due to its high theoretical pseudocapacitance, good electronic conductivity, reversible doping/dedoping, low cost, easy fabrication, and excellent stability.39–41 By virtue of its multiple redox states and highly reversible surface/near-surface reaction, PANI surpasses the capacity limitation of electrical double-layer materials and mass transfer limitation of battery materials.42–44 PANI-based MSCs have become a research hotspot in recent years with over 500 academic papers published over the last 5 years. However, despite the solid progress demonstrated for PANI-based MSCs, a comprehensive review covering all aspects ranging from the chemical properties of PANI, synthesis of PANI, working mechanisms of MSCs, and design principles of MSCs to the electrochemical performance of MSCs is lacking. Thus, herein, we provide a critical overview on the recent advances of PANI-based MSCs covering all these aspects. Our discussion begins with the fundamentals of MSCs. Subsequently, the intrinsic properties and synthetic methods of PANI are summarized. Afterward, the recent developments of MSCs using PANI electrodes including pure PANI, PANI hydrogels, and PANI composites are thoroughly outlined. Finally, we discuss the future development directions of PANI-based MSCs, followed by some critical perspectives, which can provide inspiration and guidelines for both researchers and practitioners in this field.
2. Fundamentals of MSCs
In this section, the energy storage mechanisms and typical configurations of MSCs are summarized. The advantages and limitations of each configuration are discussed in detail. In addition, multifarious technologies to fabricate MSCs, especially MSCs with interdigitated fingers electrode are discussed. These fabrication technologies can be generally divided into three categories including printing, in situ preparation, and other technologies. By analyzing the features of these different fabrication technologies, we can conclude that the most effective way to fabricate MSCs depends largely on the properties of the electrode materials and application of the devices. At the end of this section, the beneficial performance metrics to evaluate the device performance are discussed.
2.1 Working principles of MSCs
MSCs share the same charge storage mechanisms with conventional supercapacitors, which can be classified into three categories, as follows: (i) via the formation of an electrical double layer (EDL) at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte, namely, electrical double-layer capacitance (EDLC), (ii) via highly reversible redox reactions that occur on the surface of the electrode, namely pseudocapacitance, and (iii) via hybrid mechanism, in which EDLC and pseudocapacitance simultaneously contribute to charge storage.7,45,46 The formation of an EDL is purely a physical and non-faradaic process in origin, that is, no charge transfer across the electrochemical interface is involved in this process. Therefore, this charge storage mechanism has rapid kinetics, leading to high power delivery and uptake within a short time (in a timeframe of seconds to minutes).47–49 In comparison with EDLC, pseudocapacitance is derived from a faradaic process, which involves charge transfer across the electrochemical interface. Consequently, the pseudocapacitive mechanism can give rise to high capacitance and energy density.50,51 According to Conway, there are several faradaic mechanisms that can lead to capacitive electrochemical signatures (i.e., pseudocapacitance), as follows: (i) underpotential deposition, (ii) redox pseudocapacitance, and (iii) intercalation pseudocapacitance (Fig. 3).52 The latter two processes are commonly employed for the design of pseudocapacitive MSCs.
 Fig. 3  Charge storage mechanisms of both conventional supercapacitors and MSCs. (a) EDLC mechanism. (b) Pseudocapacitive mechanism including underpotential deposition, fast redox reaction, and intercalation. 
In addition to the above-mentioned three types of charge storage mechanisms, an emerging class of energy storage behavior derived from nanostructured battery materials with distinct capacitive signatures has recently attracted remarkable research interest, which is usually labeled as “extrinsic pseudocapacitance”.53–55 When the dimensions of battery materials are reduced to the nanoscale, the intrinsic diffusion-controlled bulk reaction can be transformed into non-diffusion limited surface reaction due to the increased specific surface area and shortened ion diffusion length.56,57 This transition can be directly traced employing cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic discharge curves. Experimentally, the background current in the CV curves of extrinsic pseudocapacitance materials (Fig. 4(b)) is larger than that of battery materials (Fig. 4(a)). Moreover, the anodic and cathodic peaks of extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials seem to be broader than that of battery materials.58 Intuitively, the extrinsic pseudocapacitive voltammogram displays broad redox peaks superimposed over a ‘boxlike’ profile. The small separation between the redox peaks suggests a small amount of polarization in the electrodes and similar free energy of the charge/discharge states.59 From a galvanostatic discharge point of view, extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials usually exhibit a nearly linear discharge profile, indicating that the charge storage process is not limited by diffusion. In comparison, a typical battery material controlled by diffusion often exhibits a voltage plateau in the galvanostatic discharge profile (Fig. 4(c)).
 Fig. 4  Representative characteristics of battery behavior and extrinsic-pseudocapacitance. (a) CV curves of battery material, bulk MoS2. (b) CV curves of extrinsic-pseudocapacitive material, nano-MoS2. (c) Illustrative galvanostatic discharge curves for battery material (bulk LiCoO2) and extrinsic-pseudocapacitive material (nano LiCoO2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
It seems that the boundary between capacitive behavior and battery behavior is becoming increasingly blurry. In many cases, these two mechanisms co-exist in one device, especially devices using both capacitive and battery electrodes.60,61 Analysis of the CV curves can shed light on the difference in electrochemical kinetics. In theory, a power-law relationship can be employed to describe the voltammetric response-scan rate dependence, as follows:62–64 i(V) = avb(1)where i(V) is the measured current at a fixed potential, a is a constant, and b is the power-law exponent. The b value can be obtained by calculating the slop of log(i) versus log(v) of the anodic and cathodic peaks. Generally, battery behavior can be regarded as a redox reaction limited by semi-infinite diffusion, and therefore the peak current (iP) and sweep rate (v) obey the following equation:64,65 (2)where c is the surface concentration of the electrode material, α is the transfer coefficient, D is the chemical diffusion coefficient, n is the number of electrons involved in the electrode reaction, A is the surface area of the electrode material, F is the Faraday constant, R is the molar gas constant, T is the temperature, and the function χ(bt) represents the normalized current. For a capacitive reaction, the relationship between the peak current (iP) and the sweep rate (v) can be described as follows:63,64,66 iP = CdAv(3)where Cd is the capacitance and A is the surface area of the electrode material. Based on eqn (2) and (3), it can be concluded that a chemical reaction with a b value of 0.5 (iP = av0.5) is a diffusion-controlled process (battery behavior), whereas a chemical reaction with a b value of 1 (iP = av) is a capacitive-controlled process (capacitive behavior).
Moreover, for a chemical reaction with a b value in the range of 0.5–1, the charge storage is recognized to be contributed by both capacitive behavior and battery behavior.48,67 Specifically, the energy storage in these materials is dominated by a hybrid mechanism. To date, considerable efforts have been dedicated to deconvoluting the capacitive and battery behaviors. Methods including probing the relationship between voltammetric current and sweep rate,66,68 probing the relationship of voltammetric charge and sweep rate,69 and step potential electrochemical spectroscopy (SPECS)64 have been developed to quantitatively distinguish the fraction of each mechanism. Among them, probing the relationship between voltammetric current and sweep rate is the most popular and widely used method. Scott W. Donne et al. explained and compared these methods systematically.70 More recently, Yuliang Cao et al. proposed a modified method to calibrate the charge storage mechanism based on CV data, by which the physical capacitance, pseudo-capacitance, and diffusive contributions can be well-separated.71
2.2 Device configurations of MSCs
Conventional supercapacitors possess a typical sandwich configuration, in which the electrode layers and electrolyte layer are assembled in a laminated manner.72–75 In the case of MSCs, several configurations can be rationally employed considering different application requirements, as follows: (i) sandwich configuration, (ii) in-plane configuration (also labeled as planar or co-planar configuration), (iii) fiber-shaped configuration, and (iv) 3D configuration (Fig. 5).76,77 The sandwich configuration is usually employed for the fabrication of thin-film MSCs, which is similar to that of conventional supercapacitors (Fig. 5(a)). For example, Y. S. Yoon and co-workers fabricated a thin-film supercapacitor on a silicon substrate by sandwiching LiPON electrolyte between two RuO2 electrodes. This thin-film supercapacitor can be regarded as an early prototype of MSCs due to its miniaturized device thickness despite the fact that the concept of “micro-supercapacitor” was not officially proposed at that time.22 Generally, the sandwich configuration is preferable over other configurations considering its cost-effective mass fabrication. However, this configuration suffers from an energy-power tradeoff because increasing the film thickness in the electrode is often at the expense of power delivery.78,79 The in-plane configuration is another typical MSC structure with a pair of patterned electrodes (interdigitated fingers pattern in most cases) arranged neatly on insulating substrates. Subsequently, these electrodes are simply submerged in liquid electrolyte or covered with a quasi-solid/solid electrolyte (Fig. 5(b)).80,81 Obviously, the in-plane configuration introduces several distinct advantages over the sandwich configuration. Firstly, arranging patterned electrodes on substrate with a fixed gap between them can address the short circuit phenomenon fundamentally. Therefore, the employment of a separator can be avoided.82 Secondly, the miniaturized distance between two electrodes achieved by conventional microfabrication technologies leads to shortened ion diffusion length and decreased ion transport resistance in individual cells.83 Thirdly, the interdigitated design of electrodes gives rise to a large contact between the electrolyte and electrode because the sides of the microelectrodes are also accessible to the electrolyte.84 Thus, due to the aforementioned advantages, the interdigitated in-plane configuration has emerged as the most popular structure of MSCs nowadays.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of typical configurations of MSCs. (a) Sandwich configuration. (b) Interdigitated in-plane configuration. (c) Fiber-shaped configuration. (d) 3D configuration. (e) Electrodes of 3D MSCs consisting of highly ordered 3D nanostructures. 
Due to the merits of small size, considerable deformability, good weavability, and high power density of fiber-shaped MSCs, they are recognized as one of the most promising power supplies for wearable electronics.85–87 Typically, there are three types of configurations, namely, parallel, twisted, and coaxial structures, which have been widely adopted for the fabrication of fiber-shaped MSCs (Fig. 5(c)).88 The first configuration can be assembled by pairing two linear electrodes in parallel with a separator or gel electrolyte between them.89 The structure of parallel MSCs is very simple and their large-scale production can be easily achieved. However, an external substrate and packaging shell is often needed during their fabrication, which will make the cell cumbersome.90,91 Twisted MSCs can be constructed by twisting two fiber electrodes with gel electrolyte or separator wrapped onto the surface of each electrode.92 Compared with parallel MSCs, twisted MSCs possess an improved interface between the electrode and electrolyte. Therefore, an improved electrochemical performance can be obtained.93 The third configuration, i.e., coaxial structure, is assembled in a layer-by-layer manner, in which an inner electrode fiber is wrapped by gel electrolyte, followed by an outer electrode layer. The whole device exhibits a typical core–shell signature with all the components sharing the same axis.94,95 In the case of parallel and twisted structures, an increase in performance degradation and resistance is usually observed due to the physically detachment of the electrodes during bending. Notably, this problem can be effectively avoided in the coaxial configuration due to the close contact between the electrode and electrolyte. In addition, the coaxial configuration is recognized to give rise to a high active mass loading and stable structural integrity against repeated deformations.96,97
Recently, MSCs with 3D electrode architectures either in the sandwich or in-plane configuration have been developed following the concept of 3D batteries (Fig. 5(d) and (e)).98–100 Generally, four strategies can be employed for the fabrication of 3D MSCs, as follows: (i) use of porous 3D template for the construction of 3D electrodes, followed by removal of the template after the 3D electrodes are successfully built.101 In this case, the 3D structure is introduced by a self-sacrificing template. (ii) Depositing an electrode layer uniformly on an existing conductive 3D scaffold.102,103 In this method, the 3D structure is introduced by a nanostructured current collector. (iii) Depositing electrode materials with 3D nanostructures (such as interconnected 3D nanospheres,104 nanowires,105 nanotubes,106 and nanosheets107) on a planar current collector, in which the 3D structure is introduced by the electrode material itself. (iv) Constructing 3D electrodes using 3D printing technology.108,109 All the above-mentioned strategies can provide fine 3D networks of electrode materials with good adherence to the substrate. 3D nanostructured electrodes can offer a large effective surface area that is accessible to the electrolyte. Moreover, they can give rise to a high mass loading in a limited footprint area without sacrificing the specific capacitance of electrode materials, which can lead to unprecedented areal capacitance and energy density.29,110,111
2.3 Technologies for the fabrication of MSCs
Among the various MSC configurations, the in-plane configuration is the most popular due to its stable performance and capability to be integrated with other miniaturized electronics. Therefore, tremendous efforts have been dedicated to constructing fine interdigitated in-plane structures with high resolution and low cost.78,81,112 In this section, the mainstream fabrication technologies towards interdigitated in-plane MSCs are comprehensively summarized. Notably, these technologies can be rationally employed beyond interdigitated in-plane MSCs (Fig. 6). Many of these technologies can also be successfully employed to fabricate MSCs with sandwich, fiber-shaped, and 3D configurations.
 Fig. 6  Typical fabrication technologies of MSCs including printing technologies, in situ technologies, and other technologies. Images of laser scribing, electrode conversion, electrophoretic deposition, electrochemical polymerization, inkjet printing, and screen printing: reproduced with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. Image of 3D printing: reproduced with permission from ref. 29 Copyright 2019, Cell Press. Image of roll-to-roll printing: reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. Image of stamping: reproduced with permission from ref. 150 Copyright 2018, Wiley. Image of vacuum filtration: reproduced with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 

a. 
            In situ rechnologies. 
In the case of in situ technology, the interdigitated electrode pattern can be directly deposited or synthesized on the current collector or substrate. Thus far, multifarious in situ technologies, including electrochemical polymerization,104,105 electrophoretic deposition,113,114 laser scribing,115,116 and electrode conversion,47 have been demonstrated for the fabrication of interdigitated in-plane MSCs. In situ fabrication can be achieved, for example, by focusing a laser beam on the surface of a graphite oxide (GO) film to reduce it and draw an interdigitated graphene pattern concurrently. This graphene patterned GO film can be used directly as an MSC without the integration of binder, separator, or current collector.117 Electrode conversion is an effective way to fabricate MSCs by the in situ conversion of interdigitated precursors (such as photoresist,118 graphite oxide,119 sucrose,120 and carbides47) in electrochemical active electrodes. Other technologies, such as electrochemical polymerization104 and electrophoretic deposition,121 can deposit uniform electrode layers on a conductive current collector, which are especially suitable for the fabrication of conducting polymer and transition metal oxide electrodes.122 To date, most in situ technologies are only employed for the fabrication of lab-scale MSCs due to their complicated procedure and low yield. Notably, laser scribing technology can potentially break the limitation of in situ technologies and give rise to the scalable production of MSCs, which is attributed to its easy fabrication and high efficiency. As demonstrated by Richard B. Kaner et al., more than 100 MSCs can be fabricated on a single disc within 30 min or less using the laser scribing method.123


b. Printing technologies. 
Printing technologies hold great promise for MSCs because they provide a wide range of simple, low-cost, time-saving, and versatile solutions towards the manufacturing of electrodes with complicated and desirable patterns, which can realize the full potential of MSCs.124 Several printing technologies including inkjet printing,125–127 screen printing,128–130 3D printing,95,108,131 and roll-to-roll printing132–134 have been extensively explored for fabrication of MSCs. The initial step in printing an MSC is dispersing the electrochemical active materials in the liquid phase to form a colloidal suspension or sticky paste, namely, an electrode ink. Subsequently, the active ink is printed or deposited on the target substrate using suitable printing technology. It is worth noting that the printing technologies vary greatly in terms of ink rheological behavior, achievable resolution, and material selection, which have been comprehensively summarized in Lai's work.124 The widely recognized merits of printing technologies can be summarized as follows: (i) printing methods are time-saving processes with high production efficiency, which can give rise to the large-scale and large areal fabrication of MSCs.135 (ii) The active ink is squeezed out on demand during the printing of electrode patterns, resulting in a material-saving feature, which is especially suitable for depositing expensive and scarce electrode materials.136 (iii) Printing has been demonstrated to be versatile technology for the deposition of a wide variety of materials, including carbonaceous materials, conducting polymers, transition metal oxides, and MXenes.137 (iv) Asymmetric MSCs with an in-plane configuration can be easily constructed through printing methods. Additionally, the loading mass of each electrode can be fine-tuned by varying the consumed ink volume, which is helpful to achieve charge balance in the device.138,139 (v) High mass-loading electrodes with fine-tuned frameworks in three dimensions can be constructed by 3D printing technology, which can exceed the areal energy limits of MSCs.29
The printing process of MSCs consists of several sub-steps such as ink preparation, substrate surface treatment, deposition, and solidification. Therefore, to print high-quality MSCs, all the key issues that can potentially influence the printing process should be considered, as follows: (i) preparation of well-dispersed and stable electrode ink; (ii) suitable treatment of substrate surface to enable high printing resolution and simultaneously avoid short circuit of interdigitated electrodes; (iii) squeezing the ink out of nozzles on demand stably and continuously; and (iv) solidifying the ink in desired 2D or 3D patterns without structural collapse. However, to date, many of the above-mentioned steps are not well-understood and well-controlled. Additionally, in the typical 3D printing method, non-conducting additives are often employed to prepare 3D printing ink with high viscosity, which will deteriorate the cycling performance of 3D-printed MSCs.140,141 Therefore, the rheological property of 3D printing ink and cycling stability of the devices become a paradox, which should be deliberately balanced during the design and fabrication of 3D-printed MSCs. In summary, further advances are urgently needed in this research field by comprehensively considering printing technologies, ink properties, and substrate/inks interactions.124,142


c. Other technologies. 
In addition to the aforementioned technologies, various other approaches have been successfully demonstrated for the fabrication of MSCs. Photolithography, also known as ultraviolet (UV) lithography, is mature technology that has been widely used for the fabrication of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) due to its good reliability, high resolution, and promising yield, which can enable large-scale production.143–145 During the fabrication of MSCs, photolithography can be rationally employed to fabricate both patterned current collectors and patterned electrodes with high precision (usually in the magnitude of micrometers or sub-micrometers).78,146 In most cases, this approach is elaborately combined with other technologies, such as pyrolysis,118 electrochemical polymerization,105 and photochemical reduction,119 for the fabrication of MSCs. Vacuum filtration is a commonly used routine to remove the solvent from a mixed dispersion or colloidal solution. By adding a customized interdigitated mask on a filter membrane, interdigitated electrode films can be obtained via the vacuum filtration approach.147 Mask-assisted vacuum filtration is especially suitable for 2D electrode materials such as graphene and MXene given that graphene and MXene membranes can be easily transformed onto other substrates during the sequential steps.148,149 Stamping is one of the most facile technologies that can directly transfer electrode patterns from the surface of a stamp to the surface of the substrate. By controlling the geometry of the pre-fabricated stamp, the configuration of the electrode pattern can be controlled. Zhang and co-workers stamped interdigitated MXene electrodes on various substrates including paper, glass, and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) using 3D-printed stamps. The resultant MXene MSC exhibited considerable flexibility as well as good cycling stability.150 Although stamping technology can greatly simplify the fabrication procedure and reduce the cost simultaneously, it is an imprecise method that greatly depends on workmanship. Also, it is inferior to the above-mentioned printing technologies such as inkjet printing and 3D printing considering both technical precision and performance uniformity of the devices. Spray coating is another widely used approach for the fabrication of MSCs. In the typical spray-coating method, a dispersion of electrode materials is filled in a spray gun and atomized in tiny droplets using high-pressure gas. With the help of customized mask, these little droplets can be deposited on the substrate, forming patterned electrodes after the solvent is fully volatilized.12,151,152 Spray coating is facile and versatile technology that can be used for large-areal fabrication. However, this method is not suitable for noble electrode materials due to the significant wastage of the electrode materials.

2.4 Performance metrics of MSCs
To evaluate the electrochemical performance of conventional supercapacitors, some crucial parameters including gravimetric capacitance (Cm, F g−1), energy density (Em, W h g−1), and power density (Pm, W g−1) are commonly employed.153 These parameters can be calculated using the following equations: (4) (5) (6)where Q (C) is the overall charge stored in the device, ΔV (V) is the operating voltage of the device, m (g) is the total mass of electrochemical active materials loaded on two electrodes, and Δt (s) is the discharge time.
However, in the case of MSCs, the above-mentioned parameters are no longer suitable to evaluate their performance because the loading mass of the electrochemical active materials in an MSC usually falls in the magnitude of milligrams or micrograms, which is almost negligible compared with that of conventional supercapacitors.80 In a miniaturized energy storage system, the limited footprint areal and device volume are the key issues for precise performance evaluation. In this regard, the capacitance, energy density, and power density based on the footprint areal and device volume, instead of the loading mass, are important metrics for evaluating the performance of MSCs.112 The areal capacitance (CA, F cm−2) can be calculated using either CV curves or galvanostatic charge discharge (GCD) curves according to the following equations: (7) (8)where S (cm−2) is the footprint area of two electrodes, v (V s−1) is the scan rate of the CV test, V1 (V) and V2 (V) are potential vertexes of the CV test, I(V) (A) is the voltametric current recorded during the CV test, I (A) is the constant discharge current, Δt (s) is the discharge time, and ΔV (V) is the discharge potential window.
After CA is properly calculated, the areal energy density (EA, W h cm−2), areal power density (PA, W cm−2), and volumetric capacitance (CV, F cm−3) can be sequentially calculated according to the following equations: (9) (10) (11)where ΔV (V) is the potential window, Δt (s) is the discharge time, and d (cm) is the average thickness of the electrode film. Similarly, the volumetric energy density (EV, W h cm−3) and volumetric power density (PV, W cm−3) can be calculated according to the following equations: (12) (13)
3. Fundamentals of PANI
Conducting polymers are a class of materials simultaneously bearing the good conductivity of organic conductors and excellent processability of polymers.154–156 Due to the unique properties of conducting polymers, they can be utilized in various applications such as organic solar cells,157 organic light-emitting diodes,158 electrochromism,159 electrochemical energy storage devices,160 electromagnetic shielding,161 and biosensors.162 In the case of supercapacitors, supercapacitors employing conducting polymer electrodes are envisaged to bridge the gap between existing carbon-based supercapacitors and batteries to form units with intermediate energy density. To date, various conducting polymers, including PANI,163 polypyrrole (PPy),164 polythiophene (PTh),165 and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT),126 have been widely explored for the fabrication of supercapacitors, among which PANI stands out due to its easy synthesis, low cost, high conductivity, good air stability, and large theoretical capacitance.44
The difference between carbonaceous electrodes and PANI electrodes is schematically shown in Fig. 7. Generally, carbonaceous electrodes store charges via the EDLC mechanism, which is to a large extent depends on the accessible specific surface area.49 In the case of PANI electrodes, the bulk of the materials (not just the surface layer) is involved in the redox reaction, and thereby the electrode materials can be fully used, leading to superior capacitance and energy density.40 Specifically, the advantages of employing polymeric PANI electrodes in supercapacitors or MSCs can be described as follows. Firstly, PANI possesses multiple oxidation states, and the transformation among them can lead to a theoretical pseudocapacitance as high as 2000 F g−1.39 Secondly, due to its intrinsic lightweight and flexibility, the PANI electrode is especially suitable for fabricating portable and flexible supercapacitors and MSCs.166 Thirdly, the conductivity and capacitance of the electrode can be easily controlled by tuning the doping level and nanostructure of PANI during the synthetic procedure.167 Fourthly, the polymeric PANI electrode swells when exposed to water or electrolytic ions, creating extra surface area, and thus the electrolyte can contact with the PANI electrode at the molecular level.168
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the charging process of (a) carbonaceous electrode and (b) PANI electrode. 
In this section, firstly, we introduce the chemical structures and multiple oxidation states of PANI. Then, the doping mechanism of PANI using protonic acid as the dopant is discussed. Finally, several mainstream synthetic routes for PANI including solution polymerization, electrochemical polymerization, interfacial polymerization, and vapor-phase polymerization are thoroughly summarized and discussed.
3.1 Working Principles of PANI
The tremendous research interest in PANI is dominantly derived from its multiple redox states and unique doping mechanism, which have been mentioned in numerous researches and reviews, but seldom explained in detail.43,169,170 Compared with PTh and PPy, which possess just two major oxidation states, PANI bears three major oxidation states, namely leucoemeraldine (fully reduced state), emeraldine base (half-oxidized state), and pernigraniline (fully oxidized state).40 Between the leucoemeraldine and emeraldine base, an intermediate state can be described as protoemeraldine. Between the emeraldine base and pernigraniline, there is also an intermediate state called nigraniline. The structural difference between these oxidation states is mainly determined by the number of quinoid and benzenoid rings in the PANI backbone. As labeled in Fig. 8, if PANI only has benzenoid units along its polymeric chain in undoped form, it can be described as leucoemeraldine. If there is one quinoid unit in every 8 repeating units along the polymer chain, the PANI can be labeled as protoemeraldine. If there are two quinoid units in every 8 repeating units, then the PANI is in its most stable oxidation state, namely emeraldine base. If there are three quinoid units in every 8 repeating units, the PANI is described as nigraniline. If the PANI chain is fully oxidized, then there will be four quinoid units in every 8 repeating units, which is labeled as pernigraniline.171 Experimentally, the difference between these oxidation states is not distinct. Also, any degree of oxidation can occur along the PANI polymeric chains.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structure of PANI polymeric chains with different oxidation states. These states can be interconverted through oxidation or reduction. 
PANI materials in different oxidation states usually exhibit different colors, which is the origin of their electrochromic functionality.172–174 For instance, luecoemeraldine PANI becomes white in the solid state and nearly transparent in solution. This is reflected by the prefix “lueco” in its name, which means white or colorless. The emeraldine base PANI is blue in the undoped state and turns green in the doped state, which is also reflected by the root “emerald” in its name because emerald indicates a class of colored gemstone with green color. In the case of pernigraniline PANI, it is deep violet in solution and appears black in the solid state. Therefore, it can be a basic rule to determine the oxidation state of PANI simply by its color.
PANI can be protonated (salt) by treatment of the base with protonic acid. Proton-doped PANI shows drastically enhanced conductivity of 0.1–5 S cm−1, which does not change during extended periods in air. According to A. G. MacDiarmid, the doping of PANI is a reversible process, during which the intrinsic number of electrons in the PANI backbone does not change.175 When emeraldine base PANI (Fig. 9(a)) is treated with protonic acid, the imine groups adjacent to the quinoid rings become preferentially protonated to form 2 bipolarons in every 8 monomer units (Fig. 9(b)). Then, the internal redox reaction will convert the 2 bipolaron structures to 4 polaron structures (Fig. 9(c)). Due to the coulombic repulsion, the 4 polarons will be separated and a polaron conduction band is formed (Fig. 9(d)). In a well-doped PANI polymer chain, the majority of positive charge resides on the nitrogen atoms, and a small fraction of positive charge is delocalized on the C6H4 rings. Consequently, the doping behavior of the polymeric chain gives rise to high conductivity and high charge storage ability in PANI, making it a promising electrode material for supercapacitors and MSCs in protonic electrolyte.39
 Fig. 9  PANI in emeraldine base doped by protonic acid to form emeraldine salt with high conductivity. 
3.2 Synthesis of PANI
PANI-based materials have been widely synthesized using diverse methods including solution polymerization,176 interfacial polymerization,177 vapor-phase polymerization,178 seeding polymerization,179 self-assembling polymerization,180 sonochemical polymerization,181 and electrochemical polymerization.75,104 In this section, we discuss four mainstream synthetic methods, namely, solution polymerization, electrochemical polymerization, interfacial polymerization and vapor-phase polymerization, which are mostly used to fabricate PANI electrode materials with high electrochemical activity for MSCs (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Four mainstream synthetic methods for PANI polymerization. (a) Solution polymerization, (b) electrochemical polymerization, (c) interfacial polymerization, and (d) vapor-phase polymerization. 

a. Solution polymerization. 
PANI can be synthesized via solution polymerization in organic phases by adding oxidative initiator to aniline solution (Fig. 10(a)). For instance, chloroform and acrylonitrile have been previously used as solvents to obtain homogeneous aniline solution.182,183 Regarding the aqueous phase, the polymerization of PANI is usually described as suspension, emulsion, or micelle polymerization due to the limited solubility of aniline monomers in aqueous solvent.74,184 In this case, aniline forms small droplets rather than fully dissolved in the solvent and polymerization usually starts at the surface of these small droplets. However, some recent synthetic methods of polymerizing PANI in the aqueous phase are labeled as solution or dilute solution polymerization because in these methods, protonic acids such as HCl and HClO4 are employed for the formation of an homogeneous phase in an aqueous system.176,185,186 Aniline with low concentration in aqueous solvent reacts with protonic acid to form its salt form, which is highly soluble in water. For example, Bong Gill Choi and co-workers fabricated a 3D PANI nanoweb on Au/Ti covered polyurethane acrylate nanopillars with the help of HClO4. In this work, the concentration of aniline was as low as 9–200 mM to ensure that a homogeneous aqueous solution can be formed.103 Solution polymerization is also labeled as in situ polymerization in some works, through which the PANI layer can be in situ deposited on the substrate by dipping it into a mixed solution during polymerization.105,162,187 Solution polymerization offers the feasibility to synthesize PANI in bulk quantities. Additionally, this method provides considerable flexibility for controlling the nucleation and growth mechanism during polymerization, which is beneficial when preparing polyaniline nanocomposites. However, a limitation of this synthetic method is that complicated reaction conditions are employed during polymerization, which has shifted the focus to the use of low temperatures, slow addition of reactants, and thorough mixing to improve the yields and molecular weights.


b. Electrochemical polymerization. 
Electrochemical polymerization is performed in an electrochemical system, where the driving force of polymerization is a current or potential applied on the working electrode rather than oxidative initiators mixed in the solution.75,188 To conduct electrochemical polymerization, a precursor solution containing aniline and electrolytic ions must be prepared in advance.164 Then, the current collector-patterned substrate is dipped in the precursor solution for the sequential polymerization (Fig. 10(b)). Consequently, the PANI electrode can be electrochemically polymerized and deposited on the current collector. Generally, three techniques can be employed for electrochemical polymerization, as follows: (i) use of a fixed current (galvanostatic);189,190 (ii) use of a fixed potential (potentiostatic);104,191 and (iii) use of a shifting potential (linear sweeping or cyclic sweeping).188,192 The first technique is usually conducted in a two-electrode system with a constant current passing through the conductive substrate. The second and third techniques are usually conducted in a three-electrode system with a constant potential or shifting potential versus reference electrode applied to the conductive substrate.
Obviously, the electrochemical polymerization method possesses three distinct advantages over chemical polymerization, as follows: (i) a uniform PANI layer can be deposited on the electrode using electrochemical polymerization, enabling the fabrication of binder-free PANI electrodes; (ii) the initiation and termination of the chemical reaction can be fine-controlled by electrochemical equipment, and the loading mass of PANI located on the substrate can be controlled; (iii) no extra chemicals such as oxidative initiator or surfactant are involved in the reaction, and thus the PANI obtained is pure, avoiding the complicated and time-consuming rinsing process. Meanwhile, electrochemical polymerization suffers from obvious limitations: (i) electrochemical polymerization is suitable for depositing a uniform PANI layer on the conductive substrate instead of a substrate with poor conductivity, where the PANI layer can hardly be deposited and (ii) this method is suitable for the lab-scale production of PANI electrodes, whereas it is challenging to produce PANI in large quantities employing it.


c. Interfacial polymerization. 
Interfacial polymerization is a synthetic method where polymerization occurs at the confined interfaces of liquid–liquid or liquid–air system (Fig. 10(c)).193,194 For the polymerization of PANI, a liquid–liquid system is the most popular, which contains two immiscible solvents, namely, an aqueous solvent and organic solvent. A strong acid is usually added to the aqueous solvent to obtain highly conductive emeraldine base PANI. Additionally, oxidative initiators such as ammonium peroxydisulfate and FeCl3 are added to the aqueous solvent to trigger polymerization.195,196 Aniline is dissolved in an organic solvent, such as benzene, toluene, chloroform and CS2.193,197 Subsequently, the organic phase and aqueous phase are mixed in the same container and polymerization occurs at the interface of the two phases. As polymerization proceeds, the PANI formed at the interface diffuses to the aqueous phase and can be collected through centrifugation. Based on the proper selection of reagents and reaction parameters, PANI with different nanostructures such as nanofibers198 and nanoparticles199 can be obtained. For example, Li-Zhen Fan et al. prepared PANI nanofibers at the interface between aqueous HCl solution and methylene chloride in the presence of para-phenylenediamine (PPD). It was found that the PANI nanofibers prepared in the presence of PPD were longer and less entangled than that in the absence of PPD due to the much faster polymerization rate in the initial stage.195
Interfacial polymerization offers the advantage of having an interface to regulate the reaction dynamics. In the typical solution polymerization of PANI, the polymer undergoes nucleation and secondary growth simultaneously as a result of the coexistence of monomers and oxidative initiators. In the case of interfacial polymerization, PANI can diffuse in the water phase with a high acid concentration, thereby avoiding the further growth of the polymer.193 Hence, nanofibers can be fabricated through interfacial oxidative polymerization by suppressing the overgrowth of PANI.197,200 Moreover, this procedure requires a much lower energy input than the conventional solution polymerization, which requires relatively low temperature, slow addition of reactants, and vigorous stirring.171 Nevertheless, due to the introduction of an organic liquid phase, the environmental benignity of interfacial polymerization is incomparable with solution and electrochemical polymerization.


d. Vapor-phase polymerization. 
In a typical vapor-phase polymerization method, the substrate is covered or permeated with an oxidative initiator and placed in well-sealed chamber.201 Subsequently, aniline monomers are placed in this chamber with reduced pressure and elevated temperature to form a vapor-phased aniline atmosphere.202 Once the aniline monomer is adsorbed on the substrate and contacts the oxidant, polymerization begins. As more and more aniline monomers get absorbed on the substrate, a uniform PANI layer is formed (Fig. 10(d)). Using the vapor-phase polymerization method, the PANI layer can be deposited on various substrates such PET film,203 carbon nanofibers,204 and cellulose paper205 with considerable adherence. Vapor-phase polymerization can enable the formation of a smooth and thin PANI layer on the surface of the substrate via the polymerization of vaporized monomer under vacuum. This method is especially suitable for depositing a PANI layer on substrates with complicated geometries. In addition, this synthetic method is environmentally favorable because the polymerization process can effectively eliminate the solvent waste and suppress the side reactions. However, this method is not suitable for the scalable fabrication of thick PANI electrodes.

4. PANI-based MSCs
The typical CV curve of PANI-based electrode materials obtained in a three-electrode system consists of three couples of redox peaks embedded in a high background current, corresponding to the transition between leucoemeraldine and protonated emeraldine salt, the transition between p-benzoquinone and hydroquinone, and the transition between the emeraldine base and pernigraniline, respectively.40 Due to the intrinsic multiple redox states of PANI electrode materials, they usually exhibit superior capacitance to carbonaceous electrode materials with an effective potential window of 0.8–1.0 V.74,167,206 In this section, we summarize the recent advances in PANI-based MSCs. Specifically, MSCs with electrodes of pure PANI, PANI hydrogels, PANI/carbon composites, PANI/transition metal oxides composites, and PANI/non-electrochemical active material composites are discussed in detail. Furthermore, the fabrication technologies and electrochemical performance parameters of recent representative PANI-based MSCs are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the microfabrication technologies and performance parameters of recent PANI-based MSCs




Electrode materiala
Fabrication technologyb
Electrode area (mm2)
Electrode thickness (μm)

C
A (mF cm−2)

C
V (F cm−3)

E (mW h cm−3)

P (W cm−3)
Cyclic performance
Ref.





a NWs: nanowires, NFs: nanofibers, NSs: nanosheets, MOF: metal–organic framework, LIG: laser-induced graphene, LSG: laser-scribed graphene, EG: exfoliated graphite, PNEG: electrochemically exfoliated graphene and reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-templated polyaniline nanoflake composite, and C-MWCNT: carboxylic multi-walled carbon nanotube.
b DP: dilute polymerization, EP: electrochemical polymerization, ED: electrochemical deposition, SMAIS: surfactant monolayer-assisted interfacial synthesis, SP: solution polymerization, OPE: oxygen plasma etching, MP: micelle polymerization, and IP: interfacial polymerization.
c These values were calculated according to the parameters provided in the literature.— Not available in the publication.




PANI NWs
Photolithography + DP
1.15
0.4
23.5c
588
82
1250
96%, 1000 cycles

105



PANI NWs
Sputtering + EP
0.45
10.1
45.2
105
3.9
39
87.6%, 2000 cycles

207



PANI NFs
Photolithography + EP
4
6.7c
65.1
93.0
16.4
3.83
85.7%, 1000 cycles

208



PANI NSs
Spray coating
78.6c


96.6
26
2.4
0.76
77.1%, 10000 cycles

152



Annealed PANI
Laser printing + ED
53.2c
10
54
54c
4.8
0.12
79.8%, 1000 cycles

209



2D PANI
SMAIS
—
0.01
0.37
370
17.9
20
—

210



PANI/MnO2
SP
—
—
22.5
—
52.7 W h kg−1
720 W kg−1
90.2%, 2000 cycles

211



PANI/MOF/LIG
EP + ED
—
90c
719.2
79.9c
4.0
0.44
87.6%, 6000 cycles

212



Stacked PANI/graphene
Filtration + sputtering + OPE
—
4.5
368
736
46
10.65
92.6%, 1000 cycles

213



PANI/h-graphene
Photolithography + EP
—
—
—
271.1
24.1
110.1
99.5%, 5000 cycles

214



PANI//N-doped graphene
EP
32
1.42
14.5
102
30.6
0.5
77%, 5000 cycles

139



PANI/LSG
Laser scribe + EP
425
4–8
20.6
4.6
0.407
0.196
87%, 5000 cycles

20



PANI hydrogel
Sputtering + EP
78.6c
—
561.6
—
49.9 mW h cm−2
0.4 mW cm−2
76%, 10000 cycles

104



PANI/EG
MP + Photolithography
50.6
0.2
1.5
75
6.67
600
—

215



PANI/CNT
EP + laser writing
9
14
101
72.1
6.41
0.064
94.2%, 8000 cycles

216



PNEG
IP + laser scribing
90
50
172
26
1.39
0.425
91.1%, 2300 cycles

217



PANI/C-MWCNT
Spray coating
78.6c
40.1
45.4
11.3c
2.6
1.488
90.7%, 12000 cycles

218





4.1 MSCs with pure PANI electrodes
The first MSC with conducting polymer electrodes was proposed by Kun-Hong Lee and co-workers in 2003.24 They designed an interdigitated in-plane MSC with PPy anode and poly-(3-phenylthiphene) (PPT) cathode. The resultant MSC delivered an operating window of 1.4 V and capacitance of 5.2 mF in Et4NBF4 electrolyte. However, the first MSC with PANI electrodes only emerged in 2011. The first PANI-based MSC with PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte was designed and fabricated by Zhixiang Wei's research group, where Au/Cr micro-strips serve as the current collector and PANI nanowire arrays act at the electrochemical active materials.105 As shown in Fig. 11, interdigitated Au/Cr fingers were thermally evaporated on a flexible PET film via “top-down” photolithography. Then, the PANI nanowire arrays were in situ deposited onto the Au/Cr fingers using the “bottom-up” dilute polymerization method. Furthermore, MSCs with different electrode line-widths of 100, 400, and 800 μm were fabricated to probe the relationship between electrochemical performance and line-width. It was found that a shortened line-width can reduce the ion and charge transfer path, and then lead to a higher volumetric capacitance (588 F cm−3 for 100 μm line-width MSC) and better rate performance (90% capacitance retention with current density increased by 50 times for 100 μm line-width MSC). Soon after this work, Jimin Maeng et al. integrated PANI nanowire electrodes on a flexible biomedical platform, ultrathin freestanding parylene film, for the fabrication of wafer-scale MSCs.219 The as-fabricated MSCs could be further integrated in a radio frequency (RF) rectifying circuit for RF energy harvesting. This work suggests that PANI MSCs can be regarded as a possible solution towards sustainably driving biomedical microsystems that underpin implantable devices.
 Fig. 11  All-solid-state on-chip MSC with PANI nanowire array electrodes. This work is regarded as the first PANI-based MSC, which was reported in 2011. (a) Schematic image of the fabrication process of MSC with PANI nanowire array electrode. (b) Optical picture of flexible MSC unit arrays on PET film. (c) Optical microscopy image of MSC 400 with line-width of 400 μm. (d) SEM image of PANI nanowire arrays. (e) CV curves, (f) GCD curves, and (g) Ragone plots of MSC 100, MSC 400, and MSC 800. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2011, Wiley. 
In addition to PANI nanowires, PANI nanosheets have also been utilized for the fabrication of MSCs.210 Recently, Jun Chen et al. proposed a supramolecular strategy to synthesize ultrathin PANI nanosheets in the presence of citric acid, and then further utilized the PANI nanosheets in MSCs.152 Citric acid plays a dual-role in the reaction system. On the one hand, citric acid serves as a dopant to produce PANI emeraldine salt with high conductivity. On the other hand, it acts as a crosslinker to crosslink PANI polymeric chains into 2D nanosheets. Due to the abundant existence of carboxyl groups on the surface of the PANI nanosheets, they exhibited considerable hydrophilicity and could be spray coated onto various substrates with promising adherence. Consequently, large areal MSC arrays could be fabricated through a facile spray-coating method using PANI nanosheet ink (Fig. 12). Consequently, the MSCs with PANI nanosheet electrodes delivered a high areal capacitance (96.6 mF cm−2) and volumetric capacitance (26.0 F cm−3), which could be easily integrated to drive different consumer electronics. Similarly, by virtue of a supramolecular strategy, Weiqing Yang's group developed 2D PANI nanosheets with abundant secondary structures located on the nanosheet surface. It was demonstrated that this type of secondary structure arising from the secondary growth of PANI can improve the cycling stability of the device by alleviating the volume expansion/shrinkage during the cyclic charge/discharge process.74
 Fig. 12  Large areal MSC array prepared by spray-coating method using PANI nanosheet ink. (a) 2D PANI nanosheets facilitate ion transfer in a co-planar MSC configuration. (b) Flexible MSC array derived from PANI nanosheet ink. (c) TEM image of PANI nanosheets. CV curves of MSCs connected (d) in series and (e) in parallel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
4.2 MSCs with PANI hydrogel electrodes
Conducting polymer hydrogels (CPHs) are an emerging class of derivatives of conducting polymers combining the advantages of both organic conductors and soft hydrogels.156,168,220,221 CPHs are widely used in electrochemical energy storage due to their good conductivity, high pseudocapacitance, unblocked 3D frameworks, and promising hydrophilicity.222–224 PANI hydrogels can be rationally constructed by incorporating PANI with existing hydrogels or crosslinking PANI polymeric chains using crosslinkers.155 The design of PANI hydrogels has several advantages towards PANI-based MSCs. Firstly, 3D PANI hydrogels with unblocked internal channels facilitate the penetration of the electrolyte, leading to the full utilization of the electrode materials. Secondly, the voids present in the porous framework of PANI hydrogels can well accommodate the volume changes during the charge/discharge process, which can substantially enhance the cyclic stability. Thirdly, the soft and resilient nature of PANI hydrogels make it possible for MSCs to perform stably when subjected to complicated external stress.
In 2012, Zhenan Bao et al. reported a scalable and versatile synthetic route for the preparation of PANI hydrogels.225 In this work, phytic acid with six functional groups on each molecule was employed as both the dopant and crosslinker to dope the PANI backbone and crosslink the PANI polymeric chains (Fig. 13(a)). Consequently, the phytic acid-crosslinked PANI hydrogel exhibited a porous foam structure with high conductivity of 0.23 S cm−1 and high specific capacitance of ∼480 F g−1. Moreover, by the separate inkjet printing of the monomer solution and initiator solution, a PANI hydrogel pattern with high resolution could be finely printed. To a certain extent, this work paves the way for the scalable fabrication of MSCs using CPHs electrodes. Tianxi Liu and co-workers designed a super-elastic PANI and polyvinyl alcohol (PANI/PVA) hydrogel with bi-continuous phase structure through cryopolymerization (Fig. 13(b)), which could be further utilized in stretchable, compressible, and bendable supercapacitors.226 More recently, Weiqing Yang's group proposed a facile method to construct 3D PANI hydrogels by virtue of electrochemical polymerization (Fig. 13(c)).104 A PANI hydrogel consisting of numerous interconnected nanospheres was successfully synthesized on interdigitated Au electrodes at a constant voltage of 0.8 V versus the saturated calomel electrode. Subsequently, an MSC was assembled by wrapping the PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) encapsulating layer on PANI hydrogel electrodes. The as-assembled MSC showed a high mass loading of up to 1.79 mg cm−2 and high areal capacitance of 135.9 mF cm−2 in a limited area. Additionally, this MSC with PANI hydrogel electrodes exhibited considerable resilience against different mechanical deformations. It could be bent and twisted without compressing its electrochemical performance (Fig. 13(d)).
 Fig. 13  PANI hydrogels and corresponding MSCs. (a) Phytic acid was employed as both the dopant and crosslinker to prepare PANI hydrogel, which could be ink-jet printed to form different patterns with high resolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225 Copyright 2012, PNAS. (b) Synthesis of super-elastic PANI/PVA hydrogel with bi-continuous phase structure via cryopolymerization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Electrochemical polymerization of 3D PANI hydrogel consisting of numerous interconnected nanospheres. (d) Digital photo and electrochemical performance of MSCs based on PANI hydrogel electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
4.3 MSCs with PANI/carbon electrodes
Carbonaceous materials including 0D carbon quantum dots,48,227 1D CNTs,228,229 2D graphene,115,230 and 3D hierarchical porous carbon231,232 have been widely investigated in MSCs due to their high-power density and ultralong cycling life. However, the widespread application of carbon-based MSCs is greatly hindered by their limited energy density.38,233–235 In this regard, PANI can be introduced in carbonaceous materials to enhance their energy density, while maintaining high power delivery. Moreover, the key features of carbonaceous materials for electrical double-layer capacitors are their porous structure and ultrahigh specific surface area. Therefore, carbonaceous materials can be properly integrated with PANI to increase the surface area of PANI electrodes, resulting in an improved pseudocapacitive performance. Although PANI is intrinsically a conducting polymer, the considerable internal resistance of nanostructured PANI electrodes still hinders the performance of PANI-based MSCs. Accordingly, the inclusion of carbon materials can greatly reduce the internal resistance, and thus enhance the conductivity of nanostructured PANI electrodes. Consequently, the rate capability of PANI-based MSCs can be boosted. Generally, two methods are employed to enhance the energy density of carbonaceous MSCs through the introduction of PANI, as follows: (i) enhancing capacitance, C, by devising PANI/carbon composites for symmetric devices166 and (ii) broadening the potential window, V, by employing PANI cathodes in asymmetric devices.236 Both of these methods can effectively increase the energy density of MSCs because E = 1/2CV2, where the energy density, E, is proportional to the capacitance, C, and the square of potential window, V.
Due to the exceptionally high aspect ratio of CNTs, they have been widely employed for the fabrication of fiber-shaped MSCs. For example, Huisheng Peng et al. electrochemically deposited PANI on robust and conductive aligned multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and obtained PANI/MWCNT composite fibers. Then, a pair of fibers was coated with acidic gel electrolyte and twisted for the fabrication of fiber-shaped MSC (Fig. 14(a)). Remarkably, the PANI/MWCNT fiber MSC delivered a specific capacitance of 274 F g−1 and linear capacitance of 263 mF cm−1. By bending the MSC consecutively and testing its electrochemical performance, it was found that its capacitance degraded slightly (less than 3%) over 50 bending cycles.237 Similarly, Menghe Miao et al. in situ polymerized a PANI nanowire array onto CNT yarns with high tensile strength of 500–800 MPa. A pair of PANI/CNT yarns was sequentially twisted to form a thread-like MSC.238 This thread-like MSC exhibited a much higher strength (with tenacity of ∼70 cN tex−1) than commercial cotton yarns (typically under 20 cN tex−1) (Fig. 14(b)). In addition to fiber-shaped MSCs, the PANI/CNT composites are applicable to in-plane MSCs. For instance, Liangti Qu and co-workers designed in-plane MSCs with conductive graphene oxide/polyacrylamide (GO-PAA) polyelectrolyte and PANI/CNTs electrode.216 This device showed the widest working temperature range among the reported MSCs, which could operate from −30 °C to 100 °C with a considerable electrochemical performance (Fig. 14(c)). More recently, Weiqing Yang and co-workers devised an air-stable, easy-fabricated, and rapid electron-transferring PANI ink by embedding carboxylic multi-walled carbon nanotubes (C-MWCNTs) in PANI nanosheets (Fig. 14(d)).218 The C-MWCNTs with considerable conductivity naturally formed conductive networks in the PANI nanosheets, and therefore enhanced the rate performance by 73.7%. Moreover, this PANI ink could be directly used to fabricate in-plane MSCs via a simple spray-coating method. The resultant MSCs exhibited a large areal capacitance of 45.4 mF cm−2 and promising energy density of 2.6 mW h cm−3. Even after 1000 consecutive bending cycles, the MSC could maintain 84.6% of its original capacitance.
 Fig. 14  MSCs using PANI/CNT electrodes. (a) Fabrication of fiber-shaped MSC using PANI/MWCNT composite fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fabrication of fiber-shaped MSC using PANI/CNT yarns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238 Copyright 2013, Wiley. (c) PANI/CNT MSC with wide temperature tolerance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Embedding C-MWCNTs in PANI nanosheets with enhanced rate capability for MSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Graphene is another popular carbonaceous material that can be coupled with PANI to form highly electrochemical active composites given that 2D graphene flakes offer a large surface area for the growth and dispersion of PANI nanostructures and serve as a conductive scaffold.166,239,240 Early in 2012, Tingbing Cao et al. fabricated a PANI/rGO MSC using a PDMS substrate.241 In this work, an interdigitated GO pattern was firstly deposited on a PDMS film using the micromolding in capillary (MIMIC) strategy, and subsequently GO was chemically reduced to rGO by hydrazine vapor. Then, PANI nanorod arrays were grown onto rGO using a potentiostatic technique at a fixed potential of 0.75 V versus Ag/AgCl reference electrode in dilute aniline solution (0.05 M in H2SO4 solution). Consequently, the PANI/rGO composite exhibited a high specific capacitance of 970 F g−1 at a current density of 2.5 A g−1, which was the highest capacitance among the reported PANI/rGO. Moreover, the PANI/rGO MSC exhibited an improved cyclic performance with 90% capacitance retention over 1700 galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles. In another work, Klaus Müllen's group synthesized mesoporous PANI (mPANI) on electrochemical exfoliated graphene to tackle the rate capability issue of MSCs.215 Due to the synergistic effect of the pseudocapacitive mPANI and EDLC graphene, the mPANI/graphene MSC delivered a remarkable volumetric capacitance of 75 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 together with a high power density of 600 W cm−3, which is six-times that of high-power aluminum electrolytic capacitors. Recently, Richard B. Kaner and co-workers developed an integrated MSC-sensor-resistor-NFC antenna circuit for IoTs application.20 In this integrated circuit, laser-scribed graphene (LSG) was employed as the basic component of electrodes of all the individual elements including MSC, sensor, resistor, and NFC antenna, which were densely integrated in one membrane. Then, PANI was deposited on the LSG flakes to enhance the energy density of the MSC. Amazingly, this PANI/LSG MSC offered a high energy density of 0.407 mW h cm−3, remarkable power density of 196 mW cm−3, together with an outstanding rate capability, which could endure a scan rate as high as 1 V s−1. Due to the promising electrochemical performance of the PANI/LSG MSC, the humidity sensor and NFC antenna on the integrated circuit could be successfully driven with a sub-second response time and excellent impedance matching. This work unambiguously demonstrates that PANI-based MSCs can be used as paradigm power supply systems that underpin the on-chip electronics in the future IoTs era (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  PANI/LSG MSC powered integrated circuit for IoTs applications. (a) Fabrication of an integrated system. (b) Schematic illustration of the basic elements of the integrated circuit. (c) Cross-section SEM image of LSG. (d) SEM image of PANI deposited onto the surface of LSG flakes. (e) CV curves of LSG and PANI/LSG MSCs. (f) Studying the cross-sensitivity of the LSG humidity sensor against different gases. (g) Return loss of the NFC antenna at 13.56 MHz. The inset shows a digital photograph of the NFC antenna after copper electroplating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022, Wiley. 
4.4 MSCs with PANI/transition metal oxide electrodes
PANI and transition metal oxide composites can be regarded as potential electrodes of MSCs due to the high pseudocapacitance of both components.60,242,243 To date, various transition metal oxides such as MnO2,188 RuO2,244 NiO,245 Co3O4,246 and TiO2247 have been widely incorporated in PANI for electrochemical energy storage. Combining PANI with transition metal oxides can bring several advantages over individual components, as follows: (i) metal oxides usually suffer from poor electronic conductivity, where the inclusion of conductive PANI can improve the conductivity and rate capability of metal oxides; (ii) PANI with entangled polymer chains can connect the discrete transition metal oxide particles to form a dense and compact film, and therefore enhance the mechanical resilience of the electrode layer; and (iii) some transition metal oxides can be used directly as oxidants for initiating PANI polymerization, and thus PANI can directly grow on the surface of the metal oxide with strong interaction, while remaining permeable to allow electrolyte ions to reach under the metal oxides. Recently, Xinhua Xu et al. synthesized a PANI/MnO2 coaxial composite by growing MnO2 nanoflakes on hollow PANI nanotubes, which showed a high specific capacitance of 575 F g−1 at 0.4 A g−1. This PANI/MnO2 composite was further used as an electrode ink for the stamping of MSCs and the stamped micro-device delivered an areal capacitance of 22.5 mF cm−2.211 Ying Ma and co-workers proposed a layer-by-layer strategy to deposit PANI and metal–organic framework (MOF) crystals on laser-induced graphene (LIG). The porous structure of MOFs and good conductivity of the PANI chains lead to a synergistic effect. Therefore, the MSC with the PANI/MOF electrodes exhibited a large areal capacitance of 719.2 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2, which is nearly 370 times higher than that of the MSC with bare LIG electrodes.212
4.5 MSCs with PANI/non-electrochemical active material electrodes
Non-electrochemical active materials with poor electrochemical activity hardly contribute to charge storage in supercapacitors. In most cases, researchers are trying to avoid the usage or reduce the fraction of non-electrochemical active materials because their presence will diminish the energy density of MSC devices. Given that PANI is a highly conjugated polymer with limited processability (not suitable for melt processing and limited solubility in common solvents), non-electrochemical active materials are necessary for integration with PANI with the aim to obtain robust and flexible PANI film electrodes.
In addition to electrochemical active materials, some non-electrochemical active materials can also be incorporated with PANI, aiming to increase the robustness or to enhance the processability of PANI-based electrodes. In 2020, Jun Chen's group proposed a supramolecular strategy to fabricate an ultrathin and robust PANI/PVA membrane (PPM) by covalently bonding PANI and PVA polymer chains (Fig. 16(a)).167 In this work, the dynamic boronate bond was employed to bond the rigid PANI and compliant PVA chains covalently to form a flexible and freestanding film with high elasticity (17% break strain) and tensile strength (33.7 MPa break strength). The robust PPM was further cut into pre-designed patterns for the fabrication of MSCs using the ultraviolet laser cutting method (Fig. 16(b)). Consequently, the MSCs with interdigitated PPM electrodes delivered a high energy density of 1.91 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 42.55 mW cm−3, together with a remarkable areal capacitance of 151.9 mF cm−2. This work is credited as the inspiration for developing PANI-based MSCs for future wearable electronics. More solid progress in wearable electronics was made by Xiaodong Chen's group in 2022, in which a “shrinkage-assisted patterning by evaporation” (SHAPE) method was invented to fabricate multilayer and conformal micro-electrodes.248 This work was reported to break the limitations of traditional electronic circuit manufacturing, which requires substrate-supported transfer printing because the electrode patterns herein were auto-detachable. As shown in Fig. 16(c), a PANI and bacterial cellulose (PANI/BC) composite dispersion was obtained via the typical in situ chemical polymerization, and then fabricated into micro-patterns through a mask-assisted vacuum filtration method. Due to the different evaporative shrinking properties of the PANI/BC and filtration membrane, the micro-electrode patterns could be auto-detached from the filtration membrane, and thus be used to fabricate MSCs. Notably, the 500-layer freestanding MSC prepared using this SHAPE method showed a considerable energy density (350 mW h cm−2) and high power density (40 mW cm−2), which was 100 times higher than its counterpart MSCs prepared using substrates.
 Fig. 16  MSCs using PANI/non-electrochemical active material composite electrodes. (a) Covalently bonded rigid PANI chains and compliant PVA chains. (b) Different co-planar PPM electrode patterns fabricated by ultraviolet laser cutting method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Fabrication of PANI/BC electrode using SHAPE method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2022, Wiley. 
5. Other conducting polymer-based MSCs
Numerous members exist in the big family of conducting polymers. However, to date, there are only a few conducting polymers including PANI, PPy, and PEDOT that can be practically and maturely applied in electrochemical energy storage due to their promising electrochemical activity and easy production.249 In this part, we briefly summarize the advances of MSCs using other conducting polymer electrodes, i.e., PPy and PEDOT electrodes.
PPy is a pioneering conducting polymer for MSCs, which has been applied in MSCs early in 2003.24 In 2004, Kun-Hong Lee et al. assembled an all-solid-state MSC consisting of a Cr/Au current collector, PPy interdigitated electrodes, and PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte on SiO2/Si substrate and a cell potential of 0.6 V was achieved.250 Soon after this work, they proposed the preparation of flexible PPy MSCs by peeling PPy electrodes off from the Au current collector and transferring them to a PVA film simultaneously.251 Similarly, Chunyi Zhi's group developed a versatile strategy to transfer PPy MSCs with sac-like nanostructures on different substrates such as textile, paper, and plastic tape via the use of a piece of heat-releasing tape.252 This well-established strategy possessed a very low fabrication cost of ∼0.1 USD per MSC, which is promising for the large-scale production of MSCs. Consequently, the PPy MSC exhibited a high energy density (15.25 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.89 W cm−3) together with remarkable cyclic stability (negligible capacitance degradation over 20000 charge/discharge cycles). Additionally, the as-fabricated PPy MSC could easily achieve the plug-and-play function. By integrating the PPy MSCs with a piezoelectric energy generator, rectifier, and consumer electronics, mechanical energy could be properly harvested, stored, and consumed to power small electronics. More recently, Zhong-Shuai Wu et al. devised 2D hierarchical ordered dual-mesoporous PPy/graphene (DM-PG) nanosheets, which could be used simultaneously for MSCs and NH3 sensor.253 The prepared DM-PG achieved a specific capacitance of 376 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 for MSCs and detection limit as low as 200 ppb for NH3 sensor. This work provided a paradigm for fabricating an ultrathin, miniaturized, body-attachable, and integrated electronic system using just one bi-functional material (Fig. 17(a)).
 Fig. 17  MSCs using PPy and PEDOT electrodes. (a) MSCs using pure PPy or PPy composite electrodes. PPy film MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 250 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. PPy nanowires MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 252 Copyright 2017, Wiley. PPy/graphene flakes MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 253 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (b) MSCs using pure PEDOT or PEDOT composite electrodes. PEDOT:PSS hydrogel MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 255 Copyright 2017, Wiley. Porous PEDOT MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 254 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx composite MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 256 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
PEDOT is another widely used polymer for MSCs due to its high conductivity and easy processing (Fig. 17(b)). For example, H. N. Alshareef and co-workers proposed a surfactant-mediated process to fabricate PEDOT MSCs with promising frequency characteristics (400 Hz at a phase angle of 45°).254 This PEDOT MSC was proposed to be utilized in the AC line-filtering field. Gaoquan Shi et al. unfolded the performance of PEDOT in fiber-shaped MSCs by devising PEDOT:PSS fibers using a commercial PEDOT:PSS suspension (PH1000).255 The as-prepared PEDOT:PSS fibers possessed ultrahigh conductivity of 38000 S m−1 and high tensile strength of 280 MPa. Consequently, the fiber-shaped MSC based on PEDOT:PSS fiber electrodes delivered a high volumetric capacitance of 202 F cm−3 together with good rate capability. Yury Gogotsi's group prepared PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx heterostructures via a spray-coating method and electrochemical deposition strategy.256 The as-prepared MSCs with PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx composite electrodes showed a five-fold areal capacitance and higher rate capabilities compared with MSCs using bare Ti3C2Tx electrodes. Additionally, electrochromic behavior with color changes from deep blue and colorless was observed during the charge/discharge process (−0.6 V to 0.6 V) of MSCs. This work suggests that CPs can be properly employed to assemble future electrochromic energy storage devices.
6. Conclusion and prospects
PANI is among the earliest electrochemical active materials to pave the way for the fundamental understanding and practical application of pseudocapacitors. To date, it is still one of the most attractive electrode materials with significant interest. Although the application of PANI in MSCs only started in 2011, we have witnessed encouraging progress in PANI-based MSCs in the past decade. On the one hand, pure PANI materials with different nanostructures have been elaborately synthesized and applied in MSCs.104,105 On the other hand, PANI has been successfully hybridized with other electrochemical active materials such as carbonaceous materials,218 transition metal oxides,212 and non-electrochemical active materials248 to construct high-performance composite electrodes for MSCs. From the device fabrication perspective, PANI can be regarded as a versatile candidate, which can flexibly adapt into different device configurations105,238,257 (in-plane configuration, fiber-shaped configuration, etc.) and different fabrication processes104,152,203 (in situ fabrication, printing fabrication, etc.).
The next-generation of PANI-based MSCs is expected to possess an energy density comparable with that of thin-film Li-ion batteries, while maintaining the high power density of supercapacitors. Moreover, the conventional microfabrication technologies for MSCs should feature low cost and high resolution, which can give rise to good scalability and economic viability. Moreover, it is expected that PANI-based MSCs should be highly integrated to be compatible with other on-chip electronics. These goals can be achieved by comprehensively addressing the following crucial issues.
(i) Increasing the energy density of MSCs has long been one of the most challenging tasks. The theoretical capacitance of PANI in acidic electrolyte is reported to be as high as 2000 F g−1.39 However, the accessible capacitance in many recent works is still much lower than the theoretical value.73,74,225 Designing nanostructured PANI electrodes is a feasible route to make full use of the pseudocapacitance of PANI, and consequently enhance the device energy density. Therefore, nanostructured PANI electrodes are preferable to dense film electrodes when designing PANI-based MSCs. On the other hand, broadening the cell potential window can be a promising strategy to enhance the energy density of MSCs drastically. This aim can be achieved by properly choosing the organic electrolyte or introducing a matched anode material such a carbonaceous material or MXene.75,114,258
(ii) The poor cyclic stability arising from repeated volumetric expansion/shrinkage during the galvanostatic charge/discharge process is recognized as the Achilles’ heel of pseudocapacitive PANI, hindering its widespread applications.42 The following strategies can be employed to improve the cyclic stability of PANI-based MSCs. Firstly, compounding mechanically soft frameworks such as CNTs259 and graphene oxide260 with PANI can greatly enhance its cycling stability. The frameworks serving as buffer or cushion substrates can release the inherent stress in PANI and enhance its structural integrity. Secondly, the conformal coating or encapsulation of PANI can also enhance its cyclic stability because the coating and encapsulation layer can protect the PANI bulk from structural collapse and disintegration.261 Thirdly, engineering structures of PANI can stabilize the electrode without introducing other materials. The voids, gaps, and other empty spaces between PANI nanostructures can buffer volumetric expansions substantially.74,105
(iii) Developing facile, low-cost, high-efficiency, high-resolution, and time-saving manufacturing methods is required to unleash the full potential of PANI-based MSCs. In this regard, printing technologies such as inkjet printing, screen printing, and 3D printing can be promising choices. Printing technologies are especially suitable for fabricating large areal MSC arrays with considerable uniformity and stable electrochemical performances.135,152 These methods can create patterned electrodes in the absence of complicated lithography steps, toxic chemicals, and expensive masks. Additionally, the 3D printing method has been identified to achieve an ultrahigh areal energy density with limited footprint.110,111 Thus, here we suggest that more efforts should be devoted to devising and the fundamental understanding of PANI inks. In this case, the nanostructure and solubility of PANI, properties of the solvent, properties of the extra-added agent, and the interactions between each component must be comprehensively considered.
(iv) To manufacture high-performance PANI-based MSCs, an in-depth understanding of the electrochemical processes and the structural changes in the electrodes should be developed and established. To this end, advanced characterization strategies such as in situ microscopic/spectroscopic techniques should be introduced to probe the structural changes in PANI electrodes during the cyclic charge/discharge process. Furthermore, computational modelling and machine-learning techniques are expected to predict the performance of PANI composite electrodes with big data from different synthetic parameters, which can be used to create guidelines for the synthesis of high-performance PANI composite electrodes.
(v) The cost of PANI-based MSCs is one of the critical issues for the commercialization of PANI-based MSCs. Generally, the cost of PANI-based MSCs is dependent on the synthesis of PANI and micro-fabrication procedures of the patterned electrodes. The other necessary components such as substrate, electrolyte, and encapsulating layer also contribute to the overall cost of devices. However, in recent works, the average cost of PANI-based MSCs has rarely been calculated or disclosed because the development of PANI-based MSCs is still in its infancy, which results in uncertain process and material costs. Therefore, more effort should be devoted to enhancing the electrochemical performance of devices rather than optimizing the fabrication cost of the devices. Herein, we advocate that researchers and practitioners should calculate and disclose the average cost of PANI-based MSCs, considering all the necessary components and fabrication steps. Furthermore, a viable and scalable fabrication route can be developed for future PANI-based MSCs.
(vi) Finally, next-generation PANI-based MSCs are expected to possess other functionalities besides energy storage.262,263 To date, MSCs with self-charging,264,265 self-healing,266,267 stretching,268,269 electrochromic,159,270 sensing,271,272 thermal self-protection,273,274 and photo-switch functions275 have been successfully developed. PANI is a multifunctional material with electrochemical, sensing, and electrochromic activities. Additionally, both the device components and manufacturing process of PANI-based MSCs should be optimized to ensure their compatibility with other on-chip electronics.
Author contributions
Xiang Chu: conceptualization, methodology, writing-original draft, visualization. Weiqing Yang: writing-review & editing, funding acquisition, supervision. Hong Li: conceptualization, writing-review & editing, funding acquisition, supervision.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51972277 and No. 51977185) and the Sichuan Science and Technology Program (No. 21ZDYF3951). X. Chu would like to express sincere thanks to China Scholarship Council (No. 202107000032) for the financial support during his study in Nanyang Technological University.
References
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, eaan8285 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, Y. Zhou, A. Libanori, G. Chen, W. Yang and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3380–3435 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC .
R. Xu, L. Du, D. Adekoya, G. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Sun and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2001537 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, E. Goikolea, A. Balducci, K. Naoi, P. L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yushin and P. Simon, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 419–436 CrossRef CAS .

          H. I. Becker, US Pat., 2800616, 1957. (to General Electric).
R. Kotz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1151–1163 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef .
H. Huang, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Jin, N. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Chu, B. Gu, W. Deng and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104431 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Jin, X. Chu, B. Gu, H. Huang and W. Yang, Carbon, 2019, 149, 105–116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. Chu, H. Su, H. Zhang, Y. Xie, W. Deng, N. Chen, F. Liu, H. Zhang, B. Gu, W. Deng and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Han, S. Pineda, A. T. Murdock, D. H. Seo, K. Ostrikov and A. Bendavid, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17293–17301 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, S. L. Zhang, S. Xu, H. Guo, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000918 CrossRef .
L. Jin, B. Zhang, L. Zhang and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104086 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chae, S. K. Park, K. C. Roh and H. S. Park, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 113–128 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. N. Zhang, H. Y. Zou, R. Y. Liu, C. Y. Tao, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 CAS .
J. Luo, F. R. Fan, T. Jiang, Z. Wang, W. Tang, C. Zhang, M. Liu, G. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3934–3943 CrossRef .
A. Khodabandehlo, A. Noori, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, R. B. Kaner and M. F. Mousavi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2204555 CrossRef CAS .
Marshall Brain & Chris Pollette, “How Capacitors Work” 17 September 2007. HowStuffWorks.com, https://electronics.howstuffworks.com/capacitor.htm.
Y. S. Yoon, W. I. Cho, J. H. Lim and D. J. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 101, 126–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lim, D. J. Choi, H. K. Kim, W. I. Cho and Y. S. Yoon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A275–A278 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Sung, S. J. Kim and K. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Xu, Z. Pan, Q. Zhou, W. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Gu and H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2106309 CrossRef .
L. Wang, H. Yao, F. Chi, J. Yan, H. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Jiang and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 12813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qi, S. Yick, O. Francis, A. Murdock, T. van der Laan, K. Ostrikov, Z. Bo, Z. Han and A. Bendavid, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 138–146 CrossRef .
H. Hu, Z. Pei, H. Fan and C. Ye, Small, 2016, 12, 3059–3069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yao, S. Chandrasekaran, J. Zhang, W. Xiao, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 459–470 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Huang, X. Chu, Y. Xie, D. Xiong, C. Yan, H. Zhao, H. Zhang and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4916–4924 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. Chu, Y. Xie, B. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Duan, N. Chen, Z. Xu, H. Zhang and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3776–3784 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Chu, H. Zhang, W. Yang and J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 106007 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. He, W. Yang, X. Hong, W. A. Haider, H. Tang, Z. Zhu, K. A. Owusu and L. Mai, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 49, 224–232 CrossRef .
M. Yuan, J. Yu and X. Chen, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2022, 43, 966–969 CAS .
H. Wang, F. Qiu, C. Lu, J. Zhu, C. Ke, S. Han and X. Zhuang, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, K. S. Schellhammer, F. Ortmann, S. Sun, R. Dong, M. Karakus, Z. Mics, M. Loffler, F. Zhang, X. Zhuang, E. Canovas, G. Cuniberti, M. Bonn and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3920–3924 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Su, F. Liu and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 315, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gu, H. Su, X. Chu, Q. Wang, H. Huang, J. He, T. Wu, W. Deng, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 1296–1303 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Wang, Q. Chu, Z. Wang, F. Zhang and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eftekhari, L. Li and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 86–107 CrossRef CAS .
Q. e Zhang, A. a Zhou, J. Wang, J. Wu and H. Bai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2372–2382 RSC .
T. Liu and Y. Li, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 807–842 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, X. Jia, K. Shu, C. Yu, G. G. Wallace and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4677–4699 RSC .
P. Liu, J. Yan, Z. Guang, Y. Huang, X. Li and W. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 424, 108–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fleischmann, J. B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. E. Jiang, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6738–6782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 10821–10859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4340–4363 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D. H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Springer, New York, NY,  1999 Search PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2081–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5369–5371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
C. Costentin, T. R. Porter and J. M. Saveant, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8649–8658 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, D. S. Ashby, D. M. Butts, R. H. DeBlock, Q. Wei, J. Lau and B. Dunn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 5, 5–19 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Su, F. Liu, X. Chu, C. Yan, B. Gu, H. Huang, T. Yang, N. Chen, Y. Han, W. Deng, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 307, 302–309 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Chatterjee and A. K. Nandi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15880–15918 RSC .
H. Lindstrom, S. Sodergren, A. Solbrand, H. Rensmo, J. Hjelm, A. Hagfeldt and S. E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7710–7716 CrossRef .
H. Lindstrom, S. Sodergren, A. Solbrand, H. Rensmo, J. Hjelm, A. Hagfeldt and S. E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7717–7722 CrossRef .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edn, John Wiley & Sons,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14925–14931 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sun, Z. Guan, Q. Zhu, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and B. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–11 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 454–460 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-B. Yoon, H.-K. Song, K. C. Roh and K.-B. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 161, A137–A141 CrossRef .
M. Forghani and S. W. Donne, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A664–A673 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pu, D. Zhao, C. Fu, Z. Chen, S. Cao, C. Wang and Y. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21310–21318 CrossRef CAS .
H. Su, H. Huang, H. Zhang, X. Chu, B. Zhang, B. Gu, X. Zheng, S. Wu, W. He, C. Yan, J. Chen and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3544–3553 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, X. Chu, H. Zhang, H. Huang, G. Tian, Z. Wang, B. Gu, N. Chen, W. Deng, W. Deng and W. Yang, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1801109 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Chu, Z. Zhu, D. Xiong, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 423, 130203 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chu, Y. Wang, L. Cai, H. Huang, Z. Xu, Y. Xie, C. Yan, Q. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Li and W. Yang, SusMat, 2022, 2, 379–390 CrossRef .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 RSC .
N. Liu and Y. Gao, Small, 2017, 13, 1701989 CrossRef .
D. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602802 CrossRef .
M. Yu and X. Feng, Joule, 2019, 3, 338–360 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zheng, X. Shi, P. Das, Z. S. Wu and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900583 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, H. Zhang, H. Huang, Z. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Chen and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104928 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
D. Chen, K. Jiang, T. Huang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1901806 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Lu, S. Li and Y. Zhang, iScience, 2021, 24, 102716 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Pan, Y. Cheng, Z. Shao, H. Xiang, G. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Weng, H. Bai and M. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7009–7061 RSC .
Z. Pan, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Gao and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6406–6433 RSC .
X. Xiao, T. Q. Li, P. H. Yang, Y. Gao, H. Y. Jin, W. J. Ni, W. H. Zhan, X. H. Zhang, Y. Z. Cao, J. W. Zhong, L. Gong, W. C. Yen, W. J. Mai, J. Chen, K. F. Huo, Y. L. Chueh, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9200–9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, J. Zhang, K. Lv, N. Kong, Y. Shao and J. Tao, Carbon, 2022, 200, 38–46 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shi, Li, A. Chen, T. C. Jen, X. Liu and G. Shen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 14, 34 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. W. Na, J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, Y. Jung, K. Lee, J. S. Park, J. Y. Park, K. S. Song, S. B. Lee, T. Kim and S. J. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabl8631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, J. Deng, G. Guan, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6286–6290 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13453–13457 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Zhao, H. Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. X. Yu, O. I. Malyi, X. X. Zhao, L. T. Wang, H. B. Wang, J. H. Peng, X. F. Li, Y. Y. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Pan, G. C. Xing, C. H. Lu, Y. X. Tang and X. D. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd6978 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Lin, H. Shang, J. Xu, J. Zhu and W. Huang, SusMat, 2021, 1, 105–126 CrossRef .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–12 CAS .
L. Christophe, L. B. Jean and B. Thierry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 96–115 RSC .
L. Liu, H. Zhao and Y. Lei, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 74–84 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Li, Q. Yang, P. Sun, L. Wu, B. Nie, H. Tian, Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Chen and J. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, e2004957 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Han, O. Qian, G. Meng, D. Lin, G. Chen, S. Zhang, Q. Pan, X. Zhang, X. Zhu and B. Wei, Science, 2022, 377, 1004–1007 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Yin, X. Li and Z. You, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 64–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, J.-M. Jeong, S. J. Kim, K. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, N. H. Bae, K. G. Lee and B. G. Choi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7746–7755 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chu, H. Huang, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Gu, H. Su, F. Liu, Y. Han, Z. Wang, N. Chen, C. Yan, W. Deng, W. Deng and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 301, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, W. Zou, B. Quan, A. Yu, H. Wu, P. Jiang and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, W. Li, J. Cao, X. Wang, Y. Xie, L. Deng, H. Liu, Z. Huang, L. Sun and S. Cheng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 8857–8865 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller and R. A. Outlaw, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5077–A5082 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Zheng, J. Ma, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Feng and Z.-S. Wu, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 514–520 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, F. Guo, Y. Liu, Z. Xu and C. Gao, SusMat, 2021, 1, 304–323 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, T. Liu, F. Qian, T. Y. Han, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, S. Chandrasekaran, H. Zhang, A. Ma, J. Kang, L. Zhang, X. Lu, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1906652 CrossRef .
S. Wang, J. Ma, X. Shi, Y. Zhu and Z.-S. Wu, Nano Res. Energy, 2022, e9120018 CrossRef .
J. Han, Y. C. Lin, L. Chen, Y. C. Tsai, Y. Ito, X. Guo, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, M. Esashi, T. Gessner and M. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500067 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, B. D. Myers, J. Yan, G. Shekhawat, V. Dravid and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4119–4122 RSC .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, M. Ihns, M. Li, J. Y. Hwang, M. F. Mousavi, L. Chaney, A. T. Lech and R. B. Kaner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4233–4238 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, B. Hsia, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7997–8002 RSC .
S. Wang, Z. S. Wu, S. Zheng, F. Zhou, C. Sun, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4283–4291 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, N. Nitta and G. Yushin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6498–6506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Li, X.-M. Shi, X.-Y. Lang, Z. Wen, J.-C. Li and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1830–1839 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Lee, J. W. Yang, S. Choi and H. W. Jang, Exploration, 2021, 1, 20210012 CrossRef .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, L. Q. Yao, X. Li, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3229–3264 RSC .
X. Huang, J. Chen, H. Xie, F. Zhao, S. Fan and Y. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2022, 65, 2217–2226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, S. Zheng, Y. Cao, Y. Zhu, P. Das, H. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, L. Chi, S. Liu and Z. S. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100746 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, V. Ruiz, V. Mishukova, Q. Wan, H. Liu, H. Xue, Y. Gao, G. Cao, Y. Li, X. Zhuang, J. Weissenrieder, S. Cheng and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2108773 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Y. Han, X. Y. Li, C. L. Dai, X. Q. Zhang, X. T. Jin, C. X. Shao, B. Lu, C. Z. Wang, H. H. Cheng, F. Liu and L. T. Qu, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabn8338 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, Z. Fan, Y. Shao, Z. Tian, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901839 CrossRef .
S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, R. Schneider, A. Verma, J. Heier, F. Nuesch and C. J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000716 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, M. C. Li, C. Liu, Q. Wu and C. Mei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2109593 CrossRef .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Kim, B. Jang, K. Jo, D. Kim, J. Lee, K.-S. Kim, S.-M. Lee, H.-J. Lee, S. M. Han and J.-H. Kim, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 024003 CrossRef .
S. Kang, K. Lim, H. Park, J. B. Park, S. C. Park, S. P. Cho, K. Kang and B. H. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1033–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
T. Cheng, Y. W. Wu, Y. L. Chen, Y. Z. Zhang, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Small, 2019, 15, e1901830 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, C. Jiang and W. Wu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 021319 CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Zhang, Q. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, G. G. Wallace, S. Beirne, J. M. Razal and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706592 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Qing, Z. Chen, J. Wang, G. Yang, Y. Qian, D. Liu, C. Chen, L. Wang and W. Lei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6845–6852 CrossRef CAS .
J. Orangi, F. Hamade, V. A. Davis and M. Beidaghi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 640–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shen, J. Ding and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800408 CrossRef .
X. Yan, Y. Tong, X. Wang, F. Hou and J. Liang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022, 5, 800–822 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Li, F. Zhu and O. G. Schmidt, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800367 Search PubMed .
T. Ito and S. Okazaki, Nature, 2000, 406, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, T. Kim, J. Lee, Y. S. Choi, J. Moon, S. Y. Park, T. H. Lee, H. K. Park, S. A. Lee, M. S. Kwon, H. G. Byun, J. H. Lee, M. G. Lee, B. H. Hong and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2004827 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Ryu, S. Park, Y. Park, S. W. Ryu, K. Hwang and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2204947 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhou, H. Huang, C. Xiao, S. Zheng, X. Shi, J. Qin, Q. Fu, X. Bao, X. Feng, K. Mullen and Z. S. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8198–8205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Zheng, P. Lu, J. Ma, P. Das, F. Su, H. M. Cheng and Z. S. Wu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2022, 9, nwac024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, Z. S. Wu, L. Chen, F. Zhou, S. Zheng, W. Ren, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7284–7292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhang, M. P. Kremer, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705506 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
X. Chu, G. Chen, X. Xiao, Z. Wang, T. Yang, Z. Xu, H. Huang, Y. Wang, C. Yan, N. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Yang and J. Chen, Small, 2021, e2100956 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Gao and A. F. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 327–340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heinze, B. A. Frontana-Uribe and S. Ludwigs, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4724–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, X. Chu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Liu, L. Pan and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2856 RSC .
S. Mabrouk, A. Gurung, B. Bahrami, A. Baniya, R. S. Bobba, F. Wu, R. Pathak and Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 9351–9360 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, S. R. Ha, J. H. Park, E. D. Jung, W. H. Jeong, S. Kim, M. H. Song, J.-M. Kim, S. Lee, S. H. Park, H. Choi and B. R. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 228810 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Zhu, F. Wang, J. Wang, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604491 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7736–7741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Li, L. X. Liu, Q. W. Wang, H. B. Zhang, W. Chen, G. Yin and Z. Z. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 12703–12712 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, W. Deng, X. Chu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, X. Fan, J. Song, Y. Gao, B. Zhang, G. Tian, D. Xiong, S. Zhong, L. Tang, Y. Hu and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 11555–11563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Yang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 477–481 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600969 CrossRef .
R. B. Ambade, S. B. Ambade, R. R. Salunkhe, V. Malgras, S.-H. Jin, Y. Yamauchi and S.-H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7406–7415 RSC .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 RSC .
X. Chu, X. Zhao, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Han, Y. Zhou, J. Ma, Z. Wang, H. Huang, Z. Xu, C. Yan, H. Zhang, W. Yang and J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105179 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, P. Feng, J. Chen, Z. Sun and B. Zhao, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 88, 220–240 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
I. Fratoddi, I. Venditti, C. Cametti and M. V. Russo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 534–548 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Baker, X. Huang, W. Nelson and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1510–1525 RSC .
W. R. Small, F. Masdarolomoor, G. G. Wallace and M. in het Panhuis, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4359–4361 RSC .
T. Lin, W. Liu, B. Yan, J. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Zhao, Z. Shi and S. Chen, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Q. Niu, S. Fan and Y. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 128126 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Macdiarmid, J. C. Chiang, A. F. Richter and A. J. Epstein, Synth. Met., 1987, 18, 285–290 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chu, H. Zhang, H. Su, F. Liu, B. Gu, H. Huang, H. Zhang, W. Deng, X. Zheng and W. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Zhou, X. Xu, Y. Shen, H. Yan and Z. Qin, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 386, 138448 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Lee and S.-J. Kwon, Synth. Met., 2007, 157, 336–342 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Z. Qin, T. Li, F. Zeng, Y. Chen and N. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 356, 136841 CrossRef CAS .
H. Noby, A. H. El-Shazly, M. F. Elkady and M. Ohshima, Polymer, 2018, 156, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Kim, D.-M. Lee, J. Y. Jung, M. J. Kim, M.-S. Khil, H. S. Jeong and N. D. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1130–1142 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kuramoto and A. Tomita, Synth. Met., 1997, 88, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Miras, C. Barbero and O. Haas, Synth. Met., 1991, 43, 3081–3084 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Hu, J. Luo, Y. Gu and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 7721–7730 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, F. Meng, Z. Zhou, X. Tian, L. Shan, S. Zhu, X. Xu, M. Jiang, L. Wang, D. Hui, Y. Wang, J. Lu and J. Gou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8140–8148 RSC .
M. Blaha, M. Bousa, V. Vales, O. Frank and M. Kalbac, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 34686–34695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Pan and Z. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124433 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, H. Xu, P. Chen, Y. Bao, X. Jiang and Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 413, 140146 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, X. Miao, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Lin and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 390, 138819 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Lin, S. Chen and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 415, 140206 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Tao, H. Sun, T. X. Wang, Z. Peng, J. Jin, Z. Wang, K. Peng, H. Wei, Y. J. Li, B. H. Han and L. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2021, 33, 045405 CrossRef .
I. V. Panasenko, M. O. Bulavskiy, A. A. Iurchenkova, Y. Aguilar-Martinez, F. S. Fedorov, E. O. Fedorovskaya, B. Mikladal, T. Kallio and A. G. Nasibulin, J. Power Sources, 2022, 541, 231691 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. B. Fan and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21840–21856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. T. Raaijmakers and N. E. Benes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 63, 86–142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guan, L.-Z. Fan, H. Zhang and X. Qu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 964–968 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gao, J. Yu, S. Chen, X. Xin and L. Zang, Synth. Met., 2021, 273, 116693 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Huang, S. Virji, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 314–315 CrossRef CAS .
S. Virji, J. X. Huang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 491–496 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Kuo and T.-C. Wen, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 3393–3401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Commun., 2006, 367–376 RSC .
L. Zang, Q. Liu, J. Qiu, C. Yang, C. Wei, C. Liu and L. Lao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33941–33947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, Y. Wang, F. Chen, J. Wang, F. Dai and Z. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136717 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, K.-H. Shin and J. Jang, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5066–5070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, J. Bae, M. Choi and S.-H. Yoon, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2730–2736 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deb, A. Bera, K. L. Bhowmik and B. Saha, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2018, 58, 2249–2255 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vonlanthen, P. Lazarev, K. A. See, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5095–5100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, J. Maeng, S. W. M. John and P. P. Irazoqui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301269 CrossRef .
J. Maeng, Y. J. Kim, C. Meng and P. P. Irazoqui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13458–13465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, R. Ma and D. J. Kang, Carbon, 2020, 161, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, P. Zhang, Z. Liao, F. Wang, J. Wang, M. Wang, E. Zschech, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 3921–3924 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, L. Zheng, W. Wang, Y. Shi, Q. Zhang and X. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2019, 252, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Ma and J. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2020, 474, 228681 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, S. Li, S. Yang, Z. Liu, S. Liu, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4054–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, B. Xiao, X. Xu, L. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, M. Yan, Q. Wei and L. Mai, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1012–1021 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, S. Yang, H. Lu, A. Narita, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Small, 2017, 13, 1603388 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jin, G. Zhang, G. Sun, H. Yang, Y. Xiao, J. Gao, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103938 CrossRef .
C. Chen, J. Huang, V. Mishukova, K. Jiang, X. Ye, C. Lu, Z. Chen, C. Ke, Y. Su, J. Li and X. Zhuang, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2100006 CrossRef .
X. Chu, Z. Zhu, H. Huang, Y. Xie, Z. Xu, Y. Wang, C. Yan, L. Jin, Y. Wang, H. Zhang and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 513, 230555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maeng, C. Meng and P. P. Irazoqui, Biomed. Microdevices, 2015, 17, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Sun and Y. Ma, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, J. Bae, X. Zhou, Y. Guo and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801796 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, J. Meng, M. Zhang, T. Liu and C. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2021, 58, 185–207 RSC .
Y. H. Guo, J. Bae, F. Zhao and G. H. Yu, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 335–348 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sardana, A. Gupta, K. Singh, A. S. Maan and A. Ohlan, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 45, 103510 CrossRef .
L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Lu, Y. Wang, J. Xu, J. Zhu, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Liu, Y. Q. Feng, X. B. Yan, J. T. Chen and Q. J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111–4122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 72–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dousti, S. Babu, N. Geramifard, M. Y. Choi, J. B. Lee, S. F. Cogan and G. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2022, 520, 230779 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, Y. Z. Tan, S. Zheng, S. Wang, K. Parvez, J. Qin, X. Shi, C. Sun, X. Bao, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4506–4512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Huang, C.-J. Chung, C.-T. Hsieh, P.-L. Kuo and H. Teng, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, Z. Zhang, X. Li, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, P. Zuo, C. Xu, L. Ma, S. Wang, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, Sci. China Mater., 2022, 65, 2412–2420 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Su, L. Zhang, B. Zhang, F. Chun, X. Chu, W. He and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Han, C. Huang, S. S. Meysami, D. Piche, D. H. Seo, S. Pineda, A. T. Murdock, P. S. Bruce, P. S. Grant and N. Grobert, Carbon, 2018, 126, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Han and K. Ostrikov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6018–6024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, Z. Zhang, L. Zheng, F. Teng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601111 CrossRef .
Z. B. Cai, L. Li, J. Ren, L. B. Qiu, H. J. Lin and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 258–261 RSC .
K. Wang, Q. Meng, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei and M. Miao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1494–1498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, A. Xu, Y. Zhang, W. Li and Y. Qin, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136727 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xue, F. Li, J. Zhu, H. Song, M. Zhang and T. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1284–1290 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, X. Chu, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, H. Su, L. Jin, Z. Wang, H. Huang and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeplin and E. G. C. Neiva, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 902, 115776 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, L. Deng, J. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Li and X. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2022, 9, e202200039 CAS .
K. P. Gautam, D. Acharya, I. Bhatta, V. Subedi, M. Das, S. Neupane, J. Kunwar, K. Chhetri and A. P. Yadav, Inorganics, 2022, 10, 86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Xiao, T. Zhang, S. Hao, Z. Jia and Y. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 863, 158071 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Arvizu, F. J. González, A. Romero-Galarza, F. J. Rodríguez-Varela, C. R. Garcia and M. A. Garcia-Lobato, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 020564 CrossRef .
Z. Lv, C. Wang, C. Wan, R. Wang, X. Dai, J. Wei, H. Xia, W. Li, W. Zhang, S. Cao, F. Zhang, H. Yang, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2202877 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tajik, H. Beitollahi, F. G. Nejad, I. S. Shoaie, M. A. Khalilzadeh, M. S. Asl, Q. Van Le, K. Zhang, H. W. Jang and M. Shokouhimehr, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 37834–37856 RSC .
J. H. Sung, S. Kim and K. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 133, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Sung, S. J. Kim, S. H. Jeong, E. H. Kim and K. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1467–1470 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, H. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, H. Geng and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605137 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qin, J. Gao, X. Shi, J. Chang, Y. Dong, S. Zheng, X. Wang, L. Feng and Z. S. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909756 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kurra, M. K. Hota and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, M. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700974 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, A. Levitt, N. Kurra, K. Juan, N. Noriega, X. Xiao, X. Wang, H. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 455–461 CrossRef .
J. O. Omale, R. Rupp, P. Van Velthem, V. Van Kerckhoven, V.-A. Antohe, A. Vlad and L. Piraux, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 77–84 CrossRef .
M. Boota and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 9, 1802917 CrossRef .
L. Jin, Y. Jiang, M. Zhang, H. Li, L. Xiao, M. Li and Y. Ao, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 6268 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Hu, W. Li, J. Zhang and W. Meng, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2014, 30, 321–327 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Finn, M. Yu, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, H. Qi, J. Yang, Z. Bo, F. Huang, M. S. Islam, X. Lu, L. Dai, R. Amal, C. H. Wang and Z. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1854–1896 RSC .
T. V. Nguyen, H. H. Do, T. Q. Trung, Q. V. Le, T. P. Nguyen, S. H. Hong, H. W. Jang, S. H. Ahn and S. Y. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 882, 160718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 RSC .
Y. Yue, N. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Wang, W. Liu, C. Luo, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Rao, X. Hu, J. Su and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4224–4232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, Z. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Sun, Z. Pan, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Yao, W. Lu, Q. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Lou, W. Han, D. Chen, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600282 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, Z. Chai, Z. Liang, P. Sun, W. Xie, C. Zhao and W. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34085–34092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Guo, J. Chen, B. Yang, L. Liu, L. Su, B. Shen and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702394 CrossRef .
J. Ye, H. Tan, S. Wu, K. Ni, F. Pan, J. Liu, Z. Tao, Y. Qu, H. Ji, P. Simon and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801384 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Ha, A. Al-Sudani, C. J. Ellison and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7921–7928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Sheng, F. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Zhu, X. Zhuang, R. Jordan, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1717–1722 RSC .
Z. Liu, H. I. Wang, A. Narita, Q. Chen, Z. Mics, D. Turchinovich, M. Klaui, M. Bonn and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9443–9446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Xiang Chu
	Xiang Chu received his BE Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Southwest Jiaotong University in 2016, China. Then, he became a PhD student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University in 2018, under the supervision of Prof. Weiqing Yang. Currently, he is a visiting PhD student at the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, under the supervision of Prof. Hong Li. His research interests include advanced electrochemical energy storage materials and devices.

Weiqing Yang
	Dr Weiqing Yang is currently a Full Professor at the Southwest Jiaotong University. He received his MS in Physics (2007) and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering (2011) from Sichuan University. He was a Post-Doctorate Research Fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology from 2013 to 2014, under the supervision of Prof. Zhong Lin Wang. He has published more than 200 papers. Currently, his main research interests include energy harvesting and storage devices.

Hong Li
	Dr Hong Li is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering in Nanyang Technological University (NTU) Singapore. He obtained his PhD in NTU in 2008. Prior to joining NTU in 2016 as an NAP fellow, he worked as a Postdoc at Stanford University USA (Department of Mechanical Engineering and SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis). His research interests include catalyst engineering and device development for energy conversion and storage.

 	Fig. 1  Holistic diagram illustrating various implementations of both conventional supercapacitors (SCs) and MSCs. Image of power grid: reproduced with permission from ref. 14 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. Image of rail transit: reproduced with permission from ref. 15 Copyright 2021, Wiley. Image of an airplane: reproduced with permission from ref. 16 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. Image of implantable devices: reproduced with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Image of wearable electronics: reproduced with permission from ref. 18 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. Image of self-powered system: reproduced with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2015, Springer & Tsinghua University Press. Image of IoTs system: reproduced with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 2  Brief timeline of the development history of MSCs. Image of conducting polymer MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 24 Copyright 2003, Elsevier. Image of PANI MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2011, Wiley. Image of printed PANI MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  Charge storage mechanisms of both conventional supercapacitors and MSCs. (a) EDLC mechanism. (b) Pseudocapacitive mechanism including underpotential deposition, fast redox reaction, and intercalation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Representative characteristics of battery behavior and extrinsic-pseudocapacitance. (a) CV curves of battery material, bulk MoS2. (b) CV curves of extrinsic-pseudocapacitive material, nano-MoS2. (c) Illustrative galvanostatic discharge curves for battery material (bulk LiCoO2) and extrinsic-pseudocapacitive material (nano LiCoO2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 
i(V) = avb	(1)
	(2)
iP = CdAv	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of typical configurations of MSCs. (a) Sandwich configuration. (b) Interdigitated in-plane configuration. (c) Fiber-shaped configuration. (d) 3D configuration. (e) Electrodes of 3D MSCs consisting of highly ordered 3D nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 6  Typical fabrication technologies of MSCs including printing technologies, in situ technologies, and other technologies. Images of laser scribing, electrode conversion, electrophoretic deposition, electrochemical polymerization, inkjet printing, and screen printing: reproduced with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. Image of 3D printing: reproduced with permission from ref. 29 Copyright 2019, Cell Press. Image of roll-to-roll printing: reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. Image of stamping: reproduced with permission from ref. 150 Copyright 2018, Wiley. Image of vacuum filtration: reproduced with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the charging process of (a) carbonaceous electrode and (b) PANI electrode.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structure of PANI polymeric chains with different oxidation states. These states can be interconverted through oxidation or reduction.	 

 	Fig. 9  PANI in emeraldine base doped by protonic acid to form emeraldine salt with high conductivity.	 

 	Fig. 10  Four mainstream synthetic methods for PANI polymerization. (a) Solution polymerization, (b) electrochemical polymerization, (c) interfacial polymerization, and (d) vapor-phase polymerization.	 


PANI NWs	Photolithography + DP	1.15	0.4	23.5c	588	82	1250	96%, 1000 cycles	
105

PANI NWs	Sputtering + EP	0.45	10.1	45.2	105	3.9	39	87.6%, 2000 cycles	
207

PANI NFs	Photolithography + EP	4	6.7c	65.1	93.0	16.4	3.83	85.7%, 1000 cycles	
208

PANI NSs	Spray coating	78.6c	
	96.6	26	2.4	0.76	77.1%, 10000 cycles	
152

Annealed PANI	Laser printing + ED	53.2c	10	54	54c	4.8	0.12	79.8%, 1000 cycles	
209

2D PANI	SMAIS	—	0.01	0.37	370	17.9	20	—	
210

PANI/MnO2	SP	—	—	22.5	—	52.7 W h kg−1	720 W kg−1	90.2%, 2000 cycles	
211

PANI/MOF/LIG	EP + ED	—	90c	719.2	79.9c	4.0	0.44	87.6%, 6000 cycles	
212

Stacked PANI/graphene	Filtration + sputtering + OPE	—	4.5	368	736	46	10.65	92.6%, 1000 cycles	
213

PANI/h-graphene	Photolithography + EP	—	—	—	271.1	24.1	110.1	99.5%, 5000 cycles	
214

PANI//N-doped graphene	EP	32	1.42	14.5	102	30.6	0.5	77%, 5000 cycles	
139

PANI/LSG	Laser scribe + EP	425	4–8	20.6	4.6	0.407	0.196	87%, 5000 cycles	
20

PANI hydrogel	Sputtering + EP	78.6c	—	561.6	—	49.9 mW h cm−2	0.4 mW cm−2	76%, 10000 cycles	
104

PANI/EG	MP + Photolithography	50.6	0.2	1.5	75	6.67	600	—	
215

PANI/CNT	EP + laser writing	9	14	101	72.1	6.41	0.064	94.2%, 8000 cycles	
216

PNEG	IP + laser scribing	90	50	172	26	1.39	0.425	91.1%, 2300 cycles	
217

PANI/C-MWCNT	Spray coating	78.6c	40.1	45.4	11.3c	2.6	1.488	90.7%, 12000 cycles	
218


 	Fig. 11  All-solid-state on-chip MSC with PANI nanowire array electrodes. This work is regarded as the first PANI-based MSC, which was reported in 2011. (a) Schematic image of the fabrication process of MSC with PANI nanowire array electrode. (b) Optical picture of flexible MSC unit arrays on PET film. (c) Optical microscopy image of MSC 400 with line-width of 400 μm. (d) SEM image of PANI nanowire arrays. (e) CV curves, (f) GCD curves, and (g) Ragone plots of MSC 100, MSC 400, and MSC 800. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2011, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  Large areal MSC array prepared by spray-coating method using PANI nanosheet ink. (a) 2D PANI nanosheets facilitate ion transfer in a co-planar MSC configuration. (b) Flexible MSC array derived from PANI nanosheet ink. (c) TEM image of PANI nanosheets. CV curves of MSCs connected (d) in series and (e) in parallel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  PANI hydrogels and corresponding MSCs. (a) Phytic acid was employed as both the dopant and crosslinker to prepare PANI hydrogel, which could be ink-jet printed to form different patterns with high resolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225 Copyright 2012, PNAS. (b) Synthesis of super-elastic PANI/PVA hydrogel with bi-continuous phase structure via cryopolymerization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Electrochemical polymerization of 3D PANI hydrogel consisting of numerous interconnected nanospheres. (d) Digital photo and electrochemical performance of MSCs based on PANI hydrogel electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  MSCs using PANI/CNT electrodes. (a) Fabrication of fiber-shaped MSC using PANI/MWCNT composite fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fabrication of fiber-shaped MSC using PANI/CNT yarns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238 Copyright 2013, Wiley. (c) PANI/CNT MSC with wide temperature tolerance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 216 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Embedding C-MWCNTs in PANI nanosheets with enhanced rate capability for MSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  PANI/LSG MSC powered integrated circuit for IoTs applications. (a) Fabrication of an integrated system. (b) Schematic illustration of the basic elements of the integrated circuit. (c) Cross-section SEM image of LSG. (d) SEM image of PANI deposited onto the surface of LSG flakes. (e) CV curves of LSG and PANI/LSG MSCs. (f) Studying the cross-sensitivity of the LSG humidity sensor against different gases. (g) Return loss of the NFC antenna at 13.56 MHz. The inset shows a digital photograph of the NFC antenna after copper electroplating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  MSCs using PANI/non-electrochemical active material composite electrodes. (a) Covalently bonded rigid PANI chains and compliant PVA chains. (b) Different co-planar PPM electrode patterns fabricated by ultraviolet laser cutting method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Fabrication of PANI/BC electrode using SHAPE method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248 Copyright 2022, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  MSCs using PPy and PEDOT electrodes. (a) MSCs using pure PPy or PPy composite electrodes. PPy film MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 250 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. PPy nanowires MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 252 Copyright 2017, Wiley. PPy/graphene flakes MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 253 Copyright 2020, Wiley. (b) MSCs using pure PEDOT or PEDOT composite electrodes. PEDOT:PSS hydrogel MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 255 Copyright 2017, Wiley. Porous PEDOT MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 254 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. PEDOT/Ti3C2Tx composite MSC: reproduced with permission from ref. 256 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
