Correlation between hierarchical structure of crystal networks and macroscopic performance of mesoscopic soft materials and engineering principles   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00074B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00074B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7881-7915Correlation between hierarchical structure of crystal networks and macroscopic performance of mesoscopic soft materials and engineering principles†

        
          
            Naibo 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiang Yang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ab
aResearch Institute for Biomimetics and Soft Matter, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China. E-mail: phyliuxy@nus.edu.sg
bDepartment of Physics, National University of Singapore, 2 Science Drive 3, Singapore, 117542, Singapore
Received 
      27th January 2015
    First published on 27th July 2015AbstractThis review examines how the concepts and ideas of crystallization can be extended further and applied to the field of mesoscopic soft materials. It concerns the structural characteristics vs. the macroscopic performance, and the formation mechanism of crystal networks. Although this subject can be discussed in a broad sense across the area of mesoscopic soft materials, our main focus is on supramolecular materials, spider and silkworm silks, and biominerals. First, the occurrence of a hierarchical structure, i.e. crystal network and domain network structures, will facilitate the formation kinetics of mesoscopic phases and boost up the macroscopic performance of materials in some cases (i.e. spider silk fibres). Second, the structure and performance of materials can be correlated in some way by the four factors: topology, correlation length, symmetry/ordering, and strength of association of crystal networks. Moreover, four different kinetic paths of crystal network formation are identified, namely, one-step process of assembly, two-step process of assembly, mixed mode of assembly and foreign molecule mediated assembly. Based on the basic mechanisms of crystal nucleation and growth, the formation of crystal networks, such as crystallographic mismatch (or noncrystallographic) branching (tip branching and fibre side branching) and fibre/polymeric side merging, are reviewed. This facilitates the rational design and construction of crystal networks in supramolecular materials. In this context, the (re-)construction of a hierarchical crystal network structure can be implemented by thermal, precipitate, chemical, and sonication stimuli. As another important class of soft materials, the unusual mechanical performance of spider and silkworm silk fibres are reviewed in comparison with the regenerated silk protein derivatives. It follows that the considerably larger breaking stress and unusual breaking strain of spider silk fibres vs. silkworm silk fibres can be interpreted according to the synergistically correlated hierarchical structures of the domain and crystal networks, which can be quantified by the hierarchical structural correlation and the four structural parameters. Based on the concept of crystal networks, the new understanding acquired will transfer the research and engineering of mesoscopic materials, particularly, soft functional materials, to a new phase.
Naibo Lin
Lin Naibo is currently an assistant professor at Xiamen University, China. He received his PhD (2011) from Donghua University under the supervision of Professor Xiang-Yang Liu and Professor Hongyao Xu, studying the structure and property of silk fibers. During 2012–2013, he was a lecturer at Shanghai Institute of Technology. Since 2013, he has been with the Research Institute for Biomimetics and Soft Matter, Xiamen University. Dr Lin's research interests focus on the crystal network of functional fibers and its applications.
Xiang Yang Liu
Prof. Xiang Yang Liu received his PhD degree with the cum laude title from the Radboud University Nijmegen (Netherlands), in 1993. Prof. Liu is the tenured full Professor in NUS, and currently the State Distinguished Professor for the 1000 Talents Program, Chair Prof. of the Changjiang Scholars Program. His research interests range from biomimetics and crystallization to soft matters. He has authored numerous books and more than 200 peer prestige papers, such as Nature, and has edited four books. He has been cited by top websites and newspapers several hundreds of times. His international standing can be substantiated by his delivery of more than 90 plenary/keynote or invited talks in international conferences, organization of >25 international conferences/symposia, numerous awards, and the 5th President of the Asia Association for Crystal Growth and Crystal Technology, the councilor of the International Organization of Crystal Growth.
1. Introduction
The structure and performance of materials are the two sides of a coin and can be considered as the basic two elements of “Yin” and “Yang” in Taoism. On the one hand, the structure of materials determines the performance. On the other hand, the outstanding performance of materials can be attributed to some specific structures (Fig. 1). Crystals as typical bulk functional materials have been attracting people's interests for centuries.1 Conventionally, the structural units in crystalline materials are atoms, natural and synthetic molecules.2 Recent studies have shown that for many new functional materials, the macroscopic behaviour begins to manifest itself not at the atomic or nanoscale but at the mesoscale.3 With our recently acquired knowledge of the rules of nature that govern the atomic and nanoscales, we are well positioned to unravel and control the complexity that determines the functionality at the mesoscale.3 Therefore, the ability to predict and control mesoscale phenomena and architectures is essential if atomic and molecular knowledge is to blossom into the next generation of technology opportunities, societal benefits, and scientific advances.
 Fig. 1  “Yin”-”Yang” fish of materials research: the structure and performance of materials can be considered as the basic two elements of “Yin” and “Yang” in Taoism: On the one hand, the structure of materials determines the performance. On the other hand, the outstanding performance of materials is the reflection of some specific structures. More specifically, such a connection can be described in some way by the four factors: topology, correlation length (correlation L), interaction and ordering. 
Recently, crystal networks were found to be the basic structural components of many soft materials,4 which have attracted significant interests across materials science. It follows that the relevancy of crystallization has been beyond the control of the size and the quality of bulk crystals or thin films, which has been the main concerns in the field of crystallization across the 20th century.5 It was discovered that the structure of associated crystallites, or so-called crystal networks, plays a vital role in governing the properties or macroscopic behaviour of many materials, such as small molecule gels, polymeric gels, liquid crystals, and natural fibers (i.e. silk fibers).6 It follows that in these cases, the basic building units are nano-crystalline (i.e. polymer gels and silk fibers) or partially crystalline. Owing to the special structures and properties, these materials have been found in many fields, including foods,7 cosmetics, drug delivery,8 tissue engineering,9 organic electronics,10 chemical sensing,11 templates synthesis of materials,12 and art conservation.13 We should notice that the outstanding performance of spider silk fibers was correlated with the hierarchical structure of crystal networks.14 Therefore, the comprehensive understanding on crystal networks, particularly the structure/performance correlation, is of utmost importance. In this regard, if the perfection and the properties of bulk/thin single crystals are the main concern in traditional crystallization, how crystallites are associated with each other becomes the main concern for soft and hybrid materials. The key parameters that describe the way that crystallites are associated with each other on the mesoscale determine the properties and macroscopic performance of materials, while individual crystals and their properties become less important.13
The purpose of this review is to establish a comprehensive understanding on the role of crystal networks in the performance of soft materials, which are not considered in the classical-crystallization research. Our focus, therefore, will be devoted to the basic features of crystal networks at the mesoscopic scale. This includes the classification and the formation of crystal networks that are evolved from traditional crystallization. In particular, how the crystallization theories and technologies can be extended beyond the classical domain to describe the crystal network formation will be the main concern.
We notice that as the overall strategy of materials science and engineering, “functionalization” is always the centre of concern. In other words, to design and fabricate soft materials with desired functions and performance by (re-)constructing or tuning the mesoscopic materials should become the core interest. This can be understood within the framework of the “Yin”-“Yang” fish of materials research (Fig. 1).4 In somewhat detail, the engineering of soft materials with some particular properties/performance can be achieved by fabricating the structure of the materials. This can be implemented by controlling the formation kinetics. This concerns the establishment of the correlation between the structure and performance of materials and the acquirement of formation kinetics of the materials. The latter should allow us to control the structure to acquire the materials with some particular functionality. In this review, the acquired knowledge on the structure vs. performance relationship and the formation kinetics of the structure will be combined to implement mesoscale engineering.
In this review, our concentration will be focused on the correlation between crystal network structures and the performance of soft and hybrid materials. We will demonstrate how these traditional “non-crystalline” materials can be fabricated and how their properties can be optimized on the basis of crystal network engineering. Finally, we will show how the exceptional mechanical properties of animal silks, i.e. spider silk, can be predicted based on the knowledge of crystal networks. In this sense, the knowledge concerning crystal networks can also be extended to design and guide the fabrication of ultra-performance functional materials.
2. Mesoscopic materials and crystal network
The properties of materials are determined to a large extent by how the building units are linked (i.e. structure and binding). The scale of such building units can be described as being between the size of a quantity of atoms (such as a molecule) and of the materials measured in micrometers. The lower limit can also be defined as being the size of individual atoms. Objects have in common that they both contain a large number of atoms. The average properties derived from its constituent materials describe macroscopic objects because they usually obey the laws of classical mechanics; a mesoscopic object, in contrast, is affected by fluctuations around the average of macroscopic properties (Fig. 2).15
 Fig. 2  Multilevel structure of crystal networks. 
Recently, the challenging issues have further evolved as to how these nano-sized building blocks can be assembled with each other. Moreover, many materials, such as molecular gels, biominerals, and animal silks, are found to have nanobuilding blocks as the basic building units, which are associated with each other in some ways to display some particular properties and performance of materials. As the manner in which the building blocks are associated with each other affects the performance of mesoscopic materials, the knowledge about the mesoscopic structure becomes particularly important.
In the case that the nanobuilding units are crystallites, the association of the crystallites gives rise to crystal networks. The so-called crystal network can be defined as a group of crystallites associated with each other in some ways. The crystals in a crystal network can be associated with each other by themselves or crystals of different types, or non-crystalline molecules or an amorphous phase in one-dimensional, two-dimensional or three-dimensional manners. Topologically, a crystal network can be described as a set of “nodes” interconnected by some “links”. The points refer to the joints where the connection occurs, while the lines correspond to the association or linkage between the points. Note that the links can be physical or non-physical connections.16 The performance of materials of this type is not only determined by the individual crystallites, but also by the way of crystallite association (crystal networks).
2.1 Hierarchical structure of crystal networks and description
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the structural factors that affect the performance of materials include the dimensions, hierarchy, and ordering. This holds for materials with crystal network structures as well. According to the research over the past two decades, most crystal networks are of a hierarchical and fractal structure based on the Avrami equation.18 It has been identified that most crystal networks are of the statistical fractal characteristics. The in situ measurement of the fractal growth and fractal or Hausdorff–Besicovitch dimension Df crystal networks can be implemented by optical light scattering or rheological measurements. Compared with other methods, the rheological measurements can reveal the influence of both the small aggregates, which are formed at the early stages, and the larger aggregates, which are formed at the later stages, on the elasticity of the materials. One can refer to ref. 18 for more details. In the case of fiber network formation of N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid di-n-butylamide (GP-1) in solvents such as isostearyl alcohol,19 a gel formed at room temperature when cooled from 125 °C acquires the fractal dimension Df = 2.4. The change in fractal dimension can be applied to examine the change of crystal network structure. Lam et al. characterized the fractal dimension of 12-hydroxystearic acid (HSA) fibers formed in mineral oil as a function of cooling rate.20 At slow cooling rates (i.e. less than 5 to 7 °C min−1), long fibers were produced with a fractal dimension between 0.95 and 1.05 and for rapid cooling rates (i.e. greater than 5 to 7 °C min−1), short branched fibers were produced with a fractal dimension between 1.15 and 1.32. This implies that at higher cooling rates, the fibers are less linear and coincide with a higher degree of branching. The macroscopic properties of mesoscopic materials are largely determined by the hierarchical structure of crystal networks. The typical cases of crystal networks are summarized in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  (A) Comparison between the hierarchical network of soft materials and the silk fibre: (a) “single” crystal network and nano-fibril in silk; (b) multi-domain fibre network and fibril bundle. (B) Schematic illustration of three typical hierarchical structures: (a) a multi-domain system, in which the domain–domain interaction is weak or zero; (b) a multi-domain system, in which the domain–domain interaction is strong or infinite. Modified from ref. 17. 
In general, crystal networks can either occur in the form of an entity (i.e. biominerals), or as a multi-phase (i.e. the solid/liquid) entity. In the latter case, the crystallite networks can effectively entrap and immobilize liquid in the meshes. This gives rise to soft materials, which behave like self-supporting soft solids.21
In most cases, a material does not constitute only a single crystal network, but a collection of disjoint individual networks or more complex entities. A two level collection is referred to a multi-domain network (or domain network). At this level, the “nodes” of a multi-domain network are the individual crystal networks. Obviously, the “nodes” of a multi-domain network are the individual crystal networks. The “links” between the individual crystal networks can be physical contacts or weak interactions between neighbouring crystal networks (Fig. 3A(b)). Normally, a unit volume of a material constitutes a number of fibrous/crystalline networks, each of which can be considered as a single network. A group of single networks will form a higher level of networks, namely, “domain networks” (Fig. 3A).13 The macroscopic performance of mesoscopic materials is normally determined jointly by both the domain and the crystalline networks, as well as the synergy between the different levels of networks. Fig. 3B illustrates two typical hierarchical structures: (a) a multi-domain network with weak or zero domain–domain interactions and (b) that with strong or infinite domain–domain interactions. In the following discussion, one can see that the systems with multiple spherulites belong to the case of Fig. 3B(a), while spider silk and silkworm silk fibers belong to the case of Fig. 3B(b). Note that if numerous crystal networks mutually interpenetrate and interlock with each other, they can be regarded as a “single” crystal network.
Regarding the materials of multi levels, the “links” between the adjacent fibrous networks are of particular importance for the mechanical performance of the soft materials having the hierarchical structures.22 The mechanical strength/stability of a multi-domain network material is determined by the “links” between the domains or the nodes in the fibrous networks and the synergy between the different levels of networks.23 Apart from these, some other factors also play crucial roles.
The factors of both crystal and/or domain networks that determine the performance of mesoscopic materials can be summarized as follows:
(1) Topology: the topology of nodes describes how the joints/points are associated with each other. In other words, it determines whether networks occur and how the compactness of the networks will be. Creating networks often start with topological modification.24
(2) Correlation length: the average of the distance between two physically or thermodynamically correlated points. For the fiber crystalline networks, this refers to the average of the distance between two adjacent points of networks.13
(3) Ordering/symmetry of building blocks. In many cases, the crystallites of crystal networks are anisotropic. The symmetrical correlation or ordering of these crystallites determine the performance of the materials.17 For instance, the toughness of silk fibers and biominerals depends strongly on the ordering of crystallites.
(4) Strength of linkage or interactions. Obviously, the stability of networks is directly correlated with the strength of the linkage or interactions between the adjacent structural units. The linkage can be physical or chemical connections/bonding or virtual connections.13,17
2.2 Correlation between crystal networks and physical performance

2.2.1 Topology of crystal networks. 
Network topology refers to the arrangement of various elements (links, nodes etc.). Table 1 summarizes the different topologies of crystal networks encountered frequently. Different topologies of networks often lead to the verification in compactness, rheological/mechanical properties and interfacial and macroscopic performance of mesoscopic materials. In other words, modifying the topology or pattern of crystal networks is one of the most effective ways to alter the properties and performance of mesoscopic materials.
Table 1 Summary of some typical crystal networks25




Typical network patterns
Simplified patterns
Network topologies
Examples




The images in Row 1 were reproduced with permission from ref. 26 and 27; copyright 2012 Springer and copyright 2005 American Institute of Physics. The image in Row 3 was reproduced with permission from ref. 28; copyright 2005 Springer. The left image in Row 4 was reprinted with permission from ref. 29; copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. The right image in Row 4 was reprinted with permission from ref. 30; copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.





 Side packing

 Side packing

Linear: compact-fully connected
Porous-partially connected


 Biominerals, hybrid materials etc.






 Tip split
Star network 1: tree-like network

 Macromolecules, gels, biominerals, organic and inorganic crystals.



 Side Merging/branching

 Side split
Star network 2:

 Macromolecules, gels, biominerals etc.



 Side Merging

 Closed Loop
Mesh network: fully connected

 Macromolecules, gels, silks etc.




In the following sections, some typical examples concerning the influence of crystal network pattern/topology on the macroscopic properties of materials are given.
(1) Rheological and gelation properties of soft solids. 
Soft materials of both fiber/crystal networks and a liquid phase have both the elastic properties of ideal solids and the viscous properties of Newtonian liquids (Fig. 4a). The complex modulus G* = [(G′)2 + (G′′)2]1/2 is generally employed to characterize the rheological properties of a soft material. G′ denotes the storage modulus (describing elasticity), and is mainly determined by the networks, and G′′ the loss modulus (describing viscosity) is mainly determined by the fluid phase (Fig. 4a). G′ is determined by the hierarchical structure of crystal networks.18a–c Normally, a more fluid-like soft material has a higher G′′, while a more solid-like soft material has a higher G′. The process of a fluid-like soft material turning into a solid-like soft material is often considered as gelation. In a plot of G′, G′′ as a function of time (t), the crossover point of G′ and G′′ is often regarded as the gelation point (tg′) (Fig. 4b). Alternatively, as the change of G′ is attributed to the formation of mesoscopic networks, which gives rise to the gelation of a fluid/liquid, another definition of the gelling point (tg) can be taken as the point where G′ reveals an abrupt increase (Fig. 4b).18a–c,31
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of soft materials and the rheological properties. (b) Definition of the gelling point tg′ and tg. (c) and (d) illustrate the gelation capacity change due to the variation of topological patterns. (c) Separate side fibers occurring in a L-DHL/DIOP system. (L-DHL: lanosta-8,24-dien-3β-ol:24,25-dihydrolanosterol = 56:44; DIOP: di-(2-ethyl-hexyl)phthalate (C8H17COO)2C6H4). This system gives rise to an opaque flowing viscous liquid, as shown in the picture on the right upper corner. (d) Side packing and tip splitting patterns give rise to the interconnected fiber networks in a L-DHL/DIOP gel after adding 0.004 wt% EVACP. The length of the bar: 1 μm. The addition of EVACP leads to the formation of interconnected crystal networks and a clear and solid gel, as shown in the picture on the right upper corner.34 Scale bar: 1 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35; copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
The topology of the crystal networks normally determines the rheological or gelation properties of the multiphase materials. Among the topologies of networks listed in Table 1, the star or mesh networks may gel a liquid phase easily, while liner or side packing turn out to be more compact and exhibit low gelling capability. For example, the dissolution of L-DHL (lanosta-8,24-dien-3β-ol:24,25-dihydrolanosterol 56:44) in the organic solvent di-(2-ethyl-hexyl) phthalate (DIOP) at 110 °C and cooling to room temperature will give rise to needle crystallites (side packing), and the formation of a paste-like slurry, (Fig. 4c). On the other hand, introducing some specific polymer additives (or topological modifiers, i.e., ethylene/vinyl acetate copolymer (EVACP)) may promote the formation of three dimensional interconnecting fiber networks (the change in topology from linear to star or mesh networks). As G′ is greatly enhanced by the network topological variation, one therefore acquires a self-supporting soft solid (Fig. 4d). The gels with a high gelling capability are applied to the delivery of drugs or various benefits in personal care products.31,32
On the other hand, one may need to prevent gelation in some cases. Crude oil, heavy fuel, diesel fuel, etc. contain significant proportions of higher n-alkanes, and in the cold winter, they can crystallize out and form interconnected crystal networks. The occurrence of 3% of paraffin crystal networks in crude oil can gel fuels and block the flow of liquid oils in the pipe lines or the filters in diesel engines. The effective topological modifiers may modify the topology of interconnected n-paraffin crystal networks to the linear ones to stop gelation.33
(2) Efficiency of solar cells. 
Apart from the rheological properties, many other macroscopic properties of materials can be altered by modifying the topology of the mesoscopic structure. For instance, for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), different patterns/topologies of TiO2 photoanodes (see Fig. 5) will give rise to different light harvesting efficiencies, as listed in Table 2.36 This is attributed to the fact that the networks with different topological patterns have different capabilities in harvesting photons. Obviously, the topological patterns of leaves have evolved over millions of years to acquire the optimal light harvesting efficiency in their photosynthesis. Those TiO2 photo anodes resemble to specific leaves may have a fast electron transport rate and good light harvesting ability, and therefore give rise to a better efficiency of light harvesting of the cell devices (cf.Fig. 5 and Table 2).
 Fig. 5  SEM images of TiO2: (a) nanoparticles, (b) smooth nanotubes, (c) heterogeneous nanotubes, (d) nanorods (inset is the top view), (e) flower-like structures, and (f) nanospherulites. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 36; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 2 Different patterns of TiO2 nanoparticles and the light harvesting efficiency of DSSCsa




Patterns
DSSCs efficiency (%)





a Quoted from ref. 36.





Nanoparticles
6.64


Smooth nanotubes
4.34


Heterogeneous/heterojunction nanotubes
7.24


Nanorods
3.03


Flower-like structures
4.07


Nanospherulites
8.50




(3) Interface properties. 
If mesoscopic crystal networks occur on surfaces, the properties of the respective surface, i.e. surface tension, contact angle, adhesive force, etc., may be altered if the pattern or topology of crystal networks changes. For instance, the surface properties can be altered by changing the topologies/patterns of the crystal networks; thus, they can be converted into super hydrophilic or super hydrophobic surfaces, respectively.37
Zhao et al. found that the adhesive force on a super hydrophobic MnO2 nano-structured film can be tuned by fabricating different patterns, i.e. mesh-like, ball cactus-like, and tilted nanorod structures on the surface.38Table 3 summarizes the dependence of the adhesive force on the patterns at a super hydrophobic MnO2 nano-structured film. The marvelous modulation range of the adhesive forces from 130 to almost 0 μN endows these superhydrophobic surfaces with extraordinarily different dynamic properties of water droplets (Fig. 6; Table 3).
Table 3 Normal adhesive force and force per unit length on MnO2 super hydrophobic surfaces with different patterns




Patterns
Adhesion (μN)




Note: MLS: mesh-like structure; L-MLS and S-MLS stand for MLS with large and small mesh scale; BCS: ball cactus-like structure, and TNS: tilted nanorod structure.38




L-MLS
(13 ± 2) × 10


S-MLS
(8 ± 1) × 10


BCS
(4 ± 1) × 10


TNS
0




 Fig. 6  (A) (a–d) SEM images of various MnO2 patterned films: the mesh-like structure (MLS), the tilted nanorod structure (TNS), and the ball cactus-like structure (BCS) films. The insets show the dragging water droplet. The black arrow indicates the drawing direction. (a, b) MLS of a large (L-MLS) and a small mesh size (S-MLS). (c) TNS film. (d) BCS film. (B) Schematic illustration of TCL on MnO2 films. The red lines demonstrate the possible solid–liquid–air interface contact line and the blue lines demonstrate the liquid–air boundary for a droplet, respectively. (a) A continuous contact line forms on the large MLS, which exhibits a large adhesion force. (b) TCL on small MLS (S-MLS). (c) Dash-line like TCL forms on BCS. (d) A highly discontinuous dot-like TCL forms on TNS, which exhibits extremely small adhesion. (e) High contrast black and white images converted from SEM images of L-MLS, S-MLS, BCS, and TNS in (A). Reprinted with the permission from ref. 38; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
From a microscopic point of view, the adhesion of patterned films depends on the solid–liquid contact modes, i.e. the three-phase contact line (TCL).38 The surface topology and patterns of MnO2 films were simplified according to the high contrast black and white SEM images, as shown in Fig. 6A. The solid lines describe the possible TCL for a droplet in contact with these patterns, showing different continuity.39 When a droplet is placed on most surfaces, it will spread to the equilibrium point at the local energy minimum. The contact line is pinned at a metastable state as there will be an energy barrier for any advancing or receding of the water droplet on the surface. As for a mesh-like structure (MLS) film, a continuous line-like TCL is formed on the top of nanowall sheets, as presented in Fig. 6B(a). Owing to the large energy barrier between the two metastable pinning states, L-MLS film generates a high contact angle (CA) hysteresis and thus a super-high adhesive force. With the decreasing mesh size, the energy barrier decreases as well. Consequently, the adhesive force is reduced as the mesh size shrinks (Fig. 6B(b)). Unlike the MLS structure, a highly discontinuous dot-like TCL forms on the TNS film (Fig. 6B(d)). Herein, the energy barrier between the metastable pinning states is negligible. Furthermore, an intermediate state between these two distinct TCL modes can be obtained by mixing the TCL patterns (i.e.Fig. 6B(c)). On the hierarchical BCS film, the contact line is a combination of continuous line-like and discontinuous dot-like TCL, illustrated as a separated dash-line-like TCL. Correspondingly, medium CA hysteresis and adhesive force are found on this pattern.


2.2.2 Ordering of crystal networks. 
The ordering of crystallites in crystal networks has a direct impact on the macroscopic performance of materials. In Section 7.3, we will show in detail that the breaking stress of both spider silk and silkworm silk fibers will be greatly enhanced as the ordering of β crystallites increases.26,39 In the following sections, we will focus more on the influence of the crystallite ordering on the hardness and mechanical strength of biominerals.
There are numerous reports concerning the influence of the ordering of biominerals on the mechanical performance.37 A detailed study on the correlation between the human tooth enamel was carried by Liu et al.27 The human tooth enamel can be roughly regarded as a bundle of hydroxyapatite (HAP) nanocrystallite needles (∼94%) sandwiched by some proteins and water. In the human tooth enamel and the ordering of HAP crystallites, the correlation between the hardness H/elastic modulus E and the ordering of HAP crystallites was examined by small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS).40 It follows that the ordering of biominerals varies strikingly within the dental sample: both the hardness H and the elastic modulus E increase exponentially as the ordering of the biomineral crystallites increases (see Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  The correlation between mechanical properties and the ordering of mineral crystallites within a dental sample. The hardness (H) and elastic (E) modulus vs. alignment. The solid circles and the hollow circles represent the data measured from dental enamel and dentin, respectively. φ- the ordering parameter measured by small angle X-ray scattering. The complete alignment: φ = 100%; the completely disordered arrangement: φ = 0. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer. 
The reason behind the crystallite alignment-enhanced toughness of hard tissues is not entirely clear. Nevertheless, the following so-called crack stopper model may provide some physical insight into this subject.37 As indicated by Fig. 7, normally, crystals are never perfect and are composed of a large number of micro crystallite grains. These grains are misfit to a small degree with respect to each other (Fig. 8a). Upon collision or hammering, cracks initiating at the surface of crystals can propagate easily across the crystals along the grain boundaries. This gives rise to the breakage of the crystals.
 Fig. 8  Crack stopper-parallel packing of lamella or needle-like crystals will stop the crack line to penetrate the bundled crystallites. (a) The mosaic structure of a crystal causes the propagation of a crack line, leading to breakage of the crystal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer. (b) The parallel packing of lamella or needle-like crystallites in a crystallite assembly will stop the propagation of the crack line from one crystallite to the adjacent crystallites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer. (c) Structural enforcement by molecular “glues”: the proteins between the parallel HAP crystallites adhere to the adjacent crystallites. Once a crack occurs in the middle of the assembly of the parallel crystallites, the neighbouring adhered crystallites will bypass the loading force through the crack and reconnect the two broken portions of the crystallites. 
On the other hand, in case that an entity is composed of a assembly of crystallites where lamella or needle-like nano crystallites are packed in parallel to the surface, the grain boundaries are the head-to-tail joints of the aligned nano-crystallites, which are normally terminated by the crystallites underneath. It follows then that a serious collision/hammering will cause some cracks at the surface, but they will be terminated by the parallel packed crystallites underneath if the collision force is not too large. (Fig. 8b). In other words, this parallel packing structure in a crystallite assembly will prevent the breakage vs. penetration of the crack lines across the crystallite assembly.
In addition to the ordered packing of HAP crystallites, the occurrence of proteins between the parallel HAP crystallites also plays a very important role in the enhancement of the structural toughness. It was found that there is a small amount of biomolecules between the adjacent HAP crystallites.41 Similarly, some specific proteins are also found to be sandwiched between the adjacent CaCO3 crystallites in various seashells. These proteins serve as bioglues that adhere to the adjacent crystallites. As illustrated in Fig. 8c, once a crack occurs in the middle of the assembly, the neighbouring adhered crystallites will bypass the loading force through the crack and reconnect the two broken portions of the crystallites. In other words, the loading force will be redistributed from the cracked points in three dimensions, avoiding the accumulation of force at some localized places. This obviously will enhance the breaking strength of the assembly.


2.2.3 Correlation length. 
Among the influencing factors, the correlation length ξ plays a key role in the macroscopic and physical properties of mesoscopic materials. One of the definitions refers to the average mesh size of the crystal networks. For the Caylay tree structure illustrated in Table 1, the basic fiber length (distance between two neighbouring branching points of a fiber branch) is proportional to ξ. In general, G′ initially decreases sharply as the correlation length ξ of networks increases (Fig. 9a and b). The power law G′ as a function of ξ−p (p = 0.5–1.7 depending on the type of networks) holds for soft materials consisting of single networks.
 Fig. 9  Illustration of the influence of the correlation length on G. (a) The correlation length ξ on G′ of gels with single fiber networks. The inset is the log–log plot of G′ vs. ξ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42; copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) The transition of the G′ of a material from Gcrystnet′ to Gdomain′ as the total number ((L/ξ)3) of domains within the given system increases in the case of weak domain–domain interaction (L: the length of the system). Reprinted with permission from ref. 13; copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (c) The transition of the G′ of a material from Gcrystnet′ to Gdomain′ with the total number ((L/ξ)3) of domains within the given system in the case of strong domain–domain interaction. 
In the case of materials of multi-domain fiber networks, the rheological properties are determined not only by the individual fiber networks, but also by the interactions between them (the domain network). Let Gcrystnet′ be the average storage modulus of individual crystal networks and Gdomain′ the storage modulus of the multi-domain network. It is expected that Gdomain′ vs. the correlation length ξ of the multi-domain network follows the similar power law to the plot of Gdomain′ as a function of ξ−r. Although the quantitative relationship is unknown, a transition of G′ from Gcrystnet′ to Gdomain′ as the total number (L/ξ)3 of domains within the given system increases is expected (L: the length of the system) (Fig. 9c). For soft materials with multi-domain networks, G′ and the mechanical properties are determined synergistically by different levels of network structures. Once the average domain size reduces to the size of fiber/crystal networks, G′ and the mechanical properties will be determined solely by the fiber/crystal networks.
Photonic crystals are one of the materials with the periodic structure at the mesoscale.43,44 The reflected/refracted light interferes constructively once the wavelength is at the magnitude of the structural period. This gives rise to a specific structural colour for given photonic crystals. If the basic materials are crystalline, the periodic structure corresponds to the correlation length. Obviously, the change in the correlation length of photonic crystals gives rise to different structure colours or the reflection in the UV or IR wave ranges (Fig. 10). This demonstrates the fact that the correlation length exerts a direct impact on the specific optic performance of mesoscopic materials.
 Fig. 10  (A) The creation of structural colour to silk fabrics. The two examples of silk fabrics with structural red (a) and golden (b) colours were fabricated using 240 nm and 270 nm self-assembled colloidal crystals, respectively. (B) The measured bi-structural-colour reflectance spectra. (a–d) are the reflectance spectra for silk fibroin inverse opals fabricated by 350 nm, 450 nm, 500 nm, and 700 nm colloidal spheres, respectively. The insets of a, c and d are the orange, purple and red colours observed under an optical microscope for 350 nm, 500 nm and 700 nm silk fibroin inverse opals, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43; copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
Similarly, the correlation length to a large extent determines the mechanical strength of both spider and silkworm silk fibers. More details will be given in Section 6.3.2.


2.2.4 Strength of binding and association between structural units. 
How the nodes of crystal networks are linked with each other obviously determines the stability and “strength” of the crystal networks. In the case of hierarchical network structures, the “strength” of the association between the “nodes”, crystal networks, of domain networks, will synergistically influence the rheological and mechanical properties of the systems.
In the case when the links in domain networks are much weaker than the individual crystal networks (i.e. gels), one may expect a much weak material (cf.Fig. 3B(a)). On the other hand, if the links in the domain networks are much stronger than the individual crystal networks (i.e. silk fibers), one may expect a much stronger material (cf.Fig. 3B(b)).
Once the hierarchical structures of soft materials convert a mono level structure (i.e. a sole fibrous/crystal network), one may experience a sharp change in G′ of the materials. This will be reviewed in the following sections.6a,45

3. Crystallization mechanism and crystal network formation
As the basic building blocks of crystal networks are crystallites, knowledge about crystallization is relevant for the crystal network formation. In general, crystallization consists of two major processes: nucleation and crystal growth. It can be seen from the following sections that the kinetics of these processes governs not only the occurrence of crystals, but also the formation of crystal networks. In the following section, we will present an overview on the key aspects of crystallization and discuss how the knowledge can be further extended to the field of soft materials.
As crystallization is a phase transition process, the thermodynamic driving force for crystallization is subject to the chemical potential difference. In other words, crystallization occurs because the chemical potential μambienti of a growth unit in the ambient mother phase is higher than the chemical potential μcrystal in a crystal phase. The difference between the chemical potentials μambienti and μcrystal is given as follows: Δμ = μambienti − μcrystal(1)(subscript i denotes the solute in the ambient phase.) In solutions, the chemical potential of species i is given as2,22 μi = μ0i + kBTlnai ≈ μ0i + kBTlnCi(2)where ai denotes the activity of species i, which is often approximated by the concentration Ci. μ0i denotes the chemical potential of species i in the standard state (ai = 1). The thermodynamic driving force for crystallization is given as follows: (3)aeqi and Ceqi are the equilibrium activity and concentration of species i, respectively. Given the definition of the super saturation s for crystallization22 σ = (ai − aeqi)/aeqi ≈ (Ci − Ceqi)/Ceqi(4)Eqn (4) can be simplified as Δμ/kBT = ln(1 + σ) ≅ σ (in the case of σ ≪ 1)(5) In the case when Δμ > 0, the system is said to be supersaturated, and nucleation and crystal growth are thermodynamically expected. Conversely, when Δμ < 0, the system is under-saturated and crystals will dissolve. For Δμ = 0, the ambient phase is in equilibrium with the crystalline phase.
3.1 Nucleation: the initial and one of the most important processes in crystallization
Nucleation, as one of the most crucial steps, determines whether and which crystalline phase occurs in the case of polymorphism, the size and size distribution of crystalline particles, and more importantly the formation of crystal networks or hybrid materials.13
Since the nucleation phenomenon was identified and studied by Gibbs,46a numerous models and theories have been published. Nevertheless, the first detailed experiment monitoring the nucleation process from the pre-nucleation to post-nucleation stages and quantitatively comparing them with the theories was carried out by Liu et al. using colloidal particles driven by an alternating electric field. It follows that the constituent particles in solutions on collision join into groups of two, three, four, or more particles, forming dimers, trimers, tetramers, etc.; they overcome the nucleation barrier and grow into crystals.
A characteristic feature of the nucleation process is that the substance with the properties of the new phase is fluctuating and localized in small spatial regions.23,44a,47 These regions are occupied by various atoms and molecules in the form of clusters. The clusters remaining at equilibrium with the surrounding mother phase are the critical nuclei, and the smaller or the larger clusters are the subnuclei or supernuclei, respectively. Only the supernuclei are the clusters that can grow spontaneously to reach macroscopic sizes. For simplicity, hereafter, we denote the subnuclei as “clusters”, and the supernuclei as “nuclei”. The occurrence of a nucleation barrier is attributed to the occurrence of the interface (or surface) free energy between the newly created phase and the ambient phase, which gives rise to the following two opposite effects in a supersaturated ambient phase:
(1) As the crystalline phase is a stable phase, the emergence of the new phase from the ambient phase reduces the (Gibbs) free energy of the system.
(2) The increase in the size of the crystalline new phase increases the interface (or surface) area, and consequently the interface (or surface) free energy γ. This enhances the Gibbs free energy of the system.
The combination of the two opposite effects gives rise to the so-called nucleation barrier ΔG* at r = rc, or n = n*. The spherical cluster of n* molecules is the critical nucleus and rc is the radius of curvature of the critical nuclei.23,44a,47 (6)where ρc is the particle number density in nuclei, γ is the surface free energy area density, and ΔG* and rc are the so-called nucleation barrier and the critical size, respectively. The nucleation barrier is the Gibbs free energy barrier to be overcome to form a stable crystalline phase. As shown in Fig. 11a, crystalline clusters are thermodynamically unstable until they reach the critical size rc. Obviously, the nucleation rate depends on the nucleation barrier. The lower the nucleation barrier, the higher the nucleation rate. ΔG* and rc are the driving force and the interface (or surface) free energy, respectively, which are γ dependent.
 Fig. 11  (a) Crystallization normally takes place via nucleation, followed by the growth of crystals. Nucleation is a kinetic process of overcoming the nucleation barrier, which is the outcome of the occurrence of the surface free energy γ. (b) If a barrier is too high, nature can always find a multiple step path to lower the barriers to bypass the single step process. (c) For nucleation on a substrate or the multiple step crystallization where an intermediate phase is inset, a high energy barrier is replaced by one or several much lower energy barriers. This accelerates the kinetic process. Parts of images reprinted with permission from ref. 50; copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
In the aforementioned process, as the probability of nucleation is uniform throughout the whole system, it is therefore known as homogeneous nucleation.46,48 We notice that, in most cases, homogeneous nucleation is difficult to take place due to the very high nucleation barrier (Fig. 11c). It was found recently that the genuine homogeneous nucleation of ice never occurs even at temperatures below −40 °C.40 This is subject to the very high interfacial free energy between ice and water. Nevertheless, any natural process can always find its easiest path to proceed. Two of the most common ways to bypass the high nucleation barrier of homogeneous nucleation are (i) heterogeneous nucleation and (ii) multistep (two step) nucleation/crystallization.
Heterogamous nucleation occurs when foreign bodies/substrates are present in the system. The stronger interactions between the nucleating phase and the substrates can compensate for the increase in total free energy resulting from the rise of the interfacial energy of nucleating clusters (Fig. 11a). Therefore, the occurrence of foreign bodies will lower the nucleation barrier (Fig. 11c). In such cases, the probability of nucleation in the adjacent regions of the foreign bodies is then higher than elsewhere in the system. This is why it refers to heterogeneous nucleation.
The effect of foreign bodies in lowering the nucleation barrier can be quantified by an interfacial correlation factor f(m), which is defined as follows: (7)where  is the homogeneous nucleation barrier as defined by eqn (9) and  is the heterogeneous nucleation barrier. f(m) indicates how much the nucleation barrier is reduced with respect to  due to the occurrence of foreign bodies/substrates. The parameter m describes the structural match between the nucleating phase and the substrate. For a flat substrate, one has18g,48a,49 f(m) = ¼(2 − 3m + m3)(8)with m = (γsf − γsc)/γcf ≈ cosθ (−1 ≤ m ≤ 1)(9)where θ is the contact angle of the nucleus on the substrate and γsf and γsc are surface free energy between the substrate and fluid phase and between substrate and crystal phase, respectively. In case of a perfect match, γsc → 0 and m → γsf/γcf. In the case γsf ≈ γcf, m → 1 and f(m) → 0. This implies that the heterogeneous nucleation barrier vanishes almost completely when the nucleating crystal is well ordered and oriented with respect to the structure of the substrate. As the structural match changes from a perfect match to a poor match, m decreases from 1 to −1. When m → −1 (f(m) → 1), there is no correlation between the substrate and the nucleating phase. In this case, the substrate almost exerts no influence on the nucleation kinetics, which is equivalent to homogeneous nucleation. Nuclei emerging in this case are completely disordered, bearing no correlation to substrate. In general, for a certain system, m is between −1 and 1, which means that primary nucleation is normally governed by heterogeneous nucleation. The nucleation kinetics can be described by the nucleation rate,46d,48b,51 which is defined as the number of mature nuclei created per unit volume-time from the system. There are two states of nucleation we encounter frequently: one is the stationary state and the other is non-stationary state. The stationary state is one of the most relevant states, which corresponds to the state where the cluster size distribution does not change with time. This is a state which happens only in a certain period of a nucleation process.
Taking into account the effect of substrates on both the nucleation barrier and the transport process, the nucleation rate is given as46d,51a,52 (10)and f′′(m) = ½(1 − m)(11)where B is the kinetic constant. In the case of homogeneous nucleation, the growth units can be incorporated into the nuclei from all directions. However, in the case of heterogeneous nucleation, the presence of a substrate will block the collision path of the growth units to the surfaces of these nuclei from the side of the substrate. This is comparable to a “shadow” cast on the surface of nuclei.18g,48a,49,53 The “shadow” effect of substrates is described by f′′(m) in the pre-exponential factor, which is the ratio between the average effective collision in the presence of substrates and that of homogeneous nucleation (i.e., in the absence of a substrate).
Note that for homogeneous nucleation, one has f′′(m) = f(m) = 1. In this case, eqn (10) is converted to22a (12)
In practice, nucleation will transit from “zero” to the stationary state, and gradually reach completion (zero). The transition states are non-stationary.
The multistep (two-step) nucleation/crystallization is another pathway to reduce the nucleation barrier. The formation of crystal nuclei from liquid is sub-divided into two steps of transition: the transition from an initial (i.e. solution) to an intermedium phase (i.e. a concentrated solution/amorphous phase or a less stable crystalline phase) occurs first. The crystalline nuclei subsequently occurs from the amorphous droplets.46d,50 The occurrence of the metastable amorphous phase can greatly reduce the nucleation barrier and enhance the nucleation of crystals (Fig. 11b and c). This is because the intermedium phase is much closer to the initial phase in terms of structure and properties. This causes much lower interfacial energy, and consequently a much lower nucleation barrier. The same holds for the transition between the intermedium phase and the final crystalline phase. Thus, it can be suggested that it would be much easier to replace a big step by two or more much smaller steps (the principle of the Ostwald Step Rule; cf.Fig. 11b).54
Recently, it was suggested that two-step crystallization (TSC) may be a mechanism underlying most crystallization in typical atomic systems.50 We notice that the first quantitative measurement of TSC at single-particle level was achieved in the AEF-controlled two-dimensional (2D) colloidal system.46c,50 Experimentally, two step nucleation is often found in biomineralization or macromolecular crystallization.46c It normally occurs when the nucleation process experiences some difficulty.55 Biomineralization is the process by which organisms form a variety of functional crystalline structures. An intriguing feature of these functional crystalline materials is their well-defined size and shape.56 It is believed that the amorphous metastable phases in biomineralization not only reduce the nucleation barrier but also play a key role in precisely controlling the shape and size of the crystalline structures.57
As shown in the following sections, the formation of crystal networks to a large extent is governed by nucleation. Self-epitaxial nucleation and supersaturation driven interfacial structure mismatch nucleation or crystallographic mismatch (or noncrystallographic) branching is a type of heterogeneous nucleation, where the substrates and the nucleating phase belong to the same type of material.
Furthermore, two-step nucleation also plays a key role in the formation of some specific patterns of crystal networks. As discussed before, the two-step nucleation is an effective way to bypass a high nucleation barrier by surpassing two considerably lower barriers. It has been found that the occurrence of numerous crystal networks is attributed to the high nucleation barrier of crystallization. It follows that the formation of these crystal networks often take place via two step crystallization.46c,46dFig. 12 shows the formation of hydroxyapatite (HAP) spherulitic patterns via two step crystallization. A very recent study reported that in a simulated body fluid solution, some amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) aggregate spheres occur first in the solutions.58 This is followed by the transformation from ACP aggregate spheres to HAP spherulites (HAP crystal networks). In this process, the nucleation of ACP spheres is much easier and occurs first due to the much lower nucleation barrier. The ACP spheres then serve as templates to promote the nucleation and growth of HAP crystals (heterogeneous nucleation). This whole process of the two-step crystallization and the HAP spherulitic pattern formation is demonstrated clearly in Fig. 12. The ACP cores are found in the centers and the HAP crystallites occur as the radial arms initiating from the centers of the spherulites.
 Fig. 12  The multi-step crystallization of calcium phosphate phases. The phase and morphology evolution of calcium phosphate minerals: (a–c) TEM images and SAED patterns of the precipitates. (a) Initially formed amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) spheres. Bar: 1 μm and 100 nm. (b) Intermediate state of ACP. Bar: 1 μm and 100 nm. (c) Final hydroxyapatite (HAP) spherulite. Bar: 1 μm and 200 nm. (d–i) SEM images of the evolution of ACP. (d) 3 min. (e–g) 67–73 min. (h) 90 min. (i) 7 h. Bar: (d–f) 100 nm; (g) 200 nm; (h and i) 1 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58; copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
We notice that both heterogeneous nucleation and two-step nucleation/crystallization are to lower the kinetic barrier of crystallization. The consequence of these two types of nucleation paths often leads to the formation of a variety of different patterns of crystal networks. In other words, the formation of crystal networks is a kinetically favoured option.
3.2 Crystal growth
The size and shape of crystallites is controlled to a large extent by the growth of the crystallites. In general, the growth of crystals can be regarded as a process of delivering growth units from the bulk to the crystal surface and incorporating these units into the kinks. In the case of faceted growth, the crystal surface is atomically smooth and the kinks occur only at the steps on the crystal surface. In this case, the steps can be regarded as “sinks” for the growth units to enter the crystals.49b Each advancing step disappears when it spreads over the surface and reaches the edge of the surface. In order to continue the growth of the crystal surface, a subsequent crystal layer needs to be generated on the existing crystal surface. Therefore, the step source for the creation of new layers determines the growth rate of the crystal surface. Due to the presence of the step free energy, the creation of a new layer on the existing layer of the crystal surface requires overcoming a free energy barrier, the so-called 2D nucleation barrier.22a,51c Normally, for the growth of flat or faceted crystal surfaces, the screw dislocations occurring on the surface provides uninterrupted step sources for layer-by-layer growth, and in such cases the growth is controlled by a screw dislocation mechanism.22a,59

(1) The birth-and-spread mechanism. 
This is the commonly adopted model in the case of the growth of dislocation free crystal faces (Fig. 13A). The key assumptions of the birth-and-spread model are summarized in the caption of Fig. 13A. Once crystals are perfect and defect free, the growth of crystal faces is governed by two 2D nucleation growth mechanisms.51c This implies that the crystal faces grow by depositing new crystal layers on the top of the existing layer by 2D nucleation. The continuous deposition of new layers leads to the advance of the crystal face in a given orientation. It follows that the crystal growth rate can be given as (13)
 Fig. 13  Illustration of the (A) the birth-and-spread model. The model assumes following factors: (1) there is no intergrowth between 2D nuclei; (2) the lateral spreading velocity V* is constant, independent of the island size; (3) nuclei can be born anywhere around nucleating particles, which can occur on incomplete layers as well as on islands. (B) The screw dislocation model of nucleation and growth of crystals. (a)–(d) of (B) show the process of crystal growth through the screw dislocation model; (C) the supersaturation dependence of crystal growth rate through the two models. Herein, we will review the two most commonly encountered 2D nucleation growth mechanisms: the birth-and-spread mechanism and the screw dislocation mechanism. 
In case σ ≫ 1, R ∼ C1(σ)2/3[ln(1 + σ)]1/6 ∼ σ(14)


(2) Screw dislocation mechanism (BCF, Chernov models). 
Normally, to maintain the dislocation-free growth of crystals is not easy. In many cases, the growth of crystals is governed by other mechanisms, i.e. the screw dislocation mechanism. The concept of growth spiral was developed by Frank,60 and the mathematical spiral growth theory was developed later by Burton et al.61 The BCF theory provided an enormous breakthrough in the science of crystal growth.62 As first noticed by Frank in 1949, a step emerging from the point where a screw dislocation crosses the surface cannot disappear in the course of growth, because a crystal with a screw dislocation actually consists of a single atomic plane rolled into a helicoid (Fig. 13B). Therefore, a dislocation outcrop is a continuous acting layer source that eliminates the need for 2D nucleation to continue the growth of a singular face. As shown in Fig. 13B, step OA (Fig. 13B(a)) is straight at the initial stage. In the course of growth, the step starts moving to the right; because the linear velocities of its various parts are the same, their angular velocities decrease with the distance from O. Therefore, the step shape will change until the step turns into a spiral, which ensures constancy in the angular velocity of the “rotation” of all the parts of the step about point O (Fig. 13B(b–d)). According to BCF, when the supersaturation is relatively small (σ ≪ σ1), one has the growth rate of crystal faces as R ≅ Aσ12(15)with σ1 = 2πΩγcf/(kTλs)(16)where A is a kinetic coefficient and λs denotes the surface diffusion length of growth units. This is the so-called parabolic law of spiral growth. In the case that supersaturation is relatively large, σ ≫ σ1, one then has R ≅ A′σ (A′ = Aσ1)(17) Normally, each of the abovementioned mechanisms governs the growth of crystals in different regimes. For the bulk crystal growth, the spiral growth mechanism is kinetically favoured at the relatively low supersaturation, because under this situation no 2D nucleation is required to generate a new crystal layer. On the other hand, the birth and spread mechanism is more kinetically favoured at high supersaturation because the 2D nucleation barrier becomes considerably lower, and the source of the new layer creation will not be limited by the density of screw dislocation points (Fig. 13C). For the growth of tiny or needle-like crystals, spiral dislocation will destabilize the crystallites; the growth of the tips is then governed by the birth and spread mechanism or the rough growth mode. In the case of rough face growth, because the stage of step creation is absent, the growth rate of the faces is normally higher than the flat faces. Consequently, they will be absent from the morphology of the crystals.63 We notice that in the case of small molecular gels, the networks are mainly branched crystalline needles/fibers. As the tips are tiny and experience higher supersaturation, the growth of the crystalline needles/fibers is then controlled by the birth and spread mechanism or the rough growth mode.

4. Crystal network formation: assembly pathways and controlling mechanism
As mentioned, the hierarchical structures of crystal networks and domain networks determine the properties/performance of the soft materials. The key question to be addressed is how the crystalline fibers/crystallites are linked with each other (or “crystallites networking”). In this regard, the kinetics will be discussed as follows.
4.1 Crystal network: the assembly of crystallites
Evidently, the pathway of crystal network formation is crucial. The knowledge acquired can be applied to identify effective approaches in engineering the crystal networks of meso materials. We notice that although we have discussed in the previous sections some of the ways of the formation of crystal networks, i.e. HAP spherulites, an overview on the various mechanisms of crystal network assembly is needed. Herein, we will summarize the typical pathways of crystal network assembly as follows.

(1) Two-step process of assembly. 
The two-step process of crystal network assembly is illustrated in Fig. 14a. In such a process, atoms or molecules are assembled via nucleation and growth into nanocrystals first. These nanocrystals/blocks will be further assembled into crystal networks.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of two typical pathways of a crystal network assembly: (a) two-step process of assembly; (b) one step process of assembly; and (c) mixed mode of assembly. 
Note that the assembly of nanocrystallites into crystal networks is difficult and turns out to be the key step. We note that the assembly of crystallites are referred by Cölfen and co-workers as “mesocrystals”.64 Nevertheless, they are a sort of colloidal crystals. Fig. 15A shows typical polystyrene spheres (PS) colloidal crystals.46d Although PS spheres are not nanocrystals, the way they are assembled into colloidal crystals is similar to that described in the second step in Fig. 14a.44a,46c,50 Note that in addition to the traditional colloidal interactions, the long range ordering of the colloidal crystals acquired might be attributed to the super-long range interaction between nanocrystallites. In this regard, the initiation of the key step (second step) of “meso” (or colloidal) crystals is still via nucleation, which has been verified experimentally by colloidal spheres crystallization (Fig. 14a).26,44a,46d
 Fig. 15  Examples of the two-step process of assembly as illustrated in Fig. 14a. (A) Self-assembled colloidal crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2014 Springer. (B) Cryo-TEM images of the lateral fusion process of the adjacent nanofibers into nanosheet-like crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65; copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
As another example, Li et al. applied in situ high-resolution TEM to illustrate the kinetics of multistep structural transformation (Fig. 15B).65 It follows that a nanocrystal starts to move towards the surface of the parent crystal followed by its rotation and local adjustment until both nanocrystals align reasonably well.
Recently, Bian et al. summarized the formation of the binary mesocrystallization of metal oxide via the two-step process of assembly. This will gives rise to (a) mesocrystals containing a single metal oxide, (b) binary mesocrystals, where each nanocrystalline subunit contains one of the pure metal oxides, and (c) solid solution meso-crystals, where each nanocrystal contain both metal oxides.66
We notice that the assembly of crystallites in an ordered manner will become increasingly difficult as the size of crystallites increases. This is because the structural complexity of a multiple crystallite assembly will increase and the structural match requirement will be difficult to meet with increasing crystal size. Therefore, the two-step process of crystal assembly occurs normally at the nano or meso scale. On the other hand, Brownian motion at the nanoscale, which deteriorates the structural alignment of tiny crystallites, is relatively severe at room temperature. Therefore, the media capable of suppressing the random motion of crystalline particulates may facilitate this process.


(2) One-step process of assembly. 
The so-called one-step process is illustrated in Fig. 14b. It follows that atoms or molecules are directly engaged in the formation of crystal networks. This implies that the crystallization and the crystal network formation occur simultaneously. The formation of each crystal block in the networks is then controlled by the nucleation and growth of crystallites. The nucleation and growth of daughter crystallites are influenced directly by the mother crystals. The orientation of the newly formed crystallites is controlled largely by the “fields” of the parent crystallites or crystal networks. In comparison with the two-step processes, because the crystalline blocks can grow from a very small size without jeopardizing the structural correlation between the crystallites, the crystal assembly can be very strong and sufficiently large in size.

Fig. 16 displays the ordered assembly of hydroxyapatite (HAP) crystallites in simulated body fluids with 1 mM fluorine ion (F−).67Fig. 16a illustrates the process of how the HAP crystallite assembly occurs and Fig. 16(b) and (c) shows the state of the ordered HAP crystallite assembly. These are identical to the one-step process, as illustrated by Fig. 14b.
 Fig. 16  (a) Illustration of the assembly of hydroxyapatite; (b) and (c) compact and ordered assembly of rod-like crystallites obtained at relatively low supersaturation in regime II; Scale bars: 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 


(3) Mixed mode of assembly. 
In most cases, the formation of crystal networks can be a combination of the aforementioned two processes. As nanosized crystallites are easy to acquire a structural match with the parent crystals, they are adsorbed onto the parent crystals first with a proper structural alignment (two-step process). This is followed by the further growth of the adsorbed daughter crystals via the continuous incorporation of atoms or molecules under the influence of the parent crystals/crystal networks (one-step process) (see Fig. 14c).


(4) Foreign molecule mediated assembly. 
The ordered assembly of crystallites are often regulated or facilitated by some particular foreign molecules. These molecules not only promote but guide the specific way of assembly. We note that although CaCO3 or hydroxyapatite (HAP) crystals are very regular, the crystallites can be constructed in a variety of patterns by bio molecules (Fig. 17 and 18). Note that foreign molecules can facilitate either the two-step or one-step processes. On the other hand, the foreign molecular mediated assembly is often observed in a similar way, as demonstrated by the one-step process. For instance, in biomineralization, some macro and small organic molecules generated from gene expression usually assemble into ordered templates to control mineral precipitations.41b,41c In particular, many artificial amphiphilic molecules or even crystals can form a variety of dispersed hierarchical structures or templates.58Fig. 18 demonstrates an example of molecular guided construction of nanohelixes: two types of chiral organic–inorganic nanohelixes (L- and R-enantiomers) are spontaneously formed and each individual helix can even be proliferated to a relative large material complex with homochiral characteristics. In this case, bis-(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate sodium salt (AOT) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were adopted as the models for biological amphiphilic and macromolecules, respectively. AOT is an asymmetric, double-chained amphiphilic molecule. They can assemble into various mesomorphous phases, which have been widely used in biomimetic crystallization.68 The synergistic effect of AOT and BSA on CaP mineralization give rise to a nanohelix formation (Fig. 18(a) and (b)), which was not observed in the use of AOT and BSA separately in the same calcium phosphate mineralization system, respectively. Therefore, the helix structure formation was attributed to the coexistence of AOT, BSA and CaP.
 Fig. 17  General gastropod species have right-handed shells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68; copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 18  Molecular guided construction of nanohelixes. Organic molecules regulating the architecture of biominerals in a bio-mineralization system of a racemic mixture of chiral amphiphile (bis-(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate sodium salt, AOT) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) in supersaturated calcium phosphate (CaP) solutions. (a) Homochiral cluster consisted of R-helixes exclusively. (b) Homochiral cluster consisted of L-helixes exclusively. (c) Homochiral helix networks; circles indicate the cluster centers in the net; the insert is a magnification of the rectangular region, showing the spiral details of the L-enantiomers. (d) Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns of the helixes. d = 3.34 nm and d = 1.65 nm represented the first and second diffractions of the lamellar structure in the helixes, respectively. The TEM image in the inset shows that each organic (light line)–inorganic (dark line) unit had a uniform width of 3.3 nm and the dimension of an AOT bilayer was 1.6 nm (bar = 10 nm). (e) and (f) TEM and schemes of the L- and R-helix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68; copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
We noticed that the resulted helixes further developed into micron-sized clusters. Among each cluster, the nanohelixes extended radially outward from a core. Furthermore, some clusters were connected to each other to form a network (Fig. 18). As the basic building blocks, the helixes were chiral and had two types of spiral enantiomers, L- and R-forms. Although the overall amounts of the L- and R-helixes in the reaction system were equal, only one helix enantiomer could be identified within a cluster or network. This suggests that chiral recognition or separation occurred during the cluster and network generation.

4.2 Ordered versus disordered assembly
Normally, the assembly of crystallites refers to the packing of crystallites with a certain degree of ordering or symmetry, while aggregation denotes the disordered packing (Fig. 19a).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of assembly and aggregation under the influence of an ordered structure. (b) Supersaturation driven interfacial structure mismatch nucleation: the structural match between the daughter crystals and the parent crystal will become poor as the supersaturation increases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer. 
Nevertheless, the so-called assembly and aggregation (or disordered assembly) can be interchanged under different conditions. Herein, the conditions and the mechanisms governing the formation of assembly and aggregation will be summarized.
Note that the inter transformation of the ordered and disordered assembly of crystal networks can also occur via the one-step and the combined processes of assembly. Under such conditions, a number of crystallites growing together via self-epitaxial nucleation and growth should give rise to an ordered assembly. Nevertheless, with the influence of the perturbation of external conditions, the crystallographic alignment between the adjacent crystallites may be lost, leading to crystallographic mismatch assembly or structural misalignment of the crystal networks. This process is referred to as the crystallographic mismatch nucleation-mediated branching of crystal networks.18c,35,41a,69 Based on the nature of perturbation, one normally has the following three types of mismatch nucleation-mediated branching stimulating approaches:
(1) Supersaturation driven interfacial structural mismatch nucleation mediated assembly/branching. This mismatch assembly is caused by an abrupt increase in supersaturation/supercooling. More details are given below.
(2) Additives driven interfacial structural mismatch nucleation mediated assembly/branching. The additives include polymers, surfactants, small molecules and particulates.
(3) External fields interfacial structural mismatch nucleation mediated assembly/branching. The external fields include ultrasound, electric field, etc.

Fig. 19b reveals the transition from the neat growth to the ordered stacking (assembly) growth, and finally to the aggregated growth of calcite crystals. As indicated, such a sequential pattern transformation occurs as the supersaturation increases. This, therefore, refers to supersaturation driven interfacial structure mismatch nucleation mediated branching.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, the growth of the tip faces of needle crystals is either in rough mode or in faceted growth mode. If the substrate is a growing crystal itself, the optimal structural match means that the new layer on the surface of the growing crystal precisely matches the crystallographic orientation of the parent crystal. This corresponds to the growth of crystalline fibers in common sense. However, once some mismatch occurs between the parent crystals and the nucleating layers of crystals, the new crystal growing layers will deviate from the optimal structural match position.49a It follows then that daughter crystallites often occur via heterogeneous nucleation (templating) on the top of the parent crystal surfaces.
A large degree of mismatch/misalignment between the daughter and parent crystallites will give rise to a higher interfacial energy than the matched nucleation. According to eqn (6) and (7), the mismatched templating will correspond to a much higher nucleation barrier at low supersaturation, than the matched templating (Fig. 19). This prevents the mismatch nucleation from happening at low supersaturation. This explains the formation of the ordered HAP assembly observed in Fig. 16b and 19b at low supersaturation. As the supersaturation increases, the nucleation barrier for mismatch epitaxial nucleation decreases rapidly (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  The nucleation barrier of disordered/mismatch packing with supersaturation, compared to ordered/matched packing. 
As the supersaturation increases, the mismatch/misaligned structural packing will be obtained. The disordered assembly of crystallites (Fig. 20) is obtained. The orientation of crystallites will be less ordered and open in this region. The crystal networks acquired will then be open and porous.
We notice that the transformation of crystallites stacking or assembly manner often allows a variation of the network topology, which often results in the variation of the macroscopic performance of mesoscopic materials. In Section 5, more details will be given for addressing this subject.
4.3 Mechanism of fibrous/crystal network formation and topological variation by branching
As indicated in Table 1, the different topologies of crystal networks often lead to macroscopic performance of materials. In other words, tuning the properties of mesoscopic materials can be achieved by modifying the key factors of the crystal networks, in particular the variation of the topology. In this regard, controlling the crystal network formation and/or the promotion of the topological verification are crucial.
One of the most important routes to create networks of fibers or crystallites in mesoscopic materials is to promote fiber branching/molecular merging, as described in Section 4.2.
During the crystal growth, there is a tendency of randomness of growing new layers with respect to the surface structure of the parent crystals. At low supersaturation, such randomness is suppressed due to a very high nucleation barrier (Fig. 19). However, at high supersaturation, the mismatch nucleation barrier is greatly suppressed (eqn (6) and (7)). This leads to the creation of new crystallites in deviated orientations on the surface of the parent crystals. Similar to normal nucleation, the mismatched crystallites should first nucleate on the growing crystal surface. If the energy needed to create a mismatch domain per area on the parent crystals is defined as the specific mismatch free energy γmis, the barrier for mismatch nucleation is determined by the surface supersaturation and γmis (eqn (6) and (7)). The crystallographic mismatch nucleation is a special case of heterogeneous nucleation, where γmis = γsc. If the mismatch growth does not deviate much from the crystallographic orientation of the parent crystals, we can in principle have γcf = ∼γsf. Thus, m = 1 − γmis/γcf(18) As indicated in eqn (10) and (11),  () decreases as the supersaturation increases. Note that the only difference between normal heterogeneous nucleation and the crystallographic mismatch nucleation is that in the crystallographic mismatch nucleation, the substrate is the growing crystal surface, whereas in normal heterogeneous nucleation, substrates are foreign bodies. Similar to normal heterogeneous nucleation, crystallographic mismatch nucleation and growth is controlled by the following factors:
(1) Thermodynamic driving force (supersaturation). At low supersaturation, the crystallographic mismatch nucleation is difficult to occur due to the high  (eqn (7) and (8)). As the supersaturation increases,  will drop rapidly (Fig. 20). There are a number of ways to acquire high supersaturation: (i) the low solubility of solutes: based on eqn (3), if the solubility of a solute in a solvent system is low, one can achieve a high supersaturation easily. This is why an effective small molecular gelling agent normally has a very low solubility; (ii) normally, the precipitation of gelling molecules from the liquid phase will cause a quick decrease in supersaturation. To avoid the quick reduction of thermodynamic driving force, quenching a solution from a high temperature to a low temperature can be an effective way to build up high supersaturation.
(2) Impurities. Adsorbed impurities may disturb the interfacial structural match between the nucleating layers and the parent crystal surfaces. This lowers m and promotes crystallographic mismatch nucleation.
(3) Slow surface integration. Crystallographic mismatch nucleation is governed by surface supersaturation. The orientations with slow surface integration kinetics will therefore lead to higher surface supersaturation that is closer to the bulk supersaturation. It follows that at low supersaturation, the crystal faces with slow surface integration kinetics can take advantage of the highest possible supersaturation—the bulk supersaturation of the system, and will induce crystallographic mismatch nucleation more easily.
(4) Low specific mismatch free energy. According to eqn (6)–(8), a low specific mismatch free energy γmis leads to a low . This implies that crystallographic mismatch nucleation can occur much more easily on the crystal surfaces with low γmis. Normally, crystal surfaces with low γmis often coincide with those with slow surface integration kinetics. Therefore, criteria 3 and 4 may be applied to the same crystallographic orientation for a given crystalline material.
According to the abovementioned analyses, the formation of crystal networks occurs via the self-epitaxial nucleation, and the topological variation and/or the ordered–disordered transformation are to a large extent controlled by crystallographic mismatch nucleation.13,18c,32,35,49a On the basis of criteria 1 and 3, we can expect that at high supersaturation, the crystallographic mismatch nucleation may occur in faster growth crystallographic orientations. In contrast, at low supersaturation, the crystallographic mismatch nucleation takes place more easily in slow growth crystallographic orientations. Another reason for the occurrence of crystallographic mismatch nucleation in faster growth crystallographic orientations at high supersaturation is that the faster growth crystallographic orientations can penetrate into the bulk easily, and “feel” much higher supersaturation in the bulk. This will trigger the crystallographic mismatch nucleation at the tips.
In the following Sections, we will present the fiber network construction through branching at different orientations of fibers, i.e., at the growing tips and side surface of fibers. Three typical branching mechanisms of branching are (a) tip splitting/branching, (b) type I side branching, and (c) type II side branching/merging. The various branching processes are illustrated in Table 1. The tip splitting/branching and the side branching belong to the one-step process and mixed mode of assembly. More details are given in the following section.

4.3.1 Fiber tip branching. 
As discussed, at high supersaturation, crystallographic mismatch nucleation and growth will take place at the tips, leading to fiber tip branching (see Fig. 21a and 24B). The formation process of a fiber network through tip branching has been shown in Fig. 20 and 23B. This type of fiber network consists of radius arms initiating from a primary nucleation center through 3D nucleation. The radius arms are often found to be branched with the Cayley tree structure.70 Taking into account this fact and the structural characteristics of a Cayley tree of fibrous networks, the process for network formation can be regarded as primary nucleation—growth—branching—growth—branching. Obviously, one of the key steps in building up the Cayley tree is the branching at the tips of growing nanofibers. Unlike dendritic branching, the daughter branches of the fibers cannot be correlated strictly to the crystallographic orientation of their parent fibers. Therefore, the branching is referred to as crystallographic mismatch (or noncrystallographic) branching. The kinetics of the branching kinetics can be given as follows.
 Fig. 21  (a) Illustration of crystal network formation by fiber tip splitting/branching. Branching occurs via crystallographic mismatch branching. Apart from the crystalline fibers, which occur via three-dimensional primary nucleation, the growth of crystalline fibers is generally controlled by a 2D nucleation (birth-and-spread) growth mechanism. Due to the occurrence of thermodynamic, chemical, sound, and other stimuli, the mistakes or defects would occur on the growing layers at the tip of fibers. This leads to the crystallographic mismatch branching, and the modification of topology of fibres. The continuous branching in a given sequence will give rise to the formation of fiber networks, as summarized in the second row of Table 1. (b) The correlation between ln[〈ξ〉(Δμ/kT)−1] and 1/(Δμ/kT)2 for a gel formed with a polymer additive at 20 °C. The linear relationship confirms the governing role of the crystallographic mismatch branching mechanism in the formation of organized interconnecting fiber networks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35; copyright 2002, American Chemical Society. 
The kinetics of fiber growth is generally controlled by a 2D nucleation (birth-and-spread) growth mechanism. This implies that the growth of crystal faces in the normal orientation (the fibril axis orientation in our case) takes place by growing crystal layers on top of the existing surface, and the occurrence of a new layer on the existing layer is controlled by 2D nucleation. The growth rate, Rg, of fibers in the fibril axis direction can be calculated from eqn (14) and (15).
Designating the induction time for the nucleation of new fibers on the host fibers as tg (tg ∼ 1/J), the average branching distance can be expressed as follows: 〈ξ〉 ∼ R·tg ∼ R/J(19) (20)where C2 = (C1/4πα(RS)2B). The branching kinetics described by eqn (20) has been verified in many gel systems. In a recent study, the crystallographic mismatch induced fiber branching of a small molecule gelator 12-hydroxyl stearic acid (HSA) was examined on a molecular scale using synchrotron Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy.71 It was observed that the branching distance of the HSA fibers were influenced by crystallographic mismatches resulting from the incorporation of HSA monomers into the crystal lattice in an imperfect manner.


4.3.2 Fiber side branching. 
At relatively low supersaturation, owing to the large , the crystallographic mismatch nucleation and growth will occur only at the side faces of needle crystals, as these faces are the slowest growing directions and thus have the largest effective surface supersaturation. This leads to side branching (type I). At low supersaturation, single fibers are formed first without any branching, because the free-energy barrier  is very high. As supersaturation increases ( is reduced), branching of the fibers is initiated from the side faces. With further increases in supersaturation,  at the growing tip of fibers becomes very low and tip branching is favoured. The 3d row of Table 1 describes the side branching of fibers based on the microscopic observation.


4.3.3 Fiber/polymeric side merging. 
Fiber side branching can also occur by side merging of polymer chains (Table 1). This type of branching is normally observed in polymer gels. On the basis of electron microscopy images and MD simulation, the proposed mechanism is as follows: the fiber branching takes place in four steps.29 First, the polymer chain is stiffened due to intramolecular hydrogen bonds after quenching (step 1). At this stage, the polymer chain with limited flexibility becomes rigid, which facilitates the formation of nuclei in terms of the primary self-epitaxial nucleation (step 2); the primary nuclei serve as a substrate for other oncoming stiffened chains following the same mechanism (step 3). This process thickens the nanofiber. Moreover, the epitaxial growth of the existing nuclei lengthens the fiber (step 4).29,72

5. Engineering of supramolecular soft materials by mesoscopic crystal network (re)construction
While the correlation between the structure and the performance of mesoscopic materials with network structures was covered in Sections 2 and 3, the formation kinetics of mesoscopic crystal networks has been discussed in Sections 3 and 4. Recently, it was found that crystal networks do exist in many soft materials, i.e. supramolecular gels, spiders and silkworm silks and the derivatives.4,6,15,18–22,35,81 Nevertheless, most people only care about the gelation properties from the aspect of chemistry, without paying much attention to the effect of crystal networks. As the crystal networks turn out to be one of the key mesoscopic structural components in soft materials, insufficient understanding of the formation of crystal networks and the correlation between the structure of crystal networks and the performance of materials have created many “doubts” in the society of materials research.18f On the other hand, a understanding of the structure and formation mechanisms of crystal networks will allow the identification of more effective strategies in designing and “formulating” soft materials. For instance, the factors that affect the crystal network formation kinetics, outlined in Section 4.3, can be further developed to the strategies for the engineering and fabrication of supramolecular materials. We will in this section highlight how the principles can be applied to the development of such strategies.
For a soft material with the domain structure, the rheological properties of the material depend on both the structural characteristics of the multi-level networks and the interactions among them. As mentioned before, the most important parameters of the fiber networks are the topology, the correlation length ξ (or average branching distance) of the networks, the ordering or symmetry of crystallites and the interaction among structural units. Herein, the fabrication of molecular or supramolecular gels has two fold implications: (a) branching/networking (the change of topology) or (b) tuning the branching density of materials at the mesoscopic scale (the altering of the correlation length ξ) (Fig. 22). A change in the branching state can lead to the variation of topology. Generally, we can refer to it as a topological variation.
 Fig. 22  Illustrations of network construction by the topology variation of crystallites: (a) creating branching/networking or (c) tuning the branching density; (b) SEM image of a gel of unbranched L-DHL fibers formed in DIOP in the absence of additive (left image) and the corresponding fiber network of L-DHL formed in the presence of EVACP (right image); (d) SEM images of enhanced tip branching by adding more additive EVACP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35; copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
Note that as long as the crystallites are involved in network formation, the nucleation and growth of the crystallites will govern the formation of the mesoscopic structure of materials. In the following discussion, we will first focus on the crystal networks/domain network fabrication.
5.1 Engineering in the mesoscopic structure of fiber networks by branching stimulation (topological variation)
As mentioned before, the change in branching state leads to a variation of the crystal network topology. The strategy of crystal networks fabrication (or topological variation) can be implemented by promoting mismatch nucleation (Fig. 23(B)). In Section 4.2, the basic approaches of engineering are those based on the criteria outlined by mismatch nucleation mediated branching stimulation, i.e. changing thermodynamic driving force or adding tailor-made additives. The main approaches and the principles are illustrated in Fig. 23.
 Fig. 23  (A) Illustration of the effects of supersaturation and other stimuli on energy barrier for mismatch nucleation. (B) Illustration of fiber growth and branching through the birth-and-spread mode; branching can be enhanced with stimuli. (C) SEM images: enhanced tip branching by raising the thermodynamic driving force (the driving force of B is higher than that of A); surfactant-promoted fiber tip branching C and side branching (HSA fibers formed in lanosterol without a surfactant and D with Tween 80); enhanced side branching by surfactant: GP-1 fibers formed in PG, E without surfactant, F with increasing concentration of span 20. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69b and ref. 24; copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH and copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. (D) The effect of supersaturation on the correlation length of fiber networks. A small-molecule organic gelator, N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid di-n-butylamide, grown from an isostearyl alcohol solution is used. Fitting of the data is based on eqn (20). Reprinted with permission from ref. 6c; copyright 2005, ACS. 
 Fig. 24  (A) Illustration of the micro/nanostructure engineering of soft functional materials: the control of kinetic pathway by ultrasound (route 2) with respect to normal fiber network formation (route 1). (B) SEM images of GP-1/PG gel samples. (a) Spherulitic domains formed without ultrasound; (b) 3D interconnected fiber network formed with 1 minute of sonication treatment. Scale bar: 500 nm. (c) The storage modulus G′ of the GP-1/PG gels formed without ultrasound (○) and with ultrasound (■). Reprinted with permission from ref. 81; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 

5.1.1 Engineering of crystal networks by thermodynamic driving force. 
As indicated in Section 4, supersaturation, the thermal dynamic driving force of crystallization, is one of the main parameters in controlling the fiber branching. Supersaturation does not only affect the nucleation rate, but also affects fiber branching by decreasing (at higher supersaturation) or increasing the structural match (at lower supersaturation) between the nucleating phase and the substrate (fiber). Different supersaturation can be obtained by changing the temperature for gel formation at a fixed concentration of gelator, or by keeping the temperature while changing the gelator concentration.
As shown in Fig. 23(A),  is a parameter to describe the condition under which branching will take place. In other words, this is a kinetic barrier for making a topological change. As supersaturation increases rapidly,  will also decrease (Fig. 23(A)). Mismatch nucleation leads to the branching and formation of crystal networks.
The effect of supersaturation on fiber branching has been quantified for some molecular gels. There have been a large number of cases reported concerning the tuning of branching and the network structure of crystal networks in various supramolecular gels.18c,24,28,29,31,35,69b,72b,73 For example, for a gel formed by N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid di-n-butylamide (GP-1) in isostearyl alcohol (ISA), the effect of thermodynamic driving force (supersaturation) on branching of fiber crystal networks in supramolecular gels is demonstrated in Fig. 23(C)-A and B.42 A higher thermodynamic driving force enhances the mismatch nucleation rate and fiber branching, leading to gels of a smaller ξ value (eqn (20), Fig. 23(D)).35,73b This can be quantified by eqn (20). G′ decreases exponentially with the branching distance/correlation length ξ (G′ = 1.07 × 106ξ−0.49; cf.Fig. 9a).
In addition to supersaturation, the cooling rate is another important factor describing the thermodynamic driving force that determines the network structure. A higher cooling rate (to accumulate supersaturation in a short time) leads to the formation of thinner and densely branched fibers (Fig. 23(C)-A and B). It was demonstrated that the network formation in molecular gels such as agarose gels was also controlled by nucleation13,18c,24,31,32,35,41a,69b,74


5.1.2 Engineering of crystal networks by topological modifiers. 
The agents leading to a change in the branching state or topological variation is defined as topological modifiers. Herein, the so-called topological modifiers refer to the impurities or tailor-made additives outlined in Section 4.3. To stimulate breaching by crystallographic mismatch nucleation, a suitable topological modifier should adsorb strongly on the surface of growing fibers to interrupt the structural match between the nucleating phase and the surface of growing crystal fibers. Therefore, the selection of the additive is not arbitrary. On the basis of the results obtained from theoretical calculations and experimental observations,75 we provide the following guidelines:
(1) Large molecules with a relatively rigid basic structure. The rigidity of additive molecules can result from a variety of molecular features such as the intramolecular bonding (i.e. hydrogen bonds, double or triple covalent bonds) and the presence of bulky functional groups in the backbone of the molecules. Based on both energetic and entropic consideration, for different molecules of similar types, larger molecules with somewhat rigid structures are easily adsorbed at the interfaces.75b,c
(2) Stronger interaction between additives and the substrate will lead to stronger adsorption at the surface.75a–f Because the surface of crystals is highly ordered and stiff, to obtain the maximal interactions by matching the structure of the substrate, it is desirable to have short and relatively flexible functional groups attached to the backbone of additives molecules so that they can adjust their positions to obtain optimal interactions with the solid molecules at the surface of crystals.
(3) The adsorbed additives should interrupt the growth of crystal layers along the substrate.75a–f The repulsions can originate from steric, electrostatic, polar/non-polar, or hydrophilic/hydrophobic forces, and can be achieved by attaching some functional groups to the backbone of the molecules of additives.
Large molecules such as polymers with a molecular structure that satisfies the abovementioned criteria have proven to be effective. In addition to polymers, surfactants are a class of chemicals that have interfacial adsorbing properties. Due to its amphilicity, a surfactant molecule can adsorb at the interface of two phases with different polarity to minimize the interfacial tension and free energy. Therefore, surfactants can also be suitable additives.
(a) Polymeric additives. 
Tailor-made additives, in particular polymeric additives, have been chosen as branching promoters in directing the formation of three-dimensional fiber networks. As shown in Fig. 22a, a small amount of an ethylene/vinyl acetate copolymer (EVACP) additive could construct 3D crystal networks of L-DHL (lanosta-8,24-dien-3β-ol:24,25-dihydrolanosterol = 56:44) in the solvent di-(2-ethyl-hexyl) phthalate (DIOP; Fig. 22b) by branching promotion.35 Without this additive, L-DHL crystallized into short unbranched fibers (Fig. 22b, left image), which are a paste-like material. The branching promotion by this polymer is due to its strong adsorption on the tip surface of L-DHL fibers, which leads to mismatch nucleation.
(b) Surfactants. 
Both the enhanced tip and side branching of fibers were achieved using different surfactants. For example, the presence of a small amount of Tween 80 enhanced the tip branching of GP-1 in ISA. Without the surfactant, elongated fibers with a low degree of branching (Fig. 23C(C)) were formed at low supersaturation of GP-1. The branching distance of the GP-1 fibers was decreased from 2.5 μm to 400 nm (Fig. 23C(D)). Similar effects of this surfactant were also observed on the branching of lanosterol fibers that were formed in benzyl benzoate. The presence of Span 20 enhanced the side branching of GP-1 fibers formed in propylene glycol (PG), which converts spherulitic fiber structures into comb-like and brush-like fibers (Fig. 23C(E and F)).


5.1.3 Engineering of crystal networks by ultrasound/external fields. 
Among a variety of external physical stimuli, light76 and electric fields77 have been successfully used to switch molecular aggregations involved in the formation of gel, micelles, vesicles, and membranes. However, developing a method that can control the hierarchical structure of molecules/crystal networks remains a challenge. Ultrasound is a powerful stimulus in the field of sonochemistry because of its diverse physical and chemical effects, such as cavitation, agitation, acoustic streaming, diffusion, and mechanical rupture, for many decades.78 However, it is only very recently that it was used to manipulate the formation of crystal fiber networks.79 On the one hand, ultrasound was observed to induce the mechanical disruption of molecular aggregates by cleaving the noncovalent bonding, leading to the suppression of a gelation process and the rupture of the gel network.80
The architecture of the self-organized three-dimensionally interconnected nanocrystal fibrillar networks has been achieved by ultrasound.81 The ultrasound stimulated structural transformation is correlated to the striking ultrasonic effects on turning non-gelled solutions or weak gels into strong gels instantly, with an enhancement of the storage modulus up to 3 orders of magnitude, and 4 times in terms of the gelling capability.
There are two counter effects of ultrasound in supramolecular gel fabrication. The constructive use of ultrasound was demonstrated in 2005 with two reports of ultrasound-induced gelation (“sonogelation”).79d,82 On the other hand, many molecular gels (and other materials) are damaged or destroyed by the excessive and lengthy application of ultrasound,83 because the structure of fibrillar crystal networks was broken down by sonication. Although the negative effect of ultrasound in the molecular aggregation has been studied extensively and is well-understood, the principle of the positive effect of ultrasound on altering the topology of crystal networks remain to be examined.

Fig. 24(B) reveals a gelation case of 2 wt% GP-1/PG sample. A weak gel/or viscous flowing fluid was obtained in a normal processing without ultrasound stimulus.81 Such a liquid is composed of closely packed spherulites (Fig. 24(B)a). Under the same composition and thermal treatment, the sample becomes a self-supporting solid gel when a short period of ultrasound during gelation (Fig. 24(B)b) is applied. As revealed in Fig. 24(B), ultrasound induces a transformation from the spherulites to 3D interconnected fiber networks, leading to a significant impact on the rheological properties. As shown in Fig. 24(B)c, the storage modulus G′ of the ultrasound-modified gel for the 2 wt% GP-1/PG is one magnitude stronger than the untreated gel.81
The abovementioned example demonstrates that ultrasound is capable of switching from a non-gelled to a gelling state, or a weak gel into a strong gel.
As long as crystallization is concerned, the control of nucleation and growth has always been the center of interest. Regarding the crystal network formation, high supersaturation often leads to spherulitic growth and multi domain networks. The high supersaturation growth is normally caused by the difficulty in primary nucleation, which often occurs in organic and various macromolecules, and normal crystallization with the effect of additives. Nevertheless, nucleation, both primary nucleation and secondary nucleation, can be promoted by ultrasound, so that the aforementioned crystallization and crystal network formation can be initiated at a low supersaturation regime. Low supersaturation gives rise to the side branching and less dense branching during crystal networks formation. This causes a variation of topology in the newly formed crystal networks (Fig. 24).
Apart from ultrasound stimulus, electric and magnetic stimuli are in principle capable of stimulating the similar transformation.84 These techniques enable people to produce self-supporting soft functional materials possessing significantly modified macroscopic properties from the materials previously considered to be “useless”, without the use of chemical stimuli.

5.2 Engineering of soft materials by tuning the domain network structure
As indicated in Fig. 3, mesoscopic soft materials often consist of hierarchical networks. To a large extent, the different levels of structures can influence the macroscopic performance of materials synergistically. In the case of supramolecular gels (cf.Fig. 3), the weak inter domain interactions (in the domain network) to a large extent determine the macroscopic performance of soft materials. In this regard, the density of the crystal network domains determines the mechanical properties of the materials. In a domain network, each single network domain initiates from a primary nucleation centre. Therefore, in a given volume, the number and size of single networks is directly correlated to the primary nucleation. In other words, the control of the domain network structure in a system is to control the primary nucleation in the system. A lower primary nucleation rate leads to the formation of a smaller number of nuclei, which leads to larger single networks in the end. This will improve the mechanical properties of the materials because it reduces the mechanically weak boundary areas between the single networks. Therefore, in terms of obtaining materials with better mechanical properties, reducing the primary nucleation rate is an effective approach.
The primary nucleation rate can be controlled by a variety of means. These include tuning the thermodynamic driving force or employing suitable additives to activate/inactive some nucleation centers (Fig. 25). Adding nucleation seeds or applying external fields can also be very effective (Fig. 26–28) in modifying the domain network structure. Finally, volume confinement is also an effective approach.45a,b The different approaches and typical examples are demonstrated as follows.
 Fig. 25  (a) Illustration of controlling the size and number density of single networks in a multi-domain network. Engineering multi-domain networks through controlling primary nucleation by (b) reducing the thermodynamic driving force or (c) using a polymer additive PMMMA. The concentration of GP-1 was fixed for both (b) and (c). For (c), the temperature for gelation was fixed at 40 °C. Gels were formed by GP-1 in PG. (a) and (b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 6a; copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. Images in (c) are reprinted with permission from ref. 85; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 26  (a) Rheological evolution and (b) dependence of the storage modulus G′ on the seeding density of silk fibroin solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86; copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 27  Conversion of a multi-domain fiber network to a “single” crystal fibrous network through ultrasound-assisted fiber network formation. Schematic description of the formation of spherulites (opaque liquid) through the normal thermal processing and the formation of an interconnecting fiber network through an ultrasonic stimulus. T1 > Tc > T5 > T4 = T2 > T3, Tc is defined as the critical temperature, above which the gelator is totally dissolved. For ultrasound treatment, seeds are formed by mechanically breaking down the spherulites into fiber segments by ultrasound. Elevating the temperature from T4 to T5 (low thermodynamic driving force) leads to loose branching of the fibre networks, causing the interpenetration and interlocking of different crystal networks. The domain networks will behave like a single crystal network (gelation). Photographs are reprinted with permission from ref. 88; copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 28  Illustration of the strategy of controlling the mechanical property of silk fibroin hydrogels by controlling the hierarchical network structures, i.e. varying the density of nucleation centers. (a) Illustration of the ultrasound promotion of the primary nucleation and the formation of regenerated silkworm silk fibroin (RSF) networks and gels, which gives rise to a high density of primary nucleation and RSF networks/domains. (b) Ultrasound causes a high seeding (nucleation) density of RSF networks/domains (△) and a lower G′ than the gels without ultrasound (□). Reprinted with permission from ref. 86; copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 

5.2.1 Thermodynamic driving force stimulus control. 
The influence of thermodynamic driving force is demonstrated in Fig. 25a and b. Lowering the thermodynamic driving force reduces the primary nucleation rate, which leads to the formation of larger single networks in the domain network. Correspondingly, this significantly enhances G′ of the materials. For example, for the gels formed by GP-1 (3 wt%) in propylene glycol (PG), G′ are 4.7 × 104 and 1.3 × 105 N m−2 for the gels formed at 35 and 50 °C (Fig. 25a and b), respectively, which is almost three times higher due to the increase in the sizes of single networks (Fig. 25b). Although reducing the thermodynamic driving force can enhance the G′, it also reduces the fiber mass, which has a negative effect on G′. A gel will not be formed when the driving force is below a threshold. Therefore, an optimal driving force exists for a given system.6a


5.2.2 Chemical stimulus. 
Additives that inhibit primary nucleation are also effective in promoting the formation of stronger materials. For example, it was observed that a co-polymer additive poly(methylmethacrylate co-methacrylic acid) (PMMMA) could effectively inhibit the primary nucleation of GP-1 in PG. In Fig. 25c, the primary nucleation rate was reduced by the addition of PMMMA to the gels. As the primary nucleation is reduced, the G′ of the gel could be improved more than fivefold. The advantages of the additive approach is that it does not form the gels at high temperatures (low driving force), which is important if temperature-sensitive components are encapsulated in the gels.


5.2.3 Effect of foreign particulates or seeding. 
Regarding the control of primary nucleation, one cannot avoid the impact of foreign particulates or seeding. This is to introduce foreign particulates or seeds to promote heterogeneous nucleation, so as to control the domain number and network structure. Herein, we discuss the impact of foreign particulates or seeds on the rheological properties of regenerated silkworm silk fibroin (RSF) hydrogels and the hierarchical networks (Fig. 31).86 Similar to other hydrogels and/or molecular gels, regenerated silk fibroin (RSF) hydrogels are of the hierarchical network structure; these belong to the case of weak (nanofibril) domain–(nanofibril) domain interactions, as illustrated by Fig. 3A(b). In this case, a gel RSF solution contains sufficiently silk nano-β crystallites. The nucleation density in a fresh silk fibroin solution can be acquired by mixing the fresh RSF solution with different volumes of the RSF gel solution of the same concentration (2%) at ratios of 1:0 (1×), 1:1 (2×), 1:3 (4×) and 1:7 (8×). Consequently, the nucleation density of the samples was reduced from (1×), 1:1 (2×), 1:3 (4×) to 1:7 (8×), so was the domain density in the fresh RSF solution. Rheological data showed that both the gelation time and storage modulus of the samples with a lower nucleation density are higher than those of the samples with a higher nucleation density (Fig. 26). This is in line with our prediction, as indicated by Fig. 9b.


5.2.4 Effect of external field stimuli. 
Similar to the fabrication of crystal networks, external field stimuli can also be applied to manipulate the domain networks of soft materials. In this regard, the impact of ultrasound on the structure is achieved mainly by the influence on the primary/secondary nucleation of crystal networks. As illustrated in Fig. 27, with the aid of ultrasound in combination with the thermal treatment, one can convert a non-gelling system to a strong gel with a three-dimensionally interconnecting fibrous network.87
There are two effects in this concern. First, ultrasound can promote nucleation in gelling solutions, thus crystal networks can occur at a relatively low supersaturation (cf. Section 5.1.3).81 Second, ultrasound can break the existing crystal networks. The broken crystallites will then serve as seeds (Fig. 26) in the gelling solutions. If one reduces the thermodynamic driving force (by increasing the temperature), the formation of crystal networks can proceed into the low supersaturation regime (the thermal treatment). Loose branching of fiber networks are obtained, causing the interpenetration and interlocking of different crystal networks. Consequently, the domain networks will behave like a single crystal network (Fig. 27).88
If one only applies ultrasound stimuli to a gelling solution, primary nucleation will be promoted, which will then give rise to an increase of the domain number. Fig. 28 gives an example of silk fibroin hydrogel formation, where ultrasound was employed to promote the gel formation. Similar to the case revealed by Fig. 26, silk fibroin nanofibrils grown from the solution will be promoted by ultrasound, which results in a rapid increase in the β crystallites in silk fibroin solutions. In this regard, the number of primary nuclei is proportional to the ultrasonication time and power. Therefore, a longer exposure time of ultrasonication will induce more nuclei of β crystallites, consequently a higher density of silk fibrous networks (domains) in the gels. According to Fig. 9b, this will finally result in a reduction of the storage modulus G′ of regenerated silk fibrin hydrogels. This is confirmed in Fig. 28b.

6. Spider silk vs. silkworm silk: from coupling of domain and molecular/crystallite networks to ultra-strong performance
Spider silk and cocoon silk fibers and derivatives, which are the materials with molecular β-crystal networks, are another class of soft materials with crystal networks.34d The unusual combination of high strength and extensibility of spider silk fibers is a characteristic unavailable in synthetic materials yet. This biological template suggests new directions to emulate in the pursuit of new high-performance, multifunctional materials generated with green chemistry and processing approach. The correlation between the performance and structure of these materials can bio-inspire the fabrication of multifunctional material platforms that integrate with living systems for medical materials and a host of other applications.34d
Silk derivatives, including silk hydrogels, films and sponges, belong to the soft materials with weak domain–domain interactions (Fig. 3B(a)), whereas silk fibres are those with strong domain–domain interactions (Fig. 3B(b)). The key macroscopic properties and the formation mechanism are the same as those highlighted in Sections 3–5. In terms of mesoscopic materials assembly/engineering,9a,43,44,86,89 one can acquire functionalized silk fibroin based materials, i.e. silk photonic crystals and light emission materials-fluorescent silk fibres, films, and sponges. They are applicable in the area of biomedicine, bio imaging, due to their excellent biocompatibility and mechanical properties (Fig. 29). They are also used for suturing, would dressing, artificial ligaments, tendons, and tissue scaffolds. Silk fibroin regenerated from silk fibres can also be applied for the fabrication of different materials, including micro/nanoparticles, gels, sponge and films, for biomedical applications. In this regard, the mesoscopic structure of the materials is of utmost importance, concerning the bio-performance and functionality.9a In addition to their biomedical usefulness, these materials also have important applications in electronics, photonics and microfluids.34d,90
 Fig. 29  Spider silk and cocoon silk fibres and regenerated silk derivatives, i.e. silk hydrogels, films, and sponges, are soft materials with molecular β-crystal networks. In terms of mesoscopic materials assembly/engineering, one can acquire functionalized silk fibroin based materials, i.e. silk photonic crystals and light emission materials-fluorescent silk fibres, films, and sponges. They are applicable in the areas of biomedicine, bioimaging, tissue engineering etc.9a,43,44,86,89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
On the other hand, we note that spider silk and cocoon silk fibers belong to the soft materials with strong domain–domain interactions (Fig. 3B(b)). We will discuss in this section the correlation between the structural characteristics of the silk fibers and their macroscopic performance.
Silk fibers produced by spiders are one of the most intriguing natural material marvels owing to their exceptional mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and environment-friendly nature. As shown in Fig. 30, spider silk dragline fibers possess unique mechanical properties with a combination of superior strength and extensibility. Nephila dragline silk typically features an ultimate strength of 1.3 GPa, and an extensibility of 40%, giving rise to an unusual toughness of 160 kJ kg−1, which is 5 times tougher than synthetic fibers, i.e. Kevlar.91
 Fig. 30  Comparison of toughness between different fibers. The data were quoted from ref. 92. 
 Fig. 31  The hierarchical structure of Bombyx mori silkworm and Nephila pilipes spider dragline silk fibers. (a) Both the silkworm silk and spider dragline fiber are composed of numerous interlocking nano-fibrils. Inside the nano-fibrils, the β-crystallites are connected by the amorphous chains to form a network. The β-crystallite is composed of stacked β-sheets with the peptide chains connected by the hydrogen bonds in each sheet. The yellow box indicates the unit cell of the β-crystallites and the coordinate indicates a (inter-sheet), b (inter-chain) and c directions. (b) AFM image of nano-fibrillar structure in B. mori silkworm silk with a sequence of associated segments (scale bar: 100 nm). The β-structure sequence is GAGAGSGAAS(GAGAGS)n, n = 1–11 for B. mori silkworm silks and GAGA(A)n, n = 4–6 for N. pilipes spider silks (G: glycine, A: alanine, and S: serine).95 Regarding the β nanocrystallites, the lattice constants of the orthogonal unit cell of β-crystallites (Fig. 32A) are a = 0.938 nm, b = 0.949 nm, c = 0.698 nm for silkworm B. mori silks,96 and a = 1.03 nm, b = 0.944 nm, b = 0.695 nm for spider Nephila dragline silks.97 As shown, the β-crystallites serve as the linkages connecting different silk protein molecular chains in nanofibrils. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Spider dragline silk fibers have a very high strength-to-density ratio, and can absorb great impact energy with low impact force on collision.92 In comparison, Bombyx mori (B. mori) silkworm silk fibers have weaker mechanical properties, despite the two types of silks share the similar nano and micro structures.93 Note that the major amino acids in the two types of silks are very similar. The primary structures of the two silks are as follows:   
The secondary and the higher levels of structures of both spider and silkworm silks can be measured by various techniques, such as X-ray scattering, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Based on the X-ray scattering and FTIR measurement,53,86,92,94 the structural parameters of Nephila pilipes (N. pilipes) spider dragline silk and B. mori silkworm silk are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Comparison of the structural parameters between silkworm silk and spider dragline silk fibers




Sample name
Overall β-sheets (%)
Crystallinity (%)
Orientation function f
Crystallite size (nm)



a


b


c





Silkworm cocoon silk
42
40
0.84
2.3
4.1
10.3


Spider dragline silk
38
17
0.93
2.1
2.7
6.5




It follows that although the total percentage of β-conformations (β-crystallites and intra β-sheets) for N. pilipes spider dragline silk and B. mori silkworm silk is very close to each other, the crystallinity (the percentage of β-crystallites) of N. pilipes spider dragline silk is only half compared to that of B. mori silkworm silk. On the other hand, the volume of β-nano crystallites of N. pilipes spider dragline silk is only 1/4 of B. mori silkworm silk. This implies that the β-crystallite density of N. pilipes spider dragline silk is almost double that of B. mori silkworm silk. Furthermore, the β-crystallite orientation of N. pilipes spider dragline silk fibers, described by the orientation factor f, is better than that of B. mori silkworm silk fibers. (The orientation factor f describes the orientation of the β-crystallites along the fibre axis, f = (3cos2θ − 1)/2, where θ is the angle between the c axis of the crystallites and the fiber axis. If f = 1, the β-crystallites are oriented completely parallel along the fiber axis. On the other hand, if f = 0, β-crystallites are oriented randomly.53). We will see in Section 7.3 that the abovementioned crystal network structural factors give rise to the much stronger N. pilipes spider dragline silk fibers than B. mori silkworm silk fibers.
Recent studies indicate that silk fibers are the hierarchical structure of crystal networks. The hierarchical structures of both N. pilipes spider dragline silk and B. mori silkworm silk fibers are given in Fig. 29.
Herein, a nano-fibril corresponds to a single silk protein molecular network, while a silk fiber, on the other hand, corresponds to a domain network. According to the latest results,86,92,94 a silk fiber consists of a bundle of nano-fibrils or “nano fibrous domains” (Fig. 31b). This corresponds to the case of the strong domain–domain interactions, illustrated in Fig. 3B(b). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) showed that each fiber is composed of numerous nano-fibrils with a diameter of around 30 nm for B. mori silkworm silks (Fig. 31b) and around 35 nm for N. pilipes spider dragline silk fibers. At the molecular-nano scale of the twisted nano-fibrils, nano β-crystallites, so-called the “nodes” in the networks of soft materials, are formed jointly by some adjacent silk protein molecules. In the following analysis, we will demonstrate that the strength of both silkworm silk and spider silk fibers are determined jointly by the molecular crystallite networks and the domain (nano fibrils) networks. In particular, the strong interactions between the adjacent domains (nano fibrils) will substantially strengthen silk fibers. In the following sections, we will establish the correlation between the mechanical performances, in particular the critical breaking point and the hierarchical structures, of both spider and silkworm silks.
6.1 Mechanical performance of N. pilipes dragline and B. mori silk fibers
The typical mechanical performance of N. pilipes dragline and B. mori silk fibers are illustrated in Fig. 31a.
In the linear region (elastic region in Fig. 30), the amorphous chains are being stretched with the β-crystallites unaffected. After the yield point (point S in Fig. 32A), the nonlinear mechanical performance of silks is caused by the internal structural evolution. As the crystallites serve as the joints of the crystallite networks, the breakage of the fibers is initiated by the rupture of the β-crystallites.92 However, the mechanism of eventual breakage of the silk fibers is complicated due to the multi-levels of structures and the interactions between the structural units.
 Fig. 32  (A) Comparison of the typical stress–strain curves of silk fibers and spider N. pilipes by forced silking at 10 mm s−1, (curve a) draglines and (curve b) silkworm cocoon of B. mori. Spider draglines exhibit a characteristic strain-hardening feature in the non-linear region of the stress–strain curve. (B) Schematic model demonstrating how the silkworm and spider dragline fibers respond when they are subjected to stretching. There are two β-components in the alanine-rich regions of spider dragline silk: β-crystallites and intra-molecular β-sheets. The intra-molecular β-sheets are mainly responsible for the extensibility, while the β-crystallites and the orientation and density are responsible for the toughness of silk fibers. (C) Effect of tensile deformations on the β-crystallinity of spider N. pilipes dragline fibers. (A) and (C) are Reprinted with permission from ref. 92; copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
After the yield point, the spider dragline initially displays a characteristic J-shaped behaviour of strain-hardening (the slope of the stress–strain curves increases with strain) until point H, followed by a so-called strain-weakening behaviour (the slope of stress–strain curves decreases with strain) until the ultimate strength. It was found that other species of spider dragline silks follow similar stress–strain profiles,98 indicating that strain-hardening could be a general feature of spider draglines. On the other hand, the silkworm silk behaves only in the strain-weakening mode throughout its non-linear region of the stress–strain curve.
6.2 Spider silk fiber vs. silkworm silk fibers: exceptional extensibility and strain hardening
Elastomers like rubber also exhibit a strain-hardening behaviour, which was attributed to strain-induced crystallization among the molecular chains.99 Some semicrystalline synthetic polymers also have a very similar mechanism of strain hardening as that found for amorphous polymers.100 Nevertheless, this mechanism is inapplicable to spider fibers because of the two major differences between silk and rubber. First, rubbers are composed of completely random polymer chains; therefore, the elasticity displayed in stretching rubbers is primarily due to the change in conformational entropy of molecular chains. In contrast, the amorphous chains in silk filaments are partially oriented with respect to the fibrous axis in its natural state, resulting in their remarkably different mechanical behaviour from that of rubbers.93 Second, rubbers are amorphous polymers with simple structures,101 whereas silk exhibits much more complicated hierarchical structures. Evidently, the unique structural features of spider dragline silk result in extremely high toughness and optimal extensibility, which spiders use to great advantage in their web.
The structural origin of the stress–strain behaviour of spider dragline silk vs. silkworm silk filaments has been investigated (Fig. 32A).92 As indicated in Table 4 and Fig. 31 and 32B, in the silk nano fibrils, the β-crystallites are jointly connected by several neighbouring silk protein molecules to form a molecular network. The non-crystalline β-sheets, so-called intra-molecular β-sheets, are merely normal β-sheets folded within individual silk protein molecules. For spider dragline silk, it was found that 38% of silk is in β-conformation, of which 17% is in the β-crystallites (Table 4).92 This implies that the amount of intra-molecular β-sheets in Nephila spider dragline fibers is 21%. In contrast, 42% of fibrin molecules are in the β-conformation, among which 40% is in the crystalline. The amount of intra-molecular β-sheets in silkworm silk fibers is 2%, almost negligible in comparison with that in Nephila spider dragline fibers. Fig. 32B demonstrates how the two structures contribute to their stress–strain profiles. Upon stretching after the yield point S, as shown in Fig. 32A, the intra-molecular β-sheets within the amorphous regions unfold first because they are weaker. The unfolding releases the length of the protein chains, while the β-crystallites remain unaffected. This leads to a high extension of draglines, without causing breakage of the inter-molecular linkage of molecular networks. At this stage, the modulus of silk fibres drops to nearly zero as the fiber extension is mainly caused by the breaking of weak intra-molecular hydrogen bonds. As the progressive unfolding and the alignment of protein chains continue, silk protein molecules and β-crystallites (nodes) of the molecular networks are stretched to bear the load. Consequently, the silk filaments become stiffer due to tightening of the networks (Fig. 32B). This is how strain hardening occurs in stretching spider dragline filaments. The further stretching beyond the inflection point H breaks the β-crystallites. This demolishes the crosslinks of the molecular networks in silk filaments and weakens the silk filaments (so-called strain-weakening).
The X-ray data of deformed fibers show that the β-crystallinity of the dragline starts declining once a spider dragline is stretched beyond point H.92 On the other hand, silkworm silk fibers have considerably fewer intra-molecular β-sheets in the amorphous region. Therefore, it is less extensible and only exhibits strain-weakening after the yield point. The property of strain-hardening of spider draglines plays a key role in supporting a suspended spider. In the case of a spider escaping from a predator by abseiling, the soft spider dragline can effectively buffer the impact force with its gradual hardening property.102 The stress–strain profile of the spider dragline shows that the J-shaped strain-hardening curve accounts for a very large extension, enabling quick absorption of tremendous energy at low applied stress, thus draglines can facilitate safe and gentle falls.
6.3 Hierarchical breaking mechanism

6.3.1 Role of buddle structure in silk fiber toughness. 
The breaking stress, or the toughness, of two types of silk fibers can be explained according to the hierarchical structures, as shown in Fig. 2B(b), 31 and 33(B). As revealed in Fig. 30, silk fibers correspond to crystal networks (nano fibrils) and domain networks (fibres) defined in Fig. 3. The nano-fibrils are molecular networks where β-crystallites are the nodes of the networks and molecular chains link the nodes; a silk fiber as a bundle of twisted nano-fibrils (Fig. 32(B)), which are interlocked by adjacent ones so that they cannot slip freely. This implies that the interactions between the adjacent domains are very strong/infinite (Fig. 3B(b)).
Within this framework, a twisted fibril can be regarded in the form of periodically repeating segments (Fig. 33(A)). Therefore, the breakage of fibrils happens at the maximum loading of these associated “segments”. The breakage of a fibril bundle is initiated by the fracture of the weakest segments,86,94 indicating that these “rough” fibrils can effectively avoid mutual slipping even when the silk fibers are approaching the breaking points.103 Regarding the fact that silk fibers are very long, the interactions between the adjacent nanofibrils (crystal networks) in the bundles (domain networks) are very strong (Fig. 33(B)-(a), non-slipping fibril bundle (N-NFB)). This implies that the interactions between domains are very strong (Fig. 33(B)-(b)). In stretching, the breaking of a fibrous bundle will form nano cracks in the silk fiber (Fig. 33(B)-(a)-(ii)) and disperse at different cross sections of the fiber. This will prevent catastrophic fracture of the fibril bundle. The fiber breakage occurs only if all the fibrils in a cross-section of the fiber are all broken (Fig. 33(B)-(a)-(iv)). It follows that the extra stress caused by fractured segments can be distributed uniformly among the uncracked segments of the silk nanofibril bundle along the same cross-section. This is what was observed in practice (Fig. 33(B)-(a)-(v)). The breaking of such a fiber (bundle) can be described as follows:104 the cracks are accumulating gradually in the fibril bundle with the extra stress shared equally among the unbroken segments within the same cross section; if enough cracks accumulate at one cross-section of the fiber, catastrophic breakage across the fibril bundle occurs. For the aforementioned structure, there are three significant structural effects on the strength of silks: (1) the molecular networks inside nano-fibril with β-crystallites as the nodes, which can reinforce the connection between fibroin molecules,105 (2) the periodic twisted segmental morphology of fibrils, which prevents the slipping between adjacent fibrils, and (3) the fibril bundle structure together with the non-slipping feature between fibrils makes the extra stress equally shared among the unbroken segments.
 Fig. 33  (A). Schematic illustration of the segmental structure of nano-fibrils. (B) (a-i–iv) Illustration of the breaking mechanism of network – nonslipping fibril bundle (N-NFB) at the nano-fibril bundle scale; (a-v) SEM image of the transverse cross section of a B. mori silkworm silk fiber after its breakage upon stretching (scale bar: 2 μm). (b-i) Schematic illustration of the bulk network (BN) model; (b-ii–iv) scenarios showing the breakage of BN by simulation; (b-v) typical stress–strain curve of the BN model; (c-i) schematic illustration of the network – slippery fibril bundle (SFB) model; (b-ii–iv) scenarios showing the breakage of SFB by simulation; (b-v) typical stress–strain curve of SFB model. In comparison with BN, the nano-fibrillar structure in N-NFB can inhibit the transverse growth of the crack; in comparison with SFB, the friction between nano-fibrils in N-NFB can prevent the longitudinal growth of the crack. These are the structural advantages of N-NFB, which make the silk fibers strong. (d) Comparison of the breaking stresses of silk fibers predicted by N-NFB, SFB and BN model. Note that the strength difference between N-NFB and BN in B-(d) can be correlated in some way to the dependence of G′ on the domain density shown in Fig. 9c, where G′ increases with the domain density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The advantage of the hierarchical structure of N-NFB silk fibers in toughening the silk fibers can be further demonstrated by comparing the abovementioned structure (the N-NFB structure or Fig. 33(B)-(d)) with the other two structures. One is the slippery fibril bundle (SFB) structure (Fig. 33(B)-(c) or Fig. 3B(a)) and the other is the bulk network (BN) structure (Fig. 33(B)-(b)). The SFB model assumes that the nanofibrils are cylindrical and can slip freely (there is no frictions between them). The BN structure does not have the fibril bundle structure and the molecular-crystallite structure is extended to the whole fibers.
In the BN structure, a silk fiber is considered to be a bulk molecular network without a fibril bundle structure (Fig. 33B–(b)-(i)). The network here is the same as the molecular network in a segment of fibril in the nano-fibril structure (Fig. 33(A)). The snapshots of the bulk network (BN) upon the stretching until breakage in the simulations and the corresponding mechanical behaviour are displayed in Fig. 33(B)-(b)-ii-iv and 33(B)-(b)-v, respectively. In this case, the breakage of BN behaves in a similar manner to brittle materials, where the fracture occurs as the catastrophic growth of cracks.106 According to Griffith's fracture theory, the extra stress caused by a crack is concentrated around the crack, especially at the transverse boundary of the crack (Fig. 33(B)-(b)), while in the N-NFB structure, the extra stress will be redistributed uniformly in the cross-section of the fiber, which contains cracks (Fig. 33(B)–b). In the BN structure, the concentration of the extra stress can promote the propagation of the cracks, causing a split of the materials.107 Hence, such fibers based on this model will obtain a strength of 0.56 ± 0.04 GPa, which is much weaker than the 1.00 ± 0.02 GPa obtained from the HN structure.
In the SFB structure, a bundle of nano-fibrils were stretched gradually. The snapshots of the simulations of stretching SFB to breakage are displayed in Fig. 33(B)-(c)-ii–iv. As each nano-fibril takes the load independently, the breakage of a nano-fibril occurs at its weakest position. The breakage will first start from the weakest nano fibrils and will accelerate the breakage of the remaining fibrils as the total load will add to the unbroken fibrils. This will lead to the breakage of the entire fiber. Therefore, a SFB-like fiber will be the weakest among the three types and breaks at 0.25 ± 0.03 GPa. The resulting stress–strain curve is plotted in Fig. 33(B)-(c)-(v). It follows that a gradual breakage occurs at the breaking point; it behaves very similar to ductile materials whose deformation is intermediated by localized shear at the nanoscale.108 However, the silk fibers always break abruptly in practice.
In comparison, the breaking stresses according to the N-NFB, BN and SFB structures are given in Fig. 33(B)-(d). The plot indicates that the HN structure, corresponding to Fig. 3B–b, gives the highest breaking stress. The observed non-slipping feature and the fibril bundle structure do have their implications in the strength enhancement of silk fibers. In the BN structure, a crack can develop along the transverse direction easily due to its single network structure. However, in both the N-NFB and the SFB structures, the boundaries of the fibrils can physically terminate the growth of the cracks across the fibers, and the surviving nano-fibrils can uniformly redistribute the extra stress resulting from the broken fibrils. On the other hand, in the SFB structure, the cracks can propagate in the direction of the fiber axis without any impediment. Nevertheless, in the case of N-NFB, the inter-fibrillar friction arising from the adjacent twisted nano-fibrils will prevent crack propagation of this type. In other words, the non-slipping fibril bundle structure shows a crack-stopping property for blocking the propagation of cracks in both the transverse and longitudinal directions.
Based on the discussion above, the synergy between the network structure at the nano-fibril scale and the fibril bundle structure at the fiber scale can be explained as follows: at the crystal network level, the fibrils are the molecule-β-crystallite networks, where β-crystallites serve as nodes in the molecular network (cf.Fig. 33(A)). If we consider that the reference fibers have only one level of the structure, i.e. the molecule-β-crystallite network, the domain structure exerts a significant impact on the mechanical properties of silk fibers. In case of the SFB structure (Fig. 33(B)-(b) or Fig. 3B–a), no interaction occurs among the adjacent fibrils (networks). Thus, the silk fiber strength deteriorates, and the breaking stress becomes weaker than the BN structure. On the other hand, the N-NFB structure (Fig. 33(B)-(a)) makes the fibril–fibril interactions strong. This greatly enhances the strength of the silk fibers. In other words, the twisted nanofibrils lead to stronger domain (fibril)–domain (fibril) interactions. We note that the interlock among the adjacent nanofibrils in the nanofibril bundle serves as the crack-stopper, which restricts the propagation of cracks. This consequently strengthens the silk fibers significantly.


6.3.2 Regenerated silk protein derivatives and silk fibers: mechanical performance vs. hierarchical structure. 
As mentioned above, regenerated silk protein derivatives refer to the films, sponges, hydrogels, etc. from regenerated silk proteins. Recent AFM and SEM experiments reveal that in the solidification process of regenerated silk fibroin (RSF) solutions, silk fibroin molecules self-assemble into nanofibrils of the diameter, as revealed by Fig. 31b. Representative SEM images of the nanofibril networks from freeze-dried regenerated silk fibroin sponges are shown in Fig. 34a and b. The fibril networks consist of nanofibers that have a diameter of ∼30 nm. Fig. 34c shows the wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns of the β-crystallites from a regenerated silk fibroin sponge. It follows that all the structural parameters of regenerated silkworm silk fibrils, i.e. the crystallinity, the average β-crystal size, and the β-component ratios within the regenerated silk fibrils, are confirmed to be close to those of natural silk fibers apart from the orientation of the β-crystallites (results to be published).
 Fig. 34  (a and b) Representative SEM images of freeze-dried regenerated silk fibroin (RSF) sponges (inset: a hydrogel formed after sonication with the self-supporting behavior); (c) 2D WAXS pattern of silk fibrils. (d–f) AFM images of RSF solutions (wt/v 0.04%) at different gelation stages: (d) before ultrasonication, (e) right after ultrasonication, and (f) 30 minutes after ultrasonication. The ultrasonication time was 30 seconds. Scale bars: (a) 1 μm, (b) 100 nm, (d–f) 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86; copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
The abovementioned results show that both silk fibres and silk protein derivatives have similar structures apart from the domain (fibril–fibril) networks. The domain networks of silk protein derivatives silk fibres correspond to the case shown in Fig. 3B–(a) or the SFB structure shown in Fig. 33(B)-(d), while those of silk fibres correspond to the case shown in Fig. 33B–(b) or the N-NFB structure in Fig. 33(B)-(d). In addition to the strong interaction, the nanofibrils in the silk fibres are well aligned, whereas the fibrils in regenerated silk fibroin films, sponges or hydrogels are much less ordered or in the form of random coils. In other words, the domains in the domain networks of silk fibres are much better ordered than regenerated silk fibroin films, sponges or hydrogels. As a consequence, spider or silkworm silk fibers are much stronger (breaking stress: from a few hundreds to >1000 GPa) than regenerated silk fibroin films or sponges (breaking stress: a few tens GPa; the results to be published).


6.3.3 Molecular β-crystallite network structure of nano fibrils and silk fiber breaking limit. 
Apart from the interfibrillar or bundle structure, the structure of molecular-β nanocrystallite networks in the fibrils plays a crucial role in the toughness (breaking stress) of both spider silk fibers and silkworm silk fibers. According to the data f presented in Table 4,92 spider silk fibers have higher f's values than silkworm silk fibers. This corresponds to the fact that spider dragline silk fibers have higher breaking stress than silkworm silk fibers. To systematically examine the impact of the correlation length and ordering of crystal networks on the mechanical performance of the two types of silk fibres, one can change the reeling speed of silking (ESI†) to acquire the correlation between the breaking stress and strain of silk fibers and the crystal network structure of silk fibers. According to Liu et al.,92,94f values can be further enhanced by faster reeling/spinning of both spider and silkworm silk fibers.109 It is surprising to see from Fig. 35(a) that the breaking stress of both spider dragline silk and silkworm silk fibers increases with f unambiguously in the same fitting curve after eliminating the influence of the other factors. This implies that the orientation of nanocrystallites in the networks of silk fibrils exerts a predominant influence on the breaking stress of all types of silk fibrous materials.
 Fig. 35  The influence of three structural parameters: (a) f, (b) nβ, and (c) A, on the breaking stress of the segments at the nano-fibril scale. By keeping the other parameters constant, the breaking stress of both spider dragline silk and silkworm silk fibers increases exponentially with f, or increases linearly, or decreases with A. Here, A = ∼ξ2. The striking point is that both spider silk and silkworm silk can be fitted by the same curves, meaning that the strength of the two types of fibers is governed by the similar structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Scheme for nβ and A, nβ is the number of crystallites at the cross section of a fibril. A is defined as the effective loading area of a peptide chain in the β-crystallites. 
On the other hand, we note that the crystallinity of silkworm silk fibers is higher than that of spider dragline silk fibers (Table 4). The arising question is why is spider dragline silk fibers stronger than silkworm silk fibers? The analysis based on the HN structure (Fig. 33) indicates that in addition to f, the breaking stress can be correlated to the number of the β-crystallites nβ within the cross section of a nano-fibril (cf.Fig. 35(d)),94 and the effective loading area A of a peptide chain in the β-crystallites, where A can be defined as (21)
Increasing nβ gives rise to an increase in the breaking stress of silk fibers (Fig. 35(b)) and the breaking stresses of the silk fibres decrease while A increases (Fig. 35(c)).
Within the framework of hierarchical network structures, both spider and silkworm silk fibers consist essentially of the same structural components: the crystal networks of molecular-nano β-crystallites in nano fibrils and the nano fibrils (or bundles) networks. This is why the key structural parameters of the both species can be fitted by the same curves. In this concern, the twisting of silk fibrils leads to a strong retardation of the mutual slip between the adjacent fibrils, which significantly enhances the breaking stress of silk fibres. At the nano-fibril level, a better alignment of nano β-crystallites, a larger number of β-crystallites at one cross section of a nano-fibril and a smaller effective loading area of a peptide chain in β-crystallites will eventually give rise to stronger silk fibers.
There have been continuous efforts in acquiring stronger silkworm silks fibers by genetically modifying the amino acid sequence of silk fibroin. Such efforts allow transgenic silkworms to spin “super” silk fibers having partial spidoin sequences to acquire fibers as strong as spider dragline fibers.110 The results depicted in Fig. 35 indicate that the key structural parameters, i.e., f, A, nβetc., that determine the toughness of silk fibers are decided by both the amino acid sequence or the primary structure of the silk proteins, and the reeling speed of silking process. Based on the facts that the natural reeling speed of silkworms is 4 mm s−1 and that of spiders is about 15–20 mm s−1,53 and the fact that f, A, nβetc. to a large extent are determined by the reeling speed, even if silkworms could spin the silk fibers of the spidroin amino acid sequence, the breaking stress is never going to match that of natural spider dragline fibers due to the much lower reeling speed of silkworms. In other words, the objective of naturally spinning “stronger spider dragline fibers” by transgenic silkworms is unlikely to be realized in the natural spinning process by silkworms, unless the nano β-network structure is completely modified.

7. Summary and outlook
While crystallization has been regarded as one of the most crucial processes in science and engineering for centuries, the latest development in materials science requires the further application of the crystallization knowledge beyond the classic domain to the “unrelated” area of soft matter. Although crystal networks have become the “backbones” of mesoscopic/soft materials, the structure of crystal networks, in general, plays an irreplaceable role in the performance and critical behaviour of materials. In other words, the ability to control the hierarchical structure of crystal networks will enable us to acquire the capability to design materials with some particular functions of mesoscopic/soft materials. This broadens the application of the concepts and knowledge of crystallization. On the other hand, we note that in contrast to conventional crystallization, the association of crystals in the form of networks have become one of particular relevance of interests on the mesoscale. In this context, the form of hierarchical structures becomes inevitable: the occurrence of hierarchical structures is a kinetically favoured event and will boost up the macroscopic performance of materials in some cases (e.g. spider silk fibers). In the framework of crystal networks, the key structural parameters that characterize crystal networks and the corresponding macroscopic performance of mesoscopic materials are among the main concerns. In this regard, a comprehensive summary on the definition and classification of various crystal networks and different levels was given. In particular, the four different structural parameters, namely, topology, correlation length, ordering and structural interaction, allow for the first time the quantitative characterization of the correlation between the hierarchical network structure versus the function and performance of soft matter.
Regarding the formation mechanism, we provided an overview on the main mechanisms of conventional crystallization, i.e. nucleation, the birth-and-spread and the spiral growth mechanisms. These were further extended to the description of crystal network formation. Moreover, it was identified that there are four typical pathways in network construction, namely, one-step, two-step, mixed mode of assembly, and foreign molecule mediated assembly.
We note that the fundamental knowledge acquired will only make sense if it can be applied to engineer or functionalize materials in effective and controllable manners. In this regard, the elegant engineering of materials should be based on a good understanding of the formation of crystal networks and the correlation between the structure and the performance of materials, and the formation kinetics. To achieve some particular performance, the engineering of soft materials can be implemented by mesoscopic crystal network (re)construction. This can be achieved by various means, such as thermal, precipitate, chemical, sonication stimuli, across different levels of structures.
Spider dragline silk fibers are a typical example of high performance soft materials. It was found that the knowledge of the hierarchical crystal networks and the four structural parameters should be able to decode the structural information, leading to the unusual performance-structure correlation. Within this framework, both spider and silkworm silk fibers were inferred to consist of a bundle of twisted nano-fibrils, leading to strong fibril–fibril (crystal network) interactions. This gives rise to significant enhancement of the toughness of fibers. On the other hand, the ordering and the correlation length of β-nano crystallites in the molecular crystallite networks at the nano-fibril level have a direct impact on the breaking stress of silk fibers. The fact that a better alignment of β-crystallites, a larger number of β-crystallites within a cross section of a nano-fibril and a smaller effective loading area of a peptide chain will correlatively lead to stronger silk fibers can be explained and predicted within the framework of the crystal network model. Evidently, the knowledge obtained will shed light on how to obtain an ultra-performance of soft materials from a structural point of view.
This paper provides a comprehensive overview on how to examine the “non-crystalline” matter by “crystalline eyes”. On the one hand, this study will open up a new dimension of research for the crystallization community. The theories of crystallization can be further developed to resolve some key issues and to address the doubts arising from the soft materials research community. On the other hand, such efforts also produce new research topics for people from the crystallization community to work on. In particular, the quantitative description for crystal networks requires more effort and continuous attention. Furthermore, knowledge of the crystal networks should be translated in such a way that it can facilitate functionalization and rational design of mesoscopic materials in a more controllable manner.
Acknowledgements
This study is financially supported by NUS AcRF Tier 1 (R-144-000-348-112), National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 21404087, U1405226), Fujian Provincial Department of Science & Technology (2014H6022, 2015J05109) and the 1000 Talents Program from Xiamen University.
Notes and references

  (a) 
            G. Gibbs, Collected Works. Vol. I: Thermodynamics Longmans and Green, Longmans,  1928 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Farkas, Z. Phys. Chem., 1927, 125, 236–242 CAS .

  (a) R. Becker and W. Döring, Ann. Phys., 1935, 416, 719–752 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. B. Zeldovich, Acta Physicochim. URSS, 1943, 18, 1–22 CAS .
J. Hemminger, G. Crabtre and J. Sarrao, A Report from the Basic Energy Sciences Advisory Committee, Tech. Rep, 2012, 1601–1606.

          J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, in Soft Fibrillar Materials: fabrication and applications, ed. J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 163–182 Search PubMed .

          B. Lewis and J. C. Anderson, Nucleation and growth of thin films, Academic Press, New York,  1978 Search PubMed .

  (a) J.-L. Li, B. Yuan, X.-Y. Liu, R.-Y. Wang and X.-G. Wang, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 435 RSC ; 
  (b) F. Vollrath and D. P. Knight, Nature, 2001, 410, 541–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) D. Heberer, A. Keller and V. Percec, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1995, 33, 1877–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Y. Xiong, X. Y. Liu, J. L. Li and M. W. Vallon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 5558–5563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pernetti, K. van Malssen, D. Kalnin and E. Flöter, Food Hydrocolloids, 2007, 21, 855–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. F. C. Lim, X. Y. Liu, L. Kang, P. C. L. Ho, Y. W. Chan and S. Y. Chan, Int. J. Pharm., 2006, 311, 157–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Kang, X. Liu, P. Sawant, P. Ho, Y. Chan and S. Chan, J. Controlled Release, 2005, 106, 88–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Wang, X. Y. Liu, Y. J. Chuah, J. C. H. Goh, J. L. Li and H. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1431–1433 RSC ; 
  (b) B. Kundu, R. Rajkhowa, S. C. Kundu and X. Wang, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 457–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ajayaghosh, V. K. Praveen and C. Vijayakumar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 109–122 RSC .
K. K. Kartha, S. S. Babu, S. Srinivasan and A. Ajayaghosh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4834–4841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. van Bommel, A. Friggeri and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 980–999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Carretti, M. Bonini, L. Dei, B. H. Berrie, L. V. Angelova, P. Baglioni and R. G. Weiss, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 751–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S.-M. Lee, E. Pippel, U. Gosele, C. Dresbach, Y. Qin, C. V. Chandran, T. Brauniger, G. Hause and M. Knez, Science, 2009, 324, 488–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Becker, E. Oroudjev, S. Mutz, J. P. Cleveland, P. K. Hansma, C. Y. Hayashi, D. E. Makarov and H. G. Hansma, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 278–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S.-T. Dictionary, McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., New York,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. Albert and A.-L. Barabási, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 47 CrossRef .
G. Xu, L. Gong, Z. Yang and X. Liu, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 2116–2123 RSC .

  (a) X. Y. Liu and P. D. Sawant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3518–3520 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Y. Liu and P. D. Sawant, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 374–377 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Y. Liu and P. D. Sawant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 421–426 CrossRef ; 
  (d) Y. Liu, R.-Y. Wang, J.-L. Li, B. Yuan, M. Han, P. Wang and X.-Y. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 5402–5408 RSC ; 
  (e) X. Huang, P. Terech, S. R. Raghavan and R. G. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4336–4344 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) 
            K. L. Caran, D. C. Lee and R. G. Weiss, in Soft Fibrillar Materials: fabrication and applications, ed. J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 3–75 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) 
            J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, in Soft Fibrillar Materials: fabrication and applications, ed. J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 77–114 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Liu and P. D. Sawant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 421–426 CrossRef .
R. Lam, L. Quaroni, T. Pederson and M. A. Rogers, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 404–408 RSC .
H. C. Wang, X. Y. Liu, W. L. Lu, A. Chang, Q. Zhang, B. C. Goh and H. S. Lee, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2006, 62, 44–51 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) 
            A. A. Chernov, Modern crystallography, Springer,  1984 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            B. Mutaftschiev, Handbook on Crystal Growth, ed. D. T. J. Hurle, North Holland, Amsterdam,  1993, pp. 189–245 Search PubMed .
X.-Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11550–11558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, X. Y. Liu and C. S. Strom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2252–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rogers and A. G. Marangoni, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 4596–4601 CAS .

          X. Y. Liu and Y. Y. Diao, in Bioinspiration: From Nano to Micro Scales, ed. X. Y. Liu, Springer, New York,  2012, p. 249 Search PubMed .
H. Jiang, X.-Y. Liu, C. T. Lim and C. Y. Hsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 163901 CrossRef PubMed .

          X. Y. Liu, in Low Molecular Mass Gelators: Design, Self-Assembly, Function, ed. F. Frédéric, Springer, Berlin,  2005, vol. 256, pp. 1–37 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Xiong, X.-Y. Liu, J.-L. Li and M. W. Vallon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 5558–5563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Li, X.-Y. Liu, X.-G. Wang and R.-Y. Wang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7820–7827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Sawant and X.-Y. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3793–3798 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Liu and P. D. Sawant, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 114, 3793–3797 CrossRef .
P. Bennema, X. Y. Liu, K. Lewtas, R. Tack, J. Rijpkema and K. Roberts, J. Cryst. Growth, 1992, 121, 679–696 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. A. Foster, M.-O. M. Piepenbrock, G. O. Lloyd, N. Clarke, J. A. Howard and J. W. Steed, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1037–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. F. C. Lim, X. Y. Liu, L. Kang, P. C. L. Ho and S. Y. Chan, Int. J. Pharm., 2008, 358, 102–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            S. B. W. j. Yan and L. F. Kang, in Soft Fibrillar Materials: fabrication and applications, ed. J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 129–162 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, Science, 2010, 329, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) D. N. Rockwood, R. C. Preda, T. Yücel, X. Wang, M. L. Lovett and D. L. Kaplan, Nat. Protoc., 2011, 6, 1612–1631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Liu, P. D. Sawant, W. B. Tan, I. Noor, C. Pramesti and B. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 15055–15063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Ye, X. Xin, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3214–3220 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Ye, D. Zheng, M. Lv, C. Chen, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3039–3044 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Ye, H. Y. Liu, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Small, 2013, 9, 312–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Ye, C. Chen, M. Lv, D. Zheng, W. Guo and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6577–6583 RSC .

          X. Y. Liu, Bioinspiration: From Nano to Micro Scales, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .
X. D. Zhao, H. M. Fan, X. Y. Liu, H. Pan and H. Y. Xu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3224–3228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Du, G. W. Toh and X. Y. Liu, in Bioinspiration: From Nano to Micro Scales, ed. X. Y. Liu, Springer, New York,  2012, pp. 57–106 Search PubMed .
H. Jiang and X.-Y. Liu, J. Biol. Chem., 2004, 279, 41286–41293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Y. Liu and S. W. Lim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 888–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Jiang, X.-Y. Liu, G. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Biol. Chem., 2005, 280, 42061–42066 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Liu, H. Jiang and X.-Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9085–9089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Shi, X. Y. Liu, J. L. Li, C. S. Strom and H. Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 4549–4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Diao, X. Y. Liu, G. W. Toh, L. Shi and J. Zi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5373–5380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Y. Diao and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1354–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            J. Zi, B. Q. Dong, T. R. Zhan and X. H. Liu, in Bioinspiration: From Nano to Micro Scales, ed. X. Y. Liu, Springer, New York,  2012, pp. 221–276 Search PubMed .

  (a) B. Yuan, J.-L. Li, X. Y. Liu, Y.-Q. Ma and Y. J. Wang, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 5187–5193 RSC ; 
  (b) B. Yuan, J.-L. Li, X. Y. Liu, Y.-Q. Ma and H.-Y. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2793–2795 RSC ; 
  (c) B. Yuan, X.-Y. Liu, J.-L. Li and H.-Y. Xu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1708–1713 RSC .

  (a) J. W. Gibbs, Trans. Conn. Acad. Arts Sci., 1876, 3, 108–248 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. W. Gibbs, Trans. Conn. Acad. Arts Sci., 1878, 343–524 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) T. H. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1308–1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) T. H. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2324–2347 RSC ; 
  (e) X.-Y. Liu, P. Bennema and J. Van der Eerden, Nature, 1992, 356, 778–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7337–7345 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            X. Y. Liu, in Advances in Crystal Growth Research, ed. K. Sato, Y. Furukawa and K. Nakajima, Elsevier Science, B.V., Amsterdam,  2001, pp. 42–61 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) K.-Q. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, Nature, 2004, 429, 739–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. S. Strom, X. Y. Liu and Z. C. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 428–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            X. Y. Liu, in Nanoscale structure and assembly at solid-fluid interfaces, ed. J. J. D. X. Y. Liu, Springer, London,  2004, vol. I, pp. 109–175 Search PubMed .
T. H. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13520–13526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) 
            X. Y. Liu, in Advances in Crystal Growth Research, ed. K. N. K. Sato and Y. Furukawa, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, the Netherlands,  2001, pp. 42–61 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Liu, K. Maiwa and K. Tsukamoto, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 1870–1879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Du, X. Y. Liu, J. Narayanan, L. Li, M. L. M. Lim and D. Li, Biophys. J., 2006, 91, 4528–4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Ostwald, J. Phys. Chem., 1879, 22, 289–330 Search PubMed .

  (a) I. M. Weiss, N. Tuross, L. Addadi and S. Weiner, J. Exp. Zool., 2002, 293, 478–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Addadi, S. Raz and S. Weiner, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 959–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Addadi and S. Weiner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1992, 31, 153–169 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) S. E. Wolf, I. Lieberwirth, F. Natalio, J.-F. Bardeau, N. Delorme, F. Emmerling, R. Barrea, M. Kappl and F. Marin, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 159, 433–448 RSC .
D. Kashchiev, P. G. Vekilov and A. B. Kolomeisky, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 244706 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Pan, X. Y. Liu, R. Tang and H. Y. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7415–7417 RSC .
K. Sugiyasu, N. Fujita and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 116, 1249–1253 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Frank, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1949, 5, 48–54 RSC .
W.-K. Burton, N. Cabrera and F. Frank, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1951, 299–358 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bennema, J. Cryst. Growth, 1984, 69, 182–197 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Liu, E. Boek, W. Briels and P. Bennema, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 103, 3747–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Liu, E. Boek, W. Briels and P. Bennema, Nature, 1995, 374, 342–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Cölfen and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5576–5591 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) V. M. Yuwono, N. D. Burrows, J. A. Soltis and R. L. Penn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2163–2165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, D. Görl, V. Stepanenko and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1270–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3038 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, G. Ma and X. Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 16393–16399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhai, Y. Quan, L. Li, X.-Y. Liu, X. Xu and R. Tang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3006–3012 RSC .

  (a) J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 21 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. L. Li, X. Y. Liu, C. S. Strom and J. Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2574–2578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vandewalle and M. Ausloos, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1997, 55, 94–98 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lam, L. Quaroni, T. Pedersen and M. A. Rogers, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 404–408 RSC .

  (a) J.-Y. Xiong, J. Narayanan, X.-Y. Liu, T. K. Chong, S. B. Chen and T.-S. Chung, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5638–5643 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Xiong, X. Liu, J. Li, J. Narayanan and R. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 083106 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) X. Y. Liu and P. D. Sawant, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3641–3645 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J.-L. Li, X.-Y. Liu, R.-Y. Wang and J.-Y. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24231–24235 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J.-L. Li and X.-Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 113103 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) R.-Y. Wang, X.-Y. Liu, J. Narayanan, J.-Y. Xiong and J.-L. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25797–25802 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) H.-B. Xia, X.-Y. Liu and K.-Q. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2432–2434 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Schenning, F. B. Benneker, H. P. Geurts, X. Y. Liu and R. J. Nolte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8549–8552 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Y. Liu, P. Bennema, L. A. Meijer and M. S. Couto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 220, 53–58 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Y. Liu and P. Bennema, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1993, 48, 2006–2015 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Y. Liu, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1994, 49, 583–590 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. Y. Liu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 2810–2817 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) X. Y. Liu, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 1373–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) X. Y. Liu, J. Cryst. Growth, 1997, 174, 380–385 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15467–15472 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) X. Y. Liu, P. D. Sawant, W. B. Tan, I. B. M. Noor, C. Pramesti and B. H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 15055–15063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Murata, M. Aoki, T. Suzuki, T. Harada, H. Kawabata, T. Komori, F. Ohseto, K. Ueda and S. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 6664–6676 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuchiya, Y. Orihara, Y. Kondo, N. Yoshino, T. Ohkubo, H. Sakai and M. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12282–12283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. L. Wu, B. Ondruschka and G. Cravotto, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8083–8087 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. M. Mojtahedi, M. Javadpour and M. S. Abaee, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2008, 15, 828–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Sanchez, H. Arribart and M. M. G. Guille, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 277–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            J. L. Atwood and J. W. Steed, Encyclopedia of supramolecular chemistry, CRC Press,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) N. M. Sangeetha and U. Maitra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 821–836 RSC ; 
  (d) T. Naota and H. Koori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9324–9325 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) K. Isozaki, H. Takaya and T. Naota, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2855–2857 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) J. Wu, T. Yi, T. Shu, M. Yu, Z. Zhou, M. Xu, Y. Zhou, H. Zhang, J. Han, F. Li and C. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1063–1067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. J. Paulusse, D. J. M. van Beek and R. P. Sijbesma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2392–2397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-Y. Wang, X.-Y. Liu and J.-L. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3286–3291 CAS .
C. Wang, D. Zhang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16372–16373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, P. He, J. Yan, X. Fang, J. Peng, K. Liu and Y. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) O. E. Perez and A. M. Pilosof, Food Res. Int., 2004, 37, 102–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Dubey, P. Letourneau and R. Tranquillo, Biomaterials, 2001, 22, 1065–1075 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Li and X.-Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15467–15472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Nguyen, Q. L. Huang, Z. Yang, N. Lin, G. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 1039–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Wang, X. Y. Liu and J. L. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3286–3291 CAS .
R. Y. Wang, X. Y. Liu, J. Y. Xiong and J. L. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7275–7280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) N. Lin, X. Y. Liu, Y. Y. Diao, H. Xu, C. Chen, X. Ouyang, H. Yang and W. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 361–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. C. Tansil, Y. Li, C. P. Teng, S. Zhang, K. Y. Win, X. Chen, X. Y. Liu and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1463–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. Lin, Z. Meng, G. W. Toh, Y. Zhen, Y. Diao, H. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 1205–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Vepari and D. L. Kaplan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 991–1007 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            N. Du and X. Y. Liu, in Soft Fibrillar Materials: Fabrication and Applications, ed. J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 185–208 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            N. B. Lin, X. Y. Liu, H. Y. Xu, G. Y. W. Toh and J. L. Li, in Soft Fibrillar Materials: fabrication and applications, ed. J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2013, pp. 209–231 Search PubMed .
F. Vollrath, B. Madsen and Z. Shao, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2001, 268, 2339–2346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Du, Z. Yang, X. Y. Liu, Y. Li and H. Y. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 772–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shao and F. Vollrath, Nature, 2002, 418, 741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, L. Gong, Z. Yang and X. Liu, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 2116–2123 RSC .
X. Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 39–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Takahashi, in Silk polymers-Materials Science and Biotechnology, ed. D. L. Kaplan, W. W. Adams, B. Farmer and C. Viney, ACS Books, Washington, DC,  1994 Search PubMed .

          N. T. M. A. Becker, in Silk polymers-Materials Science and Biotechnology, ed. W. W. Adams, D. L. Kaplan, B. Farmer and C. Viney, ACS Books, Washington, DC,  1994 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. Sponner, D. Porter and F. Vollrath, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 116–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Alfrey and H. Mark, J. Phys. Chem., 1942, 46, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .

          B. A. G. Schrauwen, PhD thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology,  2003 Search PubMed .
J. Moore, Br. J. Appl. Phys., 1950, 1, 6–9 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Vollrath, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 1999, 24, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Brown, C. Harnagea, H. S. Gill, A. J. Price, E. Traversa, S. Licoccia and F. Rosei, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1961–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Daniels, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1945, 183, 405–435 CrossRef .
Y. Termonia, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 7378–7381 CrossRef CAS .

          K. B. Broberg, Cracks and fracture, Academic Press,  1999 Search PubMed .

          T. L. Anderson, Fracture mechanics: fundamentals and applications, CRC press,  2005 Search PubMed .

          J. P. Hirth and J. Lothe, Theory of dislocations, Krieger Publishing Company, New York,  1982 Search PubMed .
T. Lefevre, J. Leclerc, J.-F. Rioux-Dube, T. Buffeteau, M.-C. Paquin, M.-E. Rousseau, I. Cloutier, M. Auger, S. M. Gagne, S. Boudreault, C. Cloutier and M. Pezolet, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 2342–2344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Lin, Q. Deng, X.-Y. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1216–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Teule, Y. G. Miao, B. H. Sohn, Y. S. Kim, J. J. Hull, M. J. Fraser, R. V. Lewis and D. L. Jarvis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 923–928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Two videos of the reeling process of silkworm and spider. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00074bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Naibo Lin
	Lin Naibo is currently an assistant professor at Xiamen University, China. He received his PhD (2011) from Donghua University under the supervision of Professor Xiang-Yang Liu and Professor Hongyao Xu, studying the structure and property of silk fibers. During 2012–2013, he was a lecturer at Shanghai Institute of Technology. Since 2013, he has been with the Research Institute for Biomimetics and Soft Matter, Xiamen University. Dr Lin's research interests focus on the crystal network of functional fibers and its applications.

Xiang Yang Liu
	Prof. Xiang Yang Liu received his PhD degree with the cum laude title from the Radboud University Nijmegen (Netherlands), in 1993. Prof. Liu is the tenured full Professor in NUS, and currently the State Distinguished Professor for the 1000 Talents Program, Chair Prof. of the Changjiang Scholars Program. His research interests range from biomimetics and crystallization to soft matters. He has authored numerous books and more than 200 peer prestige papers, such as Nature, and has edited four books. He has been cited by top websites and newspapers several hundreds of times. His international standing can be substantiated by his delivery of more than 90 plenary/keynote or invited talks in international conferences, organization of >25 international conferences/symposia, numerous awards, and the 5th President of the Asia Association for Crystal Growth and Crystal Technology, the councilor of the International Organization of Crystal Growth.

 	Fig. 1  “Yin”-”Yang” fish of materials research: the structure and performance of materials can be considered as the basic two elements of “Yin” and “Yang” in Taoism: On the one hand, the structure of materials determines the performance. On the other hand, the outstanding performance of materials is the reflection of some specific structures. More specifically, such a connection can be described in some way by the four factors: topology, correlation length (correlation L), interaction and ordering.	 

 	Fig. 2  Multilevel structure of crystal networks.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Comparison between the hierarchical network of soft materials and the silk fibre: (a) “single” crystal network and nano-fibril in silk; (b) multi-domain fibre network and fibril bundle. (B) Schematic illustration of three typical hierarchical structures: (a) a multi-domain system, in which the domain–domain interaction is weak or zero; (b) a multi-domain system, in which the domain–domain interaction is strong or infinite. Modified from ref. 17.	 



 Side packing	
 Side packing	
Linear: compact-fully connected
Porous-partially connected
	
 Biominerals, hybrid materials etc.


	
 Tip split	Star network 1: tree-like network	
 Macromolecules, gels, biominerals, organic and inorganic crystals.

 Side Merging/branching	
 Side split	Star network 2:	
 Macromolecules, gels, biominerals etc.

 Side Merging	
 Closed Loop	Mesh network: fully connected	
 Macromolecules, gels, silks etc.

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of soft materials and the rheological properties. (b) Definition of the gelling point tg′ and tg. (c) and (d) illustrate the gelation capacity change due to the variation of topological patterns. (c) Separate side fibers occurring in a L-DHL/DIOP system. (L-DHL: lanosta-8,24-dien-3β-ol:24,25-dihydrolanosterol = 56:44; DIOP: di-(2-ethyl-hexyl)phthalate (C8H17COO)2C6H4). This system gives rise to an opaque flowing viscous liquid, as shown in the picture on the right upper corner. (d) Side packing and tip splitting patterns give rise to the interconnected fiber networks in a L-DHL/DIOP gel after adding 0.004 wt% EVACP. The length of the bar: 1 μm. The addition of EVACP leads to the formation of interconnected crystal networks and a clear and solid gel, as shown in the picture on the right upper corner.34 Scale bar: 1 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35; copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of TiO2: (a) nanoparticles, (b) smooth nanotubes, (c) heterogeneous nanotubes, (d) nanorods (inset is the top view), (e) flower-like structures, and (f) nanospherulites. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 36; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Nanoparticles	6.64
Smooth nanotubes	4.34
Heterogeneous/heterojunction nanotubes	7.24
Nanorods	3.03
Flower-like structures	4.07
Nanospherulites	8.50


L-MLS	(13 ± 2) × 10
S-MLS	(8 ± 1) × 10
BCS	(4 ± 1) × 10
TNS	0

 	Fig. 6  (A) (a–d) SEM images of various MnO2 patterned films: the mesh-like structure (MLS), the tilted nanorod structure (TNS), and the ball cactus-like structure (BCS) films. The insets show the dragging water droplet. The black arrow indicates the drawing direction. (a, b) MLS of a large (L-MLS) and a small mesh size (S-MLS). (c) TNS film. (d) BCS film. (B) Schematic illustration of TCL on MnO2 films. The red lines demonstrate the possible solid–liquid–air interface contact line and the blue lines demonstrate the liquid–air boundary for a droplet, respectively. (a) A continuous contact line forms on the large MLS, which exhibits a large adhesion force. (b) TCL on small MLS (S-MLS). (c) Dash-line like TCL forms on BCS. (d) A highly discontinuous dot-like TCL forms on TNS, which exhibits extremely small adhesion. (e) High contrast black and white images converted from SEM images of L-MLS, S-MLS, BCS, and TNS in (A). Reprinted with the permission from ref. 38; copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  The correlation between mechanical properties and the ordering of mineral crystallites within a dental sample. The hardness (H) and elastic (E) modulus vs. alignment. The solid circles and the hollow circles represent the data measured from dental enamel and dentin, respectively. φ- the ordering parameter measured by small angle X-ray scattering. The complete alignment: φ = 100%; the completely disordered arrangement: φ = 0. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 8  Crack stopper-parallel packing of lamella or needle-like crystals will stop the crack line to penetrate the bundled crystallites. (a) The mosaic structure of a crystal causes the propagation of a crack line, leading to breakage of the crystal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer. (b) The parallel packing of lamella or needle-like crystallites in a crystallite assembly will stop the propagation of the crack line from one crystallite to the adjacent crystallites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer. (c) Structural enforcement by molecular “glues”: the proteins between the parallel HAP crystallites adhere to the adjacent crystallites. Once a crack occurs in the middle of the assembly of the parallel crystallites, the neighbouring adhered crystallites will bypass the loading force through the crack and reconnect the two broken portions of the crystallites.	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration of the influence of the correlation length on G. (a) The correlation length ξ on G′ of gels with single fiber networks. The inset is the log–log plot of G′ vs. ξ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42; copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) The transition of the G′ of a material from Gcrystnet′ to Gdomain′ as the total number ((L/ξ)3) of domains within the given system increases in the case of weak domain–domain interaction (L: the length of the system). Reprinted with permission from ref. 13; copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (c) The transition of the G′ of a material from Gcrystnet′ to Gdomain′ with the total number ((L/ξ)3) of domains within the given system in the case of strong domain–domain interaction.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) The creation of structural colour to silk fabrics. The two examples of silk fabrics with structural red (a) and golden (b) colours were fabricated using 240 nm and 270 nm self-assembled colloidal crystals, respectively. (B) The measured bi-structural-colour reflectance spectra. (a–d) are the reflectance spectra for silk fibroin inverse opals fabricated by 350 nm, 450 nm, 500 nm, and 700 nm colloidal spheres, respectively. The insets of a, c and d are the orange, purple and red colours observed under an optical microscope for 350 nm, 500 nm and 700 nm silk fibroin inverse opals, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43; copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 
Δμ = μambienti − μcrystal	(1)
μi = μ0i + kBTlnai ≈ μ0i + kBTlnCi	(2)
	(3)
σ = (ai − aeqi)/aeqi ≈ (Ci − Ceqi)/Ceqi	(4)
Δμ/kBT = ln(1 + σ) ≅ σ (in the case of σ ≪ 1)	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Crystallization normally takes place via nucleation, followed by the growth of crystals. Nucleation is a kinetic process of overcoming the nucleation barrier, which is the outcome of the occurrence of the surface free energy γ. (b) If a barrier is too high, nature can always find a multiple step path to lower the barriers to bypass the single step process. (c) For nucleation on a substrate or the multiple step crystallization where an intermediate phase is inset, a high energy barrier is replaced by one or several much lower energy barriers. This accelerates the kinetic process. Parts of images reprinted with permission from ref. 50; copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 
	(7)
f(m) = ¼(2 − 3m + m3)	(8)
m = (γsf − γsc)/γcf ≈ cosθ (−1 ≤ m ≤ 1)	(9)
	(10)
f′′(m) = ½(1 − m)	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 12  The multi-step crystallization of calcium phosphate phases. The phase and morphology evolution of calcium phosphate minerals: (a–c) TEM images and SAED patterns of the precipitates. (a) Initially formed amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) spheres. Bar: 1 μm and 100 nm. (b) Intermediate state of ACP. Bar: 1 μm and 100 nm. (c) Final hydroxyapatite (HAP) spherulite. Bar: 1 μm and 200 nm. (d–i) SEM images of the evolution of ACP. (d) 3 min. (e–g) 67–73 min. (h) 90 min. (i) 7 h. Bar: (d–f) 100 nm; (g) 200 nm; (h and i) 1 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58; copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 13  Illustration of the (A) the birth-and-spread model. The model assumes following factors: (1) there is no intergrowth between 2D nuclei; (2) the lateral spreading velocity V* is constant, independent of the island size; (3) nuclei can be born anywhere around nucleating particles, which can occur on incomplete layers as well as on islands. (B) The screw dislocation model of nucleation and growth of crystals. (a)–(d) of (B) show the process of crystal growth through the screw dislocation model; (C) the supersaturation dependence of crystal growth rate through the two models. Herein, we will review the two most commonly encountered 2D nucleation growth mechanisms: the birth-and-spread mechanism and the screw dislocation mechanism.	 
R ∼ C1(σ)2/3[ln(1 + σ)]1/6 ∼ σ	(14)
R ≅ Aσ12	(15)
σ1 = 2πΩγcf/(kTλs)	(16)
R ≅ A′σ (A′ = Aσ1)	(17)

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of two typical pathways of a crystal network assembly: (a) two-step process of assembly; (b) one step process of assembly; and (c) mixed mode of assembly.	 

 	Fig. 15  Examples of the two-step process of assembly as illustrated in Fig. 14a. (A) Self-assembled colloidal crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2014 Springer. (B) Cryo-TEM images of the lateral fusion process of the adjacent nanofibers into nanosheet-like crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65; copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Illustration of the assembly of hydroxyapatite; (b) and (c) compact and ordered assembly of rod-like crystallites obtained at relatively low supersaturation in regime II; Scale bars: 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  General gastropod species have right-handed shells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68; copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Molecular guided construction of nanohelixes. Organic molecules regulating the architecture of biominerals in a bio-mineralization system of a racemic mixture of chiral amphiphile (bis-(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate sodium salt, AOT) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) in supersaturated calcium phosphate (CaP) solutions. (a) Homochiral cluster consisted of R-helixes exclusively. (b) Homochiral cluster consisted of L-helixes exclusively. (c) Homochiral helix networks; circles indicate the cluster centers in the net; the insert is a magnification of the rectangular region, showing the spiral details of the L-enantiomers. (d) Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) patterns of the helixes. d = 3.34 nm and d = 1.65 nm represented the first and second diffractions of the lamellar structure in the helixes, respectively. The TEM image in the inset shows that each organic (light line)–inorganic (dark line) unit had a uniform width of 3.3 nm and the dimension of an AOT bilayer was 1.6 nm (bar = 10 nm). (e) and (f) TEM and schemes of the L- and R-helix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68; copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of assembly and aggregation under the influence of an ordered structure. (b) Supersaturation driven interfacial structure mismatch nucleation: the structural match between the daughter crystals and the parent crystal will become poor as the supersaturation increases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2012 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 20  The nucleation barrier of disordered/mismatch packing with supersaturation, compared to ordered/matched packing.	 
m = 1 − γmis/γcf	(18)

 	Fig. 21  (a) Illustration of crystal network formation by fiber tip splitting/branching. Branching occurs via crystallographic mismatch branching. Apart from the crystalline fibers, which occur via three-dimensional primary nucleation, the growth of crystalline fibers is generally controlled by a 2D nucleation (birth-and-spread) growth mechanism. Due to the occurrence of thermodynamic, chemical, sound, and other stimuli, the mistakes or defects would occur on the growing layers at the tip of fibers. This leads to the crystallographic mismatch branching, and the modification of topology of fibres. The continuous branching in a given sequence will give rise to the formation of fiber networks, as summarized in the second row of Table 1. (b) The correlation between ln[〈ξ〉(Δμ/kT)−1] and 1/(Δμ/kT)2 for a gel formed with a polymer additive at 20 °C. The linear relationship confirms the governing role of the crystallographic mismatch branching mechanism in the formation of organized interconnecting fiber networks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35; copyright 2002, American Chemical Society.	 
〈ξ〉 ∼ R·tg ∼ R/J	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 22  Illustrations of network construction by the topology variation of crystallites: (a) creating branching/networking or (c) tuning the branching density; (b) SEM image of a gel of unbranched L-DHL fibers formed in DIOP in the absence of additive (left image) and the corresponding fiber network of L-DHL formed in the presence of EVACP (right image); (d) SEM images of enhanced tip branching by adding more additive EVACP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35; copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Illustration of the effects of supersaturation and other stimuli on energy barrier for mismatch nucleation. (B) Illustration of fiber growth and branching through the birth-and-spread mode; branching can be enhanced with stimuli. (C) SEM images: enhanced tip branching by raising the thermodynamic driving force (the driving force of B is higher than that of A); surfactant-promoted fiber tip branching C and side branching (HSA fibers formed in lanosterol without a surfactant and D with Tween 80); enhanced side branching by surfactant: GP-1 fibers formed in PG, E without surfactant, F with increasing concentration of span 20. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69b and ref. 24; copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH and copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. (D) The effect of supersaturation on the correlation length of fiber networks. A small-molecule organic gelator, N-lauroyl-L-glutamic acid di-n-butylamide, grown from an isostearyl alcohol solution is used. Fitting of the data is based on eqn (20). Reprinted with permission from ref. 6c; copyright 2005, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Illustration of the micro/nanostructure engineering of soft functional materials: the control of kinetic pathway by ultrasound (route 2) with respect to normal fiber network formation (route 1). (B) SEM images of GP-1/PG gel samples. (a) Spherulitic domains formed without ultrasound; (b) 3D interconnected fiber network formed with 1 minute of sonication treatment. Scale bar: 500 nm. (c) The storage modulus G′ of the GP-1/PG gels formed without ultrasound (○) and with ultrasound (■). Reprinted with permission from ref. 81; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Illustration of controlling the size and number density of single networks in a multi-domain network. Engineering multi-domain networks through controlling primary nucleation by (b) reducing the thermodynamic driving force or (c) using a polymer additive PMMMA. The concentration of GP-1 was fixed for both (b) and (c). For (c), the temperature for gelation was fixed at 40 °C. Gels were formed by GP-1 in PG. (a) and (b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 6a; copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. Images in (c) are reprinted with permission from ref. 85; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Rheological evolution and (b) dependence of the storage modulus G′ on the seeding density of silk fibroin solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86; copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 27  Conversion of a multi-domain fiber network to a “single” crystal fibrous network through ultrasound-assisted fiber network formation. Schematic description of the formation of spherulites (opaque liquid) through the normal thermal processing and the formation of an interconnecting fiber network through an ultrasonic stimulus. T1 > Tc > T5 > T4 = T2 > T3, Tc is defined as the critical temperature, above which the gelator is totally dissolved. For ultrasound treatment, seeds are formed by mechanically breaking down the spherulites into fiber segments by ultrasound. Elevating the temperature from T4 to T5 (low thermodynamic driving force) leads to loose branching of the fibre networks, causing the interpenetration and interlocking of different crystal networks. The domain networks will behave like a single crystal network (gelation). Photographs are reprinted with permission from ref. 88; copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Illustration of the strategy of controlling the mechanical property of silk fibroin hydrogels by controlling the hierarchical network structures, i.e. varying the density of nucleation centers. (a) Illustration of the ultrasound promotion of the primary nucleation and the formation of regenerated silkworm silk fibroin (RSF) networks and gels, which gives rise to a high density of primary nucleation and RSF networks/domains. (b) Ultrasound causes a high seeding (nucleation) density of RSF networks/domains (△) and a lower G′ than the gels without ultrasound (□). Reprinted with permission from ref. 86; copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  Spider silk and cocoon silk fibres and regenerated silk derivatives, i.e. silk hydrogels, films, and sponges, are soft materials with molecular β-crystal networks. In terms of mesoscopic materials assembly/engineering, one can acquire functionalized silk fibroin based materials, i.e. silk photonic crystals and light emission materials-fluorescent silk fibres, films, and sponges. They are applicable in the areas of biomedicine, bioimaging, tissue engineering etc.9a,43,44,86,89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 43, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 30  Comparison of toughness between different fibers. The data were quoted from ref. 92.	 

 	Fig. 31  The hierarchical structure of Bombyx mori silkworm and Nephila pilipes spider dragline silk fibers. (a) Both the silkworm silk and spider dragline fiber are composed of numerous interlocking nano-fibrils. Inside the nano-fibrils, the β-crystallites are connected by the amorphous chains to form a network. The β-crystallite is composed of stacked β-sheets with the peptide chains connected by the hydrogen bonds in each sheet. The yellow box indicates the unit cell of the β-crystallites and the coordinate indicates a (inter-sheet), b (inter-chain) and c directions. (b) AFM image of nano-fibrillar structure in B. mori silkworm silk with a sequence of associated segments (scale bar: 100 nm). The β-structure sequence is GAGAGSGAAS(GAGAGS)n, n = 1–11 for B. mori silkworm silks and GAGA(A)n, n = 4–6 for N. pilipes spider silks (G: glycine, A: alanine, and S: serine).95 Regarding the β nanocrystallites, the lattice constants of the orthogonal unit cell of β-crystallites (Fig. 32A) are a = 0.938 nm, b = 0.949 nm, c = 0.698 nm for silkworm B. mori silks,96 and a = 1.03 nm, b = 0.944 nm, b = 0.695 nm for spider Nephila dragline silks.97 As shown, the β-crystallites serve as the linkages connecting different silk protein molecular chains in nanofibrils. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 


Silkworm cocoon silk	42	40	0.84	2.3	4.1	10.3
Spider dragline silk	38	17	0.93	2.1	2.7	6.5

 	Fig. 32  (A) Comparison of the typical stress–strain curves of silk fibers and spider N. pilipes by forced silking at 10 mm s−1, (curve a) draglines and (curve b) silkworm cocoon of B. mori. Spider draglines exhibit a characteristic strain-hardening feature in the non-linear region of the stress–strain curve. (B) Schematic model demonstrating how the silkworm and spider dragline fibers respond when they are subjected to stretching. There are two β-components in the alanine-rich regions of spider dragline silk: β-crystallites and intra-molecular β-sheets. The intra-molecular β-sheets are mainly responsible for the extensibility, while the β-crystallites and the orientation and density are responsible for the toughness of silk fibers. (C) Effect of tensile deformations on the β-crystallinity of spider N. pilipes dragline fibers. (A) and (C) are Reprinted with permission from ref. 92; copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 33  (A). Schematic illustration of the segmental structure of nano-fibrils. (B) (a-i–iv) Illustration of the breaking mechanism of network – nonslipping fibril bundle (N-NFB) at the nano-fibril bundle scale; (a-v) SEM image of the transverse cross section of a B. mori silkworm silk fiber after its breakage upon stretching (scale bar: 2 μm). (b-i) Schematic illustration of the bulk network (BN) model; (b-ii–iv) scenarios showing the breakage of BN by simulation; (b-v) typical stress–strain curve of the BN model; (c-i) schematic illustration of the network – slippery fibril bundle (SFB) model; (b-ii–iv) scenarios showing the breakage of SFB by simulation; (b-v) typical stress–strain curve of SFB model. In comparison with BN, the nano-fibrillar structure in N-NFB can inhibit the transverse growth of the crack; in comparison with SFB, the friction between nano-fibrils in N-NFB can prevent the longitudinal growth of the crack. These are the structural advantages of N-NFB, which make the silk fibers strong. (d) Comparison of the breaking stresses of silk fibers predicted by N-NFB, SFB and BN model. Note that the strength difference between N-NFB and BN in B-(d) can be correlated in some way to the dependence of G′ on the domain density shown in Fig. 9c, where G′ increases with the domain density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a and b) Representative SEM images of freeze-dried regenerated silk fibroin (RSF) sponges (inset: a hydrogel formed after sonication with the self-supporting behavior); (c) 2D WAXS pattern of silk fibrils. (d–f) AFM images of RSF solutions (wt/v 0.04%) at different gelation stages: (d) before ultrasonication, (e) right after ultrasonication, and (f) 30 minutes after ultrasonication. The ultrasonication time was 30 seconds. Scale bars: (a) 1 μm, (b) 100 nm, (d–f) 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86; copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 35  The influence of three structural parameters: (a) f, (b) nβ, and (c) A, on the breaking stress of the segments at the nano-fibril scale. By keeping the other parameters constant, the breaking stress of both spider dragline silk and silkworm silk fibers increases exponentially with f, or increases linearly, or decreases with A. Here, A = ∼ξ2. The striking point is that both spider silk and silkworm silk can be fitted by the same curves, meaning that the strength of the two types of fibers is governed by the similar structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Scheme for nβ and A, nβ is the number of crystallites at the cross section of a fibril. A is defined as the effective loading area of a peptide chain in the β-crystallites.	 
	(21)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Two videos of the reeling process of silkworm and spider. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00074b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
