Porous evaporators with special wettability for low-grade heat-driven water desalination  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA09193F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09193F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 702-726Porous evaporators with special wettability for low-grade heat-driven water desalination

        
          
            Zhigao 
            Zhu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Xu†
ac, 
      
        
          
            Yifei 
            Luo
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *d
aState Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, School of Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, P. R. China. E-mail: wangweirs@hit.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of New Membrane Materials, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, School of Environment and Biological Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, P. R. China
cSchool of Ecology and Environment, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China
dInnovative Center for Flexible Devices (iFLEX), Max Planck – NTU Joint Lab for Artificial Senses, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798 Singapore. E-mail: chenxd@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      18th September 2020
    , Accepted 5th November 2020First published on 9th November 2020AbstractAgainst the backdrop of global water scarcity, porous interface distillation (PID) working on macroporous evaporation materials attracts ever-growing attention in sustainable desalination. It excels itself in the ability to treat high-salinity brines and employ low-grade heat energy from industrial sources or solar energy, as well as low installation complexity and cost. In recent years, PID evaporators with special wettability, such as omniphobicity, asymmetric superwettability, superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity, are especially effective in improving distillation efficiency and operation lifetime, and much progress is made in this aspect. To provide a comprehensive overview, this review puts forward a panoramic discussion on the recent progress of hydrophobic and hydrophilic porous evaporators with special wettability for low-grade heat-driven water desalination, with focuses on material and structural designs to improve distillation efficiency and long-term durability. Current challenges and future perspectives are also provided as a guide for future research towards the practical application of PID for sustainable water desalination.Zhigao ZhuZhigao Zhu received his B.S. degree in polymer materials and engineering from Nanjing Tech University in 2012, M.S. degree in materials engineering from Donghua University in 2014 and doctorate degree in 2019 in Wang's group from Harbin Institute of Technology. He is now an associate professor in Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His research interest mainly focuses on superwettable nanofibrous membranes for oily water treatment and membrane distillation.Ying XuYing Xu received her B.S. degree in municipal engineering from North China University of Water Resources and Electric Power in 2014 and her doctorate degree in 2019 in Wang's group from Harbin Institute of Technology. She is now an assistant professor in Zhengzhou University. Her research interest mainly focuses on the synthesis of photo-thermal membranes for solar evaporation in water purification.Yifei LuoYifei Luo is a Ph.D. student in Materials Science at Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, under the supervision of Prof. Xiaodong Chen. She received her B.E. (first class honors) in Materials Engineering from NTU in 2016. Her current research focus is hydrogel-based functional materials and devices for bioelectronic applications, such as flexible electrodes, sensors, and energy storage devices.Wei WangWei Wang is a Professor in the School of Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He received his B.S. degree in chemistry in 2007 and Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry in 2012 from Jilin University (China). He started his independent research career at Harbin Institute of Technology in 2012 and was promoted to Full Professor in 2015. He used to work in Nanyang Technological University of Singapore as a research fellow and UC Berkeley as a senior visiting scholar. His research interests are mainly focused on filtration membranes and nano-chemistry for water purification.Xiaodong ChenXiaodong Chen is a Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his B.S. degree (honors) in chemistry from Fuzhou University (China) in 1999, M.S. degree (honors) in physical chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002, and Ph.D. degree (Summa Cum Laude) in biochemistry from the University of Münster (Germany) in 2006. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at Northwestern University (USA), he started his independent research career as a Singapore National Research Foundation Fellow and Nanyang Assistant Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2009. He was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure in 2013 and Full Professor in 2016. His research interests include programmable materials for energy conversion, water remediation, and integrated nano–bio interfaces.
1. Introduction
Freshwater production is one of the global concerns in the face of the shortage of water resources and escalating water pollution.1,2 United Nations estimate that more than 1.8 billion people (about 40% of the world's population) are experiencing absolute water scarcity.3 Additionally, this current trend will be more severe in the near future, driven by the ever-growing population and industrialization. To tackle this challenge, desalination technologies have been widely developed to extract freshwater from a range of high saline or contaminated waters, including seawater, brackish groundwater and wastewater, expecting to alleviate pressure on freshwater supply.4–8 Currently, reversible electrochemical desalination technologies that are based on the compensation of electric charge by ionic species are promising technologies for saline water treatment because of their cycling efficiency and reversibility, but most of them suffer from low removal capacity, efficiency and rate.9,10 Capacitive deionization (CDI) worked on electrostatic adsorption via electrochemical double-layer capacitance theory and Faraday redox reactions are also prosperously developed to treat industrial saline water, desalinate seawater and remove water-soluble radioactive substances from wastewater, but the high concentration of total dissolved solids (TDS) and high fouling potential of industrial saline wastewater are two major challenges in the CDI process, especially when desalination of high saline wastewater.11,12 Besides, reverse osmosis (RO) membrane technology is also regarded as the most energy-efficient desalination technology, accounting for 60% of global desalination capacity, because the liquid water does not undergo a phase transition with low energy consumption. Traditional thermally driven technologies, such as multi-effect distillation (MED) and multi-stage flash (MSF), account for another 34%.3,13–15 Despite the popularity of RO technology, its energy source and high-quality electrical power are not conducive to reduce the carbon footprint of desalination systems. Additionally, application of RO is also challenging in desalination of high-salinity brines (an excess of 80 g kg−1) due to the increased osmotic pressure. Therefore, large quantities of wastewaters containing concentrated pollutants will be discharged. While for traditional thermal techniques (e.g., MED and MSF), although high-salinity wastewater can be treated, these techniques are powered by high-grade heat energy (temperature generally higher than 70 °C). Unfortunately, the global waste heat is generally of much lower temperature, classified as low-grade heat. For instance, around 95% of waste heat from thermal power plants is below 42 °C and most naturally collected solar heat energy is also estimated to be below 50 °C.3 Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop a more sustainable desalination strategy capable of harvesting low-grade heat energy.
In recent years, an interesting type of interfacial distillation technology using evaporators with micrometer-sized pores, porous interface distillation (PID), draws particular attention for desalination.16–19 Steam is generated at the hotter air–water–evaporator three-phase interface and subsequently transferred through the colder air, driven by the vapor pressure gradient caused by the temperature difference. The porous structure in the evaporators provides low resistance paths for vapor diffusion or extends the air–water interface to improve the vaporization efficiency. Since the temperature difference is the primary driving factor, low-grade heat can serve as an energy source to realize distillation desalination. PID excels itself in many aspects compared with conventional desalination methods (Fig. 1). PID can employ low-grade waste-heat energy to treat high-salinity brines (excess of 80 g kg−1), which can not only lower the carbon footprint of the desalination process but also lead to additional environmental benefits.3 Additionally, PID can altogether reject non-volatile solutes, including H3BO3 and then produce high-quality water, which is a challenge for RO.20–23 Besides, PID has a relatively small areal footprint than other thermal desalination technologies and is highly suitable for small-scale and emergency desalination applications, because of its highly compact configuration and easy-to-deploy feature.24,25
 Fig. 1  Qualitative comparison of porous interfacial distillation (PID) with established desalination technologies across a wide variety of desalination performance metrics. Technologies include reverse osmosis (RO) and traditional thermal methods (multi-effect distillation and multi-stage flash). Three stars refer to excellent performance, and one star indicates poor performance. 
In fact, PID is not a new desalination technology. Its history dates back to the 1960s, when the first patent was issued in 1963 and the first journal article was published in 1967.26,27 PID technologies are divided into two categories according to working principles, which are respectively based on hydrophobic evaporators and hydrophilic evaporators (Fig. 2a). On the one hand, from the 1960s to around 2016, only hydrophobic porous membrane evaporators were applied in PID desalination processes due to the effective separation of clean vapor and polluted water. Water vapor can pass through the air-filled hydrophobic pores with low resistance, while the solutes and liquid water are rejected by the waterproofing interface, thus achieving separation (Fig. 2a). Habitually, hydrophobic PID was named membrane distillation (MD).28,29 On the other hand, from around 2016, researchers also began to pay attention to hydrophilic porous evaporators. The water-infiltrated hydrophilic evaporators can extend the air–water interface, promote heat transfer and then improve vaporization efficiency (Fig. 2a).30,31 Hydrophilic PID has no inherent separation ability, and thus commonly works in upward air-gap evaporation which is in situ generated by the photothermal effect of the evaporator surface and functions in an upward evaporation configuration, thus being very suitable for hydrophilic evaporators.32 Facing the energy and freshwater crises, most recently, in order to further qualify PID for sustainable desalination, energy utilization (distillation efficiency) and durable operation are becoming the two critical issues. It was revealed that individual wettable evaporators with unique structures were dramatically effective in improving distillation performance. For instance, hydrophobic evaporators with special wettability (omniphobic, asymmetrically superwettable, superhydrophobic/slippery, etc.) and low-tortuosity porous structure were explored to enhance the antiwetting, antifouling, anti-scaling and water production performance of hydrophobic PID;33,35 hydrophilic evaporators with superhydrophilicity or exclusive interaction with water molecules were designed to improve energy utilization and durable performance of hydrophilic PID (Fig. 2b).30,31 By far, there are several reviews on individual hydrophobic PID (MD) and hydrophilic PID in the literature.3,36–38 However, a comprehensive overview of PID (including both hydrophobic and hydrophilic PIDs) from the perspective of special wettability is still missing. Moreover, because of the different working modes of hydrophobic and hydrophilic PIDs, there is an urgent need to sort out the diverse design principles of special wettability and their relationships with the evaporator performance. Therefore, this review is aimed at providing such a panoramic discussion on porous evaporator design with special wettability and their performances for both hydrophobic and hydrophilic PIDs towards low-grade heat-driven sustainable water desalination. In Sections 2 and 3, we will separately summarize the recent progress of hydrophobic and hydrophilic porous evaporators with special wettability, focusing on material design to improve distillation efficiency and long-term durability. Moreover, recent challenges and prospects of PID are also presented in this review.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic evaporation diagram in hydrophobic and hydrophilic evaporators. (b) The development history and trend of PID based hydrophobic and hydrophilic porous evaporators.30,31,33,34 Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
The recent ten years have witnessed the ever-growing development of PID based hydrophobic porous evaporators towards sustainable desalination. In hydrophobic PID, hydrophobic evaporators act as the media for vapor transportation, which cannot be too thick to hinder mass transfer. Therefore, hydrophobic evaporators are generally manufactured into membrane-shape materials with separation function, and the corresponding process is named membrane distillation (MD).39–41 In the early stage, some commercial hydrophobic microfiltration membranes were first used for MD, but most of them were generally suboptimal due to their circuitous porous structure hindering vapor transfer and poor surface chemical features threatened by complicated water quality. In recent ten years, flourishing research attention has been focused on problem-oriented design, especially on optimizing the structure of hydrophobic membranes to improve evaporation efficiency (water flux) and superwettable surface construction to overcome membrane fouling, membrane water-wetting, and salt scaling and thus achieve operation durability.17,20,42 Therefore, in this section, we will review the progress of hydrophobic porous membrane evaporator design for improving evaporation efficiency and durability.
2. Hydrophobic porous evaporators
2.1 Improvement of evaporation efficiency

2.1.1 Design principle. 
The structure of the hydrophobic membrane is a crucial factor that affects the evaporation efficiency (water flux) of hydrophobic PID (MD), which can be described by mathematical equations. Generally, the flux of steam across an MD membrane is driven by a difference in the partial vapor pressure (PF − PP) between the feed side and the permeate side. The partial vapor pressure is induced by a difference in temperature across the membrane (TF − TP).43,44 The water flux of the MD membrane can be expressed as a function of membrane properties as eqn (1):45–48 (1)
In this equation, J is the mass transfer flux, B is the permeability coefficient of a hydrophobic membrane that could be affected by the membrane porosity (ε), tortuosity (τ), and the thickness (dm). Dwa is the molecular diffusion coefficient of water vapor in air, and DwK is the Knudsen diffusion coefficient of water vapor in the membrane matrix; Rw is the specific gas constant of water, and T is the mean temperature of the membrane. Herein, (Dwa/DwK) represents the diffusion coefficient ratio, which is inversely proportional to the membrane nominal pore diameter (dp) when operated at a fixed temperature.49 As can be seen from eqn (1), the water flux of a hydrophobic membrane can be significantly enhanced by increasing its porosity and nominal pore diameter or by reducing the tortuosity and thickness of the membrane, as shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the membrane characteristics, including membrane porosity, thickness, and material thermal conductivity. They together affect the membrane performances of hydrophobic PID (MD). 
An ideal hydrophobic membrane equipped with a low resistance to the transport of water vapor should meanwhile have high resistance to conductive heat transfer.50 The heat and mass transfer simultaneously occur in the MD process. The resistance to heat transfer includes three sections: hydrodynamic boundary layers at the feed side and permeate side, and the membrane resistance, which can be expressed by eqn (2).51,52 (2)
The parameter hm indicates the heat transfer coefficient of a hydrophobic membrane, ΔH is the vaporization enthalpy of water at TP, and ΔcP is the difference between the isobaric specific heat capacity of liquid water and water vapor. The combined thermal conduction coefficient of the membrane is defined as the thermal conduction coefficient of the membrane () divided by its thickness. Meanwhile,  is co-determined by the thermal conduction of the membrane (km), porosity (ε), and the thermal conductivities of the gas trapped in the membrane pores (kg):  = εkg + (1 − ε)km.3 From the above presentation, increasing membrane porosity and the membrane thickness or reducing membrane thermal conductivity can significantly decrease the conductive component of the heat transfer coefficient. Overall, based on the above two equations, we can conclude that optimizing hydrophobic membranes with high porosity, large pore size, low tortuosity, and adequate membrane thickness will play vital roles in obtaining high evaporation efficiency.


2.1.2 Mass and heat transfer management. 
High porosity, interconnected pore structure and low touristy of the MD membrane will result in low resistance to water vapor transfer, thus finally leading to a large water flux.3,35,53,54 To date, the most crucial factor determining the porous structure of a hydrophobic PID membrane should be the fabrication method.28,42,55,56 In recent years, it has been well recognized that an increase in hydrophobicity (e.g., superhydrophobicity) will slow the rate of crack formation and the capillary attraction of water into the pores, thus reducing the pore water wicking and wetting and then maintaining the separation ability of the hydrophobic membrane. Therefore, low-surface-energy hydrophobic polymers (10–30 × 10−3 mN m−1) were frequently applied to fabricate porous hydrophobic or even superhydrophobic membranes for MD application, such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), polyvinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene (PVDF–HFP), etc.20,26,55,57–60 To process those polymers, fabrication methods mainly include melt-blown, phase-inversion and electrospinning.
Melt-blown and phase-inversion are traditional methods with their advantages and disadvantages. PTFE, PP and PE show characterization of high crystallization and non-polarity, which can only be processed via thermally induced phase-inversion and melt-blown methods by dissolving them in diluents under the condition at a high temperature over Tm, which is particularly wasteful of energy.61–64 Besides, the pore size of conventional melt-blown membranes ranging from microns to tens of microns is not suitable to satisfy the requirement of the MD membrane due to the lower separation efficiency.20,65 Unlike crystalline polymers such as PP, PE, and PTFE, semi-crystalline polymers (e.g., PVDF) can be easily dissolved in some polar solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc), n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), acetone, tetrahydrofuran (THF), etc.66–70 Thus, the phase-inversion product including the flat sheet membrane and hollow fiber membrane obtained by the exchange of the solvent in the homogeneous polymer solution with the non-solvent was considered as the simplest, cheapest as well as the most energy-efficient for hydrophobic interconnected porous membrane preparation. Meanwhile, the porosity of traditional phase-inversion membranes can reach 70–80%, which can guarantee evaporation surface area or channels for steam transmission.57,71 However, phase-inversion membranes with comparatively high tortuosity impede steam transformation and thus decrease the membrane water flux, as shown in Fig. 4a(i). It is worth noting that the water flux of the PID can be dramatically improved by decreasing the tortuosity of membrane evaporators.72–75 The leading cause for the difference of membrane tortuosity lies in the differentiation of the membrane pore-formation mechanism. Generally, phase-inversion membranes are obtained by immersing the polymer solution in a non-solvent bath, and then the polymer rapidly precipitates out at the interface, finally forming a porous membrane with high tortuosity. While the melt-blown method could facilely fabricate low-tortuosity porous membranes with interconnected pores by accumulating fibers with a few microns to dozens of microns, membranes with large pore size were disadvantageous for hydrophobic PID membranes as shown in Fig. 4a(ii).
 Fig. 4  (a) Membrane design for simultaneous increasing membrane porosity and decreasing tortuosity for maximal steam transformation. The insets of (i), (ii) and (iii) respectively illustrate the FE-SEM images of the phase-inversion membrane (PVDF flat-sheet membrane), melt-blown membrane (glass fiber membrane) and electrospinning membrane (polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF–HFP) nanofibrous membranes). (b) Comparison of the permeation flux of hydrophobic porous membranes fabricated from different processes.16,18,33,54,55,57,72–75 Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Electrospinning, as another method utilizing high voltage, is considered as one of the powerful and efficient methods to fabricate continuous fibers for constructing a non-woven structured nanofibrous membrane with high porosity, interconnected pores, narrow pore size distribution and low tortuosity, as shown in Fig. 4a(iii). The electrospinning nanofibrous membrane shows comparable water flux with the melt-blown fibrous membrane, which is higher than that of traditional phase-inversion membranes, as shown in Fig. 4b. Besides, the average pore size and pore size distribution of the membrane are critical parameters for the performance of hydrophobic PID because adequate pore size can well balance the membrane permeate flux and pore wetting resistance.76–80 It is suggested that the pore size of the hydrophobic membrane is generally in the range from 0.1 to 1 μm, and the optimal membrane size should be less than 0.5 μm, which can effectively prevent membrane wetting.19,81 Owing to the unique characteristics of electrospun nanofibrous membranes with narrow pore size distribution and low tortuosity, the products obtained by electrospinning combined with some special surface modification are generally considered as promising candidates for potential application in MD.82–84
The thickness of membranes also significantly impacts the efficiency of MD because thicker membranes have higher mass transfer resistance, resulting in a lower permeate flux.85,86 Generally, the vapor flux initially increases with decreasing membrane thickness. However, a thinner membrane also reduces the thermal resistance resulting in a lower interface temperature difference, and the heat loss becomes dominant, which starts declining as a result of conduction losses when thickness goes below an optimal value.86,87 Despite the fact that the MD membrane has no strict requirement in mechanical strength, super-thin membranes can be easily destroyed by liquid flow. Thus, the adequate thickness of MD membranes should be strictly controlled to balance between permeate flux, thermal resistance and mechanical strength. Previous literature has reported that the optimal thickness of the hydrophobic MD membrane ranges from 30–60 μm depending on the system size and MD module and configuration.39 The preparation of ultrathin and self-standing hydrophobic MD membranes was comparatively tricky. As a result, the routes of the surface modification of a hydrophilic layer on one side of the thick hydrophobic membrane surface or simple overlay of functional layers are generally employed to balance the above trade-off.87–91 The concept of dual-layer hydrophobic/hydrophilic Janus MD membranes was first introduced in the early 90's. Khayeta and Matsuurab et al. utilized the migration of hydrophobic macromolecules to the membrane surface to obtain flat-sheet hydrophilic–hydrophobic membranes.88 Woo et al. fabricated a dual-layer nanofiber nonwoven membrane composed of an active hydrophobic PVDF–HFP layer with different supporting hydrophilic layers made of either polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), nylon-6 (N6), or polyacrylonitrile (PAN).92 In the above configurations, the introduction of hydrophilic layers can effectively reduce the thickness of the hydrophobic vapor transfer layer, but meanwhile, has a slight influence on the mechanical properties and thermal resistance of the whole membrane evaporator.86 In other words, the design of the asymmetrical superwettable MD membrane was aimed at simultaneously solving the contradiction between the thickness of the active layer, heat conduction and the mechanical strength of the MD membrane.
In addition to controlling the pore structure, membrane porosity, and membrane thickness, decreasing the thermal conductivity of the MD membrane may become a viable direction to improve the thermal efficiency of MD technology further. However, maybe due to the similar thermal conductivity of different organic polymer materials, it attracted little attention in reducing the thermal conductivity of a hydrophobic MD membrane. Since a ceramic material generally possesses extremely high thermal insulation, construction of ceramic membranes with excellent hydrophobic properties, appropriate thickness, and porous structure may provide a promising route to overcome the thermal loss problem during MD.

2.2 Control of wetting, fouling and scaling
Hydrophobic evaporators used for PID are severely threatened by membrane wetting, fouling and scaling, which directly affect the membrane durability during the treatment of challenging feedwaters.93–97 Membrane wetting, triggered by hot feedwater with low-surface-tension contaminants, could seriously destroy the membrane hydrophobicity after long-term operation, resulting in the rapid infiltration of the feedwater into the hydrophobic membrane pores.18,29 Membrane fouling is related to hydrophobic contaminants such as oil droplets.98–101 Hydrophobic foulants can easily accumulate onto the hydrophobic membrane surface and wick into the membrane pores owing to the underwater strong hydrophobic–hydrophobic interaction, finally preventing the transfer of vapor across the membrane.94,102–104 The scaling problem is caused by the high concentration of salts in water, which gradually transforms from dissolution to the crystallization state during the desalination process, resulting in the enhanced erosion of the hydrophobic membrane by accumulating/inlaying of salts on/into the membrane pores.105–107 Recently, the surface chemical modification method was well recognized as the dominant strategy to overcome the above problems. Here, hydrophobic membrane evaporators with special wettability are summarized, which will reveal the relationship between the special surface chemical feature and the resistance to wetting, fouling and salt scaling.

2.2.1 Design for water-wetting resistance. 
Regardless of water complexity, constructing superhydrophobic surfaces is an effective route to reduce the membrane wetting risk of hydrophobic membrane evaporators. To evaluate the wetting resistance of a hydrophobic evaporator, the parameter of liquid entry pressure (LEP) is introduced, which is the minimum transmembrane pressure for the salty feed water to overcome the hydrophobic surface and enter the membrane pores. An MD membrane with higher LEP can maximally prevent membrane wetting. The Young–Laplace equation is commonly used to express the LEP of a cylindrical capillary, which can be expressed as eqn (3):108–110 (3)where γ is the surface tension of water, θadv is the advancing water contact angle of the MD membrane, dmax is the maximal diameter of membrane pores, and C is the geometric factor depending on the membrane pore geometry. As can be observed from eqn (3), the LEP is inversely proportional to the maximal pore size of the membrane and proportional to the membrane water contact angle. Because decreasing the membranes pore size will render a reduction of the evaporation flux and efficiency, constructing superhydrophobic materials with an extremely high contact angle (CA > 150°) is the frequently employed route. In general, superhydrophobic evaporators were prepared by a combination of roughening a hydrophobic surface and subsequent modification with low surface energy materials. In recent years, inspired by natural structures (e.g., lotus leaf) with superhydrophobicity, various methods including the deposition of nanoparticles, etching, lithography, sol–gel synthesis, template-assisted synthesis, sputter deposition, etc. have been developed to construct a rough nano-surface by using inorganic nanoparticles (SiO2, TiO2, etc.), carbon nanotubes, metal oxides, etc.35,112–118 Then combined with chemical modification, superhydrophobic membranes with large LEP and better anti-wetting performance were obtained.
Indeed, hydrophobic and common superhydrophobic membranes are still challenged by the polluted feedwater with organic contaminants having different surface tensions, e.g., shale gas wastewater. Although common superhydrophobic membranes with interconnected pores show high water flux and excellent wetting resistance, superhydrophobic membrane surfaces are susceptible to wetting by amphiphilic organics with low-surface-tension.73,74,107,111,119 On the one hand, amphiphilic surfactants can be easily adsorbed onto the superhydrophobic membrane surface via the hydrophobic–hydrophobic interaction owing to the presence of hydrophobic tail moieties. On the other hand, amphiphilic surfactants lowering the saline water surface tension γ and accumulating at the air–liquid interface result in the wetting of the superhydrophobic membrane.93–95 A schematic illustration of the possible membrane pore wetting mechanism of the hydrophobic porous membrane is displayed in Fig. 5a. The hierarchically rough membrane showed excellent hydrophobicity but was easily wetted by low-surface-tension contaminants, as shown in Fig. 5b. Once the low-surface-tension sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) wetted the hydrophobic surface, the wetted hydrophobic membrane has no resistance to saline water that can quickly infiltrate the membrane pores, finally resulting in a sharp decrease in MD desalination efficiency (Fig. 5c). Since MD is a promising zero-emission water treatment technology for application in seawater desalination or industrial wastewater treatment, the application of MD technology to treat challenging wastewater that contains low-surface-tension contaminants is highly in demand.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the possible membrane pore wetting against surfactants using the common superhydrophobic membrane. (b) Contact angle measurement and (c) the stability of the membrane during MD using a hydrophobic glass fiber membrane. (d) Schematic illustration of the possible resistance of the membrane pore wetting mechanism using the superhydrophobic–omniphobic membrane. (e) Contact angle measurement and (f) the stability of the membrane during MD using an omniphobic PVDF membrane.16,34,111 Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
To solve this problem mentioned above, much research has been devoted to developing omniphobic interconnected porous membranes for durable MD.16,105,119–121 The materials not only exhibit super waterproofing performance but also present outstanding resistance towards various liquid with diverse surface tension, hence providing enhanced robustness for MD separation. Similar to common superhydrophobic membranes, omniphobic membranes require surface roughness and ultralow interface free energy. However, because wetting by low-surface-tension liquids is a thermodynamically favorable process for low energy surfaces, omniphobic surfaces need a re-entrant structure to develop a local kinetic barrier for the transition from the meta-stable Cassie–Baxter state to the fully wetting Wenzel state for low-surface-tension liquids. Additionally, water-repellent agents for chemical modification are often more robust than those applied for a common superhydrophobic surface. Usually, fluoroalkylsilanes with long chains of fluoroalkyl groups were used to graft onto the hierarchical membrane surface to obtain the omniphobic membrane. The number of fluorine atoms in the fluoroalkylsilane was generally 17, and also increasing the fluorine atoms can gradually enhance the membrane antiwetting performance. To date, fluorinated polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoroalkyltriethoxysilane, 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecanethiol, perfluorodecanoic acid and perfluorooctanoic acid can all be employed for this application.122–134 Based on the special design, the omniphobic membrane can even repel most low-surface-tension liquids ranging at 10–20 mN m−1, much better than a traditional superhydrophobic counterpart (above 20 mN m−1), thus achieving excellent wetting resistance.
Lin et al. reported the first example of omniphobic membranes for application as anti-wetting MD membranes.111 A schematic illustration of the possible resistance of the membrane pore wetting mechanism using the omniphobic porous membrane is displayed in Fig. 5d. The omniphobic membrane can repel all low-surface-tension contaminants owing to its extremely low surface energy of the membrane surface, thus preventing the MD membrane from being wetted. For the omniphobic membrane preparation, an electrostatic assembly method combined with surface fluorination was generally used to construct an omniphobic membrane surface. Taking glass fiber membranes as an example, first, the negatively charged borosilicate GF was treated with 3-aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES) in toluene via hydrolysis to obtain a positively charged GF under acidic conditions, followed by immersing it in an aqueous suspension of silica nanoparticles (SiNPs). The negatively charged SiNPs were then assembled onto the GF fiber surface via electrostatic attraction and then strengthened by treating with a toluene solution of silicon tetrachloride. Finally, FAS was grafted on SiNPs via a hydrolysis reaction significantly reducing the surface tension of the GF membrane after heat treatment at 130 °C for 1 h.16 The superhydrophobic–omniphobic membrane shows a hierarchical rough fiber surface owing to the aggregation of SiNPs. After being fluorinated by FAS, the hydrophilic GF membrane with hierarchical roughness changed from hydrophilic to omniphobic, which exhibits significantly improved antiwetting properties compared to the hydrophobic PTFE membrane, as shown in Fig. 5e. Omniphobic membranes have the capacity to repel all low-surface-tension contaminants, maintaining robust MD durability, as shown in Fig. 5f.
Membrane matrixes treated with strong acidic or alkali solution at high temperature to form functional groups could destroy the membrane structure, further affecting the robustness of the MD membrane and lowering the LEP of the MD membrane. Considering the above issue, our research group developed a dual-bioinspired method to friendly assemble the hierarchically rough membrane surface. During the synthesis of the omniphobic polyimide (PI) membrane, dopamine plays dual-functional roles as both the adhesive and the starting point to graft the positively charged PEI. The membrane was first coated with the highly charged polydopamine/polyethyleneimine (PDA/PEI) layer. The zeta potential of the PDA/PEI@PI membrane reveals the successful decoration of the highly positively charged PDA/PEI layer on the PI nanofiber surface. After that, the positively charged PI fibrous membrane was then immersed in the negatively charged Ludox SM for 3 h in acetate buffer at pH = 4.5 with an ionic strength of ∼1 mM. SiNPs can uniformly and compactly decorate on the PI nanofiber surface. After fluorination, the composite membrane shows omniphobicity towards various low-surface-tension liquids via contact angle measurements. Significantly, the dual-bioinspired method is a versatile method for material roughness construction regardless of the material composition, no matter organic materials, inorganic materials or metal materials.29


2.2.2 Design for fouling resistance. 
Besides the water-wetting phenomenon of hydrophobic membranes during the PID process, non-polar contaminants such as oils with ultralow surface energy can be easily adsorbed onto hydrophobic or omniphobic membrane surfaces to cause the fouling problem via hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions after long-term operation.99,135 Although the hierarchical micro/nanostructures of a superhydrophobic or superhydrophobic–omniphobic surface offer a kinetic barrier preventing the penetration of non-polar contaminants into membrane pores, the accumulation of these hydrophobic contaminants on the membrane surface underwater could block the membrane pores, finally reducing the membrane permeability.119,136 Inspired by the features of marine creatures such as fish scales, it was demonstrated that a hydrophilic surface layer in combination with a hierarchically rough structure could maximally overcome the hydrophobic contaminant fouling due to the preferential affinity for water.137–142 Meanwhile, the construction of multi-scaled roughness on the membrane surface, according to the Cassie–Baxter equation, was also adapted to underwater oleophobic surfaces since the trapped air in the pores was replaced by water.143,144 However, for an MD process, the hydrophilic membrane surface for preventing membrane fouling and the hydrophobic membrane surface for avoiding saline water permeation seem to be a contradictory requirement.
To solve this problem, an asymmetrically superwettable hydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus membrane where an ultrathin hydrophilic layer was deposited onto the hydrophobic membrane surface was first proposed by Wang et al. to prevent membrane fouling.98 Once the hydration layer formed on the hydrophobic membrane surface, it was difficult for hydrophobic contaminants to replace the infiltrated water owing to the comparably high liquid surface tension. Thus, the hydrophilic layer acts as a block wall to hinder the transport of non-polar contaminants to the membrane surface. Meanwhile, saline water can permeate the hydrophilic layer without any barrier and vaporize at the hydrophobic membrane surface, further permeating across the hydrophobic membrane and condensing at the cold side. However, owing to the hydrophobic rather than the omniphobic PVDF membrane surface, the above mentioned hydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus membrane surfaces with asymmetrical wettability are also proven to be wetted by low-surface-tension hydrophilic contaminants. To simultaneously solve the membrane wetting and fouling problems resulting from low-surface-tension hydrophobic and hydrophilic contaminants, an omniphobic membrane surface in combination with a hydrophilic skin layer was successfully fabricated.136 A schematic illustration of the possible simultaneous resistance of the membrane pore wetting and fouling mechanism using the hydrophilic/omniphobic Janus membrane is shown in Fig. 6a. The surfactant stabilized oil-in-saline water emulsion was first demulsified at the hydrophilic skin layer of the hydrophilic/omniphobic Janus membrane surface. Then saline water with hydrophilic contaminants permeated and evaporated at the omniphobic membrane surface, while the omniphobic membrane had the capacity to resist low-surface-tension contaminants. The synergistic effect of the hydrophobic skin layer and the omniphobic membrane substrate can simultaneously resist membrane wetting and fouling for MD.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the possible simultaneous resistance of the membrane wetting and fouling mechanism using the hydrophilic/omniphobic Janus membrane. Schematic illustration of two general methods to fabricate a hydrophilic skin layer on an omniphobic membrane surface: (b) spraying using an air-driven spray gun and (c) spraying using electrospraying. FE-SEM images of the hydrophilic skin layer fabricated via spraying using an (d) air-driven spray gun and (e) electrospraying method, respectively (the inset in (e) shows the underwater oil contact angle of the electrosprayed hydrophilic skin layer). Comparison of the resistance of membrane wetting and fouling when treating the surfactant stabilized oil-in-saline water microemulsion of relevant membranes after MD operation: (f) air-driven spray gun method and (g) electrospraying method.34,70,136 Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In order to improve the water flux, electrospun fibrous membranes with high porosity, control pore size, and adequate thickness are recognized as the optimal candidates for application in MD.145–147 However, for Janus membrane fabrication, scientists have focused on how to make a breathable and asymmetrically superwettable Janus membrane for maximal vapor transformation across the omniphobic membrane. Generally, the fabrication of Janus membranes can be done in two ways: asymmetric decoration and asymmetric fabrication.148,149 Asymmetric decoration is relatively difficult because the decoration side of the membrane should not wet the opposite wettable side during preparation, which significantly increases the difficulty of preparing an asymmetrically wettable Janus membrane. Thus, the most straightforward approach is to perfectly combine the hydrophilic layer with the omniphobic membrane without defects. In the initial stage of fabricating the asymmetrically superwettable Janus membrane, Huang et al. made utilization of the spraying coating technique depositing a hydrophilic layer on a hydrophobic/omniphobic membrane surface; however, the breathability of the Janus membrane was severely sacrificed because the composite hydrophilic solution was complicated to be uniformly dispersed on the hydrophobic/omniphobic membrane surface as shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 6b.136 More importantly, the agglomerates severely limited the transfer of vapor across the hydrophobic membrane, thus decreasing the permeation water flux. Recently, our group reported a sequential electrospinning and electrospraying technique to obtain an asymmetrically superwettable Janus nanofibrous membrane.70 First, necklace-structured PVDF membrane substrates were fabricated via electrospinning of a LiCl/PVDF solution. Second, the Janus skin layer with asymmetric superwettability was prepared via a sequential electrospraying technique using the prepared F-SiO2@PVDF–HFP/PS and SiO2@PAN solution. Owing to the strong electrostatic interaction and unevaporated solvents during electrospinning, the triple layers of the Janus membrane can be bind compactly without stratification. The PVDF nanofibrous membrane acting as the membrane substrate also showed a hierarchical roughness structure via regulating the electrospinning solution. Unlike the general method using the air-driven spray gun for hydrophilic layer coating, the electrosprayed beads-on-string structured superhydrophilic skin layer on the membrane substrate cannot block the membrane pores as schematically shown in Fig. 6c, guaranteeing the vapor transformed across the omniphobic membrane without obstacles. FE-SEM images of the above two methods for preparing the hydrophilic skin layer on the omniphobic Janus membrane are also shown in Fig. 6d and e. The spraying of hydrophilic CTS–PFO/SiNPs onto the omniphobic PVDF fibrous membrane could seriously destroy the omniphobic membrane pores, thus significantly enhancing the membrane tortuosity and decreasing the water flux of the hydrophilic/omniphobic Janus membrane. Moreover, the hydrophilic layer also behaved unstable after 2 h of operation, and the curve decreased obviously after 10 h of MD operation, which was triggered by the swelling of the hydrophilic layer, as shown in Fig. 6f. Instead, the electrospraying of the SiO2@PAN skin layer onto the omniphobic substrate can maintain robust breathability of the hydrophilic/omniphobic Janus membrane and show an extremely high underwater oil contact angle of 166°, which shows robust anti-oil fouling resistance as shown in Fig. 6g.70 The breathable and asymmetrically superwettable Janus membrane showed high water flux, good salt rejection efficiency, and excellent stability.
Fouling is a persistent problem where contaminants deposit on the membrane surface or inlaid in the membrane pores and could be detrimental to the membrane separation flux and efficiency.95,96 In the present development, most of the hydrophobic MD reports in the literature focused on how to increase membrane flux and rejection efficiency, but very few studies reported an in-depth study of the fouling mechanism during the MD desalination process. In the future, understanding the fouling phenomenon and the formation mechanism of evaporators under different water conditions should be the primary step to solve the membrane fouling problem.


2.2.3 Design for scaling resistance. 
If MD is applied for the high salinity wastewater treatment, membrane scaling may become a major and unavoidable technical challenge because the feed solution will eventually become oversaturated.150–152 The formation of mineral scales deposited on the membrane surface or inlaid in the membrane pores can both induce scaling that reduced water flux and amplify wetting that reduced salt rejection efficiency. A schematic illustration of the possible anti-scaling behavior over the superhydrophobic membrane with a slippery surface is shown in Fig. 7a. According to the Cassie–Baxter modes, the hierarchically roughened membrane with a superhydrophobic surface reduced the contact area between the liquid and the solid contact area greatly reduced the area of the interfacial crystallization at the water–solid interface. The superhydrophobic membrane surface with minimum pinning (slippery surface) could effectively reduce the overall adhesive interaction between the crystallized layer and the membrane surface, contributing to less deposition and formation of crystal particles in the membrane pores. Instead, the superhydrophobic/hydrophobic membranes without slippery surfaces are more susceptible to membrane scaling because of their high adhesive force toward high salinity water. Recently, Xiao et al. investigated a slippery mechanism to understand the scaling behavior in membrane distillation for NaCl. They first designed a novel superhydrophobic PVDF membrane with micro-pillar arrays (MP-PVDF) using a micromolding phase separation method in combination with CF4 plasma treatment.153,154 The resultant membrane showed a high water contact angle of 175.57 ± 1.3° and a sliding angle of 3.0°, which displayed excellent anti-scaling in concentrating the saturated NaCl feed, as shown in Fig. 7b. Instead, both the MP-PVDF membrane without fluorination (high water contact angle and high sliding water angle) and the C-PVDF membrane (low water contact angle and high sliding water angle) can be easily scaled owing to their high adhesiveness toward high salinity water. It was also found that the scaling of the MP-PVDF membrane mainly occurred at the membrane surface, while for the C-PVDF membrane, the liquid penetrated the membrane pores. Besides the phase separation method, the electrospinning and electrospraying approaches also contribute to the scaling-resistant superhydrophobic/slippery membrane evaporator. Lin’s group fabricated an electrospun membrane with both robust anti-scaling performance and higher water flux (about 27.4 L m−2 h−1),155 which was far higher than that of the phase conversion membrane (17.0 L m−2 h−1) under similar desalination conditions. Moreover, the mechanism of scaling resistance enabled by the superhydrophobic and slippery electrospun membrane was also systematically discussed, mainly due to the roles of the surface-bound air layer in reducing the crystal-membrane contact area, nucleation propensity, and ion-membrane contact time.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the possible antiscaling and scaling mechanisms of the superhydrophobic membrane with and without slippery surfaces. (b) The desalination performances of relevant membranes and (c) photographs of relevant membranes after concentration of the high salinity NaCl solution.153 Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
The high salinity wastewater is generally complex in composition. The gypsum scaling during MD is trickier than that of NaCl. In 2018, Karanikola et al. initially found that when treating the gypsum solution, the superhydrophobic and slippery membrane surface can delay the gypsum scaling during desalination compared to the pristine PVDF and modified PVDF membranes. However, both flux decline and pore wetting had occurred, demonstrating that the superhydrophobic and slippery membrane surface can only delay but not eliminate gypsum scaling.120 Similar results were also demonstrated by Su and Xiao et al.154,155 The exact mechanism underlying these different scaling behaviors between NaCl and gypsum is still unclear at this stage and needs further elucidation. To better improve the membrane gypsum scaling resistance, Horseman et al. developed a superhydrophobic and slippery membrane surface combined with a gas purging technique to effectively mitigate gypsum scaling in MD, enabling MD to concentrate a highly saline feed stream by 5-fold without suffering flux decline.156 Currently, periodic purging may become the optimal and effective method in removing the deposited gypsum particles on/into the membrane surface/pores since the superhydrophobic and slippery membrane surface could effectively minimize but not eliminate the formation of crystal “anchors” within the membrane pores. A similar result was also confirmed by Ye et al.157

2.3 Self-heating superhydrophobic evaporators
Besides optimizing the water flux and durability, managing the energy input by evaporator design should be another critical strategy to promote evaporation energy efficiency. In general cases, low-quality waste heat is expected to drive the MD process, leading to an energy-effective result for desalination, but waste heat sources are accessible only in some special districts in the world. So, in order to expand the application of MD with high energy efficiency, searching for suitable heating routes is attracting ever-growing research attention. In recent years, researchers have begun to focus on self-heating evaporators, which can in situ generate localized low-grade heat by the Joule heating effect or photothermal heating effect at the evaporator interface to drive distillation.158,159 This interfacial self-heating route can reduce membrane temperature polarization or obtain higher thermal recovery compared to the bulk heating system driven by high-quality electric energy. Joule heating works by the resistance of a conductor to electron flow producing thermal energy. For the Joule heated hydrophobic membrane, the membrane surface is modified with a conductive material with proper resistance (e.g., carbon nanotubes, graphene hybrid architectures, and metal nanowires).160,161 When an electric current is applied across the conductive layer, the resistance to electron flow, such as ohmic heating or resistive heating can produce thermal energy for liquid water evaporation on the membrane surface. Unlike Joule heating, photothermal heating utilizes light absorbers for capturing the light of the solar spectrum and then convert solar energy to thermal energy.162,163 The in situ produced heat evaporates the liquid water on the hydrophobic membrane surface, and then promotes the vaporized steam transferred through the hydrophobic membrane pores and it is subsequently collected at the cold side.

2.3.1 Photothermal superhydrophobic evaporators. 
The investigation of MD driven by interfacial photothermal heating began in around 2015.164 Generally, the reported photothermal MD processes can be classified into two types: photothermal direct contact membrane distillation (P-DCMD) and photothermal air gap membrane distillation (P-AGMD). In the P-DCMD application, some kinds of photothermal materials with robust light adsorbing properties were developed and combined with superhydrophobic membranes, such as carbon-based materials, plasmonic materials, conjugated polymers, and organic dyes. Here, the working mechanism of photothermal materials will not be discussed, which will be discussed later in the next section on hydrophilic evaporators. We will pay our main attention to the design of photothermal DCMD membranes. To date, there are three configurations of photothermal DCMD membranes, e.g., blending type, coating type, and bi-layer type. (i) In the blending type, photothermal nanomaterials were dissolved or dispersed into the polymer casting solution. After the membrane formation, photothermal components were in situ incorporated into the membrane matrixes. For example, Curcio et al. fabricated a superhydrophobic PVDF MD membrane filled with silver nanoparticles by the blending method. Under the illumination of UV light at 366 nm of 500 W, the membrane surface temperature was 23 K greater than the bulk water, which resulted in an 11 fold increase of the transmembrane water flux, with 0.5 M NaCl being the feed water.165 The blending type had the advantage of uniform distribution of the photothermal species embedded throughout the pores of the membranes but was suffering from the drawback of a limited content of photothermal components. If the photothermal materials were in low content, the illumination would be shielded by the polymer; and when an excessive dosage of photothermal materials was added, the mechanical properties of the membrane matrixes would be threatened. (ii) In the coating configuration, the as-prepared MD membranes were immersed in the solution with photothermal species. Afterward, the photothermal species permeated and then attached into the membrane pores due to some interfacial physical or chemical interaction. For instance, Fujiwara et al. designed a series of organic dye modified MD membranes by a coating method.166–168 The method can control the loading contents of organic dyes but may be hindered by the relatively narrow light absorbance in the entire solar spectrum of organic molecules. Therefore, a complicated dye formula was often required to enhance light utilization.167 (iii) While in the bilayer configuration, a thin sheet of photothermal materials was connected to hydrophobic membranes. For instance, Li et al. reported a carbon black or SiO2/Au nano-shell covered superhydrophobic MD membrane in 2017 through a deposition method, which delivered an up to 33% increase in distillate flux when irradiated at 1000 W m−2.169 Later, Halas et al. together with Li demonstrated another bi-layered MD membrane structure consisting of a thin photothermal layer of carbon black impregnated polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) electrospun film and a superhydrophobic layer of PVDF membrane.30 The two layers were tightly connected by the adhesive function of polydopamine (PDA). The above two designs by Li et al. had photothermal materials only on one side of the MD membrane. The nanophotonics-enabled solar membrane distillation system was directly and entirely driven by solar energy. A pilot-scale device with an active area of ∼1 × 1 m, when tested outdoor locally at Houston, USA, was able to produce an average clean water flux of 0.5 kg m−2 h−1, under less than 1 sun (700 W m−2) illumination. Indeed, the study on photothermal DCMD superhydrophobic membranes is just in the beginning. Current research is mainly focused on the concept demonstration and combination of photothermal functions with MD membranes. An evaporator design to enhance wetting control, fouling resistance, water flux, and energy efficiency is highly desired.
Photothermal membranes for air gap membrane distillation are also of research interest. For P-AGMD, superhydrophobic porous evaporators are floated on the water surface and meanwhile kept an air gap with the cooling collectors. In this configuration, the wetting of the superhydrophobic surface is no longer an issue because it is difficult for the liquid feedwater to go through the membrane to pollute the clean water due to the gravity factor and the air gap protection. Therefore, the pore size of evaporators for P-AGMD can be appropriately enlarged to increase the vapor flux and energy efficiency. For instance, Wang's group fabricated a self-floating hydrophobic photothermal mesh by the in situ polymerization of polypyrrole (PPy) onto PID stainless steel (SS), followed by grafting fluoroalkylsilane via chemical vapor deposition onto the black PPy@SS surface.164 PPy was rationally chosen as the photothermal polymer because of its broad-spectrum absorption, high photothermal conversion efficiency, and its facile solution-based fabrication, which permits a uniform film coating with easy control over the film thickness. The surface wettability of the membrane was controlled to conform Wenzel's wetting behavior, which enabled the membrane to spontaneously stay at the water–air interface and allowed for sufficient contact with the water surface to precisely heat the interfacial water under solar irradiation. For the large pore size of the photothermal mesh (larger than 5 μm), the vapor flux was 0.92 kg m−2 h−1 with an efficiency of 58%, under the illumination of 1000 W m−2, which was around 4 times than that without a photothermal evaporator. Besides, black TiO2−x nanoparticles fabricated by Mg reduction were also attached to mesh membranes by a spin coating method. After fluorination, a hydrophobic self-floating solar evaporation mesh was obtained, which displayed an efficiency of 50.30% at 1000 W m−2.170 To sum up, in the earlier development of photothermal distillation, researchers paid their attention to hydrophobic evaporators, with inspirations from the conventional MD configuration. In the latest three years, people gradually found that heat loss of P-AGMD was much higher than that of photothermal hydrophilic evaporators. Therefore, recent attention is shifting to hydrophilic photothermal evaporators for solar distillation, which will be discussed in detail in the next section.


2.3.2 Electric thermal hydrophobic evaporators. 
Besides solar–thermal conversion on the superhydrophobic evaporator surface, Joule heating utilizing the inelastic collision between electrons (the resistance of a conductor to electron flow) to produce thermal energy is another method for in situ thermal heat production.159 Carbon nanotubes, owing to its superior thermal conductivity with high current densities of 4 × 109 A cm−2 and thermal conductivity of 3500 W m−1 K−1, have opened the opportunities for efficient exploration of Joule-heating for industrial applications. To the best of our knowledge, the low anodic potentials (<2 Vd.c.) applied to the CNT-based heater result in the surface charge and water splitting and the low conversion efficiency of electrical energy to thermal energy. Significantly, a CNT-based heater can only serve in non-ionizable and non-corrosive environments because direct current providing energy to the CNT surface could result in the rapid electrochemical degradation of the CNT-based heater in an ionizable medium.159 Therefore, novel CNT-based heaters that can simultaneously work under highly ionizable and corrosive conditions for self-heating thermal desalination distillation are highly desired.
Recently, Dudchenko et al. reported a porous thin-film CNT Joule heater by layer-by-layer spray coating of a uniform mixture that crosslinked the carboxylated CNT with PVA and deposited on a superhydrophobic PTFE porous membrane, finally constructing a highly conductive, porous and asymmetrically superwettable Janus membrane.160 The upper-layer CNT based heater can immediately supply thermal energy when a potential across the upper layer of the composite membrane is applied. While the hydrophobic PTFE membrane takes the role of a conventional MD membrane, preventing salty water permeation and allowing the evaporated steam transport through the hydrophobic membrane pores. The high-frequency alternating current not only can maximally prevent the formation of the fully charged EDL depending on the solution ionic strength but also generate abundant thermal energy for a large amount of production of clean water. Although the energy consumption can be further reduced by optimizing the self-healing materials, the distillation process, the full-scale MD system, and the heat-recovery strategies, the energy efficiency of MD is inherently lower than conventional desalination technologies for high-salinity brines.
For graphene structured carbon like CNTs and graphene, the high-frequency alternative current could be one of the optimal methods to alleviate the degradation of CNTs by electrooxidation and simultaneously promote enough thermal energy for high freshwater production. The high-quality energy consumption may become the serious shortcoming toward Joule-heating using high-frequency alternative current. Joule heating of the membrane surface initiated by the electric current can combine with other methods such as the above-mentioned photothermal conversion. Recently, Cui et al. developed a hybrid heating system by a rational combination of photo-electro-thermal effect on an all-graphene hybrid architecture.171 The solar energy can not only be absorbed fully and converted into heat but also can simultaneously be transferred into power utilizing a solar cell to further heat up the graphene skeleton frame for a much-enhanced generation of water vapor. The hybrid photo-electro-thermal system inherited the excellent characteristics of photothermal conversion. Meanwhile, the introduction of a solar cell by converting light to electric power avoided the direct use of high-quality electrical energy. The hybrid photo-electro-thermal system combined with the graphene evaporator achieves a high-water production rate of 2.01–2.61 kg m−2 h−1 under solar illumination of 1 kW m−2 without system optimization. This work offers a new strategy to take advantage of solar energy through the simultaneous conversion of light to heat and light to electricity to heat for maximal efficiency.

3. Hydrophilic porous evaporators
Hydrophilic or even superhydrophilic porous evaporators began to be frequently investigated and applied in PID desalination in recent three years, and especially play important roles in photothermal distillation.162,163,172 Hydrophilic evaporators are not able to act as liquid water separators as the hydrophobic compartments do, and therefore cannot be effectively applied in conventional MD configuration. Nevertheless, in photothermal distillation processes, they excel themselves in the following aspects. (i) PID based on hydrophilic materials possesses a simpler configuration. Generally, hydrodynamic systems are built to drive water transportation in hydrophobic PID systems and consume some electric energy during operation. In the hydrophilic system, water transportation can be achieved by the capillarity of the hydrophilic macropores.173,174 Thus, the extra hydrodynamic system can be omitted. This feature of the hydrophilic system is particularly attractive for emergency water supply in remote rural or island areas with a lack of infrastructure and electricity. (ii) Hydrophilicity is capable of enhancing the photothermal evaporation efficiency. In hydrophilic systems, water can wet the evaporator pores well and then form a thin layer of water film across the whole evaporator, subsequently adequately assuring the air–water contact area for evaporation. In contrast, water could only evaporate from the pores of the hydrophobic membranes in MD. Considering the special application of hydrophilic porous evaporators in solar photothermal PID, in this section, the current research on hydrophilic evaporators with special wettability or special interaction with water for solar photothermal PID desalination will be reviewed in detail.
3.1 Improvement of evaporation efficiency

3.1.1 Design principle. 
Before understanding how to design a hydrophilic evaporator with a higher evaporation efficiency, factors impacting the vapor-generation efficiency during photothermal PIDs were first clarified. In traditional bulk heating solar distillation processes, water is generally required to be heated to a high temperature (50–90 °C) to carry on the vapor generation. This will render a quite slow response to solar irradiation and may result in a serious heat loss due to the high specific heat capacity of water.173–175 Interfacial heating solar distillation based on photothermal porous evaporators has been widely accepted and employed since 2014. In this process, the temperature of water surface responds to sunlight ultrafast and the in situ generated heat can be mainly confined at the water/air interface across the evaporators, which leaves the bulk water with a much lower temperature, and therefore greatly reduces the heat loss. Fig. 8 displays the energy balance scheme in a typical interfacial solar PID system, with a photothermal evaporator floating at the air–water interface. In such a system, solar radiation (Esun) is the only energy input which is ultimately split into and is balanced by five energy output pathways: (i) reflective solar radiation (Eref), (ii) water evaporation (Eeva), including sensible heat and latent heat of the evaporating water, (iii) radiative heat loss from the photothermal material/water interface (Erad), (iv) convective heat loss to the overlying air (Econv) and (v) heat conduction loss to the underlying bulk water (Econd). The progress of photothermal hydrophilic evaporators in the past years has been mainly guided by the energy diagram shown in Fig. 8 to enhance the water evaporation rate. The Eeva can be expressed as eqn (4) and (5): (4) αEsolar = Esolar − Eref(5)
 Fig. 8  Energy balance diagram of an interfacial-heating solar evaporator under open-air conditions. 
In this equation, m is the mass transfer flux, hfg is the latent heat, α is the solar absorptance, and A is the surface area of the absorber facing the sun. As shown in eqn (4) and (5), effort should be focused on light management by increasing the solar energy adsorption and diminishing light reflection, also on heat management by minimizing wasteful heat loss (Econv + Erad + Econd), especially. Additionally, in some studies, Eeva was modulated as well to control the evaporation.


3.1.2 Light absorbance management. 
In solar photothermal hydrophilic PID, a suitable light absorber material is often integrated into porous scaffolds (e.g., filtration membrane, filter paper, air-laid paper, foam, metallic mesh, fibrous membrane, etc.) to construct photothermal evaporators or the material itself forms a self-supporting evaporator. Light absorber materials can effectively harvest and convert sunlight into localized heat, and then vaporize the water across the surface pores into steam.
To date, various types of light absorber materials have been explored and are capable of assembling into interconnected porous evaporators for solar distillation, for instance, plasmonic metal nanoparticles, carbon-based materials, and semiconducting materials. Metallic nanostructures, e.g., Au, Ag, Al, and Ge can produce heat through plasmon resonance and then promote the evaporation of water.165,176–179 Plasmon resonance is a unique optical phenomenon occurring on metallic structures. When the frequency of incident light matches the oscillation frequency of delocalized electrons in metals, it triggers a collective excitation of electrons and generates hot electrons. The excited hot electrons oscillate coherently with an incident electromagnetic field inside the metallic particles, resulting in heat generation by a Joule mechanism.180 Carbon-based materials, including carbon black, CNTs, graphene (GO), rGO, amorphous carbon, carbonized biomass, etc. are also of important interest for photothermal transformation because of their broad light absorption, high stability, and lightweight.181–186 Carbon-based materials contain no toxic metals, possess good stability under sunlight and in water due to the aromatic bonds, and can be easily made into all kinds of structures with macro-, micro- and nanoscale morphologies desirable for photothermal distillation.187,188 They adsorb widely in the entire solar spectrum due to the closely spaced energy levels of the loosely held π electrons and then release heat by relaxing the photoexcited electrons to their ground state.189 Semiconductors, including inorganic (e.g., Ti2O3, Cu7S4, and Fe3O4) or polymeric (e.g., PPy and polydopamine) semiconductors, are another kind of effective photothermal agents for solar distillation.190–193 In these materials, light is absorbed to generate electron–hole pairs or photo-excitons. When the solar light has higher energy than the bandgap of semiconductors, the above-bandgap electron–hole pairs will be created, which will then relax to the band edges and convert the extra energy into heat through a thermalization process. Photothermal semiconductors must be with a narrow bandgap, in which the electron–hole pairs could predominantly recombine to produce heat energy. This mechanism is in sharp contrast with wide-bandgap semiconductors, where most of the light energy absorbed reemits as photons after the recombination of electron–hole pairs near the bandgap edge. The relaxation dynamics of the above-bandgap charges could be quite complicated, but an acoustic-phonon scattering mechanism may dominate it.194 All these light absorbers have their respective advantages and disadvantages and are frequently applied for photothermal PIDs. To achieve higher light absorbance and lower reflection, two types of structural engineering methods were often explored to manage the light energy: surface microstructure design and macroscopic structure design. Light absorbance of photothermal membranes is not only related to the texture of absorbers but also highly depends on surface microstructures of absorber layers. The first effective method to manage the light absorbance for photothermal distillation is to create highly porous structures (Fig. 9a and b). On the one hand, photothermal materials, especially inorganic and carbon-based ones, have a refractive index greater than 2, which may render a high light reflection of over 10%.195 Construction of highly porous nanostructured photothermal layers has proved to be a typical effective strategy to reduce the reflected light loss.196 When the sun illuminates photothermal materials, the light can create multiple reflections inside the pores of highly porous structures, which will result in an extremely low effective refractive index and therefore achieves much lower light reflection and higher absorption (Fig. 9b). On the other hand, the incident angle of light also generally impacts the light absorbance, especially for a membrane matrix with a flat surface. In some cases, highly porous surface structures, e.g., hierarchical graphene foam and plasmonic wood, can reduce the sensitivity of photothermal materials to the sunlight incident angle and then achieve more stable light–water conversion efficiency.197–199 The first example of using nanosized titanium sesquioxide (Ti2O3) as a novel light absorber for solar-thermal conversion was reported in our previous study. A double-layer photothermal interconnected porous evaporator contained a thin layer supported on a cellulose membrane. The fairly small bandgap (∼0.1 eV) endows Ti2O3 with the ability to absorb solar energy in the full spectrum range (from 250 to 2500 nm). More importantly, the light absorption ability of conventional bulk Ti2O3 can be improved when the material size is reduced to nanoscale due to the enhanced light scattering among the nanoparticles in the porous structure. By combining the ultra-small bandgap and the nanosized features of Ti2O3 nanoparticles, a nearly 100% internal and ∼92% external solar–thermal conversion efficiency obtained in our group outperforms those of most of the conventional photothermal materials.200 Besides the above two functions, some well-designed nanoporous structures can broaden the absorption bandwidth to enhance the evaporation. Aluminum is abundant in the earth's crust at low cost, but its narrow response only in the UV region caused by the larger plasma frequency than Au and Ag makes it challenging to apply Al in solar distillation. Zhu et al. reported a 3D porous membrane with the attachment of self-assembled aluminum nanoparticles (NPs) in the pore arrays of the anodic aluminum membrane (AAM) by physical vapor deposition for plasmon-enhanced solar desalination (Fig. 9c). The self-assembled Al NPs tend to be closely packed along the sidewalls of the nanopores of the AAM, resulting in a strong hybridization effect of localized surface plasmons. Moreover, there is a thin layer of naturally formed aluminum oxide coated on Al NPs, which not only provided protection for stability without extra encapsulation but also significantly changed the effective dielectric of the surroundings and, therefore, further broadens the absorption bandwidth towards the IR range. In the whole solar spectrum, the effective absorption is over 96%, and the steam generation efficiency reached up to 88.4% under 4 sun illumination.201
 Fig. 9  Illustration of light adsorption & reflection over (a) a flat surface. (b) Illustration of light adsorption & reflection over an evaporator surface with microscopic topography, including (top inset) highly porous structure and (bottom inset) specific surface nano-geometry. (c and d) are the corresponding PID evaporator examples demonstrated in the literature. (e) Illustration of light adsorption & reflection over an evaporator surface with macroscopic topography and (f) the corresponding evaporator example in the literature.177,201,202 Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
In addition to highly porous structures, a specific surface nano-geometry could also be explored to improve light-to-heat conversion by enhancing light absorbance and reducing reflection. For example, Liu et al. developed black gold dimers with nanorods connected to nanospheres and then assembled them on a filter paper as an evaporation membrane. This evaporator exhibited high light absorbance and efficient solar evaporation because the dimers accumulated broadband electromagnetic energy in the kissing point between the nanorod and the nanosphere, regardless of light impinging frequency, input angle, and polarization.203 Bae et al. proposed an interesting concept of a self-aggregated metallic nanowire bundle array structure on the interconnected porous substrate to produce flexible thin-film black gold membranes (Fig. 9d). The multiscale structure has a sufficiently small taper angle. Hence there is a wide range of metallic nanoscale gaps from zero to hundreds of nanometers over a few microns of depth and 3 mm funnel-shaped structures. The small taper angle and varying nanogaps between aggregated metallic nanowires are responsible for the broadband absorption in the visible to near-infrared region. The 3 mm funnel structure yields ultra-broadband absorption up to 17 mm in the mid-infrared region. The thin-film black gold membrane absorbed the light with the average absorption of around 91% in the wavelength range of 400 to 2500 nm, and the solar–vapor conversion efficiency is up to 57% at an incident intensity of 20 kW m−2.177
Besides designing surface microstructure to improve light energy management, optimizing the surface macroscopic architecture for evaporators sometimes is an effective alternative strategy, as illustrated in Fig. 9e. For instance, a 3D cone-shaped porous photothermal transpiration graphene oxide membrane with a 1D water path was demonstrated, which could receive light from a wide range of incident angles throughout the day.204 In our previous work, a porous origami as a photothermal material was reported based on pencils and hydrophilic paper for solar-driven water purification.202 The drawn process destroyed the van der Waals' force between graphite layers, causing the pencil cartridge to exfoliate into thin graphite sheets. The paper fibers combined with graphite sheets were demonstrated with broadband absorption for solar energy harvesting and excellent hydrophilicity for water transportation. The origami structure effectively promoted the utilization of solar energy attributed to the increased solar absorption area and decreased solar reflection loss compared with a planar system (Fig. 9f). Besides, the analog calculation results of COMSOL Multiphysics indicated that the origami structure was free from the dynamic solar motion. The nearly free cost, facile fabrication, and satisfactory solar-water conversion of 80% made this development promising for emergent water supply.


3.1.3 Heat management. 
3.1.3.1 Controlling wasteful heat loss. 
As demonstrated in Fig. 10, besides the management of light absorbance, researchers also controlled the wasteful heat loss (Econd, Erad, and Econv) to enhance the water evaporation of hydrophilic evaporators. Erad and Econv represent radiative heat loss from the photothermal material and convective heat loss to the overlying air, respectively, the values of which are both related to the surface temperature of the evaporators and the ambient temperature. The radiative and convective losses per area are expressed by eqn (6) and (7), respectively. Erad = εσ(T24 − T14)(6) Econv = h(T2 − T1)(7)where ε is the emissivity, σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, T2 is the temperature at the surface of the evaporators, T1 is the temperature of the adjacent environment, and h is the convection heat transfer coefficient. Since the steam is always surrounding the evaporator surface during solar vaporization, the temperature difference between the two parts is generally small. Therefore, it is deduced from the equations that the values of Erad and Econv are commonly able to be suppressed by reducing the evaporator surface temperature. Until now, the most recognized method to reduce T2 temperature is to let competent water being transported to the photothermal evaporation surface, which can instantaneously convert the heat energy to vapor. Nevertheless, the negative result may enhance Econd by decreasing heat insulation. In the past years, how to reduce the Econd was attracting the most research attention. So, in this part, we will mainly discuss the control of Econd, and the other two by the way.
 Fig. 10  PID photothermal evaporator design for controlling wasteful heat loss. (a) Self-floating thin-film photothermal structures without a heat barrier, (b) complex structures with a water-wettable and porous support that simultaneously serves as a heat barrier and unconfined water transportation route. They can be divided into a bilayer structure and monolithic structure. (c) Quasi-isolation multilayer structure with a water-proof heat barrier and an extra confined water channel. 
In early years, the bulk heating route is the main trend for solar distillation, during which photothermally dispersed agents were added into bulk water before exposure to irradiation. This process generally presents a low energy conversion efficiency of no more than 40% under unconcentrated solar irradiation.205 To improve energy efficiency, the solar interfacial heating concept was introduced in the early 2010s and has been a successful approach for solar water evaporation since then. At first, photothermal materials were processed into hydrophobic (CA ≥ 140°) self-floating thin sheets or membranes, as shown in Fig. 10a. These interfacial heating systems deliver better energy efficiency than the dispersion configuration under the same conditions, especially under non-concentrated solar irradiation. However, the heat loss, especially the heat conduction loss (Econd) from photothermal evaporators into the underlying bulk water driven by the large temperature difference is still a challenge. Right now, this configuration is only explored in the photothermal MD process due to the integrated feature, which has been reviewed in Section 2.3.
In order to further minimize Econd, scientists began to develop a heat localization strategy and employ thermally insulating porous heat barriers to separate the photothermal layer and the bulk water. This heat localization strategy, which restricts heat into a small amount of water in the evaporating surface, may substantially improve the efficiency of solar energy utilization. In 2014, Chen et al. proposed and designed the first bilayer structured interconnected porous evaporator by combining a graphite flake photothermal top layer on a porous carbon foam bottom layer.205 On the one hand, the porous carbon foam could self-float on the water surface due to the low density, and then acted as not only a heat-insulating layer but also transport channels to supply water flow to the evaporation surface by leveraging capillarity. On the other hand, the photothermally exfoliated graphite layer became hydrophilic and wettable, and it could effectively wick water to the photothermal hot spot by the capillary force, thus forming a thin water film on the surface of graphite, which could result in enhanced surface area for evaporation and formation of three-phase contact lines at the edges of the capillaries. This structure yielded a high solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of 85% that is 17% higher than that without bottom heat-insulating at 10 kW m−2 solar illumination and 64% at 1 kW m−2 by the coordination of the two parts. In 2015, Deng et al. also reported a similar study by utilizing a heat barrier of an air-laden paper to support a self-assembled Au film.176 Besides heat insulation and water transportation, the bottom layer served as a substrate to improve the mechanical properties of the photothermal material, as well. After that, the bilayer structure with a porous bottom layer (Fig. 10b) has been widely adopted due to the improvement in energy efficiency and mechanical stability, e.g., bilayer bio-foam of rGO combining in situ with bacterial nanocellulose, carbon nanotube membrane integrated on the silicon substrate, and so on.162,206–208 The above bilayer structure could also be converted to a monolithic structure, where the heat insulation, water transportation, and photothermal in situ heating functions were all integrated with a single layer 3D architecture. Carbon modified or plasmonic woods, plasmonic bacterial nanocellulose aerogels, rGO aerogels, rGO–polyurethane foams, carbon fibrous foams polymeric foams, and so on were prosperously reported as monolithic porous evaporators to be applied in solar PID.209–212 This integrated construction was claimed to be capable of decreasing the fabrication complexity and strengthening the durability for application. Nevertheless, the 3D thick porous structures with unconfined water transportation, both bilayer and monolithic architectures, suffer from modest energy efficiency, as summarized in Table 1. The normal level of the evaporation efficiency is around 65% under one sun irradiation in many cases. This drawback is caused by the trade-off between heat insulation and water transportation. Water-absorbing and wettable capacity are generally required to wick water to the photothermal layer, but at the same time, the water inside the macropores greatly increases the material's thermal conduction and thus compromised the role of the thick porous structure as a heat barrier. Several impressive studies reported a higher efficiency of 80–83% by tuning the wetting ability, porous structure, material texture, etc. For instance, Zhu’s group designed a composite aerogel comprised of the rGO skeleton, carbon nanotube, and sodium alginate additives. Due to the high porosity, enhanced light adsorption (92%) by the introduction of carbon nanotubes and improved hydrophilicity by adding sodium alginate (contact angle of 74°), a quite high solar-to-vapor conversion energy efficiency of 83% at 1 sun was achieved.213 Chen et al. developed a 3D nitrogen-doped porous graphene evaporator by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) with benzene or pyridine as carbon and nitrogen sources for photothermal steam generation via a high efficiency of 80% under 1 sun. The critical issue was that they decreased the thermal conductivity of the evaporator both by increasing the pore size via raising CVD temperature and by broadening the band gap of graphene via nitrogen doping.32 Wei and Ji demonstrated the first monolithic and wettable polymer foam composed of oligoaniline with a quite low thermal conductivity of 0.057 W m−1 K−1, which is lower than that of inorganic solar absorbers. Therefore, they also obtained a high energy efficiency of 80% at 1 sun.226 However, even with the above successes in decreasing Econd, the trade-off between heat insulation and water transportation cannot be eliminated, facilitating the development of another multilayer configuration with extra and confined water transportation routes (Fig. 10c).
Table 1 The solar-to-vapor efficiency and vapor flux of various photothermal porous evaporators driven by the light energy of 1 sun. Types A, B, and C correspond to a, b, and c configurations described in Fig. 10. Type D represents porous hydrogel evaporators that can reduce the vaporization enthalpy of water, thus increasing vapor flux




Photothermal evaporators
Type
Year
Solar–vapor efficiency
Vapor flux (L m−2 h−1)
Ref.




PPy mesh
A
2015
58%
0.92

164



AAO/Au
A
2015
57%
0.67

177



Al NP/AAM
A
2016
∼58%
∼0.95

201



Graphite/carbon foam
B
2014
64%
1.00

205



Ti2O3 nanoparticle membrane
B
2016
—
1.32

200



Carbon nanotube wood
B
2017
65%
0.95

208



rGO–SA–CNT aerogel
B
2017
83%
1.67

213



Graphene oxide
B
2018
87%
1.30

31



Glass microsphere–carbon black
B
2019
82.1%
—

214



Carbon-nanotubes aerogels
B
2019
86.8%
1.37

215




PPy–straw


B


2020


81.6%


3.0



216




Carbonized mushroom
C
2017
78%
1.48

217



Graphene oxide
C
2017
87.5%
1.27

218



Carbon nanoparticles
C
2017
88%
1.28

181



Ag/diatomite
C
2019
92.2%
1.33

219



PDA–PEI/PPy@PI membrane
C
2019
86.9%
1.43

220



PPy cellulose paper
C
2019
90%
1.52

221



PVA/PPy porous hydrogel
D
2019
94%
3.2

222



PVA/graphene porous hydrogel
D
2019
95%
2.5

223



PVA–chitosan/PPy hydrogel
D
2019
92%
3.6

224




Fe-MOF/PVA hydrogel


D


2020


90%


3.2



225






Zhu et al. demonstrated the first example of a multilayer configuration with confined water paths in 2016. The whole evaporator was composed of three parts, a porous and wettable photothermal sheet (GO membrane), a waterproof thermal insulator (polystyrene foam, a thermal conductivity of ∼0.04 W m−1 K−1) that simultaneously provided a floating function for the whole evaporator, and a thin layer of cellulose wrapped over the thermal insulator.218 During the solar evaporation, efficient water supply to the photothermal spot could be enabled by the confined water path within the cellulose layer pumped by capillary force, and at the same time, heat dissipation through water was minimized by the waterproof thermal insulator and the reduced dimensionality of the water path. The solar to vapor efficiency was kept at 80% under one-sun illumination, even with increasing the water quantity, which was about 3 times that of the bulk water heating system. From then on, many multilayer evaporators have been designed with different kinds of confined water paths driven by the capillary, for instance, 3D-printed porous hydrophilic GO pillars implanted in the body of CB/GO photothermal films (87.5% efficiency), carbonized mushroom stipes connected to the pileus (78% efficiency), filter paper strips and so on.31,204,214,215,217,219,227 Additionally, apart from waterproofing PS foam, air space was also employed as a thermal insulator to promote heat localization.228 Besides, the structure and wetting feature of top-layer photothermal materials were modulated to obtain better evaporation. For example, improving the hydrophilicity could form thin-film water evaporation near the three-phase contact line to enhance phase changes. Constructing vertically aligned graphene sheets membranes with low-tortuosity channels was beneficial for releasing water vapor.220,229 Now, the highest solar-to-energy conversion efficiency reported is close to or even higher than 90%.181,230–232 Our group integrated the water transportation function and photo-heating function into smartly designed and low-cost photothermal membranes comprised of PPy coated hydrophilic interconnected porous paper or electrospun nanofibers.220 Afterward, these materials were coated onto heat-insulating foam to conduct solar evaporation and achieved quite a high efficacy of over 90% under 1 sun illumination. These high values are due to the superhydrophilic feature of the evaporators, the suppressed radiative and convective losses by the good water transportation, and the minimized Econd by the excellent thermal insulation. The above results are summarized and compared in Table 1.
3.1.3.2 Reducing water evaporation energy. 

E
eva is the heat energy required to achieve water evaporation, which includes two parts, sensible heat and latent heat of evaporating water. Since there are numerous hydrogen bonds between water molecules, a certain amount of Eeva must be required to overcome the association between water molecules to achieve phase changes. Therefore, although wasteful heat energies have been effectively minimized and the solar-to-vapor efficiency has surpassed 90% under no solar concentration by optimizing hydrophilic porous evaporators, the vapor generation fluxes are still quite low in the current reports, generally below 1.6 L m−2 h−1 under one sun illumination at room temperature. This low mass (vapor) flux is a bottleneck for the solar thermal driven PID for practical application. Eqn (8) describes the relationship between vapor flux, energy efficiency, and vaporization latent heat (enthalpy) of water: η = mΔH/CoptP0(8)where m is the mass flux, ΔH is the vaporization enthalpy of water, P0 is the solar irradiation power, and Copt refers to the optical concentration on the absorber surface. Obviously, in an evaporation system, if η, Copt, and P0 were assumed to be constant, the vapor generation flux would be increased with decreasing water vaporization enthalpy.
Yu, Qu, and Yang demonstrated successful cases in their published studies by rationally designing a porous hydrogel evaporator to reduce the value of ΔH and then dramatically boost the water generation rate.222,223,225,233 The evaporators were constructed using self-floating porous polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogels with PPy or rGO solar absorbers incorporated into the networks. The internal gaps, micron channels as well as the hydrophilic PVA molecular meshes inside the hydrogels could effectively facilitate the rapid replenishment of water to the evaporation surface by capillary pumping. Simultaneously, by controlling the water loaded ratio in the photothermal hydrogel, the in situ generated heat energy was confined to only heat the water inside the evaporator. Moreover, the PVA chain could nearly eradicate the convective heat loss of water during evaporation. Therefore, under the above heat and water management, the solar-to-vapor efficiency was improved to around 94% and 95% in the PVA/PPy and PVA/rGO hydrogel systems, respectively. Indeed, the most important breakthrough of the above work is that they successfully reduced the vaporization enthalpy of water in the hydrogel molecular meshes rather than they only achieved the high solar-to-vapor energy efficiency. In the photothermal PVA hydrogel, there was a relatively high ratio of intermediate water detected by Ramon spectra that could be attributed to the surface tension induced hydrogen bond weakening. During evaporation, these intermediate water clusters will consume lower energy than the fully bonded water clusters to achieve phase changes, reducing the evaporation enthalpy (Fig. 11a). In addition, water can be evaporated as either a single molecule or in small clusters consisting of a few to tens of molecules. When water molecules were confined in the PVA molecular mesh, they were more likely to escape the polymer network as small clusters rather than individual molecules, which has been testified by tracing Li+ that can be evaporated outside together with water clusters and collected in condensate water. As such, the water is evaporated to a state with a lower enthalpy change than conventional latent heat (Fig. 11b). Based on the above two reasons, the evaporation enthalpy of water in the evaporator was decreased by near to 50%. A high evaporation flux of 3.2 L m−2 h−1 was obtained under 1 sun solar radiation, which was almost two times higher than the previously reported record (Table 1). Furthermore, the interconnected porous evaporator exhibited a daily solar water purification yield of 20.3 L m−2 under natural sunlight in Florida, USA, indicating its potential for practical applications in the future. Since the above work, several other reports based on porous hydrogel evaporators with reduced vaporization enthalpy of the water have been reported, which all presenting a higher water flux of over 2.5 L m−2 h−1 under 1 sun solar radiation.224,234 There are also some energy recycling routes to improve the efficiency of the whole system, e.g., recycling the dynamic energy of water vapor by the piezoelectric effect and converting the interfacial solar steam enthalpy into electricity by thermoelectric conversion.135,227,235,236 Because these studies are focused on vapor collector design rather than PID evaporator construction, the details will not be discussed in the present manuscript.
 Fig. 11  The water evaporation diagrams across common photothermal evaporators (a) and hydrogel photothermal evaporators with hydrogen bond weakening function (b). Less energy was consumed in the (b) case than the (a) case to achieve the same water generation due to intermediate water clusters in the liquid water phase and small water clusters in the vapor phase. (c) The schematic illustration of solar energy utilization by the typical planar system, a conventional 3D cylinder with circuitous pores and PMS with low-tortuosity in water evaporation.216 Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
3.1.3.3 Exploiting heat energy in other performances. 
Despite the great successes of reducing Eeva by the well-designed photothermal hydrogel evaporators, more economical and simple routes are still urgently demanded to overcome the limitation of water production effectively. Actually, in solar evaporation under real solar irradiation, there should be two parts of solar energy that can contribute to evaporation. One is the light energy, which irradiates on the confined evaporator surface and transforms to localized heat energy by the photothermal materials. This part of the energy is real-time and localized solar light energy, named as E1. The other is the solar heat energy independent of irradiation time and space (E2), imported from the sun and stored as heat energy in the environment, which acts as the decisive factor to determine the environmental heat energy. As illustrated in Fig. 11c, in 2D planar evaporation (most of the current evaporators), E1 is the main energy source to drive stream generation. While even the energy efficiency of E1 by 2D planer evaporators has approached its limit (100% of E1), the steam generation flux is still at a relatively low level. In this case, three-dimensional (3D) evaporators that extended a section into the atmosphere were currently proposed to enhance evaporation by capturing some E2.237–239 The evaporators could produce vapor below room temperature and then induced E2 to flow towards the evaporation surface. Yet, the evaporation enhancement contributed by E2 was generally less than 40%. This is reasoned that the capillary water lifting and distribution in common 3D evaporators were suppressed by the circuitous pores, which resulted in a limited energy transmission path of E2. Theoretically, in the same occupied space, the higher the water is transported to the 3D space by the solar evaporator, the more the E2 could be captured due to the extended heat transmission path, thus producing more vapor during solar evaporation.216
In our recent work, a nature-inspired low-porous-tortuosity 3D evaporator was demonstrated to improve water production significantly. The solar evaporator, prepared from polypyrrole-modified maize straw (PMS), has upright vascular structure enabling high water lifting and horizontal micro-gaps, facilitating broad water distribution to the outer surface. Consequently, the PMS evaporator dramatically enhanced the utilization of E2 for promoting evaporation. The maximum vapor generation rate of a single PMS (10.3 L m−2 h−1) respectively increased 2.5 times and 6 times compared with conventional 3D evaporators and planar evaporators with an identical occupied area. A scaled-up PMS array achieved a state-of-the-art vapor generation rate of 3.0 L m−2 h−1 under the simulated conditions and record-high clean water production of 2.2 L m−2 h−1 for actual seawater desalination under natural conditions (one-sun intensity). Moreover, due to the robust water transmission channel in superhydrophilic PMS, there was no salt scaling occurred during long-term desalination. This breakthrough reveals great potential for cost-effective freshwater production and the rational design of high-performance photothermal evaporators for solar distillation.216 Beside solar heat energy, an additional solar electricity is also a useful energy form for evaporation. A photo-electro-thermal evaporation system based on the solar evaporation system and solar cell, which reached a record high water-generation rate of 4.73 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination, was reported in our recent study.240

3.2 Control of salt scaling and organic pollutants
Despite the improvement of the evaporation efficiency, several new challenges associated with practical applications of solar photothermal PID need to be addressed. As a kind of raw water widely used in solar-driven PID, seawater contains 3.5 wt% total dissolved solids, including NaCl, CaCl2, and MgCl2, which would probably precipitate into crystals when water quickly evaporates from the surface of the solar evaporator. Build-up of these salt crystals will clog the porous structure and these crystals will accumulate during continuous operation, resulting in the reduction of evaporation rate.223 Especially, hydrophilic photothermal PID systems with higher evaporation flux suffer from stronger interaction with inorganic salts than the hydrophobic counterparts.241 Therefore, salt crystallization as a kind of structure fouling problem in interconnected porous structures needs to be solved. To overcome this issue, many investigations have been carried out for the development of salt-resistant photothermal materials. These strategies have been proven to be very efficient to this end, which may mainly follow three kinds of salt elimination mechanisms.242
The first one is the ex situ production of salt crystals, relying on the law of salt migration (Fig. 12a and b). According to the research of Mi et al., who reported a relatively smooth hydrophilic graphene leaf as a solar evaporator, salt crystallization would block the surface of the evaporator and reduce the steam production if without any particular structure design.228 Hence, the ex situ production of salt crystals is an attractive solution.243 One way to adjust the salt position depends on the changes in water conservancy conditions. Zhang et al. designed an evaporator composed of a horizontal evaporation disc and a vertical solution uptake thread. The crystallization sites of the salt on the disc were spatially isolated from the water evaporation surface, achieving continuous steam generation and salt harvesting in over 600 hours of non-stop operation.244 Another way is separating the evaporation surface and crystallization surface. Shi et al. designed a 3D cup that produces vapor in the cup inner-wall and solid salt as a by-product at the cup outer-wall. By rationally separating the light-absorbing surface from the salt precipitation surface, the 3D cup can be operated at high salt concentration without noticeable water evaporation rate decay in long-term operation along with continuous removal of salt crystals from the cup wall.245 Although the above methods required mechanical removal, it prevented reduction of the evaporation rate caused by the salt concentration. The formed salt crystals were recovered in the solid-state, thus achieving the goal of zero liquid discharge.
 Fig. 12  (a) The schematic diagram of the salt scaling occurred on the photothermal evaporators. (b) Mechanical removal of the formed salt crystals. (c) Automatic cleaning of the formed crystal based on the salinity gradient, and (d) the corresponding multilayer porous evaporators with abundant salt and water migration channels. (e) The formation of a concentration difference during evaporation and (f) the diagram of electricity generation driven by the salinity gradient.228,245,249,250 Reproduced with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2017, Royal Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2018, Royal Chemical Society. 
The second strategy is in situ melting of salt crystals, relying on the salinity gradient (Fig. 12c). Differing from the principle that the hydrophobic interface prevents the occurrence of salt scaling (separating the evaporation interface from the cold saline water), the salt-rejected superhydrophilic porous structure is generally designed as an integrated structure to ensure the smooth transport of salt ions.246 In our previous report, this unique-structure was named as salt auto-cleaning solar evaporation, and the principle and structure–activity relationship of the salt auto-cleaning process were revealed in detail. Thermodynamically, the movement of crystallized salt back to bulk seawater is a spontaneous process driven by the potential chemical difference of different salt concentrations. The intrinsic properties of its structure also determine the kinetic factor of salt diffusion in the membrane. According to Fick's law, if the salt auto-cleaning process was considered as the ions diffusing in the porous medium, the structure of the auto-cleaning material must possess a high porosity and superhydrophilic feature with large water content to increase the diffusion coefficient of salt ions to migrate back to the bulk water.221 Besides, other groups reported similar results.223,246–248 For instance, Chen et al. demonstrated an integrated evaporator with hydrophilic black cellulose fabrics as a light absorber, while fabrics as a water transporter and expanded polystyrene foams as an insulator.248 In this evaporator structure, the hydrophilic feature offered abundant water channels for rapid salt ion exchanging, leading to the rejection of salt scaling (Fig. 12d). Zhu et al. demonstrated a water lily-inspired hierarchical structure that enables efficient evaporation (∼80% solar-to-vapor efficiency) out of high-salinity brine and wastewater containing heavy metal ions (30 wt%). The upper epidermis absorbs sunlight and provides stomata for water vapor escape, and has the well-known hydrophobic self-cleaning property. The self-floating leaf exhibits a confined water path provided by vascular bundles to pump up water and then spread it into the large surface of the water lily.242 Besides, taking advantage of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic porous evaporators and their structural optimization, researchers have developed salt-resistant solar evaporators with multifunctional layers. Zhu et al. reported a flexible and salt-resistant Janus absorber with an upper hydrophobic carbon black nanoparticle coated polymethylmethacrylate layer for light absorption and a bottom hydrophilic polyacrylonitrile layer for pumping water. Salt may only be deposited in the hydrophilic PAN layer and quickly be dissolved back automatically, attributed to the salinity gradient between saturated brine and bottom seawater.251 Similarly, Yang et al. reported a hydrophobic salt-resistant hierarchical layer of Cu2SnSe3 (or Cu2ZnSnSe4) nanosphere arrays for broad solar harvesting and a hydrophilic filter membrane for continuous water supply and vapor generation. The as-fabricated devices achieve a remarkable and stable solar steam efficiency of 86.6% under one illumination.252
The third strategy to tackle the salt scaling problem is energy and resource recovery. Rather than being regarded as a pollutant, the salt in the solution can also be utilized as an alternative source of energy. Through inducing a high salinity gradient between the concentrated seawater and raw seawater, Yang et al. reported a new kind of technology to generate extra electricity while evaporating water (Fig. 12e and f). By employing a hydroid system of carbon nanotube modified filter paper and a commercial Nafion membrane, the system achieved a solar thermal efficiency of 75% and extra electricity power of 1 W m−2 under one sun illumination.249 Although electricity production is at a low level, the design still provides a new idea for blue energy utilization in PID. Besides the above methods, the crystallization sites of salt could also be spatially isolated from the water evaporation surface by the hydraulic scour of microfluidics in confined water paths, thus achieving continuous steam generation and salt harvesting in over 600 hours of non-stop operation.244
In addition to the common salt problem, raw water for solar evaporation also contains organic matter, which will deteriorate the water quality and form fouling materials on the evaporator surface.253 Rather than relying on the extra contamination removal process, Lou et al. firstly prepared a porous-structure based on rGO and TiO2 composites allowing for facile incorporation of photocatalysts to regenerate clean water out of contaminated water and solar-driven PID.212 Subsequently, black Ti2O3 and TiOx designed by Wang et al. also possess the function of photocatalysis as well as photothermal evaporation, although the mechanism was not investigated in detail in their papers.170,200 In fact, with reasonable water transportation and heat preservation structure design, the interconnected porous evaporators that attached various photocatalysts would all possess the property of degrading organic matter in raw water.254–260 It should be pointed out that the above-mentioned studies only reported the phenomenon of photocatalysis in solar-driven PID, and the currently targeted contaminants are generally nonvolatile model organic matter, such as dyes. While these studies may be meaningful for evaporator fouling control (though not discussed in the articles), it is still unknown whether photocatalysis is effective for volatile organic compound rejection, which is important to the cleanness of condensate water.
4. Conclusions
In summary, this article reviewed the recent developments of evaporators with special wettability for porous interface distillation in the past ten years. For PID processes working on hydrophobic porous evaporators, researchers modulated the physical structure, e.g., thickness, porosity, pore tortuosity, and size of membranes, to steadily promote the distillation flux. At the same time, they endowed the membranes with superhydrophobic, omniphobic or asymmetric wettable surface features to enhance the running durability. In addition, self-heating evaporators with outstanding capture ability toward in situ generated heat are also attracting interest. On the other hand, studies on PID processes working on hydrophilic porous evaporators have just boomed in the past 5 years and mainly focused on solar-driven photothermal distillation. Amazing achievements have been realized in improving solar-to-vapor efficiency to over 90% and vapor flux to higher than 2 L m−2 h−1 under one sun intensity by rationally modulating light absorbance, managing heat loss and controlling feedwater supply during evaporation in superhydrophilic evaporators. Besides, salt scaling control and material resource recovery also witnessed noticeable progress through rational evaporator design. Despite the impressive advancement in PID in the past years, there are still many significant barriers standing before its practical application. The main challenges and opportunities are listed as follows, which call for much more research attention.
4.1 Increasing water generation

4.1.1 Hydrophobic PID. 
The water flux and energy efficiency of hydrophobic porous evaporators for MD should be further improved. Specifically, driven by a temperature difference of 40 K, the water flux of MD processes is generally below 40 L m−2 h−1, which requires substantial improvement. To tackle this problem, thermal insulation materials, such as flexible ceramics, with low thermal conductivity may be processed into hydrophobic evaporation membranes, which can reduce the temperature polarization across the membrane and then enhance evaporation efficiency. Besides, membrane materials with straight porous architecture are anticipated to facilitate mass transfer during distillation.


4.1.2 Hydrophilic PID. 
Photothermal superhydrophilic evaporators harvesting solar energy are approaching the energy utilization limit under no solar concentration, but they still suffer from modest vapor production rates (generally below 2 L m−2 h−1). Boosting the utilization of the unconfined solar heat energy or reducing the latent heat of water by evaporator design might be promising routes to solve the problem.

4.2 Reducing water-wetting of hydrophobic evaporators
The antiwetting ability of hydrophobic evaporators should be further improved towards long-term practical application. In most reports on hydrophobic PID evaporators, researchers assessed the stability of the membranes only in several hours to tens of hours. It is difficult for the evaporators reported in the literature to satisfy the requirements of application in engineering due to the complex source water quality in real life. Additionally, there is a trade-off between water flux and anti-wetting performance (separation efficiency) in traditional membranes. Facing the above problems, straight porous membrane evaporators with homogeneous and superomniphobic surfaces are likely to break the trade-off, enabling fast steam transportation while minimizing aggression from hot steam and surfactants.
4.3 Curbing salt scaling
More attention should be paid to salt scaling in membrane pores. Source waters for distillation in realistic scenarios, such as seawater, industrial wastewater, and hypersaline water, contain many dissolved salt species, e.g., NaCl, CaSO4, and MgSO4. Their scaling behaviors, especially of Ca2+ and Mg2+, would have a heavy toll on evaporation durability but have not been investigated in detail. In the future, a deeper understanding of salt scaling on evaporators with different surface characteristics should be explored. Besides, a suitable evaporator design is to be devised to achieve a much better anti-scaling function.
4.4 Guarding against volatile organic compounds
PID can completely reject non-volatile solutes at the vapor–liquid conversion interface and then produce high-quality water, thus holding great promise for clean water production, wastewater treatment, and seawater desalination. However, many source drinks of water are polluted with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). VOCs can evaporate from the interconnected pores of evaporators and be collected together with distilled water; moreover, they may even be enriched in the collected distillate during interfacial distillation, which will seriously threaten the water quality. More advanced and multifunctional PID evaporators combined with catalytic degradation function or selective permeation will alleviate this issue.
In conclusion, PID excels itself in various aspects, such as the ability to employ low-grade waste-heat energy from industrial processes, capturing solar energy at the localized interface for in situ driven distillation, relatively small areal footprint, low-pressure operation, outstanding water quality, highly compact configuration, and easy-to-deploy feature. It is regarded as highly suitable for small-scale and on-site desalination applications towards small sized water plants, off-grid, and point-of-use potable clean water production apparatus. By resolving the abovementioned challenges and bottlenecks, PID will be endowed with a more promising prospect for practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52000105, 52000161, 52070052, 51873047 and 51761145031), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20200478), the 67th batch of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2020M671503), the Scientific Research Foundation of Heilongjiang Prov. (No. YQ2020B003), the Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF2017NRFNSFC001-048) and the CREATE Program of Nanomaterials for Energy and Water Management for the funding support.
Notes and references
M. Kummu, J. H. Guillaume, H. de Moel, S. Eisner, M. Florke, M. Porkka, S. Siebert, T. I. Veldkamp and P. J. Ward, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Leijon and C. Boström, Desalination, 2018, 435, 161–171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, A. P. Straub, T. Tong, D. M. Warsinger and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Mariñas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, R. Kwak, H. J. Kwon, V. S. Pham, M. Kim, B. Al-Anzi, G. Lim and J. Han, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31850 CrossRef CAS .
K. Christen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 46, 639 CrossRef .
D. Qu, J. Wang, L. Wang, D. Hou, Z. Luan and B. Wang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 67, 21–25 CrossRef CAS .
P. Srimuk, X. Su, J. Yoon, D. Aurbach and V. Presser, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 517–538 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pothanamkandathil, J. Fortunato and C. A. Gorski, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 3653–3662 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huo, Y. Zhao, M. Zong, B. Liang, X. Zhang, I. U. Khan, X. Song and K. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2505–2517 RSC .
E. Liu, L. Y. Lee, S. L. Ong and H. Y. Ng, Water Res., 2020, 183, 116059 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ghaffour, T. M. Missimer and G. L. Amy, Desalination, 2013, 309, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Greenlee, D. F. Lawler, B. D. Freeman, B. Marrot and P. Moulin, Water Res., 2009, 43, 2317–2348 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, J. Tian, S. Gao and B. Van der Bruggen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8831–8847 RSC .
C. Boo, J. Lee and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 8112–8119 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. An, J. Guo, E.-J. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang and T. Leiknes, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 525, 57–67 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Tijing, Y. C. Woo, W. Shim, T. He, J.-S. Choi, S.-H. Kim and H. K. Shon, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 502, 158–170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alkhudhiri, N. Darwish and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2012, 287, 2–18 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 474, 39–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Attia, S. Alexander, C. J. Wright and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2017, 420, 318–329 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. M. Gryta and A. W. M. J. Grzechulska, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 181, 279–287 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Li, X. Du, T. Tong, T. Y. Cath and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18456–18465 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chafidz, S. Al-Zahrani, M. N. Al-Otaibi, C. F. Hoong, T. F. Lai and M. Prabu, Desalination, 2014, 345, 36–49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Woods and J. Pellegrino, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 59, 46–57 CrossRef .
M. S. El-Bourawi, Z. Ding, R. Ma and M. Khayet, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 285, 4–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khayet and J. I. Mengual, Int. J. Nucl. Desalin., 2005, 1, 435–449 CrossRef CAS .
L. Eykens, K. De Sitter, C. Dotremont, L. Pinoy and B. Van der Bruggen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 182, 36–51 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, Y. Liu, H. Hou, W. Shi, F. Qu, F. Cui and W. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 3027–3036 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, S. Pedersen, K. R. Zodrow, N. J. Hogan, O. Neumann, J. Wu, T. Wang, A. Deshmukh, M. Elimelech, Q. Li, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6936–6941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, C. Jia, E. M. Hitz, B. Yang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 201–209 CrossRef .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Li, J. Gilron, D. Kong, Y. Yin, Y. Oren, C. Linder and T. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 456, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, L. Zhong, X. Chen, W. Zheng, J. Zuo, G. Zeng and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 615, 118499 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Wang, C. Wang, C. Cheng and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15272–15282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Saleem, L. Trabzon, A. Kilic and S. J. Zaidi, Desalination, 2020, 478, 114178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
L. Martínez and J. M. Rodríguez-Maroto, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 312, 143–156 CrossRef .
L. Eykens, I. Hitsov, K. De Sitter, C. Dotremont, L. Pinoy, I. Nopens and B. Van der Bruggen, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 498, 353–364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Wu, R. Wang and R. W. Field, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 470, 257–265 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Tijing, J.-S. Choi, S. Lee, S.-H. Kim and H. K. Shon, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 453, 435–462 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Lawson and D. R. Lloyd, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 120, 123–133 CrossRef .
M. Khayet, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 164, 56–88 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krishna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2812–2836 RSC .
P. J. A. M. Kerkhof and M. A. M. Geboers, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 3129–3167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, T. Laoui and R. Karnik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 317–323 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Straub, N. Y. Yip, S. Lin, J. Lee and M. Elimelech, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16090 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bhatia, M. R. Bonilla and D. Nicholson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15350–15383 RSC .
A. Deshmukh and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 539, 458–474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, N. Y. Yip and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 453, 498–515 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gryta and M. Tomaszewska, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 144, 211–222 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Wang, M. Zhu and B. S. Hsiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2423–2430 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yu, C. Cheng, L. Deng, M. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21919–21930 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Siyal, A. A. Khan, C.-K. Lee and J.-O. Kim, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 205, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thomas, E. Guillen-Burrieza and H. A. Arafat, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 452, 470–480 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu Wang, T.-S. Chung and M. Gryta, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2008, 63, 2587–2594 CrossRef .
M. Gryta, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 287, 67–78 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Hwang, K. He, S. Gray, J. Zhang and I. S. Moon, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 371, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Lalia, E. Guillen-Burrieza, H. A. Arafat and R. Hashaikeh, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 428, 104–115 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Sprague, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2006, 8, 157–187 Search PubMed .
D. L. Green, L. McAmish and A. V. McCormick, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 279, 100–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, P. Hsu, C. Kuo, S. Chen and J. Lai, Desalination, 2008, 233, 64–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Tabatabaei, P. J. Carreau and A. Ajji, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 345, 148–159 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cabassud and D. Wirth, Desalination, 2003, 157, 307–314 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kang and Y. Cao, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 463, 145–165 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rajabzadeh, T. Maruyama, T. Sotani and H. Matsuyama, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2008, 63, 415–423 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sukitpaneenit and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 340, 192–205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, N. Wang, X. Mao, Y. Si, J. Yu, S. S. Al-Deyab, M. El-Newehy and B. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14511–14518 RSC .
Z. Zhu, Z. Liu, L. Zhong, C. Song, W. Shi, F. Cui and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 563, 602–609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan and Y. Peng, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 79, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
A. Razmjou, E. Arifin, G. Dong, J. Mansouri and V. Chen, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 850–863 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, A. Huang, Y. Chen, C. Chen, C. Hsu, F. Tsai and K. Tung, Desalination, 2018, 428, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, H. Ye, X. Li, P. Li, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Zhu and B. S. Hsiao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 206, 14–25 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, R. Wang and A. G. Fane, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 6335–6341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Phattaranawika, R. Jiraratananon and A. G. Fane, J. Membr. Sci., 2003, 215, 75–85 CrossRef .
S. Adnan, M. Hoang, H. Wang and Z. Xie, Desalination, 2012, 284, 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imdakm and T. Matsuura, Procedia Eng., 2012, 44, 1874 CrossRef .
L. Martínez, F. J. Florido-Díaz, A. Hernández and P. Prádanos, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2003, 33, 45–55 CrossRef .
L. Zhong, Z. Zhu, Y. Han, Q. Wang, D. Liu, F. Cui, B. Li and W. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 2553–2564 RSC .
K. W. Lawson and D. R. Lloyd, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 124, 1–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, J. H. Kim, S. J. Moon, E. Drioli and Y. M. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 550, 545–553 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qing, X. Shi, W. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, P. Wang and C. Y. Tang, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 564, 465–472 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, X. Ma, Z. Xu, W. You and F. Li, Desalination, 2014, 347, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
F. Laganà, G. Barbieri and E. Drioli, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 166, 1–11 CrossRef .
X. An, G. Xu, B. Xie and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2376–2384 RSC .
M. Khayet, M. C. García-Payo, L. García-Fernández and J. Contreras-Martínez, Desalination, 2018, 426, 174–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khayeta and T. Matsuurab, Desalination, 2003, 158, 51–56 CrossRef .
L. D. Tijing, Y. C. Woo, M. A. H. Johir, J.-S. Choi and H. K. Shon, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 256, 155–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qtaishat, M. Khayet and T. Matsuura, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 329, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. P. Chew, Y. Zhang, K. Goh, J. S. Ho, R. Xu and R. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25524–25534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Woo, L. D. Tijing, M. J. Park, M. Yao, J.-S. Choi, S. Lee, S.-H. Kim, K.-J. An and H. K. Shon, Desalination, 2017, 403, 187–198 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rezaei, D. M. Warsinger, V. J. Lienhard, M. C. Duke, T. Matsuura and W. M. Samhaber, Water Res., 2018, 139, 329–352 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and S. Lin, Water Res., 2017, 112, 38–47 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. An, J. Guo, S. Jeong, E. J. Lee, S. A. A. Tabatabai and T. Leiknes, Water Res., 2016, 103, 362–371 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Tijing, Y. C. Woo, J.-S. Choi, S. Lee, S.-H. Kim and H. K. Shon, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 475, 215–244 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rezaei, D. M. Warsinger, J. H. Lienhard V. and W. M. Samhaber, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 530, 42–52 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Hou and S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 3866–3874 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zuo and R. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 447, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Warsinger, J. Swaminathan, E. Guillen-Burrieza, H. A. Arafat and J. H. Lienhard V., Desalination, 2015, 356, 294–313 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Z. Zhu and G. Zeng, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 744, 140822 CrossRef CAS .
J. Israelachvili and R. Pashley, Nature, 1982, 300, 341–342 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Tsao, D. F. Evans and H. Wennerstrom, Science, 1993, 262, 547–550 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Meyer, K. J. Rosenberg and J. Israelachvili, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15739–15746 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, Z. Liu and Y. Hu, Desalination, 2018, 432, 23–31 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boo, S. Hong and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 14198–14207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, C. Boo, W. H. Ryu, A. D. Taylor and M. Elimelech, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11154–11161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Zhu, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13538–13546 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pepicelli, T. Verwijlen, T. A. Tervoort and J. Vermant, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 5977–5990 RSC .
H. Liu and G. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23936 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, S. Nejati, C. Boo, Y. Hu, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2014, 1, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sheng, Y. Xu, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15139–15147 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Shi, F. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Jin and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2071–2076 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Lee, B. J. Deka, J. Guo, Y. C. Woo, H. K. Shon and A. K. An, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 10117–10126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Z. Yang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Yang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., 2003, 115, 4349–4352 CrossRef .
J. Zhang and S. Seeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4699–4704 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yong, Y. Fang, F. Chen, J. Huo, Q. Yang, H. Bian, G. Du and X. Hou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 1148–1155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Li and Y. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1105–1108 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boo, J. Lee and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 12275–12282 CrossRef CAS .
V. Karanikola, C. Boo, J. Rolf and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 14362–14370 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Lu, J. Zuo, J. Chang, H. N. Kuan and T. S. Chung, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 4472–4480 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tuteja, W. Choi, M. Ma, J. M. Mabry, S. A. Mazzella, G. C. Rutledge, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Science, 2007, 318, 1618–1622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, A. K. Kota, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 578–581 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Chhatre, W. Choi, A. Tuteja, K. C. Park, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4027–4035 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jin, J. Wang, X. Yao, M. Liao, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2861–2864 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and S. Seeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6652–6656 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, T. Zhang and T. Cui, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9295–9301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu and T. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2964 CrossRef .
L. Yuan, T. Wu, W. Zhang, S. Ling, R. Xiang, X. Gui, Y. Zhua and Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6952–6959 RSC .
H. Zhao and K. Y. Law, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11812–11818 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Wong, G. Liu and A. Tricoli, Small, 2017, 13, 1603688 CrossRef .
W. S. Wong, G. Liu, N. Nasiri, C. Hao, Z. Wang and A. Tricoli, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 587–596 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2744–2747 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Zhou, A. Gestos, J. Fang and T. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10221–10226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
Y. X. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Jin and S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 13304–13310 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Lu, P. Wu, Z. Zhang, J. Li, W. Zhu, Y. Hu, D. Wu and J. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18675–18683 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Cheng, C. H. Lau and L. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9534–9545 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Wei, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 665–669 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Xue, J. Gao, J. Meng, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3401–3405 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Zhai, Y. Yang, X. Yang and Z. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 354, 463–472 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, W. Wang, D. Qi, Y. Luo, Y. Liu, Y. Xu, F. Cui, C. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801870 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, Z. Li, L. Zhong, R. Zhang, F. Cui and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 572, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
Y. Huang, Z. Wang, D. Hou and S. Lin, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 531, 122–128 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, Y. Yao, R. Xiang and Y. Wu, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 453, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Yang, M. Gao, M. Hong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802894 CrossRef .
H. C. Yang, J. Hou, V. Chen and Z. K. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13398–13407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, W. Zhong, J. Hou, V. Chen and Z. Xu, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 523, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qu, Z. Yan, H. Yu, G. Fan, H. Pang, H. Rong and J. He, Desalination, 2020, 486, 114493 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kiefer, A. Präbst, K. S. Rodewald and T. Sattelmayer, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 590, 117294 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, L. Zhong, T. Horseman, Z. Liu, G. Zeng, Z. Li, S. Lin and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.memsci.2020.118768 .
Z. Xiao, R. Zheng, Y. Liu, H. He, X. Yuan, Y. Ji, D. Li, H. Yin, Y. Zhang, X. M. Li and T. He, Water Res., 2019, 155, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Z. Li, H. Guo, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Yin, X. Li, J. Song, L. D. Nghiem and T. He, Desalination, 2019, 466, 36–43 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, T. Horseman, H. Cao, K. Christie, Y. Li and S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 11801–11809 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horseman, C. Su, K. S. S. Christie and S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2019, 6, 423–429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, S. Yu, L. Hou, B. Liu, Q. Xia, G. Liu and P. Li, Water Res., 2019, 149, 588–595 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10, 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boo and M. Elimelech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 501–503 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Dudchenko, C. Chen, A. Cardenas, J. Rolf and D. Jassby, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 557–563 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gupta, K. D. Rao, S. Kiruthika and G. U. Kulkarni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12559–12575 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, J. Zhou, L. Miao, C. Liu, Y. Peng, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7691–7709 RSC .
P. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1078–1089 RSC .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS .
A. Politano, P. Argurio, G. Di Profio, V. Sanna, A. Cupolillo, S. Chakraborty, H. A. Arafat and E. Curcio, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603504 CrossRef .
M. Fujiwara and T. Imura, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5705–5712 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara and M. Kikuchi, Water Res., 2017, 127, 96–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara, Desalination, 2017, 404, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, K. R. Zodrow, P. B. Szemraj and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23712–23719 RSC .
M. Ye, J. Jia, Z. Wu, C. Qian, R. Chen, P. G. O'Brien, W. Sun, Y. Dong and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601811 CrossRef .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706805 CrossRef .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
A. Ahsan, M. Imteaz, U. A. Thomas, M. Azmi, A. Rahman and N. N. Nik Daud, Appl. Energy, 2014, 114, 924–930 CrossRef .
S. W. Sharshir, A. H. Elsheikh, G. Peng, N. Yang, M. O. A. El-Samadony and A. E. Kabeel, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 521–544 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, T. Chen, J. Xu, G. Li and K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 513–531 RSC .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, G. Zhong, C. Kubel, A. A. Jelle, C. Qian, L. Wang, M. Ebrahimi, L. M. Reyes, A. S. Helmy and G. A. Ozin, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 6329–6334 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11665–11673 RSC .
Q. Zhao, N. Chen, D. Zhao and X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11453–11461 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Song, D. Ji, C. Li, A. Cheney, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, B. Chen, J. Gao, Y. Li, X. Liu, D. Aga, S. Jiang, Z. Yu and Q. Gan, Global Challenges, 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Cui, M. Zhao, Y. Xu, L. Chen, Z. Cao, S. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 704–710 RSC .
Y. Fu, T. Mei, G. Wang, A. Guo, G. Dai, S. Wang, J. Wang, J. Li and X. Wang, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 114, 961–968 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guo, X. Ming, Y. Fu, G. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29958–29964 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pal, G. Natu, K. Ahmad and A. Chattopadhyay, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4111–4118 RSC .
P. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, H. Su, L. Sun, S. Tanemura, W. Cao, F. Jiang and L. Zhao, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 166–173 CrossRef .
M. W. Higgins, A. R. Shakeel Rahmaan, R. R. Devarapalli, M. V. Shelke and N. Jha, Sol. Energy, 2018, 159, 800–810 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. He, Y. Hu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9362–9368 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Xu and K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Song, M. Huang and H. Jiang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800108 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Xu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700046 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, H. Gholami Derami, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y.-S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18397–18402 RSC .
J. Yang, Y. Pang, W. Huang, S. K. Shaw, J. Schiffbauer, M. A. Pillers, X. Mu, S. Luo, T. Zhang, Y. Huang, G. Li, S. Ptasinska, M. Lieberman and T. Luo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5510–5518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Keshavarz Hedayati and M. Elbahri, Materials, 2016, 9, 497 CrossRef .
J. Cai and L. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 37–53 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, A. Guo, T. Mei, J. Wang, J. Li and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5629–5635 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Li, B. Tang and P. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14600–14607 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Ma, D. Liu, H. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 869–876 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Huang, C.-E. Hsiung, Y. Tian, J. Wang, Y. Han and A. Fratalocchi, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1600013 CrossRef .
X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1223–1230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. Wu, W. Song, Y. Mo, X. Lin, Q. He and B. Guo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6186–6193 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701756 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, L. Tian, K. K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9400–9407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, J. Luan, K. K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 609–616 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, G. Wang, X. Ming, X. Liu, B. Hou, T. Mei, J. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Carbon, 2018, 130, 250–256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Song, J. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14628–14636 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, G. Zhang, Q. Ji, H. Liu, R. Liu and J. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9974–9983 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, C. Tang, J. Ma, D. Liu, D. Qi, S. You, F. Cui, Y. Wei and W. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 5150–5158 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 201606762 Search PubMed .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Gu, Y. Su, H. Su, C. Guo and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17817–17821 RSC .
Y. Xu, H. Xu, Z. Zhu, H. Hou, J. Zuo, F. Cui, D. Liu and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22296–22306 RSC .
Y. Xu, D. Liu, H. Xiang, S. Ren, Z. Zhu, D. Liu, H. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 586, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, H. Lu, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1907061 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 623–628 RSC .
L. Zhu, T. Ding, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900250 CrossRef .
C. Finnerty, L. Zhang, D. L. Sedlak, K. L. Nelson and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11701–11709 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mu, W. Bai, Y. Fan, Z. Zhang, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9673–9679 RSC .
Y. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Han, H. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Qi and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123379 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Sun and C. J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901312 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, J. Bae, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7913–7919 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, M. H. Singer, C. Li, A. R. Cheney, D. Ji, L. Zhou, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Bei, Z. Yu, S. Jiang and Q. Gan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800222 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, R. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhuo, L. Shi, J. Chang, S. Hong, K.-C. Ng and P. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1171–1186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Han, Y. Xu, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Qi, D. Liu and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21771–21779 RSC .
J. Xu, Z. Wang, C. Chang, B. Fu, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, Desalination, 2020, 484, 114423 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, J. Li, Y. Wang, C. Fang, X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, Z. Wu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, C. Liu, F. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3024–3032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900498 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, H. Zhao, Z. Yin, J. Zhao, X. Yin, N. Li, D. Yin, Y. Li, B. Lei, Y. Du and W. Que, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1143–1150 RSC .
C. Song, D. Qi, Y. Han, Y. Xu, H. Xu, S. You, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Wei and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 9025–9033 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. He, L. Wang, Y. Huang and B. Jiang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 132, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Han, J. Zhang, F. Cui, Y. Zhao, X. Li and W. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5476–5485 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hao, Y. Yang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10789–10797 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. He, X. Wang and Y. Hu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 171, 272–278 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Shi, S. Zhuo, C. Zhang, Y. Aldrees, S. Aleid and P. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qiao, J. Wu, H. Li, Y. Xu, L. Ren, K. Lin and W. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7066–7073 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Luo, H. Xu, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Yang, W. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, e2004401 CrossRef .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Zhigao Zhu	Zhigao Zhu received his B.S. degree in polymer materials and engineering from Nanjing Tech University in 2012, M.S. degree in materials engineering from Donghua University in 2014 and doctorate degree in 2019 in Wang's group from Harbin Institute of Technology. He is now an associate professor in Nanjing University of Science and Technology. His research interest mainly focuses on superwettable nanofibrous membranes for oily water treatment and membrane distillation.
Ying Xu	Ying Xu received her B.S. degree in municipal engineering from North China University of Water Resources and Electric Power in 2014 and her doctorate degree in 2019 in Wang's group from Harbin Institute of Technology. She is now an assistant professor in Zhengzhou University. Her research interest mainly focuses on the synthesis of photo-thermal membranes for solar evaporation in water purification.
Yifei Luo	Yifei Luo is a Ph.D. student in Materials Science at Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, under the supervision of Prof. Xiaodong Chen. She received her B.E. (first class honors) in Materials Engineering from NTU in 2016. Her current research focus is hydrogel-based functional materials and devices for bioelectronic applications, such as flexible electrodes, sensors, and energy storage devices.
Wei Wang	Wei Wang is a Professor in the School of Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He received his B.S. degree in chemistry in 2007 and Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry in 2012 from Jilin University (China). He started his independent research career at Harbin Institute of Technology in 2012 and was promoted to Full Professor in 2015. He used to work in Nanyang Technological University of Singapore as a research fellow and UC Berkeley as a senior visiting scholar. His research interests are mainly focused on filtration membranes and nano-chemistry for water purification.
Xiaodong Chen	Xiaodong Chen is a Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his B.S. degree (honors) in chemistry from Fuzhou University (China) in 1999, M.S. degree (honors) in physical chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002, and Ph.D. degree (Summa Cum Laude) in biochemistry from the University of Münster (Germany) in 2006. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at Northwestern University (USA), he started his independent research career as a Singapore National Research Foundation Fellow and Nanyang Assistant Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2009. He was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure in 2013 and Full Professor in 2016. His research interests include programmable materials for energy conversion, water remediation, and integrated nano–bio interfaces.

 	Fig. 1  Qualitative comparison of porous interfacial distillation (PID) with established desalination technologies across a wide variety of desalination performance metrics. Technologies include reverse osmosis (RO) and traditional thermal methods (multi-effect distillation and multi-stage flash). Three stars refer to excellent performance, and one star indicates poor performance.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic evaporation diagram in hydrophobic and hydrophilic evaporators. (b) The development history and trend of PID based hydrophobic and hydrophilic porous evaporators.30,31,33,34 Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the membrane characteristics, including membrane porosity, thickness, and material thermal conductivity. They together affect the membrane performances of hydrophobic PID (MD).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Membrane design for simultaneous increasing membrane porosity and decreasing tortuosity for maximal steam transformation. The insets of (i), (ii) and (iii) respectively illustrate the FE-SEM images of the phase-inversion membrane (PVDF flat-sheet membrane), melt-blown membrane (glass fiber membrane) and electrospinning membrane (polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF–HFP) nanofibrous membranes). (b) Comparison of the permeation flux of hydrophobic porous membranes fabricated from different processes.16,18,33,54,55,57,72–75 Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the possible membrane pore wetting against surfactants using the common superhydrophobic membrane. (b) Contact angle measurement and (c) the stability of the membrane during MD using a hydrophobic glass fiber membrane. (d) Schematic illustration of the possible resistance of the membrane pore wetting mechanism using the superhydrophobic–omniphobic membrane. (e) Contact angle measurement and (f) the stability of the membrane during MD using an omniphobic PVDF membrane.16,34,111 Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the possible simultaneous resistance of the membrane wetting and fouling mechanism using the hydrophilic/omniphobic Janus membrane. Schematic illustration of two general methods to fabricate a hydrophilic skin layer on an omniphobic membrane surface: (b) spraying using an air-driven spray gun and (c) spraying using electrospraying. FE-SEM images of the hydrophilic skin layer fabricated via spraying using an (d) air-driven spray gun and (e) electrospraying method, respectively (the inset in (e) shows the underwater oil contact angle of the electrosprayed hydrophilic skin layer). Comparison of the resistance of membrane wetting and fouling when treating the surfactant stabilized oil-in-saline water microemulsion of relevant membranes after MD operation: (f) air-driven spray gun method and (g) electrospraying method.34,70,136 Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the possible antiscaling and scaling mechanisms of the superhydrophobic membrane with and without slippery surfaces. (b) The desalination performances of relevant membranes and (c) photographs of relevant membranes after concentration of the high salinity NaCl solution.153 Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 
	(4)
αEsolar = Esolar − Eref	(5)

 	Fig. 8  Energy balance diagram of an interfacial-heating solar evaporator under open-air conditions.	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration of light adsorption & reflection over (a) a flat surface. (b) Illustration of light adsorption & reflection over an evaporator surface with microscopic topography, including (top inset) highly porous structure and (bottom inset) specific surface nano-geometry. (c and d) are the corresponding PID evaporator examples demonstrated in the literature. (e) Illustration of light adsorption & reflection over an evaporator surface with macroscopic topography and (f) the corresponding evaporator example in the literature.177,201,202 Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 
Erad = εσ(T24 − T14)	(6)
Econv = h(T2 − T1)	(7)

 	Fig. 10  PID photothermal evaporator design for controlling wasteful heat loss. (a) Self-floating thin-film photothermal structures without a heat barrier, (b) complex structures with a water-wettable and porous support that simultaneously serves as a heat barrier and unconfined water transportation route. They can be divided into a bilayer structure and monolithic structure. (c) Quasi-isolation multilayer structure with a water-proof heat barrier and an extra confined water channel.	 

PPy mesh	A	2015	58%	0.92	
164

AAO/Au	A	2015	57%	0.67	
177

Al NP/AAM	A	2016	∼58%	∼0.95	
201

Graphite/carbon foam	B	2014	64%	1.00	
205

Ti2O3 nanoparticle membrane	B	2016	—	1.32	
200

Carbon nanotube wood	B	2017	65%	0.95	
208

rGO–SA–CNT aerogel	B	2017	83%	1.67	
213

Graphene oxide	B	2018	87%	1.30	
31

Glass microsphere–carbon black	B	2019	82.1%	—	
214

Carbon-nanotubes aerogels	B	2019	86.8%	1.37	
215


PPy–straw
	
B
	
2020
	
81.6%
	
3.0
	

216


Carbonized mushroom	C	2017	78%	1.48	
217

Graphene oxide	C	2017	87.5%	1.27	
218

Carbon nanoparticles	C	2017	88%	1.28	
181

Ag/diatomite	C	2019	92.2%	1.33	
219

PDA–PEI/PPy@PI membrane	C	2019	86.9%	1.43	
220

PPy cellulose paper	C	2019	90%	1.52	
221

PVA/PPy porous hydrogel	D	2019	94%	3.2	
222

PVA/graphene porous hydrogel	D	2019	95%	2.5	
223

PVA–chitosan/PPy hydrogel	D	2019	92%	3.6	
224


Fe-MOF/PVA hydrogel
	
D
	
2020
	
90%
	
3.2
	

225


η = mΔH/CoptP0	(8)

 	Fig. 11  The water evaporation diagrams across common photothermal evaporators (a) and hydrogel photothermal evaporators with hydrogen bond weakening function (b). Less energy was consumed in the (b) case than the (a) case to achieve the same water generation due to intermediate water clusters in the liquid water phase and small water clusters in the vapor phase. (c) The schematic illustration of solar energy utilization by the typical planar system, a conventional 3D cylinder with circuitous pores and PMS with low-tortuosity in water evaporation.216 Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The schematic diagram of the salt scaling occurred on the photothermal evaporators. (b) Mechanical removal of the formed salt crystals. (c) Automatic cleaning of the formed crystal based on the salinity gradient, and (d) the corresponding multilayer porous evaporators with abundant salt and water migration channels. (e) The formation of a concentration difference during evaporation and (f) the diagram of electricity generation driven by the salinity gradient.228,245,249,250 Reproduced with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2017, Royal Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2018, Royal Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
