Group 16 conjugated polymers based on furan, thiophene, selenophene, and tellurophene  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00139J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00139J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 6442-6474Group 16 conjugated polymers based on furan, thiophene, selenophene, and tellurophene

        
          
            Shuyang 
            Ye†
a, 
      
        
          
            Victor 
            Lotocki†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dwight S. 
            Seferos
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, Canada. E-mail: dwight.seferos@utoronto.ca
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, 200 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E5, Canada
Received 
      16th February 2022
    First published on 17th July 2022AbstractFive-membered aromatic rings containing Group 16 elements (O, S, Se, and Te), also referred as chalcogenophenes, are ubiquitous building blocks for π-conjugated polymers (CPs). Among these, polythiophenes have been established as a model system to study the interplay between molecular structure, solid-state organization, and electronic performance. The judicious substitution of alternative heteroatoms into polythiophenes is a promising strategy for tuning their properties and improving the performance of derived organic electronic devices, thus leading to the recent abundance of CPs containing furan, selenophene, and tellurophene. In this review, we first discuss the current status of Kumada, Negishi, Murahashi, Suzuki–Miyaura, and direct arylation polymerizations, representing the best routes to access well-defined chalcogenophene-containing homopolymers and copolymers. The self-assembly, optical, solid-state, and electronic properties of these polymers and their influence on device performance are then summarized. In addition, we highlight post-polymerization modifications as effective methods to transform polychalcogenophene backbones or side chains in ways that are unobtainable by direct polymerization. Finally, the major challenges and future outlook in this field are presented.
Shuyang Ye
Shuyang Ye received his PhD in chemistry from the University of Toronto in 2019, working in the area of controlled polymerizations and conjugated polymers containing heavy chalcogenophenes. After completing his PhD, he took up a postdoctoral fellowship in the Seferos group and engaged in two industrial collaborative projects of developing polymeric reagents for mass cytometry and synthesizing air-sensitive phosphonic acids for organic electronics. Currently he is enjoying a break before starting an industrial job. In his time outside the lab, Shuyang enjoys cooking, running, and playing beach volleyball at Woodbine beach.
Victor Lotocki
Victor Lotocki grew up in the Greater Toronto Area and completed his BSc at the University of Waterloo. Afterwards, he carried out his MSc studies at McGill University in Prof. Ashok Kakkar's group, where he synthesized redox-responsive miktoarm star polymers for drug delivery. Currently, Victor is working on a PhD in Prof. Dwight Seferos’ group at the University of Toronto. His main research interests focus on the synthesis and self-assembly of polymers with complex architectures. Outside of chemistry, Victor is an active volunteer in areas related to science policy and education.
Hao Xu
Hao Xu grew up in Chengdu, China. He received his BSc under the supervision of Prof. Changsheng Zhao from Sichuan University in 2020. He is now a second-year PhD student in Prof. Dwight Seferos's group at the Department of Chemistry at the University of Toronto. Presently, his research focuses on the synthesis of monodisperse sequence-defined conjugated oligomers and polymers. Outside the lab, Hao enjoys playing piano and ukulele, taking photos, playing badminton, and coding Python script that automates his research projects.
Dwight S. Seferos
Dwight Seferos is a Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the University of Toronto. Seferos began his independent career at the University of Toronto in 2009, and was promoted to associate professor in 2014 and professor in 2017. Research in the Seferos group concerns the design, synthesis, characterization, and device engineering of organic materials and polymers for electronic and optical applications (OLEDs, solar cells, batteries, etc.). Seferos has authored or coauthored over 150 publications, holds numerous patents, and has founded one academic start-up venture. Seferos has been recognized by many national and international awards including the DuPont Young Professor Award, Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, CSC Strem Chemical Award, ACS Harry Gray Award, E. W. R. Steacie Memorial Fellowship, the RSC Rutherford Metal in Chemistry, and the CIC Award in Macromolecular Science.
1. Introduction
π-Conjugated polymers (CPs) are a subset of materials characterized by a continuous backbone of alternating single and double bonds. Their overlapping p-orbitals create a π-system with an extensive delocalized electronic structure, which results in useful physical and optoelectronic properties.1 Since their discovery, CPs have continuously garnered enormous interest from scientific and engineering communities due to their applications in organic photovoltaics (OPVs), organic field effect transistors (OFETs), organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), chemical sensors, energy storage, and drug delivery technologies.2
Polymers that utilize Group 16 heterocycles have become especially prevalent, as polythiophene (PTh) has been adopted as a model system. Through PTh and its valuable derivates, researchers have been continuously gaining insights into the interplay between the molecular structure, solid-state organization, and electronic performance of CPs. The substitution of alternative heteroatoms into polythiophenes can impart new functionality that ultimately improve the performance of derived devices. In this vein, CPs that contain Group 16 heterocycles such as furan, selenophene, and tellurophene have recently been developed to glean insight into the structure–property relationships of CPs, and have garnered much attention due to their potential to improve and control self-assembly, optoelectronic, and charge transport properties. This review aims to summarize the progress in the synthesis and properties of polymers containing chalcogenophenes and provide insight in designing CPs with desirable properties.
1.1 Chalcogenophene chemistry
Chalcogens (denoted as E) in five-membered heterocycles and a comparison of their properties are summarized in Table 1. Traversing Group 16 from O to Te, the C2EC5 bond angle decreases and the C2C3C4 bond angle increase monotonically to accommodate the larger heteroatom, resulting in small variations in the directionality of the bonds connecting to the adjacent heterocycles. Owing to the larger atomic radius and polarizability of Se and Te, the propensity of their lone pairs to be involved in intermolecular interactions increases, which can potentially be used to enhance charge-transport properties.3 Strong Te–Te interactions are found in the crystal structures of 3,4-dimethoxytellurophene,4 potentially playing a significant role in the molecular organization and solid-state morphology of polytellurophenes. Additionally, increasing the size of the heteroatom also results in increased C2–E bond length along with decreased bond strength. The C2–Te bond energy is significantly lower than those involving the lighter congeners, which contributes to the relatively high lability of tellurophene-containing materials as established by our observation of polytellurophenes thermal decomposition upon annealing at high temperatures.
Table 1 Comparison of the properties of chalcogens and chalcogenophenes5






O
S
Se
Te




Atomic Number
8
16
34
52


Covalent radius (pm)
66
105
120
138


Electronegativity
3.5
2.5
2.4
2.1


C2–E bond length (Å)
1.362
1.714
1.855
2.055


C2EC5 (°)
106.5
92.17
87.76
82.53


EC2C3 (°)
110.65
111.47
111.56
110.81


C2C3C4 (°)
106.07
112.45
114.55
117.93


Bird's index, I5
43
66
59
48


pKa (α-H)
35.66
33.06
—
—




When structural (I5, see Table 1), magnetic, energetic, and electronic properties of aromatic rings are weighed, one can arrive at a general trend of aromaticity: benzene > thiophene > selenophene > tellurophene > furan.5 Aromaticity profoundly influences the thermodynamic stability and reactivity of heterocycles. For example, the relative reaction rates for the electrophilic substitution of these heterocycles occur in the reverse order of aromaticity. The electrophilic bromination of selenophene appears to proceed more slowly than furan but faster than the thiophene counterpart under otherwise identical conditions. In part due to its low aromaticity, furan can additionally act as a diene in Diels–Alder reactions under mild conditions whilst other chalcogenophenes cannot, which will be further discussed in the section of Diels–Alder cycloaddition. These differences in aromaticity dictate the varied and rich chemistries employed to synthesize these important precursors. The aromaticity of these heterocycles not only influences their reactivity, but also plays an important role in the stability and properties of the resulting CPs. In polymers, the reduced aromaticity of furan, selenophene, and tellurophene favours the transition to quinoidal structures from the aromatic–quinoid equilibrium, resulting in a more rigid polymer backbone.
The aromatic protons on chalcogenophenes possess acidity to some degree, with a more acidic α-H than the β-H. The preparation of a number of the chalcogenophene monomers and oligomers relies on the formation of organometallic intermediates, which can be achieved by deprotonation with strong bases. The pKa of α-H varies with the incorporation of different heteroatoms. The thiophene α-H (pKa 33.0) is stronger than the furan α-H (pKa 35.6) by nearly three orders of magnitude.6 Among the first four Group 16 elements, Te is the least electronegative (Table 1) and has a lower Pauling electronegativity than carbon, leading to polarized Teδ+–Cδ− bonds, which lead to distinct tellurophene chemistry and a lower α-H acidity. Consequently, thiophene and selenophenes can be readily deprotonated by lithium diisopropylamide (LDA), while furan and tellurophene may require stronger bases like n-BuLi.
Compared to the other Group 16 heterocycles, furan has recently become more prominent as a greener alternative building block due to its biodegradability and biorenewable sourcing.7 Commercial furan is produced by the metal-catalyzed decarbonylation of 2-furaldehyde, preferably palladium on charcoal. Thiophene and its derivatives occur in the petroleum distillates and are widely commercially available. Unlike furans and thiophenes, selenophene and tellurophene must be prepared via a ring-closing route or through other metallacycle intermediates.2 Historically, the study of selenophene and tellurophene polymers has lagged behind due to the lack of synthetic methods to synthesize and functionalize these heterocycles. Among the halogenation reactions of chalcogenophenes, bromination of tellurophene stands out as normal conditions of electrophilic substitutions using N-bromosuccinimide lead to significant decomposition,8 while iodination of tellurophene using N-iodosuccinimide affords the desired products in modest yields.9,10 This is likely due to the unique coordination chemistry of the tellurium heteroatom with lighter halogens. The desired brominated tellurophenes were obtained by quenching the lithiated11 or dilithiated8 tellurophenes with 1,2-dibromotetrachloroethane. The development of strategies to reduce the synthetic complexity of Group 16 heterocyclic monomers is critical to their development as useful polymers.
2. Polymerization methods
Electrochemical or chemical oxidative polymerization has been used to synthesize Group 16 conjugated polymers. These polymerizations were initially carried out on non-functionalized aromatic monomers, and the key step was oxidative dehydrogenation, which was achieved by applying a bias voltage or adding an oxidant. Nowadays, significant applications of these methods include preparing membrane materials or the electrodes for energy storage devices.12,13 However, oxidative polymerization methods are uncontrolled, and the obtained polymers are poorly defined and inevitably contain structural defects. Despite the progress in optimizing polymerization conditions,14,15 neither electrochemical nor chemical oxidative polymerization offers the ability to control the regioregularity or polymeric architecture of the resulting polymers.
Modern methods rely on transition-metal catalysis as the C–C bond forming step and their advancements not only allow for control of the chain length and architecture, but also the regioregularity of the polymer. Although most of the cross-coupling polymerizations proceed in a step-growth manner exemplified by polymerizing AA/BB-type monomers (Fig. 1a), two main strategies have made it possible to change from a step-growth to a chain-growth mechanism on AB-type monomers (Fig. 1b). One relies on catalyst association with the propagating polymer chain via a metal–π complex, which has been termed catalyst transfer polymerization (CTP).16–18 The other is dictated by reactivity differences rather than an associative intermediate,19,20 where the dissociated catalyst preferentially reacts with the C–Br bond at the polymer terminus instead of the counterpart on a organometallic monomer, reminiscent of the living synthesis of polyamide.17,21 In this review, we will summarize the recent progress of Kumada, Negishi, Murahashi, Suzuki–Miyaura, and direct arylation polymerizations, representing the best routes to well-defined, high molecular weight (MW) CPs containing furan, thiophene, selenophene, and tellurophene.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) AA/BB-type and (b) AB-type cross coupling polymerizations. 
2.1 Kumada and Negishi polymerizations
Kumada and Negishi polymerizations were developed based on the cross-coupling reactions between an aryl halide and either an aryl magnesium or an aryl zinc species, which have been used extensively in preparing PTh. Nowadays, treating dibrominated or diiodinated 3-alkylchalcogenophenes with slightly substoichiometric isopropylmagnesium chloride (i-PrMgCl) or “Turbo Grignard” (i-PrMgCl·LiCl)22 at room temperature has been widely adopted to activate monomers, leading to a mixture of two regioisomers, 5-mer and 2-mer with a 4:1 molar ratio, denoting metathesizing at 5- and 2-position respectively. The regioselectivity of the metathesis reaction is influenced to a large extent by the ring substituents. The steric properties,23 electronic nature,24–27 and potential heteroatom coordination28 of substituents may either individually or collectively affect the regioselectivity. Heterofunctional monomers are used to obtain exclusive metathesis product, which is achieved by either taking advantage of reactivity differences of different halogens (mostly Br/I)29 or deprotonating monohalogenated monomer precursors.30–33
There is substantial evidence for the quasi-living nature of Kumada and Negishi thiophene polymerizations mediated by nickel catalysts which has been termed Kumada CTP and Negishi CTP respectively, including: (1) the linear increase of number-average molecular weight (Mn) as a function of monomer conversion; (2) narrow MW distributions; (3) one set of polymer end groups (H/Br); (4) MW control based on monomer-to-catalyst ratios and; (5) the ability to perform chain extension, yielding block copolymers (BCP) in one pot by sequential monomer addition. These features are strikingly distinct from a step-growth polymerization. Four steps are involved in the catalytic cycle (Fig. 2): transmetalation (TM), reductive elimination (RE), ring-walking (RW) and oxidative addition (OA). Evidence for complexes 1 and 2 in the catalytic cycle has been identified using in situ31P NMR, which provides a convenient handle to characterize the intermediates and catalyst resting states.11,34,35 In 2020, we successfully developed a protocol to isolate the complex 1,36 yielding living polymers and oligomers with well-defined end groups ready for either post-polymerization derivatization, chain extension with other monomers, or orthogonal polymerization reactions. In recent years, the hypothesis that Ni(0) is able to ring-walk over the conjugated polymer backbone has become commonly accepted since many experiments have provided indirect evidence for it.16,37 For further reading on this topic, please refer to other articles and reviews.16,38–40
 Fig. 2  Proposed mechanism for Kumada CTP (M = Mg) and Negishi CTP (M = Zn) mediated by 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane nickel(II) chloride [Ni(dppe)Cl2]. [OA]: oxidative addition; [TM]: transmetalation, [RE]: reductive elimination; [RW]: ring-walking. The green circle represents the end group. Simplified monomer structure is used for clarity. Adapted from ref.11 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Kumada CTP and Negishi CTP have been employed for many different monomers (Fig. 3), including the whole series of Group 16 aromatic heterocycles. A large library of substituents has been established to diversify thiophene monomers, including alkyl,41,42 alkyl ester,43,44 alkyl ether,45 oligoethylene glycol,24,45–47 thioether,25,48 substituted aryl,28,49–53 alkynyl,54 and α-ketal.55 However, the diversity of functional groups is limited by their compatibility with relatively active Grignard and Negishi reagents. Moving beyond thiophene, synthetic efforts have been centered on 3-alkylheterocycle polymers, namely poly(3-alkylfuran) (P3AF),56,57 poly(3-alkylselenophene) (P3AS),20,58 and poly(3-alkyltellurophene) (P3ATe).9,11,59 Thiophene and selenophene are similar in terms of reactivity and polymerization behaviours, while furan and tellurophene behave quite differently, mostly due to their limited solubility and reduced aromaticity. During the synthesis of polyfuran and polytellurophene, the polymer aggregates as the reaction progresses, and consequently, premature termination occurs, leading to lower Mn.9,57 However, solubility issues can be mitigated by adopting elevated temperatures in the synthesis of P3AF56 and P3ATe59 enabling more rapid polymerization kinetics and leading to higher Mn in resulting polymers. For example, Rivard and coworkers reported the synthesis of poly(3-cumenyltellurophenes) at 80 °C, yielding polymers with Mn of 8 kDa.60 On the other hand, high temperatures can also be detrimental to polymerizations because they promote catalyst dissociation, resulting in broader dispersities (Đ) and less controlled polymerizations.9 To date, it has not been possible to synthesize high Mn P3AF homopolymers using Kumada CTP, while controlled synthesis of high Mn P3ATe has been achieved by incorporating solubilizing branched side chains.
 Fig. 3  Representative Group 16 homopolymers synthesized by Kumada CTP and Negishi CTP. 
The operation of CTP usually requires strictly moisture- and air-free conditions which has prompted the need to develop air-tolerant methods. Schoenebeck and coworkers demonstrated a simple and robust method to polymerize Negishi-type monomers in open flasks that used air- and moisture-stable palladium(I) dimer catalysis.61 McNeil and coworkers reported air-tolerant P3HT synthesis capitalizing on rapid Negishi cross-coupling using a moisture tolerant organozinc pivalates monomer mediated by an air-stable Pd precatalyst.62 These efforts largely lower the synthetic barriers to developing CPs in academia and open the way for industrial materials research and development.
2.2 Murahashi polymerizations
Since its discovery in 1975,63 the use of Murahashi cross-coupling, which involves an organolithium reagent, has stagnated, especially for its application in polymerization. It was considered a technically nonpractical reaction due to the high reactivity, poor selectivity, and low functional group tolerance of its organolithium coupling partner. However, there has recently been a renaissance of Murahashi cross-coupling mainly due to the work of Feringa's group,64,65 which might further revive the preparation of CPs based on this coupling. Nevertheless, there are only a handful of reports on the preparation of Group 16 conjugated polymers using Murahashi coupling. Mori and coworkers demonstrated the controlled polymerizations of lithiated monomers in the presence of the N-heterocyclic carbene based Ni complex.66 Three strategies including deprotonation, Li–Br exchange, and halogen dance were used to prepare such monomers.
Based on Murahashi cross-coupling, we recently developed a temperature-cycling method to synthesize monodisperse high oligomers of 3-hexylthiophene requiring no additional purification or intermediate steps (Fig. 4).67,68 The judicious selection of reagents, temperature, and catalysts are of importance for its successful implementation. The high activity of lithiated thiophene, which is generated by deprotonating 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene with LDA, enables rapid and quantitative TM to the nickel center even at cryogenic temperatures. While at such temperatures, RE cannot proceed, and the catalytic cycle halts at the Ni(II)-dithienyl complex 2. Conceptually, adding one exact equivalent of LDA would be ideal. However, this is very challenging with standard laboratory equipment and is not practical. Thus, excess LDA was added to ensure the nickel centers are fully occupied, and the remaining lithiated monomers are shown to be present in the mixture without catalyst interference. Excess thienyl lithium is then quenched at −78 °C by adding a solution of butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT). After warming the mixture to room temperature, quantitative RE and intramolecular OA occur in the thiophene-Ni(dppe) catalyst system. This strategy allows for the addition of one thiophene unit per chain per cycle, generating monodisperse oligomers bearing up to 18 repeating units. More recently, we have successfully applied this method to selenophene monomers.
 Fig. 4  Representative synthesis of monodisperse oligo(3-hexylthiophene). Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Suzuki–Miyaura polymerizations
With a history of more than 40 years, Suzuki–Miyaura coupling has witnessed the most conspicuous growth in the synthetic chemistry of organic materials and has become ubiquitous for constructing both small molecules and macromolecules.69,70 Due to its simple reagent handling, broad substrate scope, mild reaction conditions, and great tolerance to functional groups, the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction has emerged as a promising alternative for synthesizing CPs, and it is particularly useful when non-alkyl functional pendants are used. The choices of organoboron moiety, catalyst, as well as reaction conditions all play a role in influencing the coupling efficiency of a target arene. Generally, Pd catalysts combined with electron-rich ligands are more common than Ni catalysts in this polymerization.71 Similar to other techniques, the presence of additional free ligands is shown to improve overall polymerization.72,73 Developments in small molecule coupling have brought about some exciting advances in preparing CPs. For more information, readers can refer to a recent review.74 In this section, only the recent progress towards Suzuki–Miyaura CTP of AB-type Group 16 monomers will be discussed.
The catalytic cycle of Suzuki–Miyaura CTP is similar to that of the Kumada counterpart (Fig. 2) but with a distinct TM step.69 Inorganic bases and water are used to promote effective transfer of the aryl group to the metal, but their specific role in TM remains under debate due to the difficulty in characterizing key intermediates. Similar to Kumada CTP and Negishi CTP, Suzuki–Miyaura CTP relies on the formation of a strong metal–π complex to maintain chain-growth character and prevent chain transfer or termination.
Aryl bromides are used predominately in this type of polymerization while diverse organoborons have been used as cross-coupling partners including boronic acids, borate esters, borates and more.75 Unlike the vast majority of Kumada, Negishi, and Murahashi type monomers, Suzuki type monomers generally can be prepared, purified, and handled under ambient conditions. In AB-type chalcogenophene monomers, the alkyl substituent is usually located adjacent to the halogen atom due to synthetic convenience. In a recent study, Yokozawa and coworkers show this arrangement also suppresses undesired disproportionation and benefits the chain-growth character.76
One of the challenges with Suzuki–Miyaura CTP is the competing protodeboronation of the organoboron monomers, leading to low MWs and poor yields. To tackle this issue, boron-masking strategies were used to improve the efficiency of the coupling reaction, where the active boronic acid was slow released. An attempt with AB-type thienyl monomers containing N-methylimidodiacetic (MIDA) boronate esters using a Pd2(dba)3/SPhos combination was successful in obtaining polymers with relatively high Mn and high yields (>97%), indicating largely suppressed protodeboronation. However, Đ for all attempts were very high.77 By switching to a RuPhos-Pd catalyst, excellent Suzuki–Miyaura CTP of the same thiophene-MIDA monomer was achieved by Choi and coworkers, affording high Mn, low Đ, and defect-free P3ATs in excellent yields (Fig. 5).78 Moreover, an excellent linear relationship between Mn values of P3HT (3.7–17.6 kDa) and monomer-to-catalyst ratios (15–100) was observed. The block copolymerization of two thiophene monomers using Suzuki–Miyaura CTP was demonstrated for the first time, providing evidence of the living nature of this polymerization. Using this strategy, pre-activation of RuPhos-Pd catalyst on the aryl iodine located at the chain end of coil type polymers followed by monomer addition led to the formation of well-defined rod–coil block copolymers.79
 Fig. 5  P3HT synthesis via Suzuki–Miyaura CTP developed by Choi and coworkers. 
Choi and coworkers investigated the effects of boronates, halides, ligands, and chain transfer agents on the control of polymerization, revealing that Suzuki–Miyaura CTP of the bromothiophene monomer by RuPhos Pd G3 exhibited the best performance, and additional RuPhos ligand effectively stabilized the growing chain-ends and reduced chain transfer during the polymerization.73 Additionally, the one-pot synthesis of block copolymers was demonstrated using monomers bearing organoboron groups with drastically different reactivities. Choi and coworkers recently further demonstrated a universal Suzuki–Miyaura CTP method that covers a wide range of monomers from electron-rich (Fig. 6a) to electron-deficient (hetero)arenes (Fig. 6b) using commercially available Buchwald RuPhos and SPhos Pd G3 precatalysts and rationally designed boronates, 4,4,8,8-tetramethyl-1,3,6,2-dioxazaborocane (Me4DABO, Fig. 6) and its N-benzylated derivative, to modulate the reactivity and stability of the monomers.80 Using this method, well-defined homopolymers, statistical copolymers, and block copolymers of these electronically distinct monomers were obtained for the first time, and this powerful Suzuki–Miyaura CTP could greatly contribute to the continuing precise synthesis of novel conjugated polymers.
 Fig. 6  (a) Poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) synthesis via Suzuki–Miyaura CTP developed by Choi and coworkers. (b) Structures of benzotriazole and quinoxaline monomers. 
Alkyl thiophenes undergo Suzuki–Miyaura CTP, including regioregular poly(5-alkyl-2,3-thiophene)81 (Fig. 7). Due to functional group compatibility, ester-functionalized regioregular polythiophene82 and polyfuran83,84 can be synthesized using Suzuki–Miyaura type of polymerization (Fig. 7). So far, there are no reports of polyselenophene (PSe) and polytellurophene (PTe) homopolymers synthesized via Suzuki–Miyaura CTP. The recent developments of excellent Suzuki–Miyaura CTP of both electron-rich and electron-deficient monomers have demonstrated that this technique will have far-reaching implications in the controlled synthesis of CPs.
 Fig. 7  Representative Group 16 homopolymers synthesized by Suzuki–Miyaura polymerizations. 
2.4 Direct arylation polymerizations (DArP)
Recently, direct arylation polymerization (DArP) has been advanced rapidly and established as a promising tool for the synthesis of CPs, as highlighted in several reviews.85–89 DArP features dehydrohalogenative cross-coupling reactions between halogenated (hetero)arenes and non-functionalized (hetero)arenes. Due to the direct use of C–H bonds, DArP circumvents the installation of organometallic functionalities, which improves atom economy and generates environmentally benign by-products. Another appealing aspect of this approach is its excellent functional group tolerance and broad substrate scope, making it more attractive for the synthesis of high-performance CPs.
Compared to other metal-catalyzed cross coupling reactions, DArP has a distinct TM step. Among all the mechanistic possibilities, the concerted metalation deprotonation pathway remains the most widely supported,90 where a base ligated to the metal center assists in C–H bond activation synchronizing with the C–M bond formation, followed by RE forming the C–C bond. Proton acidity can be used as a predictive trait for determining reactivity. However, when multiple protons are present, unselective C–H activations become possible, as evidenced by the observation of minor β-coupling in the DArP of thiophene monomers.91,92 Choices of ligands, catalytic systems, additives, and solvents are shown to help minimize the defects.93,94
Over the last decade, significant progress has been made in improving DArP, including enhancing the C–H bond selectivity, reducing structural defects, increasing polymer yields, expanding the monomer scope, and developing novel catalytic systems. So far, DArP has been demonstrated on a variety of heterocyclic aromatic monomers, including thiophenes,95–99 selenophenes,100 and furan-flanked building blocks.101 However, most of the polymer syntheses proceed in a step-growth fashion, which expels some key points of interest in developing polymeric materials, including chain-growth character, MW control, and low Đ. Here, we would like to highlight two strategies that help improve DArP in this regard. In 2018, Luscombe and coworkers first reported dual-catalytic Ag–Pd system for P3HT synthesis via DArP (Fig. 8a).96 The linear increase of Mn as a function of monomer consumption and low Đ polymers were observed under conditions using Pd-PEPPSI-iPr and 0.1 equivalent Ag(I) adamantanoate in the presence of equimolar pyridine. In the polymerization, silver carboxylate additives play a beneficial role facilitating C–H activation while pyridine plays an inhibitory role to the Pd catalyst, allowing TM of primarily Ag-activated monomers. Although the polymerizations reach an upper limit of approximate 6 kDa despite attempts with lower catalyst loadings, this is an encouraging step towards chain-growth polymerizations in DArP. Recently, Hu and coworkers demonstrated DArP of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene in confined Pd-impregnated nanoreactors, yielding P3HT with a Mn of 3.2 kDa and a Đ as low as 1.24 (Fig. 8b).102 Furthermore, the MW seems controllable through the simple modulation of the nanoreactor pore diameter. Similar improvements are also shown in other classical step-growth methods, including Suzuki–Miyaura polymerization, Sonogashira polymerization, and Stille polymerization.
 Fig. 8  DArP of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene in (a) dual-catalytic Ag–Pd system and (b) confined nanoreactors (Pd@SS-CNMs: Pd-impregnated mesoporous-silica supported carbon nanomembranes; PivOH: pivalic acid). 
3. Synthesis of linear copolymers
3.1 Block copolymer synthesis
The McCullough and Yokozawa groups’ discovery of quasi-living Kumada CTP is largely responsible for the initial interest in developing conjugated block copolymers.41,42 In addition to the synthesis of individual homopolymers, CTP has been instrumental to the development of conjugated block copolymers, and their preparation can be roughly divided into three main methods: (i) chain extension, (ii) cross-coupling, and (iii) post-polymerization derivation by end-capped functional groups.

3.1.1 Chain extension. 
Kumada CTP has been widely used to extend polymers into block copolymers through the sequential addition of monomers following the completion of an initial block, such as with the addition of activated dibromoselenophene monomers to a vessel containing living polythiophene chains in order to synthesize poly(3-hexylthophene)-block-poly(3-hexylselenophene) (P3HT-b-P3HS).103 However, efficient BCP formation by chain extension does have prerequisites which include catalyst compatibility with each monomer, the ability to ring-walk over distinct units without strong complexation, and resistance to additives or the build-up of by-products such as salts. Recently, it has been demonstrated that living polymers can be isolated with complexed Ni catalysts at chain ends that are stable in the solid state under standard conditions.36 While chain extension from these living polymers has only been demonstrated for the same monomer so far, living chain isolation grants the opportunity to polymerize second blocks in BCP under vastly different conditions with different solvents and reagents, allowing more precise and creative syntheses. While this is the first demonstration of such a principle for Kumada CTP, extending isolated living chains emulates BCP syntheses that can be achieved through the chain extension of kinetically dormant macromonomers using atom-transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) or nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP).104,105 Furthermore, these isolated living chains have the potential to be used as versatile commercial reagents like currently available ATRP and NMP analogues.
As a result of the chain-growth nature of CTP, BCPs can be synthesized. Previous syntheses of BCP containing P3AT and P3AS blocks indicate that BCPs are successfully prepared when the more soluble polymer is polymerized first.103,106,107 The polymerization of second blocks may sometimes also necessitate higher temperatures to maintain the solubility of growing BCPs,108,109 especially when including P3ATe, and because magnesium salts by-products can partially inhibit Kumada CTP.11 Expanding the idea of chain extension, triblock copolymers are synthesized through the repeated addition of activated monomers to polychalcogenophenes with living ends.110,111 For example, in the synthesis of P3AT triblock copolymers with blocks containing different alkyl chain lengths, monomers were activated at a 1:1 ratio with i-PrMgCl, and the amount of monomer relative to Ni catalyst was fixed at 40:1. To ensure solubility, Kumada CTP was carried out at 35 °C.110 It should also be noted that random ring-walking introduces the possibility of additional blocks being polymerized from Br groups at the initiating ends of BCP,38 although the use of external initiators bypasses this problem by installing non-polymerizable, typically aryl groups.18,112
In contrast to BCPs in which both blocks consist of electron-rich heterocycles, the addition of electron-poor blocks by chain extension is much more challenging. Electron-deficient monomers are thought to trap ring-walking catalysts in a strongly associated metal–polymer π-complex, which in addition to stalling polymerization, can promote otherwise uncompetitive side reactions.113,114 More efficient ring-walking can be achieved by designing catalysts with bulky electron-donating ligands that can both stabilize catalyst–polymer complexes and offset increased RE activation energy due to ligand sterics.80,115 A notable catalyst following these design principles is the [N,N′-dimesityl-2–3-(1,8-naphthyl)-1,4-diazabutadiene]dibromonickel Ni(II) diimine catalyst, with which a BCP of electron-rich P3HT and electron-deficient polybenzotriazole could be synthesized in either monomer order with good control over MW and Đ.116 While such optimizations are often necessary for many non-chalcogenophene monomers, it has also been recently shown that poly(phenyl isocyanide) (PPI) chain extension from P3HT is possible using Kumada CTP with a typical Ni(dppp)Cl2 catalyst.109
The reactivity of monomers for Suzuki–Miyaura CTP can be modulated by introducing appropriate boronates, making it possible to carry out one-shot block copolymerization, where two monomers are mixed prior to the initiation. Choi and coworkers utilize the vastly different hydrolysis rates between pinacol boronates and MIDA boronates to synthesize BCP of thiophenes with two different side chains using in situ-generated Pd(II) catalyst from Buchwald SPhos Pd G3 precatalysts.78 Similarly, adding RuPhos-Pd catalyst to a mixture of a pinacol boronate-functionalized thiophene monomer and a Me4DABO functionalized-benzotriazole leads to the successful block copolymerization of two electronically distinct monomers.80 BCP formation in both cases is evidenced by monitoring monomer consumption, MW evolution and the 1H NMR spectra of the resulting polymers. Generally, chain-growth mechanisms in CTP have relied on strong metal–backbone complexation. However, this is limiting for BCP syntheses via chain extension since subsequent blocks may not necessarily have adequate catalyst affinity. Koeckelberghs and coworkers have demonstrated that RuPhos-Pd can easily dissociate from a propagating chain and reinsert into a dormant chain, making it a more universal catalyst for conjugated BCP synthesis. In order to maintain chain-growth character, polymerization is first initiated using a catalyst-complexed chalcogenophene or fluorene as an external initiator. Then, the propagating chain is grown using monomers with Br and ZnBr as X and Y polymerizable groups (Fig. 1), where Br only becomes sufficiently active once ZnBr is consumed (Fig. 9). This chain-growth strategy has been applied to synthesize diblock and triblock copolymers with polythiophene, polyselenophene, and polyfluorene blocks in any order.19,20
 Fig. 9  Synthesis of conjugated triblock copolymers in which blocks can be added in any order through a chain-growth mechanism. 


3.1.2 Cross-coupling. 
Early examples of CTP often featured chains which contained mixtures of Br and H end groups, usually from incomplete metathesis or overdosed alkyl Grignard reagents.117–119 Br end groups on polychalcogenophenes have been widely used to connect separate polymer blocks through cross-coupling. To optimize BCP formation with minimal homopolymer or triblock copolymer impurities following cross-coupling, Br/H chains must be synthesized in high yields. The synthesis of a 100% Br/H set of polymers requires the complete activation of monomers, and therefore, consumption of alkyl Grignard reagent. This necessitates either long activation times, using t-BuMgCl or the addition of LiCl.119 One simpler way to afford Br/H chains in >90% amounts has been to use exactly equimolar or slightly deficient amounts of Grignard reagent, which can be ensured via titration.120
Given that Br-functionalized polychalcogenophenes can be synthesized without post-polymerization modifications, they can be coupled to boronic ester-functionalized polymers by the Pd-catalyzed Suzuki–Miyaura reaction to obtain BCP or to initiators for further polymerization.120,121 In a preparation similar to one demonstrated earlier by Verduzco and coworkers, the donor–acceptor BCP poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)-block-poly-((9,9-dioctylfluorene)-2,7-diyl-alt-[4,7-bis(3-hexylthiophen-5-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]-2′,2′′-diyl) (P3HT-b-PFT6BT) was synthesized by coupling Kumada CTP-prepared P3HT-Br to 9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diboronic acid bis(1,3-propanediol) ester via Suzuki–Miyaura coupling, and extending the chain with 4,7-bis(5-bromo-4-hexylthiophen-2-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole using Suzuki polycondensation.121,122 Besides Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling, Yamamoto-type cross-coupling has also found notable use in BCP formation.123,124 For example, the donor–acceptor BCP, P3HT-b-PPymPh, was synthesized by preparing P3HT-Br as before, and coupling it to 1,4-bis[2-(5-bromopyridyl)]-2,5-bis(2-(tert-butyl dimethylsilyloxy)ethyl) benzene with Ni(cod)2.123 Yamamoto cross-coupling is advantageous in that it allows cross-coupling between polychalcogenophenes if another method such as chain extension is not suitable, however it requires stoichiometric amounts of nickel catalyst.125


3.1.3 Functional end-group control. 
One of the key features of CTP is the ability to selectively manipulate the end-groups of polymers. The use of aryl-functionalized Ni(II) catalysts (also called external initiators) allows for the installation of an aryl group at the starting end of a polymer. Such external initiators are usually synthesized by an OA reaction of Ni(0)112,126 with an aryl halide or a TM reaction with Ni(II) species.127 Enabled by the quasi-living nature of CTP, end-group functionalization with desired functional groups becomes possible by adding the corresponding organometallic species, paving the way towards a variety of post-polymerization modifications.128 Combining external initiation with end-group functionalization, bifunctional polymers can be obtained, allowing for orthogonal reactions.
The ability to selectively install vinyl, allyl, and especially ethynyl groups through their corresponding Grignard reagents has opened the way for efficient BCP synthesis. In the synthesis of poly(3-octylthiophene)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (P3OT-b-PEG), the P3OT vinyl terminus was converted to a hydroxyethyl group via hydroboration and oxidation, before the hydroxy group was deprotonated for the initiation of anionic ring opening polymerization of ethylene oxide.129 However, the most widespread use of CTP end-capping is in facilitating click chemistry to form BCPs.
The most familiar type of click chemistry to polymer chemists is the copper-catalyzed alkyne–azide cycloaddition (CuAAC).130 Owing to its atom economy, functional group and reaction condition tolerance, and overall efficiency, it has found wide usage in BCP synthesis.131 The advantage to this synthetic method in producing conjugated BCP is that blocks can be synthesized and purified separately, promoting their reaction and limiting the carryover of impurities. For example, rather than using Suzuki–Miyaura mediated chain extension to synthesize P3HT-b-PF,132 the Verduzco group controllably synthesized individual azido-capped polyfluorene (PF) and alkyne-capped P3HT blocks using Suzuki–Miyaura CTP and Kumada CTP respectively before carrying out the CuAAC reaction.133 One can replace either block, working with ethynyl poly(3-heptylselenophene) (P37S) as the Group 16 heterocycle-containing crystalline block, or replacing PF with amorphous polystyrene.134–136 Another prominent form of click chemistry is the thiol–ene click reaction, which enables the linkage of vinyl- or allyl-capped polychalcogenophenes to thiol-functionalized polymers.137 However, most examples of this type of click reaction involve the grafting of polythiophenes to more complex structures including thiol-functionalized surfaces, carbon nanotubes, or star polymers.138,139

3.2 Statistical, gradient, alternating, and periodic copolymer synthesis
Monomers of polychalcogenophenes are commonly polymerized using CTP, and their resulting copolymer structure can be influenced by reagent addition conditions. Accounting for relative monomer reactivities, statistical copolymers can be synthesized by adding mixed monomers to a catalyst-containing solution,140 whereas gradient copolymers are prepared by initiating the polymerization of one monomer and gradually adding the second.106 Block copolymer synthesis similarly begins by initiating one monomer, but the second is only added following the first's >90% consumption.141 Statistical and gradient copolymers have the additional caveat of having to determine monomer reactivity ratios. For example, 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) and 3-heptylselenophene (37S) have similar reported reactivity ratios of 0.52 and 1.56 respectively when polymerized with Ni(o-tolyl)(dppe)Br, with TM being the main determining step. This has been attributed to the less electronegative Se atom causing its anionic carbon to be slightly more nucleophilic.106 An interesting advantage to the Kumada CTP of statistical copolymers based on alkylthiophene and alkylthiothiophene is that they have been found to increase regioregularity in comparison to block copolymers due to increased head-to-tail coupling selectivity.142 With the rising performance of conjugated polymers, the need for their reproducible synthesis in industrial quantities has also arisen. One way of addressing this has come through droplet microfluidics, where injecting thiophene and selenophene monomers alongside the appropriate Kumada CTP reagents into an immiscible perfluoropolyether carrier fluid facilitates their statistical polymerization. These polymers were prepared with high >95% regioregularities and moderate <1.7 Đ.143
The preparation of alternating and periodic copolymers of polychalcogenophenes typically involves the initial preparation of monomers composed of individual chalcogen-containing heterocycles (Fig. 10). For example, the synthesis of poly[(3-hexylthiophene)-alt-(3-hexylfuran)] (P3HT-a-P3HF) alternating copolymers began with the linking of 3HT and 3-hexylfuran (3HF) heterocycles via Suzuki–Miyaura coupling and the resultant product's bromination. This monomer was then polymerized with Kumada CTP. In another study, 3HT, 3-hexylselenophene (3HS), and 3-hexyltellurophene (3HTe) heterocycles were joined using Stille coupling to yield three different dimers before their iodination and Kumada CTP to yield alternating copolymers. It is important that such monomeric dimers are synthesized so that the lighter heterocycle contains the free C5 “tail” end, as this encourages high selectivity in Grignard metathesis. Dimers synthesized with the opposite orientation undergo Grignard metathesis at both of their free C2 and C5 positions. This methodology can also be extended to more complicated periodic copolymers featuring furan-per-thiophene-per-selenophene (FTSe), thiophene-per-thiophene-per-selenophene (TTSe), thiophene-per-selenophene-per-selenophene (TSeSe), and thiophene-per-selenophene-per-tellurophene (TSeTe) sequences. Such trimers can be prepared by starting with previously prepared dimers and reacting them with a stannylated third heterocycle.57,144,145 While furan-containing alternating copolymers had slightly lower MWs and yields than expected, it is significant that all the alternating copolymers polymerized with Kumada CTP in this manner had generally predictable MWs and low Đ, indicating good catalyst-furan ring affinity and that catalyst ring-walking still occurs over monomeric trimers and over three different heterocycles.38,144
 Fig. 10  Synthesis of alternating and periodic copolymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In 2013, Rivard and coworkers reported the synthesis of symmetrical homo-bifunctional selenophene- and tellurophene-containing pinacolborane via Zr-mediated ring-forming chemistry.146 These monomers were then copolymerized with dihalogenated (hetero)arenes affording a series of selenophene or tellurophene-containing alternating and periodic copolymers. Although the polymerization proceeds via a step-growth mechanism, regioregularity is not a concern due to the use of symmetrical monomers.
4. Properties of homopolymers
4.1 Optoelectronic properties
PTh, and especially P3HT, have long been used as model conjugated polymers due to their well-developed synthetic methodologies, processability, low bandgap, and high carrier mobility.147–149 Devices incorporating P3HT/fullerene blends have reached appreciable power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of up to 8%,150 with slightly higher 11% PCEs resulting from the use of non-fullerene blends,151 yet solar cells with carefully engineered thiophene-containing structures have recently been approaching PCEs of 19%.148,152,153 However, complex synthetic routes and device preparation methods limit the industrial relevance of many of these polychalcogenophene-based devices.148,152–154 Additionally, polymer-based devices still maintain poorer PCEs than inorganic semiconductors.155 Accordingly, the somewhat limited spectral absorbance range of P3HT has instead prompted new developments in bandgap engineering through either heavy atom or side chain substitution. One of the principal methods that have been used to control and optimize the bandgap energies and optoelectronic properties of polychalcogenophenes has been the substitution of their chalcogen atoms. Since chalcogens differ in their size, polarizability, and electronegativity, they can be used to adjust the properties of their respective polymers.156,157
Bandgap engineering in polychalcogenophenes differs with respect to both HOMO and LUMO levels. Low atom electronegativities, for example, have the effect of lowering both HOMO and LUMO, although LUMOs are generally lowered to a greater extent, thus narrowing bandgaps. Since the electronegativity of chalcogens decreases as one progresses to heavier elements, from O to Te, the HOMO–LUMO gaps in corresponding chalcogenophenes accordingly decrease (Table 2 and Fig. 11).158,159 Furthermore, chalcogens’ ionization potentials which follow the same trend will also decrease LUMO levels, further narrowing bandgaps in polychalcogenophenes. This has the promising effect of increasing the n-doping potential of heavier polychalcogenophenes.160 The more planar chain conformations observed in heavier polychalcogenophenes can also contribute to greater π-orbital delocalization along their backbones, resulting in lower LUMO levels.161 It is notable that HOMO electron densities are concentrated on the C2–C3 and C4–C5 bonds in heterocycles, while LUMO electron densities are concentrated on the C3–C4 and inter-heterocycle bonds, reflecting the aromatic ground state and quinoidal state, respectively (Fig. 11). While polychalcogenophenes are most stable in their aromatic forms, larger chalcogens bring about elongated bonds to adjacent carbons in their heterocycles. In part due to this distorted heterocycle geometry, chalcogenophenes incorporating heavier atoms display more quinoidal character.159
Table 2 Optoelectronic properties of representative polychalcogenophenes with 3-hexyl substituents




Polymer
Solution λmax (nm)
Thin film λmax (nm)
HOMO (eV)
LUMO (eV)
BandgapCV (eV)
Bandgapopt (eV)





a Relatively red-shifted due to minimized steric effects from the small O atom.
b A reduction peak could not be obtained in acetonitrile.





P3HF
465a57
48957
−5.0957
N/Ab57
N/Ab57
2.1957


P3HT
448100
514100
−4.98100
−2.55100
2.43100
1.93100


P3HS
49958
562100
−4.96100
−2.80100
2.16100
1.72100


P3HTe
55859
612162
−4.77145
−2.96145
1.81145
1.4459




 Fig. 11  Calculated optical absorption spectra for chalcogenophene hexamers alongside representative HOMO and LUMO diagrams. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2021. 
Narrowing bandgaps by raising HOMO and lowering LUMO is greatly advantageous for applications in OPVs, as this potentially optimizes short-circuit current (JSC). However, raising HOMO levels also reduces the open-circuit voltage (VOC) in such devices.158,163 Similarly, LUMO levels which are too low-lying may limit electron transfer to acceptor materials. A strategy that is commonly used to tailor bandgaps within conjugated polymers involves the modification of substituents on heterocycles. While more precise tuning is usually afforded through careful substituent selection, electron-donating substituent increase both HOMO and LUMO levels, while electron-withdrawing substituents lower them.163,164 It is also important to consider that heterocycle substituents may affect polychalcogenophene structures in other ways, such as through conjugation or backbone distortion. The bulky side chains on poly[3-(2,5-dioctylphenyl)thiophene] induce its backbone planarization which results in an optical transition energy red-shifted by 0.25 eV relative to P3HT, indicating the narrowed bandgap.53 Annealing thin films of P3HT/PCBM blends has also shown to narrow the HOMO-LUMO gap of P3HT via planarization, with little significant effect to PCBM.165
The ability of an electron to be excited from the HOMO to the LUMO is reflected in the maximum absorbance wavelength, λmax, in optical absorbance spectra, which in turn are used to capture useful information about polychalcogenophene structure. Consistent with the trend of narrowing bandgaps for heterocycles containing O to Te atoms, optical absorbances for these corresponding polychalcogenophenes will also appear red-shifted (Table 2).159 For example, relative to other polychalcogenophenes, P3ATes have red-shifted optical absorbances, narrower bandgaps, and higher polarizability. However, poly(3-ethylhexyltellurophene) (P3EHTe) curiously exhibits a blue-shifted absorbance maximum relative to poly(3-hexyltellurophene) (P3HTe) and poly(3-dodecyltellurophene) (P3DDTe), likely due to backbone twisting induced by the larger side chain.72 Heavier polychalcogenophenes in general are more red-shifted due to their stabilization of lower lying LUMO levels, alongside more quinoidal character, higher coplanarity, and greater π-electron delocalization.145,159,161,162
The identity of the solvent has a large impact on the optoelectronic and aggregation properties of CPs. Generally speaking, increasing solvent polarity will result in a bathochromic shift (positive solvatochromism) that is associated with the stabilization of chalcogenophenes in their first excited state. Structurally, this bathochromic shift is related to the close packing of planarized polychalcogenophenes which results in increased conjugation lengths.164,166 As potential conjugation lengths increase with increasing repeating units in polymer backbones, the degree of polymerization (DP) too will affect the possible red-shift extent to a certain threshold, which, for P3HT has been established to be around 20 units. As conjugation lengths increase with additional monomers, the 0–0 transition also grows relative to the 0–1 transition, indicating intrachain excitonic coupling.167
4.2 Crystallization and self-assembly behaviour
The optoelectronic and device properties of polychalcogenophenes are influenced by their self-assembly. Polychalcogenophenes typically form lamellar structures that have separated crystalline and amorphous domains, with chain folds and defects primarily lying within amorphous regions.168–170 Owing to Đ, crystallized fibers are typically not straight and have rough edges attributed to the stacking of chains with different DP.171 Polychalcogenophenes have long been known to be polymorphic, that is to say, they assemble into different isomeric crystalline structures. In each structure, polymers are characterized by planar heterocycle chains along the (001) direction, with side chains running along the (100) direction. Planar polychalcogenophene heterocycles will π–π stack along the (010) direction (Fig. 12). Generally speaking, heavier chalcogen substitution will increase the (010) distance between π-stacks due to the increased atomic sizes. This consequently leads to shorter lamellar (100) distances as there is a larger available volume for side chain interdigitation.145 Most commonly, P3ATs will assemble into lamellar structures in which individual layers are denoted by polymers whose main backbones are separated from other backbones by staggered and separated alkyl side chains. This ‘type-I’ polymorph is noted for having lamellar thicknesses which scale linearly with the length of the alkyl side chains, while polymer stacks remain consistent.169,172 In polyselenophenes, the type-I polymorph has also been found to improve π–π stacking.169 Type-II polymorphs are characterized by shorter distances along the (100) axis in unit cells due to the interdigitation of interlamellar side chains.173 As a result, the inclusion of branching side chains in polymers can suppress type-II formation by limiting interdigitation.162,174
 Fig. 12  Representative crystal structure of P3HT. 
P3HT crystallizes as a monoclinic system with predominantly type-I polymorphism. Type-II polymorphs are comparatively rare for P3ATs, but they have been seen in smaller Mn P3ATs and those that have longer (C > 6) side chains, although never as a pure phase. The closer packing in this form leads to thinner layers with less consistent distances,169,172,175 and they are less suited for electronic devices due to their smaller (010) dimensions.176 Notably, type-II polymorphs are obtained for moderately sized, 26 kDa, P3HT samples by carefully self-seeding with small crystalline aggregates below the crystallization temperature.173 Type-II polymorphs are kinetically favoured and preferentially formed at lower temperatures, but annealing at higher temperatures reverts them back to type-I.172,176
Unlike P3HT, P3HS readily forms the phase-pure type-II polymorph at room temperature for low MW samples. More specifically, it was found that 5.9 kDa P3HS crystallizes with a type-II form, increasing its Mn to 9.9 kDa introduces a coinciding type-I phase, and 19 kDa P3HS exhibits purely type-I polymorph. As with P3HT, the type-II polymorph of P3HS is the kinetically favoured form for small Mn polymers, and annealing its thin films will irreversibly convert P3HS to the thermodynamically preferred type-I form. Unlike P3HT, however, the type-II form P3HS exhibits much stronger crystallinity, forming 100 nm fibers in thin films in contrast to the amorphous films seen for higher Mn samples.169 Low Mn P3HS has also been observed to form interesting spherulitic morphologies that consist of type-II nanoribbons when crystallized from aged dichloromethane. These structures slowly transition from lamellar morphologies to spherulites over 54 hours of aging, and they continue to grow for up to 120 hours.168
Compared to polythiophenes and polyselenophenes, the polymorphism of polytellurophenes is much less explored. X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments of P3HTe and branched P3EHTe show that the latter has a (100) spacing around 2 Å longer than the former, despite the same side chain length. As branched structures suppress interdigitation, and since no shoulder was observed in P3HTe's first-order (100) diffraction peak, this alludes to some degree of side chain interdigitation in P3HTe, meaning that it exhibits at least some type-II polymorphism at a relatively high Mn of 22.9 kDa. This implies that the type-II structure is progressively more favoured with heavier polychalcogenophenes.162,174 This is supported by the fact that larger chalcogens provide greater volumes for side chain interdigitation due to their increased (010) spacings.145
Polychalcogenophenes predominantly assemble into lamellae, resembling stacked sheets, and they can orient themselves either “edge-on” (with side chains (100) extending into the substrate and a parallel (010) π-stacking direction) or “face-on” (π-stacking (010) normal to the substrate alongside parallel (100) side chains) relative to the substrate. The edge-on orientation is generally thermodynamically preferred, but the orientation of crystallites largely depends on film processing conditions, and it is also known to be correlated with regioregularity and MW.177–180 Devices incorporating polychalcogenophenes require a certain stacking directionality, depending on the specific application. For example, in OPVs charge transport is directed out-of-plane between electrodes which lay normal to the substrate, so a face-on crystallization on the substrate would be beneficial. In OFETs, charge transport occurs in-plane, necessitating an edge-on orientation for optimal material charge transport properties.180,181 Since charge transport occurs in the π-stacking direction in OFETs, greater (010) distances, as observed for heavier polychalcogenophenes, are detrimental to their charge carrier mobilities. However, other factors such as backbone planarity, conjugation length, and aggregation strength also play a large role in charge transport, and since heavier polychalcogenophenes notably suffer from poorer solubility, their lower thin film quality can also reduce observed carrier mobilities as well.145,182 In addition, better edge-on crystallinities have been observed for conjugated polymers bearing shorter alkyl side chains, although longer side chains result in better edge-on orientations at the thin film-substrate interface. Thermal annealing, which promotes edge-on orientation, shows the greatest crystallinity improvement for longer side chain polymers.180
Within donor/acceptor blends used in OPV bulk heterojunctions (BHJ), efficient nanophase separation is required for improved optoelectronic properties. For such blends, heavier polychalcogenophenes benefit the most from slow film drying as seen by finer polymer/fullerene mixing, while polythiophenes display similar properties in films prepared by both fast and slow drying. Notably, VOC increases from PTh to PSe to PTe for fast dried films, while the opposite trend is true for slow drying. Regardless, increased polymer ordering from slow drying improves JSC, although to a lesser extent for lighter polychalcogenophenes.183 Overall, heavier polychalcogenophenes have been noted to have more disordered domains with less π–π stacking between conjugated polymers.161
An important strategy for improving conductivities in conjugated polymers is doping, typically with p-dopants such as FeCl3 or FeTs3. Notably, heavier polychalcogenophenes require smaller dopant concentrations for similar increases in conductivity.184–186 P3AS and P3ATe with low dopant concentrations can also achieve comparable power factors to highly doped P3AT.185 Since the polymer structures are saturated at similar dopant levels for different chalcogens, this implies different doping mechanisms across the series. In fact, doping of poly(3-alkylchalcogenophenes) with dimethyloctyl (DMO) side chains with 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) resulted in charge transfer complex formation between π-stacks for P3DMOT and P3DMOS, while F4TCNQ intercalated between P3DMOTe side chains and doped it primarily by integer charge transfer. The same type of mechanism seems to be favoured for shorter unbranched side chains as well, as seen for P3HT. Most importantly, the degree of oxidation from doping increased from S to Se to Te.186 Differences in lamellar spacings also influence the doping mechanism. When doped, conjugated polymers will structurally change in order to accommodate dopants, and polychalcogenophene lamellar spacing will shift to fairly uniform values for the same dopant. For example, FeCl3 doping of P3AT, P3AS, and P3ATe resulted in consistent (100) distances of 21.6–23.9 Å across the samples.184 Since such spacings decrease for heavier chalcogen substitution, P3AS and P3ATe require greater structural reorganization to accommodate dopants. Interestingly, doping with FeTs3, which has a larger anion, saw the emergence of a second polymorph with lower d-spacing in P3AS and P3ATe samples.
P3HTe forms fiber-like crystalline structures between 50 and 100 nm in length, although unlike P3HT, these were not discernible in neat films, only in blends with high-density polyethylene (HDPE). On the other hand, blends of HDPE and either P3EHTe or P3DDTe do not exhibit notable crystallization, and instead result in irregular domains, possibly due to the side chains’ increased miscibility with the HDPE phase. In each example, the strong contrast provided by tellurium enabled efficient imaging and identification for structure–property relationships. In any case P3HTe and P3DDTe blends with HDPE featured modest charge carrier mobilities 1.6 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively when incorporated in OFETs, compared to a lower mobility of 2.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the HDPE blend with branched P3EHTe.174
Tellurium is a metalloid, which may lead to Te–Te interaction in polytellurophenes that assist in molecular organization. Crystal structures of the first substituted tellurophenes, 3,4-Dimethoxytellurophene, have shown Te–Te distances of 3.80–4.04 Å, lower than their van der Waals distances of 4.30 Å, indicating strong interactions which reflect their metallic character. In comparison Se–Se distances were measured to be 3.78 Å, compared to the similar 3.80 Å van der Waals distances, reflecting slightly weaker interactions.4,187 However, polytellurophenes are among the most amorphous polychalcogenophenes, possibly due to such Te–Te interactions disrupting crystallization and the increased torsional barrier between heavier polytellurophene repeating units.188 Tellurium–halogen coordination in polytellurophenes has also been shown to control bandgaps via hypervalent bond formation and further control optoelectronic properties. This will be further discussed in Section 6.1.3 Halogen coordination.
Polyfurans are an interesting class of polychalcogenophenes as they tend to deviate the most from established chalcogenophene trends. Polyfurans are notoriously susceptible to degradation, particularly through ring opening and cycloaddition in their oxidized states, making their doping and application as conductive materials inefficient. Some methods, including careful anhydrous polymerizations, the use of mild oxidizing agents, copolymerization with small amounts of thiophene, and the use of electron-withdrawing side chains have been used to avoid this issue.189–191 Recently, poly(3-hexylester furan) (P3HEF), which bears ester side chains, has been shown to reversibly assemble into oxidative degradation-resistant helical structures with the addition of poor solvent. Regular P3HF, on the other hand, behaves in a rod-like manner like other poly(3-alkylchalcogenophenes). Specifically, steric factors between ester and furan oxygen atoms forced all side chains into a syn conformation, resulting in a helical structure stabilized by both π-stacking and hydrogen bonding. Interestingly, the 0.4 nm internal cavities of these structures lend themselves to host–guest chemistry.83 While HH/TT defects have been shown to generally lower polychalcogenophene planarity and conjugation lengths, model 16-mer oligofurans with inserted HH defects have shown that they have very little effect for polyfurans.192 Remarkably, the solution λmax for P3HF with repeating HH linkages is 458 nm, only very slightly blue-shifted from 465 nm for P3HF with regular HT coupling. In fact, polyfurans have been known to adopt very coplanar backbones, with P3HF undergoing a very minor red-shift from 465 to 489 nm when cast from solution into a thin film, and the substitution of small furan units into chalcogenophene copolymers can force planarity.57,193 Recently, repeating HH linkages have also been applied in P3HEF synthesis (HH-α-TT-P3HEF). Unlike their alkyl side chain analogues, these ester groups impose harsh steric restrictions to the backbone, forcing HH-α-TT-P3HEF into an extended conformation from the helical one observed for HT-P3HEF. However, their effective conjugation lengths were lower than HT-P3HEF due to significant backbone twisting (Fig. 13). Despite their linearity, these are similarly resistant to degradation when compared to P3HF.84
 Fig. 13  DFT energy-minimized structures of octameric analogues for HT-P3HEF and HH-α-TT-P3HEF. Lower effective conjugation in extended HH-α-TT-P3HEF compared to helical HT-P3HEF results in a broader HOMO–LUMO gap. Reproduced from ref.84 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2022. 
5. Copolymer properties and self-assembly
5.1 Block copolymers
Block copolymers are polymers in which two or more blocks of different polymeric chains are covalently linked together. The balance in polarity, crystallinity, MW fraction, and other properties between blocks allows for the specific and predictable self-assembly of BCP into various nanostructures via phase separation. It is important to note that clear phase separation and structure formation are dependent on the self-assembly of low Đ BCP, which are granted by CTP.194,195 Because macrophase separation is impossible for connected blocks, immiscible polymers separate at the nanoscale. Blocks within BCP can be broadly categorized at rods or coils. Conjugated chalcogen-containing polymers, which are the focus of this review, are defined as rod-type due to the rigidity conferred by their conjugated π-stacking backbone, whereas amorphous polymers which often have aliphatic backbones form coil-type blocks. As a result, most morphological studies concerned with these chalcogen-containing polymers feature nanostructures with low curvature.196
Polychalcogenophenes in thin films and blends have often suffered from morphological disorder and from imperfect aggregation/self-assembly which impede properties such as conductivity and charge carrier mobility. BHJ blends require a large degree of nanoscale phase separation to maximize donor–acceptor interfaces and promote effective exciton diffusion between them. However, phases in polychalcogenophene-based blends often continue separating into the micro scale.197 Block copolymers have therefore been used to tune morphology, and by extension, optoelectronic properties by stabilizing donor–acceptor blends.196,198–200 The optoelectronic properties of OPVs are heavily influenced by the morphology of the polymers that they contain, making the understanding and elucidation of conjugated BCP self-assembly incredibly important. OPVs typically require nanostructuring at the 10–100 nm scale, which rod-like conjugated polymers can provide, and this conveniently covers the 10–50 nm scale over which exciton diffusion can reliably occur.196,201,202 Another favourable BCP application lies in their ability to co-crystallize. This is a promising tool for OFETs as it promotes charge transport properties, and it specifically requires BCP, since polychalcogenophene-containing blends have only shown phase separation with separate crystal domains.203 While co-crystallization is normally difficult to achieve, requiring similar structures, potential energies, and crystallization kinetics,198,204,205 such similarities can be found for a number of different polychalcogenophenes that comprise blocks that either share the same heterocycle with different alkyl side chains, or different heterocycles with the same alkyl side chains.194,195,203,206

5.1.1 Rod–rod block copolymers. 
Among the examples of conjugated block copolymers incorporating polythiophenes is the well-developed model system of P3AT-b-P3AS block copolymers, usually featuring similar 3-hexyl side chains. Substituting the S atom in polythiophene heterocycles for the lower Group 16 Se atom in a separate block has been demonstrated to cause microphase separation of these blocks despite their similar chemical nature. Polymers of this type have broad absorbances, incorporating features of both of their constituents, as well as a red-shifted absorption onset relative to control P3HT.103 This onset can be tuned by the specific Se content in the block copolymer; for example, the onset can shift from 590 to 620 nm for BCPs that vary from 26% to 81% mol Se (relative to 560 nm for pure P3HT). Also notable is that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the absorbances reach their maxima when polythiophene and polyselenophene contents are equal, indicating their equal chromophoric contribution.103,207 Interestingly, the solution self-assembly of higher Se content PTh-b-PSe occurs earlier (at higher temperature), although this has the consequence of limiting ordering, especially in lower MW samples. Such low MW samples also tend to assemble into shorter fibrils, while maintaining similar 15–20 nm width.207 The scope of earlier studies of P3AT-b-P3AS BCP have been limited morphologically as a result of their inclusion of shorter hexyl side chains, whose lengths do not facilitate solubility at higher MWs. Inclusion of dodecyl side chains solves this problem and prevents early phase separation between blocks as a result of insolubility, giving access to a range of different nanostructures. Nanostructures self-assembled from poly(3-dodecylthiophene)-block-poly(3-dodecylselenophene) (P3DDT-b-P3DDS) fall into three categories based on their DP: lamellar phase separation, co-crystallization, and patchy co-crystallization (Fig. 14). The most familiar example is that of DP < 35 at which block microphase separates into distinct lamellae, with lamellar widths correlating to the length of the extended BCP, and therefore DP. Increasing DP for each block to 50–60 begins to impede full chain extension, and this entanglement leads to co-crystallization of blocks. For DP > 80, there is a partial recurrence of phase separation enabled by chain folding, leading to patchy fibers. Interestingly, this results in crystallization occurring more readily for high DP BCP than for medium DP in which chain folding is still restricted due to BCP rigidity.206,208
 Fig. 14  Proposed DP-dependent self-assembly model for P3DDT-b-P3DDS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Polythiophenes have a HOMO of around −5.19 eV. Upon linking PSe blocks, as in the case of PTh-b-PSe BCP, HOMO levels remain nearly unchanged at roughly −5.16 eV, being lowered slightly to −5.25 eV with increasing Se content, while the optical bandgap of 1.63 eV more closely resembles that of PSe.207 When incorporated into OPVs with [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as an acceptor, the PTh-b-PSe BCP exhibited superior external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra, hole mobility (μh), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and PCE to mixtures of the two homopolymers or lone PSe. While the BCP's PCE and μh (2.52%, 2.22 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) were below that of PTh homopolymers (3.12%, 5.57 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), with separate PTh and PSe layers disrupting hole mobility, the BCPs did lead to greater device stability.209 Within the BHJ of polymer solar cells (PSC), distinct phases, as conferred by BCP self-assembly, are important for polymer–acceptor separation. Fittingly, P3HT-b-P3HS were shown to have superior optoelectronic properties, including PCE and VOC, relative to P3HT-s-P3HS. However, in statistical copolymers, where there is no intrinsic phase separation, slow vapour annealing can be used to optimize polymer–fullerene separation in BHJ, and lead to devices with notably improved optoelectronic properties. Slowly annealed P3HT-s-P3HS exhibited PCE of 2.67% and 3.05% when blended with PCBM and indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), compared to P3HT-b-P3HS which had PCE of 2.16% and 1.14%.210 Optoelectronic properties can also be improved by replacing the hexyl side chain on Se heterocycles with a heptyl chain that increases lamellar spacing by 1.6 Å and bringing it more in line with that of P3HT. This increases crystalline nanofibril length and optimizes PCE in the ICBA blend, bringing it to 3.27%, which is in line with the improvement seen by slow annealing.210,211 A reverse strategy was implemented with P3BT-b-P3HS, for which the shorter butyl chain, relative to hexyl, optimizes the BCP's self-assembly into co-crystalline structures. These have the advantage of increasing carrier mobility to a maximum of 0.045 cm2 V−1 s−1. However, of the studied films with different 1:1, 2:1, and 1:2 block ratios, it was shown that only the 1:2 P3BT-b-P3HS BCP retained co-crystallinity following thermal annealing, thereby retaining a charge carrier mobility of up to 0.025 cm2 V−1 s−1.198
The inclusion of heteroatom spacers and the length of alkyl side chains on rod–rod BCP too can affect block solubility, melting point, and crystallinity, and can therefore have an impact on the morphology of self-assembled BCP. For example, the forced planarization/increased rigidity of one block in a poly(3-octylthiophene)-based (P3OT-based) BCP with a block of poly(3-octyl-4-fluorothiophene) (P3OFT) can stabilize P3OT domains better than analogous blends, suggesting that backbone fluorination may be a viable strategy in stabilizing BHJ active layers.107 For P3AT-b-P3AT where blocks differ only in their side chain, a difference of more than 2 carbons can easily induce microphase separation into lamellae, as with P3BT-b-P3OT or P3HT-b-P3DDT. Otherwise, co-crystallization occurs readily between blocks.194,195 However, the balance between phase separation and co-crystallization is more complicated as it depends not only on the chemical identity and ratio of blocks, but also factors including the processing solvent and annealing temperatures. Even P3AT BCPs with disparate butyl and dodecyl side chain-containing blocks can be tuned to exhibit co-crystalline structure. For example, casting P3BT-b-P3DDT thin films from chloroform, as opposed to ortho-dichlorobenzene or trichlorobenzene, results in co-crystallization due to the solvent's quick evaporation time. However, BCPs with larger (67%) P3BT block ratios tended to form P3BT crystals first due to the shorter alkyl chains’ lower solubility, followed by co-crystal formation.203
Triblock copolymers featuring combinations of P3BT, P3HT, P3OT, and P3DDT all exhibit co-crystallization in both the as-cast state and after thermal annealing, with those combinations that place the shortest alkyl chain block in the center featuring the highest degrees of film crystallinity and charge carrier mobility.110 However, as preliminarily evidenced by the loss of vibronic structure in solvatochromic experiments, it is also possible to prevent aggregation between blocks in triblock P3ATs by separating blocks containing linear side chains with a non-aggregating block containing branched octyldodecyl side chains.111 For polychalcogenophenes with appropriately similar structures, potential energies, and crystallization kinetics, co-crystallization is a powerful tool which can promote charge transport in OFETs.198,204,205 In particular, P3BT-b-P3HT showed mobilities as high as 1.2 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the as-cast state, higher than corresponding P3BT and P3HT controls and their blends. These BCP exhibited increased mobilities for higher MW samples, and upon thermal annealing, only the lowest 12000 MW sample had a decreased carrier mobility due to the tendency of co-crystals to form along the alkyl chain direction in it. Presumably due to such co-crystallization, this sample was the only one to retain its structure upon two-step thermal annealing, whereas 15k–28k MW samples underwent microphase separation (Fig. 15).205
 Fig. 15  Stepwise representation of high MW P3BT-b-P3HT microphase separation from co-crystals through two-step thermal annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Crystallization-driven self-assembly (CDSA) has been used to grow ribbon-like micelles of completely P3HT-based BCP. Blocks of regioregular (rr) and regiosymmetric (rs) (with repeating HH–TT coupling) P3HT were grown sequentially using Kumada CTP to form rrP3HT-b-rsP3HT diblocks. In a modified strategy, careful cooling to room temperature from 80 °C in anisole allowed for the core crystallization of rrP3HT with minimal defects, leaving rsP3HT to form the corona. It is also possible to cool the solution only to 40 °C, supersaturating it, which dramatically limits homogenous nucleation. The addition of seeds at this point more precisely and easily enables the growth of micelles of up to 4 μm. Despite the full P3HT makeup of these BCP micelles, charge carrier mobility is independent of coronal chains, with the only contribution coming from the crystalline regioregular cores, as evidenced by comparisons to rrP3HT-b-rsP3HT, rrP3HT-b-PS and rrP3HT fibers. However, μ does increase with both increasing fiber length and DP of rrP3HT (fiber width).134,212 Due to its inherent crystallinity, P3HT does tend to nucleate spontaneously, which limits the extent of micellar growth through CDSA. End-capping with charged phosphonium groups, creating an amphiphile, both controls crystalline growth and provides colloidal stability. These amphiphilic P3HT micelles were grown to unprecedented lengths of 2.8 μm, increasing P3HT's potential applications in optoelectronic devices.213 Relative to polythiophenes, polytellurophenes are less soluble, possess higher oxidation potentials by roughly 0.2 eV, and require much smaller concentrations of iron(III) p-toluenesulfonate (FeTs3) for successful p-doping.184 As a result, the substitution of S for Te over a separate block facilitates the self-assembly of poly[3-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)thiophene]-block-poly[3-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)tellurophene) (P3DMOT-b-P3DMOTe) by the selective oxidation of the P3DMOTe block. Upon addition of FeTs3 in chlorinated solvents, P3DMOTe chains crystallize, facilitating micelle formation, with colloidal stability provided by solubilized P3DMOT chains. These micelles were shown to be stable for at least two months. Notably, micelle formation was promoted using an oxidant, so reversible disassembly could be enabled through the addition of a chemical reductant (Fig. 16).108
 Fig. 16  Proposed model for the reversible oxidation-promoted self-assembly of P3DMOT-b-P3DMOTe. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.1.2 Rod–coil block copolymers. 
Unlike their rod–rod counterparts, rod–coil BCP have been extensively studied over the past few decades. Due to the presence of rod-type blocks which tend to occupy large crystalline domains and behave anisotropically, rod–coil block copolymers do not conform to the classic Flory–Huggins parameters which describe coil–coil BCP. Instead, due to the strong alignment between rod blocks, rod–coil BCP tend to form lamellar structures over large temperature and block ratio ranges, with large coil fractions and high temperatures required for isotropic and nematic phase formation, respectively. However, bulky and branched side chains in P3ATs have been shown to lessen the degree of interchain rod–rod interactions.196,214,215 It should be noted that a reduction in P3AT regioregularity shortens persistence lengths, reduces crystallization and interchain interactions, and can therefore transition such rod–coil BCP to coil–coil types.216,217 Nevertheless, polychalcogenophene crystallization occurs readily at low temperatures, providing competition for other self-assembly pathways.196,218
In fact, P3AT crystals can extend past their confined phases, and because this phenomenon, termed breakout crystallization, heightens disorder, derived devices suffer from diminished optoelectronic properties. Melt-state gyroid morphologies of P3EHT-b-PEG, for example, will be forced into rough lamellar morphologies upon cooling due to breakout crystallization. Maintaining morphologies from the melt-state and preventing such growth via confined crystallization can primarily be achieved by either inducing crystallization while the amorphous coil block is in its glassy phase, thus providing a physical barrier, or by increasing the segregation strength, χ·DP, of the blocks in the BCP by adjusting the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter, χ, or the DP.219,220 In the case of P3EHT-b-PEG, the addition of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) increases χ by strengthening PEG segregation due to Li ion binding, and this results in maintained lamellar morphologies from the melt-phase to the solid state alongside confined P3EHT crystallization.219 In BCP of P3DDT and poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP), the former strategy was applied by lowering the regioregularity of the P3DDT block to <85%. Regioregularity affects crystallization modes and temperatures, so by effectively lowering P3DDT crystallization temperatures to or below that of P2VP Tg, its crystallization could be confined to its own phase.216,220 However, reducing regioregularity also interrupts charge transport pathways and has a detrimental effect on P3AT-based devices.216 A more recent advancement has been in the use of solvo-microwave annealing which rapidly forces the ordering of BCP due to high heat and solvent vapour pressure that promotes chain mobility and phase reorganization. Compared to conventional thermal annealing methods which require long times for efficient ordering, and in which slow cooling can result in breakout crystallization, solvo-microwave annealing of P3DDT-b-PLA requires only 3 minutes for ordering that exhibits up to clearly distinguishable (500) peaks via grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). While fast quenching of thermally annealed samples could prevent breakout crystallization, it also prevents this high degree of crystallinity (Fig. 17).221
 Fig. 17  TEM and inset Fast Fourier Transform images of P3DDT-b-PLA thin-films prepared (a) as-cast, (b) with fast quenching after thermal annealing, (c) with slow cooling after thermal annealing, (d) and with solvo-microwave annealing. (e) Scheme of the lamellar structure of P3DDT-b-PLA. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In solution, polychalcogenophene-based rod–coil BCP have been assembled into a variety of structures, including helical nanoribbons, vesicles, sheets, nanowires, and spheres.129,171,222,223 However, the most prominent structure is still that of the 1D micelle. Owing to their ubiquity, polarity, and amorphous nature, oligo- and polyethylene glycol have become established amorphous blocks in polythiophene-based BCPs.224 The amphiphilicity granted by PEG blocks also allows the dissolution and processing of these BCP in many solvents including THF, toluene, chloroform, anisole, ethyl acetate, methanol, and water. Transitioning to the more PEG-selective solvents towards the end of this list strengthens P3HT π–π stacking, resulting in a bathochromic shift and the appearance of more pronounced vibronic structure tied to interchain π–π interactions. More notably, this promotes the formation of nanofibers with crystalline P3HT cores and amorphous PEG coronas. These structures are retained in thin films, whereas the use of better cosolvents promotes phase separation.225 P3HT-b-PEG BCP consistently undergo solution self-assembly to form nanowire-like micelles for P3HT fractions of 0.41 < f < 0.82, with little change to optoelectronic properties. Decreasing PEG chain length in such BCP has the effect of extending the possible length of micelles to over 1 μm due to the reduction in stretching energy of PEG chains (Fig. 18).223 These micellar extensions are permitted in methanol, but in water, where PEG swells and occupies a larger effective volume, spherical micelles are formed instead.129 One major recent advancement has been the self-assembly of P3HT-b-PEG on inclined water surfaces, forcing alignment. These nanowires grow such that individual polymers are positioned perpendicular to the flow direction, and micelles of sub-millimetre scales can be attained (Fig. 19). FET devices fabricated using films assembled in this way were shown to have hole mobilities of up to 2.6 ± 0.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, about an order of magnitude higher than for those formed on flat surfaces at 2.9 ± 1.1 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1.226
 Fig. 18  TEM images of P3HT-b-PEG with decreasing PEG lengths corresponding to (A) fPHT = 0.41, (B) fPHT = 0.61, and (C) fPHT = 0.82 alongside representative schematic micelles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 19  Schematic representations of P3HT-b-PEG self-assembly on (a) a flat surface and (b) an inclined surface. Colour-coded TEM images of P3HT-b-PEG films assembled on (c and e) flat and (d and f) inclined surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Owing to the desirability of controllable self-assembly of conductive nanowires as well as their crystallinity, polychalcogenophenes represent a promising class of polymers for core crystallization and bottom-up device fabrication using CDSA, especially since it has recently been used to access electrical circuits by growing polythiophene-based fibers across electrode gaps.227 One of the first examples of polychalcogenophene CDSA came from the Manners group, where P3HT was covalently linked to colloidally stabilizing polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) blocks, thus preventing nanofibrillar aggregation. CDSA was used to form and epitaxially extend P3HT-b-PDMS micelles up to 320 nm while maintaining minimal length dispersity. Relative to P3HT homopolymers, the BCPs showed red-shifted absorbances, alluding to greater crystallinity and larger π-conjugation lengths. In the solid state, these block copolymers exhibited a lamellar morphology. Notably, BCPs were found to crystallize at lower temperatures and with a higher degree of hysteresis in DSC measurements.228 A major optimization in this strategy since then has been the replacement of hexyl side chains with octyl chains, as in P3OT-b-PDMS. The increased solubility of the side chains in the common solvent, THF, allowed for further epitaxial growth during crystallization, reaching up to 600 nm.229 Polychalcogenophene CDSA usually leads to 1D fibers or 2D platelets,230 but an interesting recent exception involves the use of helical poly(phenyl isocyanide)s (PPI) which can induce chirality in P3HT-b-PPI. While micelle growth and length are dictated by CDSA, PPI handedness and block length were reflected in the handedness and degree of circular dichroism of P3HT-b-PPI micelles. While these micelles exhibit orange-light emission in toluene, the increasing addition of PPI-selective isopropyl alcohol shifts this emission to yellow, then blue, and a 4/6 ratio of toluene/isopropanol in particular induces the emission of white light.109
The use of CDSA has been extended to other Group 16 heterocycle-containing polymers, namely polyselenophenes. Using polystyrene as colloidally stabilizing coronal blocks, P37S-b-PS has been used to grow micelles with fully extended chains along their widths. Pure polyselenophenes are noted to form two different crystalline polymorphs, so it is interesting that only type-2 packing was seen with these BCP.135 Unfortunately, polyselenophenes are notoriously difficult to solubilize, making them difficult to work with, but this also has the consequence of limiting micellar length. This can be remedied both by replacing heptyl chains with more soluble dodecyl chains on the polyselenophene heterocycle, as well as replacing polystyrene with PDMS, which does not aggregate as strongly. Such corrections, in addition to the direct preparation of P3DDS-b-PDMS seeds in diethyl ether and avoiding the use of ultrasonication, extended possible micelle fiber lengths from 300 nm to 900 nm.136

5.2 Gradient copolymers
As opposed to conjugated BCP, statistical copolymers have much less defined self-assembly properties, without significant microphase separation and no lamellar organization. Notably, the McNeil group has performed a comparative study of P3HT-P3HS block, gradient, and random copolymers, finding that gradient copolymers fill a middle ground between block and statistical copolymers and can therefore be used to control the extent of phase separation in derived materials. Similarly, gradient copolymers show subtle depressed H-aggregate peaks for each constituent polymer relative to BCP, whereas such features are not seen in random copolymers.106 Because gradient copolymers are not as likely to assemble into micelles as BCP, they are useful in BHJ active layers, where they can stabilize donor–acceptor blends.231,232 Significantly, P3HT-g-P3HS have been shown to form smaller domain sizes in BHJ, which results in higher charge densities when compared to either homopolymer.233 Another rather direct way of addressing this phase-separation problem was in the synthesis of a gradient copolymer of P3HT and P3HT with PCBM pendants. Compared to the homopolymer, these gradient copolymers showed no significant phase separation or decreases in solar cell efficiency, even following thermal annealing. However, it must be noted that the copolymers with 1–10 wt% PCBM pendant contents had a significant detrimental effect on PCE and fill factor (FF), even considering annealing effects, due to a reduction in phase-pure P3HT fibrils. This can be resolved for copolymers with 0.1 wt% PCBM, but these are prone to the same type of phase separation as P3HT homopolymers.141,234
5.3 Statistical copolymers
The properties of polychalcogenophene-based statistical copolymers correspond primarily to the average composition of constituent monomers, featuring bandgap energies and optoelectronic properties that are averages of analogous homopolymers. Increased valence bands resulting from increasing Se content in particular provide higher charge carrier concentrations after doping.140,211,235 However, statistical copolymers feature clearly depressed vibronic structure compared to block and homopolymer analogues. Due to differences in solid-state organization, monomer composition does not necessarily translate to analogous trends in device performance. Whereas crystalline order is preserved in BCP,103,207 the random sequence of monomers in P3HT-s-P3HS lead to smaller crystallites and associated stacking imperfections. P3HT-s-P3HS stack edge-on, similar to P3HT, and their interchain π-stacking distances increase with increasing Se content due to the heteroatom's larger size, alongside a slight decrease in lamellar spacing. Additionally, in P3HT-s-P37S, crystalline structures are maintained as type-I polymorphs for all Se contents except for 100%, where they exist as type-II polymorphs instead. In any case, specifically engineering bandgap properties may be an advantage of such statistical copolymers if crystalline disorder is not considered to be detrimental.140,235 Studies of P3BT-s-P3HS too have revealed similar tunability in bandgaps and interchain spacing, however the close packing of P3BT further grants good charge mobility in OFETs relative to P3BT and P3HS homopolymers, as well as their blends. While P3BT does benefit from close π–π stacking, its poor solubility resulting from the short alkyl chain hinders charge mobility. Introduction of P3HS with its longer alkyl chain can then promote solubility and force planarization between heterocycles, improving charge transport, yet only in small amounts since selenophenes also widen π-stacking distances. It has been shown that charge mobilities of 0.059 cm2 V−1 s−1 were achieved for P3BT-s-P3HS which contained 30% P3HS, with charge mobilities dropping to 0.030 cm2 V−1 s−1 when P3HS content rose to 63%.236 Doping via sequential processing involves the introduction of dopants to a pre-cast solvent-swelled thin film, allowing it to retain its thin morphology. P3HT-s-P37S was doped with 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) in this manner, and it was found that the swellability of films is directly related to the extent that a dopant can infiltrate and dope them. Since crystallinity is inversely related to swellability, and because Se incorporation increases the crystallinity of P3HT copolymers, the least swellable and lowest carrier concentration P3HT-s-P37S films generally had the highest Se contents, 100% Se films notwithstanding due to different, type-II, crystalline polymorphs. Overall, the 100% P37S films had the highest carrier densities, charge carrier mobilities, and conductivities (Fig. 20).235
 Fig. 20  Effect of increasing selenophene content on P37S-s-P3HT (a) electrical conductivity, (b) doped:undoped (100) peak area ratio, (c) carrier density, and (d) carrier mobility. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The active layers of BHJs often contain polychalcogenophenes, yet homopolymers of this type are prone to microphase separation, leading to donor–acceptor blends with limited contact at the interface. Whereas gradient copolymers of P3HT and PCBM pendant-bearing P3HT were previously discussed and determined to improve device longevity at the expense of performance, statistical copolymers improved both.141,234 These statistical copolymers were shown to stabilize the nanoscale phase separation of their blends with acceptor PCBM, with larger PCBM pendant contents in the copolymer decreasing PCBM phase aggregates (as tested from 2–8%). Notably, photovoltaic devices incorporating the statistical copolymer had improved PCE of 3.1% relative to the control at 2.4%, an effect not seen with the other copolymers. However, a minor PCE decrease was seen after 90 minutes due to a decrease in VOC facilitated by charge recombination.141
5.4 Alternating and periodic copolymers
Copolymers with alternating sequences of chalcogenophenes exhibit bandgap properties that are correlated to the specific contents of either constituent heterocycle. Heavier chalcogenophene (Te > Se > S) incorporation shifts HOMO levels up and LUMO levels down, narrowing the bandgap. This relationship also holds for alternating copolymers of dimeric repeating units that feature all combinations of thiophene, selenophene, and tellurophene. Predictably, alternating copolymers with higher heavy atom contents exhibited the largest red-shifts in the order TeTe > SeTe > STe > SeSe > SSe > SS with a maximum and minimum λmax of 631 nm and 448 nm in o-dichlorobenzene solution, which red-shifted further when processed in the solid state (Fig. 21). Alternating or periodic copolymers based on trimers of thiophene and selenophene heterocycles also feature increased red-shifts with greater selenophene content in both the solid state and in solution, with a λmax of 480 nm for copolymers with TSeSe sequences compared to 455 nm for TT.140,145 Interestingly, FT and FTSe repeating units result in the greatest red-shift in solution compared to copolymers with alternating sequences featuring only thiophene and/or selenophene heterocycles as a result of planarity forced by the small furan unit. However, the FTSe alternating copolymer is comparatively the most blue-shifted in the solid state since all of the alternating copolymers are forced to adopt a planar structure.57,140,144
 Fig. 21  Optical absorption spectra of CPs incorporating thiophene (S), selenophene (Se), and tellurophene (Te) repeating units in (a) o-dichlorobenzene and (b) as thin films. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Alternating copolymers feature greater crystalline ordering. For thiophene, selenophene, and tellurophene alternating and periodic copolymers, interchain stacking generally increases for repeating units that feature additional Te or Se heterocycles, in that order, as a result of their larger size. However, this increase is not as pronounced as it is in P3HT-P3HS statistical analogues which may be a result of statistical populations which feature larger individual Se sequences. Regardless, periodic copolymers with TTSe and TSeSe repeating units exhibit highly oriented structures and a greater degree of packing. In one study, it was found that copolymers with TSe units are a notable exception that feature greater d-spacing and orientational disorder, even compared to statistical copolymers, that may be a result of its backbone curvature.140,144,145,237
6. Post-polymerization modifications (PPM)
To date, an extensive library of Group 16 conjugated polymers has been built using direct polymerization methods. Although it has been mostly overlooked until recently, post-polymerization modification (PPM) can complement such development as it has proven to be an effective strategy for introducing new functionality and properties from polymeric precursors. In particular, the PPM of conjugated polymers can be used to directly tailor their properties through heterocycle transformation and functional group installation in ways that are incompatible with respective polymerization techniques. This section aims to summarize various strategies that have been developed so far for modifying either the backbone or side chains of Group 16 conjugated polymers.
6.1 Backbone modifications

6.1.1 Diels–Alder cycloaddition (DAC). 
A unique feature of furan heterocycles is that they can react as dienes in Diels–Alder cycloadditions (DAC) under relatively mild conditions due to their low aromaticity. In fact, the Diels–Alder chemistry of furans has been exploited to expand the functional properties of polymeric materials used in biomedical applications, including self-healing, biomolecular immobilization, drug delivery, drug release, and dynamic material fabrication.238 However, many of these polymers do not contain a π-conjugated backbone. One relevant example is the synthesis of aromatic perylene derivatives by intramolecular tandem DAC of two tethered furan units.239 Recently, Gidron and coworkers transformed methyl-terminated oligofurans containing up to six units into oligonaphthalene analogues by DAC with arynes as dienophiles following deoxygenation, while retaining π-conjugation (Fig. 22).240 These methyl terminal groups are of importance for the formation of desired product upon deoxygenation. For instance, the reaction of H-terminated bifuran yields 4,4′-binaphthol instead of the binaphthalene under otherwise identical conditions. The versatility of this approach is further evidenced by the high conversion of a single oligofuran into a library of substituted oligoarenes by varying the identity and order of added dienophiles. While this method has only been demonstrated for oligofuran, it may be used to access other π-conjugated small molecules and can be extended to polymeric systems through reaction condition optimization.
 Fig. 22  Transformation of oligofurans into oligonaphthalenes. 
In addition to DAC, furan derivatives are also known to react with singlet oxygen (1O2), a highly reactive oxygen species due to its high electrophilicity and excited-state energy. In fact, furans have been frequently exploited in designing molecular probes for 1O2. Thomas and coworkers reported that poly(fluorene-co-phenylene) with 2,5-diarylfuran moieties as nonconjugated pendants can respond to 1O2 by fluorescence quenching.241 In the case of polymers, the rapid photodegradation of polyfuran likely occurs by 1O2 addition.242 DAC reactions were also reported in tellurophene-based small molecules. Upon irradiation at 365 nm under aerobic conditions, 2,5-diphenyltellurophene undergoes photooxidation by 1O2 and is transformed into endoperoxide followed by the extrusion of TeO2 and ring opening.243 PTh, PSe, and PTe possess better stability compared to polyfuran. The photooxidation of P3HT has been attributed to the DAC reaction of the thienyl unit with 1O2. However, this mechanism is still under debate. A recent study found that the oxidation of P3HT is likely initiated by superoxide instead of 1O2.244 In any case, the reaction of chalcogenophenes with 1O2 leads to a loss of conjugation, which is detrimental from a material perspective, and it is not a beneficial example of π-conjugated polymer PPM.


6.1.2 Heteroatom oxidation. 
Due to their electron rich nature, chalcogenophenes are susceptible to oxidation. Chalcogens, S, Se, and Te have access to higher oxidation states due to the presence of d-orbitals, which allows their oxidation even in conjugated systems. In an elegant example, all thiophene rings in oligothiophenes up to quaterthiophene are oxidized to thiophene-S,S-dioxides (TDO) by Rozen's reagent, a stable form of hypofluorous acid with acetonitrile (HOF·CH3CN).245 Campos and coworkers have since extended this approach to the oxidation of P3ATs and poly(thiophene-alt-9,9′-dioctylfluorene) (Fig. 23a).246 Although P3ATs are merely oxidized up to 60%, this route produces polymers with significantly narrower bandgap (1.67 and 1.76 eV, depending on the extent of oxidation), compared with pristine P3ATs (1.94 eV). This approach demonstrated that facile post-polymerization oxidation of the backbone of conjugated polymers, instead of monomer variation, is an efficient strategy for tuning the electronic properties of materials.
 Fig. 23  Oxidation of polythiophene using Rozen's reagent or m-CPBA. 
In a control experiment by Campos and coworkers, up to 15% incorporation of TDO was achieved after two days using excess meta-chloroperbenzoic acid (m-CPBA). In combination with microwave assistance, Amir and coworkers improved the extent of this reaction to 56% (Fig. 23b).247 TDO moieties not only impact the electronic properties of materials, but can also act as functional handles for further reactions. For example, crosslinked PTh can be achieved through thermally activated DAC between TDO and other thiophene rings at 150 °C (Fig. 24).247 While comparable hole mobilities are achieved in both the pristine and cross-linked films, blends of the crosslinked P3HT with PCBM exhibit improved blend stability by limiting PCBM crystal formation after prolonged annealing, indicating the material's potential to improve the thermal stability of OPV devices.
 Fig. 24  Diels–Alder reaction of P3HT-TDO with thiophene ring. Adapted from ref. 247 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. 
To our knowledge, there are no reports of controlled oxidation of PSe and PTe thus far, likely due to the instability of selenophene- and tellurophene-1,1-dioxides, as shown in small molecule analogues.243,248,249 Treating 2,5-diphenyltellurophene with one equivalent of m-CPBA affords telluroxide with a significantly high rate of reactivity, leading to an immediate colour change from colourless to yellow and a resultant red-shift in the absorption spectrum. However, increasing m-CPBA to four equivalents results in the extrusion of TeO2, and produces (Z)-1,4-diphenylbut-2-ene-1,4-dione rather than tellurophene-1,1-dioxides. This work brought the susceptibility of the tellurophene ring system to oxidative ring opening into the spotlight.


6.1.3 Halogen coordination. 
Among the chalcogens, tellurium forms the strongest hypervalent bonds. Tellurophenes undergo rapid and efficient oxidation with halogens or other oxidants to form hypervalent adducts, with no reported furan, thiophene, and selenophene analogues. The bromination of 2,5-diaryltellurophene leads to a decrease in aromaticity, a red-shift in optical properties, and lower-lying HOMO and LUMO levels. Interestingly, dehalogenation of such adducts can be triggered by thermal treatment, irradiation, or chemical reduction.10,250 Tellurophene halogenation in particular not only allows structural and electronic property modification in corresponding polymers, but also lays the foundation for the oxidant sensing of species such as molecular bromine.251,252
Seferos and coworkers pioneered the bromination of tellurophene-containing polymers using the copolymer poly(bitellurophene-alt-9,9′-dihexylfluorene).10 The addition of molecular bromine leads to a red-shift in the polymer's optical absorbance, and it can be reversed without sample degradation upon annealing at 150 °C. Tomita and coworkers developed an effective method to prepare tellurophene-containing conjugated polymers via metallacycle transfer of titana-cyclopentadiene derivatives with tellurium tetrachloride followed by reduction (Fig. 25).253,254 Interestingly, the polymer precursor containing titana-cyclopentadiene was synthesized directly from 1,4-diethynyl-2,5-bis(alkyloxy)benzene with a low-valent titanium complex at cryogenic temperatures. Again, bromination of the final tellurophene copolymer leads to a much narrower bandgap accompanying the lowering of HOMO and LUMO energy levels. The Te–O interactions increase the coplanarity of the polymer backbone with and without bromination.
 Fig. 25  (top) Synthesis of tellurophene-containing polymer 3 by treating organotitanium precursor 2 with TeCl4, followed by reduction using sodium thiosulfate aqueous solution. (bottom) Bromination of the tellurophene copolymer with molecular bromine. Adapted from ref. 253 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. 
Based on tellurophene bromination, Choi and coworkers designed solution-processable thin-film transistors utilizing a diketopyrrolopyrrole-bitellurophene copolymer for detecting Br2 vapor (Fig. 26a).255 The exposure to Br2 vapor leads to a 60-fold and a 500-fold increase of the source–drain current (IDS) at gate voltage (VG) equal to 0 V and 5 V, respectively. The reversibility of the bromination reaction is evidenced by the recovery of the transfer curve to the state prior to Br2 exposure after thermal annealing, and no significant hysteresis behaviour of the IDS value was observed for up to three bromination–debromination cycles. Good selectivity towards Br2 is observed when the device is exposed to the mixed atmosphere of Br2 and ICl. Huang and coworkers studied the bromination of n-type conjugated copolymers based on tellurophene and naphthalene diimide (NDI) (Fig. 26b).256 Unlike the previous p-type copolymers,10,253,255 the bromination of the NDI-tellurophene copolymers results in a blue-shift of the absorption spectra despite no visible colour change in solution. The hypsochromic optical properties contradicted the computational results and are tentatively attributed to disrupted conjugation as a result of the increased dihedral angle between the NDI and tellurophene.
 Fig. 26  Typical examples of tellurophene bromination by treatment with bromine. 


6.1.4 Te–Li exchange. 
Polymers carrying reactive carbon–metal bonds on the backbone are attractive candidates for further derivatization. For instance, Tamao and coworkers demonstrated that 2,5-diaryltellurophene was a good source to obtain 1,4-diaryl-1,4-dilithio-1,3-butadiene intermediate by Te–Li exchange.257 This strategy was further extended to the tellurophene copolymer, poly(tellurophene-alt-9,9′-dioctylfluorene), which was transformed into a lithiated polymer by treating it with 2.4 equivalents of n-BuLi in THF at cryogenic temperatures (Fig. 27). Due to its high reactivity, the obtained organolithium can be conveniently converted into other functional groups, such as proton, iodine, and trialkyltin, by adding the corresponding electrophiles.258 In a separate study, a germole-containing π-conjugated polymer was obtained by lithiating a tellurophene-based polymer followed by germylation reactions with dimethylgermanium dichloride.259 The resulting germole-containing polymer was found to have a narrower bandgap compared to its tellurophene counterpart. Te–Li exchange provides further opportunities to transform tellurophene polymers into other functional polymers.
 Fig. 27  Synthetic route for diene-containing polymers from tellurophene-containing precursors. 


6.1.5 Aromatic substitution. 
Ring-substitution has been used to diversify chalcogenophene building blocks and their corresponding electronic properties. Since solubilizing alkyl chains are usually installed at the 3-position in chalcogenophenes, substitution at the 4-position has become an interesting strategy to introduce various functional groups. Swager and coworkers synthesized a series of functionalized P3HT by efficient bromination followed by Li–Br exchange and quenching with a variety of electrophiles (Fig. 28).260 By gradually increasing the feed ratio of n-BuLi and brominated polythiophenes, a high efficiency of over 95% is achieved. Although the efficiency of transforming Li into electrophilic groups is moderate (47–65%), this work expands the strategies to synthesize many novel functionalized polymers and showcases that it is feasible to generate multiple reactive anions on one macromolecule. Bromination at the 4-position of polychalcogenophene repeating units can also lead to diverse pendant groups through Stille coupling. For example, Qin and coworkers synthesized poly(4-bromo-3-dodecylselenylene vinylene) (PSV), and substituted the bromine atoms with various thienyl derivatives with yields ranging from 59% to 79% to produce cross-conjugated PSVs.261 In an older example, an electron acceptor based on 1,1,4,4-tetracyanobuta-1,3-diene was substituted with 4-bromo groups on P3HT, leading to the formation of high-spin poly(anionic radical)s.262
 Fig. 28  Post-polymerization of polythiophene by Li–Br exchange and quenching with a series of electrophilic reagents. Adapted from ref. 260 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. 
Similar PPM of conjugated polymers can also be carried out electrochemically, through the aptly named electrochemical polymer reaction (ECPR).263 This reaction occurs between a cationic polymer (p-doped) and nucleophilic anion on the surface of polymer film-covered electrodes, yielding substituted conjugated polymers (Fig. 29). One of its advantages is that the reaction rate and the degree of functionalization are easily controlled by varying electrochemical parameters. Both chlorinated P3HT and P3HS have been prepared in this manner, with P3HS showing better reaction efficiency, likely due to its higher HOMO level.264 In the chlorination of P3HT-b-P3HS, P3HS segments exhibit a higher degree of chlorination (49%) than the P3HT segment (30%), which is consistent with the trend observed in corresponding homopolymers. However, chlorination does not proceed on 2-ethylhexyl substituted PTh and PSe, likely due to the steric hindrance of the branched alkyl chain.264 One critical problem of this method is the relatively low current efficiency in the anodic halogenation process, which can be improved by using boron trifluoride-diethyl etherate as an electrolyte.265 Although ECPR has not been demonstrated in polytellurophene, one can get a glimpse of tellurium's unique and rich redox behaviours from the formation of the tellurium–halogen bonds during electrochemical oxidation of π-extended tellurophenes. Both stable localized and stable delocalized oxidized species can be formed from these tellurophenes depending on the electrochemical methods and conditions. The chlorination and bromination processes occur at the Te center and are reversible. Additionally, electrochemical oxidation allows for introducing less-coordinating anions (i.e. ClO4−, BF4−, and PF6−) to the tellurophene ring.266
 Fig. 29  Typical example of anodic chlorination of poly(3-alkylthiophene). Adapted from ref. 264 with permission from Chemistry Europe, Copyright 2017. 
Unlike chlorination and bromination, fluorination is more often used to tailor the solid-state packing and performance in organic electronics, as poly(3-octyl-4-fluorothiophene) exhibits a 5-fold increase in average hole mobilities in OFETs compared to its non-fluorinated counterparts.27 However, halogenation does not guarantee better performance. High degrees of P3HT bromination deteriorate its performance in OPVs. In fact, 37% thiophene ring bromination almost completely nullifies its photovoltaic properties.267 This could be attributed to decreased absorption in the visible-light range, reduced delocalization of π-electrons, and decreased crystallinity of P3HT.

6.2 PPM of side chains
Generally, solution-processable CPs consist of a π-conjugated backbone and peripheral side chains.268 Compared with backbone modification, side chain engineering is more generally applicable to a broader scope of CPs. For instance, the synthesis of electron-deficient CPs with low-lying molecular orbitals can be achieved by transforming ketal protecting groups adjacent to heterocycles within side chains into electron-withdrawing ketone groups.26,55 Meanwhile, alkyl ester side chains can be transformed into tertiary or quaternary amine-containing chains for plasmid DNA–polyplex formation.269,270
Polythiophene backbone oxidation allows for facile bandgap modification after polymerization.246,247 Similarly, sulfur atoms can be oxidized when they are present in thioether side chains. However, the oxidation of sulfur atoms in side chains exhibits a higher degree of conversion relative to backbone oxidation,246,247 the reactivity of which is limited by intrinsic aromatic stability of heterocycles. Swager and coworkers prepared chiral helical poly(3-alkylsulfonethiophene) (P3AST) in high yields (99%) by oxidizing the 3-alkylthio counterparts with m-CPBA (Fig. 30).48 The polymer precursor poly(3-alkylthiothiophene) was synthesized in a controlled manner by Kumada CTP. The resulting helical P3AST exhibits high magneto-optic activity and a large Faraday effect with Verdet constants up to (7.63 ± 0.78) × 104 deg T−1 m−1, which rivals the present recorded materials and expands the previous design space for polythiophene MO materials.
 Fig. 30  Transformation of poly(3-alkylthiothiophene) to poly(3-alkylsulfonethiophene) by treatment with m-CPBA. 
Aside from chemical modification, photocleavage and thermal cleavage are also employed to tailor the structures and properties of CPs. Because most side chain cleavage studies have been systematically summarized by a recent review,271 herein we only present some notable examples. Photocleavage utilizes light as an external stimulus to modify photolabile protecting groups, which enables photochemical control over solubility and molecular interactions. These structurally-modified CPs are promising candidates for the fabrication of photopatterning materials272 and electroactive films.273 For instance, Reynolds and coworkers reported a multistage cleavable side chain that enables aqueous processing without compromising semiconducting capabilities (Fig. 31).273 PTh was transformed into water-soluble PTh after hydrolysis with potassium hydroxide, converting the ester groups on photolabile o-nitrobenzyl (ONB) side chain into hydrophilic pendent ionic methylmalonate. This allowed polythiophenes to be cast into thin films from aqueous solution, and side chain cleavage could be initiated upon irradiation at 365 nm, leading to the formation of solvent-resistant electroactive films.
 Fig. 31  Multistage photocleavage of polythiophene containing esters and ONB groups. Adapted from ref. 273 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Thermal cleavage is another effective approach for cleaving long and bulky side chains that are required for solution processing,274–276 and it can be used to regain the high thermal stability of CPs after film formation. Recently, You and coworkers found that maintaining a 30/70 mol ratio of hexyl/carboxylic acid groups on PTh following thermal cleavage could yield higher PCE (1.5% with PC61BM) without sacrificing morphological stability (Fig. 32).277 A series of polymer precursors were synthesized by copolymerizing hexyl and 2-methyl-2-hexyloxycarbonyl functionalized thiophenes with various ratios by Suzuki–Miyaura polymerization. Partial side chain removal allows for the thermal cleavage to proceed at a relatively low temperature (below 200 °C). Slow alkyl chain cleavage was observed at temperatures as low as 120 °C, suggesting that this approach can be applied in devices using a flexible plastic substrate.
 Fig. 32  Synthesis and alkyl chain cleavage of the thiophene-containing copolymer. Adapted from ref. 277 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
7. Summary and outlook
In this review, we summarize the recent progress in the Kumada, Negishi, Murahashi, Suzuki–Miyaura and DArP polymerizations, representing the best routes to well-defined CPs containing chalcogenophenes. Kumada CTP still dominates in the synthesis of electron-rich polychalcogenophenes, but for a given catalyst system, the monomer scope is rather narrow. Recent exciting advancements in Suzuki–Miyaura CTP are promising for developing a more universal method to prepare homopolymers and copolymers of electronically distinct monomers, including electron-deficient monomers that are challenging to polymerize in a controlled manner.
There has recently been a renaissance of chalcogenophenes beyond the more common 3-alkyl variants in building high performance polymers. For instance, remarkable field-effect hole mobility (μh, 0.57 cm2 V−1 S−1) and electron mobility (μe, 0.31 cm2 V−1 S−1) were obtained in polymers based on simple head-to-head dialkoxybithiophene building blocks bearing fluorine278 and cyano substituents,279 respectively. These developments restore confidence that simpler PTh materials and their Group 16 analogues might be able to catch up with state-of-the-art donor–acceptor copolymers. Further exploration of new building blocks and synthetic tools to access the corresponding polymer materials are important to get them out of the laboratory door.
Block copolymer synthesis is generally achieved by either chain extension or block coupling reactions that involve either cross-coupling or click chemistry, yet even within these categories there are notable avenues for synthetic development. Recently, it has been demonstrated that CPs can be isolated with living Ni(II) aryl halide complexes at their ends.36 While this technique has not been used for BCP synthesis, chain extension of isolated living polymers with different monomers is a feasible development. These living conjugated polymers can act as versatile macromonomers in creative polymerizations that take advantage of disparate reaction conditions and environments, and enable in-depth studies on the ring-walking theory and CTP mechanisms. Additionally, they are potentially useful additions to commercial catalogues of living polymers with dormant ends, similar to those synthesized by atom-transfer radical polymerization and nitroxide-mediated polymerization.36
The individual preparation and purification of separate blocks prior to their coupling has been used to extend the scope of BCP synthesis, particularly in rod–coil BCP development. Such syntheses have been especially successful for certain diblock copolymers, but the lack of a variety of easily accessible end groups limits the synthesis of further blocks. While end-capping propagating conjugated polymer chains with vinylic or allylic Grignard reagents efficiently opens up possibilities for derivatization at one end,117 the initiating chain end is more difficult to work with. External initiators bearing functional hydroxyl or thiol groups must undergo protecting/deprotecting steps, while aryl substituents on such initiators may limit initiation rates themselves.280,281
The use of temperature cycling for the synthesis of monodisperse high oligothiophenes is another recent development that has bolstered the range of possible polychalcogenophene syntheses.67 With a widened monomer scope and a technique for accurately transferring activated monomer, it becomes realistic to achieve sequence specificity in monodisperse high oligomers. Additionally, alternating and periodic copolymers require tedious iterative synthesis and purification of multi-heterocycle monomers that limits their practical use.57,145 Such oligomeric monomers with defined sequences could potentially be synthesized without additional purification steps, along with other monomers with more repeating units. Temperature cycling has also opened up the opportunities to investigate RE mediated by Ni catalysts as well as the factors directing catalyst ring-walking in both small molecules and macromolecules.
Despite significant advances in the field of block copolymers, there is still much left to understand. While coil–coil BCP self-assembly can be accurately described and predicted through models such as Flory–Huggins theory, the inclusion of rod-like segments complicates the matter due to their rigidity and tendency to crystallize.196 The elucidation of conjugated homopolymer crystallization mechanisms,162,169,172,174 as well as recent synthetic developments, have done much to advance the study of rod–rod BCP assembly in this respect. However, studies of structure–property relationships are still underway and are desirable for the development of organic electronics. For example, BCP-induced active layer phase stabilization has significantly aided in the development of high PCE solar cells,148,196 and the co-crystallization of BCPs, as mainly observed in polychalcogenophenes with either similar side chains or heterocycles, has improved charge carrier mobilities in OFETs.198,204–206
While the study of rod–rod copolymers can greatly benefit from more extensive morphology mapping through phase diagrams, rod–coil BCP are somewhat less obscure, having been described by a combination of Flory–Huggins and Maier–Saupe parameters. Such BCP predominantly form lamellar structures due to their facilitation of rod–rod interactions, while isotropic and nematic phases require large coil fractions and high temperatures.196 The specific incorporation of highly crystalline rod-like blocks such as polychalcogenophenes, however, can deviate assembly expectations. Breakout crystallization has been shown to either force lamellar structures with rough boundaries, or entirely disrupt coil-block domains, which can worsen optoelectronic properties in devices.216,219–221 Fortunately, techniques such as solvo-microwave annealing have been developed to confine crystallization.221
Post-polymerization modification has proven to be an effective method to transform the backbones or side chains of Group 16 CPs in ways that are unobtainable by direct polymerization. Previous studies have established how PPM affects optical, electronic, and solid-state properties. However, reports of organic devices fabricated using PPM are still rare, since these strategies still suffer from low efficiency and reproducibility. Insight into relationships between the extent of PPM and device performance would also be beneficial for the optimization of current strategies, as certain modifications, such as thermally induced side chain cleavage, require intermediate conversion for superior performance.277
Chalcogenophenes are ubiquitous building blocks for CPs. While they most commonly constitute polymeric backbones, these Group 16 heterocycles are also widely utilized as flanking units in numerous high performance small molecules and copolymers, including donor–acceptor copolymers. When comparing the properties of CPs, one often overlooked aspect is the synthetic cost of the materials. Osedach and coworkers have found that CPs cost increases linearly with the number of necessary synthetic steps, so a compromise must be made between device performance and synthetic complexity.282 Considering these factors, P3HT holds better prospects for OPV application than higher-performance photovoltaic materials, despite its modest performance. Likewise, furan, selenophene, and tellurophene analogues have afforded better performance in some cases, but their synthetic complexity may limit their commercial outlook.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSERC of Canada, the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, the Ontario Research Fund, and the University of Toronto Connaught Foundation McLean Award. V. L. is grateful for the Ontario Graduate Scholarship.
References
T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4867–4886 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Reynolds, B. C. Thompson and T. A. Skotheim, Conjugated Polymers: Perspective, theory, and new materials, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2019 Search PubMed .
R. S. Ashraf, I. Meager, M. Nikolka, M. Kirkus, M. Planells, B. C. Schroeder, S. Holliday, M. Hurhangee, C. B. Nielsen, H. Sirringhaus and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1314–1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Patra, Y. H. Wijsboom, G. Leitus and M. Bendikov, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 1487–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. R. Katritzky, C. A. Ramsden, J. A. Joule and V. V. Zhdankin, in Handbook of Heterocyclic Chemistry, ed. A. R. Katritzky, C. A. Ramsden, J. A. Joule and V. V. Zhdankin, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 3rd edn,  2010, ch. 2.3, pp. 87–138 Search PubMed .
R. R. Fraser, T. S. Mansour and S. Savard, Can. J. Chem., 1985, 63, 3505–3509 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zheng and L. Huo, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Al-Hashimi, Y. Han, J. Smith, H. S. Bazzi, S. Y. A. Alqaradawi, S. E. Watkins, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Heeney, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1093–1099 RSC .
S. Ye, M. Steube, E. I. Carrera and D. S. Seferos, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1704–1711 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Jahnke, G. W. Howe and D. S. Seferos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10140–10144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, S. M. Foster, A. A. Pollit, S. Cheng and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2075–2080 RSC .
M. E. Abdelhamid, A. P. O'Mullane and G. A. Snook, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11611–11626 RSC .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397–2409 RSC .
M. Mizuno, H. Tateno, Y. Matsumura and M. Atobe, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2, 642–645 RSC .
M. A. Ansari, S. Mohiuddin, F. Kandemirli and M. I. Malik, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 8319–8328 RSC .
C. N. Jarrett-Wilkins, A. A. Pollit and D. S. Seferos, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 493–505 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokozawa and Y. Ohta, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 1950–1968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Lutz, M. D. Hannigan and A. J. McNeil, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 225–247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Verswyvel, P. Verstappen, L. De Cremer, T. Verbiest and G. Koeckelberghs, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 5339–5349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Verswyvel, J. Steverlynck, S. Hadj Mohamed, M. Trabelsi, B. Champagne and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4668–4675 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pal, D. P. T. Nguyen, A. Molliet, M. Alizadeh, A. Crochet, R. D. Ortuso, A. Petri-Fink and A. F. M. Kilbinger, Nat. Chem., 2021, 13, 705–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krasovskiy and P. Knochel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3333–3336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sämann, B. Haag and P. Knochel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 16145–16152 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cheng, S. Ye, C. N. Apte, A. K. Yudin and D. S. Seferos, ACS Macro Lett., 2021, 10, 697–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-S. Lin, Y. Shoji, S. N. Afraj, M. Ueda, C.-H. Lin, S. Inagaki, T. Endo, S.-H. Tung, M.-C. Chen, C.-L. Liu and T. Higashihara, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 31898–31909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Bridges, C. Guo, H. Yan, M. B. Miltenburg, P. Li, Y. Li and D. S. Seferos, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5587–5595 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fei, P. Boufflet, S. Wood, J. Wade, J. Moriarty, E. Gann, E. L. Ratcliff, C. R. McNeill, H. Sirringhaus, J.-S. Kim and M. Heeney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6866–6879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takagi, H. Joo, Y. Yamashita, E. Kawagita and C. Torii, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 4013–4020 CrossRef CAS .
E. Goto, S. Nakamura, S. Kawauchi, H. Mori, M. Ueda and T. Higashihara, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 2287–2296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tamba, K. Shono, A. Sugie and A. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9700–9703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tanaka, S. Tamba, D. Tanaka, A. Sugie and A. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16734–16737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tamba, S. Tanaka, Y. Okubo, H. Meguro, S. Okamoto and A. Mori, Chem. Lett., 2011, 398–399 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shibuya and A. Mori, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 6976–6987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Lanni and A. J. McNeil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16573–16579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Lanni and A. J. McNeil, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8039–8044 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, S. Cheng, A. A. Pollit, M. W. Forbes and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11244–11251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, B. O. Patrick and P. Kennepohl, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3866 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Tkachov, V. Senkovskyy, H. Komber, J.-U. Sommer and A. Kiriy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7803–7810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Verswyvel, F. Monnaie and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9489–9498 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Leone, P. K. Goldberg and A. J. McNeil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7846–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yokoyama, R. Miyakoshi and T. Yokozawa, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1169–1171 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Sheina, J. Liu, M. C. Iovu, D. W. Laird and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3526–3528 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vallat, J. P. Lamps, F. Schosseler, M. Rawiso and J. M. Catala, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 2600–2602 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Ji, X. Shi, X. Zheng, X. Wang and F. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4519–4529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schmode, A. Savva, R. Kahl, D. Ohayon, F. Meichsner, O. Dolynchuk, T. Thurn-Albrecht, S. Inal and M. Thelakkat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13029–13039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Onorato, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, C. Nowak, L. Q. Flagg, R. Li, B. X. Dong, L. J. Richter, F. A. Escobedo, P. F. Nealey, S. N. Patel and C. K. Luscombe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21410–21423 RSC .
M. J. Dyson, E. Lariou, J. Martin, R. Li, H. Erothu, G. Wantz, P. D. Topham, O. J. Dautel, S. C. Hayes, P. N. Stavrinou and N. Stingelin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6540–6547 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, I. Jeon, Z. Lin, M. D. Peeks, S. Savagatrup, S. E. Kooi, T. Van Voorhis and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6501–6508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schiefer, T. Wen, Y. Wang, P. Goursot, H. Komber, R. Hanselmann, P. Braunstein, G. Reiter and M. Sommer, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 617–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, K. Sugiyasu, J. Aimi, A. Sato and M. Takeuchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8870–8875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Holcombe, C. H. Woo, D. F. J. Kavulak, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14160–14161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, K. Nagura, M. Takeuchi and K. Sugiyasu, Polym. J., 2017, 49, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
D. Raithel, L. Simine, S. Pickel, K. Schötz, F. Panzer, S. Baderschneider, D. Schiefer, R. Lohwasser, J. Köhler, M. Thelakkat, M. Sommer, A. Köhler, P. J. Rossky and R. Hildner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 2699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pammer, F. Guo, R. A. Lalancette and F. Jäkle, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6333–6343 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, F. S. Kim, G. Ren, Y. Xu, Y. Pang, S. A. Jenekhe and L. Jia, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 4681–4690 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Politis and J. C. Nemes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 2537–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, A. Fortney, C.-H. Tsai, M. A. Baker, R. R. Gil, T. Kowalewski and K. J. T. Noonan, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 332–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Heeney, W. Zhang, D. J. Crouch, M. L. Chabinyc, S. Gordeyev, R. Hamilton, S. J. Higgins, I. McCulloch, P. J. Skabara, D. Sparrowe and S. Tierney, Chem. Commun., 2007, 5061–5063 RSC .
A. A. Jahnke, B. Djukic, T. M. McCormick, E. Buchaca Domingo, C. Hellmann, Y. Lee and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Luppi, R. McDonald, M. J. Ferguson, L. Sang and E. Rivard, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14218–14221 RSC .
G. Magnin, J. Clifton and F. Schoenebeck, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10179–10183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kubo, M. S. Young, K. D. Souther, M. D. Hannigan and A. J. McNeil, J. Polym. Sci., 2021, 59, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamamura, I. Moritani and S.-I. Murahashi, J. Organomet. Chem., 1975, 91, C39–C42 CrossRef CAS .
M. Giannerini, M. Fañanás-Mastral and B. L. Feringa, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 667–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hazra, C. C. C. Johansson Seechurn, S. Handa and T. J. Colacot, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 13188–13202 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fuji, S. Tamba, K. Shono, A. Sugie and A. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12208–12211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. McKeown, S. Ye, S. Cheng and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17053–17056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, R. Zhao and D. S. Seferos, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 4203–4214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. D'Alterio, È. Casals-Cruañas, N. V. Tzouras, G. Talarico, S. P. Nolan and A. Poater, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 13481–13493 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sakamoto, M. Rehahn, G. Wegner and A. D. Schlüter, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 653–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Leone, E. A. Mueller and A. J. McNeil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15126–15139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Baker, S. F. Zahn, A. J. Varni, C.-H. Tsai and K. J. T. Noonan, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 5911–5917 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Park, S.-H. Hwang, I.-H. Lee and T.-L. Choi, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 3306–3314 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Bautista, A. J. Varni, J. Ayuso-Carrillo, M. C. Carson and K. J. T. Noonan, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 1404–1414 RSC .
A. J. J. Lennox and G. C. Lloyd-Jones, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 412–443 RSC .
Y. Tokita, M. Katoh, K. Kosaka, Y. Ohta and T. Yokozawa, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 7065–7072 RSC .
J. A. Carrillo, M. J. Ingleson and M. L. Turner, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 979–986 CrossRef CAS .
K.-B. Seo, I.-H. Lee, J. Lee, I. Choi and T.-L. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4335–4343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Choi, H.-S. Yang, J.-H. Chae, T.-L. Choi and I.-H. Lee, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 5497–5503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Kim, H. Park, T. Kim, S.-H. Hwang, D. Seo, T. D. Chung and T.-L. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 11180–11190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Zhang, C. Ma, P. V. Bonnesen, J. Zhu, B. G. Sumpter, J.-M. Y. Carrillo, P. Yin, Y. Wang, A.-P. Li and K. Hong, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4691–4698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, J. C. Worch, A. Fortney, C. Gayathri, R. R. Gil and K. J. T. Noonan, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4757–4762 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Varni, A. Fortney, M. A. Baker, J. C. Worch, Y. Qiu, D. Yaron, S. Bernhard, K. J. T. Noonan and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8858–8867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Varni, M. Kawakami, S. N. Kramer, M. Rice, S. J. Geib, L. A. Peteanu, T. Kowalewski and K. J. T. Noonan, J. Polym. Sci., 2022, 60, 579–589 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Gobalasingham and B. C. Thompson, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 83, 135–201 CrossRef CAS .
J.-R. Pouliot, F. Grenier, J. T. Blaskovits, S. Beaupré and M. Leclerc, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14225–14274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mainville and M. Leclerc, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 2–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Mayhugh, P. Yadav and C. K. Luscombe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 6123–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kuwabara and T. Kanbara, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 92, 152–161 CrossRef .
D. Lapointe and K. Fagnou, Chem. Lett., 2010, 1118–1126 CrossRef .
Y. Fujinami, J. Kuwabara, W. Lu, H. Hayashi and T. Kanbara, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Rudenko, A. A. Latif and B. C. Thompson, Nanotechnology, 2013, 25, 014005 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye and B. C. Thompson, J. Polym. Sci., 2022, 60, 393–428 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leclerc, S. Brassard and S. Beaupré, Polym. J., 2020, 52, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, R. Takita, Y. Kikuzaki and F. Ozawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11420–11421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Lee and C. K. Luscombe, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 767–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Pankow, L. Ye and B. C. Thompson, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 4561–4572 RSC .
L. Ye, R. M. Pankow, M. Horikawa, E. L. Melenbrink, K. Liu and B. C. Thompson, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 9383–9388 CrossRef CAS .
C. Beaumont, J. Turgeon, M. Idir, D. Neusser, R. Lapointe, S. Caron, W. Dupont, D. D’Astous, S. Shamsuddin, S. Hamza, É. Landry, S. Ludwigs and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 5464–5472 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Lai, T.-C. Tung, W.-W. Liang and Y.-J. Cheng, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2978–2988 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sui, Z. Wang, J. Bai, Y. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Deng, Y. Han and Y. Geng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 2616–2622 RSC .
Y. Wu, M. Ding, J. Wang, B. Zhao, Z. Wu, P. Zhao, D. Tian, Y. Ding and A. Hu, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 64–70 CrossRef .
J. Hollinger, A. A. Jahnke, N. Coombs and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8546–8547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Edgecombe, J. A. Stein, J. M. J. Fréchet, Z. Xu and E. J. Kramer, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 1292–1304 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lee, Y. Li, C. M. Ruda and K. L. Wooley, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5339–5341 RSC .
E. F. Palermo and A. J. McNeil, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 5948–5955 CrossRef CAS .
P. Boufflet, S. Wood, J. Wade, Z. Fei, J.-S. Kim and M. Heeney, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2016, 12, 2150–2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. J. Hicks, C. N. Jarrett-Wilkins, J. R. Panchuk, J. G. Manion and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 6383–6392 RSC .
L. Xu, C. Wang, Y.-X. Li, X.-H. Xu, L. Zhou, N. Liu and Z.-Q. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16675–16682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhai, M. Zhu, S. Chen, Y. Yin, X. Shang, L. Li, G. Zhou and J. Peng, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 5775–5786 CrossRef CAS .
L. Verheyen, B. Timmermans and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6421–6429 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Bronstein and C. K. Luscombe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12894–12895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Komber, V. Senkovskyy, R. Tkachov, K. Johnson, A. Kiriy, W. T. S. Huck and M. Sommer, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9164–9172 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Smith, A. K. Leone, P. M. Zimmerman and A. J. McNeil, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 1411–1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Pollit, S. Ye and D. S. Seferos, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 138–148 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bridges, H. Yan, A. A. Pollit and D. S. Seferos, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 671–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeffries-El, G. Sauvé and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 10346–10352 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, R. S. Loewe and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 5777–5785 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Lohwasser and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3388–3397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, M. P. Aplan, Z. D. Seibers, S. M. Kilbey, Q. Wang and E. D. Gomez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20412–20421 RSC .
M. P. Aplan, C. Grieco, Y. Lee, J. M. Munro, W. Lee, J. L. Gray, Z. D. Seibers, B. Kuei, J. H. Litofsky, S. M. Kilbey II, Q. Wang, I. Dabo, J. B. Asbury and E. D. Gomez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804858 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lin, K. A. Smith, C. N. Kempf and R. Verduzco, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 229–232 RSC .
D. Izuhara and T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2678–2684 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakabayashi and H. Mori, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9618–9625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, E. H. Kim, A. Wei and E.-I. Negishi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 044201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Smeets, K. Van den Bergh, J. De Winter, P. Gerbaux, T. Verbiest and G. Koeckelberghs, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7638–7641 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Standley, S. J. Smith, P. Müller and T. F. Jamison, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 2012–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeffries-El, G. Sauvé and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1017–1019 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Park, S.-G. Kang, M. Fryd, J. G. Saven and S.-J. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9931–9933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Rostovtsev, L. G. Green, V. V. Fokin and K. B. Sharpless, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2596–2599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Meldal and C. W. Tornøe, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2952–3015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sui, X. Shi, H. Tian, Y. Geng and F. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 7072–7080 RSC .
K. A. Smith, Y.-H. Lin, D. B. Dement, J. Strzalka, S. B. Darling, D. L. Pickel and R. Verduzco, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 2636–2645 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. MacFarlane, X. Li, C. F. J. Faul and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 11269–11280 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Kynaston, O. E. C. Gould, J. Gwyther, G. R. Whittell, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 685–695 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Kynaston, A. Nazemi, L. R. MacFarlane, G. R. Whittell, C. F. J. Faul and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 1002–1010 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sticker, R. Geczy, U. O. Häfeli and J. P. Kutter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10080–10095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Lin and H. Xu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2020, 41, 1900540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, X. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Xie and H. Xu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1174–1181 RSC .
A. Fortney, C.-H. Tsai, M. Banerjee, D. Yaron, T. Kowalewski and K. J. T. Noonan, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 9494–9501 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kong, B. Song, E. A. Mueller, J. Kim and A. J. McNeil, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900467 CrossRef .
L. M. Kozycz, D. Gao and D. S. Seferos, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 613–621 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bannock, M. Al-Hashimi, S. H. Krishnadasan, J. J. M. Halls, M. Heeney and J. C. de Mello, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 214–218 RSC .
C.-H. Tsai, A. Fortney, Y. Qiu, R. R. Gil, D. Yaron, T. Kowalewski and K. J. T. Noonan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6798–6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Liu, W.-W. Liang, Y.-Y. Lai, Y.-C. Su, H.-R. Yang, K.-Y. Cheng, S.-C. Huang and Y.-J. Cheng, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3836–3844 RSC .
G. He, L. Kang, W. Torres Delgado, O. Shynkaruk, M. J. Ferguson, R. McDonald and E. Rivard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5360–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108–4110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, H. Ke and Y. Liu, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 1074–1087 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Kaloni, P. K. Giesbrecht, G. Schreckenbach and M. S. Freund, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10248–10283 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, X. Geng, D. He, X. Jia and L. Ding, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2114–2121 RSC .
D. Baran, R. S. Ashraf, D. A. Hanifi, M. Abdelsamie, N. Gasparini, J. A. Röhr, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, S. Lockett, M. Neophytou, C. J. M. Emmott, J. Nelson, C. J. Brabec, A. Amassian, A. Salleo, T. Kirchartz, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 363–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bi, S. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Xu, Y. Cui, T. Zhang, J. Ren, J. Qin, L. Hong, X. Hao and J. Hou, Joule, 2021, 5, 2408–2419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Zhu, D. Wei, G. Han, J. Min, Y. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, H. Yan, F. Gao, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, B. Liu, Y. Ma, J.-W. Lee, J. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Li, B. Li, K. Feng, Y. Shi, B. Zhang, D. Han, H. Meng, L. Niu, B. J. Kim, Q. Zheng and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. M. Biesold, M. Zhang and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6914–6949 RSC .
E. I. Carrera and D. S. Seferos, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
X. He and T. Baumgartner, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11334–11350 RSC .
D. Hashemi, X. Ma, R. Ansari, J. Kim and J. Kieffer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 789–799 RSC .
V. Topolskaia, A. A. Pollit, S. Cheng and D. S. Seferos, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 9038–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. M. J. S. R. Jayasundara and G. Schreckenbach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 17528–17537 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Tsoi, D. T. James, E. B. Domingo, J. S. Kim, M. Al-Hashimi, C. E. Murphy, N. Stingelin, M. Heeney and J.-S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9646–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Razzell-Hollis, F. Fleischli, A. A. Jahnke, N. Stingelin, D. S. Seferos and J.-S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2088–2098 CrossRef CAS .
A. Casey, S. D. Dimitrov, P. Shakya-Tuladhar, Z. Fei, M. Nguyen, Y. Han, T. D. Anthopoulos, J. R. Durrant and M. Heeney, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5110–5120 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nagahora, S. Yahata, S. Goto, K. Shioji and K. Okuma, J. Org. Chem., 2018, 83, 1969–1975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. McLeod, A. L. Pitman, E. Z. Kurmaev, L. D. Finkelstein, I. S. Zhidkov, A. Savva and A. Moewes, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 224704 CrossRef PubMed .
V. C. Gonçalves and D. T. Balogh, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 42, 3303–3310 CrossRef .
L. Farouil, F. Alary, E. Bedel-Pereira and J.-L. Heully, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 6532–6545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, J. Peng and F. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107970–107976 RSC .
L. Li, J. Hollinger, A. A. Jahnke, S. Petrov and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2306–2310 RSC .
M. Brinkmann and J. C. Wittmann, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 860–863 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Hayward, D. J. Lunn, A. Seddon, J. R. Finnegan, O. E. C. Gould, O. Magdysyuk, I. Manners, G. R. Whittell and R. M. Richardson, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3097–3106 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Prosa, M. J. Winokur and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 3654–3656 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rahimi, I. Botiz, N. Stingelin, N. Kayunkid, M. Sommer, F. P. V. Koch, H. Nguyen, O. Coulembier, P. Dubois, M. Brinkmann and G. Reiter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11131–11135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Jahnke, L. Yu, N. Coombs, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, A. J. Tilley, P. M. DiCarmine, A. Amassian, N. Stingelin and D. S. Seferos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3767–3773 RSC .
C. Poelking and D. Andrienko, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8941–8956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buono, N. H. Son, G. Raos, L. Gila, A. Cominetti, M. Catellani and S. V. Meille, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6772–6781 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salleo, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vakhshouri, B. H. Smith, E. P. Chan, C. Wang, A. Salleo, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 7359–7369 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, R. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Yu, J. Liu, R. Xing, Y. Geng and Y. Han, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7557–7566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saifuddin, S. Roy, S. Mandal and S. Hazra, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 1377–1386 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Wenderott, B. X. Dong and P. F. Green, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 27076–27102 RSC .
H. Lu, X. Li and Q. Lei, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 732132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Manion, S. Ye, A. H. Proppe, A. W. Laramée, G. R. McKeown, E. L. Kynaston, S. O. Kelley, E. H. Sargent and D. S. Seferos, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5033–5042 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Panchuk, A. W. Laramée, J. G. Manion, S. Ye and D. S. Seferos, Synth. Met., 2019, 253, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gregory, A. K. Menon, S. Ye, D. S. Seferos, J. R. Reynolds and S. K. Yee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802419 CrossRef .
M. P. Gordon, S. A. Gregory, J. P. Wooding, S. Ye, G. M. Su, D. S. Seferos, M. D. Losego, J. J. Urban, S. K. Yee and A. K. Menon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 233301 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Jahnke and D. S. Seferos, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 943–951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, L. Janasz, W. Zajaczkowski, J. G. Manion, A. Mondal, T. Marszalek, D. Andrienko, K. Müllen, W. Pisula and D. S. Seferos, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1800596 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. McConnell, W. E. Godwin, S. E. Baker, K. Powell, M. Baskett and A. Morara, Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater., 2004, 53, 697–708 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. González-Tejera, E. S. de la Blanca and I. Carrillo, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 165–189 CrossRef .
S. Shi, L. Tang, H. Guo, M. A. Uddin, H. Wang, K. Yang, B. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Sun, H. Y. Woo and X. Guo, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 7301–7312 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Jin, D. Sheberla, L. J. W. Shimon and M. Bendikov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2592–2601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, N. Zamoshchik and M. Bendikov, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54, 712–722 CrossRef CAS .
P.-T. Wu, G. Ren, C. Li, R. Mezzenga and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2317–2320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, M. He, F. Qiu and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6422–6428 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yassar, L. Miozzo, R. Gironda and G. Horowitz, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 791–844 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185–1199 RSC .
M. Zhu, S. Pan, Y. Wang, P. Tang, F. Qiu, Z. Lin and J. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8644–8648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng and Y. Han, Giant, 2020, 4, 100039 CrossRef .
H. Chen, W. Zhang, M. Li, G. He and X. Guo, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2879–2949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Scherf, A. Gutacker and N. Koenen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1086–1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Firdaus, V. M. Le Corre, S. Karuthedath, W. Liu, A. Markina, W. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, M. M. Nahid, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Lin, A. Seitkhan, A. Basu, W. Zhang, I. McCulloch, H. Ade, J. Labram, F. Laquai, D. Andrienko, L. J. A. Koster and T. D. Anthopoulos, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, S. Chen, S. Zhu, L. Li, D. Zhai, D. Huang and J. Peng, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 4571–4581 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pal and A. K. Nandi, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 8426–8432 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, L. Li, D. Zhai, Y. Yin, X. Shang, B. Ni and J. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 58094–58104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Kynaston, K. J. Winchell, P. Y. Yee, J. G. Manion, A. D. Hendsbee, Y. Li, S. Huettner, S. H. Tolbert and D. S. Seferos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7174–7183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hollinger, P. M. DiCarmine, D. Karl and D. S. Seferos, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 3772–3778 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Kynaston, Y. Fang, J. G. Manion, N. K. Obhi, J. Y. Howe, D. F. Perepichka and D. S. Seferos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6152–6156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, J. Hollinger and D. S. Seferos, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7114–7121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, J. Hollinger, A. A. Jahnke and D. S. Seferos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6058–6063 RSC .
J. Hollinger, J. Sun, D. Gao, D. Karl and D. S. Seferos, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 437–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, P. J. Wolanin, L. R. MacFarlane, R. L. Harniman, J. Qian, O. E. C. Gould, T. G. Dane, J. Rudin, M. J. Cryan, T. Schmaltz, H. Frauenrath, M. A. Winnik, C. F. J. Faul and I. Manners, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fukui, J. D. Garcia-Hernandez, L. R. MacFarlane, S. Lei, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15038–15048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Davidson and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 8097–8105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, K. S. Lee, C. Choi, J. Kwak, H. C. Moon and J. K. Kim, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 3647–3653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, H. Park, J. S. Park, J.-W. Lee, F. S. Kim, H. J. Kim and B. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2672–2696 RSC .
J.-S. Kim, J. Han, Y. Kim, H. Park, J. P. Coote, G. E. Stein and B. J. Kim, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 4077–4084 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9205–9216 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Patel, A. E. Javier, K. M. Beers, J. A. Pople, V. Ho, R. A. Segalman and N. P. Balsara, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4901–4906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Coote, J.-S. Kim, B. Lee, J. Han, B. J. Kim and G. E. Stein, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 9276–9283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, J.-S. Kim, J. M. Shin, H. Yun, Y. Kim, H. Park and B. J. Kim, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 4962–4972 RSC .
A. C. Kamps, M. H. M. Cativo, M. Fryd and S.-J. Park, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 161–164 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Kamps, M. Fryd and S.-J. Park, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2844–2852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Leclère, M. Surin, P. Viville, R. Lazzaroni, A. F. M. Kilbinger, O. Henze, W. J. Feast, M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini, A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4452–4466 CrossRef .
H. Yang, H. Xia, G. Wang, J. Peng and F. Qiu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 5060–5067 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oh, S. Kang, M. H. M. Cativo, M. Yang, S.-H. Chung, J. Kim, J. Bouffard, S. Hong and S.-J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5099–5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. El-Zubir, E. L. Kynaston, J. Gwyther, A. Nazemi, O. E. C. Gould, G. R. Whittell, B. R. Horrocks, I. Manners and A. Houlton, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 6222–6228 RSC .
S. K. Patra, R. Ahmed, G. R. Whittell, D. J. Lunn, E. L. Dunphy, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8842–8845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Tritschler, J. Gwyther, R. L. Harniman, G. R. Whittell, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 5101–5113 CrossRef CAS .
L. MacFarlane, C. Zhao, J. Cai, H. Qiu and I. Manners, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 4661–4682 RSC .
D. Sun and H. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 9512–9522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, R. W. Sandoval, C. M. Dettmer, S. T. Nguyen and J. M. Torkelson, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2686–2697 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Amonoo, A. Li, G. E. Purdum, M. E. Sykes, B. Huang, E. F. Palermo, A. J. McNeil, M. Shtein, Y.-L. Loo and P. F. Green, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20174–20184 RSC .
E. F. Palermo, S. B. Darling and A. J. McNeil, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3401–3406 RSC .
D. T. Scholes, P. Y. Yee, G. R. McKeown, S. Li, H. Kang, J. R. Lindemuth, X. Xia, S. C. King, D. S. Seferos, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang and J. Peng, Polymer, 2021, 227, 123854 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. González, K. N. Raftopoulos, G. He, C. M. Papadakis, A. Brown, E. Rivard and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700065 CrossRef PubMed .
T. N. Gevrek and A. Sanyal, Eur. Polym. J., 2021, 153, 110514 CrossRef CAS .
A. Criado, M. Vilas-Varela, A. Cobas, D. Pérez, D. Peña and E. Guitián, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 12637–12649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gadakh, L. J. W. Shimon and O. Gidron, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13601–13605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Altınok, S. Friedle and S. W. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 756–762 CrossRef .
E. Ozkazanc and H. Ozkazanc, Synth. Met., 2020, 261, 116325 CrossRef .
E. I. Carrera and D. S. Seferos, Organometallics, 2017, 36, 2612–2621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aoyama, T. Yamanari, T. N. Murakami, T. Nagamori, K. Marumoto, H. Tachikawa, J. Mizukado, H. Suda and Y. Yoshida, Polym. J., 2015, 47, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amir and S. Rozen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7374–7378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, J. Xia, E. J. Dell, Y. Jiang, R. Song, H. Lee, P. Rodenbough, A. L. Briseno and L. M. Campos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1832–1836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Milanovich, T. Sarkar, Y. Popowski, J. Z. Low, L. M. Campos, S. Kenig, G. L. Frey and E. Amir, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7698–7707 RSC .
J. Nakayama, T. Matsui, Y. Sugihara, A. Ishii and S. Kumakura, Chem. Lett., 1996, 269–270 CrossRef CAS .
T. Masuda, Y. Inagaki, H. Momma, E. Kwon and W. Setaka, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 8593–8599 RSC .
E. I. Carrera, A. E. Lanterna, A. J. Lough, J. C. Scaiano and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2678–2689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. McCormick, A. A. Jahnke, A. J. Lough and D. S. Seferos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3542–3548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, L. Lv, L. Hu, Q. Shi, A. Peng and H. Huang, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2600–2607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishiyama, F. Zheng, S. Inagi, H. Fueno, K. Tanaka and I. Tomita, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 4693–4698 RSC .
Y. Matsumura, H. Nishiyama, S. Inagi and I. Tomita, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2019, 57, 2519–2525 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaur, D. H. Lee, D. S. Yang, H. A. Um, M. J. Cho, J. S. Kang and D. H. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14394–14396 RSC .
L. Lv, X. Wang, X. Wang, L. Yang, T. Dong, Z. Yang and H. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34620–34629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Katkevics, S. Yamaguchi, A. Toshimitsu and K. Tamao, Organometallics, 1998, 17, 5796–5800 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, Y. Komatsuzaki, N. Shida, H. Nishiyama, S. Inagi and I. Tomita, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1900171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, A. Tanudjaja, Z. Gao, S. Inagi and I. Tomita, Polymer, 2020, 204, 122809 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, E. M. Sletten and T. M. Swager, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 229–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang and Y. Qin, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 1018–1025 RSC .
Y. Yuan, W. Choi, H. Nishide and T. Michinobu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 345–350 RSC .
S. Inagi and T. Fuchigami, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 854–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shida, D. Okazaki, T. Kurioka, H. Nishiyama, D. S. Seferos, I. Tomita and S. Inagi, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1824–1827 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kurioka, H. Nishiyama, I. Tomita and S. Inagi, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 753–755 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shida, H. Nishiyama, F. Zheng, S. Ye, D. S. Seferos, I. Tomita and S. Inagi, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 124 CrossRef .
S. Tanaka, S. K. B. Rosli, K. Takada, N. Taniai, T. Yoshitomi, H. Ando and K. Matsumoto, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 46874–46880 RSC .
J. Mei and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 604–615 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Carreon, W. L. Santos, J. B. Matson and R. C. So, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 314–317 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Wu, J. Sun, X. Wang, L. Cao and F. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16735–16740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Freudenberg, D. Jänsch, F. Hinkel and U. H. F. Bunz, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5598–5689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Muralidhar, K. Kodama, T. Hirose, Y. Ito and M. Kawamoto, Polym. J., 2022, 54, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schmatz, Z. Yuan, A. W. Lang, J. L. Hernandez, E. Reichmanis and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 961–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2740–2754 CrossRef .
M. Ghasemi, H. Hu, Z. Peng, J. J. Rech, I. Angunawela, J. H. Carpenter, S. J. Stuard, A. Wadsworth, I. McCulloch, W. You and H. Ade, Joule, 2019, 3, 1328–1348 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Sachs-Quintana, T. Heumüller, W. R. Mateker, D. E. Orozco, R. Cheacharoen, S. Sweetnam, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3978–3985 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Son, S. Samson, S. Siddika, B. T. O’Connor and W. You, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4745–4756 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, H. Guo, M. A. Uddin, J. Yu, H. Y. Woo and X. Guo, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700519 CrossRef .
H. Wang, J. Huang, M. A. Uddin, B. Liu, P. Chen, S. Shi, Y. Tang, G. Xing, S. Zhang, H. Y. Woo, H. Guo and X. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10089–10098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Doubina, A. Ho, A. K. Y. Jen and C. K. Luscombe, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7670–7677 CrossRef CAS .
N. Doubina, S. A. Paniagua, A. V. Soldatova, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and C. K. Luscombe, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 512–520 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Osedach, T. L. Andrew and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 711–718 RSC .

Footnote† S. Ye and V. Lotocki contributed equally to this article. All authors jointly wrote the manuscript and discussed the content.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Shuyang Ye
	Shuyang Ye received his PhD in chemistry from the University of Toronto in 2019, working in the area of controlled polymerizations and conjugated polymers containing heavy chalcogenophenes. After completing his PhD, he took up a postdoctoral fellowship in the Seferos group and engaged in two industrial collaborative projects of developing polymeric reagents for mass cytometry and synthesizing air-sensitive phosphonic acids for organic electronics. Currently he is enjoying a break before starting an industrial job. In his time outside the lab, Shuyang enjoys cooking, running, and playing beach volleyball at Woodbine beach.

Victor Lotocki
	Victor Lotocki grew up in the Greater Toronto Area and completed his BSc at the University of Waterloo. Afterwards, he carried out his MSc studies at McGill University in Prof. Ashok Kakkar's group, where he synthesized redox-responsive miktoarm star polymers for drug delivery. Currently, Victor is working on a PhD in Prof. Dwight Seferos’ group at the University of Toronto. His main research interests focus on the synthesis and self-assembly of polymers with complex architectures. Outside of chemistry, Victor is an active volunteer in areas related to science policy and education.

Hao Xu
	Hao Xu grew up in Chengdu, China. He received his BSc under the supervision of Prof. Changsheng Zhao from Sichuan University in 2020. He is now a second-year PhD student in Prof. Dwight Seferos's group at the Department of Chemistry at the University of Toronto. Presently, his research focuses on the synthesis of monodisperse sequence-defined conjugated oligomers and polymers. Outside the lab, Hao enjoys playing piano and ukulele, taking photos, playing badminton, and coding Python script that automates his research projects.

Dwight S. Seferos
	Dwight Seferos is a Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the University of Toronto. Seferos began his independent career at the University of Toronto in 2009, and was promoted to associate professor in 2014 and professor in 2017. Research in the Seferos group concerns the design, synthesis, characterization, and device engineering of organic materials and polymers for electronic and optical applications (OLEDs, solar cells, batteries, etc.). Seferos has authored or coauthored over 150 publications, holds numerous patents, and has founded one academic start-up venture. Seferos has been recognized by many national and international awards including the DuPont Young Professor Award, Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, CSC Strem Chemical Award, ACS Harry Gray Award, E. W. R. Steacie Memorial Fellowship, the RSC Rutherford Metal in Chemistry, and the CIC Award in Macromolecular Science.

Atomic Number	8	16	34	52
Covalent radius (pm)	66	105	120	138
Electronegativity	3.5	2.5	2.4	2.1
C2–E bond length (Å)	1.362	1.714	1.855	2.055
C2EC5 (°)	106.5	92.17	87.76	82.53
EC2C3 (°)	110.65	111.47	111.56	110.81
C2C3C4 (°)	106.07	112.45	114.55	117.93
Bird's index, I5	43	66	59	48
pKa (α-H)	35.66	33.06	—	—

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) AA/BB-type and (b) AB-type cross coupling polymerizations.	 

 	Fig. 2  Proposed mechanism for Kumada CTP (M = Mg) and Negishi CTP (M = Zn) mediated by 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane nickel(II) chloride [Ni(dppe)Cl2]. [OA]: oxidative addition; [TM]: transmetalation, [RE]: reductive elimination; [RW]: ring-walking. The green circle represents the end group. Simplified monomer structure is used for clarity. Adapted from ref.11 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative Group 16 homopolymers synthesized by Kumada CTP and Negishi CTP.	 

 	Fig. 4  Representative synthesis of monodisperse oligo(3-hexylthiophene). Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  P3HT synthesis via Suzuki–Miyaura CTP developed by Choi and coworkers.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) synthesis via Suzuki–Miyaura CTP developed by Choi and coworkers. (b) Structures of benzotriazole and quinoxaline monomers.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representative Group 16 homopolymers synthesized by Suzuki–Miyaura polymerizations.	 

 	Fig. 8  DArP of 2-bromo-3-hexylthiophene in (a) dual-catalytic Ag–Pd system and (b) confined nanoreactors (Pd@SS-CNMs: Pd-impregnated mesoporous-silica supported carbon nanomembranes; PivOH: pivalic acid).	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis of conjugated triblock copolymers in which blocks can be added in any order through a chain-growth mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthesis of alternating and periodic copolymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 


P3HF	465a57	48957	−5.0957	N/Ab57	N/Ab57	2.1957
P3HT	448100	514100	−4.98100	−2.55100	2.43100	1.93100
P3HS	49958	562100	−4.96100	−2.80100	2.16100	1.72100
P3HTe	55859	612162	−4.77145	−2.96145	1.81145	1.4459

 	Fig. 11  Calculated optical absorption spectra for chalcogenophene hexamers alongside representative HOMO and LUMO diagrams. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 12  Representative crystal structure of P3HT.	 

 	Fig. 13  DFT energy-minimized structures of octameric analogues for HT-P3HEF and HH-α-TT-P3HEF. Lower effective conjugation in extended HH-α-TT-P3HEF compared to helical HT-P3HEF results in a broader HOMO–LUMO gap. Reproduced from ref.84 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 14  Proposed DP-dependent self-assembly model for P3DDT-b-P3DDS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Stepwise representation of high MW P3BT-b-P3HT microphase separation from co-crystals through two-step thermal annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed model for the reversible oxidation-promoted self-assembly of P3DMOT-b-P3DMOTe. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  TEM and inset Fast Fourier Transform images of P3DDT-b-PLA thin-films prepared (a) as-cast, (b) with fast quenching after thermal annealing, (c) with slow cooling after thermal annealing, (d) and with solvo-microwave annealing. (e) Scheme of the lamellar structure of P3DDT-b-PLA. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  TEM images of P3HT-b-PEG with decreasing PEG lengths corresponding to (A) fPHT = 0.41, (B) fPHT = 0.61, and (C) fPHT = 0.82 alongside representative schematic micelles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representations of P3HT-b-PEG self-assembly on (a) a flat surface and (b) an inclined surface. Colour-coded TEM images of P3HT-b-PEG films assembled on (c and e) flat and (d and f) inclined surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Effect of increasing selenophene content on P37S-s-P3HT (a) electrical conductivity, (b) doped:undoped (100) peak area ratio, (c) carrier density, and (d) carrier mobility. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Optical absorption spectra of CPs incorporating thiophene (S), selenophene (Se), and tellurophene (Te) repeating units in (a) o-dichlorobenzene and (b) as thin films. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Transformation of oligofurans into oligonaphthalenes.	 

 	Fig. 23  Oxidation of polythiophene using Rozen's reagent or m-CPBA.	 

 	Fig. 24  Diels–Alder reaction of P3HT-TDO with thiophene ring. Adapted from ref. 247 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 25  (top) Synthesis of tellurophene-containing polymer 3 by treating organotitanium precursor 2 with TeCl4, followed by reduction using sodium thiosulfate aqueous solution. (bottom) Bromination of the tellurophene copolymer with molecular bromine. Adapted from ref. 253 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 26  Typical examples of tellurophene bromination by treatment with bromine.	 

 	Fig. 27  Synthetic route for diene-containing polymers from tellurophene-containing precursors.	 

 	Fig. 28  Post-polymerization of polythiophene by Li–Br exchange and quenching with a series of electrophilic reagents. Adapted from ref. 260 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 29  Typical example of anodic chlorination of poly(3-alkylthiophene). Adapted from ref. 264 with permission from Chemistry Europe, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 30  Transformation of poly(3-alkylthiothiophene) to poly(3-alkylsulfonethiophene) by treatment with m-CPBA.	 

 	Fig. 31  Multistage photocleavage of polythiophene containing esters and ONB groups. Adapted from ref. 273 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 32  Synthesis and alkyl chain cleavage of the thiophene-containing copolymer. Adapted from ref. 277 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 
Footnote
† S. Ye and V. Lotocki contributed equally to this article. All authors jointly wrote the manuscript and discussed the content.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
