High power zinc iodine redox flow battery with iron-functionalized carbon electrodes   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP02067C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP02067C
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 16222-16226High power zinc iodine redox flow battery with iron-functionalized carbon electrodes†

        
          
            Abena A. 
            Williams
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Robert K. 
            Emmett
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mark E. 
            Roberts
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29604-0909, USA. E-mail: mrober9@clemson.edu
bPower Division, C5ISR Center, U.S. Army DEVCOM, APG, MD 21005, USA
Received 
      5th May 2023
    , Accepted 2nd June 2023First published on 5th June 2023AbstractThe zinc iodine (ZI) redox flow battery (RFB) has emerged as a promising candidate for grid-scale electrical energy storage owing to its high energy density, low cost and environmental friendliness. In this work, ZI RFBs were made with electrodes comprising carbon nanotubes (CNT) with redox-active iron particles, yielding higher discharge voltages, power densities, and 90% lower charge transfer resistances compared to cells with inert carbon electrodes. Analysis of the polarization curves reveals that cells with iron-containing electrodes have lower mass transfer resistances and 100% increase in power density (44 mW cm−2 to 90 mW cm−2) at 110 mA cm−2 relative to cells with inert carbon electrodes.
Over the past few decades, the world's energy consumption has increased significantly as populations increase and countries develop. Increasing development and support for renewable energy sources is imperative to meet the growing energy demands while minimizing our overall environmental impact and carbon footprint.1,2 Mature forms of renewable energy, namely wind, solar and tidal, will continue to be periodic and intermittent because they depend largely on weather patterns and cycles, including time of day and season.3 Large-format electrochemical energy storage systems (e.g. batteries) have consequently become increasingly popular to support electricity generated from these sources by enabling the conversion of electrical to chemical energy when the electricity is not needed and vice versa when the supply is unavailable.2,4
Redox flow batteries (RFBs) have gained considerable interest as a grid-scale energy storage system capable of supporting the integration of renewable sources.5 In short, RFBs are rechargeable batteries that store chemical energy in liquid electrolytes that flow through inert carbon electrodes from external tanks.6 Because charge is stored in a different media than where charge transfer occurs, RFBs have a unique advantage of decoupled energy and power outputs.7 The power density is dependent on the size of electrodes and the redox reaction rates while the energy density is determined by the electrolyte concentration and storage tank size.8 Hence, the power and energy density can be scaled independently. In addition to their cost and scaling advantage over Li-ion batteries, they are more environmentally friendly because the carbon footprint associated with the entirety of the manufacturing process is low.1,9
The vanadium redox flow battery (VRFB), which comprises vanadium ions dissolved in sulfuric acid, has attracted the most research interest because of the potential for high energy densities. Vanadium offers excellent electrochemical activity and reversibility because of its stablity in various oxidation states. Despite these advantages, VRFBs suffer from the high cost and limited availability of vanadium, the need for expensive separators, and the use of corrosive electrolytes.10,11 Although vanadium ions are present on both sides of the battery, the performance can be limited by electrolyte crossover and self-discharge because a different set of redox couples exist on each side of the cell, V4+/V5+ on the positive and V2+/V3+ on the negative electrode.12,13
The zinc iodine (ZI) RFB chemistry, a low-cost and environmentally friendly alternative to vanadium, has demonstrated potential for large-format batteries because of its high electrochemical activity.14,15 This system exploits the highly soluble and electroactive iodide/triiodide redox couple (I−/I3−) in the catholyte, which comes from an inexpensive salt, potassium iodide (KI).16 The anolyte is based on the Zn/Zn2+ redox couple, which is also extremely soluble and is derived from a low cost, abundant metal.17,18 The half-cell reactions and their standard electrochemical potential are:Anode: Zn ↔ Zn2+ + 2e−, 0.76 V vs. SHECathode: I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I−, 0.54 V vs. SHEOverall: I3− + Zn ↔ 3I− + Zn2+, Ecell = 1.30 VAn attractive feature of the ZI flow battery is the use of a symmetric electrolyte, which eliminates the potential for cross-contamination and self-discharge, two key factors that limit battery performance.17,19 To improve their viability for grid-scale energy storage systems, the material cost and/or power limitations of RFBs must be addressed. The cost of RFBs can be reduced by replacing the vanadium chemistry with a low-cost alternative, such as zinc or iron; however, research is still needed to find suitable replacements for Nafion membranes, which can make up to 40% of the cost of an RFB cell.20,21 However, RFBs with non-vanadium redox chemistries tend to exhibit lower discharge voltages and current densities, which limit the batteries power output and compatibility with grid-level systems. One way to overcome these limitations is to decrease the resistance of the electrodes and increase the electrochemical reaction rates at the electrode–electrolyte interface by incorporating redox-active transition metals particles into the inert carbon electrodes.10
Previously, we demonstrated that the power density increases by 140% (and energy density by 57%) when carbon electrodes contain redox-active iron nanoparticles using a “stationary” RFB with iron-based redox electrolytes.22 The activity of the embedded nanoparticles arises from the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox couple (0.77 V vs. SHE), which has been shown to accelerate reactions at the electrode–electrolyte interface. In comparison to inert carbon, the use of redox active sites reduces the barrier to charge transfer, which leads to faster charge transfer (higher current densities), and lowers the activation and ohmic resistances, resulting in higher operating voltages (higher power density). Because the nanoparticle is sterically trapped within the carbon nanotube, it is stable for well over 1000 cycles unlike metal doping from various other methods.23
Here, we demonstrate the use of iron-modified carbon electrodes in a zinc iodine (ZI) redox flow battery to increase the power output and make it compatible with grid-scale energy storage systems. Our ZI RFBs exhibit higher discharge voltages, power density, and 90% lower charge transfer resistances compared to cells with inert carbon electrodes. Analysis of polarization curves reveals that cells with iron-containing electrodes have lower mass transfer resistances and 100% increase in power density (44 mW cm−2 to 90 mW cm−2) at 110 mA cm−2 relative to cells with inert carbon electrodes.
The electrochemical behaviour of the iron-modified carbon nanotube electrodes (Fe-CNT) was initially evaluated in the zinc iodine redox chemistry in a 3-electrode cell and compared to pure carbon nanotube electrodes (C-CNT). The electrodes were initially conditioned using cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 30 mV s−1 until a stable voltammogram was observed. The results of the subsequent CV profiles obtained at varying scan rates are shown in Fig. 1(a). Reduction and oxidation peaks corresponding to the Zn/Zn2+ redox couple around −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl and the I3−/I− couple around 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl were observed at all scan rates similar to that observed in literature.16 The peak currents measured were higher in the cell containing Fe-CNT at all scan rates, and notably higher as the scan rate was increased, which suggests that a ZI redox flow battery with iron modified electrodes can operate with higher currents and power density.
 Fig. 1  (a) Cyclic voltammetry scans of the Fe-CNT electrode in 1 M zinc iodine (ZI) electrolyte at 5 (blue), 2 (green), and 1 mV s−1 (orange). (b) Cyclic voltammetry scans of the C-CNT electrode in ZI electrolyte at 5 (blue), 2 (green) and 1 mV s−1 (orange). The electrode area is 2 mm2 for all tests. 
Next, a test-scale RFB was assembled with 3 cm × 3 cm electrodes, a Nafion membrane and 1 M electrolyte as both the catholyte and the anolyte (see ESI† for details). The flow battery performance was evaluated using Fe-CNT electrodes as both cathode and anode and then similar tests were performed using inert C-CNT as both electrodes. Specifically, we used electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to determine the resistance of each cell, and galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling to analyse conventional battery behaviour and develop polarization curves to evaluate the flow rate dependence.
The resistance of each cell was determined using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and the Nyquist plot from these measurements are shown in the ESI,† Fig. S1 (ESI†). A significant difference was seen in the charge-transfer resistance between the battery with Fe-CNT electrodes and the battery with C-CNT electrodes. The areal specific resistance (ASR) of the cell was calculated by multiplying the charge transfer resistance by the electrode surface area. Cells with Fe-CNT electrodes exhibited a notably lower resistance of 0.27 Ohm cm2 compared to 2.8 Ohm cm2 for C-CNT electrodes, which suggests that Fe-CNT electrodes will facilitate significantly higher current densities at the same discharge voltage relative to C-CNT, or higher current densities at a particular operating voltage. Thus, higher power densities can be obtained in ZI flow batteries with the redox-active iron containing carbon electrodes because the particles serve as catalytic sites and reduce the barrier to charge transfer at the interface.
The performance of RFBs with either Fe-CNT or C-CNT electrodes were characterized using galvanostatic charge and discharge cycling with an electrolyte flow rate of 30 mL min−1. Fig. 2 shows the charge/discharge profiles for each battery type at relatively low current densities (panels a and b) and also for high current densities (panels c and d). The discharge voltage was limited to 0.8 V and the charge was limited to 1000 mAh to avoid high voltages and oxygen generation from the water-splitting reaction at the anode. At low current densities, RFBs with Fe-CNT electrodes sustain higher discharge voltages and longer discharge times. Because each RFB is charged for the same amount of time at each current density, the longer discharge times observed in cells with Fe-CNT electrodes equate to improved electrolyte utilization.
 Fig. 2  Charge/discharge curves from ZI RFBs with iron-containing (Fe-CNT) and inert carbon (C-CNT) electrodes. Discharge profiles of (a) Fe-CNT and (b) C-CNT electrodes at current densities of 6.7 (red), 8.9 (blue), 11 (green) and 13 mA cm−2 (pink). (c) Discharge profiles of (c) Fe-CNT and (d) C-CNT electrodes at current densities of 56 (red), 67 (blue), 78 (green), 89 (pink), and 111 mA cm−2 (orange). 
As shown, the discharge voltage decreases with increasing current, particularly at higher current densities (>56 mA cm−2), because of the higher overpotential, activation resistance and increased ohmic resistance.24 While batteries comprising C-CNT electrodes could only sustain the minimal voltage of 0.8 V for current densities up to 56 mA cm−2, those with Fe-CNT could be operated at current densities up to 110 mA cm−2. The superior performance of RFBs with Fe-CNT electrodes at relatively high current density is further evidence that redox-active iron nanoparticles facilitate faster reactions because of the lower barrier to charge transfer. Increasing the current density where ionic starvation occurs – the current density that the battery can no longer sustain the minimum operating voltage – is important to obtain high power densities and faster charging times.
Polarization curves were developed at varying flowrates to investigate each battery's response to higher current loads and correspondingly higher ion-transfer demands. Prior to each test, the flow rate was adjusted to the new target and the battery was fully charged to a voltage of 1.5 V. At each flow rate, the battery was charged and discharged for 2 min with increasingly higher currents using a 1 min rest time between cycles. For rates above 110 mA cm−2, the charge current density was limited to 110 mA cm−2 to avoid degradation to the cell and electrolyte, and the discharge time was reduced to 1 min to avoid depleting the electrolyte of redox species. Fig. 3 shows the polarization curves for each cell, which includes the discharge voltage vs. current density for various electrolyte flow rates, and the power density vs current density for a flow rate of 30 mL min−1. The voltages reported are not IR-corrected because the difference was not significant.
 Fig. 3  Polarization curves for zinc iodine RFBs. Discharge voltage vs. current density for cells with (a) Fe-CNT electrodes and (b) C-CNT electrodes at varying flowrates. (c) Discharge voltages vs. current density comparison for cells with Fe-CNT (gray) and C-CNT (white) electrodes at 30 mL min−1 and 10 mL min−1. (d) Polarization curves for RFBs with Fe-CNT (gray) and C-CNT (white) electrodes at 30 mL min−1. 
A broad comparison of Fig. 3, panels a (Fe-CNT) and b (C-CNT) reveals that the ZI battery with iron-functionalized electrodes maintained higher discharge voltages at all flowrates compared to the battery with inert carbon electrodes, indicative of lower ohmic resistances. Furthermore, electrolyte flow rate did not affect the performance of cells with Fe-CNT; however, cells with C-CNT demonstrated the expected increase in voltage with increasing flow rate. This suggests that RFBs with redox active electrodes facilitate increased charge transfer rates even at low electrolyte concentrations. In other words, the electrolyte does not need to be replenished as the redox component is more rapidly depleted at higher currents. As a result, we anticipate significantly lower required flow rates for practical applications in addition to improved electrolyte utilization; the RFB with Fe-CNT can operate over a broad state-of-charge of the electrolyte and/or lower electrolyte concentrations.
Select polarization curves obtained at flow rates of 10 mL min−1 and 30 mL min−1 are compared for cells containing Fe-CNT and cells containing C-CNT electrodes in Fig. 3c. The advantage from the use of the redox-active component in the electrode is clear: Fe-CNT batteries clearly outperform C-CNT batteries at all current densities and remain operational at over twice the maximum current. Even at very low flow rates where mass transfer can be a limitation, flow batteries with active electrodes outperform those with inert carbon operating at any flow condition.

Fig. 3d shows the power density, which was calculated using Ohm's law (P = IV), along with the discharge voltage as a function of current density for batteries with Fe-CNT and C-CNT electrodes (30 mL min−1 electrolyte flow rate). As expected from the higher discharge voltages and current densities achievable with Fe-CNT electrodes, these batteries yield significantly higher power densities over a wider range of current densities, up to 110 mA cm−2. The maximum power density for batteries with Fe-CNT electrode RFBs was 98 mW cm−2 and 59 mW cm−2 for those with inert CNT electrodes. For a given electrolyte system, the power is primarily dependent upon the electrode area and the rate of reaction. Because the same electrolyte and electrode size was used in both cells, the 66% increase in power density can be attributed to the presence of redox active iron nanoparticles within the electrodes, which we showed lowers the barrier to charge transfer. Higher power densities will enable smaller stack sizes to meet similar power demands, for a reduced overall system cost.

Fig. 4 shows continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling of RFBs with iron-functionalized CNT electrodes in 1 M electrolyte for the initial 60 cycles along with the voltage, coulombic, and energy efficiency. We did not observe any capacity fade over more than 120 cycles. A high voltage efficiency of >84% was sustained over the entire process (∼80% for C-CNT at the same current density), which demonstrates that the iron nanoparticles within the electrodes remains stable. The coulombic efficiency of these batteries is relative low compared to previous reports because the electrolyte concentration is low and the membrane is not as selective.16,17 The improved electrolyte utilization obtained from using Fe-CNT electrodes is important to reduce the electrolyte tank size and the amount of raw materials required to achieve a given energy capacity.
 Fig. 4  Cycling performance of ZI RFB with Fe-CNT electrodes at 17 mA cm−2. (a) Voltage profile over time for continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling. (b) Voltage, coulombic and energy efficiency vs. cycle number. 
Here, we presented a low cost, environmentally friendly, aqueous redox flow battery with iron-functionalized carbon electrodes that achieves high power density. We showed that RFBs with zinc iodine electrolytes and electrodes containing redox-active nanoparticles achieved a 66% increase in power density compared to those with inert carbon. The redox-active particles act as catalyst sites for faster charge transfer by reducing activation and ohmic losses, thereby improving the power density and electrolyte utilization. Analysis of the polarization curves developed from cells containing these electrodes shows that voltages above 1.0 V could be maintained for current densities up to 60 mA cm−2 under varying electrolyte flow conditions, yielding a maximum power density of 98 mW cm−2. Our results help overcome the limitation of using low-cost aqueous electrolytes in redox flow batteries. This electrolyte system/electrode combination provides a viable, low-cost solution to meet the growing needs of electrical energy storage for intermittent energy sources, such as wind and solar. As a technology, RFBs provide unparalleled scalability and safety, and here we provide a route to low cost and high efficiency energy storage systems.
Author contributions
A. W.: methodology, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft preparation, visualization. R. K. E.: methodology, formal analysis, writing – reviewing and editing, visualization. M. E. R.: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, writing – reviewing and editing, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
AW acknowledges support from the Department of Education Graduate Assistance in Areas of National Need Fellowship Program (P200A180076 and P200A210105).
Notes and references
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, L. Xia, C. Wu, M. Ding, C. Jia and Q. Wang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 443001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lou, D. Yuan, Y. Yu, Y. Lei, M. Ding, Q. Sun and C. Jia, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 2357–2363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Luo, B. Li, X. Wei, L. Li and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 970–986 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun and H. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2022, 15, e202101798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. H. Chakrabarti, S. A. Hajimolana, F. S. Mjalli and M. Saleem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R55 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Emmett and M. E. Roberts, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230087 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Weber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baumann, J. F. Peters, M. Weil and A. Grunwald, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1071–1083 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huang, J. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Yang, W. Deng and Y. Su, J. Power Sources, 2021, 515, 230640 CrossRef CAS .
V. Viswanathan, A. Crawford, D. Stephenson, S. Kim, W. Wang, B. Li, G. Coffey, E. Thomsen, G. Graff, P. Balducci, M. Kintner-Meyer and V. Sprenkle, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 1040–1051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Kim, W. Wang, M. Vijayakumar, Z. Nie, B. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Xia, J. Hu, G. Graff, J. Liu and Z. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rychcik and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Power Sources, 1988, 22, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, Y. Liu, W. Lu, H. Zhang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1834–1839 RSC .
Q. P. Jian, M. C. Wu, H. R. Jiang, Y. K. Lin and T. S. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2021, 484, 229238 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Z. Nie, M. Vijayakumar, G. Li, J. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, H. Zhang, W. Xu, W. Wang and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11171–11176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Deng, R. Liang, G. Jiang, Y. Jiang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1665–1675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mousavi, G. Jiang, J. Zhang, A. G. Kashkooli, H. Dou, C. J. Silva, Z. P. Cano, Y. Niu, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 465–476 CrossRef .
L. Gao, Y. Ding, G. He and G. Yu, Small, 2022, 18, 2107055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Zeng, T. S. Zhao, L. An, X. L. Zhou and L. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 438–443 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Emmett, M. Grady and M. E. Roberts, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2022, 3, 2100132 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Emmett, M. Karakaya, R. Podila, M. R. Arcila-Velez, J. Zhu, A. M. Rao and M. E. Roberts, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26498–26503 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aaron, Z. Tang, A. B. Papandrew and T. A. Zawodzinski, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1175 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp02067cThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:
Anode: Zn ↔ Zn2+ + 2e−, 0.76 V vs. SHE
Cathode: I3− + 2e− ↔ 3I−, 0.54 V vs. SHE
Overall: I3− + Zn ↔ 3I− + Zn2+, Ecell = 1.30 V

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cyclic voltammetry scans of the Fe-CNT electrode in 1 M zinc iodine (ZI) electrolyte at 5 (blue), 2 (green), and 1 mV s−1 (orange). (b) Cyclic voltammetry scans of the C-CNT electrode in ZI electrolyte at 5 (blue), 2 (green) and 1 mV s−1 (orange). The electrode area is 2 mm2 for all tests.	 

 	Fig. 2  Charge/discharge curves from ZI RFBs with iron-containing (Fe-CNT) and inert carbon (C-CNT) electrodes. Discharge profiles of (a) Fe-CNT and (b) C-CNT electrodes at current densities of 6.7 (red), 8.9 (blue), 11 (green) and 13 mA cm−2 (pink). (c) Discharge profiles of (c) Fe-CNT and (d) C-CNT electrodes at current densities of 56 (red), 67 (blue), 78 (green), 89 (pink), and 111 mA cm−2 (orange).	 

 	Fig. 3  Polarization curves for zinc iodine RFBs. Discharge voltage vs. current density for cells with (a) Fe-CNT electrodes and (b) C-CNT electrodes at varying flowrates. (c) Discharge voltages vs. current density comparison for cells with Fe-CNT (gray) and C-CNT (white) electrodes at 30 mL min−1 and 10 mL min−1. (d) Polarization curves for RFBs with Fe-CNT (gray) and C-CNT (white) electrodes at 30 mL min−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cycling performance of ZI RFB with Fe-CNT electrodes at 17 mA cm−2. (a) Voltage profile over time for continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling. (b) Voltage, coulombic and energy efficiency vs. cycle number.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp02067c

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
