Photovoltaic performance enhancement by external recycling of photon emission  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE40377G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE40377G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1499-1503Show Chemical TermsPhotovoltaic performance enhancement by external recycling of photon emission

        
          
            Avi 
            Braun
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Eugene A. 
            Katz
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Feuermann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Brendan M. 
            Kayes
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jeffrey M. 
            Gordon
          
        
      *ae
aDepartment of Solar Energy and Environmental Physics, Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Sede Boqer Campus 84990, Israel. E-mail: jeff@bgu.ac.il
bThe Albert Katz International School for Desert Studies, Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Sede Boqer Campus 84990, Israel
cThe Ilse Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheva 84105, Israel
dAlta Devices Inc., 545 Oakmead Parkway, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
eThe Pearlstone Center for Aeronautical Engineering Studies, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheva 84105, Israel
Received 
      2nd February 2013
    , Accepted 28th March 2013First published on 2nd April 2013AbstractExperimental evidence of enhancing the performance of ultra-efficient solar cells by external recycling of photon emission is presented – predicated on the strategy of increasing cell open-circuit voltage by reducing radiative recombination. It is equivalent to restricting the angular range of photon emission, and can only be effective in photovoltaics with high external luminescent efficiency. This has precluded the voltage enhancement from being observable in today's photovoltaic technologies. As shown here, however, it is attainable with the latest generation of champion single-junction one sun thin-film GaAs cells. The measurements are understandable in terms of basic photovoltaic thermodynamics.

Broader context
Although one approach for improving the performance of ultra-efficient solar cells is through optical concentration (principally by increasing open-circuit voltage), an equally potent alternative is decreasing the cell's recombination current – an aim that can be realized by externally recycling cell photon emission. While the theory for the potential benefit of photon recycling has recently been elucidated, experimental proof-of-concept had proven elusive – requiring a photovoltaic device possessing a high external luminescent efficiency, combined with efficient light recycling optics. The associated prospect of approaching – and even surpassing – the nominally fundamental (Shockley–Queisser) limit for solar cell conversion efficiency is tantalizing and, in principle, achievable. Here, we report experimental evidence of enhancing the performance of today's champion single-junction commercial GaAs cells by external recycling of photon emission from the cell's front surface. The magnitude of the observed effect is placed in the perspective of the fundamental bounds for voltage enhancement, and the potential for future improvements is evaluated.

Introduction
With today's ultra-efficient solar cells having attained close to their basic limit for current generation and fill factor, the path to higher efficiency – approaching and even surpassing the Shockley–Queisser limit for conversion efficiency1 – is via enhancing open-circuit voltage Voc.2 Efficiency bounds depend on cell irradiance Pin, the number of junctions, the input spectrum, cell temperature T, and basic assumptions related to photon absorption and emission (e.g., up conversion, down conversion, and the angular distribution of the photon emission from the cell's surface due to radiative recombination). The Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit for single-junction non-concentrator cells with photon recycling achieved by a perfect rear mirror – but no restriction on front-surface emission – is 33.5% for the air-mass 1.5 terrestrial solar spectrum.2 The best performance to date is 28.8% (at Pin = 1 mW mm−2 ≡ 1 sun and T = 25 °C),3,4 for a thin-film GaAs cell with a rear mirror of 98% specular reflectivity. The prospect of back-surface mirror reflectivity being raised to close to 100% notwithstanding, a key question is how else to improve cell efficiency.
Two strategies for improving ultra-efficient cell performance via Voc enhancement are:
(1) optical concentration to increase short-circuit current Isc (which is essentially the photo-current, proportional to Pin) – a key rationale for concentrator photovoltaics, and
(2) decreasing the reverse saturation current Io (which is a lumped recombination current).
Both strategies are prompted by the relevant photodiode equation (1)where k is Boltzmann's constant, q is the electron charge, n is the diode quality factor (unity for an ideal junction), and Isc » Io.
In this communication, we adopt the second approach, and focus on diminishing the effect of recombination current in single-junction non-concentrator cells by externally recycling the emitted photons from the cell's front surface (in addition to the conventional back-surface mirror4,5). This would raise the detailed-balance conversion efficiency bound for a single-junction cell (under standard test conditions) to 41%.6
The questions are how to experimentally evidence this physical effect, and why no improvement of this nature has been demonstrated to date.
Beneficial emission-trapping techniques at a cell's front surface cannot rely solely on mirrors due to Kirchoff's law linking spectral emissivity to spectral absorptivity. It has been recognized theoretically that one way to break the seemingly inviolable symmetry between absorbed and emitted photons is to recycle the radiative emission from angles outside of the incident solar angular radius.6–9
We explore this possibility by siting the cell in a mirrored dome that reflects emitted photons back to the cell. Our particular optical method is strictly for convenience – in order to demonstrate a fundamental physical effect – and is neither advocated nor intended for practical commercial cell design (for which solutions have not yet been manufactured, but have been conceptualized6). Our particular optical method does not provide an internal suppression of the recombination current. Nevertheless, the experimentally generated physical effect of externally recycling photon emission in our system is basically the same as the effect that could, in principle, be achieved by proposed futuristic solutions for integrating light-trapping elements into a solar cell such that emitted photons are efficiently redirected back to the cell's active region.6
Because this approach can only moderate radiative (as opposed to non-radiative Shockley–Read–Hall and/or Auger) recombination, the degree to which it can ameliorate realistic cell performance needs to be addressed. Eqn (1) can be recast in terms of the contribution of radiative recombination to Io (Io,rad), and the fraction of Io that it comprises Qe = Io,rad/Io representing the cell's external luminescent quantum efficiency (LQE): (2)
The external LQE (Qe) is the number of photons emitted into free space relative to the number of electron–hole pairs generated by light absorption: a figure of merit representing the degree to which photons can be recycled. Qe should not be confused with the internal LQE, which is a measure of photon emission from the active region and exceeds Qe in real devices. In fact, internal LQE values have experimentally been shown to reach 99.7% for GaAs devices.11
For Lambertian emission, Io,rad follows from Planck's law for non-thermal emission:8 (3)where E denotes photon energy, α(E) denotes the cell's spectral absorptance, h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light in the medium, and E − qVoc » kT has been assumed.
Denoting the efficiency of restricting photon emission as ηr, one obtains (4)
There is a thermodynamic limit for increasing Voc (above its 1 sun value) implied by eqn (4), because the sun is an extended (rather than a point) source of finite angular radius θs = 4.7 mrad (the effective solar angular radius is typically at least 5 mrad when realistic optical errors are included). Hence the ratio Isc/Io cannot be increased by more than a factor of 1/sin2(θs) (∼45000).6–9 Nonetheless, realizing that limit would raise Voc by up to 275 mV (for T = 25 °C and n = 1), corresponding to GaAs cell efficiency increasing to 41%.
Unfortunately, for essentially all photovoltaic technologies developed to date, Qe has been too small (0.01 or smaller10) for improvements associated with increasing ηr to be perceptible. This obstacle was recently mitigated in part with the realization of thin-film 1 sun single-junction GaAs solar cells that have exhibited record conversion efficiencies as high as 28.8% (ref. 3) – an achievement rooted in managing to dramatically increase Qe. The use of an absorber material with near-unity internal fluorescence yield, of well-controlled thickness, combined with a highly optimized back reflector allowed for this increase in Qe, and a corresponding increase in Voc, relative to previous GaAs cells.4
In the experiments described below, we show that substantial recycling of photons emitted from a cell's front surface can produce an observable increase in Voc – a first step toward surpassing the Shockley–Queisser limit by this approach.
Experimental
The experimental configuration (Fig. 1a) included:
 Fig. 1  External photon recycling. (a) Schematic of the experimental configuration. (b) Estimated net recycling efficiency 〈ηr〉 as a function of dome vertical position (the cell is in the focal plane at position zero). 
(a) A few μm thick 10 × 10 mm2 thin-film single-junction GaAs cell4 for which we measured Voc = 1120 mV, Isc = 28.5 mA and an efficiency of 26.5% at Pin = 1 sun and T = 25 °C.
(b) An oblate hemi-ellipsoidal gold-coated dome (diameter 25.4 mm, foci separation 6 mm) that redirects radiative emission back to the cell. A hexagonal opening (10 mm diagonal) at the dome's apex allows the insertion of power delivery and spectral probe optical fibers. This optic was designed for an unrelated previous experiment to regenerate thermal radiation from a 6 mm diameter disk.12 Hence the optic is not perfectly matched to our square 100 mm2 cell.
(c) Delivery of solar beam radiation (measured with a spectrally neutral pyroelectric sensor) indoors from an outdoor mini-dish concentrator, via a high-transmissivity quartz-core 1.0 mm diameter fiber of numerical aperture 0.66, previously described in ref. 13 and 14. The fiber tip resided 5.2 ± 0.2 mm above the cell, to ensure an average cell irradiance of 1 sun while shedding less that 1% of the power delivery beyond the cell.15
(d) A thermoelectric controller thermally bonded to the cell, maintaining T = 25.0 ± 0.1 °C (independent of the cell-dome separation), and monitored continuously using a T-type thermocouple attached to the bottom of a 3 mm thick Cu plate that mechanically supported the cell.
(e) An electronic data-logging system monitoring Isc, Voc and T, synchronized with a step motor that elevated or lowered the dome (the cell and fibers were stationary). The measurement resolution (and absolute error) was: ±0.1(0.5) mV for Voc, ±0.01(0.30) mA for Isc, and ±0.01(1.00) °C for T.

η
r was moderated by varying the dome's vertical position (maximum displacement of 50 mm, resolution of 10 μm). The net light recycling efficiency 〈ηr〉 (averaged over the spectrum and angular range of emission) is plotted in Fig. 1b, estimated as the product of:
(1) a reflectivity of 0.98 for the dome's gold coating over the emission spectrum,
(2) the fraction of photon emission recycled to the cell, based on ray trace evaluation: varying from 0 at maximum vertical displacement, to 0.70 when the cell was in the focal plane (the maximum fraction is less than unity primarily due to the opening in the dome's apex),
(3) the spectrum-weighted absorptance of the cell 〈α〉: the ratio between the convolution of the spectral absorption with the emission signal and the total number of emitted photons (accounting for the fact that Fresnel reflections off the cell give rise to multiple passes of light between the cell and the dome).
To evaluate 〈α〉, spectral emission was measured using a single-slit spectrometer connected to a 400 μm diameter optical fiber of numerical aperture 0.22. In order to distinguish between spectral emission and recycled Fresnel reflections, we subtracted the measured spectrum at short-circuit (which is dominated by reflection) from the measured spectrum at open-circuit (which consists of both reflection and emission), as shown in Fig. 2. The result is a 〈α〉 value that varies with dome position (via its influence on multiple ray passes) from 0.76 ± 0.05 to 0.87 ± 0.05 as the fraction of recycled emission increases from 0 to its maximum value. The spectral signature of the recycled photon emission (defined as the product of the net spectral light-recycling efficiency 〈ηr(λ)〉 and the emission spectrum) is also shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Spectra of reflected and emitted photons. The curves at open-circuit (OC), short-circuit (SC), and the difference (OC − SC, which is the signature of photon emission) are measured spectra (photon density per s per nm), normalized to the highest measured value (i.e., to the open-circuit value at a wavelength of 870 nm, which corresponds to the bandgap of GaAs). The shaded area, labeled PR, is a measure of the number of photons recycled: the product of the net recycling efficiency and the photon emission. The cell's measured external quantum efficiency (EQE)4 is also included. 
Results and discussion

I
sc and Voc were measured at T = 25.0 ± 0.1 °C and Pin = 1 sun, for 40 different values of dome vertical position, in increments of 1 mm (Fig. 3): increasing when the cell is near the focal plane (high photon recycling, at position zero), decreasing as the dome is distanced, and asymptoting when the dome is essentially removed (zero photon recycling) – consistent with the trends in recycling efficiency (Fig. 1b). Since at short-circuit the radiative emission is essentially zero, changes in Isc with dome position are attributed to the redirection of Fresnel reflections back to the cell. Changes in Voc, however, may result from both the redirection of Fresnel reflections and the recycling of photon emission. In order to isolate the contribution of recycled photon emission (namely, the effect being probed here), we used the measured changes in Isc together with eqn (1)17 in order to filter out the small contribution of Fresnel reflections to Voc. These corrected values of Voc are also included in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Measurements () of Isc and Voc as the dome is raised and lowered (which in turn modifies 〈ηr〉). The nominal focal plane corresponds to position zero. The solid symbols () represent Voc corrected so as to account exclusively for the contribution of recycling photon emission (i.e., filtering out the contribution that results from an increase in current due to recycled Fresnel reflections). The error bars are smaller than the symbol sizes. T deviated from 25 °C by no more than 0.1 °C for all measurements. 
The net increase in Voc due exclusively to the external recycling of emitted photons is 4 mV. The same voltage enhancement was measured at T = 50 °C (at Pin = 1 sun), as well as at Pin values spanning 0.4 to 1.8 suns (at T = 25 °C). The increase in cell conversion efficiency was the same as for Voc (0.4% relative), based on measurements of the I–V curves.
Toward understanding the sizable difference between the theoretical maximum Voc enhancement of 275 mV due to recycling front-surface photon emission, and the actual observed enhancement of 4 mV, we return to eqn (4) and recast it in the form of the Voc enhancement, ΔVoc, for a particular solar cell under constant illumination: (5)where superscripts 0 and 1 denote two arbitrary degrees of photon recycling (Qe is assumed to be a constant characteristic of the specific cell). ΔVoc depends strongly on Qe. In particular, as Qe → 1, and as ηr approaches its fundamental upper bound of 1 − sin2(θs), ΔVoc approaches its theoretical upper bound of 275 mV.
To estimate the Qe of our cells from measurements of Isc, Voc and the external quantum efficiency, we applied a method10 based on Rau's reciprocity theorem,18 yielding Qe = 0.245 ± 0.015. For this value of Qe, and for ηr = 0.6 (the maximum light recycling efficiency with our particular optical system and cells), ΔVoc = 4.10 ± 0.25 mV, in agreement with our measurements. Note that even with perfect photon recycling, ΔVoc with the cells studied here could not exceed 8 mV due to the cells' Qe being well below unity. Fig. 4 illustrates the agreement between the measured increase in Voc as a function of dome position, and the corresponding values calculated from eqn (4) for a cell with Qe = 0.245 (at T = 25 °C), as ηr varies between 0 and its maximum value (in this particular experiment) of 0.6.
 Fig. 4  
V
oc enhancement: comparison between the measurements (solid square symbols) and the theoretical curve based on our estimated Qe = 0.245 (solid line). 
The calculated sensitivity of the performance enhancement to both Qe and 〈ηr〉 (eqn (5)) is illustrated in Fig. 5, and illuminates why the maximum attainable ΔVoc in our experiments must be far below the theoretical upper bound: a consequence of working with a cell of insufficiently high Qe. Attempting to improve cell performance by photon recycling (equivalently, by restricting emission angle) when Qe assumes the low values of today's PV technologies is a futile exercise, simply because reducing radiative recombination is an insignificant effect in a cell overwhelmingly dominated by non-radiative recombination. However, when innovative cell design and manufacture can attain significantly higher values of Qe, the benefit of photon recycling can be considerable. Such future improvements could emerge from the conflation of substantially thinner cells with superior light-trapping architectures (e.g., 50–250 nm for GaAs6), to yield the necessary near-unity values for both external luminescent efficiency and net radiative recycling efficiency.
 Fig. 5  Calculated dependence of ΔVoc on 〈ηr〉 as Qe is increased. The labels near the right-hand ordinate are the Qe values of the corresponding curves. The dashed curve for Qe = 0.245 relates to the cells in this study. The ordinate is limited to 80 mV although, in principle, ΔVoc can reach 275 mV in the idealized limit of both Qe and 〈ηr〉 approaching unity. 
Conclusion
Our experiments reveal direct proof of a measurable improvement in cell performance stemming from recycling photon emission from the cell's front surface. This approach has the potential to create single-junction non-concentrator cells that can surpass the Shockley–Queisser limit. Our experiment provides a novel method for moderating the degree of recycling photon emission (up to a maximum that is configuration-dependent) and monitoring it non-destructively, thereby permitting an evaluation of the effect of photon recycling on cell performance.
The magnitude of the Voc enhancement is modest: 4 mV at a nominal Voc of 1120 mV – well below the maximal theoretical increase of 275 mV for the ideal case of perfect photon recycling (i.e., photon emission restricted to the solar angular radius) and Qe = 1. The large difference between the maximum theoretical ΔVoc and our measured values is consistent with basic theory – explained by Qe for our device being well below unity. Future cell designs with higher Qe values are projected to exhibit a significantly larger ΔVoc provided photon emission can be efficiently recycled.
Acknowledgements
Avi Braun gratefully acknowledges the generous support of the Adams Fellowship of the Israeli Academy of Arts and Sciences.
References
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, Detailed balance limit of efficiency of p–n junction solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CAS .
O. D. Miller, E. Yablonovitch and S. R. Kurtz, Strong internal and external luminescence as solar cells approach the Shockley–Queisser limit, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 303–311 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 41), Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1–11 Search PubMed .

          B. M. Kayes, H. Nie, R. Twist, S. G. Spruytte, F. Reinhardt, I. C. Kizilyalli and G. S. Higashi, 27.6% conversion efficiency, a new record for single-junction solar cells under 1 sun illumination, in Proc. 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conf.,  2011, pp. 4–8,  DOI:10.1109/PVSC.2011.6185831 .
D. C. Johnson, I. M. Ballard, K. W. J. Barnham, J. P. Connolly and M. Mazzer, Observation of photon recycling in strain-balanced quantum well solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213505 Search PubMed .
E. D. Kosten, J. H. Atwater, J. Parsons, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Highly efficient GaAs solar cells by limiting light emission angle, Light: Sci. Appl., 2013, 2, e45 Search PubMed .

          R. Winston, J. C. Miñano and P. Benítez, Nonimaging Optics, Elsevier, Oxford,  2005 Search PubMed .

          P. Würfel and U. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells: From Basic Principles to Advanced Concepts, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. N. Munday, The effect of photonic bandgap materials on the Shockley–Queisser limit, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 064501 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, Radiative efficiency of state-of-the-art photovoltaic cells, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 472–476 Search PubMed .
I. Schnitzer, E. Yablonovitch, C. Caneau and T. J. Gmitter, Ultrahigh spontaneous emission quantum efficiency, 99.7% internally and 72% externally, from AlGaAs/GaAs/AlGaAs double heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 131–133 Search PubMed .
J. M. Gordon, D. Feuermann, M. Huleihil and E. A. Katz, New optical systems for the solar generation of nanomaterials, Proc. SPIE, 2003, 5185, 99–108 Search PubMed .
J. M. Gordon, E. A. Katz, D. Feuermann and M. Huleihil, Toward ultrahigh-flux photovoltaic concentration, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3642–3644 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Katz, J. M. Gordon, W. Tassew and D. Feuermann, Photovoltaic characterization of concentrator solar cells by localized irradiation, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044514 Search PubMed .
The cell flux map is inhomogeneous with a peak irradiance of 2.4 suns at the center.16 Because the essential determinations here relate to voltage and current differences at fixed Pin, the small effect of non-uniform radiation on cell performance is inconsequential.
A. Braun and J. M. Gordon, Analytic solution for quasi-Lambertian radiation transfer, Appl. Opt., 2010, 49, 817–822 Search PubMed .
A diode quality factor n = 1.03 was regressed with eqn (1) from the linear plots of measured Voc against ln(Isc) in the experiment with varying cell irradiance, for both maximum and zero external photon recycling.
U. Rau, Reciprocity relation between photovoltaic quantum efficiency and electroluminescent emission of solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085303 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Although one approach for improving the performance of ultra-efficient solar cells is through optical concentration (principally by increasing open-circuit voltage), an equally potent alternative is decreasing the cell's recombination current – an aim that can be realized by externally recycling cell photon emission. While the theory for the potential benefit of photon recycling has recently been elucidated, experimental proof-of-concept had proven elusive – requiring a photovoltaic device possessing a high external luminescent efficiency, combined with efficient light recycling optics. The associated prospect of approaching – and even surpassing – the nominally fundamental (Shockley–Queisser) limit for solar cell conversion efficiency is tantalizing and, in principle, achievable. Here, we report experimental evidence of enhancing the performance of today's champion single-junction commercial GaAs cells by external recycling of photon emission from the cell's front surface. The magnitude of the observed effect is placed in the perspective of the fundamental bounds for voltage enhancement, and the potential for future improvements is evaluated.

	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 1  External photon recycling. (a) Schematic of the experimental configuration. (b) Estimated net recycling efficiency 〈ηr〉 as a function of dome vertical position (the cell is in the focal plane at position zero).	 

 	Fig. 2  Spectra of reflected and emitted photons. The curves at open-circuit (OC), short-circuit (SC), and the difference (OC − SC, which is the signature of photon emission) are measured spectra (photon density per s per nm), normalized to the highest measured value (i.e., to the open-circuit value at a wavelength of 870 nm, which corresponds to the bandgap of GaAs). The shaded area, labeled PR, is a measure of the number of photons recycled: the product of the net recycling efficiency and the photon emission. The cell's measured external quantum efficiency (EQE)4 is also included.	 

 	Fig. 3  Measurements () of Isc and Voc as the dome is raised and lowered (which in turn modifies 〈ηr〉). The nominal focal plane corresponds to position zero. The solid symbols () represent Voc corrected so as to account exclusively for the contribution of recycling photon emission (i.e., filtering out the contribution that results from an increase in current due to recycled Fresnel reflections). The error bars are smaller than the symbol sizes. T deviated from 25 °C by no more than 0.1 °C for all measurements.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  
V
oc enhancement: comparison between the measurements (solid square symbols) and the theoretical curve based on our estimated Qe = 0.245 (solid line).	 

 	Fig. 5  Calculated dependence of ΔVoc on 〈ηr〉 as Qe is increased. The labels near the right-hand ordinate are the Qe values of the corresponding curves. The dashed curve for Qe = 0.245 relates to the cells in this study. The ordinate is limited to 80 mV although, in principle, ΔVoc can reach 275 mV in the idealized limit of both Qe and 〈ηr〉 approaching unity.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
