Graphitic carbon nitride materials: controllable synthesis and applications in fuel cells and photocatalysis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03479D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03479D
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717-6731Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsGraphitic carbon nitride materials: controllable synthesis and applications in fuel cells and photocatalysis

        
          
            Yao 
            Zheng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Liu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ji 
            Liang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mietek 
            Jaroniec
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Shi Zhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *ab
aARC Centre of Excellence for Functional Nanomaterials, Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, QLD 4072 Brisbane, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@uq.edu.au;  Web: http://www.nanomac.uq.edu.au/Qiao.html Fax: +61-7-33463973;   Tel: +61-7-33463815
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA5005, Australia
cDepartment of Chemistry, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA
Received 
      16th December 2011
    , Accepted 6th February 2012First published on 7th February 2012AbstractGraphitic carbon nitrides (g-C3N4) are becoming increasingly significant due to the theoretical prediction of their unusual properties and promising applications ranging from photocatalysis, heterogeneous catalysis, to fuel cells. Recently, a variety of nanostructured and nanoporous g-C3N4 materials have been developed for a wide range of new applications. This feature article gives, at first, an overview on the synthesis of g-C3N4 nanomaterials with controllable structure and morphology, and secondly, presents and categorizes applications of g-C3N4 as multifunctional metal-free catalysts for environmental protection, energy conversion and storage. A special emphasis is placed on the potential applications of nanostructured g-C3N4 in the areas of artificial photocatalysis for hydrogen production, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) for fuel cells, and metal-free heterogeneous catalysis. Finally, this perspective highlights crucial issues that should be addressed in the future in the aforementioned exciting research areas.Yao ZhengYao Zheng obtained his BS and MS in Chemical Engineering in 2006 and 2009 respectively at Nanjing University of Technology (China). He is currently studying as a PhD candidate in Prof. Qiao's group at Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), the University of Queensland (Australia). His research interests focus on the development of nanostructured metal-free catalysts for a series of electrochemical energy conversions including oxygen reduction and CO2 reduction reactions, etc.Jian LiuDr Jian Liu is currently an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow (APD) at AIBN, UQ, Australia. He obtained his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Science (CAS), China, in 2008 under supervision of Prof. Qihua Yang and Prof. Can Li. He joined AIBN, UQ as a research fellow, where his research interests include synthesis of hollow, yolk shell nanostructured materials as delivery vehicles and nanoreactors, colloidal polymer and carbon spheres for energy storage. He was honoured with the prestigious UQ Foundation Research Excellence Award and ARC APD Fellowship.Ji LiangMr Ji Liang is currently a PhD student supervised by Prof. Qiao at Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN) of the University of Queensland. He obtained his Master and Bachelor degrees at Tianjin University (China) in 2010 and 2008 respectively. His current research interests include (i) the metal free catalysts based on carbon materials applied in PEM fuel cells as well as (ii) novel carbon materials for energy conversion/storage applications.Mietek JaroniecMietek Jaroniec received his MS and PhD from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland in 1972 and 1976, respectively. Since 1991 he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio (USA). His research interests revolve primarily around interdisciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry, chemical separations, and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at the gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, gas and liquid chromatography, adsorbents and catalysts. At Kent State he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.Shi Zhang QiaoS. Z. Qiao received his PhD degree in chemical engineering from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2000, and is currently an Associate Professor at AIBN of the University of Queensland. His research expertise is in nanomaterials and nanoporous materials for bioseparations, drug/gene delivery and new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 135 papers in refereed journals, and has filed four patents on novel nanomaterials that are promising for drug/gene delivery, fuel cells, photocatalysis and solar cells. He will move to the School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide to take a full professor position in February of 2012.

Broader context
The need for developing efficient, low-cost, and stable catalysts for emerging energy storage and conversion technologies has stimulated investigations of the materials that differ from traditional metal and metal-oxide based catalysts. Recent progress in nanoscience and nanotechnology creates new opportunities in the design of novel graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanomaterials as metal-free catalysts for fuel cells and photocatalysis. These nanomaterials are expected to play key roles as electrocatalysts and photocatalysts due to feasible synthesis, unique structure and excellent performance. The current perspective presents an overview of recent progress in the synthesis of g-C3N4 nanomaterials with tunable structure and morphology, their chemical functionalization, and potential applications ranging from photocatalysis and sustainable catalysis to fuel cells.

1 Introduction
A growing population and rising living standards continuously increase the world demand for energy. Many researchers see the hope in novel nanomaterials, which could improve sustainable energy conversion and storage technologies to meet future energy demands. A variety of nanomaterials have been proposed for energy conversion and storage technologies owing to their unique properties. Nanostructured carbon nitrides (CNs) are an appealing class of nanomaterials to complement carbon in a variety of applications. CNs with different structures possess not only intriguing properties including high hardness, low friction coefficient, and reliable chemical inertness, but also a great potential for energy conversion and storage, and environmental applications including direct methanol fuel cells, catalysis, photocatalysis and CO2 capture.1–9 In addition, CNs are obviously “sustainable”, as they are composed of carbon and nitrogen only, and can be prepared from simple precursors at a low cost. There is no doubt that CNs have risen as a shining star in the horizon on the path of the scientists searching for new materials for future energy conversion and storage as well as for electronic and composite industry.
CNs can be synthesised by the pyrolysis of nitrogen rich precursors. Depending on the degree of condensation, the resulting materials are called melon (linear polymers of connected tri-s-triazines via secondary nitrogen) or graphitic carbon nitrides (g-C3N4, 2D sheets of tri-s-triazine connected via tertiary amines). Among these, g-C3N4 is considered to be the most stable allotrope of various CN structures under ambient conditions and there are numerous articles on the synthesis of g-C3N4 and its derivatives.3,10,11 g-C3N4 is commonly prepared by pyrolysis of nitrogen-rich precursors via bulk reaction or poly-condensation. The electronic band structure and band gap of g-C3N4 depend on the degree of condensation of material at different temperatures (see Section 2.1) and the choice of precursor (see Section 2.2.2), which further influence its potential applications. Recently, it has been reported that the semi-conductive melon-derived g-C3N4 can serve as a highly efficient, low-cost photocatalyst for water splitting.12,13 Alternatively, incorporation of a carbon conductive support can be used to extend to the electrochemical-related applications of g-C3N4 as a feasible low-temperature fuel cell cathode material.14–16
It has been shown that the introduction of porosity and high surface area can enhance the catalytic performance of g-C3N4 to a large extent.10,11 A great effort has been devoted to the synthesis of nanostructured g-C3N4. For instance, both soft and hard templating methods have been used for the synthesis of nanoporous g-C3N4 with various structures and controllable pore size.10,11 In addition, g-C3N4 thin films and monoliths were also successfully prepared by sol–gel and nanocasting methods to extend the range of applications of this exciting material.
This feature article presents a brief history of g-C3N4 related research and discusses extraordinary properties of g-C3N4 such as its peculiar thermal stability, appropriate electronic structure for photocatalysis and energy conversion. Due to these properties, g-C3N4 has generated tremendous interest among material researchers. Thus, there is a need for a feature article, which provides a concise review of the methods for synthesis of nanostructured and nanoporous g-C3N4 and related materials, and elaborates on the potential applications of these materials in various fields such as oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) occurring in fuel cells, photocatalytic hydrogen production, and heterogeneous catalysis in various organic systems. Finally, some concluding remarks and perspectives on the current status and future directions in the g-C3N4-related research are presented.
2 Various structures and morphologies of g-C3N4
2.1 Bulk structures and synthesis of differently condensed g-C3N4
Theoretically, there are several hypothetical phases of CNs that naturally exist, including α, β, cubic, pseudocubic, and graphitic structures.1,17 Among these allotropes, g-C3N4 is considered the most stable one under ambient conditions, e.g., it is stable in air up to 600 °C, which enables its potential applications in heterogeneous catalysis under extreme conditions. As an analogue of graphite, g-C3N4 possesses a stacked 2D structure, which could be regarded as a nitrogen heteroatom-substituted graphite framework consisting of π-conjugated graphitic planes formed via sp2 hybridization of carbon and nitrogen atoms. The stacking distance of two layers in g-C3N4 is d = 0.326 nm, 3% more dense than the packing in crystalline graphite (d = 0.335 nm). This smaller interlayer distance can be explained by altering the localization of electrons and strengthening the binding between layers due to nitrogen heteroatom substitution.10
There are two types of g-C3N4 structural isomers, which can be synthesized by proper selection of precursors and condensation methods. The first one (Fig. 1a) comprises the condensed s-triazine units (ring of C3N3) with a periodic array of single carbon vacancies. The second one (Fig. 1b) is composed of the condensed tri-s-triazine (tri-ring of C6N7) subunits connected through planar tertiary amino groups, which has larger periodic vacancies in the lattice. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations further indicate that the g-C3N4 networks composed of the melon-based segments (the second type structure) are thermodynamically more stable than the melamine-based arrangements (the first type structure)18 because the tri-s-triazine unit is energetically more stable than s-triazine. Some reports attributed this finding to the different electronic environment of nitrogen atoms and the size of the nitride pores on the basis of previous studies showing that the vacancy-free direct analogue of graphite is energetically unstable.19 Therefore, it is widely accepted that the tri-s-triazine nucleus is the basic unit for the formation of the g-C3N4 network and the following discussions are based on this assumption.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of (a) s-triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine based connection in g-C3N4. Blue and gray spheres represent nitrogen and carbon atoms, respectively. 
The first record of synthesizing a polymeric CN, melon, was reported by Berzelius and Liebig in 1834 and therefore it is one of the oldest synthetic polymers.20 Since this date, numerous methods have been developed for the synthesis of g-C3N4 and reviewed elsewhere.3,10,11 The bulk-material synthesis of g-C3N4 generally includes pyrolysis of nitrogen-rich precursors to incorporate s-triazine rings or to generate them during synthesis. A solid-state reaction of melamine (2,4,6-triamino-1,3,5-triazine, C3H6N6) with cyanuric chloride (2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine, C3Cl3N3) at high pressure and high temperature is one of the most classical methods to synthesize the bulk g-C3N4.21–28 The in-plane organization of tri-s-triazine units and the compression of aromatic planes were found during polycondensation of these triazine-based compounds. Besides, a direct heating of s-triazine-based compounds like melamine (C3H6N6), melem (C6H6N10), and melam (C6H9N11) in an inert atmosphere has been also used to synthesize the bulk g-C3N4 rapidly.6,29,30 However, it was shown that the bulk reaction can hardly result in an ideal composition of g-C3N4 material due to incomplete condensation or polymerization of precursors in the bulk phase. It is known that the electronic band structure and band gap, which are very important for applications of g-C3N4, depend on the degree of condensation of the material. Consequently, bulk g-C3N4 solids perform rather poorly in some catalytic processes, while more disordered, polymeric g-C3N4 exhibits desirable activity, as structural defects or surface terminations seem to play a key role in the catalytic activation.
Thomas and Antonietti et al.10,31,32 developed a facile synthesis of high quality g-C3N4 by direct heating of simple liquid-based precursors such as cyanamide (CN–NH2) or dicyandiamide ((CN–NH2)2) under normal pressure. This process is a combination of polyaddition and polycondensation reactions initiated by condensing precursors to melamine at about 240 °C. The second step is the formation of melem via melamine rearrangements at about 390 °C with elimination of NH3. The melem molecules can then undergo further condensation into melon, a linear polymer of tri-s-triazine units, which is associated with further release of NH3 molecules. The final step of this polymerization is the formation of g-C3N4 sheets by fusing the melon chains at around 520 °C. The as-prepared polymeric g-C3N4 becomes unstable slightly above 600 °C, resulting in evolution of nitrogen and cyanogen fragments. Elemental analysis shows that a small amount of hydrogen (1.1–1.4%) in the form of amino (–NH2) and imino (–NH) groups is located at the terminal of periodical melon units. It is expected that deprotonation of the material would further change its surface properties (e.g., by increasing the Lewis basicity) and hence affect its catalytic performance. Besides the controllable condensation degree of g-C3N4 achieved by using the aforementioned liquid precursors at different reaction temperatures, another advantage of these precursors is the possibility to obtain a variety of nanostructured g-C3N4 materials via nanocasting (hard templating) or supramolecular self-assembly (soft templating) strategies (see the next section). These nanostructured g-C3N4 materials can not only provide more active sites for various catalytic reactions, but also facilitate the reactant's mass transfer during heterogeneous catalysis.
2.2 Synthesis of nanoporous g-C3N4
Porous materials are especially attractive as heterogeneous catalysts or materials for energy conversion-related catalytic reactions due to their accessible porosity and large surface areas.33–38 Mesoporous g-C3N4 (meso-g-C3N4) features unique semiconductor properties along with accessible crystalline pore walls, and a large surface area facilitating mass transfer, which make it a promising metal-free catalyst. As compared to the bulk g-C3N4, meso-g-C3N4 materials exhibit higher specific surface area (up to 830 m2 g−1) and larger porosity (up to 1.25 cm3 g−1), larger numbers of active sites present on the surface and higher size- or shape-selectivity, resulting in enhanced performance. The most important pathways for the preparation of meso-g-C3N4 are based on the templating methods, e.g., soft-templating (self-assembly) and hard-templating (nanocasting) methods (Fig. 2). A continuous meso-g-C3N4 framework with cylindrical or spherical mesopores and their inverse replicas can be obtained by these methods.
 Fig. 2  Scheme of two major routes for the synthesis of meso-g-C3N4: (a) soft-templating method and (b) hard-templating method, reproduced with permission from ref. 52 © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.2.1 Soft-templating synthesis of meso-g-C3N4. 
In the soft-templating method, the arrangement of mesopores is achieved by the cooperative assembly of amphiphilic surfactant molecules and guest species that is driven by the natural tendency of reducing interfacial energy. The constituents and properties of organic templates are critical for the formation of mesostructures. Therefore, these templates are also called structure-directing agents (SDAs). The soft-templating synthesis is often carried out under hydrothermal conditions using evaporation induced self-assembly (EISA).
Specifically, meso-g-C3N4 has been synthesized by using different surfactants (e.g., Triton X-100, P123, F127, Brij30, Brij58, and Brij76) or ionic liquids (ILs) as soft templates through the self-polymerization reaction of dicyandiamide39 to get different pore structures and specific surface areas. However, only a special selection of the template and proper design of pyrolysis route could successfully result in mesoporous structures because the template materials decompose before formation of g-C3N4. Besides, there was still some amount of carbon residue from the templating polymers in the resulting materials, which could significantly decrease the nitrogen content in the final product as well as affect its catalytic activity. Shen et al. reported the synthesis of bimodal meso-g-C3N4 with pore diameters of 3.8 nm and between 10 and 40 nm by using Triton X-100 as a template, melamine and glutaraldehyde as the precursors.40 The polar nature of the as-prepared meso-g-C3N4 surface, which was brought by the existence of C–N and N–H groups, could improve the immobilization of Candida rugosa lipase, and thus help to retain its catalytic activity and thermal stability.


2.2.2 Hard-templating synthesis of meso-g-C3N4. 
Nanostructured g-C3N4 in the form of nanowires/nanospheres can be replicated by using primary nanopores in the silica template in order to form stable replica arrays. The desired nanoporous g-C3N4 being an inverse replica of the silica template is obtained after removal of the template, which involves aqueous ammonium bifluoride (NH4HF2) or hydrogen fluoride (HF). Caution: this process is hazardous and not environmentally friendly.
Template choice. 
Meso-g-C3N4 can be synthesized by using different templates such as colloidal silica spheres or mesoporous silicas with different structures. For instance, the use of silica nanoparticles (12 nm) as a template resulted in a meso-g-C3N4 replica with high surface area (up to 450 m2 g−1) and spherical pores of 12 nm, which were arranged in an irregular fashion.41 Meso- or macroporous g-C3N4 materials have been successfully prepared using silica colloidal crystals with larger particles (20–80 nm) as hard templates (Fig. 3A).42 Besides silica spheres, 2D hexagonal SBA-15 and 3D cubic KIT-6 mesoporous silicas were also applied to synthesize highly ordered meso-g-C3N4, which can be further used as a “reactive template” for mesoporous metal nitride synthesis (Fig. 3B).43–47
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of meso-g-C3N4 synthesized by using (A) different diameter silica spheres as a template, reproduced with permission from ref. 42 © 2011 Wiley-VCH; and (B) ordered mesoporous silica (SBA-15 for b and c or KIT-6 for d and e) as a template, reproduced with permission from ref. 43 © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 118 © 2009 American Chemical Society, and ref. 45 © 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
Precursor choice. 
Selection of appropriate precursors is also critical in the synthesis of meso-g-C3N4 with designed components and structures. Using ethylenediamine ((CH2–NH2)2) and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) as precursors and SBA-15 as a hard template (Fig. 4a), ordered mesoporous carbon nitride (meso-CN) materials were successfully synthesized through the nanocasting method.48,49 The product showed 2D hexagonal ordered mesostructures with ∼2.9 nm pores, specific surface area of 140 m2 g−1, and pore volume of 0.16 cm3 g−1. The C/N ratio could be tuned from 4.5 to 3.5 by increasing the weight ratio of (CH2–NH2)2 to CCl4 from 0.3 to 0.9. This method was also employed to prepare 3D cubic meso-CN structures by using SBA-16 silica as a hard template.50 Meso-CN nanoparticles of ∼150 nm were also replicated by using a new mesoporous silica IBN-4 as a hard template. The resulting material showed higher carbon to nitrogen atomic ratio (2.3) than that in the SBA-15 and KIT-6-templated materials, which may be attributed to the enlarged pore size of the IBN-4 template that facilitates its impregnation with (CH2–NH2)2.51
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration, TEM images of meso-g-C3N4 synthesized by using different precursors (A) ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride, reproduced with permission from ref. 48 © 2008 Wiley-VCH; and (B) cyanamide, reproduced with permission from ref. 41 © 2006 Wiley-VCH. 
Other carbon and nitrogen-rich organic compounds including melem [C6N7(NH2)3], melamine [C3N3(NH2)3], dicyandiamide ((CN–NH2)2), ammonium dicyanamide (NH4[N(CN)2]), and cyanamide (CN–NH2)10,52–55 were also applied to synthesize highly condensed meso-g-C3N4. A disordered meso-g-C3N4 material (Fig. 4b) was prepared by Antonietti and co-workers41 using cyanamide as a precursor and silica nanospheres as a hard template. The resulting meso-g-C3N4 materials possessed 12 nm pores and surface areas between 86 and 439 m2 g−1 depending on the precursor/silica weight ratio used. An average value of 0.71 was determined for the C/N atomic ratio, which is quite close to the theoretical one of 0.75. Jun et al.44 improved this synthesis by adopting ordered mesoporous silica SBA-15 as a hard template to fabricate ordered meso-g-C3N4 with a high surface area of 239 m2 g−1, pore volume of 0.59 cm3 g−1 and a mean pore size of 4.89 nm. By using the same precursor, Park et al.43 reported a facile strategy to synthesize nitrogen-enriched meso-g-C3N4 materials with different 2D and 3D structures via the incipient wetness process without using any solvent. The N/C ratio of the replicas was 1.13 after carbonization at 550 °C for 3 h. 2D-meso-g-C3N4 and 3D-meso-g-C3N4 materials possessed high surface areas (361 and 343 m2 g−1) and large pore volumes (0.50 and 0.67 cm3 g−1).

3 g-C3N4-based multifunctional metal-free catalysts for clean energy conversion
3.1 Artificial photocatalytic hydrogen production and photocatalysis
The development and commercialization of new clean energy has been driven by increasing concerns over issues such as climate change and energy security as a result of dwindling petroleum supplies. Although hydrogen economy and related green chemistry solutions have been proposed for many years, the generation of energy from renewable sources in a safe and reversible manner still remains a big challenge.56–58 Artificial photocatalyst-assisted water splitting employing solar energy is an ideal method for large-scale hydrogen production. To date, various semiconductors have been explored for this promising reaction; most of them are metal-based inorganic solids such as metal oxides,59,60 metal (oxy)sulfides61 and metal (oxy)nitrides.62 Since a breakthrough reported by Fujishima and Honda conducting the decomposition of water on illuminated TiO2 electrodes in 1972,63 TiO2 is widely used due to its optical and electronic properties, long-term stability, low-cost, and nontoxicity.64–68 However, the absorption edge of TiO2 on the whole spectrum occurs at ca. 390 nm (a band gap energy of 3.18 eV, as shown in Fig. 5a), corresponding to ultraviolet (UV) irradiation that takes up to only 4% of solar energy. Therefore, the efficiency of photocatalysis on TiO2 is greatly limited, which is one of the major barriers toward wide-scale applications of this material.
 Fig. 5  (a) A comparison of band positions for TiO2 and g-C3N4, reproduced with permission from ref. 69 © 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) The UV-vis absorption spectra of TiO2 and g-C3N4 materials, reproduced with permission from ref. 70 © 2011 Elsevier B.V. (c) A typical time course of H2 production from water containing 10 vol% triethanolamine as an electron donor under visible light (λ > 420 nm) by using pristine g-C3N4 (solid) and hollow 3.0 wt% Pt-deposited g-C3N4 (hollow) photocatalysts. (d) Time course of O2 production from water containing 0.01 M silver nitrate as an electron acceptor under visible light (λ > 420 nm) by using 3.0 wt% RuO2-loaded g-C3N4, reproduced with permission from ref. 12 © 2008 Macmillan. 

3.1.1 Pristine g-C3N4. 
As compared to commercial TiO2, g-C3N4 presents a smaller band gap of 2.7 eV,69 corresponding to a blue light absorption up to 450 nm (Fig. 5a). The absorption edge of g-C3N4 on the whole ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) diffuse reflectance spectrum also shifts remarkably to longer wavelengths and thus covers a wider area than that of TiO2 (Fig. 5b).70 This proper band gap is especially relevant for applications in photochemistry and photocatalysis. Wang et al.12,71 firstly predicted that g-C3N4 is capable of photo-splitting water thermodynamically under light irradiation in neutral solution as well as under acidic (HCl, pH = 0) or basic conditions (NaOH, pH = 14). Their proof-of-concept studies revealed that bulk g-C3N4 can successfully catalyse two parts of the water splitting cycle with visible light, namely, the water-reduction half-cycle to produce H2 (Fig. 5c) and the water-oxidation half-cycle to form O2 (Fig. 5d) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). This redox reaction can occur in the presence of a proper sacrificial electron acceptor or donor, respectively, even without addition of precious metal co-catalysts.12 The authors further calculated that N atoms in the matrix would be the preferable oxidation sites for H2O to O2, whereas the C atoms provide the reduction sites for H+ converting into H2. Even though the quantum yield of the system (0.1% at λ = 420–460 nm) is still low,13 the discovery of a non-metallic material achieving the same function as conventional metal-based photocatalysts is expected to offer new opportunities to progress the field of artificial photosynthesis.


3.1.2 Heteroatoms-doped g-C3N4. 
Although g-C3N4 materials possess high thermal and chemical stability as well as proper electronic properties, which make them attractive for photocatalytic water splitting applications, the photocatalytic efficiency of pristine g-C3N4 is still not satisfactory. Generally, chemical doping is an effective strategy to modify the electronic structures of semiconductors as well as their surface properties.72–74 Doping of TiO2 with metallic (Cr, Fe, V) and non-metallic elements (N, C, B) was used to create localized/delocalized states in the band gap and thus extend its optical absorption to the visible region.65,67,75–80 Correspondingly, both the compositions and the properties of g-C3N4 can be further engineered by introducing selected heteroatoms into the matrix to slightly modify the molecular structure and consequently the photocatalytic activity of the composite.
Non-metallic elements-doped g-C3N4. 
Doping of g-C3N4 with boron, fluorine, phosphor, or sulfur was employed very recently to modify its electronic structure and improve photocatalytic performance. Besides inherent photocatalytic hydrogen evolution on pristine g-C3N4, doped g-C3N4 can be applied for aliphatic C–H bond oxidation, photocatalytic phenol oxidation, cyclohexane oxidation, photodegradation of dyes, etc.81–87 Since the formation of g-C3N4 is a polycondensation process, the selection of proper precursors is a critical issue to achieve in situ doped (also referred to as structurally doped) heteroatoms in the designed sites. The structures, synthesis methods, and applications of various non-metallic elements-doped g-C3N4 are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summaries of various non-metallic elements-doped g-C3N4 materials




Elements
Structurea
Heteroatom sources
Applications
Ref.





a Blue, gray, white, cyan, green, red, and yellow spheres represent nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen, fluorine, boron, phosphorus, and sulfur atoms, respectively.
b This material was synthesized by treating the pre-synthesized g-C3N4 in a H2S atmosphere at 450 °C.





F



Ammonium fluoride (NH4F)
Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and benzene to phenol oxidation

81



B



BH3NH3
Aliphatic C–H bond oxidation

82



B



Boron oxide B2O3
Photodegradation of dyes

83



P



Ionic liquid (BmimBF4)
Enhancing the electrical conductivity of g-C3N4

84



S



H2S atmosphereb
Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and phenol oxidation

85



S



Trithiocyanuric acid C3H3N3S3
Water oxidation reaction for oxygen evolution

86



F and B
Structure uncertain
Ionic liquid (BmimPF6)
Cyclohexane oxidation

87





Fluorination has been widely used to modify the properties of carbon materials such as graphite, activated carbons, carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc.88–92 Because of the much larger electronegativity of fluorine than nitrogen, the doped fluorine is bonded with carbon to result in a partial conversion of C-sp2 to C-sp3, which may lead to lower plane order of the material. Wang et al.81 synthesized and proposed two fluorinated g-C3N4 configurations (CNFs) by using NH4F as the doping reactant; the fluorine concentration in the resulting CNFs can be controlled by incorporating different amounts of NH4F. The fluorine doping led to a decrease in the band gap compared with the undoped g-C3N4 and correspondingly a red shift of the UV-vis spectrum, which also indicates that fluorine is structurally doped into the g-C3N4 matrix, different from protonation in which the spectrum was blue-shifted.93 Due to the alternative electronic structures, one of the optimized CNF samples revealed a 2.7 times higher photocatalytic H2 evolution activity than that of undoped g-C3N4. Besides H2 evolution, CNF as a multifunctional catalyst can also catalytically oxidize benzene to phenol under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), which is negligible on undoped g-C3N4. Wang et al.81 attributed the enhanced photocatalytic activity and redox properties of CNF to the modified electronic structure of HOMO and LUMO (defined as the conduction band and the valence band of one compound, respectively) induced by fluorine doping. They proposed that the incorporation of fluorine at the bay carbon (left one in the cell of Table 1) will shift both the LUMO and HOMO to higher energy values while incorporation of fluorine at the corner carbon (right one in the cell of Table 1) will shift the LUMO to higher energy and the HOMO to lower energy values.
Besides incorporating larger electronegativity of fluorine, Wang et al.82 also found that replacing carbon atoms with boron having smaller electronegativity can form a strong Lewis acid site in the g-C3N4 networks. They synthesized boron-doped g-C3N4 (CNB) by using BH3NH3 as the doping reactant during the condensation process; the resulting CNB materials held a lower HOMO position than undoped g-C3N4, thus increasing the potential oxidation strength. As a result, these materials exhibited a good catalytic performance on the selective oxidation of toluene and substituted benzylic aromatics with a remarkably higher selectivity towards the formation of aldehydes or ketones than those on traditional metal catalysts.82 Different from substituting carbon atom with boron heteroatom in the periodical melon rings as mentioned above, Yan et al.83 developed a boron doping g-C3N4 structure by substituting the hydrogen atom at the terminal of periodical melon with boron, forming C–NB and C–NB2 functional groups. The resulting material showed a slightly reduced band gap (2.66 eV) as compared to the pristine g-C3N4 (2.75 eV) and revealed a high activity for photodegradation of two typical dyes (rhodamine B and methyl orange).83
Zhang et al.84 developed a phosphorus doped g-C3N4 matrix in which the corner carbon was replaced to form a P–N bonding (as illustrated in Table 1); a simple and commercially available ionic liquid of BmimBF4 was applied as the doping reactant. As compared to undoped g-C3N4, the p-doped g-C3N4 showed a significantly enhanced electrical (dark) conductivity up to 4 orders of magnitude and also revealed an improvement in photocurrent generation by a factor of up to 5, both of which are significant steps toward the photovoltaic applications of g-C3N4.
Unlike in situ doping of g-C3N4 materials via the condensation process, certain non-metallic elements can be incorporated into the matrix by post-treatment of the pre-synthesized g-C3N4 in the doping reactant atmosphere. One example is sulfur-doped g-C3N4 achieved by treating g-C3N4 in a H2S atmosphere at 450 °C to introduce sulfur in the original nitrogen site of the melon ring, as illustrated in Table 1. More interestingly, the resulting g-C3N4−xSx revealed a unique electronic structure with an increased band gap and a slightly reduced absorbance of visible light, opposite to all other elements doped g-C3N4 listed here. Liu et al.85 attributed this interesting phenomenon to a synergistic effect of sulfur: a widening and upshifting of the valence band was achieved through homogeneous distribution of the sulfur dopant, and an upshifting of the conduction band minimum caused by the quantum confinement effect relating to the markedly reduced particle size after doping (Fig. 6d). This unique electronic structure offers g-C3N4−xSx with a special photocatalytic activity towards H2 evolution, which is 7.2 and 8.0 times higher than undoped g-C3N4 under λ > 300 and 420 nm, respectively. Additionally, a complete oxidation process of phenol under λ > 400 nm can occur on g-C3N4−xSx, which is impossible for undoped g-C3N4 (Fig. 6a–c).85
 Fig. 6  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of g-C3N4 (black) and g-C3N4−xSx (purple). (b) A typical time course of hydrogen evolution from water containing 10 vol% triethanolamine scavenger on Pt-deposited g-C3N4 (black) and g-C3N4−xSx (purple) under λ > 300 and 420 nm, respectively. (c) Activity comparison of the photo-oxidation process of phenol on g-C3N4 (black) and g-C3N4−xSx (purple) under λ > 400 nm. (d) Schematic of band structure evolution of g-C3N4 by sulfur doping and subsequent quantum confinement effect, reproduced with permission from ref. 85 © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Different from post-treatment doping, sulfur can also be in situ doped into the g-C3N4 matrix by using sulfur-enriched trithiocyanuric acid as the precursor via a polycondensation process with –SH groups at the terminal of periodical melon acting as the leaving groups.86 The residual sulfur in the resulting sulfur-doped g-C3N4 (CNS) samples was estimated to be 0.8 and 0.5 wt% at 550 and 650 °C calcination, respectively. Unlike g-C3N4−xSx synthesized via post-synthesis treatment, this in situ synthesized CNS showed an extension of the spectrum towards absorption in the visible range as compared to the undoped g-C3N4; consequently, the water oxidation reaction can be achieved at a moderate rate on polymeric CNS without addition of co-catalysts, which has not been observed on undoped g-C3N4.
Co-doping g-C3N4 with boron and fluorine could also induce a unique electronic structure in the resulting materials. Wang et al.87 synthesized boron and fluorine enriched meso-g-C3N4 (CNBF) using ionic liquid (BmimBF6) as the doping source via a designed soft-templating route. The resulting materials possessed high nitrogen, boron, and fluorine contents, high surface area, local graphitic order, and an excellent photoconductivity under visible light. Besides, the CNBF materials showed satisfactory performance in the oxidation of cyclohexane with good conversion rate and excellent cyclohexanone product selectivity.
Metallic elements-doped g-C3N4. 
Apart from non-metallic element doping used to reduce the band gap energy and expand light absorption into the visible range of g-C3N4, metallic element dopants can also introduce a certain amount of free electrons to the g-C3N4 semiconductor. Generally, metallic elements can be incorporated into the g-C3N4 matrix via polycondensation at 600 °C by using dicyandiamide as precursor and additional metal chloride as a doping source.94–99 The metal components strongly modify the electronic properties of pristine g-C3N4, and provide new class of organic–metal hybrids with additional new functions such as mimicking metalloenzymes in H2O2 activation, selective oxidation of benzene and other hydrocarbons, etc.
Wang et al.94 firstly predicted the capability of g-C3N4 doped with metal on the basis of other nitrogen-enriched π-conjugated macrocyclic scaffolds like porphyrin and phthalocyanine, etc. The as-synthesized g-C3N4 with doped metal cations of Zn2+ and Fe3+ could serve as H2O2 activation agent in many reactions such as the oxidative degradation of various organic dyes, direct oxidation of benzene to phenol under mild conditions, and mimicking metalloenzymes. The optical band gap energy gradually shifted to lower energies with increasing Fe content in the Fe/g-C3N4 hybrid materials, reflecting a host–guest interaction between g-C3N4 and the metal.94 A change in the optical absorption was also observed for Zn/g-C3N4, which is probably caused by the d–p repulsion of the Zn3d and N2p orbitals. A remarkable H2 production rate was obtained on the 10%-Zn/g-C3N4 sample reaching a value of 59.5 μmol h−1, which is about 10 times higher as that on undoped g-C3N4.94
Ding et al.97 synthesized and studied other transition metal elements (e.g., Co, Ni, Mn, Cu) modified g-C3N4 (M/g-C3N4) for selective hydrocarbon oxidation. The spectra of all resulting samples showed obvious red shifts in the band-gap transition and higher absorbance in the visible region as compared to undoped g-C3N4. In particular, the most pronounced effect was found for Cu/g-C3N4, where the light absorption limit was extended to 750 nm. The changes of electronic structure and therefore absorbance in the visible light region on all M/g-C3N4 samples can be simply evaluated by transformations of their colours: the colour of the pure g-C3N4 was pale yellow, whereas the other colours were yellow for Mn/g-C3N4, brown for Fe/g-C3N4, gray for Co/g-C3N4, and brown for Ni/g-C3N4 and Cu/g-C3N4; deeper colour indicates that a given sample can absorb more visible light. The different electronic structures indicate their unique properties in heterogeneous catalysis. Consequently, Fe and Cu/g-C3N4 were shown to be efficient catalysts for the hydroxylation of benzene to phenol with H2O2, and Co and Fe/g-C3N4 samples were proven to be active for the epoxidation of styrene with O2.


3.1.3 Graphene/g-C3N4 composites. 
In addition to doping selected heteroatoms into the framework, which could slightly modify the molecular orbital shape and position, pristine g-C3N4 can be also engineered by charge-transfer complexation to form a nanocomposite with an electron-rich system that results in rearranging electron density within the catalyst.15,86,100,101 Graphene sheets (GS), excellent electron collectors and transporters,102–105 have been used to boost performance of various energy conversion and storage devices such as photovoltaic devices, supercapacitors, fuel cells, and Li-ion batteries.106–108 As an analogue of graphite, g-C3N4 also possesses a stacked two-dimensional structure; therefore it is easily predictable that combining graphene and g-C3N4 with a homogeneous structure will induce unique electronic, mechanical, and chemical properties in the resulting composite (GSCN). Xiang et al.100 showed that GS acting as electronic conductive channels in GSCN can efficiently separate the photogenerated charge carriers and, consequently, enhance the visible light photocatalytic H2-production activity of the g-C3N4 catalyst. When loaded with 1.5 wt% Pt, the optimized GSCN catalyst showed a H2-production rate of 451 μmol h−1 g−1 with an apparent quantum efficiency of 2.6% by a water-splitting mechanism under visible-light irradiation. This value exceeds that of pure g-C3N4 and commercial N-doped TiO2 nanoparticles by a factor of 3.07 and 1.21, respectively. This may be ascribed to GS, which in GSCN composites become the separation center of the photogenerated electrons and holes to effectively hinder the electron–hole pair recombination in a typical photocatalytic process.
Layer-by-layer GSCN (Fig. 7a) developed by Li et al.101 revealed a high catalytic activity towards molecular oxygen activation for selective oxidation of secondary C–H bonds with a good conversion rate and high selectivity to the corresponding ketones. They contributed the high-performance of selective oxidation on GSCN to the synergistic effect of GS and g-C3N4 as demonstrated in Fig. 7b: the introduction of GS could obviously shift the HOMO (positive hole) of g-C3N4 to lower energies via π–π* or charge-transfer interactions to ensure the selectivity of the catalytic reaction.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic structure of a GSCN multilayer. (b) Schematic representation of the oxidation mechanism, reproduced with permission from ref. 101 © 2011 American Chemical Society. 

3.2 g-C3N4-based electrocatalysts for highly efficient oxygen reduction
Fuel cells offer a great opportunity to obtain cleaner and more sustainable energy in the 21st century. Among various kinds of fuel cells, the proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) is believed to be the most promising power source candidate for next generation light-duty vehicles and portable electronics.109 However, one of the main problems encountered in PEMFC commercialization is the need for a low-reserve and expensive Pt electrocatalyst to facilitate its sluggish cathodic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).110–115 g-C3N4, which possesses high nitrogen content, thus, can provide a sufficient number of active sites for electrocatalytic reactions and enhance its potential for ORR. Due to its non-conductive nature, the electrocatalytic performance of g-C3N4 is greatly limited by its poor electron transfer ability. One of the proposed effective strategies is the use of carbon conductive support like mesoporous carbon, active carbon black, and graphene sheets in the g-C3N4 catalysts to improve the electron accumulation on the surface of catalysts and, consequently, to enhance their electrocatalytic activities. Recent studies show that g-C3N4-carbon hybrids could provide comparable ORR performance to that achieved by commercial Pt/C catalysts as well as high CO and methanol tolerances. Therefore, they are considered as a new generation of cathode catalysts especially for direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC).

3.2.1 3D g-C3N4-based composites as ORR catalysts. 
Lyth et al.116 first investigated ORR activity on a pure g-C3N4 electrode in acidic medium and found that its fundamental catalytic activity was higher than that of pure carbon. However, the current density achieved on pure g-C3N4 was still low; it was suggested that this is due to the low surface area of the material. Blending g-C3N4 with a high surface area carbon black16 resulted in a significant improvement of the current density; the composite catalysts facilitated a four-electron (4e−) ORR process, indicating an enhanced electrochemical efficiency for ORR.117 According to our theoretical studies,14 g-C3N4's limited electron transfer ability is responsible for the accumulation of OOH− intermediate products on the catalyst via an inefficient two-electron (2e−) ORR process, which is one of the main reasons for its low ORR catalytic activity. As demonstrated in Fig. 8a, the active sites facilitating ORR on pure g-C3N4 are limited to very narrow zones of the electrode–electrolyte–gas three-phase boundaries (TPB) because of the poor electron transfer efficiency, which leads to an unsatisfactory ORR performance. One effective way to increase the number of electrons accumulated on the g-C3N4 surface and then enlarge the concentration of active sites is to add an electron-conductive material as a support for the g-C3N4 catalyst. Predictably, the active sites facilitating ORR on g-C3N4 with a conductive support can spread over the whole surface of the catalyst due to the increased electron transfer efficiency of the composite, which in turn facilitates an efficient 4e− ORR process and sharply enhances the catalyst's performance. By using mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) as a conductive support, the synthesized nanoporous g-C3N4@CMK-3 catalyst exhibited a much higher ORR activity than that on pure g-C3N4, which is also competitive in relation to a commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 8b and c). In addition, the newly developed g-C3N4@CMK-3 electrode further revealed an enhanced stability in an alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 8d) and much higher tolerance with methanol than that on a commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 8e). All the results show the great promise of g-C3N4@CMK-3 as a feasible ORR electrocatalyst especially for DMFC; the facile synthesis procedure and commercial availability of precursors will also further promote this exciting technology.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schemes of ORR's pathway on pristine g-C3N4 and g-C3N4@CMK-3 composite (red areas represent the active sites facilitating ORR). (b) Cyclic voltammograms of ORR on various electrocatalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (c) Linear sweep voltammograms of various electrocatalysts on RDE at 1500 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (d) Current–time (i–t) chronoamperometric response of g-C3N4@CMK-3 at −0.3 V; inset represents cyclic voltammograms under continuous potentiodynamic sweeps. (e) Chronoamperometric responses of Pt/C and g-C3N4@CMK-3 at −0.3 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution without methanol (0–3 h) and with adding methanol (3–6 h), reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © 2011 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 2D g-C3N4-based composites as ORR catalysts. 
Except for the aforementioned 3D ordered mesoporous carbon, 2D graphene is also a great choice because it is an excellent electron collector and transporter; the proposed layer-by-layer (sandwich) structure of g-C3N4/graphene provides a prefect channel for electron transportation. Yang et al.118 synthesized graphene-based carbon nitride nanosheets (G–CN) with individual dispersion of graphene between nanosheets by nanocasting technology using graphene-oxide-based silica nanosheets as a hard template (as illustrated in Fig. 9). The resulting G–CN nanosheets not only possessed a high nitrogen content, thin thicknesses, and high surface areas, but also showed an enhanced electrical conductivity and thus excellent electrocatalytic performance for ORR, including high electrocatalytic activity and high selectivity of 4e− ORR path; both are superior in comparison to those observed for carbon nitride sheets without graphene and similar to the commercial Pt/C catalysts. Sun et al.15 also immobilized g-C3N4 onto graphene sheets to form g-C3N4/graphene composites in the liquid-phase solution. The composite exhibited an enhanced electrocatalytic activity for ORR and CO tolerance comparable to that of 23 wt% Pt nanoparticles supported on graphene sheets. They also proposed that the ORR mechanism on g-C3N4/graphene is similar to that on the most developed metal-free ORR electrocatalysts, i.e. nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N–CNT):15 carbon atoms of g-C3N4/graphene in the oxidized state are electrochemically reduced in the first step, and subsequently re-oxidized by adsorbed O2 molecules.119 In this case, the ORR activity of the carbon–nitrogen system can be attributed to the high electron affinity of nitrogen atoms, which induces a high positive charge density on the adjoining carbon atoms. Computer simulations have validated this hypothesis, showing that the barrier to ORR on a carbon atom can be reduced in the presence of an adjoining nitrogen atom, especially at quaternary sites near the zigzag edges of graphene sheets.120–123
 Fig. 9  (a) Fabrication of G–CN and pure CN nanosheets for ORR. (b) Current–time (i–t) chronoamperometric responses at −0.25 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH on G–CN and Pt–C electrodes followed by introduction of O2 and methanol (0.3 M). (c) Electrochemical activity given as the kinetic-limiting current density (JK) at −0.40 V and electron transfer number (n) for all G–CN and CN nanosheets. CN600, CN800, and CN1000 represent samples of carbon nitride (CN) with/without graphene pyrolysis at different temperatures; see panel (a) for details. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. 

4 Other applications: heterogeneous catalysis and template for metal nitride synthesis
The unique electronic and surface properties of nanoporous g-C3N4 material make it very interesting for applications such as photocatalytic hydrogen production and fuel cell technology. These unique properties can be extended to find numerous applications in related heterogeneous catalysis including O2 activation, organic photosynthesis, and reductive CO2 fixation.
4.1 Friedel–Crafts type reactions
Friedel–Crafts reactions refer to a typical aromatic C–H activation process and are known to be some of the less sustainable industrial processes, producing about 88 mass% of waste in their standard AlCl3 promoted version.124 Goettmann et al.125 showed that meso-g-C3N4 was a valuable Lewis base catalyst which enabled rather unusual aromatic substitution reactions of a generalized Friedel–Crafts type. This metal-free catalyst not only allowed for the use of sustainable alkylation agents such as alcohols or acids, but also showed an unpredicted reactivity towards urea and quaternary ammonium compounds. An interesting finding was that the sample with low nitrogen content exhibited a higher catalytic activity in Friedel–Crafts acylation of benzene than that with high nitrogen content (all catalysts gave 100% selectivity), due to the formation of defect sites on the pore walls in the former sample.125
4.2 Selective oxidation reactions
Selective oxidation of hydrocarbons with clean oxidants is a crucial process for the development of products ranging from commodity chemicals to speciality pharmaceuticals. Chen et al.95 demonstrated that the Fe/g-C3N4 catalyst was active for the direct oxidation of benzene to phenol using hydrogen peroxide. By taking advantage of the photocatalytic functions of g-C3N4, the yield of the phenol synthesis could be markedly improved. Su et al.69 showed that meso-g-C3N4 can function as a photocatalyst to activate O2 for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohols under visible light irradiation. By combining the surface basicity and semiconductor functions of meso-g-C3N4, the photocatalytic system can provide a remarkable selectivity (>99%) to generate benzaldehyde. The system also selectively converts other alcohol substrates to their corresponding aldehydes/ketones. Later, using meso-g-C3N4, the same group126 reported the aerobic oxidation of amines into imines with an excellent yield, which are regarded as important electrophilic intermediates in organic synthesis. In addition, g-C3N4 shows a certain degree of catalytic activity to a variety of organic oxidation reactions like oxidation of alkanes, olefins, and heteroatoms, etc. assuring selective and sustainable oxidation,11 therefore making this material of a great potential for industrial applications.
4.3 CO2 activation/reduction reactions
Two possible reaction pathways can be envisaged for the reaction of benzene with CO2 activated by meso-g-C3N4:127 a Friedel–Crafts-type condensation of benzene with CO2 to yield benzoic acid, and an oxidation of benzene with CO2 to yield phenol with evolution of CO. However, the formation of benzoic acid is very weakly endothermic and disfavoured entropically. Ansari et al.128 also showed meso-g-C3N4's catalytic activity towards activation of CO2 by using the oxidation of cyclic olefins with molecular oxygen as an example reaction. They found that the presence of CO2 in the oxidation system could induce an enhanced conversion of cyclic olefins, in which CO2 acted as a source of oxygen for the formation of carbon monoxide and surface carbamate.
4.4 Template for metal nitride synthesis
Meso-g-C3N4 can also be used as a reactive hard template to produce metal nitride nanomaterials by directly heating a metal species-loaded sample to 650–800 °C under nitrogen atmosphere.44,129–136 During the heat treatment, the melen-derived g-C3N4 is decomposed and supplied nitrogen-contained species to efficiently convert metal salts/oxides to nitrides.52 Thomas and co-workers developed this strategy and produced plenty of metal nitrides including TiN, GaN, VN and ternary Al–Ga–N and Ti–V–N nanoparticles by using the cage-like meso-g-C3N4 as a reactive template and a nitrogen source simutaneously.129,130 Metal oxides such as TiO2, V2O3, Ga2O3, Nb2O5 and Al2O3 can also be converted to corresponding nanostructured metal nitrides.131–133 Domen and co-workers adopted this method to synthesize tantalum nitride nanoparticles using TaCl5 as a precursor.134 It is found that TaN can be produced under N2 atmosphere but pure phase high quality Ta3N5 is formed when N2 is replaced by NH3 atmosphere.134 The obtained Ta3N5 nanoparticle catalyst exhibited a high performance in photocatalytic water splitting.
5 Summary and outlook
As a multifunctional metal-free catalyst, g-C3N4 shows promising activity towards artificially photocatalytic hydrogen production. Its potential applications can also be extended to a wide range covering heterogeneous catalysis for various reactions, such as CO2 activation/reduction, and reactive template for metal nitride synthesis when equipping g-C3N4 with other heteroatoms or nanocasting it to a special nanostructure. Especially, combination of a conductive support (e.g. mesoporous carbon or graphene) with g-C3N4 can result in a highly efficient cathodic ORR electrocatalyst, which opens a new avenue for developing more metal-free ORR catalysts to promote fuel cell technology. Sandwich-like homogeneous g-C3N4/graphene nanosheets seem to be a perfect structure for the electron transfer pathway from graphene sheet to g-C3N4 sheet, assuring an efficient oxygen reduction. The powerful theoretical calculation is still on its way to clarify the ORR mechanism and pathway on the g-C3N4/graphene nanosheet in detail. Although the potential applications of g-C3N4 have been obviously extended, the correlations between the g-C3N4 structure and its catalytic activity in a specific reaction are still not very clear. Further theoretical modelling is needed to understand the physicochemical properties of carbon nitride and to elucidate the relationship of nanostructure, catalytic kinetics and shape selectivity. Depending on the successful combination of theoretical prediction and experimental technique for g-C3N4 in the applications of artificial photocatalysis and oxygen reduction, a great deal of other capacities should be explored to develop a cheap and commonly available metal-free catalyst for broad applications across the areas of heterogeneous catalysis, sensors, and lithium ion batteries.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through Discovery Project program (DP1095861, DP1094070, DP0987969). JL gratefully acknowledges the award of an ARC Australian Postdoctoral Fellowship (APD) and a UQ Early-Career-Research Grant.
Notes and references
A. Y. Liu and M. L. Cohen, Science, 1989, 245, 841–842 CAS .
M. Kawaguchi, S. Yagi and H. Enomoto, Carbon, 2004, 42, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kroke and M. Schwarz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 493–532 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zimmerman, R. Williams, V. N. Khabashesku and J. L. Margrave, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 731–734 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Khabashesku, J. L. Zimmerman and J. L. Margrave, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Gillan, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3906–3912 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Miller, J. Wang and E. G. Gillan, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2463–2469 RSC .
M. Kim, S. Hwang and J.-S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1656–1659 RSC .
K. Kailasam, J. D. Epping, A. Thomas, S. Losse and H. Junge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4668–4674 CAS .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Muller, R. Schlogl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2008, 8, 76–80 CrossRef .
K. Maeda, X. Wang, Y. Nishihara, D. Lu, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4940–4947 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116–20119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, C. Li, Y. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Yao and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740–4742 RSC .
S. M. Lyth, Y. Nabae, N. M. Islam, S. Kuroki, M. Kakimoto and S. Miyata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B194–B201 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B, 1985, 32, 7988–7991 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kroke, M. Schwarz, E. Horath-Bordon, P. Kroll, B. Noll and A. D. Norman, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 508–512 RSC .
M. Deifallah, P. F. McMillan and F. Cora, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5447–5453 CAS .
J. Liebig, Liebigs Ann., 1834, 10, 10 Search PubMed .
H. Montigaud, B. Tanguy, G. Demazeau, I. Alves and S. Courjault, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 2547–2552 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, K. Leinenweber, M. Bauer, L. A. J. Garvie, P. F. McMillan and G. H. Wolf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7788–7796 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, Y. Xie, X. Wang, S. Lv, T. Hou and X. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 380, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
T. Komatsu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2001, 202, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
T. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 802–803 RSC .
B. Jürgens, E. Irran, J. Senker, P. Kroll, H. Müller and W. Schnick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10288–10300 CrossRef .
B. V. Lotsch, M. Döblinger, J. Sehnert, L. Seyfarth, J. Senker, O. Oeckler and W. Schnick, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4969–4980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, L. Chen, L. Shi, J. Ma, Z. Yang and Y. Qian, Carbon, 2003, 41, 2674–2676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. Cao and H. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 115605 CrossRef .
B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1891–1900 CrossRef CAS .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1455–1460 RSC .
M. J. Bojdys, J.-O. Müller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8177–8182 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 2373–2420 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Davis, Nature, 2002, 417, 813–821 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taguchi and F. Schüth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 77, 1–45 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2821–2860 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hartmann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4577–4593 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Ying, C. P. Mehnert and M. S. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 56–77 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and Y. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 435–439 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shen, L. Ren, H. Zhou, S. Zhang and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3890–3894 RSC .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fukasawa, K. Takanabe, A. Shimojima, M. Antonietti, K. Domen and T. Okubo, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Park, S.-W. Chu, C. Xue, D. Zhao and C.-S. Ha, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10801–10807 RSC .
Y.-S. Jun, W. H. Hong, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4270–4274 CrossRef CAS .
E. Z. Lee, Y.-S. Jun, W. H. Hong, A. Thomas and M. M. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9706–9710 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y.-S. Jun, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4093–4095 CrossRef CAS .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 816–827 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, K. Ariga, T. Mori, T. Nakanishi, S. Hishita, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1648–1652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, P. Srinivasu, D. P. Sawant, T. Mori, K. Ariga, J.-S. Chang, S.-H. Jhung, V. V. Balasubramanian and Y. K. Hwang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4367–4372 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, V. V. Balasubramanian, S. T. Selvan, D. P. Sawant, M. A. Chari, G. Q. Lu and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7884–7887 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Wan and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3854–3878 RSC .
M. H. V. Huynh, M. A. Hiskey, J. G. Archuleta and E. L. Roemer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 737–739 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, F. Goettmann and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 738–755 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. V. Huynh, M. A. Hiskey, J. G. Archuleta, E. L. Roemer and R. Gilardi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5658–5661 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Ye, T. Kako and T. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15824–15830 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13457–13553 Search PubMed .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Konstantinou and T. A. Albanis, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 49, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su, S. C. Mathew, G. Lipner, X. Fu, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16299–16301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan and H. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, L26–L29 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CAS .
H. Sjöström, S. Stafström, M. Boman and J. E. Sundgren, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 75, 1336 CrossRef .
D. Geng, S. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Liu, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 9193–9198 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Sun, F. Li, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4516–4520 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mitoraj and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9975–9978 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, Y. Ichihashi, M. Takeuchi and H. Yamashita, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1998, 24, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, W. Ma, C. Chen, J. Zhao and Z. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4782–4783 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamashita, M. Harada, J. Misaka, M. Takeuchi, B. Neppolian and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 2003, 84, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, G. Li, X. Wang, X. Hu, C. W. Leung and Z. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2717–2719 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Di, M. Antonietti, H. Li, X. Chen and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5119–5121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Yao, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 446–450 RSC .
S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, J. Ye and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6294–6295 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Sun, K. Maeda, K. Domen, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 675–678 CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3356–3359 CAS .
J. T. Robinson, J. S. Burgess, C. E. Junkermeier, S. C. Badescu, T. L. Reinecke, F. K. Perkins, M. K. Zalalutdniov, J. W. Baldwin, J. C. Culbertson, P. E. Sheehan and E. S. Snow, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3001–3005 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, G. D. Del Cul, W. Yan, C. Liang and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12782–12783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, L. Cheng, X. Zhang, D. D. D. Ma and S.-t. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17738–17739 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, S. Yue, C. Gu, F. Xu and D. Golberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6552–6553 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Artioli, L. Malavasi, M. C. Mozzati and Y. D. Fernandez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12044–12045 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 50–51 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Chen, A. Thomas, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1609–1612 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658–11659 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takanabe, K. Kamata, X. Wang, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13020–13025 RSC .
Z. Ding, X. Chen, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 274–281 CAS .
Y. Bing, L. Qiuye, I. Hideo, K. Tetsuya and Y. Jinhua, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 034401 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, S. A. C. Carabineiro, D. Shan, J. L. Faria, Y. Zhu and J. L. Figueiredo, J. Catal., 2010, 274, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CAS .
X.-H. Li, J.-S. Chen, X. Wang, J. Sun and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8074–8077 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4517–4521 CAS .
S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS .
D. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ermete, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88, 1–24 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 558–566 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D. Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T. Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyatake, M. Hori, K. Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda, K.-i. Kimijima and N. Iwashita, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3904–3951 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jaouen, E. Proietti, M. Lefevre, R. Chenitz, J. Dodelet, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 114–130 CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 CAS .
S. M. Lyth, Y. Nabae, S. Moriya, S. Kuroki, M.-a. Kakimoto, J.-i. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20148–20151 CAS .

          M. R. Tarasevich, A. Sadkowski and E. Yeager, Comprehensive Treatise of Electrochemistry, Plenum, New York,  1983 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Pan, S. Wang, X. Chen, P. Hu, L. Sun and X. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10016–10018 RSC .
K. A. Ritter and J. W. Lyding, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and H. Dai, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 661–665 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Clark, Green Chem., 1999, 1, 1–8 RSC .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4530–4532 RSC .
F. Su, S. C. Mathew, L. Möhlmann, M. Antonietti, X. Wang and S. Blechert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
F. Goettmann, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2717–2720 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ansari, B.-H. Min, Y.-H. Mo and S.-E. Park, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1416–1421 RSC .
A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 264–267 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fischer, J. O. Müller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2489–2496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Buha, I. Djerdj, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3499–3505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fischer, P. Makowski, J.-O. Müller, M. Antonietti, A. Thomas and F. Goettmann, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 444–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, K. Takanabe, R. Ohnishi, D. Lu, S. Okada, H. Hatasawa, H. Morioka, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7492–7494 RSC .
L. Yuliati, J.-H. Yang, X. Wang, K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4295–4298 RSC .
H. Zhao, M. Lei, X. Yang, J. Jian and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15722–15723 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawaguchi and K. Nozaki, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† The authors equally contributed.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Yao Zheng	Yao Zheng obtained his BS and MS in Chemical Engineering in 2006 and 2009 respectively at Nanjing University of Technology (China). He is currently studying as a PhD candidate in Prof. Qiao's group at Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), the University of Queensland (Australia). His research interests focus on the development of nanostructured metal-free catalysts for a series of electrochemical energy conversions including oxygen reduction and CO2 reduction reactions, etc.
Jian Liu	Dr Jian Liu is currently an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow (APD) at AIBN, UQ, Australia. He obtained his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Science (CAS), China, in 2008 under supervision of Prof. Qihua Yang and Prof. Can Li. He joined AIBN, UQ as a research fellow, where his research interests include synthesis of hollow, yolk shell nanostructured materials as delivery vehicles and nanoreactors, colloidal polymer and carbon spheres for energy storage. He was honoured with the prestigious UQ Foundation Research Excellence Award and ARC APD Fellowship.
Ji Liang	Mr Ji Liang is currently a PhD student supervised by Prof. Qiao at Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN) of the University of Queensland. He obtained his Master and Bachelor degrees at Tianjin University (China) in 2010 and 2008 respectively. His current research interests include (i) the metal free catalysts based on carbon materials applied in PEM fuel cells as well as (ii) novel carbon materials for energy conversion/storage applications.
Mietek Jaroniec	Mietek Jaroniec received his MS and PhD from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland in 1972 and 1976, respectively. Since 1991 he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio (USA). His research interests revolve primarily around interdisciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry, chemical separations, and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at the gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, gas and liquid chromatography, adsorbents and catalysts. At Kent State he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.
Shi Zhang Qiao	S. Z. Qiao received his PhD degree in chemical engineering from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2000, and is currently an Associate Professor at AIBN of the University of Queensland. His research expertise is in nanomaterials and nanoporous materials for bioseparations, drug/gene delivery and new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 135 papers in refereed journals, and has filed four patents on novel nanomaterials that are promising for drug/gene delivery, fuel cells, photocatalysis and solar cells. He will move to the School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide to take a full professor position in February of 2012.

Broader context
The need for developing efficient, low-cost, and stable catalysts for emerging energy storage and conversion technologies has stimulated investigations of the materials that differ from traditional metal and metal-oxide based catalysts. Recent progress in nanoscience and nanotechnology creates new opportunities in the design of novel graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanomaterials as metal-free catalysts for fuel cells and photocatalysis. These nanomaterials are expected to play key roles as electrocatalysts and photocatalysts due to feasible synthesis, unique structure and excellent performance. The current perspective presents an overview of recent progress in the synthesis of g-C3N4 nanomaterials with tunable structure and morphology, their chemical functionalization, and potential applications ranging from photocatalysis and sustainable catalysis to fuel cells.


 	Fig. 1  Scheme of (a) s-triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine based connection in g-C3N4. Blue and gray spheres represent nitrogen and carbon atoms, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of two major routes for the synthesis of meso-g-C3N4: (a) soft-templating method and (b) hard-templating method, reproduced with permission from ref. 52 © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of meso-g-C3N4 synthesized by using (A) different diameter silica spheres as a template, reproduced with permission from ref. 42 © 2011 Wiley-VCH; and (B) ordered mesoporous silica (SBA-15 for b and c or KIT-6 for d and e) as a template, reproduced with permission from ref. 43 © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 118 © 2009 American Chemical Society, and ref. 45 © 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration, TEM images of meso-g-C3N4 synthesized by using different precursors (A) ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride, reproduced with permission from ref. 48 © 2008 Wiley-VCH; and (B) cyanamide, reproduced with permission from ref. 41 © 2006 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A comparison of band positions for TiO2 and g-C3N4, reproduced with permission from ref. 69 © 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) The UV-vis absorption spectra of TiO2 and g-C3N4 materials, reproduced with permission from ref. 70 © 2011 Elsevier B.V. (c) A typical time course of H2 production from water containing 10 vol% triethanolamine as an electron donor under visible light (λ > 420 nm) by using pristine g-C3N4 (solid) and hollow 3.0 wt% Pt-deposited g-C3N4 (hollow) photocatalysts. (d) Time course of O2 production from water containing 0.01 M silver nitrate as an electron acceptor under visible light (λ > 420 nm) by using 3.0 wt% RuO2-loaded g-C3N4, reproduced with permission from ref. 12 © 2008 Macmillan.	 


F	

	Ammonium fluoride (NH4F)	Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and benzene to phenol oxidation	
81

B	

	BH3NH3	Aliphatic C–H bond oxidation	
82

B	

	Boron oxide B2O3	Photodegradation of dyes	
83

P	

	Ionic liquid (BmimBF4)	Enhancing the electrical conductivity of g-C3N4	
84

S	

	H2S atmosphereb	Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and phenol oxidation	
85

S	

	Trithiocyanuric acid C3H3N3S3	Water oxidation reaction for oxygen evolution	
86

F and B	Structure uncertain	Ionic liquid (BmimPF6)	Cyclohexane oxidation	
87


 	Fig. 6  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of g-C3N4 (black) and g-C3N4−xSx (purple). (b) A typical time course of hydrogen evolution from water containing 10 vol% triethanolamine scavenger on Pt-deposited g-C3N4 (black) and g-C3N4−xSx (purple) under λ > 300 and 420 nm, respectively. (c) Activity comparison of the photo-oxidation process of phenol on g-C3N4 (black) and g-C3N4−xSx (purple) under λ > 400 nm. (d) Schematic of band structure evolution of g-C3N4 by sulfur doping and subsequent quantum confinement effect, reproduced with permission from ref. 85 © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic structure of a GSCN multilayer. (b) Schematic representation of the oxidation mechanism, reproduced with permission from ref. 101 © 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schemes of ORR's pathway on pristine g-C3N4 and g-C3N4@CMK-3 composite (red areas represent the active sites facilitating ORR). (b) Cyclic voltammograms of ORR on various electrocatalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (c) Linear sweep voltammograms of various electrocatalysts on RDE at 1500 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (d) Current–time (i–t) chronoamperometric response of g-C3N4@CMK-3 at −0.3 V; inset represents cyclic voltammograms under continuous potentiodynamic sweeps. (e) Chronoamperometric responses of Pt/C and g-C3N4@CMK-3 at −0.3 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution without methanol (0–3 h) and with adding methanol (3–6 h), reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Fabrication of G–CN and pure CN nanosheets for ORR. (b) Current–time (i–t) chronoamperometric responses at −0.25 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH on G–CN and Pt–C electrodes followed by introduction of O2 and methanol (0.3 M). (c) Electrochemical activity given as the kinetic-limiting current density (JK) at −0.40 V and electron transfer number (n) for all G–CN and CN nanosheets. CN600, CN800, and CN1000 represent samples of carbon nitride (CN) with/without graphene pyrolysis at different temperatures; see panel (a) for details. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 © 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 
Footnote
† The authors equally contributed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
