LED revolution: fundamentals and prospects for UV disinfection applications   - Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EW00241B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EW00241B
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2017, 3, 188-202LED revolution: fundamentals and prospects for UV disinfection applications†

        
          
            Jian 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Stephanie 
            Loeb
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jae-Hong 
            Kim
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, and Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Nanotechnology-Enabled Water Treatment (NEWT), Yale University, 17 Hillhouse Ave, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA. E-mail: jaehong.kim@yale.edu;  Fax: +86 1 2034324387;   Tel: +86 1 2034324386
bBeijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences, Beijing, 100083, China
Received 
      10th September 2016
    , Accepted 8th December 2016First published on 17th January 2017AbstractThe UV-light emitting diode (LED) has been attracting significant attention as a new UV source that can replace conventional mercury gas-filled lamps in water disinfection applications. However, the UV-LED remains a relatively new addition to the water treatment toolbox. The current lack of fundamental understanding risks underutilizing uniquely advantageous features of the UV-LED due to unguided design and non-optimized disinfection practices. Our review presents the necessary fundamental knowledge required for the successful implementation of UV-LEDs, including the mechanism of light generation, LED chip fabrication, package design, and essential properties of UV-LEDs. We introduce distinct advantages, such as wavelength tuning, control of radiation patterns, and array design, while emphasizing the significant differences between LED and mercury lamp technologies required to achieve successful technology transfer. Previous studies investigated the design of UV-LED disinfection systems; however, little consensus has yet emerged regarding the integration of LEDs into flow-through reactors. While UV-LED disinfection systems will undisputedly mature in the near future, environmental engineers face a number of urgent research needs in this area including heat sink design, radiation pattern and array design optimization for uniform UV dose delivery, targeted pathogen-wavelength considerations, improved light extraction, and component monitoring systems.

Water impact
Advances in materials science have intersected environmental engineering with the advent of UV LEDs for water disinfection. New solid-state light sources differ drastically from conventional gas-discharge lamps, risking unguided design. This review unpacks the UV LED from fundamentals to application, in an accessible manner, providing the information required to successfully transfer this technology to the water treatment community.

1. Introduction
Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation has become a widely practiced primary disinfection step in drinking water and wastewater treatment due to its benefits over conventional chemical disinfection, such as effective inactivation of protozoan parasites, lack of disinfectant residual, negligible disinfection by-product formation, and ease of retrofitting into existing processes.1–5 In conventional UV technologies, mercury vapor-filled lamps produce germicidal UV irradiation with fixed emission patterns dictated by the inherent properties of the mercury gas, which are either monochromatic (i.e., low-pressure)6 or polychromatic (i.e., medium-pressure) depending on the gas pressure.7 Inherent to their design, these lamps are constructed from fragile quartz material, pose a risk of toxic mercury release, require high drive voltage, consume a relatively large amount of electricity, and have a relatively short service life.8,9 These challenges manifest in practical applications from full-scale municipal water treatment to small-scale point-of-use (POU) treatment, demanding continuous research and development in this area. Consequently, recent rapid development of UV-light emitting diode (UV-LED) technology and accompanying cost reductions have encouraged researchers and industry practitioners in the water and wastewater disinfection sectors to consider UV-LEDs as an alternative UV source. Just as we are observing the rising dominance of visible LEDs over traditional fluorescent/incandescent lamps for indoor/outdoor lighting, we are on the verge of a major technological breakthrough in the field of water and wastewater disinfection with the emergence of cost-competitive UV-LED technology.10
The advantages of LEDs over gas-filled lamps, for visible or UV applications, are well recognized, as summarized in Table 1. Notable contrasting features of LEDs include durable construction,11 design flexibility due to small unit size,12 ability to tailor emission spectrum, no risk of chemical leaching,13 no warm up period,14 simple DC power requirements,15 and much longer life-time (achieved for UVA/B, and emerging for UVC LEDs), to name a few. Some of these advantages, which will be discussed in more detail throughout this review, have inspired researchers in recent years to explore the feasibility of applying UV-LEDs in water disinfection. Past research efforts have been somewhat constrained by the severely limited number of commercial products compared to mercury vapor lamps, and the present relatively low efficiency of a single UV-LED, compared to visible LEDs and conventional UV light sources.12,16 Most studies have focused on integrating LEDs into various reactors,14,17–19 evaluating their effectiveness for pathogen inactivation,4,20,21 and developing ways to standardize validation protocols and design parameters.11,16,22–26 Other lines of research have focused on employing LEDs as an alternative light source for photocatalytic reactors that are intended to inactivate pathogens and degrade pollutants through the conversion of photons to reactive oxygen species (ROS).27,28 Experience and knowledge gained from designing and operating mercury UV lamp disinfection systems have certainly provided useful guidelines to these studies, but at the risk of stifling the potential of this truly innovative tool.
Table 1 Advantages of UV-LEDs over conventional Hg lamps




Attribute
Conventional mercury vapor lamp
UV-LED
Advantages over conventional lamps
References




Mercury content
20–200 mg
None
Mercury free
Würtele 2011 (ref. 25), Lim 2010 (ref. 29)


Warm up time
2–15 min
Instantaneous
Intermittent-flow friendly; pulsing possible
Chatterley 2010 (ref. 14)


Size
20 mm (diameter) × 120 mm (length)
≈1 mm2
Easy integration
Kneissl 2010 (ref. 12)


Operating surface temperature
Polychromatic ∼600 °C; monochromatic ∼100 °C
Same as process water
Zero-flow friendly; not fouling promoting
Aoyagi 2011 (ref. 4)


Shell material
Quartz glass
Metal or ceramic
Durable
Crawford 2005 (ref. 11)


Architecture
Cylindrical tube
Point source
Versatile integration into any design
Aoyagi 2011 (ref. 4)


Wavelength
Polychromatic (200–300 nm); monochromatic (95% at 254 nm)
Monochromatic; available in a range of wavelengths (210–400 nm)
Targeted performance
Bolton 2003 (ref. 7), Hideki 2014 (ref. 13)


Voltage current
110−240 V AC; 0.5–2.0 amps
6–30 V DC; 0.02 amps
Battery/solar cell drive
Lui 2014 (ref. 15)


Replacement interval
5000–12000 h
3000 h (at 250 nm)–26000 h (at 365 nm)
Much longer lifetime
Crystal IS 2015 (ref. 30) Rasoulifard 2015 (ref. 31), Obra 2016 (ref. 32)




The LED functions through a fundamentally different light generation mechanism, and therefore cannot simply replace current mercury vapor lamps in existing disinfection infrastructure. Common to any technology that is translated from one field to another, understanding the fundamental workings of the LED is a prerequisite for successfully bringing the technology to fruition. At the same time, clearly defining areas where LEDs can fill specific needs in disinfection systems can drive the future development of LED technology tailored for such applications. This review provides the fundamental knowledge that is most essential to environmental scientists and engineers interested in UV-LED technology research and development, in a manner that allows the intricacies of the LED to be understood, rather than viewed as a black-box technology. This knowledge base is important, as the significant differences between LED and mercury vapor lamp technologies can cause failure in technology transfer, as previously adopted disinfection strategies may no longer be optimal with this new light source. A review specifically focused on the key aspects of LED design, fabrication, and applications that are most relevant to environmental engineers but currently absent from the literature is needed. In this manner, we aim to fill the knowledge gap between electrical/materials science and environmental engineering, presenting these complex topics in a manner that avoids discipline specific jargon and is accessible to the environmental engineering community. We first discuss how UV-LEDs are constructed and how they produce UV photons, highlighting the characteristics that are most relevant to disinfection applications. Unique properties such as wavelength and radiation pattern variations are also presented. We further review recent advances made to incorporate UV-LEDs into disinfection systems, with extended discussions on the distinctive advantages and challenges.
2. Fundamentals of UV-LED
The LED is a solid-state semiconductor device that converts direct current (DC) into light of varying emission wavelength depending on the semiconductor's bandgap. Since the first practical visible LED was developed in 1962,33 LED technologies have advanced toward shorter wavelength emissions, from red (GaAsP semiconductor materials with 620–750 nm emission) to blue (GaN; 450–400 nm),34–36 and more recently UV (200–400 nm).12 The development of gallium nitride based LEDs (GaN/InGaN/AlGaN) was a major breakthrough in UV-LED technology, as these materials can produce UV irradiation in a wide range of wavelengths depending on their composition.37 In the late 1990s, UV-LEDs based on Al-doped GaN reached wavelengths shorter than 360 nm.38–40 Contemporary LEDs can emit shorter UV wavelengths, below 300 nm, that exhibit germicidal action, with new record efficiencies and shorter wavelengths continuously being introduced to the literature and the commercial market.41–51 The shortest emission wavelength reported to date is 210 nm.52 As of 2015, the highest reported efficiency and power output in the UVC range is 14.3% (external quantum efficiency at 280–300 nm emission; see section 2.3 for definition)13 and 153.4 mW, respectively, which are predicted to continually improve following the trend outlined in Fig. 1. In the commercial market, Crystal IS was the first company to generate an LED disinfection product line in 2014, which offers germicidal output powers from 15 mW to 30 mW.53 Recently, Jason Lighting Technology Co. broke records by producing UVC LEDs (280 nm, 10 mW) with lifetimes reaching 1000 hours.54 The emergence of an increasingly large number of UV-LEDs with varying characteristics, both in the research phase and in the commercial market, makes it difficult to choose the most suitable UV-LED that will take full advantage of their unique features for targeted applications. This is particularly true for disinfection, where a different UV source has been the standard for decades. In this section, we discuss how light is generated in the LED chip, how the chip is packaged into a final product, and what unique properties UV-LEDs exhibit, with specific discussion relating their implications in disinfection applications.
 Fig. 1  External quantum efficiency and power output of UVC-LED chip versus time collected from published data of UVC-LEDs.13,42,43,47,48,50,52,55–62 
2.1 Light generation mechanism
A semiconductor p–n junction, known as the active region, is the central component of the LED that emits light under the influence of an electric field.63 The electricity-to-light conversion process is inversely analogous to the mechanism through which semiconductor solar cells generate electricity from light.64 The p–n junction is formed when a p-type semiconductor is brought in contact with an n-type semiconductor.65 For a UV-LED, the p-type semiconductor is formed by substituting a Group II element (e.g., Mg) as an impurity into a Group III element (i.e., Ga or Al in AlGaN); because the impurity element has one less valence electron, an electron deficient hole (h+, positive charge carrier) is generated. Likewise, the n-type is prepared by substituting a Group IV element (e.g., Si), containing one additional valence electron, into a Group III element, generating a free electron (e−, negative charge carrier).66 At the p–n junction, the holes in the p-type semiconductor and free electrons in the n-type semiconductor diffuse along the concentration gradient toward the interface (Fig. 2a) where they recombine, leaving behind residual negative charges on the p-side and residual positive charges on the n-side. This creates a region around the interface that is devoid of mobile charge carriers, called the depletion region (Fig. 2b, top). In this region, the resultant electric field formed by the residual changes the energy level of the band structure and generates a potential energy difference (φB) between the p- and the n-sides, opposing the further exchange of charge carriers at equilibrium (Fig. 2b, bottom).67 When a p–n junction is biased in the forward direction, the voltage difference (VD) overcomes the φB and disrupts this equilibrium. Current flows across the interface as electrons are injected from the n region into the p region, a process referred to as minority-carrier injection (Fig. 2c, top). When electrons in the n-region conduction band combine with holes in the p-region valence band, excess energy is released in the form of light and heat (Fig. 2c, bottom).63 The amount of energy released, and consequently the wavelength of the emitted light, is determined by the difference between the conduction band and valence band energy levels, an intrinsic property of semiconductors, termed the material's bandgap. This means that the wavelength of emitted photons can be manipulated by employing different semiconductor materials and doping different impurity ions at varying concentrations that influence the bandgap.68 This ability to tailor emission wavelength distinguishes LEDs from conventional mercury vapor lamps which rely on a single element with a fixed electronic structure to produce light.69
 Fig. 2  Circuit and energy level diagram schematics of an LED p–n junction in (a) initial movement of mobile carriers, (b) equilibrium with zero bias voltage applied, and (c) emitting light from the p–n junction when bias voltage is applied. The process of photon generation: (1) holes (h+) in the p-type neutral region (NR) and electrons (e−) in the n-type NR diffuse along the concentration gradient toward the interface (2) forming a depletion region (DR) devoid of mobile charge carriers, (3) creating an electric field (EF) that opposes the further exchange of charge carriers at equilibrium; (4) when a p–n junction is biased in the forward direction (5) this equilibrium is disrupted and current flows across the interface as electrons are injected from the n region into the p region; (6) when electrons in the n-region conduction band (CB) combine with holes in the p-region valence band (VB), excess energy equivalent to the band gap (BG) is released in the form of light and heat. 
2.2 LED chip fabrication
A small semiconductor piece containing the light generating p–n junction active region is known as the LED chip. An AlGaN semiconductor p–n junction is typically fabricated by growing semiconductors in a layer-by-layer fashion (i.e., n-type layer followed by p-type layer) on top of an optically transparent sapphire substrate (α-Al2O3; Fig. 3a). These layers are carefully deposited from the gas phase by chemical reaction with the substrate through a process known as metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE). The MOVPE process is widely used for industrial LED chip fabrication, especially for UV-LEDs,13 as changing the gas composition, temperature, and/or pressure in the deposition reactor allows for careful control over the semiconductor layer thickness and structure.70–72 Inefficiencies can be introduced to the LED if crystal lattice defects form during epitaxial growth. Threading dislocation defects, which are generated due to both the large lattice mismatch and the high thermal coefficient incompatibility between sapphire and GaN, are a major cause of non-radiative recombination in UV-LEDs, since wide bandgap (shorter wavelength) semiconductors tend to be more susceptible to the formation of these defects.10 Thus, developing AlGaN films with a low threading dislocation density is considered the most urgent mission in advancing high efficiency UV-LEDs toward real-world environmental applications.
 Fig. 3  Schematic view of the (a–d) UV LED chip fabricated and (e–f) LED lamp packaged. 
After the layers are deposited by epitaxial growth, the p-type layer is partially etched to expose the n-type layer, allowing the attachment of conducting metals, such as Ni/Au alloy, to both layers forming p- and n-electrodes (Fig. 3b).73,74 An electric potential is provided across these electrodes, producing light through minority-carrier injection and recombination mechanisms discussed above. The resulting chip is shown in Fig. 3c, which is known as a conventional chip (CC), the most widely adopted chip in industry due to its relatively low fabrication cost and technical maturity. Note that the schematics in Fig. 3 are simplified to illustrate only the essential elements required for light generation. State-of-the-art LED chips can be made of double heterostructured semiconductors75–77 and have additional features such as the placement of multiple quantum wells between the p–n junction to accumulate more electrons for injection across the interface.78 For more details on advanced LED fabrication techniques, the reader is referred to ref. 13.
Thermal management is a key design parameter for LED chips. The generation of excessive heat within the chip can occur as a result of high operating voltages, relatively low electricity-to-light conversion efficiencies, and the poor thermal conductivity of sapphire. The accumulation of heat can reduce device efficiency and lead to a spectral shift in emission.79 Several strategies have been developed to counter heat build-up,80,81 including the flip chip (FC) design,82,83 shown in Fig. 3d. In this design, the semiconductor layers are flipped and connected to a submount with higher thermal conductivity so that heat is more efficiently transferred away from the active region, and unlike CCs, the electrodes and wires do not obstruct the UV radiation path. The FC chips typically exhibit approximately twofold increases in efficiency compared to CCs. This allows higher voltages to be applied without excessive heat accumulation, making the FC a preferred design option for deep-UV-LEDs despite its complexity and higher fabrication cost.34 Chip surface shaping84,85 and texturing are other common approaches to improve thermal management and light extraction.86,87 Note that LED chips are made from metal alloys that can operate over a wide temperature range; therefore, heat generation does not directly impact physical durability, despite its significance in chip fabrication and considerable impact on performance.
2.3 LED lamp packaging
In order to protect the active region under a given environment and to enable the LED to function for a specific application, the semiconductor chip is housed in a package consisting of several components, completing the LED fabrication process. While various designs and alterations exist, a typical package consists of electrical leads, a heat sink, an optical window, and some other auxiliary components.88 Each package component contributes a function to the overall LED operation. Electrical leads are attached to each electrode via a wire bond to serve as electric conduits and partly contribute to heat dissipation. A heat sink helps effectively dissipate heat generated from the LED chip. The optical window provides the path through which the emitted light escapes, while the shape of the window plays a critical role in determining the UV radiation pattern. Since the radiation pattern is a critical factor in designing UV disinfection, it will be discussed in more detail in section 3.2. Overall, package design affects critical considerations relevant to disinfection applications including lifetime, optical output power, and radiation pattern.
UV-LED packaging is similar to visible light LED packaging, but with distinctive features to accommodate the special requirements of UV-LED chips. In typical visible-LED packages, a polymer encapsulant fills the void space between the LED chip and the optical window to protect the LED chip, while also improving the light extraction of the LED by avoiding the dramatic change in refractive index (n) between the semiconductor materials (n > 2.50) and air (n ≈ 1.00).34 Highly transparent polymers with high thermal stability, such as silicone or epoxy, are the preferred choice for optical windows due to low cost, durability, and ease of manipulation. However, polymer materials absorb UV light and lose transparency over time,89 hence they cannot be used for UV-LEDs and alternative package designs are needed. An example is the transistor outline (TO; Fig. 3e) design in which an LED chip is placed inside a metal structure, hermetically sealed with a glass (quartz) lens, and vacuumed or charged with noble gas, avoiding the use of a polymer. Another critical factor unique to UV-LED packaging design is the need to dissipate the excess heat generated from the active region. The surface mount device (SMD) configuration (Fig. 3f), in which LED chips, typically one to three, are mounted on a printed circuit board that is further mounted onto a heat sink made of metals, effectively accommodates this design requirement. Due to its efficient heat dissipation, compact size, and ability to house more than one chip, the SMD is currently the most widely used packing for UV-LEDs. Not pictured here, the newer chip-on-board (COB) design allows further compaction by placing multiple microchips onto the same board, allowing light to emit from the entire surface of the lamp (in contrast to the point emission in other designs), while preserving the efficient heat dissipation of the SMD design.
UV-LED package design has been rapidly evolving with the development of advanced materials for better UV extraction, more compact design allowing the integration of more chips, and more efficient heat dissipation strategies. These advances are directly impacting how UV-LEDs can be applied for disinfection applications. The small dimension of UV-LEDs allows for the development of disinfection reactors in scales and configurations not possible with bulky mercury vapor lamps, such as small POU devices. Without the fragile quartz tube required for gas-filled lamps, UV-LED devices are more mechanically robust, making them suitable for applications that may encounter high vibrations, shock, or intense fluid pressure variations. Of particular note is the advancement toward more non-point-source emission, such as the COB design, which may allow for emission patterns more akin to conventional UV lamps.
2.4 UV-LED properties
Intrinsically different from conventional gas-discharge lamps, the electrical and optical properties of UV-LEDs are defined in technical terms that may be unfamiliar in environmental fields. This section discusses the fundamental and operational properties of UV-LEDs that are most relevant to the design of disinfection systems. We will focus on key parameters used to describe LED performance and methods of quantifying, characterizing, and controlling LED radiant output. Understanding these parameters will provide a framework for the discussion in section 3, which addresses how the important differences between LEDs and gas-discharge lamps are changing the landscape of environmental UV technologies.
As a guide to understanding LED properties, Fig. 4 shows a series of figures and graphs commonly used to characterize the performance of a typical (yet hypothetical) UV-LED device. First, the spectrum is reported in terms of the wavelength at maximum intensity and the width of the peak, defined by the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) (Fig. 4a). Note that LEDs have nearly monochromatic, Gaussian-shaped emission spectra as a direct result of their solid-state light generation mechanism. As mentioned in section 2.1, the peak wavelength is determined by the bandgap of the semiconductor chip because the bandgap energy is equal to the energy of the emitted photon. The energy (E) of an emitted photon is inversely related to its wavelength (λ) by E = hc/λ, where h is Planck's constant and c is the speed of light. The ability of the UV-LED chips to convert electricity to photons is defined by two efficiency terms: internal quantum efficiency (IQE) and external quantum efficiency (EQE).68 The IQE defines the number of photons emitted from the active region per electron injected into LED: (1)where Pint is the optical power emitted from the active region, I is the injection current, and e is the elementary charge of an electron. However, only a fraction of generated photons can escape the LED due to loss through absorption, refraction, and reflection by the lamp components. This defines the light extraction efficiency: (2)where P is the optical power emitted from the device. As a result, the true efficiency of the LED in terms of the number of usable photons produced per electron input, the EQE, is defined as follows: (3)
 Fig. 4  Properties and schematics of an illustrative UV LED. (a) LED emission spectrum, (b) current–voltage curve, (c) radiant flux–current curve, (d) radiant flux–temperature, (e) redshift in peak wavelength with increased driving current, (f) angular diagram of LED radiant emission pattern. The dotted lines here are the typical operation value of a UV LED. 
As the above definitions indicate, the number of emitted photons and the amount of energy irradiated depend on the electrical input (forward current). The electricity input per applied potential can be estimated using current–voltage relationships that are characteristic of each LED (Fig. 4b). The radiant flux of any lamp is defined as the total radiant energy emitted per unit time (mW) and is calculated by integrating the energy output over all emission wavelengths. For higher pressure gas discharge lamps, this includes energy across a wide number of wavelengths, whereas low pressure (LP) mercury lamps emit 95% of their energy at 254 nm. In this manner, LED radiant flux is similar to LP lamps, with the advantage that the emission peak can be tuned to different wavelengths depending on the chip fabrication material. Radiation flux is linearly dependent on the forward current, as shown in Fig. 4c. However, as forward current increases, more heat is generated and the temperature of the active region will increase, resulting in a decrease in radiation flux due to the increased probability of carrier non-radiative recombination (Fig. 4d). Excess heat generation can also result in a redshift in emission (Fig. 4e; typically shown versus forward current) due to bandgap contraction; however, this has a minor effect on peak wavelength and is most likely not of concern for disinfection applications.26,79 The LED thermal management is often expressed as thermal resistance (°C W−1), i.e., the change in temperature per change in electricity input, which strongly depends on both the type of LED chip and package. The LED radiation pattern is typically illustrated using an angular diagram (Fig. 4f) which describes the range of viewing angle (the degree of light spreading) and the intensity of emission at a specific angle (shown as the distance from the origin). Emission patterns are particularly important for UV disinfection reactor design; more details will be discussed in section 3.2.
Aside from the fundamental optical and electrical properties of LEDs, practical considerations such as durability, lifetime, and robustness will be of interest to environmental engineers. LED lamp lifetime not only depends on the chip lifetime, but also involves package technology, packaging material, heat dissipation potential, and driving voltage. The actual service life depends largely on the application condition. For example, operating the LED at conditions below the absolute maximum rating for properties such as the operating voltage or current can extend the life and protect the device. Other special properties, such as moisture resistance, are often listed in the product data sheet and may be of particular interest for water treatment applications.
3. UV-LEDS for disinfection applications
The unique properties of UV-LEDs exhibit a great potential for exploring novel and improved disinfection applications beyond those achieved with traditional mercury vapor lamps. However, the intrinsic differences between LEDs and conventional lamps can result in unforeseen undesirable outcomes if UV-LEDs are treated simply as a substitute light source. In this chapter, we expand our discussion on the unique characteristics of UV-LEDs to focus on their implications in disinfection reactor/process design.
3.1 Emission wavelength engineering
It has been well established that photons with wavelengths in the range of 240 to 280 nm are effectively absorbed by DNA (Fig. 5). When absorbed, these photons trigger damage in DNA molecules through the formation of pyrimidine dimers between consecutive base pairs, ultimately impeding replication and causing cell death.90–94 Among many variables that determine the effectiveness of UV photons on microbial inactivation, the overlap between the lamp emission spectrum and the absorption spectrum of DNA is one critical factor,94,95 especially since the absorption spectrum varies among microorganisms as summarized in Table 2. Such an overlap between the light source's emission spectrum and the DNA absorption spectra (or germicidal action spectra, if known) of a target microorganism can be maximized through the selection of UV-LEDs with certain peak emission wavelengths, which is not possible with mercury-filled lamps.96 For example, while a commercial UV-LED with 270 nm emission was comparable to LP UV lamps in terms of Escherichia coli inactivation, the LED with 265 nm peak emission was found to be even more effective.11,14 As previously discussed (section 2.1), the bandgap can be tuned by changing the composition of the material; in benchmark In–Al–Ga–N materials, a higher molar fraction of Al (e.g., AlxGa(1−x)N) leads to a larger bandgap (shorter wavelength emission), while a high molar fraction of In (e.g., InxGa(1−x)N) results in a smaller bandgap (longer wavelength emission).34 This trend in emission wavelength with different molar fractions of Al/In in the AlxGa(1−x)N and InxGa(1−x)N LED material system is shown in Fig. 5.37
 Fig. 5  Relationship between bandgap energy and emission wavelength in semiconductor UV LED material systems at room temperature. A typical DNA absorption spectrum for B. subtilis is shown in blue for reference.94 
Table 2 The optimal relevant wavelength (240–400 nm) for UV inactivation of microorganisms




Microorganism
Range of reported optimal wavelengths (nm) in the absorption spectrum of microorganism
Reference





a Medium-pressure UV lamp with specific filters and low-pressure UV lamp as the UV source.
b Xenon lamp with interference filter and low-pressure UV lamp as the UV source.
c Tunable laser as the UV source.





MS2 family (MS2, fr, R-17, 7-S)
253–265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a; Mamane–Gravetz 2005 (ref. 92)b; Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c


T-2
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


φX-174
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


Vaccinia
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMC)
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


Polyoma
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


Reovirus-3
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a


Fd
265
Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a



Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis) spores
263–268
Cabaj 2002 (ref. 98)a; Mamane 2005 (ref. 92)b; Chen 2009 (ref. 94)b



S. typhimurium LT2
264
Chen 2009 (ref. 94)b


Adenovirus 2
260–270
Linden 2007 (ref. 99)a; Beck 2014 (ref. 97)c



Cryptosporidium parvum

260–270
Linden 2001 (ref. 100)a; Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c



Bacillus pumilus

260–265
Rochelle 2010 (ref. 101)a; Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c


T1UV
265
Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c


T-7
270
Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c




The ability to design a device with selected emission wavelengths is expected to bring forth significant advances in disinfection process design with enhanced ability to target specific microorganisms. While no natural system contains a single type of microorganism, the multi-barrier approaches that are currently a norm in water treatment (e.g., media filtration preceding disinfection or the application of more than one disinfectant in sequential disinfection schemes) allow engineers to deal with a much narrower range of pathogens at the actual disinfection step. UV-LEDs with different peak emissions can be combined into a single device that emits a spectrum most suitable to a specific microorganism, or a broader spectrum for a range of pathogens.99,102,103 In addition, supplementing the main peak emission with other emissions may have a synergistic inactivation effect due to the varying UV sensitivity of different microorganisms and/or organism components, increasing the effectiveness of UV inactivation.92,99,104 For example, a recent report suggested that the coupled wavelengths of 280/365 nm, or 280/405 nm, could synergistically enhance the inactivation efficiency of pure cultured strains of E. coli and Enterococcus faecalis, as well as indigenous fecal indicator bacteria in treated wastewater.20,28 The authors attributed this synergy to the higher optical output available in UVA LEDs, as well as the potential for UVA light to produce ROS through photosensitization of natural organic matter,105–107 supplying a second mechanism of disinfection through oxidative stress. As such, supplementing UVC with longer wavelength UVA could indirectly enhance disinfection through the activation of photocatalysts, or photosensitizers, for the production of ROS.20 The attenuation of light in water increases with shorter wavelengths; as such, the selection of emission wavelength requires a balance between effectiveness and transmissivity, particularly for organisms with more blue shifted action spectra.
The concept of UV-dose and the approach of using the product of intensity and time (IT) to predict the extent of inactivation for specific microorganisms are widely practiced by environmental engineers. It is important to understand that existing UV-dose values for log-inactivation, such as those published in USEPA guidelines,108 are determined under LP mercury lamp radiation, and are not broadly applicable to other light sources, such as UV LEDs. As such, the development of new standard validations protocols for UVC LEDs is essential.109 Previous standards using LP lamps may be useful as a starting point, as it has been shown that LEDs with emission near 250–260 nm show similar inactivation kinetics when compared with LP lamps.110 As such, the following two factors need to be carefully considered when designing an LED disinfection device informed by established UV-dose values: (1) established dose standards are derived for power outputs typical of LP mercury lamps. At very low intensities, disinfection may occur more slowly, and conventional time–dose reciprocity relationships may no longer hold.21,111 With low efficiency chips, higher intensities can be reached using multiple LEDs arranged in arrays. (2) Differences in the inactivation responses related to different wavelengths will be the most pronounced when the peak of the microorganism's action spectra is far from the LP peak emission of 254 nm. The action spectra can be used as a guideline to select LEDs with the most effective emission wavelengths. If the action spectra are not available, the DNA/RNA absorption spectra might be used as a predictive estimate of the most effective wavelengths.
3.2 Radiation pattern
Conventional mercury lamps emit light in a radially uniform fashion, while there is a relatively minor variation in intensity along the length especially near the lamp ends.6 In contrast, UV-LED radiation patterns significantly vary depending on the type of LED chip and packaging material. Therefore, designing UV-LED reactors based on conventional reactor designs without careful consideration of an altered emission pattern can lead to design flaws.11,23,112 Likewise, not characterizing and reporting the emission pattern of UV-LEDs makes it difficult to compare and duplicate results in the literature.
Radiation emitted by a bare LED chip reaches the maximum intensity at the angle normal to the face and decreases according to the cosine of the angle away from the normal axis. This pattern, shown in Fig. 6a, is known as the Lambertian pattern.113 Intensity around the angle is typically reported after normalizing relative to the maximum, such that only the angular distribution of flux, independent of total flux produced, is depicted. In addition to the angular diagram, the radiation pattern is also often reported in terms of full-angular width at half-maximum, or 2Φ1/2 (Φ denotes angle), i.e., the angular width of the radiation pattern at half the maximum power. For example, the Lambertian radiation pattern with intensity changing as a function of cos(Φ) has the highest radiation at Φ = 0° and half of its maximum value at Φ = 60°. Therefore, the 2Φ1/2 of the Lambertian radiation pattern is 120°. This anisotropic radiation from the bare LED is further distorted as light from the LED chip passes through materials with varying refractive indices. A large difference in refractive index between semiconductor materials and surrounding environmental media, such as air or water (n = 1.33),34 creates an inevitably drastic change in the direction path of the light.
 Fig. 6  The radiation patterns of (a) bare LED chip and (b) with different shapes of reflective cup structure. 
The light pattern that finally comes out of an LED lamp is determined by additional structural factors such as the roughness of the LED chip face, properties of the reflecting cup, and the type of encapsulating lens.114 Beginning nearest to the active region, the first structural factor is the roughness of the LED chip face. Although the pattern emitted by every chip face will be generally Lambertian as discussed above, microstructures on the chip or waveguides can create deviations from this pattern, such as narrowed emissions.114 The second factor is the geometry and roughness of the reflector cup. The reflector cup surrounds the LED chip not only to provide a unique appearance for the finished lamp, but also to create a useful beam pattern. Parabola, cone, and cylinder shapes are most common for commercial reflector cups, each producing a unique radiation pattern (Fig. 6b; radiation pattern computationally obtained using Tracepro software).115Table 3 shows examples for the radiance intensity (RI; the power emitted per unit solid angle) and 2Φ1/2 for the different shapes of reflective cup. Solid angle is measured in dimensionless units of steradians, which describe area like a three-dimensional analogue for using radians (or degrees) to describe distance by sweeping out an arc length on a unit circle. Consequently, the RI for different lamps is approximately proportional to planar intensity (W m−2) when the distance and angle between the control surface and light source remains constant. RI and 2Φ1/2 can also be controlled by cup depth; the deeper the cup, the greater the RI and the smaller the 2Φ1/2.116 The roughness of the reflector cup surface also has an effect on diffuse reflection and consequently the uniformity of light across a given area.117,118 The final structural factor is the geometry of the encapsulant lens, which distorts the radiation pattern produced by the chip and the reflector cup. Flat, ball, or hemispherical lenses are most commonly used with UV-LEDs; representative radiation patterns for each are shown in Fig. 7.
Table 3 Simulated data of different shapes of reflective cup and different depths of cup deepening for cone




Shapes
Depths (mm)
RI (W sr−1)
2Φ1/2 (°)




Parabola-shape
0.9
0.81
24.5


Cylinder
0.9
0.35
58.5


Cone
0.6
0.74
20.0


0.7
1.40
13.5


0.9
2.10
11.5


1.1
2.03
11.5


1.2
1.96
13.0




 Fig. 7  Radiation patterns of UV LEDs in typical TO (a–c) and SMD packaged (d–f). 
Accurate assessment of radiation patterns is a prerequisite for the design of an effective UV-LED tailored to a specific application. Such an assessment often involves a numerical simulation through solving tedious and computationally expensive Monge–Ampère second-order nonlinear partial differential equations.119,120 However, indirect methods such as ray mapping121–127 and geometric estimations using compound surfaces128–130 may alternatively be used to obtain reasonable approximations for desired freeform surfaces. An alternate design has been proposed based on total internal reflection (TIR) in which the light source is embedded in the lens. Although TIR has the potential to create a device in which 100% of the light is extracted,113,131 it has not been incorporated into UV-LED design yet due to technical challenges (primarily, a lack of inexpensive materials that are transparent to UV). While it is possible that in the future environmental engineers can work with LED manufacturers to guide the design of the above components and create tailored radiation patterns optimal for disinfection reactors, it is critical to carefully consider these patterns when commercial UV-LEDs are employed in reactor design. A critical knowledge gap exists when relating these radiation patterns to UV-dose delivery in disinfection reactors, as many questions of optimization and standardization remain unanswered.
3.3 Array design
The light intensity from a single UV-LED is currently not sufficient to disinfect significant amounts of water in large-scale flow-through reactors. Therefore, multiple UV-LEDs need to be arranged together in an array that can achieve a desired UV intensity.132 Such an array design is indeed common in visible-LED applications such as indoor/outdoor lighting133–135 and display applications;136 for UV-LEDs, it has also been studied in photo-curing applications.137 However, relatively few studies have focused on optimizing the array design for UV-LEDs in water disinfection reactors. The earliest proof of concept studies put together multiple UV-LEDs to achieve sufficient radiation power and substituted them for mercury lamps in a typical collimated beam batch reactor to demonstrate that UV-LEDs can achieve inactivation of test microorganisms, such as E. coli, to a level comparable with that of mercury lamps.11,15,18 A study by Bowker et al. confirmed that LEDs are comparable to LP UV lamps by investigating several spatial arrangements based on the number and spacing of UV-LEDs and the distance of the sample from the light source.21 Yet, no systematic study has been performed to correlate the variation in the aforementioned radiation pattern with array configuration for the most optimized disinfection practice.
Environmental engineers can certainly elaborate on past developments in visible-LED array design to achieve more uniform radiation distribution in disinfection reactors. Table 4 summarizes common visible-LED array designs and their performance characteristics. It should be noted, however, that these characteristics are relevant to applications where light delivery through air to distances very far from the light source is important (e.g., indoor/outdoor lighting). Computational simulations used to predict radiation distribution are a mature technology and have been already adopted for disinfection reactors.138–140 Such tools can provide useful guidelines when collimated beam reactors are evaluated, since the disinfection target is placed relatively far from the light source and the radiation is collimated. In flow-through reactors, differences in radiation patterns from different UV-LEDs can have a considerable impact on how much UV radiation a differential element of fluid receives depending on its proximity to the UV source. It is possible that the same array design might result in different UV dose delivery if LEDs with drastically different radiation patterns are used. Such differences will be also greatly impacted by fluid mixing, which will be different with reactors employing UV-LEDs compared to reactors that house conventional UV lamps (i.e., mostly within the reactor, obstructing the flow). These uncertainties are unique to the application of UV-LEDs for water disinfection; future studies need to address the complex relationship among radiation patterns from each UV-LED element, radiation distribution from an array of UV-LEDs, and UV dose (distribution) delivered to microorganisms passing near the UV source.
Table 4 Primary array design in industry and relative characteristics




Array model
Pattern
Characteristics




Line
Line
Large radiation area; dispersed light


Curve


Plane
Rectangle
Uniform irradiation; small radiation area; high flux


Circle (annular)


Surface
Cylinder (inside or outside)
Inside: light converged; high flux; outside: light dispersed; large radiation area


Sphere (inside or outside)


Three-dimensional
Sphere
Uniform irradiation in every direction or along with cylindrical surface




3.4 Reactor design
The UV-LED provides an exceptionally flexible platform to help overcome some shortcomings of traditional UV reactor designs, from small scale POU systems in remote and developing areas to large scale industrial and municipal water treatment systems. In practical applications, several factors need to be carefully considered, including constraints that exist with conventional lamps and also constraints that are unique to UV-LEDs. Herein, we discuss some of the recent research efforts to design UV-LED disinfection reactors. The field of UV-LED disinfection reactor design is in its infancy, with few commercial reactors available and only a limited number of the endless possible configurations explored at both POU-scale and industrial-scale applications.
Quickly advancing from the batch reactor collimated beam apparatus mentioned above, researchers have been exploring various reactor designs to realize UV-LED disinfection in flow-through configurations. As expected in the early phases of any technology development, each study has adopted UV-LEDs with different peak emissions, radiation patterns, array design, and different operational conditions, making it difficult to compare results. Regardless, most reactors employed arrays of UV-LEDs and placed them close to the water flow, following the same design logics of mercury lamp-based reactors (Fig. 8a). Such a familiar design, like that proposed by Oguma et al., mimics conventional reactors by placing a column of UV-LED arrays inside a quartz sleeve and immersing the sleeve in the direction of flow.16 Mimicking previous reactors will allow for easy integration with existing technology, such as employing the same fouling control methods. However, copying this conventional design can lead to intrinsic disadvantages including higher power required to compensate for reflection losses and lack of space for a proper heat-removal system. As an alternative to this encased design, Aoyagi et al. and Würtele et al. have proposed panel type reactors in which the reactor wall is covered by a number of UV-LED panels, a drastically different design compared to conventional UV reactors where the lamps are housed inside the reactor.4,25 Panels can be placed on the sides or bottom of the reactor, and total dose delivery can be enhanced by employing a long or tortuous flow path and UV reflective surfaces. External panel designs have a number of intrinsic benefits, including achieving uniform irradiation, the ability to attach an external heat sink, and avoiding inconsistencies due to irregular water flows that may occur due to changes in water pressure or accidental flow fluctuations that are often present in conventional UV lamp encased irradiation chambers. Not limited to planar panels, a recent design employed a ring-shaped array composed of two unit rings, each with 10 UV-LEDs,141 similar to the conceptual reactor shown in Fig. 8b. The two units, which can be operated jointly or separately, present a particularly flexible apparatus, allowing for the distance between arrays and the emission source (i.e., different wavelengths) to be rapidly adjusted. However, due to the low power of the UV LEDs, a long residence time and narrow water flow channels are required to maintain uniform irradiation under these flow conditions. Additionally, little discussion in the literature has addressed the difference in fouling and potential new cleaning methods that might be required. In addition to empirical studies, numerical simulations for characterizing inactivation in UV-LED reactors have begun to emerge in the literature, including computational fluid dynamics (CFD)19,142,143 and Monte Carlo type simulations.144 Integrating such simulations into the reactor design process has the potential to greatly expedite reactor optimization and improve the efficiency of next generation commercial reactors. However, there remain many unknowns regarding how best to integrate UV-LEDs into flow-through reactors and many iterations of empirical tests and numerical simulations will likely be required before a consensus is reached.
 Fig. 8  Conceptual reactor designs with (a) encased and (b) covered LED array. 
Past studies on disinfection reactors hint at the potential of UV-LED systems primarily in POU applications14,20,28 (distinct from point-of-entry, or POE, in which mercury UV lamps are relatively well accepted); i.e., decentralized treatment nearest to the point of consumption. As such, POU devices must be small, durable, simple to operate, and safe for the end-user. This reflects the well-accepted assertion that traditional UV lamps are less suitable for POU water disinfection due to high energy consumption, the need for a high voltage driver, hazardous mercury content, and the fragility of lamp tubes.145 Consistently, researchers have claimed that the distinct advantages of UV-LEDs are best represented in small-scale reactors.11,14,15,17–19 Applications in remote regions that lack proper infrastructure have also been proposed, mainly through combination with photovoltaic cells – particularly appealing since UV-LEDs function with DC.15,18 Test conditions for UV-LED disinfection systems are approaching real practical applications; however, commercial UV-LEDs remain scarce due to the challenge of cost, scale, and market demand. The first UV LED water treatment device, the AquaPearl, was introduced to the market in 2012 through a joint effort between Dot Metrics Technologies and Aquionics, a company specializing in UV disinfection. The AquaPearl product line, now owned by Nikkiso and operated under its subsidiary AquiSense Technologies, boasts a mercury-free flow-through treatment system in 3 sizes, with capacities from 1.5 to 12 L min−1, providing at least a 4-log reduction of regulated pathogens (validated by a third party under USEPA guidelines), with instant on-off, and a lifetime of 10000 hours. As an innovative product, and the first of its kind, the systems remain high cost compared with mercury based alternatives. Experimental observations on the comparable effectiveness of UV-LED to conventional lamps are rapidly accumulating in the literature,14,17,109 but there is still a lack of detailed design guidance for POU systems in terms of LED packaging type, optimal wavelength combination, radiation pattern, array configuration, and thermal management. If the decision was based on overall disinfection efficiency alone, it would be easy to overdesign the system. Considering that prohibitive costs are the major reason for a relatively slow advance in real world application, future research must focus on an optimal system design that can achieve maximum efficiency using the minimum number of UV-LED chips.
4. Outlook
As a fundamentally new source of germicidal UV light, the UV-LED possesses unique advantages compared to conventional lamps and presents a largely untapped potential in the area of water disinfection. Despite this potential, widespread use is currently severely limited due to low optical output power and prohibitive costs.13,15,146 With further technical progress resulting from the increasing demand for such devices and production scale-up, the costs of UV LEDs will certainly fall along with the increase in power output, lifetime, and efficiency in the near future. The time has come for environmental engineers to prepare for this foreseen rapid transition of technology Although several studies have developed various UV-LED reactors for water disinfection, many of them are based on traditional UV lamp designs.14,16,18,23,31,109 While similarities certainly exist, there are many aspects of UV-LEDs that require distinctive approaches for water disinfection. Considering these differences, this review points toward a few urgent research needs beyond the feasibility tests and concept demonstrations that have been the primary focus of many past studies. They include (1) the design of an improved heat-dissipation system in all LED water treatment reactor types, (2) better understanding of controllable radiation patterns in reactor design in a way that can assist enhancing the uniformity of the inhomogeneous light output from UV-LEDs, (3) a careful evaluation of the impact of UV-LED types on UV delivery, especially considering its unique radiation pattern and array configuration, (4) engineering of optimal wavelength combinations for targeted disinfection applications, (5) advanced technologies such as light collection/distribution and light extraction; and (6) a new monitoring system that can assess the functioning of individual LED elements. These challenges, while extensive, present a substantial opportunity for environmental engineers in the UV disinfection field to capitalize on the advances of material science to make strides expanding the impact, efficiency and versatility of their current disinfection systems well beyond what could have been achieved prior to the invention of solid-state lighting.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the National Science Foundation Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Nanotechnology-Enabled Water Treatment (ERC-1449500). Support for J. C. was provided by the China Scholarship Council. Support for S. L. was provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References

          W. J. Masschelein and R. G. Rice, Ultraviolet light in water and wastewater sanitation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, U.S.A.,  2002 Search PubMed .
C. Lubello, R. Gori, F. P. Nicese and F. Ferrini, Water Res., 2004, 38, 2939–2947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Dotson, C. E. Rodriguez and K. G. Linden, J. - Am. Water Works Assoc., 2012, 104, 77–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aoyagi, M. Takeuchi, K. Yoshida, M. Kurouchi, N. Yasui, N. Kamiko, T. Araki and Y. Nanishi, J. Environ. Eng., 2011, 137, 1215–1218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi and Y.-J. Choi, Water Res., 2010, 44, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Oranje, Gasontladingslampen (Gas-discharge lamps), Amsterdam, Meulenhoff,  1942 Search PubMed .
J. R. Bolton and K. G. Linden, J. Environ. Eng., 2003, 129, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Bolton and C. A. C. Cotton, The ultraviolet disinfection handbook, American Water Works Association, New York, U.S.A.,  2011 Search PubMed .

          W. Kowalski, Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation handbook: UVGI for air and surface disinfection, Springer Science & Business Media, New York, U.S.A.,  2010 Search PubMed .

          H. Hirayama, in III-Nitride Ultraviolet Emitters, Springer, Switzerland,  2016, pp. 75–113 Search PubMed .

          M. H. Crawford, M. A. Banas, M. P. Ross, D. S. Ruby, J. S. Nelson, R. Boucher and A. A. Allerman, Final LDRD report: Ultraviolet water purification systems for rural environments and mobile applications, Report 1, Sandia,  2005 Search PubMed.

          M. Kneissl, T. Kolbe, M. Würtele and E. Hoa, TECHNEAU: Technology Enabled Universal Access to Safe Water,  2010 Search PubMed.
H. Hideki, M. Noritoshi, F. Sachie, T. Shiro and K. Norihiko, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 100209 CrossRef .
C. Chatterley and K. Linden, J. Water Health, 2010, 8, 479–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Lui, D. Roser, R. Corkish, N. Ashbolt, P. Jagals and R. Stuetz, Sci. Total Environ., 2014, 493, 185–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oguma, R. Kita, H. Sakai, M. Murakami and S. Takizawa, Desalination, 2013, 328, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Nelson, D. W. McMartin, C. K. Yost, K. J. Runtz and T. Ono, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 5441–5448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Y. Lui, D. Roser, R. Corkish and R. Stuetz, presented in part at the 2014 Solar Research Conference,  2014 Search PubMed.
R. M. Jenny, M. N. Jasper, O. D. Simmons, M. Shatalov and J. J. Ducoste, Water Res., 2015, 83, 310–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Chevremont, A. M. Farnet, B. Coulomb and J. L. Boudenne, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 426, 304–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bowker, A. Sain, M. Shatalov and J. Ducoste, Water Res., 2011, 45, 2011–2019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bak, S. D. Ladefoged, M. Tvede, T. Begovic and A. Gregersen, Biofouling., 2010, 26, 31–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vilhunen, H. Särkkä and M. Sillanpää, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2009, 16, 439–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wengraitis, P. McCubbin, M. M. Wade, T. D. Biggs, S. Hall, L. I. Williams and A. W. Zulich, Photochem. Photobiol., 2013, 89, 127–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Würtele, T. Kolbe, M. Lipsz, A. Külberg, M. Weyers, M. Kneissl and M. Jekel, Water Res., 2011, 45, 1481–1489 CrossRef PubMed .

          Y. Gu, N. Narendran, T. Dong and H. Wu, Spectral and luminous efficacy change of high-power LEDs under different dimming methods, San Diego, California, USA,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Hamamoto, M. Mori, A. Takahashi, M. Nakano, N. Wakikawa, M. Akutagawa, T. Ikehara, Y. Nakaya and Y. Kinouchi, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2007, 103, 2291–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Chevremont, A. M. Farnet, M. Sergent, B. Coulomb and J. L. Boudenne, Desalination, 2012, 285, 219–225 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Lim, D. Kang, O. A. Ogunseitan and J. M. Schoenung, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 320–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Crystal IS, http://www.cisuvc.com/products/optan, (accessed 30 Nov,  2016) .
M. H. Rasoulifard, M. Fazli and M. R. Eskandarian, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 24, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
I. D. L. Obra, B. A. E. García, J. L. L. C. López, J. L. G. Sánchez and J. Sanchez, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016 10.1039/C6PP00245E .
N. Holonyak Jr and S. Bevacqua, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1962, 1, 82–83 CrossRef .

          E. Schubert, Light-emitting diodes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2006 Search PubMed .
T. S. Perry, IEEE Spectrum, 1995, 32, 52–55 CrossRef .
M. Asif Khan, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 7191–7206 CrossRef .

          M. Razeghi and M. Henini, Optoelectronic devices: III-nitrides, Gulf Professional Publishing, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. Han, M. H. Crawford, R. J. Shul, J. J. Figiel, M. Banas, L. Zhang, Y. K. Song, H. Zhou and A. V. Nurmikko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1688–1690 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kinoshita, H. Hirayama, M. Ainoya, Y. Aoyagi and A. Hirata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 175–177 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nishida, H. Saito and N. Kobayashi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 711–712 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, V. Adivarahan, M. Shatalov, Y. Lee, S. Wu, J. Yang, J. Zhang and M. A. Khan, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, L1419 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adivarahan, S. Wu, J. P. Zhang, A. Chitnis, M. Shatalov, V. Mandavilli, R. Gaska and M. A. Khan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4762–4764 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adivarahan, W. H. Sun, A. Chitnis, M. Shatalov, S. Wu, H. P. Maruska and M. A. Khan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 2175–2177 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hirayama, Y. Enomoto, A. Kinoshita, A. Hirata and Y. Aoyagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 37–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hirayama, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 091101 CrossRef .
H. Hirayama, A. Kinoshita, T. Yamabi, Y. Enomoto, A. Hirata, T. Araki, Y. Nanishi and Y. Aoyagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 207–209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Max, S. Wenhong, B. Yuri, S. Ajay, H. Xuhong, D. Jianyu, Y. Jinwei, S. Michael, M. Craig, W. Michael and G. Remis, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 062101 CrossRef .
S. Max, S. Wenhong, L. Alex, H. Xuhong, D. Alex, B. Yuri, Y. Jinwei, S. Michael, G. Remis, M. Craig, G. Gregory and W. Michael, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 082101 CrossRef .
T. Kolbe, F. Mehnke, M. Guttmann, C. Kuhn, J. Rass, T. Wernicke and M. Kneissl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 031109 CrossRef .
J. R. Grandusky, J. Chen, S. R. Gibb, M. C. Mendrick, C. G. Moe, L. Rodak, G. A. Garrett, M. Wraback and L. J. Schowalter, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 032101 CrossRef .
A. Fujioka, K. Asada, H. Yamada, T. Ohtsuka, T. Ogawa, T. Kosugi, D. Kishikawa and T. Mukai, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2014, 29, 084005 CrossRef .
Y. Taniyasu, M. Kasu and T. Makimoto, Nature, 2006, 441, 325–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Crystal IS, Single-chip UVC LED from Crystal IS Achieves 65 mW cw at 260 nm, http://www.ledinside.com/news/2013/3/uvc_led_crystal_is_20130325, (accessed 30 Nov, 2016) Search PubMed .

          Jason, Qingdao Jason Electric Unveils 10 mW UVC LEDs, http://www.ledinside.com/products/2016/10/qingdao_jason_electric_unveils_10mw_uvc_leds, (accessed 30 Nov, 2016) Search PubMed .
S. Wenhong, A. Vinod, S. Maxim, L. Youngbae, W. Shuai, Y. Jinwei, Z. Jianping and M. A. Khan, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, L1419 CrossRef .
H. Hirayama, S. Fujikawa, N. Noguchi, J. Norimatsu, T. Takano, K. Tsubaki and N. Kamata, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 1176–1182 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zhang, A. Chitnis, V. Adivarahan, S. Wu, V. Mandavilli, R. Pachipulusu, M. Shatalov, G. Simin, J. W. Yang and M. A. Khan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4910–4912 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Grandusky, S. R. Gibb, M. C. Mendrick, C. Moe, M. Wraback and L. J. Schowalter, Appl. Phys. Express, 2011, 4, 082101 CrossRef .
N. Maeda and H. Hirayama, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2013, 10, 1521–1524 CrossRef CAS .
K. Toru, O. Toshiyuki, N. Toru, Y. Hiroyuki, M. Baxter, M. Seiji, I. Shin-ichiro, K. Yoshinao, K. Akinori and S. Zlatko, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 092103 CrossRef .
S. Inoue, T. Naoki, T. Kinoshita, T. Obata and H. Yanagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 014036 CrossRef .
M. Ichikawa, A. Fujioka, T. Kosugi, S. Endo, H. Sagawa, H. Tamaki, T. Mukai, M. Uomoto and T. Shimatsu, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 072101 CrossRef .

          R. H. Haitz, M. G. Craford and R. H. Weissman, in Handbook of optics, San Jose, CA, U.S.A.,  1995, vol. 2, pp. 121–129 Search PubMed .
A. A. Bergh and P. J. Dean, Proc. IEEE, 1972, 60, 156–223 CrossRef .

          H. Ehrenreich and F. Spaepen, Solid state physics, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.,  2001 Search PubMed .
N. Shuji, M. Takashi and S. Masayuki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 30, L1998 CrossRef .

          R. H. Bishop, The Mechatronics Handbook, -2 Volume Set, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, U.S.A.,  2002 Search PubMed .

          E. F. Schubert, T. Gessmann and J. K. Kim, in Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, U.S.A.,  2005 Search PubMed .

          M. Schiler, Simplified design of building lighting, John Wiley & Sons, New York, U.S.A.,  1997 Search PubMed .
H. Amano, N. Sawaki, I. Akasaki and Y. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 353–355 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hiroshi, K. Masahiro, H. Kazumasa and A. Isamu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 28, L2112 CrossRef .
A. Hiroshi, A. Tsunemori and A. Isamu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1990, 29, L205 CrossRef .
S. Srivastava, S. Hwang, M. Islam, K. Balakrishnan, V. Adivarahan and A. Khan, J. Electron. Mater., 2009, 38, 2348–2352 CrossRef CAS .
R. France, T. Xu, P. Chen, R. Chandrasekaran and T. Moustakas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 062115 CrossRef .
R. E. Nahory, M. A. Pollack, E. D. Beebe and J. C. DeWinter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1975, 27, 356–357 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schlotter, J. Baur, C. Hielscher, M. Kunzer, H. Obloh, R. Schmidt and J. Schneider, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1999, 59, 390–394 CrossRef .
T. Mukai, D. Morita and S. Nakamura, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 189–190, 778–781 CrossRef .
C. A. Tran, A. Osinski, R. F. Karlicek and I. Berishev, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1494–1496 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan, K. Balakrishnan and T. Katona, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Krames, O. B. Shchekin, R. Mueller-Mach, G. Mueller, L. Zhou, G. Harbers and M. G. Craford, J. Disp. Technol., 2007, 3, 160–175 CrossRef CAS .

          M. S. Ha, Thermal analysis of high power LED arrays, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, U.S.A.,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. J. Xu, W. Yi-Feng, S. Keller, S. Heikman, B. J. Thibeault, U. K. Mishra and R. A. York, IEEE Microw. Guided Wave Lett., 1999, 9, 277–279 CrossRef .
J. J. Wierer, D. A. Steigerwald, M. R. Krames, J. J. O'Shea, M. J. Ludowise, G. Christenson, Y.-C. Shen, C. Lowery, P. S. Martin, S. Subramanya, W. Götz, N. F. Gardner, R. S. Kern and S. A. Stockman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 3379–3381 CrossRef CAS .

          M. R. Krames, F. A. Kish and T. S. Tan, US Pat., 6229160,  2001 Search PubMed .
M. R. Krames, M. Ochiai-Holcomb, G. E. Höfler, C. Carter-Coman, E. I. Chen, I.-H. Tan, P. Grillot, N. F. Gardner, H. C. Chui, J.-W. Huang, S. A. Stockman, F. A. Kish, M. G. Craford, T. S. Tan, C. P. Kocot, M. Hueschen, J. Posselt, B. Loh, G. Sasser and D. Collins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 2365–2367 CrossRef CAS .
I. Schnitzer, E. Yablonovitch, C. Caneau, T. J. Gmitter and A. Scherer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 2174–2176 CrossRef CAS .
R. Windisch, B. Dutta, M. Kuijk, A. Knobloch, S. Meinlschmidt, S. Schoberth, P. Kiesel, G. Borghs, G. H. Dohler and P. Heremans, IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2000, 47, 1492–1498 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. T. Habtemichael, Packaging designs for ultraviolet light emitting diodes, Georgia Institute of Technology, New York, U.S.A.,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. M. Barton, I. Hamerton, B. J. Howlin, J. R. Jones and S. Liu, Polymer, 1998, 39, 1929–1937 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Cavalieri and A. Bendich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Ravanat, T. Douki and J. Cadet, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2001, 63, 88–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mamane-Gravetz, K. G. Linden, A. Cabaj and R. Sommer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 7845–7852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inagaki, R. Hamm, E. Arakawa and L. Painter, J. Chem. Phys., 1974, 61, 4246–4250 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Chen, S. A. Craik and J. R. Bolton, Water Res., 2009, 43, 5087–5096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Rauth, Biophys. J., 1965, 5, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meulemans, Ozone: Sci. Eng., 1987, 9, 299–314 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Beck, H. B. Wright, T. M. Hargy, T. C. Larason and K. G. Linden, Water Res., 2015, 70, 27–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cabaj, R. Sommer, W. Pribil and T. Haider, Water Sci. Technol.: Water Supply, 2002, 2, 175–181 Search PubMed .
K. G. Linden, J. Thurston, R. Schaefer and J. P. Malley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 7571–7574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Linden, G. Shin and M. D. Sobsey, Water Sci. Technol., 2001, 43, 171–174 CAS .

          P. A. Rochelle, E. R. Blatchley III, P.-S. Chan, O. K. Scheible and C. Shen, Challenge Organisms for Inactivation of Viruses by Ultraviolet Treatment, Water Research Foundation and US EPA, Dmever, CO,  2010 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, J. Deng, J. Zhang, A. Lunev, Y. Bilenko, T. Katona, M. Shur, R. Gaska, M. Shatalov and A. Khan, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2006, 203, 1815–1818 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Huffman, T. R. Slifko, K. Salisbury and J. B. Rose, Water Res., 2000, 34, 2491–2498 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jacquet and G. Bratbak, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2003, 44, 279–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Mcguigan, R. M. Conroy, H. J. Mosler, P. M. Du, E. Ubombajaswa and P. Fernandezibañez, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 235, 29–46 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kohn and K. L. Nelson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 192–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, Y. Zhang, W. Qi, C. Ferronato, Y. Xi and J. M. Chovelon, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Schmelling, C. Cotton and E. Mackey, Ultraviolet disinfection guidance manual for the final long term 2 enhanced surface water treatment rule, United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Washington, DC,  2006 Search PubMed .
K. Song, M. Mohseni and F. Taghipour, Water Res., 2016, 94, 341–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chatterley and K. Linden, J. Water Health, 2010, 8, 479–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Haider, A. Cabaj, W. Pribil and M. Lhotsky, Water Sci. Technol., 1998, 38, 145–150 Search PubMed .
M. Mori, A. Hamamoto, A. Takahashi, M. Nakano, N. Wakikawa, S. Tachibana, T. Ikehara, Y. Nakaya, M. Akutagawa and Y. Kinouchi, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., 2007, 45, 1237–1241 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhenrong, H. Xiang and L. Xu, Appl. Opt., 2009, 48, 6627–6634 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Moreno and C.-C. Sun, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 1808–1819 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. MA, L.-Y. HE, T. LIU and P. SU, Guangxue Jingmi Gongcheng, 2013, 4, 013 Search PubMed .

          P. C.-P. Chao, L.-D. Liao and C.-W. Chiu, Design of a novel LED lens cap and optimization of LED placement in a large area direct backlight for LCD-TVs, Strasbourg, France,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. Luo, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert, J. Cho, C. Sone and Y. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 243505 CrossRef .
J. K. Kim, H. Luo, E. F. Schubert, J. Cho, C. Sone and Y. Park, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L649 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Winston, J. C. Miñano and P. G. Benitez, Nonimaging optics, Academic Press, Boston, MA, U.S.A.,  2005 Search PubMed .
H. Ries and J. Muschaweck, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2002, 19, 590–595 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wu, L. Xu, P. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Zheng, H. Li and X. Liu, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 229–231 Search PubMed .

          W. A. Parkyn, Illumination lenses designed by extrinsic differential geometry, Kona, HI,  1998 Search PubMed .

          B. Parkyn and D. Pelka, Free-form illumination lenses designed by a pseudo-rectangular lawnmower algorithm, San Diego, California, USA,  2006 Search PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. Liu, Z.-R. Zheng and P.-F. Gu, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 12958–12966 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Qian and Y. Luo, Appl. Opt., 2007, 46, 3716–3723 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, Z. Feng, Y. Han and H. Li, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 9055–9063 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bäuerle, A. Bruneton, R. Wester, J. Stollenwerk and P. Loosen, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 14477–14485 CrossRef PubMed .

          V. Oliker, in Trends in Nonlinear Analysis, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2003, pp. 193–224 Search PubMed .
F. R. Fournier, W. J. Cassarly and J. P. Rolland, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 5295–5304 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Michaelis, P. Schreiber and A. Bräuer, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 918–920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Chen, T.-Y. Wang, K.-L. Huang, T.-S. Liu, M.-D. Tsai and C.-T. Lin, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 10984–10995 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Harrah and D. P. Woolverton, US Pat., 6498355,  2002 Search PubMed .

          D. Nuttall, R. Shuttleworth and G. Routledge, presented in part at the 4th IET ConfPower Electronics, Machines and Drives, PEMD, York, 2–4 Apri,  2008 Search PubMed.

          W. Reymond, US Pat., 5936599,  1999 Search PubMed .

          T. L. Roney and B. S. Rigsby, US Pat., 5528474,  1996 Search PubMed .

          C. Chang, US Pat., 09823768,  2001 Search PubMed .
R. Mills, A. Uhl and K. Jandt, Br. Dent. J., 2002, 193, 459–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Blatchley, Water Res., 1997, 31, 2205–2218 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ducoste, D. Liu and K. Linden, J. Environ. Eng., 2005, 131, 1393–1403 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wols, L. Shao, W. Uijttewaal, J. Hofman, L. Rietveld and J. Van Dijk, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 4491–4502 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oguma, R. Kita and S. Takizawa, Photochem. Photobiol., 2016, 92, 314–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Dai, W. Dong, S. Zhang and J. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 215, 25–31 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Jenny, O. D. Simmons, M. Shatalov and J. J. Ducoste, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 116, 524–535 CrossRef CAS .
R. Simons, U. Gabbai and M. Moram, Water Res., 2014, 66, 338–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. D. Sobsey, Managing water in the home: accelerated health gains from improved water supply, World Health Organization Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,  2002 Search PubMed .

          M. A. Lange, T. Kolbe and M. Jekel, in III-Nitride Ultraviolet Emitters, Springer, Switzerland,  2016, pp. 267–291 Search PubMed .

Footnote† The authors declare no competing financial interest.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Water impact
Advances in materials science have intersected environmental engineering with the advent of UV LEDs for water disinfection. New solid-state light sources differ drastically from conventional gas-discharge lamps, risking unguided design. This review unpacks the UV LED from fundamentals to application, in an accessible manner, providing the information required to successfully transfer this technology to the water treatment community.


Mercury content	20–200 mg	None	Mercury free	Würtele 2011 (ref. 25), Lim 2010 (ref. 29)
Warm up time	2–15 min	Instantaneous	Intermittent-flow friendly; pulsing possible	Chatterley 2010 (ref. 14)
Size	20 mm (diameter) × 120 mm (length)	≈1 mm2	Easy integration	Kneissl 2010 (ref. 12)
Operating surface temperature	Polychromatic ∼600 °C; monochromatic ∼100 °C	Same as process water	Zero-flow friendly; not fouling promoting	Aoyagi 2011 (ref. 4)
Shell material	Quartz glass	Metal or ceramic	Durable	Crawford 2005 (ref. 11)
Architecture	Cylindrical tube	Point source	Versatile integration into any design	Aoyagi 2011 (ref. 4)
Wavelength	Polychromatic (200–300 nm); monochromatic (95% at 254 nm)	Monochromatic; available in a range of wavelengths (210–400 nm)	Targeted performance	Bolton 2003 (ref. 7), Hideki 2014 (ref. 13)
Voltage current	110−240 V AC; 0.5–2.0 amps	6–30 V DC; 0.02 amps	Battery/solar cell drive	Lui 2014 (ref. 15)
Replacement interval	5000–12000 h	3000 h (at 250 nm)–26000 h (at 365 nm)	Much longer lifetime	Crystal IS 2015 (ref. 30) Rasoulifard 2015 (ref. 31), Obra 2016 (ref. 32)

 	Fig. 1  External quantum efficiency and power output of UVC-LED chip versus time collected from published data of UVC-LEDs.13,42,43,47,48,50,52,55–62	 

 	Fig. 2  Circuit and energy level diagram schematics of an LED p–n junction in (a) initial movement of mobile carriers, (b) equilibrium with zero bias voltage applied, and (c) emitting light from the p–n junction when bias voltage is applied. The process of photon generation: (1) holes (h+) in the p-type neutral region (NR) and electrons (e−) in the n-type NR diffuse along the concentration gradient toward the interface (2) forming a depletion region (DR) devoid of mobile charge carriers, (3) creating an electric field (EF) that opposes the further exchange of charge carriers at equilibrium; (4) when a p–n junction is biased in the forward direction (5) this equilibrium is disrupted and current flows across the interface as electrons are injected from the n region into the p region; (6) when electrons in the n-region conduction band (CB) combine with holes in the p-region valence band (VB), excess energy equivalent to the band gap (BG) is released in the form of light and heat.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic view of the (a–d) UV LED chip fabricated and (e–f) LED lamp packaged.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Properties and schematics of an illustrative UV LED. (a) LED emission spectrum, (b) current–voltage curve, (c) radiant flux–current curve, (d) radiant flux–temperature, (e) redshift in peak wavelength with increased driving current, (f) angular diagram of LED radiant emission pattern. The dotted lines here are the typical operation value of a UV LED.	 

 	Fig. 5  Relationship between bandgap energy and emission wavelength in semiconductor UV LED material systems at room temperature. A typical DNA absorption spectrum for B. subtilis is shown in blue for reference.94	 


MS2 family (MS2, fr, R-17, 7-S)	253–265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a; Mamane–Gravetz 2005 (ref. 92)b; Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c
T-2	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
φX-174	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
Vaccinia	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMC)	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
Polyoma	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
Reovirus-3	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a
Fd	265	Rauth 1965 (ref. 95)a

Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis) spores	263–268	Cabaj 2002 (ref. 98)a; Mamane 2005 (ref. 92)b; Chen 2009 (ref. 94)b

S. typhimurium LT2	264	Chen 2009 (ref. 94)b
Adenovirus 2	260–270	Linden 2007 (ref. 99)a; Beck 2014 (ref. 97)c

Cryptosporidium parvum
	260–270	Linden 2001 (ref. 100)a; Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c

Bacillus pumilus
	260–265	Rochelle 2010 (ref. 101)a; Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c
T1UV	265	Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c
T-7	270	Beck 2015 (ref. 97)c

 	Fig. 6  The radiation patterns of (a) bare LED chip and (b) with different shapes of reflective cup structure.	 

Parabola-shape	0.9	0.81	24.5
Cylinder	0.9	0.35	58.5
Cone	0.6	0.74	20.0
0.7	1.40	13.5
0.9	2.10	11.5
1.1	2.03	11.5
1.2	1.96	13.0

 	Fig. 7  Radiation patterns of UV LEDs in typical TO (a–c) and SMD packaged (d–f).	 

Line	Line	Large radiation area; dispersed light
Curve
Plane	Rectangle	Uniform irradiation; small radiation area; high flux
Circle (annular)
Surface	Cylinder (inside or outside)	Inside: light converged; high flux; outside: light dispersed; large radiation area
Sphere (inside or outside)
Three-dimensional	Sphere	Uniform irradiation in every direction or along with cylindrical surface

 	Fig. 8  Conceptual reactor designs with (a) encased and (b) covered LED array.	 
Footnote
† The authors declare no competing financial interest.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
