Multifunctional metal-phosphide-based electrocatalysts for highly efficient solar hydrogen production integrated devices   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA09588B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09588B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 2899-2909Multifunctional metal-phosphide-based electrocatalysts for highly efficient solar hydrogen production integrated devices†

        
          
            Jin-Tao 
            Ren
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin-Lian 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing-Hui 
            Kong
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhong-Yong 
            Yuan
          
        
      *ab
aNational Institute for Advanced Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Smart Sensing Interdisciplinary Science Center, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: zyyuan@nankai.edu.cn.
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China
Received 
      9th December 2022
    , Accepted 9th January 2023First published on 9th January 2023AbstractUninterrupted H2 production from water electrolysis powered by sunlight is critical for the development of hydrogen economy. The key to realize this purpose is to construct integrated devices involving energy storage and water splitting and corresponding efficient electrocatalysts, which remains a significant challenge. Herein, we developed a new type of solar hydrogen production integrated device using rechargeable zinc–air battery as energy storage media and energy driven device and alkaline water electrolyzer as the H2 production terminal, wherein highly active FeNi phosphide-carbon hybrid materials prepared from the organophosphonic acid modified polyaniline polymer were employed as advanced electrode catalysts for the trifunctional HER/OER/ORR to improve device efficiency. Density functional theory calculations demonstrate that the hetero-engineering between FeNi phosphide and carbon modulates the d-band center, thereby improving the adsorption of intermediates during reactions. Further, the fabricated zinc–air battery with metal phosphide-based catalyst as an air cathode displays large power density (117 mW cm−2), excellent charge–discharge capability (voltage gap of 0.74 V at 10 mA cm−2), and outstanding cycling stability (over 500 h). The assembled water splitting electrolyzer also delivers low overpotentials (1.67 V at 20 mA cm−2) and excellent stability. Furthermore, two zinc–air batteries in series powered the overall water-splitting cell achievingan average H2 production rate of 0.24 mL min−1, demonstrating significant prospects for H2 production. Ultimately, this integrated water electrolysis device exhibited excellent stability in 15 day tests with the commercial silicon photovoltaic cell as the power source by day and the rechargeable zinc–air batteries provide electricity at night, without any decay in the performance. This work may provide new opportunities for low-cost and uninterruptible solar hydrogen production by constructing integrated devices.
1. Introduction
To resolve the tremendous problem of increasing energy depletion and environment pollution, the development of an integrated water electrolysis device driven by sustainable energy is highly pivotal in achieving industrial water electrolysis under higher current densities for continuous H2 production.1,2 Solar hydrogen production has been regarded as the most promising approach for H2 production, which obtains H2 directly from water splitting powered by renewable sunlight.3 However, the intermittent nature of sunlight hampers the continuous H2 production by solar energy powered water splitting.4 Therefore, it is significant to find a cost-effective and safe device for storing surplus solar energy during the day and releasing it when required at night and would realize efficient utilization of electricity from sunlight. Rechargeable metal–air batteries, for instance, aqueous zinc–air battery, benefiting from their larger theoretical energy density (1086 W h kg−1) and outstanding rechargeable efficiency, have been considered as ideal candidates.5 The electrocatalytic reactions involved in these devices contain the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), which determine the overall performance of energy conversion devices.6 Conventionally, noble metal-based catalysts, for instance, Pt/C, RuO2, IrO2, have been widely utilized to boost the sluggish reaction kinetics, and are considered as the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts of the past decades.7,8 Nevertheless, there still exist some inherent deficiencies for those noble metal electrocatalysts. Firstly, the limited reserves caused unfavorable cost and sensitive durability to certain small poisoning molecules, such as SOx, CO, and POx, significantly hindering the scalable and practical applications. Thus, it is necessary to prepare noble-metal free alternatives with excellent activity and robust stability.9 Secondly, in order to meet the needs of actual application in various devices, it is desirable to explore alternative catalysts with multi-functionality, for instance, the bifunctional OER-ORR electrocatalysts for rechargeable metal–air batteries, and bifunctional HER-OER catalysts for water electrolyzer.10 Most importantly, it is quite difficult to design multifunctional catalysts since different electrochemical reactions always need various types of active species.11 It has been accepted that multifunctional catalysts with excellent activity and stability, as well as acceptable cost, can be obtained by the rational structural and compositional design and optimization, depending on the environmentally benign and sustainable resources.
Recently, the nanoengineered transition metal phosphides (TMPs, TM = Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) and their derivatives have attracted huge interest as noble-metal free catalysts with acceptable activity and stability for different reactions, including ORR, OER, and HER.12,13 In particular, TMPs-based hybrid materials also exhibit bifunctional performance in some cases.14 Despite these exciting achievements, there still remain some formidable challenges for nanoengineered TMPs-based catalysts. Firstly, although the development of TMPs-based materials with bifunctional OER-ORR activities has been widely reported, achieving the trifunctional electrocatalysts remains an important goal.15,16 It is highly attractive to integrate the inspiring ORR, OER, and HER activity into the unified TMPs-based catalysts for the production and utilization of sustainable energy.17 Secondly, only the active sites at the gas–liquid–solid boundary can contribute to electrocatalytic reactions, considered as exposed or accessible active centers, while the present TMPs-based hybrids are normally designed by encapsulating nanoparticles into the monotonous carbon matrix.18,19 The monotonous pore structure is easily blocked by adsorbed reactant molecules or evacuated gas bubbles, and therefore impede the contact of reactants and desorption of products on active sites. The development of an in situ formed hierarchically structured electrode with self-supported structure would boost the mass transfer and improve the utilization of active sites during electrochemical reactions.20,21 Therefore, it is critical to develop a high-performance integrated device with continuous H2 production, and achieve active and robust TMPs-based trifunctional electrocatalysts with simple synthesis method and low cost to enhance the energy conversion efficiency.22,23
Herein, with the assistance of the supermolecular assembly strategy by using organophosphonic acid-modified polyaniline nanofibers as precursor, a 3D heterogeneous assembling porous electrode composed of ultrafine FeNiP nanoparticles within a N,P-doped porous carbon nanofiber layer on carbon cloth (labeled as FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC) was fabricated. The presence of organophosphonic acids in the polyaniline network not only ensures the in situ phosphorization of metal components during the carbonization process, but also regulates the pyrolysis process of polyaniline to form meso-/micro-pores into the final carbon matrix. Benefitting from the synergistic effect of hierarchically porous morphology, abundant/multiple active sites and an integrated electrode structure, the resultant FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits remarkable tri-functional electrocatalytic performance for HER (89 mV at 10 mA cm−2, Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1), ORR (E1/2 at 0.82 V, Tafel slope of 127 mV dec−1), and OER (317 mV at 10 mA cm−2, Tafel slope of 75 mV dec−1) in alkaline media. In-depth density functional theory (DFT) stimulations indicate that the interaction between FeNiP and the heteroatoms-doped carbon modulate the electronic structure and d-band center, which significantly facilitates the adsorption of intermediates during reactions. With the efficient catalysis of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, the assembled aqueous zinc–air battery and alkaline water splitting cell exhibit excellent device performance and impressive stability. Ultimately, the integrated electrolyzer, powered by a commercial silicon photovoltaic cell during the day and aqueous zinc–air batteries at night, can produce significant amounts of H2 with zero energy consumption from fossil energy in 15 day tests.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Morphological and structural characterization
The preparation of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC was achieved by a supermolecular assembly-assisted electrodeposition approach, and the overall synthetic procedures are illustrated in Scheme 1. Firstly, the organophosphonic acids (amino trimethylene phosphonic acid, ATMP)-modified polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers on carbon cloth (labeled as PANI-ATMP/CC) was fabricated through a facile electrodeposition strategy. Herein, the organophosphonic acids were selected to replace the inorganic acids. The presence of organophosphonic acids not only induces the polymerization of aniline monomers, but also enables the formation of hydrogen bonds between PANI and ATMP to achieve the in situ insertion of phosphorus elements into the polymer skeletons.24 Then, FeNi LDH was further attached onto the surface of PANI-ATMP/CC (denoted as LDH PANI-ATMP/CC) by the electrodeposition route with the presence of iron and nickel salts in aqueous solution. Finally, to fabricate the FeNiP phosphides-loaded porous carbon fiber on carbon cloth (labeled as FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC), the assembled LDH PANI-ATMP/CC underwent thermal annealing treatment at 900 °C for 2 h under Ar protection.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and NiFe@NCF/CC. 
The morphology and components of PANI-ATMP/CC were firstly characterized. The SEM images in Fig. S1† show the typical morphology of PANI-ATMP/CC. Uniform nanofibers with the diameter of approximately 30 nm are shown entangled with each other, and the interconnected 3D network is anchored on the skeleton of the carbon cloth to form the monolithic and integrated structure. By using inorganic HCl to replace the organophosphonic acids, a similar nanofiber morphology is still obtained (Fig. S2†). As shown on the FTIR spectrum in Fig. S3,† the typical N–H, C–N+, NQN, and CC bonds are clearly observed for PANI-ATMP/CC and PANI/CC, verifying the formation of polyaniline after electrodeposition treatment.25,26 In particular, the weak peak at 991 cm−1 for PANI-ATMP/CC is ascribed to the P–OH stretching vibrations,27 which disappeared in the spectrum of PANI/CC. This fact directly proves the introduction of ATMP molecules into the PANI frameworks, which would facilitate the post-modification of the resultant carbon materials during the pyrolysis stage.
After thermal annealing treatment, the morphology and microstructure of the resultant samples were characterized. Low-magnification TEM images of NCF/CC in Fig. 1a display the randomly oriented nanofibers with rough surface. Further magnification in Fig. 1b shows that NCF/CC has microporous channels. However, with respect to the p-NPCF/CC sample (Fig. 1c and d), the clear micropores are presented on the nanofibers, while the entire fiber morphology is well-maintained. The specific surface area of p-NPCF/CC determined from N2 sorption isotherms (Fig. S4†) is 327 m2 g−1. This value is larger than that of the NCF/CC prepared with the absence of organophosphonic acids, which supports the TEM observation that introducing organophosphonic acids into polyaniline frameworks can significantly change the textural properties of the resultant carbon matrix. To clearly reflect the pyrolysis behavior of the polyaniline with or without organophosphonic acid molecules in the frameworks, thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) was performed. As shown in Fig. S5† for the PANI/CC sample, the decomposition of PANI starts from about 230 °C. Meanwhile, the stability of the resultant PANI-ATMP/CC decreased to a lower temperature at 200 °C, demonstrating that the decomposition of the organic components can be significantly accelerated. In addition, PANI-ATMP/CC has a relatively lower carbon yield than PANI/CC under the same temperature, which further proves the changed pyrolysis behavior of PANI after interconnecting the organophosphonic acids molecules into the frameworks.
 Fig. 1  (a and b) TEM images of NCF/CC. (c and d) TEM images of p-NPCF/CC. (e–g) TEM images and (h) high-resolution TEM images of FeNi@NCF/CC. (i and j) TEM images and (k) high-resolution TEM image, (l) HAADF-STEM and the corresponding elemental mapping images, and (m) SEM image of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC. 
The TEM images (Fig. 1e–g) of FeNi@NCF/CC synthesized in the absence of organophosphonic acids show stacked nanofibers with ultrafine nanoparticles. High-resolution TEM analysis in Fig. 1h exhibits the clear lattice fringes with the interplane spacing of 0.209 nm, corresponding to the (111) plane of Ni. The slightly enlarged lattice fringe distance should be ascribed to the doping of Fe atoms to form FeNi alloys. For the synthesized FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC sample (Fig. 1i and j), an evident porous structure is clearly observed on the nanofibers, in accordance with the sample of p-NPCF/CC. Particles with the average diameters of 10 nm are uniformly dispersed on the nanofibers. The high-resolution TEM images in Fig. 1k exhibit lattice fringes of 0.204 nm, which matches well with the (130) lattice plane of Ni2P. The HAADF-STEM images and the corresponding EDX mapping images (Fig. 1l) provide evidence that C, N, P, Fe, and Ni elements are uniformly dispersed on the nanofiber skeleton, and the scattered nanoparticles are composed of FeNi phosphides. This indicates that the high-temperature pyrolysis of organophosphonic acids would result in the sublimation of phosphorus from the phosphorus functionalities under higher temperature, which could react with the metal species to facilitate the formation of metal phosphides throughout the porous carbon materials. This phosphorus form as the small organic molecule source is desirable owing to its affordable cost. This ensures the efficiency of this one-pot approach to prepare FeNiP-carbon nanostructures with better characterizations in comparison with those traditional approaches involving excessive NaH2PO2 or red phosphorus. The cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 1m) of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC demonstrates that the thickness of the surface nanofibers layer is about 10 μm. This multi-scale structure endows FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC with the favorable mass transferability with the abundantly exposed active centers and improved gas diffusion coefficient, which is significant to the multifunctional and outstanding electrochemical performance.
The powder XRD patterns (Fig. 2a) exhibit the broad diffraction peaks at about 26° and 41° (2θ) for the metal-free samples of p-NPCF/CC and NCF/CC, assignable to the diffractions from the (002) and (100) planes for graphitic carbon, respectively. With respect to the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and NiFe@NCF/CC samples, all of the diffraction peaks are indexed into Ni (JCPDS No.65-2865) and Ni2P (JCPDS No.03-0953), respectively, which is consistent with their high-resolution TEM observations. Due to the similar atomic radii of Fe and Ni, the Fe atom tends to imbed into the skeleton of Ni and Ni2P in the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and NiFe@NCF/CC samples, respectively. Therefore, the slightly shifted diffraction peaks in comparison with their standard diffraction data are observed for the prepared FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and NiFe@NCF/CC samples.28,29
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the prepared samples. High-resolution XPS spectra of (b) C 1s, (c) N 1s, and (d) P 2p for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, NiFe@NCF/CC, and p-NPCF/CC. High-resolution XPS spectra of (e) Fe 2p, and (f) Ni 2p for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, and NiFe@NCF/CC. 
To investigate the surface chemical states and interaction of the fabricated samples, XPS analysis was conducted. As shown on the survey spectra of each sample in Fig. S6,† all of the targeted elements are found. Furthermore, the content of Fe and Ni in FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC are determined to be 0.57 at% and 0.41 at%, respectively, which are consistent with the ICP-OES results. The high-resolution C 1s spectrum (Fig. 2b) can be deconvoluted into the C–N/C–P peak at the binding energy of 286.1 eV, indicating the incorporation of N and P into the C skeleton. In the case of the N 1s spectrum (Fig. 2c), as for the metal–carbon hybrids, it can be assigned to five contributions: the pyridinic N (398.3 eV), Fe/Ni–Nx(399.4 eV), pyrrolic N (400.3 eV), graphitic N (401.3 eV) and oxygenated N (403.8 eV).30 The formation of pyridinic N and Fe/Ni–Nx is favorable for the electrocatalytic activity by modulating the local electronic structure.31,32 The high-resolution spectrum of P 2p (Fig. 2d) exhibits two peaks centered at 129.5 and 130.6 eV, which can be attributed to the spin-splitting peaks of P in the Fe/Ni–P species. The broad peak located at 133.4 eV can be deconvoluted into two peaks. The peak at 133.1 eV comes from the P–C species, which further confirms the successful doping of P in the carbon skeleton. Finally, the other peak (134.5 eV) can be derived from the oxidized phosphorus.33,34 The high-resolution Fe 2p and Ni 2p spectra in Fig. 2e and f, respectively, exhibit the typical peaks assigned to Fe0 and Ni0, further indicating the formation of the FeNi alloy-loaded carbon matrix. For the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalysts, the peaks located at 706.7 and 720.3 eV in the high-resolution Fe 2p spectrum (Fig. 2e) can be assigned to the Fe–P species in the FeP phase, while those at 711.5 and 725.0 eV can be ascribed to the surface oxidized Fe-based species.35,36 Typical Ni–P bonds at 853.5 and 869.6 eV are also observed on the high-resolution Ni 2p spectrum (Fig. 2f), which further prove the formation of metal phosphides with the assistance of organophosphonic acids.37 Those microstructural, morphological, and surface chemical interaction results verify that the advanced nanofibers hybrid materials composed for FeNiP nanoparticles anchored on the N,P-doped porous carbon matrix assembled into the 3D integrated electrode can be easily fabricated by the organophosphonic acids-assisted electrodeposition route. Furthermore, the materials have a hierarchically porous structure in carbon fibers, dual heteroatom-doped carbon matrix, abundant active species of FeNiP, and 3D integrated electrode structure to assure the multifunctional electrocatalytic functions.38,39
2.2. Electrochemical activity performance
The electrocatalytic performance of the fabricated materials was evaluated by the typical three-electrode setup, and the fabricated binder-free catalysts were directly used as the working electrode. Fig. 3a shows the typical iR-corrected HER polarization curves in 1.0 M KOH. FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits the smaller overpotential of 89 mV to deliver the current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is much lower than those of FeNi@NCF/CC, p-NPCF/CC, and NCF/CC, and approaches that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. These activity differences indicate the importance of FeNiP as the active species in the hybrid nanostructure toward HER.40,41 In particular, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC also exhibits a smaller Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1 (Fig. 3a), lower than that of other samples, which implies the favorable reaction kinetics. The smaller charge-transfer resistance (Rct) value (Fig. S8†) of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC also proves the improved reaction kinetics in comparison with other samples. In addition, the intrinsic activity of the as-prepared catalysts was evaluated by employing the turnover frequency (TOF), wherein the amount of active sites was calculated by using CV (Fig. S9†). Evidently, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC shows higher TOF values than FeNi@NCF/CC, p-NPCF/CC, and NCF/CC in the entire potential region (Fig. S10†), indicating the intrinsic reason for the excellent HER activities. The stability of the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC was also estimated via chronopotentiometry analysis and continuous CV measurements (Fig. 3b). After continuous testing for 12 h, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC retained 96.8% of the initial current density, which is evidently higher than that of the Pt/C catalyst under identical conditions. The polarization curves of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC after 1000 CV cycles nearly overlays its initial curve. Furthermore, the individual nanofiber structure of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC after the stability test is still maintained (Fig. S11†).
 Fig. 3  LSV curves and corresponding Tafel slopes, as well as the stability tests of various samples for (a and b) HER in H2-saturated 1.0 M KOH, (c and d) ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH, (e and f) OER in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH. (g) Diagram for comparing the trifunctional HER/OER/ORR activities of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC with other reported catalysts. 
Taking into consideration the multiple active components involved in FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, such as Fe/Ni–N–C, FeNiP nanoparticles and N,P co-doped carbon, which are all effective for O2 electrocatalysis, the alkaline ORR and OER performances were further investigated. The ORR polarization curves without the iR compensation of the catalysts are shown in Fig. S12.† FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits the positive onset potential and the larger current density compared with other samples, indicating the excellent capability for O2 reduction. To further reflect the reaction kinetics behavior for those fabricated catalysts, the catalyst powder scraped from their self-supported electrode was also measured on the RDE instruments. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curve for the catalysts under 1600 rpm in Fig. 3c shows that NiFeP@p-NPCF has a higher half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.82 V, which is superior to other catalysts, and is just 19 mV lower compared with the Pt/C catalyst. NiFeP@p-NPCF also delivers a larger diffusion current density in comparison with other samples. It should be noted that the ORR performance of the metal-free p-NPCF nearly approaches that of NiFe@NCF. Those results indicate that the sufficient active components and the hierarchically porous structure are critical for the excellent ORR activity.42 The corresponding Tafel plots in Fig. 3c reveal the lower Tafel slope for NiFeP@p-NPCF, suggesting the favorable reaction kinetics toward ORR. Moreover, the relatively lower Tafel slopes indicate that the electron transfer step together with the conversion of O2 to the surface adsorbed *OOH might be the rate-determining step.43 The LSV curves measured at different rotation speeds (Fig. S13a†) were further investigated to determine the electrocatalytic kinetics for NiFeP@p-NPCF toward ORR. According to the Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots in Fig. S13b,† the electron transfer number per oxygen molecule (n) can be determined to be approximately 3.90 at various potentials. Moreover, the RRDE measurements in Fig. S14† show that the electron transfer number exceeds the value of 3.80 in the potential region from 0.8 to 0 V vs. RHE. This is associated with the lower H2O2 yield (<10%). These results indicate the efficient 4e− transfer pathway. The stability of NiFeP@p-NPCF was also evaluated by continuous CV scanning and chronoamperometry test (Fig. 3d). It is revealed that E1/2 negatively shifts by about 13 mV after 1000 cycles. The chronoamperometry curve also demonstrates the better stability of NiFeP@p-NPCF in comparison with the Pt/C catalyst, demonstrating the robust durability for continuous operation.
Besides the excellent ORR activity, the highly efficient performance for OER is also required because the discharging and charging processes of the metal–air batteries are totally controlled by the ORR and OER, respectively. Herein, the iR-corrected OER polarization curves for different catalysts are shown in Fig. 3e. FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC still exhibits the highest OER activity, and requires an overpotential of 317 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 and renders a lower Tafel slope for 75 mV dec−1. The performance of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC is evidently better compared to other samples, and even approaches that of the commercial RuO2 catalyst. In addition, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits a lower Rct than other samples (Fig. S15†), implying the faster reaction kinetics. In particle, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits the TOF value of 0.26 s−1 at the overpotential of 400 mV (Fig. S16†), which is nearly 1.4 times higher than that of FeNi@NCF/CC, further proving the excellent intrinsic activity toward OER. Importantly, as shown in Fig. 3f, the polarization curves of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC after 1000 cycles remain nearly unchanged in comparison with its initial curve. It is worth mentioning that the chronoamperometry test for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC also exhibits robust stability for long-term operation. The robust stability for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC can be rationally ascribed to its well-designed hybrid structure, unique 3D porous carbon skeleton, and integrated electron structure.
The performances of a large number of previously reported multifunctional electrocatalysts and this fabricated FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalyst are plotted together in Fig. 3g. The smaller overpotentials of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC are observed compared with the other catalysts, highlighting the advantages of this fabrication strategy for the preparation of active and stable electrocatalysts derived from nonprecious metal elements.
2.3. Insight into the activity contribution
For gas-involved catalytic reactions, not all active sites are involved in the electrocatalytic processes. Only the active sites at the gas–solid–liquid boundary contribute to the electrocatalytic capability, which are labeled as the exposed or accessible active sites.44,45 To further evaluate the relationship between the geometric structure and electrocatalytic performance, the porous structure of all fabricated catalysts was investigated by N2 sorption isotherms. As plotted in Fig. S17,† the fabricated FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and p-NPCF/CC have larger specific surface areas than FeNi@NCF/CC and NCF/CC. Usually, the micropore is easily blocked by adsorbed water, and impedes the effective contact of reactants to active sites. Meanwhile, the meso-/macro-pores can accelerate the transfer of reactant and product.46 On the basis of the isotherms, the specific surface areas of the meso-/macro-pores of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and p-NPCF/CC are calculated to be 77 and 91 m2 g−1, respectively, which are higher than those of FeNi@NCF/CC and NCF/CC. This means that the exposed active sites and mass transfer behavior of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC with hierarchically porous architecture would be significantly improved.47 The electrochemically double layer capacitance (Cdl) tests also unambiguously illustrate the advantages of the meso-/macro-pores structure. FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits the largest Cdl value of 21.37 mF cm−2 (Fig. S18†), which is evidently higher than that of FeNi@NCF/CC. The Cdl value of metal-free p-NPCF/CC even approaches that of FeNi@NCF/CC. These results imply that the assembled nanofibers with porous structure could expose the most available electrochemical active sites for electrocatalysis.
Next, the additional experiments were conducted to investigate the accessible active sites and O2 diffusion coefficient in those fabricated catalysts. The CV curves of the catalysts were collected at different scan rates in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. The oxygen diffusion coefficient was determined by linear fitting of the current peaks to the square roots of the scan rates. As shown in Fig. S19c, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC has a larger oxygen diffusion coefficient of 1.085 × 10−3 cm2 s−1 compared with FeNi@NCF/CC (0.797 × 10−3 cm2 s−1). In addition, as shown in Fig. 4a, the catalyst was firstly immersed in O2-saturated electrolyte to manipulate all of the accessible active sites filled with dissolved O2. Then, the catalyst was immersed into N2 saturated-electrolyte and the electrolyte was bubbled by flowing N2.48 The chronoamperometry was measured at 0.80 V vs..RHE to consume the adsorbed O2 in the catalyst. The collected current density gradually decreased to zero. The amount of adsorbed O2 can be calculated by the quantity of electricity. As displayed in Fig. 4b, a higher amount of adsorbed O2 is achieved by FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC in comparison with other samples, indicating the greater number of exposed active sites to adsorb O2. As depicted in Fig. 4c, these results indicate that the meso-/macro-pores improve the mass transferability of the reactant and product, and then increases the density of the exposed active sites.49,50 Hence, the designed hierarchical structure with uniformly dispersed active components could significantly enhance the electrocatalytic performance in aqueous electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic measurement of the adsorbed oxygen quantity in the catalyst. (b) Chronoamperometry curves and adsorbed oxygen content. (c) Schematic diagram of the accessible active sites and mass transfer process. (d) Three-dimensional charge density difference of the FeNiP/NPC heterostructure. (e) Computed work function of FeNiP/NPC and FeNiP. (f) Total and projected DOS for FeNiP/NPC and FeNiP. 
To understand the electronic interaction between the metal phosphides and heteroatom-doped carbon substrates on the electrocatalytic performance at the atomic level, DFT calculations were performed. To illustrate the localization distribution of the interface electron, the differential charge density was also carried out. From the three-dimensional charge density difference observation in Fig. 4d, the electrons mainly appear near the interfaces and lead to the depletion (yellow) and accumulation (blue) of charges at the interfaces, in which the metal phosphides clusters connect with the carbon substrates, which would be helpful for accelerating the interfacial charge transfer. The deformation charge density facilitates adsorption and the activation of reaction intermediates. The work function was also calculated to further reflect the interfacial electron migration. A lower work function meant that less energy was needed to transfer the electron from the inside of the catalysts to the surface. The work function of FeNiP/NPC is 3.608 eV (Fig. 4e), which is lower than that of FeNiP (4.450 eV), illustrating the more likely surface electron migration and participation of more electrons in the electrocatalytic reactions. The density of states (DOS) was also employed to reflect the electronic structure difference of FeNiP before and after hetero-engineering. The DOS results (Fig. 4f) show that the d-band of FeNiP/NPC can be adjusted by heterointerface engineering compared with the pure FeNiP cluster, and the d-band center of FeNiP/NPC shifts negatively. According to the d-band center theory, the higher energy difference between the Fermi level and d-band center would weaken the adsorption of the reaction intermediates, and the electrocatalytic performance would be evidently improved.51 It could be speculated that the multifunctional catalytic activities can be promoted and balanced when the metal species and adsorbed intermediates have a relatively suitable adsorption ability and accelerated electron transfer. Therefore, those stimulation results demonstrate that the metal phosphides-carbon hetero-engineering could adjust the interfacial electron distribution and d-band center, thus facilitating the adsorption and activation of the reaction intermediates, synergistically enabling the multifunctional electrocatalytic performance.
2.4. Rechargeable zinc–air battery and water splitting performance
Benefiting from the excellent activity and stability of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC for alkaline OER and ORR, the homemade zinc–air battery was further investigated. The configuration of the assembled aqueous zinc–air battery is illustrated in Fig. 5a. The charge–discharge polarization curves of the zinc–air battery are shown in Fig. 5b. The charge–discharge potential gap at 10 mA cm−2 for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC is 0.74 V, which is smaller compared with the benchmark for Pt/C + RuO2 and FeNi@NCF/CC. A peak power density of 117 mW cm−2 is achieved by this FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC-catalyzed battery at the output voltage of 0.596 V. This is better than that of the noble metal Pt/C + RuO2 combination (106 mW cm−2), as well as many air electrodes in the previously reported literature (Table S2†). The specific capacity of 764.2 mA h gzn−1 can be achieved for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, which is superior to that of Pt/C + RuO2 (748.9 mA h gzn−1) and FeNi@NCF/CC (742.1 mA h gzn−1), at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5c), indicating the superior specific capacity. The corresponding gravimetric energy density of the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC-catalyzed battery is 904.8 mW h gzn−1, which is still higher than that of Pt/C + RuO2 (818.1 mW h gzn−1) and FeNi@NCF/CC (839.6 mW h gzn−1). The cycling durability of this FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC-catalyzed battery was also measured. As observed in Fig. 5d, at the current density of 10 mA cm−2, the repeated charge–discharge curves reflect the negligible voltage fading after continuous operation for 500 h (500 cycles), and the round-trip efficiency just decreases from 61% to 53%, indicating the outstanding cycle stability. In contrast, the formed battery with the Pt/C + RuO2 catalyst presents poor cycling stability with the evident activity decline after 100 cycles. In addition, as shown in Fig. 5e, the “NK” logo consisting of seventeen of light-emitting diodes (LED) can be powered by two FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC-catalyzed zinc–air batteries connected in series.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the liquid zinc–air battery. (b) Charge–discharge polarization curves and the corresponding power density curves of the fabricated zinc–air battery. (c) Specific capacity curves at different current densities. (d) Discharge/charge cycle curves at 10.0 mA cm−2. (e) LEDs are lit by batteries in series. 
Inspired by the impressive HER and OER performance in alkaline media, FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC was considered as the bifunctional electrocatalyst in a two-electrode electrolyzer for H2 production, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. Determined from their polarization curves in Fig. 6b, cell voltages of 1.50 and 1.67 V are required for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC to deliver the current density of 10 and 20 mA cm−2, respectively, which is comparable with the reported transition metal-based catalysts (Table S3†). Furthermore, the multistep chronoamperometric assessments in Fig. 6c exhibit the stable current output under different current densities, demonstrating the superior stability for overall water splitting. The faradaic efficiency for HER and OER in this FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC-catalyzed electrolyzer approach is 97% (Fig. S20†) using the water displacement method (Fig. S21†), implying the high efficiency of producing H2 and O2. Benefiting from the multifunctional FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalyst, we propose the integrated devices to realize the self-driven H2 production by the rechargeable zinc–air battery-powered water electrolyzer, as shown in Fig. 6d. This integrated system includes one two-electrode electrolyzer powered by two zinc–air batteries connected in series with the open circuit of 2.86 V (Fig. S22†), and the fabricated FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC as the multifunctional electrode in all devices. When the anode and cathode of the two-electrode electrolyzer are connected to the positive electrode and negative electrodes of the zinc–air batteries, the H2 and O2 bubbles are stably generated on the cathode and anode, respectively. There results demonstrate the promising operational ability of this self-driven electrolyzer for green H2 production. Moreover, the generated H2 and O2 are collected by the water displacement method (Fig. S24†). As shown in Fig. 6e, the generated volumes of H2 and O2 exhibit a linear relationship with the testing time. The ratio of the production rates for H2 to O2 is nearly 2.0, in accordance with the theoretical ratio. Within only 60 min with the power of the zinc–air batteries, a volume of 14.1 mL H2 is produced, corresponding to the average H2 production rate of 0.24 mL min−1, manifesting the significant prospect for H2 production. This achievement indicates the significant practicability of this self-driven electrolyzer based on the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalyst for cost-effective and sustainable H2 production.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-electrode electrolyzer. (b) Polarization curves of the two-electrode electrolyzer and inset is the activity comparison. (c) Catalytic stability of the bifunctional FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalyst. (d) Digital image of the water-splitting unit powered by liquid Zn–air battery and the detailed gas generation on the HER electrode and OER electrode. (e) The volume of gases experimentally measured versus working time. (f) Digital images of the uninterrupted H2 production system by water splitting powered by solar photovoltaic and aqueous zinc–air batteries. (g) Current density versus time curves of this hydrogen production system powered by solar energy in day and aqueous zinc–air batteries in night. 
To implement carbon-neutral production, a new type of solar hydrogen production integrated device is presented as shown in Fig. 6f, wherein the hydrogen production by the water-splitting electrolyzer can be powered by electricity derived from the solar cell in sunlight. The charge operation of the rechargeable zinc–air battery can also be conducted by the solar panels to store the solar energy in the battery, while the continuous hydrogen production in the dark can be powered by the aqueous zinc–air battery as the power supply. Firstly, the operability of photovoltage charging of the aqueous zinc–air battery was evaluated. When charged by the silicon photovoltaic cell for 60 min, as illustrated in the inset in Fig. S25,† the discharge platform with the current density of 10 mA cm−2 of the zinc–air battery remains nearly constant while operating for over 1000 min. Subsequently, powered by the silicon photovoltaic cell during the day and aqueous zinc–air battery during the night, the uninterruptible H2 production from the two-electrode electrolyzer is achieved, and the corresponding current density versus time curves are shown in Fig. 6g. With the electrolysis progressing, the collected current density of the electrolyzer exhibited fluctuations during the day, which can be ascribed to the fluctuation of the light intensity of the sunlight. The largest current density of about 130 mA cm−2 is achieved. With the power of the aqueous zinc–air batteries, the stable current density output of the electrolyzer is presented, highlighting the high processing stability of the FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC cathode for battery discharging. After calculating based on their current–time curves, the produced H2 volume is about 0.778 L in the first day, illustrating the satisfactory potential for uninterruptible H2 production from sustainable energy. More importantly, such integrated hydrogen production device can be continuously operated in 15 day tests.
3. Conclusions
In this work, the flexible and integrated 3D electrode composed of hierarchically porous carbon nanofibers and FeNiP nanoparticles was successfully fabricated by pyrolyzing the organophosphonic acids-modified polyaniline nanofibers with FeNi LDH. The 3D framework is totally formed by the interconnected N,P co-doped carbon nanofibers with hierarchically porous structure, ensuring the sufficient active sites and superior charge/mass transfer characterizations. As expected, the fabricated FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC exhibits excellent activity and is satisfactory for alkaline HER/ORR/OER. DFT stimulations verify that the hetero-engineering between FeNiP and carbon substrates significantly modulates the d-band center and interfacial electron distribution, thereby facilitating the adsorption of reaction intermediates during different electrocatalytic reactions. Correspondingly, the resultant rechargeable zinc–air battery and two-electrode electrolyzer with FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC electrode exhibit high activity and excellent durability. As a proof-of-concept, the sustainable H2 production can be implemented by employing the rechargeable zinc–air battery to drive the overall water-splitting reaction, relying on the developed FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalyst. The concept of a new type of solar hydrogen production integrated device is also presented, wherein the uninterruptible H2 production from a two-electrode electrolyzer powered by a silicon photovoltaic cell in the day and aqueous zinc–air batteries in the night is evaluated. This integrated water electrolysis device exhibits excellent stability in 15 day tests. This reported contribution not only supplies a universal approach to engineer transition metal phosphide-based nanomaterials, but also presents the new concept for solar hydrogen production with sustainable energy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22179065, 22105108, and 21875118), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M680860), and the Smart Sensing Interdisciplinary Science Center, Nankai University.
Notes and references
R. Yang, X. Zheng, M. Qin, B. Lin, X. Shi and Y. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2201594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhao, K. Du, P. F. Yin, J. Ran, J. Mao, T. Ling and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Sci., 2021, 9, 2104363 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Chen, J. Zhang, M. S. Balogun, P. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2112738 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, K.-h. Ye, S. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Huang and H. Ji, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131027 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Li, J. White, C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu and T. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801396 CrossRef .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 816–854 RSC .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803329 CrossRef .
J. Shan, C. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Dong, W. Xu, L. Chen, Y. Jiao, Y. Jiang, L. Song, Y. Zhang, M. Jaroniec, Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 23214–23222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Vijayakuma, S. Ramakrishnan, C. Sathiskumar, D. J. Yoo, J. Balamurugan, H. S. Noh, D. Kwon, Y. H. Kim and H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131115 CrossRef .
V. Vij, S. Sultan, A. M. Harzandi, A. Meena, J. N. Tiwari, W. G. Lee, T. Yoon and K. S. Kim, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7196–7225 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, Q. Liu, Y. Ma, Z. Fang, Z. Liang, G. Shao, B. Tang, W. Yang, L. Qin and X. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903854 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. T. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 713–747 RSC .
T. Xiong, X. Yao, Z. Zhu, R. Xiao, Y. w. Hu, Y. Huang, S. Zhang and M. S. Balogun, Small, 2022, 18, 2105331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, H. Wang, C. Huang, P. Ye, X. Luo, J. Ning, Y. Zhong and Y. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120512 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, Z. Wen, P. Cai, G. Wang, S. Ci and K. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 295, 120275 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tian, P. C. Zhao and W. C. Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808066 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cheng, F. Liao, W. Shen, L. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. Li and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18977–18982 RSC .
B. Cao, Y. Cheng, M. Hu, P. Jing, Z. Ma, B. Liu, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906316 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, T. Kim, J. Lee, S. I. Choi and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806682 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Ren, Y. Yao and Z. Y. Yuan, Green Energy Environ., 2021, 6, 620–643 CrossRef .
F. Diao, W. Huang, G. Ctistis, H. Wackerbarth, Y. Yang, P. Si, J. Zhang, X. Xiao and C. Engelbrekt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23702–23713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, S. Kuhl, P. Strasser and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16009 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Weng, J. T. Ren, H. Y. Wang, X. W. Lv, Y. J. Song, Y. S. Wang, L. Chen, W. W. Tian and Z. Y. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121190 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Su, Y. P. Liu, T. Chen and Z. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28369–28376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Rathore, N. P. S. Chauhan, M. K. Rawal, S. C. Ameta and R. Ameta, Polym. Bull., 2019, 77, 4833–4850 CrossRef .
Q. Zhou, J. Chen, T. Zhou and J. Shao, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 3504–3513 RSC .
Y. P. Zhu, Y. P. Liu and Z. Y. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2118–2121 RSC .
W. J. Fan, Z. L. Li, C. H. You, X. Zong, X. L. Tian, S. Miao, T. Shu, C. Li and S. J. Liao, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 292–299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, S. Liu, K. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, K. Wu, X. Cao, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen and A. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8614–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Fu, C. Z. Zhu, J. H. Song, D. Du and Y. H. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700363 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Jeerh, P. Zou, B. Sun, M. Walker, K. Xie and S. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18701–18713 RSC .
T. Meng, Y. N. Hao, L. Zheng and M. Cao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14613–14626 RSC .
Q. Qin, H. Jang, P. Li, B. Yuan, X. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803312 CrossRef .
J. T. Ren, Y. S. Wang, L. Chen, L. J. Gao, W. W. Tian and Z. Y. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124408 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Zhang, C. M. Zhang and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18723–18729 RSC .
Y. Q. Wu, X. Tao, Y. Qing, H. Xu, F. Yang, S. Luo, C. H. Tian, M. Liu and X. H. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900178 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Li, T. T. Liu, X. J. Bo, M. Zhou, L. P. Guo and S. J. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, M. S. Balogun, Y. Tong and Y. Huang, Mater. Today Sustain., 2022, 18, 100118 CrossRef .
H. T. Du, R. M. Kong, X. X. Guo, F. L. Qu and J. H. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21617–21624 RSC .
Q. Shao, P. T. Wang and X. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806419 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, P. Liu, X. Fu, Y. Yuan, L. Wang, R. Gao, L. Zheng, L. Yang and Z. Bai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2112805 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Hu and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736–11758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Hopkins, C. N. Chervin, J. F. Parker, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001287 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Tian, J. T. Ren, X. W. Lv and Z. Y. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Y. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lv, J. Chen, X. Chen, J. Chen and Y. Li, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3495–3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, S. Zhou, R. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Zhang and Z. Xiang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 488, 229468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. Oh, E. Cho and H. Kwon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6305–6311 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Zhang, Y. H. Lui, A. P. S. Gaur, B. L. Chen, X. H. Tang, Z. Y. Qi and S. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8739–8748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, A. Chen, L. Chen and Z. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2003841 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta09588bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC and NiFe@NCF/CC.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) TEM images of NCF/CC. (c and d) TEM images of p-NPCF/CC. (e–g) TEM images and (h) high-resolution TEM images of FeNi@NCF/CC. (i and j) TEM images and (k) high-resolution TEM image, (l) HAADF-STEM and the corresponding elemental mapping images, and (m) SEM image of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the prepared samples. High-resolution XPS spectra of (b) C 1s, (c) N 1s, and (d) P 2p for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, NiFe@NCF/CC, and p-NPCF/CC. High-resolution XPS spectra of (e) Fe 2p, and (f) Ni 2p for FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC, and NiFe@NCF/CC.	 

 	Fig. 3  LSV curves and corresponding Tafel slopes, as well as the stability tests of various samples for (a and b) HER in H2-saturated 1.0 M KOH, (c and d) ORR in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH, (e and f) OER in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH. (g) Diagram for comparing the trifunctional HER/OER/ORR activities of FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC with other reported catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic measurement of the adsorbed oxygen quantity in the catalyst. (b) Chronoamperometry curves and adsorbed oxygen content. (c) Schematic diagram of the accessible active sites and mass transfer process. (d) Three-dimensional charge density difference of the FeNiP/NPC heterostructure. (e) Computed work function of FeNiP/NPC and FeNiP. (f) Total and projected DOS for FeNiP/NPC and FeNiP.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the liquid zinc–air battery. (b) Charge–discharge polarization curves and the corresponding power density curves of the fabricated zinc–air battery. (c) Specific capacity curves at different current densities. (d) Discharge/charge cycle curves at 10.0 mA cm−2. (e) LEDs are lit by batteries in series.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-electrode electrolyzer. (b) Polarization curves of the two-electrode electrolyzer and inset is the activity comparison. (c) Catalytic stability of the bifunctional FeNiP@p-NPCF/CC catalyst. (d) Digital image of the water-splitting unit powered by liquid Zn–air battery and the detailed gas generation on the HER electrode and OER electrode. (e) The volume of gases experimentally measured versus working time. (f) Digital images of the uninterrupted H2 production system by water splitting powered by solar photovoltaic and aqueous zinc–air batteries. (g) Current density versus time curves of this hydrogen production system powered by solar energy in day and aqueous zinc–air batteries in night.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta09588b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
