8 Muon spectroscopy  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B100763G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B100763G
(Paper)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2001, 97, 315-3488 Muon spectroscopyChristopher J. RhodesSchool of Pharmacy and Chemistry, Liverpool John Moores University, Byrom Street, Liverpool, UK L3 3AFFirst published on 18th April 20011 IntroductionThe elusiveness of reactive free radicals poses great challenges for
their investigation per se in most processes in which they have an
intermediary role; this is true particularly in heterogeneous media. There
are, however, methods available for the detection of radicals with enormous
sensitivity and specificity which are given the collective acronym μSR
(MuSR). All the MuSR methods rely upon the addition of the light hydrogen
atom ‘muonium’
– a hydrogen atom with a radioactive
positive muon as its nucleus, having a mass
1
/9 that of a protium
atom – to an organic substrate. In addition to its property of
radioactive decay, the muon also has spin, and therefore experiments akin
to those of conventional magnetic resonance experiments may be undertaken.
Among the suite of methods thus encompassed is transverse-field MuSR
(TF-MuSR), which is equivalent to ENDOR and yields the nucleus (muon)
coupling directly, while the avoided level crossing (ALC) approach yields
the magnitudes of the couplings from other nuclei present in a given
radical, and also their relative signs (like TRIPLE does). Although these
are resonance experiments, they do not require the application of
external radiofrequency fields; however, radiofrequency experiments are
possible, in which the analogies with more conventional magnetic resonance
experiments are more direct. However, the experiments which are rendered
possible by muons are unique, and have no practicable counterpart
in more conventional techniques. In particular, the feature of
single-particle-counting methods being used in combination with nuclear
spins which are 100% polarised (i.e. vastly in excess of the
Boltzmann factor!) permits unparalleled sensitivity regarding reactive
radicals. Through the incisiveness of these methods, knowledge in the field
of free radical chemistry has been gained that would be unachievable using
the more established methods of EPR and its relatives.In consequence of these benefits, although my own background is in EPR
(a topic which I have reviewed previously in this series),1–3 my research group has become
increasingly involved in the techniques of MuSR, especially in regard to
determining the behaviour of radicals in catalytic systems and in
heterogeneous environmental processes, and for the measurement of free
radical reaction rates pertinent to biological membrane damage and repair.
These are all topics whose investigation we could not have attempted
without muons.To do such experiments, it is necessary to obtain access to one of the
several muon facilities which are distributed around the world,
particularly the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI; Switzerland); the ISIS
facility at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL; UK); TRIUMF (Canada);
KEK (Japan). My group works mainly at PSI and ISIS.I have quite deliberately tried to avoid re-reviewing material which has
already been well reviewed by others. Therefore, I allow the reader to make
reference to a number of excellent and detailed critiques of many of the
specific techniques employed with muons; the last mention of muons
in Annual Reports was made in 1985 by Brian Webster, in an article
entitled ‘Muon Spin Rotation’.4
The present review is intended to provide a broad indication of the many
possibilities offered by muons to chemists (and indeed other kinds of
scientists) in general, and is written accordingly. I appreciate the
invitation from Professor Graham Webb to write it.2  Background to the muon spectroscopy
techniques5,62.1 Chemical aspectsMuonium, a radioactive hydrogen atom with a positive muon as its
nucleus, is formed in situ in many materials when they are
irradiated with positive muons (μ+). Since the muon is
radioactive, being a β-emitter [eqn.
(1)], muonium atoms, either free or bound in molecules, may be
detected by scintillation counting.The muon is very short-lived, having a mean lifetime of 2.2 ×
10−6 s. This corresponds to a half-life of 1.52 ×
10−6 s, and a radioactive decay constant of 0.455 ×
106 s−1, so setting a ‘microsecond’
timescale over which kinetic and other dynamic processes may be studied
using muons. μ+
→
e + νμ +
e+(1) π+
→
μ+ +
νμ(2) μ+ + e−
→
Mu.(3)Though they are present in cosmic radiation, muons are needed in high
fluxes for research purposes, and are produced using a particle
accelerator, by which means a beam of energised protons is caused to
impinge on a beryllium or a carbon target. Among the products of the
ensuing nuclear reactions are pions (binding components of nuclei), which
decay on a nanosecond timescale to form muons [eqn.
(2)], and these may be implanted into various forms of matter, to
study the magnetic properties of solid, liquid and gas phase systems.
Depending on the charge of the pion, either positive or negative muons are
formed in their decay: negative muons find application, inter
alia, in the promotion of nuclear fusion, while their positive
counterparts apply particularly to chemistry, biology, materials and
catalysis research.7Since muonium atoms (μ+e−;
Mu.) may be formed in situ by muons passing
through the walls of sample cells, a range of liquid, solid and gas phase
materials may readily be investigated. The muons then combine with
radiolytic electrons; when both have achieved near thermal energies
[eqn. (3)]. Muonium is equivalent to a
normal protium atom (p+e−) and indeed shows the
chemical properties of a light hydrogen atom
(Mu. has a mass
1
/9 that of a protium
atom); if the sample contains unsaturated organic molecules,
Mu. can act as a normal hydrogen atom and undergo an
addition reaction. (As we see later, there are alternative routes to
radical formation that do not require the formation of free
Mu. atoms.) The method is indeed highly specific for
the study of free radicals, of which many types may be so formed
[e.g.eqn. (4)–(7)]: (4) R2CCR2 +
Mu.
→
R2C(Mu)CR2.
(5) R2CCR–CRCR2
+ Mu.
→
R2C(Mu)–C.(R)
–CRCR2(6) R2CS +
Mu.
→
R2C(Mu)–S.
(7)Given that single-particle counting methods are employed, techniques
involving muons are extremely sensitive (one single molecular
radical is detected at a time by TF-MuSR).2.2 Transverse-field muon spin rotation
spectroscopy5,6Though the process outlined above may be viewed in connection with other
isotopic labelling techniques, information akin to that obtainable from
magnetic resonance experiments8 is also
available, since magnetic spectroscopic (hyperfine) interactions
(couplings) are revealed through their influence on the positron count rate
in appropriately arranged detectors. The following is a description,
specifically, of the TF-MuSR technique, in which each radical is
characterised by a single pair of lines in its TF-MuSR spectrum (in high
magnetic fields, applied transverse (at 90°) to the muon beam
direction; Fig. 1), which represent the
−½, +½
ms
electron spin combination with the muon (mμ) states: these
occur at the precession frequencies from muons which experience the sum of
the applied and (−½, +½
ms) hyperfine magnetic fields. [One
can imagine the muon spin rotating around the axis of the applied
magnetic field (Fig. 1), as the spin of a
similar magnetic nucleus, following a 90°
pulse of
radiofrequency radiation in an ‘FT-NMR’ experiment.8b] The muon–electron hyperfine
coupling constant is obtained from the difference between the high
(ν2) and low
(ν1) frequencies for each radical:
Aμ = ν2
−
ν1; as the coupling increases, for a given magnetic
field, the frequency ν2 increases, while
concomitantly ν1 first decreases, reaches zero and
then increases due to a sign change in the transition: in the latter limit
the coupling is obtained from the sum of the frequencies:
Aμ = ν1
−
(−ν2). A representative example of an actual
such TF-MuSR spectrum is that of
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me radicals,
derived from allyl acetate (Fig. 2). An
analysis of the data may be made corresponding to each frequency as
described below.† Fig. 1  μ+ spin ‘rotating’ under the influence of a
magnetic field (B), applied transverse to the muon beam
direction.  Fig. 2  TF-MuSR spectrum of
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me radicals
formed by muonium addition to allyl acetate. 2.3 Radical reaction kinetics using
TF-MuSRThe use of TF-MuSR in measuring the reaction kinetics of radicals in
solution, in general, has been extensively reviewed.5,6 For kinetic studies of reactive radicals, the classical
method is pulse-radiolysis,9,10 but
generally this necessitates using aqueous media, since the radicals are
generated via the radiolysis products of water, e.g.
hydroxyl radicals. This should provide no difficulty when it is desired to
model processes that occur in aqueous regions of cells, but is surely a
potential limitation in understanding radical reactions in cell membranes,
since these are non-aqueous, and it is known that the rates of radical
reactions can vary according to the hydrophilic or hydrophobic character of
their medium.5,9–11The TF-MuSR method has no such restriction, requiring only that the
medium should contain an appropriate substrate for muonium addition, and so
both aqueous and non-aqueous phases might, in principle, be studied. The
procedure requires measuring the widths of TF-MuSR spectral lines
(λ) for a given radical, as a function of concentration of
a reacting substrate [S]; the lines are ‘uncertainty-broadened’
by the chemical reaction. Using the relation (8)
– in which λ0
is the linewidth in the absence of a chemical reaction – along with
the measured linewidths (relaxation rates), (λ), λ = λ0 +
k[S](8)k, the second order rate constant for the reaction of a given
radical with a given substrate (S), can be determined from a plot of
λvs. [S]. Fig. 3
shows such a plot for
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me radicals,
derived from allyl acetate, in their reaction with vitamin K from which the
rate constant was derived (see Table 2
later). This result is discussed in the section on Biological systems. Fig. 3  Plot of linewidth (λ) as a function of vitamin K
concentration for
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me radicals in
diethyl ether solution, leading to the second order rate constant
(k), according to eqn. (8). 2.4 Kinetic studies of muonium atomsThe TF-MuSR method may also be used to study the kinetics of reactions
of free Mu atoms.5,6 Because the muon
hyperfine coupling in Mu is very large (ca. 4.5 GHz) it is not
normally feasible to measure the ν1 and ν2
frequencies directly as is normally done for radical species (with typical
hyperfine couplings of ca. 200–500 MHz). In contrast, a low
(B < 20 G) magnetic field is often applied, which reveals the
ν12/ν23 transitions in the
muon hyperfine diagram5,6 in a single
resonance whose linewidth (λ) may be measured as a function
of substrate concentration [S], thus yielding the direct rate constant
k, from a plot of λvs. [S], according to
eqn. (8), as is done to measure free radical
reaction kinetics.Muonium and protium atoms differ by only 0.43% in their reduced mass,
but by a factor of 8.8 in atomic mass: therefore, they provide an excellent
pair of atoms with which to probe kinetic isotope effects. This topic is
the subject of an excellent recent review by Walker.12 When these atoms react with various solutes in
water, the ratio of rate constants
(kMu/kH) was found to vary in the
range 103–10−2, and in the main, these
can be explained in terms of differences in diffusion rate, differing
zero-point energies, quantum mechanical tunnelling and steric hindrance, at
least when there is a single reaction mechanism involved. It is suggested
that some reactions occur by a different mechanism for each hydrogen
isotopomer, leading to different reaction products.In terms of reactivity, Mu lies between H-atoms (protium) and hydrated
electrons, and is slightly nucleophilic. Examples where Mu and H appear to
react by different mechanisms are in their addition to
(aza)benzenes,13,14 and where Mu adds
to the oxygen atom of a carbonyl group, but H instead abstracts a hydrogen
atom from an adjacent alkyl group.12 It is
difficult to be sure, in some cases, what path is taken by H, since product
radicals detected by EPR are often not formed by a genuine H-atom
reaction,15 or the pH is strongly
acid,16 as compared with a MuSR study made
in a near neutral medium. The rate constants measured by Neta and
Schuler16 for radiolytically produced
H-atoms in acidic solutions of substituted benzene show a negative
ρ in a Hammett plot of kHvs.σ, whereas that for Mu addition to the neutral materials is
positive, indicating mildly nucleophilic character for Mu, whereas H is
electrophilic to a similar degree.123 Longitudinal field experiments3.1 Longitudinal-field muon spin relaxation
(LF-MuSRx)The practical basis of the method (LF-MuSRx) has been described.17–20 When the frequency of
a particular molecular motion (either intramolecular, or that of overall
molecular reorientational diffusion) approaches that of the dominant
spectral transition (ω) in the muon–electron coupled
system, there is an increase in the relaxation rate (λ) of
the muon spins, as measured in a longitudinal magnetic field (LF), which
reaches a maximum when the frequencies are equal. The effect is shown in
Fig. 4, and there are in some cases two
maxima (e.g.Fig. 7 later),
corresponding to two distinct sorbed fractions, each with its own motional
characteristics. Motional correlation times (τ) are extracted
from the LF-relaxation rates (λ), viaeqn. (9): λ =
(2πδA)2τ/(1 +
ω2τ2)(9)
Here, δA is the variation in the hyperfine frequency during
the motional event, and represents the anisotropy in the hyperfine
interaction, which is modulated by the molecular reorientational motion and
relaxes the muon spin; ω is taken as the frequency of the
<1|
↔
|2> transition, which is strongly induced by
this mechanism21-23 (for
cyclohexadienyl, this is 103/2π MHz, in an external magnetic field of
100 G). Since λ = 1/T1, the maximum in
the relaxation rate corresponds to a ‘T1 minimum’
familiar8 in NMR and EPR spectroscopy, where
a dominant transition frequency (ω) is matched by that of
some motional process and the relaxation mechanism finds its maximal
efficiency. Examples of the method appear throughout this review.
Activation parameters Ea and
τ∞ are obtained from plots of −ln
τvs. 1/T, according to the Arrhenius
expression (10) in which
τ∞ is the ‘attempt time’, or
‘reciprocal attempt frequency’: τ =
τ∞exp(Ea/RT).
(10) Fig. 4  LF-MuSRx plot for cyclohexadienyl radicals sorbed in zeolite LiX (see
text). 3.2 Avoided level crossing (ALC-MuSR)
spectroscopy24,25As is the case with LF-MuSRx, this technique uses a magnetic field
applied in a direction longitudinal to that of the muon beam. Similarly,
the muon spins do not rotate (as they do in the TF arrangement)
but ‘sit’ along the magnetic field axis (Fig. 5): what may be observed is the relaxation
(change of spin orientation) of the muons, caused by resonant energy
transfer with another magnetic nucleus (Δm = 0;
‘flip-flop’ transition), or pure flips of the muon spins
(Δm = 1), induced by an anisotropic muon–electron
magnetic dipolar couplings. Applications of ALC-MuSR have been reviewed by
Roduner, both in the general context,24 and
as concerned specifically with studies of radicals sorbed on
surfaces,25 mainly in relation to catalytic
systems. The reader is directed to these reviews and to the papers cited
therein for details and applications of the method, whose advantages
include the determination of hyperfine coupling constants of magnetic
nuclei in the radical, other than the muon itself, and their sign relative
to that of the muon hyperfine coupling. As mentioned (vide infra)
in the section on Catalytic systems, from the detailed analysis of the ALC
lineshapes, the precise nature of the kind of motion a given radical is
undergoing is also revealed, and the method also has particular advantages
in studying radicals in the gas phase. Fig. 5  Magnetic field (B) applied longitudinally to the muon beam
direction, in which the muon spins undergo relaxation (spin inversion). 4 Muonium formationThe process indicated in eqn. (3) appears
simple, yet it remains the subject of numerous investigations by various
groups. The details are complex, but there are essentially two models for
the formation of muonium in various materials: ‘hot atom’ and
‘spur’.5 Much work has been done
in an attempt to validate and discriminate between them, the latest of
which concerns the ‘spur model’, which according to theoretical
and numerical evaluations of experimental data predominates in both gas and
liquid hydrocarbon systems; track electron kinetics is shown to be central
in the comprehension of results from MuSR experiments.26,27 There is also a recent paper dealing with the
influence of an electric field on muonium formation in sapphire (electric
fields are important in investigations of this kind, because they modulate
the nature of muon–electron encounter events), which appears to raise
more questions than it solves, and indeed indicates the complexity of the
problem in general.28The muon–electron hyperfine coupling for muonium (Mu) in the gas
phase has been determined to be 4463.3022 MHz29 which may be compared30 with 1420.4057 MHz for protium (H) and 218.2562
MHz for deuterium (D). Since hydrogen atoms trapped in cages experience a
matrix effect which disturbs the wave functions and is manifested by
changes in the coupling, these may be used as sensitive probes of local
environments. In this regard, a detailed study has been reported of these
hydrogen isotopes in different octasilsesquioxanes (the cubic arrangement
of Si8O12 units), and in H2O and
D2O.31 A strong isotope effect
is found along with a temperature dependence, and both features are well
described by a single-oscillator model.32
Evidence for the ‘solvation’ of H and Mu atoms by water in an
aqueous LiCl glass has also been presented; it is proposed that
H/Mu–OH2
σ*-complexes are formed.33The term ‘muonium’ is also used by physicists to describe
more complex atomic arrangements: hence we have terms such as
‘anomalous muonium’, or more generally ‘muonium
centres’, which describe paramagnetic centres involving a muon bound
into the extended lattice of some material such as silicon or germanium.
MuSR experiments often reveal dynamic behaviour, especially under the
influence of illumination, in which initially trapped electrons become
mobilised, thus influencing the relaxation rate of muons bound within a
given structure and providing insight into the conduction processes in
semiconductors.34–365 Radical formationIn eqns. (4)–(7), the formation of various functionalised
radicals is depicted as the addition of a free (thermal) Mu atom to the
substrate, but the experience of radiation chemistry is that other routes
are possible: especially when the substrate is polar and could readily
accept either radiolytically produced electrons or muons the actual radical
precursor is not necessarily Mu itself, since ionic routes could be
important. This was first investigated for acetone.37 In liquid acetone,37 though Mu was found to be the major radical
precursor, an alternative channel (possibly involving charge-neutralisation
of ionic precursors) was implicated (possibly contributing to ⅓ of
the total Me2C–OMu. yield). There has
also been a study made of various imidazole derivatives,38 which is significant since
pulse-radiolysis39 work on imidazoles shows
that, like acetone, both electrons and protons (so muons too) are readily
added: charge neutralisation of these initial ionic species (respectively
by muon or electron addition) could lead to ‘formal’ Mu-adduct
radicals.The detailed reaction mechanism has already been considered from which
it was concluded that Mu is the most probable precursor in these
systems.38,40 Moreover, the
calculated relative energies of the radicals are in accord with the
observed yields of the Mu adducts, which points to the radicals originating
via a common mechanism, i.e. approach of the Mu atom to
the imidazole ring, from which the distribution of product radicals is
dictated by their relative energies.A similar plot of ΔΔHfvs.
k/k0 was made by Roduner and Webster41 for the formation of Mu-adduct radicals in a
series of substituted dienes, from which they concluded that Mu was the
probable radical precursor, but left the caveat that a similar distribution
of radical yields would be expected if the mechanism was that of electron
addition to initially formed μ+ adducts (allylic
carbocations). The results for imidazoles enable the rejection of this
possibility, because the free thermal muon (μ+)
would surely add to the N(3) nitrogen atom, and, certainly on the fast
timescale required to observe them, the radical distributions could not be
explained by subsequent electron addition and rearrangement of the
initially formed radicals. In accord with this view, Roduner has presented
compelling evidence that thermal Mu is the direct muonic precursor of the
cyclohexadienyl radical:42 in neat benzene,
it has a lifetime of 10 ps and disappears by addition to the aromatic ring;
Mu is formed within ca. 1 ps by the combination of
μ+ with an electron near to the end of the radiation track of
the (near thermal) positive muon. Walker’s group have also concluded
that thermal Mu is the dominant radical precursor in liquid mixtures of
benzene and styrene.43If Mu is the main radical precursor in organic systems, as it is in
aqueous media,5 the radical yields reveal the regioselectivity
pattern for true hydrogen atoms, largely in the absence of ionic routes. By
implication, this may be used in a mechanistic comparison with
radiochemical studies where free radicals are detected by EPR spectroscopy,
which are hydrogen atom adducts of molecules that have been exposed to
ionizing radiation. The origin of these adducts may indeed be from actual
hydrogen atom addition, but proton and electron migration, even in cold
solid materials, can also lead to these species, without free hydrogen
atoms ever being formed. In solid media particularly, the extreme
difficulty encountered in telling which mechanism is dominant is
superlatively exemplified by the extensive and detailed work required to
explain free radical formation in DNA.44A good example of this is the detection by TF-MuSR of muonium adducts of
pyridine and of the pyridinium cation, produced in samples of liquid
pyridine and of solid pyridinium tetrafluoroborate (PyH+
BF4−), for which coupling constants and
relative radical yields are listed in the Table
1.45 In pyridine, there are four
potential sites for muonium addition to occur. Addition at either of the
three distinct carbon sites would yield (aza)cyclohexadienyl type
radicals, which should be characterised by large (ca. 500 MHz)
muon coupling constants.6,38,46
Addition at the nitrogen atom is expected to form a radical
(I) with a relatively small coupling, in analogy with the species
(II) studied by EPR.47 In fact,
only two (from the three possible) radical species are formed with large
coupling constants, but there is also a radical detected with a very small
muon coupling (ca. ±6 MHz), which is the N-adduct
(I).
Table 1 Results for muonium atom addition to pyridine and the pyridinium
cation

Site of additionSubstrateorthometaparaNa 
Muon hyperfine coupling (MHz).b 
Yield of each radical expressed as a fraction of the total observed radical
yield.c 
Yield of each radical expressed as a fraction of the total radical yield,
the latter being estimated with the assumption that the initial
N(H+)-adduct decomposes to a 50∶50 mixture of I
and II, (see text and Scheme
1).C5H5N503.9a526.8an.d.5.8a(28%)b(30%)bn.d.(42%)bC5H5NH+521.4a559.6a664.7a0.9a(23%)b(16%)b(19%)b(42%)b(16%)c(12%)c(13%)c(59%)cThe pyridinium cation exhibits notable differences in its behaviour,
particularly that significant reactivity now appears at the para
position (Table 1); additionally, the
radical (I) is formed very dominantly. The formation of a radical
by ‘hydrogen’ (Mu.) atom addition to the
N(H+) atom is unexpected; indeed, it has been
proposed47 that protonation of the pyridine
N-atom serves to ‘block’ it against addition of an H-atom.
However, the evidence is compelling, and the most probable mechanism
involves addition of muonium to the N(H+) atom,
followed by deprotonation (Scheme
1). Scheme 1 Previous workers have used EPR spectroscopy to identify the free radical
species formed as products from pyridine by the action of ionising
radiation, as isolated in neutral alcohol glasses,47,48 and in acidic media47,49 as solid matrices at 77 K. In alcohol glasses,
overall H-atom addition to the N-atom was found, whereas in acidic
matrices, addition predominantly to the para carbon atom was
confirmed by deuterium labelling.49Since the radicals generated by ionising radiation are all formed in
entirely different selectivity from those observed by MuSR, their origin
from the addition of H-atoms directly is most unlikely; however, an
alternative mechanism, in which initially formed electron adducts
(III)/(II) are protonated, accounts easily for them
(Scheme 2). Clearly, the N-atom is the
favoured site for protonation in (III) with its high electron
density, but EPR data47,49 for both
(II) and (III) show that the frontier orbital50 has a high electron population on the
para carbon atom and so is the favoured site for protonation in
(II). Scheme 2 6 Biological systemsThe application of MuSR in obtaining information relevant to
‘biological systems’ is a long-desired wish, and has met with
some success, including the measurement of rate constants for the reaction
of Mu with DNA51 and some isolated ‘base’
analogues,51 and the identification of the
product radicals formed in the latter, simpler cases,52,53 and in imidazoles.38
The identification of product radicals features particularly in the context
of radiation biology,44,54,55
since it is of a matter of some interest to know the outcome of H-atom
reactions with organic bases, such as are present in DNA, and indeed those
with protein constituents. We acknowledge that trying to study actual DNA,
or an intact protein, would probably not be feasible due to the large
number of reaction sites and the complex mixture of product radicals
expected.6.1 Measurements relevant to an alternative mode
of lipid damageFollowing the suggestion56 that
oxidative damage to lipids might involve the formation of C2 glyceryl
radicals, in addition to main chain allylic radicals, which are generally
thought important,57 the kinetics of
potential ‘repair’ reactions by vitamin E and vitamin
K1 (which are lipophilic and tend to locate in cell membranes)
to 1,1,2-trimethylallyl
[Me(MuCH2)CC(Me)–CH2.
] and 1-acetoxyprop-2-yl
[MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me] radicals
were studied.58 These radicals are intended
as models of, respectively, main-chain and glyceryl type radicals (damage
sites), and are formed by Mu addition to 2,3-dimethylbuta-1,3-diene and to
allyl acetate.The second order rate constants for the reaction of these radicals with
vitamin E and with vitamin K1 are shown in Table 2. The results suggest that direct
scavenging of glyceryl radicals by vitamin E could be an efficient process,
and of main-chain allylic radicals fairly so; additionally, it appears that
vitamin K1 can act directly as a ‘radical repair
agent’, given its relatively high reactivity with allylic radicals
(4× faster than with vitamin E), so prior reduction to the quinol
form59,60 may be unnecessary. The
interceptive role of vitamin K toward allylic radicals is proposed in
Scheme 3, in which the conjugation of
the initial ene is increased by one CC unit.
Table 2 Second order rate constants (M−1 s−1)
for the reactions described in the text

Vitamin EVitamin K1Me(MuCH2)CC(Me)–CH2
.9.38 × 1063.54 × 107MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me
1.76 × 1082.03 × 106 Scheme 3 TF-MuSR has been uniquely successful in the study of thiyl radicals
(RS.).11 Thiyl radicals
are widely implicated in biological systems,9,57,61,62 and are formed from thiols when these repair
free radical damage on bio-molecules. Since thiyl radicals are themselves
reactive species9,63 it is of concern
to know the subsequent outcome of their formation, particularly in regard
to their reactivity with sensitive cellular constituents: potentially there
is a duplicity, in which a thiol might act initially to repair a free
radical damage site, but the resulting thiyl radical causes further damage.
The derived second order rate constants (k) for the reaction of
MeC(Mu)(NH2)S. (from thioacetamide) and
PhC(Mu)(NH2)S. (from thiobenzamide) radicals
with selected lipid and antioxidant materials, measured in ethanol and in
tetrahydrofuran solutions, are displayed in Table
3, along with those for related thiyl radicals measured in
partly aqueous solutions using pulse-radiolysis.
Table 3 Rate constants (M−1 s−1
×
10−7) for reactions of thiyl radicals with various
substrates

Thiyl radical(SH)GlutathioneBetacaroteneLinolenic acidLinoleic acida 
From ref. 9.
 
b 
Measured in super-dried ethanol solution.
 
c 
From ref. 63, measured in partly aqueous solution.
 
d 
This work.
 
e 
Measured in tetrahydrofuran solution. Key: GS. =
H3N+(−O2C)CH(CH2
)2CONH(HO2CCH2NHCO)CHCH2
S.; CysS. =
H3N+(−O2C)CHCH2S.
; PenS. =
H3N+(−O2C)CMe2
S.; RS.(2+) =
H3N+(CH2)3H2N+
(CH2)2S.; TA =
MeC(Mu)(NH2)S.; TB =
PhC(Mu)(NH2)S..
 
HO(CH2)2S.—250 ± 1a—3.1aGS.6.62 ± .76d22 ± 1a1.9c0.8cCysS.—26 ± 1a0.9c0.6cPenS.——0.4c0.3cRS.(2+)—0.42 ± 0.02a——TA18.7 ± .6b,d57.3 ± 1.6b,d2.4 ± 0.2b,d1.4 ± 0.2b,d81.2 ± 2.0d,e3.2 ± 0.4d,e2.0 ± 0.2d,eTB16.9 ± .8b,d37.3 ± 1.8b,d2.0 ± 0.2b,d1.2 ± 0.1b,d48.9 ± 2.0d,e2.6 ± 0.3d,e1.9 ± 0.2d,eThe unsaturated acids are chosen to model membrane lipid components, and
it is clear that thiyl radicals react with them (by H-atom abstraction from
allylic groups) at appreciable rates: the rates are faster by a factor of
2–3 than for thiyl radicals with these substrates in aqueous
media, and so membrane damage and loss of cellular integrity from the lipid
peroxidation that this may initiate is a serious possibility.The effect of potential protective agents has also been considered.
Glutathione is well established to repair radical-induced damage in
cells,57 and could certainly scavenge
reactive thiyl radicals (and indeed other radicals that may be produced)
given the high rate constants for its reactions with them; again, the rates
are faster by a factor of 3–4 than for the equivalent reactions in
aqueous media. β-Carotene has received considerable attention as a
dietary supplement supposed to protect against developing cancer, and to
alleviate the effects of ageing: the rates are indeed very large for the
scavenging of thiyl radicals by this agent, and accords that such a
protective role might contribute in these conditions, though the effect of
β-carotene on the incidence of lung cancer in smokers has proved
highly contentious.64,65Squalene is central to biology since it is a key intermediate in the
biosynthesis of steroids,66 and like
β-carotene and vitamin E is proposed to possess antioxidant
properties.67 It has also been shown that
squalene is capable of quenching singlet oxygen in n-butanol solution as a
function of its low ionisation potential68
and its free radical scavenging properties have been demonstrated in an EPR
study of the radiation chemical yield of radicals formed in poly(methyl
methacrylate).69 There are no EPR studies
reported of radicals formed from squalene, and in neat squalene no
radicals could be observed using TF-MuSR.70
However, when the squalene was diluted 50∶50 by volume with diethyl
ether, the spectrum shown in Fig. 6(a) was
obtained. The spectrum shows two signals only, with unusually broad lines;
these are confirmed to be from a single type of radical species since there
is just one correlated peak [Fig. 6(b)], and
hence just one radical hyperfine coupling present. Inspection of the
molecular structure of squalene (III) shows that it contains six
CC double bonds, and so there are potentially 12 sites at which a
Mu atom could add. In such additions, tertiary radicals are normally formed
in preference to secondary radicals, and so addition at the 3,7,11
positions is expected, in each case giving a radical of type:
RCH2C.(Me)CH(Mu)CH2R′.
R′ is, in each case, a ‘large’ hydrocarbon group, and the
spin-delocalising properties of the RCH2CMeCH units are expected
to be all very similar; therefore, because there is no reason to expect
that addition at either positions 3 or 7 or 11 (equivalent by symmetry with
positions 14, 18 and 22) predominates over the others, three radicals are
expected, but with an almost common coupling constant. Since the lines are
very broad, it seems likely that any small differences in couplings that
may be present are masked by their width. At ca. 241 MHz the
coupling is typical for (smaller) tertiary radicals of similar structural
type (Table 4),70,71 which may be considered as models for the
squalene–Mu adduct radical. In these radicals, the coupling, which is
the result of torsional partial rotation (averaging) about C–C bonds,
is reduced from that in
Me2C.–CH2Me, by a weighting
of conformations in which the C–Mu overlaps weakly with the unpaired
electron orbital.71 The lack of observation
of radicals in neat squalene is apparently due to its very viscous
nature72 and the large molecular size of
the adduct radicals. In diethyl ether solution at 298 K a reorientation
rate of ca. 10−8 s is indicated by the 14 MHz
linewidth, which may be contrasted with typical values of ca. 5
× 10−12 s for fairly small molecules in mobile
liquids such as diethyl ether.73 Therefore,
even though the bulk viscosity of squalene is reduced vastly by dilution
with ether, at the molecular level, which is actually probed by magnetic
resonance, the reorientation rates are still reduced by a factor of 2000
from normal fluid media containing small molecules,73i.e., at this molecular level, it is
the interactions between the large and relatively slowly moving molecules
which are dominant, and are not so greatly reduced from those occurring in
neat squalene (linewidths of ca. 100 MHz are predicted for these
radicals in neat squalene, hence their invisibility). Fig. 6  (a) TF-MuSR spectrum recorded from a 50 vol.% solution of squalene in
diethyl ether, showing two broad signals from a mixture of radicals of type
RCH2C.(Me)CH(Mu)CH2R′, with
an almost common coupling constant, resulting from muonium addition to the
3,7,11 (14,18,22) positions of squalene (III). The sharp peak at
ca. 100 MHz is the first harmonic of the cyclotron frequency, at
ca. 50 MHz; (b) is its correlation spectrum confirming the
presence of only radicals with a similar functional identity (the scale is
that of the coupling constant directly). 
Table 4 Isotropic muon-electron hyperfine coupling constants for muonium-adduct
radicals formed from squalene and related model compounds

RadicalCoupling constant/MHzMe2C.–CH2Mu
291.6Me2C.–C(Mu)(H)Me251.4Me2C.–C(Mu)(H)But
251.2Et2C.–C(Mu)(H)Me240.0RCH2(Me)C.–C(Mu)(H)CH
2R′240.7(From squalene)  The
largest biological molecules that appear to have been investigated using
MuSR methods are cytochrome c,74,75 myoglobin75 and
dextran76 and an iron–dextran
complex.76 In cytochrome c, it is
found that muonium is trapped at the oxygen atom of CO amino acid
groups, where the muon relaxation rate is subject to the influence of
electronic dynamics; free muons are predicted to associate with all atoms
on the protein chain carrying a negative charge, so addition of both muon
and Mu is expected at the CO oxygen sites. In the heme units, muons
are trapped at the pyrrole nitrogen atoms, where they are subject to a
‘chemical shift’ of 88.4 ppm.74
In another report of both cytochrome c and myoglobin,75 rapid electron motion within the proteins has
also been evidenced from its effect on the muon relaxation rate.
Measurements made between 5 and 300 K show that the inter-site diffusion
rate for one-dimensional motion along the polypeptide chain depends only
weakly on temperature. Evidence for an increase in higher dimensional
motion appears at around 200 K in cytochrome c, which is believed
to reflect an overall change in the protein structure. Myoglobin, in
contrast, shows a different temperature variation, which follows the
different protein dynamics in this molecule.Both zero field and LF relaxation was used to study dextran and an
iron–dextran complex.76 The results
are complex, but allowed the determination of the muon hyperfine coupling
constant for both samples. Additionally, superparamagnetic relaxation
processes associated with the iron–dextran cores were identified. In
zero field, the relaxation was found to follow a stretched exponential form
which indicates a broad distribution of correlation times for the internal
magnetic fields, whilst the temperature dependence of the muon spin
relaxation rate provides evidence that the superparamagnetic relaxation
follows a thermally activated Arrhenius behaviour with an activation energy
Ea/k = 84 K.7 Environmental applicationsFree radicals feature strongly throughout Nature and hence are central
to environmental processes. In consequence of the intense solar UV
radiation in the upper atmosphere, halogenated organic materials, such as
organic solvents and CFCs, undergo photolysis forming free radicals, mainly
in the stratosphere. Until fairly recently atmospheric processes have been
viewed as being those of pure gas reactions,77 but it is now thought that atmospheric aerosols,
clouds and dust particles can provide surfaces on which reactions can occur
with great efficiency.78 Indeed, the
presence of a background atmospheric dust load, evenly spread through the
atmosphere, has been established.79 The
quantity of atmospheric dust (mainly clays) blown skywards by the desert
winds is thought to amount to perhaps 5–10 billion tonnes
annually.80,81 To edge towards a
model system combining some of these ideas – specifically to study
the interaction of halocarbon radicals with clay materials – a study
was made of 1,1-dichloroethyl radicals sorbed on porous silica and on
kaolin.20 An activation energy of 10.6
± 1.4 kJ mol−1 was determined for the
reorientational diffusion of 1,1-dichloroethyl radicals sorbed on silica
gel by TF-MuSR spectroscopy, as is confirmed by LF-MuSRx measurements,
which give a value of 10.9 ± 0.7 kJ mol−1. Also
according to TF-MuSR measurements, the activation energy for this radical
sorbed in kaolin powder is 11.0 ± 1.3 kJ mol−1,
which is within experimental error of that obtained from an LF-MuSRx study
(12.3 ± 0.8 kJ mol−1). The LF-MuSRx method also
reveals the presence of an additional, more mobile, fraction of
1,1-dichloroethyl radicals in both silica and kaolin with respective
activation energies of 2.6 ± 0.4 and 2.4 ± 0.2 kJ
mol−1. This, secondary, fraction is
‘invisible’ to TF-MuSR.In the lower atmosphere the higher concentration of oxygen makes an
important contribution, and so the chemistry of the troposphere is
dominated by oxidation reactions, mediated largely by
.OH radicals.77 The
plant kingdom emits enormous quantities of hydrocarbons into the
atmosphere, especially terpenes from forests. Indeed the
‘Blue-Ridge-Mountains-of-Virginia’, of Laurel and Hardy fame,
appear blue behind the haze caused by the tropospheric oxidation of pinenes
and other terpenes.81 The process of
hydrocarbon oxidation involves the partial oxidation of minute hydrocarbon
droplets, and is incomplete, leading to a carbonaceous aerosol –
hence the haze. It is a kind of cold combustion, involving the formation
and diffusion of hydrocarbon radicals within the developing microporous
structure of these developing carbon particles.Using LF-MuSRx, my group has attempted to investigate the formation of
radicals from a variety of terpenes and their interaction with a porous
carbon material.82 The results for
α-pinene and β-pinene are representative of this study. Addition
of Mu to either pinene isomer will yield very similar radicals, differing
only in the relative position of the muon and a proton
(IV)/(V). It might be expected, therefore, that their
reorientational dynamics would also be very similar, and indeed the
similarity of the results is demonstrated by Fig.
7. Both samples reveal two distinct motional regimes,
corresponding to radicals located at different sorption sites within the
carbon micropores. The activation parameters are shown in Table 5 and it is clear that they are identical
within error for both fractions for both isomers. From our LF-MuSRx results
for benzene sorbed in activated carbon (to which we allude next) we propose
that the fraction of lower activation energy corresponds to molecules that
occupy the meso- and macropores (i.e. those of dimensions >20
Å), while the fraction at higher activation energy is sorbed within
the micropores (4–20 Å). However, the A (frequency)
factors indicate there is very little increase in freedom (entropy) for the
pinene derived radicals, as they escape from the small pores, than is
apparent for benzene (vide infra). This may be because the larger
pinene molecules are denied access to the very small (<10 Å)
pores, but occupy those which are somewhat larger in their size
distribution. Fig. 7  LF-MuSRx plots for (a) α-pinene and (b) β-pinene, both sorbed
in porous carbon (see text). 
Table 5 Activation parameters measured for α-pinene and β-pinene
sorbed in activated carbon powder (see text)

A/s−1Ea/kJ mol−1A/s−1Ea/kJ mol−1α-pinene(8.1 ± 2.4) × 10116.0 ± 0.3(4.8 ± 1.3) × 101213.1 ± 1.7β-pinene(4.5 ± 1.1) × 10116.6 ± 0.9(8.1 ± 2.5) × 101216.0 ± 1.2    When benzene is loaded into activated carbon, two
relaxation maxima are found.19 The data
obtained in the high temperature range yield activation parameters of
Ea = 26 kJ mol−1 and
τ∞ = 2 × 10−16s, while
the lower temperature data set yields 6 kJ mol−1 and 6
× 10−12 s, actually very similar to the values
obtained in bulk benzene.83 It is proposed
that these differing mobilities are a consequence of benzene molecules
being confined in pores of differing size: the fraction with lowest
activation energy being from the larger pores (>20 Å), hence the
similarity in behaviour to bulk benzene, while the more restricted motional
behaviour corresponds to benzene confined to micropores (4–20
Å). According to transition-state theory, the pre-exponential factor
in the latter corresponds to a large positive entropy of activation of +52
J mol−1 K−1, which is believed to
represent the substantial increase in reorientational freedom conferred to
the benzene molecules as they escape (‘pop-out’) from these
small pores into more spacious regions.Percival’s group has inaugurated a programme to study
supercritical water (SCW) which has remarkable properties compared with
normal (sub-critical) water. The critical point of water is 374 °C and
221 bar and at temperatures near or above this there is a reduction in its
ionic product of many orders of magnitude, and its relative permittivity
becomes typical of organic solvents. Organic materials may be oxidised in
it (SCWO) as a means for hazardous waste destruction, including chemical
weapons, and in the clean-up of nuclear processing sites.84 Given the conditions required to make water
supercritical, specially designed and robust cells are required, and
Percival et al. have described such a cell made entirely from
titanium which is suitable for MuSR measurements.85 So far, only reports of the formation and
temperature dependence of the hyperfine coupling of muonium in sub- and
supercritical water have been reported;85,86 however, the abstract87 of a recent conference shows that far more has
been accomplished than this: namely, the measurement of rate constants for
reactions of muonium in sub- and supercritical water, and the detection of
muonium labelled organic radicals, cyclohexadienyl and tert-butyl
in saturated (at least sub-) aqueous solutions of benzene and
isobutene. No doubt further publications will be forthcoming, which I look
forward to reading.8 Catalytic systemsThere is now a considerable body of evidence which implicates
hydrocarbon free radicals in processes such as the cracking and partial
oxidation of hydrocarbons over zeolite and other metal oxide
catalysts.88,89 In zeolites, the
organic reactant is sorbed into the microporous structure of the catalyst,
where reactive intermediates are produced, and the products of their
interactions are then desorbed.90 Because
free radicals are so reactive they have normally only a fleeting existence,
and are accordingly very difficult to study directly, being present only in
low concentrations, and many will have fairly complex EPR spectra. Some
success has been found using EPR, but such measurements are limited to low
temperatures,89 since under catalytically
relevant conditions the spectral signature of the radicals is rapidly lost
through their diffusion and consequent termination reactions. The extreme
sensitivity, and time resolved character of MuSR, where reactive radicals
are generated continually in real time is a profound advantage in such
studies, and the first reported example of a TF-MuSR study of a free
radical (1,1,2-trimethylallyl) sorbed on a catalytic surface (fumed silica)
was reported in 1987.91 The same method was
used a few years later to provide the first example of a radical
(cyclohexadienyl) being observed in a zeolite (NaX) at ambient
temperature (Fig. 8).92 This was a surprise (and a delight!) since a
folklore had developed that it was probably impossible to detect radicals
in zeolites, among various workers who had tried, but until then failed to
do so. This study was extended considerably to other hydrocarbon radicals,
and to another zeolite, Na-mordenite, from which the activation parameters
describing the reorientation of molecular radicals in these catalytic
materials were determined.90 Fig. 8  TF-MuSR spectra of cyclohexadienyl radicals, recorded from (a) liquid
benzene and (b) from benzene sorbed in zeolite NaX. Fig. 8 allows a comparison to be made
between a MuSR spectrum of cyclohexadienyl radicals recorded (a) in liquid
benzene and (b) sorbed in zeolite NaX, and it is obvious that sorption on
the zeolite surface causes pronounced line-broadening, due to its
restriction of molecular reorientational motion. This may be thought of in
similarity with the difference between, say, a 1H or
13C NMR spectrum recorded from molecules in liquid solution, and
from those in a solid sample: the latter containing lines so broad that
‘magic-angle-spinning’ is sometimes used to reduce the
line-broadening effect which results from the detection of the full range
of the chemical shift, and of the nuclear magnetic dipolar coupling (both
effects being averaged out in solution).8b In MuSR, there is a dipolar coupling
between the muon and the unpaired electron, which, in a restricted
environment, causes line-broadening;90,92 indeed, the linewidth is proportional to the time the
molecule takes to reorient, the so-called ‘rotational correlation
time’
τ. Since the reorientational rate increases with
temperature, the τ values may be fitted to an Arrhenius type
expression: τ =
τ0
exp(Ea/RT),(11)
from which the activation energy (Ea) and frequency
factor (τo−1) signify details of
the molecular reorientation step. While this is conceptually
straightforward, and may be considered as the starting point for studies of
radicals in catalytic media, the technique is not the most effective
possible using muons, and all further work has used ALC-MuSR and LF-MuSRx.
ALC is the ‘Rolls-Royce’ of the techniques available for
determining the detailed dynamics of radicals sorbed on surfaces.
Extracting such information, however, does depend on the availability of
detailed theoretical models to analyse the effect of restricted molecular
motion in modulating the muon, and other nucleus – electron dipolar
couplings, which changes the lineshapes in ALC-MuSR spectra. This task has
been undertaken, mainly by Roduner’s group in Stuttgart, and in their
collaboration with Fleming and Percival in Canada, with particular
reference to the cyclohexadienyl radical, as formed by Mu addition to
benzene molecules sorbed on the surfaces of ‘fumed’ silica and
in association with cations in zeolites. Before discussing these dynamic
aspects, we note that the feature of ALC in detecting other magnetic nuclei
which are ‘visible’ (coupled) to the unpaired electron24,25 has been exploited in measuring
hyperfine couplings to nuclei from cations, such as Cu+,
Li+, Na+ and H+, exchanged into ZSM5
zeolites.93 The observation of these
additional couplings confirms that the cyclohexadienyl radicals (and so the
benzene molecules from which they are formed) really do ‘sit’
on the cations, as has been supposed;94
however, the radical does not so much ‘sit’ on the
H+ ion but (at least below ca. 300 K) reacts with it,
forming a cyclohexadiene radical cation95
– in fact the first example of a radical ion containing a muon!The reorientational dynamics of cyclohexadienyl radicals in two samples
of high-silica H-ZSM5 (SiO2/Al2O3 = 670,
900) was studied by ALC;96 since the number
of (Brønsted) acid sites is low in these materials, the
cyclohexadienyl radicals will be present per se. Depending on the
precise type of motion pertaining for the radical, a distinct lineshape is
predicted,96 as shown in Fig. 9, in which (a) shows the ‘powder’
pattern, obtained in the rigid limit of slow reorientational motion: the
resonance labelled Δ1 is from a transition (pure muon spin
flip) which only occurs when the motion is anisotropic, while
Δ0 is the muon–nucleus ‘flip-flop’
transition. When the radical is assumed to perform fast uniaxial motion
about an axis perpendicular to the molecular plane, a parallel axial
component D∥ of −6.8 MHz is obtained [Fig. 9(b)], while for uniaxial rotation about the
long-axis of the radical, D∥ is obtained at +5.8
MHz. Thus the preferred rotational axis can be deduced from the shape of
the powder pattern, because the sign difference in the dipolar interaction
will act in reverse in its influence on the lineshape. An axial lineshape
with a further reduced width would indicate a more extensive averaging,
caused by a tumbling or wobbling type motion. An example of this is shown
in Fig. 9(c) for different reorientational
correlation times and a ‘tip’ angle of the rotational axis of
30°. For isotropic motion, the Δ1 resonance disappears
completely, while that of Δ0 is narrow and isotropic
[Fig. 9(d)]. Fig. 9  Simulations, showing the effect of the molecular motion indicated on the
ALC-MuSR spectrum of the cyclohexadienyl radical (see text). Reproduced
with permission from ref. 96. Copyright
1998, American Chemical Society. In the case of H-ZSM5, a high reorientational mobility was found down to
50 K, indicating that the radicals are located at the more spacious channel
intersections, and below 20 K the motion became frozen. At 298 K, the fit
was found to resemble that in Fig. 9(b), but
with a much reduced anisotropy, so that although the type of rotation
essentially occurs about the axis perpendicular to the molecular plane,
there is an extensive concomitant jump–reorientation motion of the
rotation axis, as the radicals exchange between two different adsorption
sites. Evidence was presented that, above 450 K, sites enforcing a reduced
reorientational mobility became accessed, and these are probably located
inside the channels of ZSM5. In a previous study of cyclohexadienyl
radicals sorbed in silicalite97 (NaZSM5 with
SiO2/Al2O3 = 670) and in Na-ZSM5 (with
SiO2/Al2O3 = 50), the effect of benzene
loading on molecular mobility was investigated and, at close to the
saturation capacity of 8 benzene molecules per unit cell, a restricted
fraction was detected, even at 300 K, which must be from radicals formed
within the channels. The preferred location of hydrocarbon radicals
(specifically the tetramethylethylene radical cation) in the channel
intersections of ZSM5 is supported by EPR measurements.98 We note that a theoretical study of the effect
of a Na+ cation on the proton coupling constants in the
cyclohexadienyl radical has been made,99
which predicts that the CH2 proton couplings are both enhanced
by the presence of the cation, and that for the proton on the side of the
ring opposite to the cation the most, while the ring adopts a distorted
form.Several studies have been reported of radicals (also cyclohexadienyl,
and substituted versions) sorbed on small silica grains (‘fumed
silica’). While these materials are less important as catalysts than
are zeolites, the reorientation of essentially ‘flat’ molecules
on a single curved surface is potentially less complicated. However, the
fact that the apparent activation energy for reorientation of
cyclohexadienyl radicals on 140 Å diameter grains is about twice that
for their reorientation on 70 Å diameter grains, and that there is
isotropic averaging of the muon anisotropic (dipolar) coupling, leads to
the conclusion that the reorientational motion involves diffusion over the
entire granular surface.100 On 70 Å
diameter grains, the rotational diffusion coefficients
(Drot) for the cyclohexadienyl radical and the
2,4,6-trimethylcyclohexadienyl radical (at nominal monolayer coverages of
benzene and mesitylene, respectively) are given by eqns. (12) and (13):101 Drot(C6H6) =
426(+51/−45)MHz exp((−8.6 ± 0.2)
kJ mol−1/RT),(12) Drot(C6H3Me
3) = 584(+480/−240)MHz
exp((−12.6 ± 1.4) kJ
mol−1/RT).(13)
The activation energy is ca. 50% greater for the substituted
radical, which is as expected if it is determined by the van der Waals
interaction between the radical and the surface, since van der Waals forces
are proportional to the polarisability of molecules, and so to a reasonable
approximation to the number of carbon atoms in a given molecule. In
contrast, the effect of pore-confinement on benzene molecules sorbed in
porous silica, with average pore dimensions of 60 Å, is
proposed to cause a liquid–solid type phase transition which depends
on the size of the benzene molecular aggregate.102Though it does not (certainly in its present simple form) approach the
level of sophistication in describing molecular reorientation that is
possible with ALC-MuSR, LF-MuSRx does provide a relatively straightforward
and direct means to motional correlation times and so to the frequency
factor (A) and activation energy (Ea)
associated with a particular kind of motion. This is suitably illustrated
by a study18 of benzene sorbed in cation-exchanged
(Li+, Na+, K+, Mg2+,
Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+) zeolite X and
(Na+) zeolite A, as outlined below (a plot of relaxation rate
vs. T is shown in Fig. 4).
The importance of zeolite X is that it has the faujasite structure, as does
ultra-stable zeolite Y, which is used extensively in the petrochemical
industry for catalytic cracking of hydrocarbons. This zeolite has a
three-dimensional internal channel system with supercages: the supercages
are some 13 Å in diameter, with access windows of 7.4 Å in
cross section, and there are 8 cages per unit cell;103 therefore, molecules as small as benzene
(kinematic diameter 5.5 Å) are readily admitted into its micropores.
The activation parameters18 were converted
into Gibbs energies (ΔG‡), enthalpies
(ΔH‡) and entropies
(ΔS‡) of activation for cyclohexadienyl
radicals sorbed in the range of Group 1 and Group 2 cation exchanged
zeolite X samples. For the Group 1 series, all at 18 wt% loading of
benzene, (LiX, NaX, KX), ΔG‡ has an almost
common value of ca. 10 kJ mol−1, but the relative
contribution made to this by ΔH‡ and
TΔS‡ varies, with the entropy
term becoming increasingly dominant as the cation radius increases
(rK+ >
rNa+ >
rLi+). This reflects the decreasing
importance of cyclohexadienyl/benzene–cation interactions, since the
ΔH‡ value falls from 7.9 kJ
mol−1 in LiX to only 2.8 kJ mol−1 in KX,
and is in order with previous measurements of the isosteric enthalpies of
the adsorption of benzene in Na+, K+, Cs+
exchanged zeolite X.104 In both NaX and
KX, the motional process is dominated by the entropy change, and in fact,
the values for ΔH‡ and
ΔS‡ are quite similar to those determined
for bulk benzene and for benzene sorbed in the large-pores of porous
carbon.19 It was concluded that the
activation process is dominated by interactions/collisions between almost
free benzene molecules, certainly in NaX and in KX. In all cases,
ΔS‡ is negative, and we have previously
argued that this represents a ‘sticking’ collision between the
cyclohexadienyl radical and one or more benzene molecules in the activation
step,20 since reorientation of an
effectively isolated molecule is expected to show a near zero
ΔS‡.73We have also used LF-MuSRx to investigate the sorption and dynamics of
cyclohexadienyl radicals and dimethylcyclohexadienyl radicals (derived from
benzene and from p-xylene) in Na-ZSM5, in silicalite and in
Na-mordenite: the structures of ZSM5/silicalite and mordenite are
represented in Fig. 10. Unlike the
faujasites,103 zeolites X and Y, which
contain cages, ZSM5 and mordenite both contain only channels. For
cyclohexadienyl radicals in ZSM5, silicalite and mordenite, a fraction was
detected with a common reorientational activation energy of ca. 5
kJ mol−1; however, in both ZSM5 and silicalite there
appeared a secondary fraction with an activation energy of ca. 14
kJ mol−1. This was absent in mordenite. Mordenite contains
effectively a single kind of linear channel, which has a cross section of
ca. 7 Å; therefore, there is only one general location for
sorbed molecules, namely within these channels, though there will be
sorption sites of differing strength present, which the single distribution
represents. In ZSM5 and silicalite, the straight channels are slightly
elliptical and have a cross section of ca. 5.5 Å; there is
also a zig-zag channel system which provides a lateral interconnection of
the straight channels [Fig 10(a)]. As we
have already mentioned, at low loadings hydrocarbon molecules tend to
locate at the intersections of these channels but, as the loading
increases, molecules are forced to occupy more restrictive sites within the
channels themselves: since high loadings (ca. 8 molecules per unit
cell) at around the saturation capacity of the zeolites were employed, we
believe the two distinct motional distributions represent the channel
intersection and channel locations, the latter providing the higher
activation energy. The results for dimethylcyclohexadienyl radicals are
rather similar, but indicate slightly reduced activation energies. This is
probably because more limited molecular excursions are permitted for these
larger molecules, within channels that are narrower than the long-axis of
p-xylene; for benzene, free rotation is allowed. These results are
in accord with those obtained from 2H-quadrupole-NMR
measurements.105–107 Fig. 10  Representations of the microporous structures of (a) ZSM5 and (b)
mordenite zeolites. 9 Organometallic complexesIn the foregoing examples of heterogeneous systems, the muon has mainly
taken-on the role of a spin-label to determine aspects of molecular
sorption, particularly in zeolites, clays and porous carbons. However, such
muon spin-labelling studies have also been made using LF-MuSRx of the
intramolecular dynamics of radicals formed by muonium addition to
Ph4X (X = C, Si, Ge, Pb),108
and to some metallocenes and benzene–metal π-complexes,108,109 in which the muon acts as a
spin-probe of torsional motion of the phenyl groups and of the overall
motion of the cyclopentadienyl or benzene ring about the metal atom. In
ferrocene an activation energy of 5.4 ± 0.5 kJ
mol−1 and an attempt frequency of 1 ×
1012 s−1 were obtained109 using LF-MuSRx, which agree very well with
results from NMR110 and neutron
scattering111 measurements. Therefore, it
may be concluded that addition of Mu to form a free radical has little
influence on the ring-dynamics of ferrocene. It is interesting that in
benzene chromium tricarbonyl, the activation energy is around 15 kJ
mol−1.108 For the
torsional motion in tetraphenyl-lead,108
an activation energy of ca. 2 kJ mol−1 was
determined that occurred at a much lower attempt frequency of 4 ×
1010 s−1.Though not strictly an ‘organometallic’ compound, I include
here a study of the reorientational dynamics of aza-cyclohexadienyl
radicals in pyridinium tetrafluoroborate. The reactivity of the pyridinium
ion in this material has already been referred to. Using ALC-MuSR, it was
shown that these Mu substituted radicals undergo fast uniaxial rotation
about an axis perpendicular to the molecular plane. The changes in
reorientational dynamics between 239 and 244 K verify the existence of a
phase transition in this range. Furthermore, there is evidence for a
wobbling motion of the rotational axis superimposed on this uniaxial motion
which freezes in at the first transition temperature,
T1 = 238.7 K.11210 MaterialsThis is a rather broad heading, and is intended to cover the aspect of
muons in probing magnetic and dynamic properties of substances such as
semiconductors, charge transfer complexes and liquid crystals i.e.
‘materials’. Among the family of
4-arylmethyleneamino-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yloxyl
(Ar–CHN–TEMPO) radical crystals are included
derivatives that show either ferromagnetism or metamagnetism, and included
among the aryl groups are p-biphenyl and 4-pyridyl. The former is
ferromagnetic, with a transition temperature of 0.4 K, while the latter is
metamagnetic, with a Néel temperature of 0.12 K. These materials may
be probed with muons.113 Using ab
initio Hartree–Fock theory, the bonding sites for both free
muons and muonium with these materials were determined, as were the
hyperfine fields, including both intramolecular and intermolecular
interactions. The results agree quite well with zero-field MuSR results.
MuSR methods are also useful in the investigation of both conducting and
non-conducting polymers. In conducting polymers, the muon-generated radical
states take the form of highly mobile polarons, and muon spin relaxation
has been used to study the mobility of these polarons and to measure the
temperature dependence of their intra-chain and inter-chain diffusion
rates. It is found that the transport properties are strongly influenced by
the librational ring modes of the phenylene rings in polyaniline (PANI),
polypyridine (PPY) and polyphenylenevinylene (PPV) polymers (Fig. 11).114 In
contrast, the muon generated radical states in non-conducting polymers such
as polybutadiene are localised with the electron remaining in a site
β-to the muon. Using TF-MuSR, ALC-MuSR and LF relaxation measurements,
the localised radical state can be used to probe the chain dynamics of the
polymer, in which dramatic changes are seen in the muon responses on
traversing the glass–rubber transition, as various dynamical degrees
of freedom are frozen out.114 Jayasooriya
and his co-workers have used the LF-MuSRx method to probe
‘segmental’ dynamics in chains of dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine,
and have also measured methyl oleate as a ‘model’
material.115 Two peaks were measured for
the phosphatidylcholine sample, with maxima at ca. 250 K and 360
K, which afford activation energies of 7 and 31 kJ mol−1,
respectively, and are believed to represent two distinct dynamic processes,
rather than phase transitions, and, unlike methyl oleate, there is no
substantial increase in the muon relaxation rate at the chain melting
temperature, implying that the melting process does not change markedly the
microdynamics of the chain segment. These workers have also made a
comparable study116 of a polyurethane
elastomer based on methylenediphenylene isocyanate, in which a number of
dynamic processes are tentatively identified within the temperature range
100 to 470 K, but to say more about them requires both improved statistics
and a better theoretical model of the dynamics involved in the polymer
chains. Fig. 11  Molecular structures of PANI, PPY and PPV polymers. Dynamics in the nematic liquid crystal 5CB (VI) were
investigated using ALC-MuSR. It is shown that this method can be used to
detect the change in molecular motion associated with a nematic to liquid
phase transition, and good fits are obtained if a cone model is assumed for
the director distribution in the nematic phase, and evidence is obtained
for greater dynamic freedom of the director in the liquid phase.117  Muon
spin rotation measurements have been used to study the superconducting
vortex properties of the organic superconductors
κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(SCN)2,
α-(BEDT-TTF)2NH4Hg(SCN)4 and
β-(BEDT-TTF)2IBr2. These materials all have
highly anisotropic structures consisting of metallic layers of BEDT-TTF
molecules alternating with less well conducting anion layers. It is found
that varying the anion changes the anisotropy of the superconductivity and
also leads to changes in the superconducting transition temperature. A
combination of transverse and longitudinal magnetic fields was used to
probe the three-dimensional flux line lattice that is present at low
temperatures and low fields, and also to study the loss of flux lattice
order that occurs on increasing the temperature and field.118 In another study, muon radical states were
studied in the electron donor molecules TTF (VII) and BEDT-TTF
(VIII) and in the electron acceptor molecule TCNQ (IX),
using ALC-MuSR.119 These results should be
considered in parallel with a theoretical study120 of Mu-radical formation in these systems,
which aims to connect the couplings measured with possible radical
structures, since there is in each case a number of potential sites for Mu
addition to occur. In BEDT-TTF, two similar couplings of ca. 240
and 290 MHz were observed119 which are
probably from a radical arising by Mu addition at the external CC
bond, and which can occupy two different conformations. There is the
indication of a third radical with a coupling of <10 MHz, which is
probably from addition to the central CC bond, followed by
extensive twisting of the molecule. It seems clear that the ca.
335 MHz radical formed in TTF must be that arising from Mu addition at the
external CC bond, but the calculations appear to indicate that a
second radical with a very small, ca. 5 MHz, coupling arises from
Mu addition at sulfur followed by S–C bond cleavage. Personally, I
think the radical is the Mu adduct of the central CC bond (as for
BEDT-TTF), which undergoes extensive twisting about the resulting C–C
bond to bring the muon into a position of weak overlap with the essentially
localised unpaired electron. In TCNQ, a coupling of 72.5 MHz is calculated
for the radical arising from Mu addition to a terminal N-atom, which agrees
very well with the experimental value of ca. 80 MHz; a mechanism
involving muon addition to the initially formed TCNQ radical anion is
proposed.120 ALC-MuSR measurements have
also been made on a sample of polycrystalline anthracene/tetracyanobenzene
from 25 K to above room temperature, which reveal Δm = 1
(pure muon spin-flip) transitions from several adducts of anthracene,
showing isotropic coupling constants of 203, 230, 316 and 368 MHz.121      From a repolarisation measurement a paramagnetic
(radical-like) state was imputed to be formed in solid sulfur,122 and this was confirmed by a subsequent ALC
study,123 which provided a measurement of
the muon coupling at 233 ± 5 MHz, from the Δm = 1
transition. In a theoretical study of possible radicals which could be
formed by a reaction between a Mu atom and a sulfur (S8)
molecule,124 the most likely candidate was
identified as the muonic sulfanyl (sulfhydryl) radical
MuS., but a preferential orientation of this species
was invoked so as to enhance the (negative) isotropic muon coupling by a
(negative) contribution from the muon dipolar tensor. Despite the good
agreement so obtained between theory and experiment, such a preferential
orientation appears unusual for such a small radical, particularly at room
temperature. Other models may be reasonable, for instance a
Mu-S8
‘sulfuryl’ radical, or a S–Mu–S
‘bond-centred’ species, but more theoretical and experimental
work is being encouraged. The latest experimentally based report reveals
that, in fact, there is a complex pattern of conversions between various
charge (radical) states which have yet to be fully identified, although the
evidence is moving away from MuS..125 Labelling with 33S might prove
valuable (though expensive), and Webster has reported calculations on the
33S couplings in some possible sulfur derived radicals which
might serve to guide the experimentalist in such studies.126 Selenium is also now under investigation and
coincidentally also shows a radical with a coupling of 230 MHz:127 the plot thickens, but it seems unlikely to me
that MuS. and MuSe. would have
identical isotropic coupling constants. For completeness, I merely mention
that a MuSR study of elemental boron has been published, but there was no
radical state identified in this material.128 Hydrogen transport in molybdenum disulfide has
also been modelled using MuSR methods, which is proposed to be relevant to
the properties of this material as a hydrodesulfurisation catalyst to
remove sulfur compounds from crude petroleum by reaction with
hydrogen.129No review of the previous decade would be complete without mentioning
‘fullerenes’, and this one is no exception, since very subtle
aspects of molecular dynamics have been revealed for the muonium adducts of
these materials. In C60, all carbon sites are equivalent,
whereas in C70 there are five distinct radicals
possible by Mu addition. From an ALC study,130 it was shown that the dynamics of the
C60–Mu adduct in the essentially ordered phase of the
crystalline fullerene (T < 260 K) are well described by a
spherical diffusion or isotropic jump–reorientation motion, with an
activation energy of 176 meV and a reciprocal frequency factor of 2.95(13)
× 10−12 s; this is in striking contrast with the
behaviour of C70–Mu adducts whose reorientational
behaviour accords to a pseudo-static model with a temperature-dependent
order parameter.131 Curiously, in a
LF-repolarisation study, which is sensitive in the low-field region of the
order of the hyperfine anisotropy, it was concluded that the pseudo-static
model did not explain the data, and possible subtleties of the dynamics are
invoked to account for this.13211 Radicals in the gas phaseWhile EPR may be used to measure very simple radicals in the gas phase,
studying radicals containing more than about five atoms is difficult. At
low pressures, the line structure arising from magnetic rotational coupling
leads to enormous spectral complexity, whereas at pressures close to one
atmosphere (101·325 Pa) the features are collisionally broadened and
unresolved. Because organic radicals play a key intermediary role both in
atmospheric chemistry as a result of pollution,133,134 and in combustion133,134 processes, studying them is crucial. Most
importantly, such direct detection of radicals permits the determination of
the kinetics of their reactions, also in the gas phase.The first study,135 using TF-MuSR, of a ‘large’
organic radical, in the gas phase, was of the ethyl radical, formed by Mu
addition to ethene (MuCH2CH2.).
This was a key paper, alerting that such gas-phase studies are indeed
possible, but which have been largely superseded by ALC methods. Dilger
et al. have considered the advantages in using ALC for the study
of gas-phase radicals as large as cyclohexadienyl, which are mainly a
consequence of the high magnetic fields employed; these quench the electron
spin relaxation, and cause the spectral lines to be relatively quite
narrow.136 In principle, such high fields
can be realised in combination with W-band microwave frequencies
(ca. 95 GHz) in EPR experiments, but this necessitates using a
microwave cavity with submillimeter dimensions, which is impractically
small to accommodate a reasonable quantity of a gas-sample.In a fundamental study, Roduner and his co-workers have discovered that
there is a kinetic isotope effect of ca. 7 in favour of
H. (protium) adding to O2, as compared with
Mu. addition.137 This
was followed by a theoretical investigation in which was calculated the
rate of addition of Mu, H and D to O2, and which offers some
explanations for the kinetic isotope effects found experimentally.138 These workers have also studied some gas-phase
reactions of radicals, rather than hydrogen atoms, formed by Mu addition to
appropriate substrates in the gas phase. For instance,
MuCH2CH2., the muonated ethyl
radical,139 undergoes both chemical
reaction, MuCH2CH2. +
O2
→ MuCH2CH2OO.,
and collision-controlled electron spin-exchange, the latter being the
faster process by a factor of 30: this is due to retardation of the
chemical step by a dominant steric factor which arises from the
required direction of approach for successful C–O bond formation.
Similarly, the kinetics of addition of the (muonated) tert-butyl
radical to oxygen have been investigated,140 from which a frequency factor of A =
68(19) × 10−13 cm3
molecule−1 s−1 was determined; this is
2.3 times greater than the corresponding value for the ethyl radical
[A = 29(3) × 10−13 cm3
molecule−1 s−1]. The activation energies
are the same, at −2.4(7) kJ mol−1 and −2.4(3)
kJ mol−1 for the addition of tert-butyl and
ethyl, respectively, to O2. The addition reactions141 of the ethyl and tert-butyl radicals
with NO were also studied kinetically, in the gas phase, yielding
activation energies of −1.4(3) and −7.3(4) kJ
mol−1, respectively; small, negative activation energies
are, in fact, typical for radical addition reactions involving small
molecules.14212 Structural studies of free radicalsIn the early days of free radical MuSR, comparisons were generally drawn
between results obtained from EPR measurements on related radicals,
e.g. MuCH2CH2. with
CH3CH2.. It became clear that
there was always a substantial hyperfine isotope effect, even after
allowing for differences in the muon/proton magnetogyric ratio (3.18),
which amounts to ca.1.4 for conformationally unrestricted radicals
(like ethyl) and ca. 1.2 for more rigid systems like
cyclohexadienyl. These deviations are rooted143,144 in the differing vibrational frequencies and
amplitudes conferred upon molecules which have, in effect, had a proton
replaced by a particle with a mass of only
1
/9th of that of a
proton. Many radicals have been characterised, mainly by TF-MuSR, and I
will end the review with just a few relatively recent examples.The PhCHOMu radical, formed by Mu addition to benzaldehyde, is very
sensitive to the effect of substituents in the aromatic ring: electron
withdrawing groups are found to decrease the isotropic muon coupling, while
electron releasing groups increase it. When the radical is generated in a
series of cation-exchanged zeolite X samples, the coupling similarly
provides a sensitive measure of the cation–π-electron interaction,
being smallest in the presence of highly polarising cations like
Li+ and Mg2+, which act, therefore, as electron
withdrawing substituents.145,146 As
indicated in Section 2.1, muon containing radicals are nearly always formed
by Mu addition to CC bonds (or more complex π-electron systems),
thus placing the muon in a position that is β to a localised unpaired
electron site; however, Percival and co-workers have succeeded in producing
a radical with an α-muon, Me3SiCHMu.,
which has, therefore, a negative muon coupling constant.147 For carbonyl adducts,
R2C.–O–Mu, the coupling can in
principle be either positive or negative, depending on the magnitude of the
muon out-of-plane vibration, but is positive in all cases studied so far;
however, on the basis of the temperature dependence of the muon coupling in
X, its sign is established as being negative.148 This is a consequence of the electronic
push–pull character of the
MuO–C.–CC–CO system,
which increases the ‘double-bond-character’ of the MuO–C
unit, and reduces the out-of-plane sweep of the muon, so it does not
excurse from the region of negative coupling. A related study is the
muonium adduct of biacetyl; this has a coupling of only 2 MHz at 298 K, but
its temperature dependence establishes that it is still of positive
sign.149 We had originally speculated that
the small coupling might be due to an intramolecular H–(Mu) bond
between the two oxygen atoms in an s-cis geometry, but on
theoretical grounds, and also with the example of X in mind (where
this geometry is impossible, but the muon is still confined close to the
radical plane), we believe that it is also due to an electronic
‘push–pull’ effect: i.e.
MuO–C.–CO. One other surprise is
that while muonium addition to the vinyl group, leaving a spin-delocalised
benzyl-type radical, is strongly favoured for styrene and
vinylnaphthalenes,150 for
9-vinylanthracene, the expected 9-anthrylethyl radical (XI) is not
formed, but instead the ring adduct (XII).151 Adductsof nitroalkanes,
RN(O)OMu., have also been characterised, and the
temperature dependences of the, positive, muon couplings were rationalised
in terms of the calculated N–OMu torsional barriers.152 I end with a study of Mu addition to a
sulfur–nitrogen double bond, as provided by the compound
Me3SiNSNSiMe3.153 The
observed muon hyperfine coupling is 90.7 MHz which, according to ab
initio calculations, means that addition has occurred to a nitrogen
atom rather than to the sulfur atom.      13 Concluding remarksThis review could have been written in a rather more specialist manner,
which could be appropriate as the techniques of MuSR are indeed very
sophisticated, and I marvel at the skill of the experimental physicists at
PSI and RAL who, apparently effortlessly and despite sleep deprivation,
keep the experimental hardware running. I chose, instead, to write in a
more general fashion since I wish to bring awareness of the possibilities
of MuSR to chemists in general. Now I take for granted using muons in my
research, it is only when I stand back mentally and consider how else I
could investigate the systems I do that I realise just how unique and
powerful these experiments really are: in the majority of cases, there
simply would be no alternative to them. I think that the power of
‘MuSR’ in providing information that would largely be
completely inaccessible to conventional methods of EPR and ENDOR is
suitably illustrated by the papers that I have chosen (and I could have
chosen a great many others too).In my survey of the literature, I have given some emphasis to radical
reaction data which are relevant to ‘biological’ (membrane)
media, and to radicals formed in heterogeneous systems, such as zeolite
catalysts and also in environmentally important materials, such as
activated carbon, silica and clay (kaolin); reacting gas-phase systems are
outlined too. These seem important and worthwhile areas whose expansion I
would predict.References AcknowledgementsIt is a pleasure to acknowledge my co-workers and other scientific
collaborators, particularly: Ivan Reid, Tim Dintinger, Harry Morris,
Chantal Hinds, Estelle Butcher, Rod Macrae, Steve Cox, Chris Scott, Migg
Roduner, Jas Jayasooriya, David Walker, Brian Webster and Martyn Symons. I
also acknowledge the financial support of my own research programme in MuSR
by the Leverhulme Trust, the EPSRC, the European Union, Unilever Research,
the Paul Scherrer Institute, and John Moores University.References1 C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 1993, 90, 67 RSC .C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 1996, 92, 215 RSC .C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 1999, 95, 199 RSC .B. C. Webster, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 1985, 82, 3 RSC .D. C. Walker,
Muon and Muonium Chemistry,Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge,
 1983. Search PubMed .E. Roduner, The
Positive Muon as a Probe in Free Radical Chemistry, Lecture Notes in
Chemistry, Springer,
Heidelberg,  1988. Search PubMed .Hyperfine Interactions, Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation/Relaxation/Resonance
(μSR’96), ed. K. Nagamine, R. M. Macrae, R. Kadono and K.
Nishiyama, Baltzer, The Netherlands,
 1997. Search PubMed .
  (a) A. Carrington and
A. D. McLachlan,
Introduction to Magnetic Resonance, Chapman and
Hall, London,  1979 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) R. K. Harris,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy,Pitman, Melbourne, 1983, Search PubMed .S. A. Everett, M. F. Dennis, K. B. Patel, S. Maddix, S. C. Kundu and R. L. Willson, J. Biol. Chem., 1996, 271, 3988 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Swallow, Prog. React. Kinet., 1978, 9, 195 Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger, C. S. Hinds, H. Morris and I. D. Reid, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S49 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Walker, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 1 RSC .Z. Wu, M. V. Barnabas, J. M. Stadlbauer, K. Venkateswaran, G. B. Porter and D. C. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 9096 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wu, J. M. Stadlbauer and D. C. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 3988 CrossRef CAS .H. Zeldes and R. Livingston, J. Phys. Chem., 1972, 76, 3348 CrossRef CAS .P. Neta and R. H. Schuler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 1056 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger and C. A. Scott, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, 62 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger and C. A. Scott, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, 729 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger, I. D. Reid and C. A. Scott, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S58 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger, I. D. Reid and C. A. Scott, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, 281 CrossRef CAS .S. F. J. Cox and D. S. Sivia, Hyperfine Interact., 1994, 87, 871 CAS .S. F. J. Cox and D. S. Sivia, Appl. Magn. Reson., 1997, 12, 213 Search PubMed ; S.F.J. Cox, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 1998, 11, 103 CrossRef CAS .C. Christides, S. F. J. Cox, W. I. F. David, R. M. Macrae and K. Prasides, J. Chim. Phys., 1993, 90, 663 Search PubMed .E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 337 RSC .E. Roduner,
M. Schwager and
M. Shelley,
Radicals on Surfaces, ed. A. Lund and C.J. Rhodes,
Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1995,
p. 259. Search PubMed .V. N. Gorelkin, V. R. Soloviev, A. M. Konchatakov and A. S. Baturin, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 409 CrossRef .L. D. A. Siebbeles, S. M. Pimblott and S. F. J. Cox, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 404 CrossRef .J. D. Brewer, J. H. Brewer, G. D. Morris, D. G. Eshchenko and V. G. Storchak, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 428 CrossRef .D. E. Casperson, T. W. Crane, V. W. Hughes, P. A. Souder, R. D. Stambaugh, P. A. Tompson, H. Orth, G. zu Putlitz, H. F. Kaspar, H. W. Reist and A. B. Denison, Phys. Lett. B, 1975, 59, 397 CrossRef .L. W. Anderson, F. M. Pipkin and J. C. Baird, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1960, 4, 69 CrossRef CAS .H. Dilger, E. Roduner, R. Scheuermann, J. Major, M. Schefzik, R. Stosser, M. Pach and D. G. Fleming, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 482 CrossRef .E. Roduner, P. W. Percival, P. Han and D. M. Bartels, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 102, 5989 CrossRef CAS .M. C. R. Symons, C. J. Rhodes and I. D. Reid, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, 823 CrossRef CAS .R. Kadono, R. M. Macrae and K. Nagamine, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 105, 327 CrossRef CAS .R. Kadono, R. M. Macrae, K. Nagamine and K. Nishiyama, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 105, 303 CrossRef CAS .R. Kadono, A. Matsushita, R. M. Macrae, K. Nishiyama and K. Nagamine, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 73, 2724 CrossRef CAS .E. Roduner, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1986, 28, 75 CAS .C. J. Rhodes, H. Morris and I. D. Reid, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1995, 2107 RSC .M. R. Grimmett, Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1970, 12, 103 CAS .C. J. Rhodes and E. Roduner, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 1497 RSC .E. Roduner and B. C. Webster, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 1939 RSC .E. Roduner, Hyperfine Interact., 1984, 17–19, 785 .J. M. Stadlbauer, K. Venkateswaran, G. B. Porter and D. C. Walker, Hyperfine Interact., 1994, 87, 877 CAS .C. von Sonntag,
The Chemical Basis of Radiation Biology, Taylor and
Francis, London,
 1987. Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes,
H. Morris and
I. D. Reid,
Magn. Reson. Chem.,  2001, 39, in
press. Search PubMed .E. Roduner, G. Brinkman and P. W. F. Louwrier, Chem. Phys., 1982, 73, 117 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Ronfard Haret, A. Lablache Combier and C. Chachaty, J. Phys. Chem., 1974, 78, 899 CrossRef CAS .C. Chachaty, Comp. Rend., 1967, 264, 1421 Search PubMed .H. J. Bower, J. A. McRae and M. C. R. Symons, J. Chem. Soc. (A), 1968, 1918 RSC .I. Fleming,
Frontier Orbitals and Organic Chemical Reactions,
Wiley, London,
 1982. Search PubMed .C. Bucci, G. Guidi, M. Manfredi, R. Tedeschi, P. R. Crippa, G. M. Munari, A. Vecli and P. Podini, Hyperfine Interact., 1979, 6, 425 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Barnabas, K. Venkateswaran, J. M. Stadlbauer, Z. Wu and D. C. Walker, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 10204 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes,
C. S. Hinds and
H. Morris,
unpublished results. .Z. M. Baq and
P. Alexander,
Fundamentals of Radiobiology, Pergamon,
Oxford, 1966. Search PubMed .M. Tubiana,
J. Dutreix and
A. Wambersie,
Introduction to Radiobiology, Taylor and
Francis, London,
 1990. Search PubMed .S. N. Muller, R. Batra, M. Senn, B. Giese, M. Kisel and O. Shadyro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2795 CrossRef .B. Halliwell and
J. M. C. Gutteridge,
Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine, Clarendon
Press, Oxford,  1989. Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger, H. A. Moynihan and I. D. Reid, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, 646 CrossRef CAS .K. Mukai, H. Morimoto, S. Kikuchi and S. Nagaoka, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 1993, 1157, 313 Search PubMed .K. Mukai, S. Itoh and H. Morimoto, J. Biol. Chem., 1992, 267, 22277 CAS .B. Kalyanaraman, Biochem. Soc. Symp., 1995, 61, 55 Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes, in
Toxicology of the Human Environment – the Critical Role of
Free Radicals, ed. C. J. Rhodes Taylor and
Francis, London,  2000,
p. 285. Search PubMed .C. Schoneich, K.-D. Asmus, U. Dillinger and F. v. Bruchhausen, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1989, 161, 113 CrossRef CAS .L. McGinley,
The Wall Street Journal, January 19,
 1996. Search PubMed .P. M. Rowe, Lancet, 1996, 347, 249 CrossRef CAS .J. Mann,
Secondary Metabolism, Clarendon Press,
Oxford,  1978. Search PubMed .G. S. Kelly, Alternative Med. Rev., 1999, 4, 29 Search PubMed .Y. Kohno, Y. Egawa, S. Itoh, S. Nagaoka, M. Takahashi and K. Mukai, Biochem. Biophys. Acta – Lipids Lipid Metab., 1995, 1256, 52 Search PubMed .M. Trihi, J. L. Duroux, M. J. Hyvernaud and M. Bernard, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1561 Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger, H. A. Moynihan and I. D. Reid, Free Radical Res., 2000, 33, 75 Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes and M. C. R. Symons, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1, 1988, 84, 1187 RSC .R. C. Weast,
CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 66th Edition,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
 1986. Search PubMed .S. R. Harrison, R. S. Pilkington and L. H. Sutcliffe, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1984, 80, 669 RSC .D. Cammarere, R. H. Scheicher, N. Sahoo, T. P. Das and K. Nagamine, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 636 CrossRef .K. Nagamine, F. L. Pratt, S. Ohira, I. Watanabe, K. Ishida, S. N. Nakamura and T. Matsuzaki, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 631 CrossRef .S. H. Kilcoyne and B. C. Webster, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S20 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Wayne,
Chemistry of Atmospheres,Clarendon Press,
Oxford,  1985. Search PubMed .R. van Dingenen, N. R. Jensen, J. Hjorth and F. Raes, J. Atmos. Chem., 1994, 18, 211 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Wuebbles, J. Geophys. Res., 1983, 88, 1433 CAS .I. Tegen and I. Fung, J. Geophys. Res., 1994, 99, 22897 CrossRef .R. P. Turco,
Earth Under Siege, Oxford University Press,
Oxford,  1997. Search PubMed .C.J.Rhodes, H.Morris, U.Zimmerman and I.D.Reid, to be
published..S.F.J.Cox, personal communication; from LF-MuSRx data for pure,
bulk benzene, activation parameters of Ea = 6.6 kJ
mol−1 and and τ∞ = 2.4
× 10−11 s may be obtained, which are, in fact, very
similar to those obtained by TF-MuSR measurements on pure benzene.19.J. Beard, New Sci., 1993, 139, 19 Search PubMed ; T. J. Houser, Y. Zhou and X. Liu, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 1996, 9, 106 CrossRef CAS .P. W. Percival, J.-C. Brodovitch, K. Ghandi, B. Addison-Jones, J. Schuth and D. M. Bartels, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 4999 RSC .K. Ghandi, J.-C. Brodivitch, B. Addison-Jones, P. W. Percival and J. Schuth, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 476 CrossRef .P. W. Percival, J.-C. Brodovitch, K. Ghandi, B. Addison-Jones, I.
McKenzie and J. Schuth, Abstract Number (O-22), from the ‘Eighth
International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation, Relaxation and
Resonance’, held in Les Diablarets, Switzerland 30 August–3
September 1999..J. K. A. Clarke, R. Darcy, B. F. Hegarty, E. O’Donoghue, V. Amir-Ebrahimi and J. J. Rooney, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 425 RSC .Radicals on Surfaces, ed. A. Lund and C. J. Rhodes,
Kluwer, Dordrecht,
 1995. Search PubMed .C. J. Rhodes, E. C. Butcher, H. Morris and I. D. Reid, Magn. Reson. Chem., 1995, 33, S134 CAS .M. Heming and E. Roduner, Surf. Sci., 1987, 189, 535 .C. J. Rhodes, E. Roduner and I. D. Reid, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 512 RSC .M. Stolmar and E. Roduner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 583 CrossRef CAS .B. Zibrowius, J. Caro and H. Pfeifer, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1, 1988, 84, 2347 RSC .E. Roduner,
H. Dilger,
U. Himmer,
R. Scheuermann and
I. D. Reid, PSI
Annual Report 1998, ed. U. Baltensperger, D. Herlach, P.-R. Kettle
and R. Lorenzen, Paul Scherrer Institute,
Villigen,  1999, vol. 1, p.
85. Search PubMed .E. Roduner, M. Stolmar, H. Dilger and I. D. Reid, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7591 CrossRef CAS .M. Stolmar, E. Roduner, H. Dilger, U. Himmer, M. Shelley and I. D. Reid, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 106, 51 CrossRef CAS .E. Roduner, R. Crockett and L.-M. Wu, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1993, 89, 2101 RSC .B. C. Webster and R. M. Macrae, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 598 CrossRef .I. D. Reid, T. Azuma and E. Roduner, Hyperfine Interact., 1990, 65, 879 .M. Shwager, H. Dilger, E. Roduner and I. D. Reid, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 142 Search PubMed .E. Roduner,
M. Schwager,
P. Tregenna-Piggott,
H. Dilger,
M. Shelley and
I. D. Reid,
Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem.,  1995,
99, 1338. Search PubMed .J. Karger and
D. M. Ruthven,
Diffusion in Zeolites – and other Microporous Solids,
Wiley, New York,
 1992. Search PubMed .M. A. Hepp, V. Ramamurthy, D. R. Corbin and C. Dybowski, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 2629 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Nagy, E. G. Derouane, H. A. Resing and G. RayMiller, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 833 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Eckman and A. J. Vega, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 4679 CrossRef CAS .I. Kustanovich, D. Fraenkel, Z. Luz and S. Vega, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 4134 CrossRef CAS .U. A. Jayasooria, J. A. Stride, G. M. Aston, G. A. Hopkins, S. F. J. Cox, S. P. Cottrell and C. A. Scott, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 27, 106 .U. A. Jayasooria, G. M. Aston and J. A. Stride, Appl. Magn. Reson., 1997, 13, 165 Search PubMed .A. Kubo, R. Ikeda and D. Nakamura, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1986, 82, 1543 RSC .A. B. Gardner, J. Howard, T. C. Waddington, R. M. Richardson and J. Tomkinson, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 57, 453 CrossRef CAS .B. Beck, E. Roduner, H. Dilger, P. Czarnecki, D. G. Fleming, I. D. Reid and C. J. Rhodes, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 607 CrossRef .T. M. Briere, J. Jeong, T. P. Das, S. Ohira and K. Nagamine, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 128 CrossRef .F. L. Pratt, S. J. Blundell, Th. Jestadt, B. W. Lovett, A. Husmann, I. M. Marshall, W. Hayes, A. Monkman, I. Watanabe, K. Nagamine, R. E. Martin and A. B. Holmes, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 625 CrossRef .N. J. Clayden, U. A. Jayasooriya and S. P. Cottrell, Phys. Chem., Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 4379 RSC .N. J. Clayden, U. A. Jayasooriya, J. A. Stride and P. King, Polymer, 2000, 41, 3455 CrossRef CAS .B. W. Lovett, J. S. Stiessberger, S. J. Blundell. Th. Jestadt, A. Ardavan, I. M. Marshall, F. L. Pratt and I. D. Reid, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 612 CrossRef .F. L. Pratt, S. J. Blundell, A. Husmann, I. M. Marshall, B. W. Lovett, W. Hayes, S. L. Lee, C. Ager, F. Y. Ogrin, T. Sasaki, S. Endo, N. Toyota, K. Kanoda, V. N. Laukhin, E. Laukhina, I. Watanabe and K. Nagamine, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 396 CrossRef .F. L. Pratt, S. J. Blundell, Th. Jestadt, B. W. Lovett, R. M. Macrae and W. Hayes, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S27 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Macrae, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S33 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Macrae, I. D. Reid, J.-U. von Schutz and K. Nagamine, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 616 CrossRef .S. F. J. Cox, S. P. Cottrell, G. A. Hopkins, M. Kay and F. L. Pratt, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 106, 85 CrossRef CAS .S. F. J. Cox, I. D. Reid, K. L. McCormack and B. C. Webster, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 273, 179 CrossRef CAS .B. C. Webster, K. L. McCormack and R. M. Macrae, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 3423 RSC .I. D. Reid and S. F. J. Cox, Physica B, 2000, 289–290, 620 CrossRef .B. C. Webster, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S16 CrossRef CAS .I. D. Reid, S. F. J. Cox, U. A. Jayasooriya and G. A. Hopkins, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S3 CrossRef CAS .S. F. J. Cox, S. P. Cottrell, J. S. Lord, C. A. Scott, U. A. Jayasooriya, G. A. Hopkins and N. Suleimanov, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S9 CrossRef CAS .P. C. H. Mitchell, D. A. Green, E. Payen and C. A. Scott, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S43 CrossRef CAS .E. Roduner, K. Prassides, R. M. Macrae, I. M. Thomas, C. Niedermayer, U. Binninger, C. Bernhard, A. Hofer and I. D. Reid, Chem. Phys., 1995, 192, 231 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Macrae, K. Prassides, I. M. Thomas, E. Roduner, C. Niedermayer, U. Binninger, C. Bernhard, A. Hofer and I. D. Reid, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 12133 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Macrae, R. Kadono, F. L. Pratt, K. Tanigaki, K. Nishiyama and K. Nagamine, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 106, 175 CrossRef CAS .R. Atkinson,
Air Pollution, the Automobile and Public Health, ed.
A.Y.Watson, R.R.Bates and D.Kennedy, National Academy
Press, Washington DC,
 1988. Search PubMed .J. Troe, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 1399 Search PubMed .E. Roduner and D. M. Garner, Hyperfine Interact., 1986, 32, 733 CAS .H. Dilger, E. Roduner, M. Stolmar, I. D. Reid, D. G. Fleming, D. J. Arseneau, J. J. Pan, M. Senba and M. Shelley, Hyperfine Interact., 1996, 106, 137 CrossRef .U. Himmer, H. Dilger, E. Roduner, J. J. Pan, D. J. Arseneau, D. G. Fleming and M. Senba, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 2076 CrossRef CAS .U. Himmer and E. Roduner, Phys. Chem., Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 339 RSC .H. Dilger, M. Schwager, P. L. W. Tregenna-Piggott, E. Roduner, I. D. Ried, D. J. Arseneau, J. J. Pan, M. Senba, M. Shelley and D. G. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 6561 CrossRef CAS .H. Dilger, M. Stolmar, P. L. W. Tregenna-Piggott, E. Roduner and I. D. Reid, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 956 Search PubMed .H. Dilger, M. Stolmar, U. Himmer, E. Roduner and I. D. Reid, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 6772 CrossRef CAS .O. Pritchard,
Reaction Kinetics, Specialist Periodical Reports,
Chemical Society, London,
 1975, vol. 1. Search PubMed .T. A. Claxton and A. M. Graham, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1987, 83, 2307 RSC .T. A. Claxton, A. M. Graham, S. F. J. Cox, D. M. Maric, P. F. Meier and S. Vogel, Hyperfine Interact., 1990, 65, 913 .C. J. Rhodes, I. D. Reid and R. A. Jackson, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 106, 193 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes, C. S. Hinds and I. D. Reid, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 4265 RSC .B. Addison-Jones, P. W. Percival, J.-C. Brodovitch, F. Ji, D. Sharma and S. Vlodek, Hyperfine Interact., 1994, 87, 847 CAS .C. J. Rhodes, R. M. Macrae and I. D. Reid, Chem. Commun., 1999, 2157 RSC .R. M. Macrae, C. J. Rhodes, K. Nishiyama and K. Nagamine, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 259, 103 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes and E. Roduner, Hyperfine Interact., 1990, 65, 969 .C. J. Rhodes, H. Morris and I. D. Reid, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 106, 203 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Rhodes, H. Morris, C. A. Scott, I. D. Reid and E. Roduner, Magn. Reson. Chem., 1997, 35, 687 CrossRef .P. F. Kelly, A. Soriano-Rama, P. T. Wood, I. D. Reid, T. A. Claxton, C. J. Rhodes and U. A. Jatasooriya, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, S65 CrossRef CAS .Footnote† As
noted above, muons decay to positrons (μ+
→
e+ + e +
νμ) on a microsecond timescale, which are
detected using scintillation counters, and counted using fast electronics;
the decay events are accumulated in four data histograms. Generally, the
histogram is of the form where N0 is a
N(t) = N0{B +
exp(−t/tμ)[1 +
F(t)]},normalisation factor, roughly equal to the
number of counts in the first channel (t = 0), B is the
background fraction (usually <1%), tμ is the muon
lifetime and F(t) reflects the time dependence of the
muon spin polarisation. For experiments in which a number of frequencies
are obtained (as in the present case), F(t) is the sum of
contributions of the form corresponding to a muon
Fj(t) =
Ajexp(−λ
jt)cos(ωj
t +
ϕj),precession at a specific
frequency νj, for which
Aj is the asymmetry (amplitude),
λj the relaxation rate which
provides a measure of chemical reactions or physical relaxation processes,
and ϕj is the initial phase. The
data are analysed by fitting directly the latter expression to the
experimental data in Fourier space, which yields the parameters
Aj,
λj,
ωj,
ϕj for each frequency.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
Table Content:
μ+
→
e + νμ +
e+	(1)
π+
→
μ+ +
νμ	(2)
μ+ + e−
→
Mu.	(3)
	(4)
R2CCR2 +
Mu.
→
R2C(Mu)CR2.
	(5)
R2CCR–CRCR2
+ Mu.
→
R2C(Mu)–C.(R)
–CRCR2	(6)
R2CS +
Mu.
→
R2C(Mu)–S.
	(7)

 	Fig. 1  μ+ spin ‘rotating’ under the influence of a
magnetic field (B), applied transverse to the muon beam
direction.	 

 	Fig. 2  TF-MuSR spectrum of
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me radicals
formed by muonium addition to allyl acetate.	 
λ = λ0 +
k[S]	(8)

 	Fig. 3  Plot of linewidth (λ) as a function of vitamin K
concentration for
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me radicals in
diethyl ether solution, leading to the second order rate constant
(k), according to eqn. (8).	 
λ =
(2πδA)2τ/(1 +
ω2τ2)	(9)
τ =
τ∞exp(Ea/RT).
	(10)

 	Fig. 4  LF-MuSRx plot for cyclohexadienyl radicals sorbed in zeolite LiX (see
text).	 

 	Fig. 5  Magnetic field (B) applied longitudinally to the muon beam
direction, in which the muon spins undergo relaxation (spin inversion).	 



C5H5N	503.9a	526.8a	n.d.	5.8a
(28%)b	(30%)b	n.d.	(42%)b
C5H5NH+	521.4a	559.6a	664.7a	0.9a
(23%)b	(16%)b	(19%)b	(42%)b
(16%)c	(12%)c	(13%)c	(59%)c

 	Scheme 1	 

 	Scheme 2	 

Me(MuCH2)CC(Me)–CH2
.	9.38 × 106	3.54 × 107
MuCH2CH.CH2OC(O)Me
	1.76 × 108	2.03 × 106

 	Scheme 3	 


HO(CH2)2S.	—	250 ± 1a	—	3.1a
GS.	6.62 ± .76d	22 ± 1a	1.9c	0.8c
CysS.	—	26 ± 1a	0.9c	0.6c
PenS.	—	—	0.4c	0.3c
RS.(2+)	—	0.42 ± 0.02a	—	—
TA	18.7 ± .6b,d	57.3 ± 1.6b,d	2.4 ± 0.2b,d	1.4 ± 0.2b,d
81.2 ± 2.0d,e	3.2 ± 0.4d,e	2.0 ± 0.2d,e
TB	16.9 ± .8b,d	37.3 ± 1.8b,d	2.0 ± 0.2b,d	1.2 ± 0.1b,d
48.9 ± 2.0d,e	2.6 ± 0.3d,e	1.9 ± 0.2d,e

 	Fig. 6  (a) TF-MuSR spectrum recorded from a 50 vol.% solution of squalene in
diethyl ether, showing two broad signals from a mixture of radicals of type
RCH2C.(Me)CH(Mu)CH2R′, with
an almost common coupling constant, resulting from muonium addition to the
3,7,11 (14,18,22) positions of squalene (III). The sharp peak at
ca. 100 MHz is the first harmonic of the cyclotron frequency, at
ca. 50 MHz; (b) is its correlation spectrum confirming the
presence of only radicals with a similar functional identity (the scale is
that of the coupling constant directly).	 

Me2C.–CH2Mu
	291.6
Me2C.–C(Mu)(H)Me	251.4
Me2C.–C(Mu)(H)But
	251.2
Et2C.–C(Mu)(H)Me	240.0
RCH2(Me)C.–C(Mu)(H)CH
2R′	240.7
(From squalene)

 		 

 	Fig. 7  LF-MuSRx plots for (a) α-pinene and (b) β-pinene, both sorbed
in porous carbon (see text).	 

α-pinene	(8.1 ± 2.4) × 1011	6.0 ± 0.3	(4.8 ± 1.3) × 1012	13.1 ± 1.7
β-pinene	(4.5 ± 1.1) × 1011	6.6 ± 0.9	(8.1 ± 2.5) × 1012	16.0 ± 1.2

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  TF-MuSR spectra of cyclohexadienyl radicals, recorded from (a) liquid
benzene and (b) from benzene sorbed in zeolite NaX.	 
τ =
τ0
exp(Ea/RT),	(11)

 	Fig. 9  Simulations, showing the effect of the molecular motion indicated on the
ALC-MuSR spectrum of the cyclohexadienyl radical (see text). Reproduced
with permission from ref. 96. Copyright
1998, American Chemical Society.	 
Drot(C6H6) =
426(+51/−45)MHz exp((−8.6 ± 0.2)
kJ mol−1/RT),	(12)
Drot(C6H3Me
3) = 584(+480/−240)MHz
exp((−12.6 ± 1.4) kJ
mol−1/RT).	(13)

 	Fig. 10  Representations of the microporous structures of (a) ZSM5 and (b)
mordenite zeolites.	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structures of PANI, PPY and PPV polymers.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
Footnote
† As
noted above, muons decay to positrons (μ+
→
e+ + e +
νμ) on a microsecond timescale, which are
detected using scintillation counters, and counted using fast electronics;
the decay events are accumulated in four data histograms. Generally, the
histogram is of the form where N0 is a
N(t) = N0{B +
exp(−t/tμ)[1 +
F(t)]},normalisation factor, roughly equal to the
number of counts in the first channel (t = 0), B is the
background fraction (usually <1%), tμ is the muon
lifetime and F(t) reflects the time dependence of the
muon spin polarisation. For experiments in which a number of frequencies
are obtained (as in the present case), F(t) is the sum of
contributions of the form corresponding to a muon
Fj(t) =
Ajexp(−λ
jt)cos(ωj
t +
ϕj),precession at a specific
frequency νj, for which
Aj is the asymmetry (amplitude),
λj the relaxation rate which
provides a measure of chemical reactions or physical relaxation processes,
and ϕj is the initial phase. The
data are analysed by fitting directly the latter expression to the
experimental data in Fourier space, which yields the parameters
Aj,
λj,
ωj,
ϕj for each frequency.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
