Intrinsic stability enhancement and ionic migration reduction by fluorinated cations incorporated in hybrid lead halide perovskites   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC06308G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC06308G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5299-5306Intrinsic stability enhancement and ionic migration reduction by fluorinated cations incorporated in hybrid lead halide perovskites†

        
          
            Fedwa 
            El-Mellouhi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Sergey N. 
            Rashkeev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Asma 
            Marzouk
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lara 
            Kabalan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abdelhak 
            Belaidi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Belabbes 
            Merzougui
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nouar 
            Tabet
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Fahhad H. 
            Alharbi
          
        
      ab
aQatar Environment and Energy Research Institute (QEERI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar. E-mail: felmellouhi@hbku.edu.qa
bCollege of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar
Received 
      13th December 2018
    , Accepted 11th February 2019First published on 11th February 2019AbstractImproving the stability of hybrid perovskite solar cells is believed to be the main step toward large scale commercialization of this technology. In this work, we demonstrate that the stability can be enhanced significantly by proper fluorination of the methylammonium cation. A systematic study to identify the optimal stability of the perovskite material with low controlled concentrations of modified cations was conducted using density functional theory (DFT). Our results suggest a route to enhance the thermodynamic stability of hybrid inorganic–organic perovskites, while at the same time reduce the ionic diffusion. The optimal fluorination has no significant impact on the band gap or the volume expansion of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. We demonstrate that the fluorination has a tendency to stabilize the material due to the strengthening of some initially weak hydrogen bonds between MA+ cations and the surrounding lead-iodide framework. The observed strengthening is the result of internal structural deformations which are related to the formation of long C–N bonds. Finally, we showed through calculation that fluorination should reduce significantly the iodine vacancy mediated diffusion in the perovskite under applied bias voltage.
Introduction
Within just a few years, the conversion efficiency of hybrid inorganic–organic methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPI) perovskite based solar cells has dramatically increased and exceeded ∼23%.1–3 Such a great progress is believed to be the result of a unique combination of favorable properties of this material, including strong light absorption and long carrier lifetime, efficient charge carrier transport4,5 and defect tolerance.6 From a practical perspective, the simplicity of the perovskite solar cell (PSC) fabrication technique, which uses a low-cost chemical process to synthesize the photo absorbing material, is remarkably impressive. However, different instabilities hinder the commercial deployment of PSCs.7 It is well known that CH3NH3PbI3 is sensitive to moisture, UV exposure, and the presence of oxygen.8,9 More fundamentally, CH3NH3PbI3 suffers from intrinsic instability – it was computationally confirmed that the compound is thermodynamically unstable and its spontaneous decomposition leading to CH3NH3I and PbI2 is inevitable in the long-term.9–11 Also, it is believed that the dynamics of the polarized molecular cations (MA+) should contribute to many properties of this material12–18 including the stability.10,17 In particular, enhanced interaction between the dipoles originating from organic molecules in the presence of an external electric field was suggested to play an important role in the photoferroic effect in perovskite nanostructured films.19
On the other hand, it was suggested in the literature that the migration and accumulation of iodide ions under external fields may reduce the open-circuit voltage or the steady-state photocurrent, thus affecting the performance of solar cells.20 Also, this affects the non-radiative recombination which causes an appearance of photoluminescence (PL) inactive (or dark) areas at perovskite films.21–26 In particular, it was shown that local carrier lifetime depends on the microstructure of the perovskite sample, and the ion mobility is higher at the grain boundaries than in the bulk which makes these areas darker.22 Also, PL experiments indicate that both irreversible and reversible responses of the perovskite film could be observed under different electric fields and humidity conditions.23–26 These nonradiative recombination pathways are detrimental to the energy conversion and can be passivated by chemical treatment using pyridine.22 Recently, it has been demonstrated that the addition of 1-methyl-3-(1H,1H,2H,2H-nona-fluorohexyl)imidazolium iodide (FIm) as an additive salt during the preparation of Cs0.05(MA0.15FA0.85)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3-based perovskites leads to solar cell devices that remain stable for >100 days when stored under atmospheric conditions.27 This additive does not incorporate within the materials but rather acts as a blocking layer against the interaction with water. Furthermore, it was shown that replacing a methylammonium cation by alternative protonated molecular cations in MAPI allows an enhancement in electronic coupling between the cation and the PbI6 octahedra by forming strong hydrogen bonds.28 The PSC materials could be stabilized chemically even further by replacing the inorganic halide anion (I−) with another halide ion (F−, Cl−, or Br−).29 Such a chemical mechanism of the stabilization exploits a balance between the electronegativity of the material constituents and the resulting ionic electrostatic interactions.
Kieslich et al.30 have recently demonstrated using a combination of inelastic neutron spectroscopy and ab initio lattice dynamics that tuning the hydrogen bonding interaction between the molecule and the inorganic framework helps to balance the enthalpy and vibrational entropy of interactions giving further control over the structural phase transition in hybrid materials and hence resulting in the stability of the absorber and the device.31,32 The stability enhancement of hybrid perovskite absorbers could also be achieved by the introduction of organic and inorganic anionic33–36 and cationic additives such as Cs, Rb, K, Na, and Li.37,38
Large fluorinated cation additives have been introduced within the perovskites or introduced as additives or as a terminal moisture blocking layer27,39–42 showing signs of enhanced intrinsic stability and resistance to water infiltration by increasing the hydrophobicity. This being said, the large fluorinated molecular cation, in most cases, reduced the 3D structural dimensionality of the perovskites, hence lowering their power conversion efficiencies.
Another observed phenomenon that was attributed to the mobile ions in the material is the hysteresis in the current–voltage characteristics of the halide perovskite solar cells.43 The hysteresis is observed when the current–voltage curve depends on the scanning direction of the voltage. This difference in current–voltage curves indicated that the absorber was undergoing a transient change due to an initial bias.44 This hysteresis has been attributed to the slow motion of the iodine ions and associated long-lived interface polarization that depend on the state of the solar cell and the applied electric field.45 In previous works, the hysteresis has been suggested to be a result of the contribution of spontaneous electric polarization (ferroelectricity), however it is not considered any more as the dominant mechanism.46 Efforts to reduce or eliminate the hysteresis focused on improving the charge carrier extraction by interfacial band alignment, chemical surface modification of the perovskite, and defect and trap site passivation. It has been reported that dual-functional sulfoxide (SO) in the salts used as a dopant in the perovskite can assist the crystallization process and passivate the surface defects, thus eliminating the J–V hysteresis in the perovskite solar cells via defect control.47 Interestingly it has been suggested that removing the hysteresis from the current–voltage curves does not necessarily mean that the ion motions are stopped but instead the accumulation of the ions at the interface does not affect the carrier extraction.44
A recent work using time-resolved scanning Kelvin probe microscopy on insulator-coated lateral electrodes reported the long-range dynamic redistribution of charged Frenkel defects in lead halide perovskites MAPI and FAPI.48 A substantial number of theoretical calculations predicted either a vacancy domination49 or equivalent migration50,51 of associated Frenkel defects of halide vacancies and interstitials. The measured as well as calculated iodine migration barriers in the literature vary from 0.08–0.6 eV depending on the experimental and the computational conditions. It has also been demonstrated that the ionic diffusion of I-Frenkel defects could be greatly reduced in the vicinity of the additive ions contributing to attenuating the hysteresis effect. Haruyama et al.52 proposed that the incorporation of a larger cation than MA could help in suppressing hysteresis as well as preventing aging behavior of devices. Furthermore, the dipoles of the organic molecules have been reported to exert a screening effect of the moving ionic charges while their rotation was proposed to assist the iodine migration.53
Huang et al.54 have reported the successful incorporation of a small amount of large fluorinated cations into the lead iodide perovskites. They made a comparison between the properties of devices fabricated from pristine MAI·PbI2 and (CF3CH2NH3I)0.05(MAI)0.95PbI2, (C2F5CH2NH3I)0.05(MAI)0.95PbI2, and (C3F7CH2NH3I)0.05(MAI)0.95PbI2 thin films. The use of fluorine-containing molecules and hydrophobic fluorine-containing groups was shown to improve the stability of the perovskite thin films as well as their optical and electrical properties. The fluorine-containing perovskite-type films produced a reduced hysteresis under applied voltage leading to the preparation of efficient, stable perovskite-type solar cells.54
In this work, we propose an approach to enhance the thermodynamic stability and reduce the ionic diffusion in hybrid inorganic–organic MAPI perovskite materials via introducing partially fluorinated organic cation additives. We also found that in addition to the reduction of ionic diffusion, partially fluorinated MAPI materials are expected to show increased hydrophobicity reducing the penetration of water in the perovskite and therefore, mitigating the instability related to the presence of water molecules.
Methods
Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations were used to evaluate the stability of the fluorinated MAPI materials using the projected augmented wave (PAW) method as built in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).55 All calculations were performed using the spin polarized generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization for the exchange and correlation energy of interacting electrons.56 The energy cutoff for the planewave basis set was set to 520 eV and a 4 × 4 × 3 Monkhorst–Pack k-point mesh was employed. Long-range van der Waals interactions have been taken into account using the Tkatchenko and Scheffler (TS) scheme.57 The convergence of the final forces was set to 0.01 eV Å−1. The simulation box used in the calculations is based on the 48 atoms tetragonal unit cell (4 formula units) of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite.
The simulation box is large enough to allow the octahedral rotations and tilts and hence, a better assessment of the stability. A workflow has been constructed to handle all possibilities of random substitution of hydrogen with fluorine atoms enabling a DFT high throughput calculation framework. For each workflow, fluorine concentration was increased from 1 up to 4 fluorine per unit cell followed by a full geometry optimization. The resulting configurations were subsequently ranked according to their lowest total energy. The ground state was identified at each fluorine concentration considered. Charges at different atomic sites and interatomic distances in singly charged fluorinated methylammonium cations were calculated using the GAUSSIAN package at the B3LYP/6-31G* level of theory.58 Hydrogen bonding analysis was conducted using the NCIPLOT program for plotting noncovalent interaction regions.42,59–61
Pure MAPI materials have been reported in several works to be thermodynamically unstable with respect to the decomposition of PbI2 and MAI.62 We assess the thermodynamic stability of the fluorinated materials using the intrinsic decomposition reaction:63MA1−xFMAxPbI3 → (1 − x)MAI + xFMAI + PbI2where FMA refers to various fluorinated cation additives considered in the present study and x refers to their concentration.
Results and discussion
The B3LYP/6-31G* cluster type density functional theory (DFT) calculations for an individual fluorinated methylammonium cation indicate that it is energetically much more favorable to substitute hydrogen by fluorine in the C–H bond rather than in the N–H bond due to stronger repulsion between electronegative fluorine and nitrogen (which is more electronegative than carbon). The cases of mono-, di-, and tri-fluo-methyl (substitution of one, two, or three H atoms in C–H bonds by F atoms labelled as MFMA, DFMA, and TFMA, respectively) of an individual MA cation were considered (Fig. 1). The dipole moment of the cation significantly jumps up in fluorinated cations. A more detailed analysis of charges at different atomic sites as well as interatomic distances for mono-fluorinated (CH2F–NH3)+ cations is shown in Supporting Materials of the ESI† (Fig. S1).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematics of the MAPI tetragonal unit cell (4 formula units) used in calculations; changes in the supercell total energy (ΔEtot) and the bandgap (ΔEg) in meV relative to pristine MAPI for 10 different representative configurations obtained by the substitution of: (b) 4% (one [CH2F–NH3]+ per supercell), (c) 8% (one [CHF2–NH3]+), and (d) 12% (one [CH2F–NH3]+ plus one [CHF2–NH3]+) of hydrogen in the supercell by fluorine (which corresponds to one, two, and three F atoms per supercell). 
First, the C–F bond length (1.338 Å for mono-fluorination and 1.318 Å for di-fluorination) is much longer than its homologue C–H bond length (1.089 Å). Second, the charge localized at the F atom (−0.290e to −0.303e) is negative while the charge at H atoms of the C–H bond is positive (+0.178e to +0.200e). Both factors tend to increase the dipole moment of the fluorinated MA+ cation. Calculated dipole moments for mono-, di- and tri-fluorinated cations are respectively: 5.40, 6.21, and 6.7 Debye (compared to the values of 5.35, 6.08, and 6.58 Debye obtained in ref. 19) and are much higher than the dipole moment of a non-fluorinated MA+ cation (2.20 Debye). Such a significant jump in the dipole moment should affect the interaction between the nearest neighboring dipoles as well as the interaction of charged ions moving in the material upon the application of an external electric field.19 This can be explained using the negative electrostatic potential map concentrated on the C–F bonds that would contribute to modifying the interaction with charged ions compared to methylammonium. The calculated interaction map between the molecule and the water–oxygen complex is shown in the last row of Table 1. The methylammonium cation displays a non-negligible interaction map of the methyl group with the water–oxygen, which could be explained using the positive partial charges carried by the hydrogen atoms in the methyl group as shown in detail in Fig. S1 (ESI†). In the case of mono-fluo-methylammonium (MFMA) and di-fluo-methylammonium (DFMA) cations, the interaction with water is suppressed indicating an increase in their hydrophobicity.
Table 1 Structure, dipole moment, effective radius, and heat of formation for [CH3–NH3]+, [CH2F–NH3]+, and [CHF2–NH3]+ ions. An electrostatic potential map and a water–oxygen interaction map for the same ions are shown in the two bottom rows. The water–oxygen interaction map indicates a non-negligible isosurface around the methyl group, while the isosurface vanishes around the fluorinated ligand











It also modifies the interaction between the cation and the surrounding framework which is composed of PbI6 vertex-connected octahedra.
It is well-known that in the pristine MAPI material, the MA+ cation does not interact strongly with the lead iodide framework and does not introduce any states near the band edges,51 which could be the reason for the high optoelectronic-property tolerance of this material to some defects.6 To investigate how substitution of MA+ cations by their fluorinated counterparts, that are larger in size, affects the interaction with the lead iodide framework, we started with the room temperature phase consisting of the tetragonal unit cell of MAPI (4 chemical units) and performed random substitution of H with F in four MA ions of the supercell. Substitutions of one, two, three, and four H atoms in C–H bonds of the four MA cations corresponding to about 4%, 8%, 12%, and 16% of the total amount of hydrogen atoms in the supercell were considered (about 150 different combinations in total, Fig. 1(a)). For each combination, structural relaxation based on DFT total energy calculations was performed.

Fig. 1(b)–(d) show the changes in the supercell total energy and the bandgap for different configurations with one, two, and three hydrogen atoms substituted by fluorine, i.e. MFMA, DFMA and TFMA. All the possible configurations are investigated and given structural labeling then sorted based on increasing their total energy. Only substitutions of H in C–H bonds are shown (substitution of H by F in the N–H function leads to a much higher total energy – at least by 3 eV which is not shown here), and the bandgap does not change by more than 0.1 eV compared to the pristine MAPI crystal as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Although GGA-PBE functional based calculations cannot reproduce correctly the bandgap, they still could be used for the qualitative analysis of bandgap differences. Meanwhile, it was shown that the GGA-PBE functional with long-range van der Waals interactions included can reasonably describe the geometry (the unit cell shape and volume, bond lengths and interatomic distances) and energy parameters (total energy, reaction and Hull energies, energy barriers, etc.) in MAPI and other hybrid inorganic–organic perovskite materials. In the work presented here, we did not target high-precision calculations of band energies (and the bandgaps) but focused mainly on calculations of small energy differences associated with structural and chemical lattice modifications. For these purposes, the GGA-PBE functional approach with van der Waals corrections should be sufficient. Nevertheless, we have also performed HSE06 + SOC (SOC means Spin–Orbit Coupling) calculations on a few samples and found that the trends in the bandgap differences obtained with the GGA-PBE functional remained unchanged.
For the configuration with one MFMA substitution the change in total energy also does not exceed 0.1 eV (Fig. 1(b)). The ∼0.3 eV jump in ΔEtot as shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d) (for DMFA and MFMA + DMFA substitutions) corresponds to configurations where two fluorine atoms are positioned at one MA ion. In other words, configurations containing [CHF2–NH3]+ ions are energetically more favorable than configurations containing [CH2F–NH3]+ only due to more significant distortion of the MAPI inorganic (lead and iodine) network by the [CHF2–NH3]+ species. At the same time, [CH2F–NH3]+ ions do not cause any large distortion in the perovskite framework which is confirmed by the fact that fluorination does not cause a noticeable volume expansion of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite cell volume (the volume expansion does not exceed 1% even for 12% of hydrogen to fluorine substitution, as could be seen from Fig. 2(a)). We also analyzed the standard deviation of the bandgap variation as a function of fluorination in the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (Fig. S1, ESI†) which indicates that the variation in the bandgap is not significant. It also means that fluorination will not significantly modify the absorption coefficient of the material.
 Fig. 2  (a) Deviation from the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite equilibrium volume as a function of increasing replacement of cationic C–H bonds with C–F bonds. (b) Change in the formation energy for the fluorinated CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite supercell at different degrees of fluorination. Zero of the formation energy corresponds to the pristine perovskite structure. 
Also, fluorination of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite stabilizes the structure as follows from the calculated formation energy differences between the fluorinated and the original perovskite structures (Fig. 2(b)). This being said, the optimal replacement of C–H by C–F bonds that would ensure the stability enhancement should not exceed 8%. For example at 12% the lowest configuration corresponds to two MA being altered leading to the presence of one [CH2F–NH3]+ and one [CHF2–NH3]+ which start to weaken the stability of the sample (see Fig. 2(b)). Energetically the material with only one of the MA molecules being replaced by [CHF2–NH3]+ would lead to the best stability enhancement and would constitute the upper limit before the stability deteriorates if more C–F bonds are included in the material. This means that a controlled amount of di-fluo-methylamine molecules could be used as an additive to help enhance the thermodynamic stability. This is further confirmed by the analysis of the impact of the fluorination of the methyl group on the hydrogen bonding strengthening. Before looking explicitly at the features of the hydrogen bonding some conclusion could be anticipated from the charge distributions. In fact, some initially weak hydrogen bonds between the amine groups and the surrounding lead-iodide framework strengthen in the fluorinated material. This is mainly due to the injected negative charge by fluorine making it possible to weaken and elongate the N–C bond as could be seen from Fig. S1 (ESI†).
To characterize in detail the strength of hydrogen bonds, we recently employed a developed noncovalent interaction (NCI) approach that enables real-space visualization of both attractive (van der Waals and hydrogen bonding) and repulsive interactions based on the electron density.42,59–61 This approach allows the description of the interplay between stabilizing and destabilizing contributions that determine the stable minima on hydrogen-bonding potential-energy surfaces.

Fig. 3 shows NCI diagrams [s vs. sign(λ2)ρ] (see the ESI† for definitions and more details) for the original perovskite as well as for [CH2F–NH3]+, [CHF2–NH3]+, and ([CH2F–NH3]+ + [CHF2–NH3]+) ions that substitute the original MA+ cations. For the visualization of the NCI regions we also plot reduced density gradient (RDG) isosurfaces in real space, which allows interpretation of different features in the NCI diagram as well as comparison of the strength of different NCI components. Fig. S3 (ESI†) shows RDG isosurfaces for the same four materials. The main feature of all NCI diagrams is the appearance of several peaks at negative values of sign(λ2)ρ (bounding box around −0.2) corresponding to H⋯I hydrogen bonds of different lengths. Here, the H atom belongs to the NH3 group of the original MA+ cation. The presence of the electronegative fluorine atom in the fluorinated [CH2F–NH3]+ cation causes strong repulsion of the CH2F group from the nearest iodine ions of the framework.
 Fig. 3  Noncovalent interaction index (NCI) diagrams for: (a) the original CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite supercell; (b), (c), and (d) supercells with one, two, and three replacement of cationic C–H bonds with C–F bonds, respectively. This corresponds to the lower energy configuration [CH2F–NH3]+, [CHF2–NH3]+, and ([CH2F–NH3]+ [CHF2–NH3]+) ions that substitute the original MA+ cations. The bounded area points to the creation of stronger hydrogen bonds upon fluorination of MA. 
Due to this, the opposite NH3 group moves closer to other iodine ions of the framework. The reduction in the distance between H atoms in the NH3 group and these iodine anions results in strengthening the H⋯I hydrogen bonds, which explains the increase in the formation energy of the fluorinated materials discussed above. Nonetheless, increasing the concentration of fluorine beyond the optimal value of 8% would increase the repulsion and would be detrimental to the bonding and the overall cohesion of the material confirming our thermodynamic stability analysis.
Based on our calculation, we believe that substitution of one, two, or three hydrogen atoms of the methyl group in the MA cation may lead to better stability of the perovskite due to the electron withdrawing nature of C–F causing an increase in the acidity of the proton attached to the nitrogen atom. In other words, the acidity (mobility) of the proton in the structure CHxFz–N+⋯H⋯I− is considered as a key element in tailoring the stability of the perovskite structure. Hence, one can perturb the distance of the proton between N+ and I−, by simply modifying the chemical environment of the methyl group, e.g., fluorination.
We found that fluorination should reduce significantly the iodine diffusion in the perovskite. To understand this phenomenon, we calculated vacancy formation energies for different iodine vacancies in the supercell as well as the barriers for vacancy migration from one iodine site to another (Fig. 4). Our calculated iodine vacancy migration barrier of ∼0.3 eV agrees well with the recent experimental results48 of 0.28 eV as well as some reported calculated values.52,64,65

Fig. 4(a) shows the initial lowest energy position of the iodine vacancy (1) as well as its intermediate positions along the optimal migration trajectory (at each intermediate position the next nearest neighbor position with lowest energy was chosen) along the c-axis. The final position (1′) is equivalent to position 1 and is located in the neighboring periodic supercell. Fig. 4(b) indicates that the migration trajectory in pure MAPI is less energetically demanding than in the fluorinated material.
 Fig. 4  (a) Lowest configuration with VI (a large black sphere) located in the vicinity of di-fluo-methylamine; labels indicate the vacancy mediated iodine migration trajectory (1–2–3–4–1′) to reach the neighboring cell along the Z direction of the supercell. Positions 1 and 1′ are equivalent; the arrow indicates the direction of the applied voltage parallel to the Z-direction. (b) Formation energy differences between intermediate vacancy positions (2, 3, 4) along the trajectory and its initial position (1) for 0% and 8% fluorinated MAPI. (c) Energy barriers for VI migrating along the trajectory in pure MAPI. (d) Energy barriers for vacancies migrating along the trajectory in 8% fluorinated MAPI. 
However, to evaluate the mobility of iodine ions (or iodine vacancies), one also needs to calculate the migration energy of vacancies which correspond to the energy barrier for vacancy jumps between different positions along the trajectories. Nudge elastic band calculations indicate that these energy barriers depend on the vacancy position only weakly for all jumps (Fig. 4(c and d)), being about 0.3 eV in agreement with some previous reports.52,64,65
The rate of vacancy migration along the Z-direction between two nearest supercells is defined by the absolute maximum of the curves shown in these figures. Interestingly, the fluorinated MAPI effective barrier to move from 1 to 1′ is about 0.2 eV higher than the pristine MAPI.
Simple calculations show that at room temperature the iodine migration rate from one unit cell to the next in the fluorinated sample is of the order of 10−3 lower at room temperature than in the pristine MAPI crystal which is in favor of our assumption of the reduction in the migration rate of iodine ions in fluorinated MAPI materials. Based on the assumption of an applied voltage along the Z-direction, we examined the variation of the electrostatic potential parallel to the applied voltage for pristine and fluorinated samples and the results are illustrated in Fig. 5. We notice large electrostatic potential differences reaching up to ∼3 eV in the vicinity of the di-fluo-methylamine suggesting that a vacancy-assisted iodine migration moving along the Z-direction would experience a modified electrostatic potential. A closer look at the electrostatic potential differences and their 2D projection at selected minima displays noticeable differences in the distribution of the electrostatic potentials that could be attributed to the large differences in the cationic dipole moments DMA = 2.21 Debye versus DDFMA = 6.2 Debye. Noticeable differences can also be observed along the X and Y directions as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†).
 Fig. 5  (a) Difference in the total electrostatic potential experienced by the iodine vacancy without and in the presence of one di-fluo-methylamine (DFMA) molecule substituted within the MAPI tetragonal unit cell. 2D slices showing the XY plane of electrostatic potential perpendicular to the Z-axis at selected minima indicated by arrows for (b) MA only and (c) with one DFMA. 
Combining the vacancy migration pathway analysis done earlier with the electrostatic potential difference, one can conclude that fluorination should significantly reduce and/or mitigate iodine anion diffusion in the perovskite under applied bias voltage due to the modified diffusion rates and electrostatic repulsion between fluorine species and iodine anions. In other words, the presence of electronegative fluorine atoms in the molecular cations causes the formation of additional energy barriers for migrating ions which would help suppress the hysteresis effect leading to hybrid inorganic–organic perovskite solar cells with enhanced performance and intrinsic stability.
In addition to an increase in the thermodynamic stability, fluorination should also lead to an increase in hydrophobicity of the hybrid inorganic–organic perovskite material CH3NH3PbI3 which might reduce and/or prevent water infiltration to the sample. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), the interaction map with the water–oxygen indicates a non-negligible isosurface around the methyl group, while the isosurface vanishes around the fluorinated molecule. Thinking about an extended system composed of a network of fluorinated molecules distributed within the MAPI grains would then prevent the infiltration of water and might act as a repelling layer for moisture.
To put in evidence the effect of fluorination of MA on the stability of the studied perovskite material,66 work is in progress to investigate ways to introduce fluorinated molecule salt additives to form mixed cation perovskite materials67 (MFAI)x(MAI)1−xPbI2.
The major bottleneck is the challenging synthesis of partially fluorinated MA namely CHxFz–NH2 (x = 0, z = 3; x = 1, z = 2, and x = 2, z = 1).66 Two approaches are sought; one is based on chemical fluorination using a source of fluorine, such SF4 or F2, which requires certain conditions to be met and particular attention to safety issues. The second, which is considered safer, involves the electrochemical oxidation of methylamine in the presence of fluoride containing salts, dissolved in non-aqueous media.
Conclusions
We performed a systematic study on the stability of fluorinated perovskite materials to identify the optimal controlled concentration of incorporated fluorinated MA cations using density functional theory (DFT). We found that the optimal fluorination has no significant impact on the band gap, i.e., on the optical absorption properties of the material. The volume expansion of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite is also insignificant which means that it is unlikely that fluorination causes additional lattice mismatch and related interfacial defects. Calculations of the formation energy of fluorinated MAPI demonstrated that fluorination has a tendency to stabilize the material which is related to the fact that some initially weak hydrogen bonds between MA+ cations and the surrounding lead-iodide framework strengthen in the fluorinated material due to internal structural deformations connected to the formation of long C–N bonds. Finally, we showed that fluorination should significantly reduce and/or mitigate iodine vacancy mediated diffusion in the perovskite under applied bias voltage. We expect that the iodine diffusion reduction will result in developing solar cell devices with increased performance reflected both in terms of enhanced device stability and photovoltaic efficiency.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have filed a provisional patent application.
Acknowledgements
This work was sponsored by the Qatar Environment and Energy Research Institute. Computational resources were provided by the research computing centre at Texas A&M University at Qatar.
Notes and references
N.-G. Park, MRS Bull., 2018, 43, 527–533 CrossRef CAS .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efficiencies-07-17-2018.pdf, accessed 10 December 2018.
A. A. B. Baloch, M. I. Hossain, N. Tabet and F. H. Alharbi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 426–434 CrossRef PubMed .
S. N. Rashkeev, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais and F. H. Alharbi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pecchia, D. Gentilini, D. Rossi, M. Auf der Maur and A. Di Carlo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 988–992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Brandt, V. Stevanović, D. S. Ginley and T. Buonassisi, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 359, 388–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Berry, T. Buonassisi, D. A. Egger, G. Hodes, L. Kronik, Y. Loo, I. Lubomirsky, S. R. Marder, Y. Mastai and J. S. Miller, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5102–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu, H. Xiang, X.-G. Gong, A. Walsh and S.-H. Wei, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2018, 35, 36104 CrossRef .
A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. I. Saba and P. Delugas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17421–17428 CrossRef CAS .
F. El-Mellouhi, E. T. Bentria, S. N. Rashkeev, S. Kais and F. H. Alharbi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi and S. Sanvito, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Madjet, G. R. Berdiyorov, F. El-Mellouhi, F. H. Alharbi, A. V. Akimov and S. Kais, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4439–4445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Berdiyorov, F. El-Mellouhi, M. E. Madjet, F. H. Alharbi and S. N. Rashkeev, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 53901 CrossRef .
M. E. A. Madjet, A. V. Akimov, F. El-Mellouhi, G. R. Berdiyorov, S. Ashhab, N. Tabet and S. Kais, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5219–5231 RSC .
G. R. Berdiyorov, M. E. Madjet and F. El-Mellouhi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 8–12 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Carignano, A. Kachmar and J. Hutter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8991–8997 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Carignano, Y. Saeed, S. A. Aravindh, I. S. Roqan, J. Even and C. Katan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27109 RSC .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .
C. Li, A. Guerrero, Y. Zhong, A. Gräser, C. A. M. Luna, J. Köhler, J. Bisquert, R. Hildner and S. Huettner, Small, 2017, 13, 1701711 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. DeQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Galisteo-López, M. Anaya, M. E. Calvo and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2200–2205 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gottesman, L. Gouda, B. S. Kalanoor, E. Haltzi, S. Tirosh, E. Rosh-Hodesh, Y. Tischler, A. Zaban, C. Quarti, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2332–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, X. Wen, C. F. J. Lau, T. Young, J. Yun, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9060–9068 RSC .
D. L. Jacobs, M. A. Scarpulla, C. Wang, B. R. Bunes and L. Zang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7893–7902 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salado, M. A. Fernández, J. P. Holgado, S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. J. Dyson and S. Ahmad, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3846–3853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. El-Mellouhi, E. T. Bentria, A. Marzouk, S. N. Rashkeev, S. Kais and F. H. Alharbi, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 16035 CrossRef .
F. El-Mellouhi, A. Marzouk, E. T. Bentria, S. N. Rashkeev, S. Kais and F. H. Alharbi, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2648–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kieslich, J. M. Skelton, J. Armstrong, Y. Wu, F. Wei, K. L. Svane, A. Walsh and K. T. Butler, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8782–8788 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev. DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00336 .
J. A. Christians, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2136–2143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoon, G. Kim, C. W. Myung, S. Kajal, J. Jeong, J. W. Kim, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5865–5871 CrossRef .
K. Poorkazem and T. L. Kelly, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2017, 1, 181–190 CrossRef .
L. K. Ono, E. J. Juarez-Perez and Y. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30197–30246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. G. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801948 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Son, S. G. Kim, J. Y. Seo, S. H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, A. J. Pearson, G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, B. Philippe, H. Rensmo, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2671–2678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. García-Benito, C. Quarti, V. I. E. Queloz, S. Orlandi, I. Zimmermann, M. Cavazzini, A. Lesch, S. Marras, D. Beljonne, G. Pozzi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and G. Grancini, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8211–8220 CrossRef .
A. C. Garcia-Castro, N. A. Spaldin, A. H. Romero and E. Bousquet, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 104107 CrossRef .
K. T. Cho, Y. Zhang, S. Orlandi, M. Cavazzini, I. Zimmermann, A. Lesch, N. Tabet, G. Pozzi, G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5467–5474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Munárriz, F. A. Rabuffetti and J. Contreras-García, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 6901–6910 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 193–198 CrossRef PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, N. K. Noel and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 2472–2476 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walsh and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1983–1990 CrossRef CAS .
A. Slonopas, B. J. Foley, J. J. Choi and M. C. Gupta, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 74101 CrossRef .
W. Chen, K. Sun, C. Ma, C. Leng, J. Fu, L. Hu, M. Li, M. Wang, Z. Zang, X. Tang, H. Shi and S. Lu, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Birkhold, J. T. Precht, R. Giridharagopal, G. E. Eperon, L. Schmidt-Mende and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12633–12639 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
D. Meggiolaro and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2206–2222 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048–10051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Tong, W. Geng, O. V. Prezhdo and L. M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Huang, G. Niu and W. Huang, CN,  2017, 107302055A Search PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tkatchenko, R. A. DiStasio, R. Car and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 236402 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, Ö. Farkas, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, J. Cioslowski and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, Revision E.01, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Contreras-García, E. R. Johnson, S. Keinan, R. Chaudret, J.-P. Piquemal, D. N. Beratan and W. Yang, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 625–632 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Contreras-García, W. Yang and E. R. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12983–12990 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Otero-de-la-Roza, E. R. Johnson and J. Contreras-García, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12165–12172 RSC .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7717–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Charles, J. Dillon, O. J. Weber, M. S. Islam and M. T. Weller, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22495–22499 RSC .
L. Smrčok, B. Bitschnau and Y. Filinchuk, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2009, 44, 978–984 CrossRef .
J.-H. Yang, W.-J. Yin, J.-S. Park and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13105–13112 RSC .

          F. El Mellouhi, S. N. Rashkeev, A. Belaidi, B. Merzougui, N. Tabet and F. H. Alharbi, US Pat., 62/642910,  2018 .
H. Park, R. Mall, F. H. Alharbi, S. Sanvito, N. Tabet, H. Bensmail and F. El-Mellouhi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 21, 1078–1088 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc06308gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
MA1−xFMAxPbI3 → (1 − x)MAI + xFMAI + PbI2

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematics of the MAPI tetragonal unit cell (4 formula units) used in calculations; changes in the supercell total energy (ΔEtot) and the bandgap (ΔEg) in meV relative to pristine MAPI for 10 different representative configurations obtained by the substitution of: (b) 4% (one [CH2F–NH3]+ per supercell), (c) 8% (one [CHF2–NH3]+), and (d) 12% (one [CH2F–NH3]+ plus one [CHF2–NH3]+) of hydrogen in the supercell by fluorine (which corresponds to one, two, and three F atoms per supercell).	 




 	Fig. 2  (a) Deviation from the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite equilibrium volume as a function of increasing replacement of cationic C–H bonds with C–F bonds. (b) Change in the formation energy for the fluorinated CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite supercell at different degrees of fluorination. Zero of the formation energy corresponds to the pristine perovskite structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Noncovalent interaction index (NCI) diagrams for: (a) the original CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite supercell; (b), (c), and (d) supercells with one, two, and three replacement of cationic C–H bonds with C–F bonds, respectively. This corresponds to the lower energy configuration [CH2F–NH3]+, [CHF2–NH3]+, and ([CH2F–NH3]+ [CHF2–NH3]+) ions that substitute the original MA+ cations. The bounded area points to the creation of stronger hydrogen bonds upon fluorination of MA.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Lowest configuration with VI (a large black sphere) located in the vicinity of di-fluo-methylamine; labels indicate the vacancy mediated iodine migration trajectory (1–2–3–4–1′) to reach the neighboring cell along the Z direction of the supercell. Positions 1 and 1′ are equivalent; the arrow indicates the direction of the applied voltage parallel to the Z-direction. (b) Formation energy differences between intermediate vacancy positions (2, 3, 4) along the trajectory and its initial position (1) for 0% and 8% fluorinated MAPI. (c) Energy barriers for VI migrating along the trajectory in pure MAPI. (d) Energy barriers for vacancies migrating along the trajectory in 8% fluorinated MAPI.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Difference in the total electrostatic potential experienced by the iodine vacancy without and in the presence of one di-fluo-methylamine (DFMA) molecule substituted within the MAPI tetragonal unit cell. 2D slices showing the XY plane of electrostatic potential perpendicular to the Z-axis at selected minima indicated by arrows for (b) MA only and (c) with one DFMA.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc06308g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
